Bibliotheca Eliotae. Eliotis Library.

LONDINI ANNO VERBI INCARNATI. M.D.XLII. Leaf

TO THE MOST ROYAL AND PVISSANT PRINCE, AND HIS MOST REDOVBTED SOVErayne lord
king HENRY the eight, king of England, France, and Irelande, defender of the
faith, and of the Church of England and also of Irelande in earth the supreme
head, his humble servant Thomas Glyot knight, desires perpetual felicity.
THE HONORABLE PHILOSOpher Plutarchus, most worthy master to Traiane the
emperor, does define in a similitude most apt and proper, what is signified
by the dignity and name of a king, saying: That which god is in heaven, and
the son in the fyrmament the same in earth is a king to those, whom he
governs. In almighty god nothing is greatter than Justice, whereby he
rewards good men, above their merytes, and punysheth ill men under their
deservings. The power of the Sun is declared when he surmountynge the
rygorous storms of sturdy winter, and being in his most dilectable progress
of lusty spring time, shows to the world his celestial vysage dyscouered:
than herbs, graynes, and fruits, both holsom and dylectable, be found in
abundance, the pleasant verdure of trees does delight the beholders: the birds
in their harmony do declare, how much they rejoice at the benign aspecte of
that noble planete. Likewise that king, which governs for the weal of his
countreye, beholdynge benygnely them that be studyouse, or occupied about
things that be virtuous, he not only does animate or give life to their
courages, but also renders to their wytt^^^^ more sharpness, with a prompt
dexterity armed with hardines. It is ther^^ (...) marvel, that great kings
have in their counsayles most wytty person^^, saying that the making of great
wits is in their puissaunce, although virtue proceeds immedyately from god,
and sapience likewise. And yet Sapience is oftentimes hid in those persons,
whom either malyctouse wits hates, or envy pursues, or fortune
contemns. Of the said power annexed (as it were) unto a kings majesty, most
noble prince, most gracious soueraygne lord, I among diverse other have had
good experience. For where about two years passed, far above mine
expectation, I received by words procedyng from the mouth of your highness,
comfort incredible to the setting forth of my Dictionary, which at that time I
had lately begun, and that very sengly, and with little study. I all infla^med
with the said comfort, did afterward proceed therein much more exactly, and
did ampliate the warke above that that I purposed: so that your majesty (as I
was infourmed) and diverse other commended my diligence. Not withstandyng, the
said comfortable words of your hyghnes, contynually resortyng unto my
remembrance, cessed not to provoke me to read over eftsoon, and reuolue my
said warke, fearyng (as god shall judge me) lest by my negligence, either some
words lackyng, or some interpretation being mysconceyued, my labors should be
not only unprofitable unto the reders, but also unworthy the most benygne and
favorable report of your excellent majesty. I therefore most fervently styrred
by your gracis comfort, in pervsyng my said Dictionary, have proceeded to the
correction and amplifycation thereof, in such form, as hereafter follows.
First sequestrynge my self from all other business (that only except,
wherein I was bounden to serve your highness) I assembled all such authors
as I thought should be necessary, for the achieuynge of that which I took in
enterprise, whose names do immedyately follow this proheme: and layenge them
before me, I not only did seriousely and dilygently try and examyne every
word, which either in sygnification or form of speaking, called a phrase,
moughte make any doubt to them that should read it, and by the same authors
did as truly correct it, as my learning would serve me: but also with a new
spirit of hardynesse, received by the often remembrance of your gracious said
comfort. I following the exaumple of Suidas the greek, adventured to make a
general collection by the order of letters of all notable countrays, cities,
mountains, and ryuers, with their true descriptions, bounds and commodities,
the names and natures of sundry beasts, fowls, serpents, and fysshes: the
declaration of a great number of herbs, trees, fruits, gummes, precyouse
stones, and metalles, which before me were never of any man (that I can here
of) declared and set forth in english: The true definitions of all
syckenesses and kinds of maladyes, which commonly do happen to men, with the
cause, whereof they proceed: Finally the names of most notable personages, who
from the first man Adam until three hundred years after the incarnation of
CHRIST, did any thing worthy a special remembrance, expedient and necessary
to the moderation of our acts and procedynges, with the hystoryes or lives of
the said persons compendyousely gathered. I have not omytted fables and
inventions of paynymes, for the more easy understanding of poets. I also
thought it necessary to enterlace the detestable heretykes, with their sundry
heresies, concerning the substance of our catholyke faith justly condemned by
the hole consent of all true christen men, to the intent that those heresies
being in this wise diuulgate, may be the sooner espied and abhorred in such
books, where they be craftily enterlaced with holsom doctrine. Ne the knowledge
of them as heresies may indamage any man in his conscience (as some men have
supposed) more than the common knowledge and often recitation of treasons,
fornication, or felonies contrived or practysed in sundry facions, for as much
as these things do require less study, than the maynteynynge of erroneous and
dyuellysshe opynyons, wherefore the knowledge thereof is much more daungerouse:
And yet the knowledge both of the one and the other is right expedient, sens in
every thing it is as necessary to aforesee, what shall bring damage unto us,
as contrary wise what might be founden good and co^modiouse. As well in this
part as in the hystories and fables, I have set out the computation of time
callid Chronography, wherein it appears how long the persons were either
before the incarnation of CHRIST, or how long after. Also I have declared
the ancient coins, weyghtes, and measures, conferryng them with those which
be current and usual among us. I have planted in proverbs, called Adagia,
such as be founden in latin authors, with their expositions. Also the proper
terms belongyng to phisyke and surgery, and other diverse and sundry arts and
scyences. More over I have declared diverse greek words, which be usurped of
latyne authors. In this form have I fynyshed this warke, to the glory of
almighty god, and the no little porfyte (I trust) of all englyshemen, which
are and shall be desirous of doctrine, which I should never have enterprised,
nor have brought to conclusyon, had I not ben inflamed by the comfort received
of your royal majesty. By this it appears, that the benygnitie of pryncipall
governors, extended to them which be of honest exercise, does stere up in
them a more greatter spirit, whereby their wits and courages do appear more
abundant. Witnesses thereof be the great numbres of wonderful learned men, and
most valyant and polytyke capytaynes, which were in the times of great
Alexander, Octauian, Titus. Traiane, Hadriane, both Antonines, and Alexander
Seuerus, most noble emperors, of whom diverse by them were advanced to
dignities, many enryched, none unrewarded. And truly in this your gracis realm
there is a great number studyousely inclyned to learning, provoked as well by
your gracis most noble example, which have showed your self not only
studyouse in holy scripture, but also to be notably learned, and to have an
excellent judgment in all kinds of doctrine, as also your bishops and
chapleynes of honor, men famous in learning. And by such words as your
highness has openly spoken in comfortyng and also commandyng young gentylmen,
to enbrace good letters, and to be occupied in readinge good authors, there be
not a few young men of the state of the temporaltie, by an honest emulation,
do endeavor them to be founden in learning worthy to receive like fruits of
your gracis benygnitie, as the state of the clergy has done hitherto, whereof
diverse have been right worthy to have it. But when both your temporaltie and
clergy do flourysshe in doctrine, as (your highness procedynge to the setting
up of good lectures with lyberal salaries) it is likely to happen right
shortly: than this realm of England, like as it may compare with any realm
christened in temperate air, and abundance of all things, which the
necessity of man's nature requires: so in all parts of honor and surety
shall it surmount all other countrays, your majesty gouernynge, whom almighty
god has abundantly endowed with the principal gifts of grace, nature, and
fortune. Finally may it like your most royal majesty to receive this my simple
labor and study, which I have eftsoon dedicate unto your hyghnes, with like
benignity as you received my first edition, which neither in dilygence, nor
sincere exposition, nor in copy of words, nor in abundaunce of matter and
sentence, is in any wise to be hereto compared. And if I may perceive your
hyghenesse to be pleased with this form of exercise, god gyuynge me health,
and by your gracis assistence and favor, living in quietness and out of
necessity. I intend to employ the rest of my time in such study, as your
majesty shall have cause to take no less thankfully, than if I served your
highness in other affairs, wherein should be much more travail of body: Such
trust and assured judgment I have in your gracis most excellent wisdom,
which is the only botreaux of my welthe and comfort, like as it is to all
England the princypall bulwark. I heartily beseech god to augmente your
highness in all parts of felycitie.

A QVIBVS phrases colliguntur.
MARCUS Tullius. C. Iul. Caesar. Terentius. Titus Liuius. Salustius. Cornelius
Celsus. Iunius Columella. Pla^tus. Vergilius. Cornelius Tacitus. Fab.
Quintilianus.
HISTORICI.
Graeci, HErodotus. Thucydides. Plutarchus. Herodianus. Dionysius
Halycarnasseus. Laertius.
Latini, Appianus. Helianus. Arrianus. Polybius Titus Liuius Cornelius Nepos.
Suetonius. Valerius Maximus Quintus Curtius. Julius Capitolinus. Lampridius.
Ammianus. Aemilius Probus. Justinius. Eurropius.

COSMOGRAPHI.
STrabo. Pomponius Mela. Ptholomeus. Americus Vesputius. Petrus Martyr.
Antonius Sabellicus. Raphael Volaterranus. Recentes Chronographi.
PHILOSOPHI.
PLato. Aristoteles. Xenophon. Theophrastus. Plotinus. Porphyrius, Proclus.
Philo. Alexander Aphrodiscus. Xenocrates. Seneca Censorinus. Boethius. Julius
Firmicus. Hyginius.
AVTHORES sacri.
MOses. Agiographi. Eusebius. Tertullianus. Hieronymus. Epiphanius. Augustinus.
Gennadius.
AVTHORES ambigui tituli.
graeci VArro. Plinius. Solinus. Aulus Gellius. Macrobius. Vitruuius. Vibius
Sequester. Frontinus. Vegetius. Ludouicus Coelius. Hermolaus Barbarus. Iouianus
Pontanus. Erasmus Rotherodamus. Gulielmus Budeus, Lazarus Baph^us. Georgius
Agricola. Robertus Senalis, de ponderibus and mensuris.
MEDICI.
HIppocrates. Galenus Dioscorides. Paulus Aegineta Alexander Trallianus
Constantinus Affricanus Serapio Mesu^h Io. Ruellius Io. Manardus. Antonius Musa
Brasceuola Io. Agricola Georgius Agricola.
LEGVM interpretes.
PAndectarum Authors Andreas Alciatus Vldericus Zasius Claudius Cantiuncula.
Fabularum scriptores. HOmerus Hesiodus Ouidius Diodorus Siculus Pausanias.
GRAMMATICI.
SVidas. Iul. Pollux Eustathius Homeri interpres Aristophanis interpres
Priscianus Seruius Donatus Porphyrio Acron Pompeius Festus Pedianus Angelus
Politianus Pomponius Laetus Beroaldus Bononiensis. M. Antonius Sabellicus.
Vitellius. Baptista Pius. Baptista Egnatius.
A recentioribus To. Stephno ac Steph. Doleto gallis aliquid traduxi in lingua^
nostra^, neutrum tamen usque adeo imitatus, quin diuersitatis utriusque linguae
rationem habuerim.

BONIS AEQVE AC DOCTIS VIRIS CONSTANTISS. AMICIS ELIOTA.
IACTA EST ALEA, PRODIT IN MEDIVM OPUS, NON TAM RECENS, quam uarium ac
multiplex, atque ob id criticorum stylis ac morsibus uehementer obnoxium.
Nimiru^ a uobis nihil est quod metuam, nempe qui in alieno stadio cum plumbeis
pedibus aequis passibus incedere solebatis, non ignauorum hominum more hinc
inde saltuatim procurrentes, uerba uellicantes quae litera uel accentu perperam
inuertantur. Igitur tabula prius a uobis perlecta, in quam errores ac uitia,
quae crebro soleant inter imprimendum contingere, bona fide collegimus: in
lectionis cursu mox ad eandem tabula^ uitia corrigetis, authorisque nomen ac
dignitatem (quandoquide^ incredibili studio subueniendae Reipub. id opus
occeperit) aduersum illiusmodi fucos* and crabrones fortititer defendetis.
Caeterum pro mutua beneuolentia inter nos, studioru^ ac uoluntatum similitudine
comparata, si quid uobis interlegendum occurrerit, quod uestris eruditis oculis
minus satisfecerit, aliquantisper stilum continebitis, quousque collecta
obfirmataque memoria, scribentis uoluntatem ac diligentiam cum illis
authoribus, a quibus aut uerbum aliquod, uel sententia^, seu cuiusquam rei
descriptionem coepisse uideatur, mature contuleritis. In traductione uerborum
ac sententiarum eloquentia^ ullam non expectabitis in illa, quicquid mihi
nimium festinanti interciderit, concinnabitis, tum legibus amicitiae tantum
tribuetis, ut amicum dormitantem, seu uerius oneri succumbentem, ab inuidorum
dentibus, obiecto quopiam honesto elogio uindicetis: and si non alio, saltem
isto,

Eliota uir equestris ne in ullo malo otio, perniciosoue negotio uitam
infirmaret, utque aliqua ex part de Repub. been meritus esse uideretur, aliis
rebus omnibus neglectis, quae tum opes maximas, tum summas dignitates polliceri
soleant, id oneris assumpsit, quo tu^ literas latinas scire cupientes facilius
instrueret, tum iisdem literis mediocriter imbutos, uaria uerborum
suppellectili, multip licique rerum cognitione, locorum atque hominum
spectaculo magis illustrium, ad studium capescendum acrius incitaret. quod cum
effecerit, se uoto liberabit. In tam arduo negotio si ab eo quicquam
imprudenter exciderit, quod solidae doctrinae fraudi non fuerit, uel puritatem
linguae latinae minus infecerit, ne dum probitati morum offecerit, nec sanitati
corporis quicquam nocuerit, essent medius fidius nimium ingrati, ne dicam
improbi, qui labenti non potius manum porrigerent, quam insultando gratiam
imminuerent. Id genus elogii uobis amici non minus honorificum, quam mihi iure
amicitiae debitum: quippe quod non solum humanitatis laudem, sed and uerae
sapientiae apud homines opinionem sit uobis allaturum, humanum quidem est labi,
errare, decipi at labantem non sustinere, aut errantem in uiam no^ reducere,
aut deceptu^ consilio aut opera no^ iuuare si possis, amicum praesertim, non
modo inhumanum existimatur, uerum etiam bonis omnibus execrandum. In moribus
nihil habere commune cum beluis, bonisque fauere prorsus sapientis est, atque
ab omnibus amplectendum, modicum officium est, quod a uobis peto atque parua
res, quam nec inimico ne dum aduersario ipse pernegarem. tam chara semper mihi
fuit Respub. ut quem in eam nouerim insigne quoduis beneficium molientem, hunc
non potuerim honorificis uerbis non prosequi, laudare, extollere, quamuis mihi
caetera uita, ac moribus minus probaretur. In hoc opere ut ab omnibus been
audiam equidem non laboro, cu^ id neque Platoni, neque Ciceroni, neque Deo illi
Maeonio contingere quidem potuerit. Gaudebo sane, si mea beneuolentia in
Rempub. in Nobilitatem amor, charitas in plebem, tum a rege doctiss. tu^ a
uobis uestrumque simillimisita comprobentur, ut me haud indignum existimetis,
quem uestro patrocinio aduersus calumniatorum impetum defendere uolueritis. Hoc
tandem uos nescire nollem, tam uerbalia nomina, quam etiam participia a me
plaeraque praetermissa, quod uerbis primigeniis ex literaru^ ordine facile
compertis, leuiore negotio, quae ab eis deriuentur inuenire poteritis. At ne
uobis ineptire uidear longis logis, hoc tandem breuiter capiatis. Si meu^ in
hoc labor qualemcunque conatu^ a uobis liberaliter acceptum defensumque
cognouero, a me long maiora molimina operaque iis multo praestantiora breuiter
expectabitis.

SALVETI.
ERRATA.
OBSECRO TE AMICE LECTOR, ne quicquam ex hac bybliotheca in tuum usum capias,
priusquam errata typographi nimium festinantis, ex hac tabella castigaueris, ne
author de sua patria been meritus, immerito gratiam illi debitam amittat, ac tu
itide^ spem ac fortassis laborem imprudenter perdideris.

FOr Aijt read Abijt. Abiudicauit, put out Adiudicauit. Auita, put out Aulta.
In Acer, for wyche, read maple, and put out the resydue. In Acus, aci, for
hornebeke, read hornkeke. In Adhaese, put out not. In Agnascentia, for were,
read where. In Albion, the.xli. line for no whyter, read any whyter. In
Alia, for Molimerus, read Molmitius. In Amphimacrus, for the myddel syllable
long read the myddell syllable short. In Anagallida aquatica, for Alysaundis,
read Alysaunder. In Antaeci, put out zone or gyrdell, and put in contrary. In
Anthyllis, for herb Iuye, read herb Iue. In Apsis, for name, read naue. In
Arcadia, the.vi. line, for bagpyde, read bagpype. Argemata, put out ta. In
Arnion, for Arnoglosso, read Arnoglossa. In Artamitae, for Ceclaminus, read
Cyclaminus. After Aruum, for Ars, read Arx. Atrengere senectam, read
Attingere. Aurea aetheria, read Aura. In Basilius for quadriuales, read
Quadriuiales. Bedegnar, read Bedeguar. After Bellona, for Bollouaci, read
Bellouaci. After Bipennis, for Biponella, read Bipenella. In Brachylogia, for
spethe, read speech. In Bubonium, for Inguinali, read Inguinalis. Bulapatham,
read Bulapathum. Buphonum, read Buphonium. In Calecut, the tenthe line, yet
is his neck, put out is. Calirrohe, read Calirhoe. Cauere testamenta, read
Testamento. Caute, wise, read wisely. Celebare ludos, read Celebrare ludos. On
Celtogallia, for hloe, read hole. In Cibele, the.xvi. verse for Pessinuus,
read Pessimus. In Complodo. put out psi, and write plosi. In Concilium
Lugdunense, the last word for dignity read divinity. In Corus, put out a
southewest wind. Custodio, read Custodia. Custodia, read Custodio. De
caltaria in carbonariam, read De calcaria. Decidus, read Deciduus, in the.vii.
line for cernis, read ceruis. In Decies the.xxiiii. line, for Decies, read
Deciens. In Dedisco, dicere, read dediscere. In Delphmus, the.ix. line read,
There has been of them known to love children, and receive* them. Depuneo,
nere, read nire. Descistere, read desistere. In Dirigeo, for strynke, read
shrynke. Disiecta milites, read Disiecti milites. In Domi nobiles, for
honorably, read honorable. Dorsum, the.iii. line for shelpe read shelfe. In
Dracones, the.iii. line for Pyretum, read Pyretrum. Eblandiri solitudidines,
read solitudines. Eblanditus, gotten by slattery, read by flattery. In Ebur,
Dioscorides calls it Thamaeacte, put it out in that place, and set before in
Ebu lus at the end of the second line. Dioscorides calls it Chamaeacte.
Edere luci, for lyghe, read light. In Efferre pedem, the.iii. line, for
efferrat, read efferat. In Esaias, in the last line at the end for.96.
years, read. 800. years. Ethopela, read Ethopeia. Exinantio, read Exinanio.
Facere conuitiam, read Conuitium. Floreo, rui, rure, read rere. In
Folliculus, for ears of weate, read ears of wheat. In Frumentum, for weate
or rye, read wheat or rye. In Heraclia, Nemiphar, read Nenuphar. In
Hipposelinon, for the herb callache or smallache, or march, read the herb
called smallache or march. Hucertus, read hubertus. Hyaccynthinus, read
Hyacynthinus. In clausulam disputationi imponere, for an end, read an end.
Infici, read Inficio. In Intentio, but forth, read but the. In Ioannes, the
third line, annes Baptista, read Ioannes, the.liiii. line, Iolysabeth read
Elysabeth. the.liiii. line, read.vi. months. In Ioppe, the. iiii line, for
the haven callid wheche Port Iaffe, read, the haven which is called Port
Iaffe. Iubilium, read Iubilum. Lixinium, read Lixiuium. In lunaticus, for
made, read mad. In Lycoctones, for Asconitum, read Aconit^. Male precare,
read precari. Manibus pedibusque ire in sententiam, the.iiii. line, read,
Where the greater part. Marconiani, read Marcomani. Mateaeotechina, read
Mataeotechnia. Matter matrina, read has a mother living. Matrinuis, read
Matrimus. Mediouratrices, read Mediomatrices. Melamirus, read Melanurus.
Melisphillon, read Melissophillon. Morosi, read Morose. Moscatulae, peacis,
read pears. Moscena, read Moscua. Mullus, for Sestertia, read Sesterrios,
and in the space after, put in.iii.li.xiiii.s.iiii. d. Naeuia, read Nenia.
Narbonensis prouincia, the.ii. line, read the mountains called Alps.
Nascitus uentus, read Nascitur uentus. Nonae, put out the mids. Nouantum
Chersonesum, read a place in the west part of Scotland. Nugigerulus, read a
bearer about of fables. Numa, the.viii. line, he brought, put out he.
Numerato, the.xi line, that notwithstanding put out that. Nummus argenteus, the
second line, was also that, put out also. Occurrit peruionibus, read
pernionibus. Oculi eruditi, read, when one knows whether a thing be well
done or no. Oculos tollere, put out, thing be weldone or no O dipodioniua,
read Oedipodionius. Oenophorus, a cupbearer. Oratoriae, read oratorie, without
a diphtho^g. Orthopnoea, when a man ran not, read can not. Ozinum, read
Ozimum. Paciscor, the fyfthe line, I agreed, read, he agreed. Palangari, read
Palangarij. Pannonia, the.iiii. line, for free, read far. Parthenium, the.vi.
line, for helcine, read helxine. Paratus, read Parasitus. Patiiactiuras,
read pati iacturas. Patrimis, read Patrimus. Pendo, the third line, expen
-read expendo. Per silentium adesse aeque animo, read aequo animo. Perinde,
the second line, uen, read even. Pernicissimus, read Perniciosissimus.
Petulenter, read Petulanter. Peuxedanum, read Peucedanum. Pharmacentice,
read Pharmaceutice. Pisarurus, read Pisaurus. Padaris, read Podaris. Pono,
the.xxviii. line, when, read where. Possum, the second line, read sermon.
Posterior, the second line, between feram, and subauditur, put a point.
Praesagiu^, the.vi. line, cu^ exire, read exirem. Praetereo, the.xiii. line,
Nos nobilitate, read Hos nobilitate. etc. Praetexo, the.iii. line, retexta,
read Praetexta. Praeuerto, the.vi. line, pulbamentum, read pulpamentum. Puppes,
the foreparte, read the hinder part or docke of the ship. Quadi, the
second line, wuifes, read wulfes. Quadragies, the.xvii. lhne, committed,
read omytted. Quia, the second line, beatae uixisse, read beat. Quo non, the
ii. line, ad locum, read ad lacu^. Rhodus, Caparthium, read Carpathium.
Sacamento teneri, read Sacramento. Saliares coena, read Saliaris. Salinacis,
the.ii. line, Helmophroditus, read Hermophroditus. Scordion, the.iiii. line,
ransoms, read ramsons. Scessus, read Secessus. Seorsum, the fourth line, namely
the^ Demea, read the. Sesquimodus, read Sesquimodius. Silphion, the.ii. line,
Beuicyne, read Beuioyn. Somnorinum, read Somnium. Spina Aegyptia, the third
line, Bedegnar, read Bedeguar. After Stenoboea, for Sentor, read Stentor.
Super coenam, at supper, read after supper. Syntaxis, the.v. line, quod recte,
read quam recte. Syrtes, shelpes, read shelfes. Tabulata, the third line, not
not, put out the one not. Taminea uua, the.iiii. line, Stauis agria, read
Staphis agria. Taraxacon, for Soufystell, read Southistell. Thessalia, the.x.
line, Polybras, read Polybius. Tollere cristas, the.ii. line, or them, read to
the^. TRbales, read Trabales. Tracto, haec art, read hac art. Tragum,
weate, read wheat. Trama, un under, read an under garment. Transalpina
gallia, on his side, read on this side. Trasimenus, the.iii. line, Roman, read
Romans Trcolon, read Tricolon. Turricula, a little town, read a lyttel
tower. Veritanus ager, a selde, read a field. Veromanditi, read Veromandui.
Vertere. In fugam uertere, plyght, read flight. Vitisator, he that sells
vynes, read he that sets. Vrua, read Vrna. Vsucapia, read Vsucapio.
A ANTE B.
A SIGNIFIES of, or from.

Ab, and abs, be of the same sygnifycation, only A, goes before a word, which
begins with a co^sonant: Ab and abs, goth before a word, that does begin
with a vowel. It was also among the old Romans the note or mark of
acquital of transgressors, and therefore of Cicero A, is called litera
salutaris, the letter of saulfgarde.

Aaron was son of Amram, and brother to Moses. The word signifies, the
mountaigne of fortitude, or a strong hill. This man was of the tribe of Leui,
the fourth from him in lineall descent. He was in his proper tongue very
eloquent, and was elect of god to be the first bishop of the jews, and
lived.Lxxiii. years, and dyed before all the people on the mount of Oreb, when
he had been bishop.xxxvi. years, before the incarnation of Christ.M.CCCC.lxxi.
years.

Ab accidentibus, an officer, unto whom it belongs to write such things as
do chance.

Abaci, the tables inbowed, whereon pyllars do stand.

Abacti, officers deposed, or such as be constrained to resign their
authority.

Abactor, a stealer of cattle.

Abactores, thieves that steal cattle.

Abactus, tus, theft of cattle.

Abactus magistratus, deprived of his office.

Abacuk, Epiphamus.
a prophet which was of the trybe of Simeon, who prophesied and lamented the
taking of Jerusalem, by Nabuchodonosor, Afterward as he carried meat and
drink to his heruest men, an angel took him up by an hear of his head, and
carried him into Babylon, and brought him in to the dongeon, where Daniel the
prophet was among lions, who being fed and relieved by him, he was oftesones
carried home the same day. And dyed.ii. years before that the Jews returned
from Babylon, before the incarnation of Christ.D C. years.

Abaculi, counters, which auditors do use.

Abaculus, of Pliny is taken for account.

Abacus, a countynge table, or cupbourd.

Abagio, Varro de lingua latina.
gere, to fetch a compass in speking, and not to consist or abide in one
oration or sentence.

Abalienatio, alienation.

Abalienator, he that does alyene or put away a thing, or alters the
possession thereof, an alienour called of lawyars.

Abalienatus, he whom a man puts from him.

Abalienatus iure ciuium, outlawed out of the liberties of the city.

Abalienata morbis membra, Members mortified by syckenesse.

Abalieno, aui, are, to put or turn away, or to make strange.

Abambulo, aui, are, to ascend, or mount up.

Abamita, my great graundfathers sister.

Abanec, a gyrdell, which priests did wear, wrought with colors of scarlet
and purple, in such wise, that there seemed to be in it flowers and precious
stones set in order.

Abania, is interpreted the father, unto god acceptable, or gratifienge unto
god.

Abaphus, vndyed or vncolored.

Abarceo, cui, cere, to prohibit, or put of from a thing.

Abarimon, Plinius.
a country in Tartary, where men have fete turned backewarde, and be
wonderful swyft and wild.

Abas, the twelfe king of Argiues, and was graundfather to Perseus. An other
was a Trojan, companion to Aeneas, and makes in the geniti^^ case Abantis.

Abaster, one of the horses of Pluto king of hell.

Abathon, an isle in Egypt by the city of Me^phis, where ^syris, whom the
Egyptians named their god, was buried by his wife Isis.

Abatis, two words made of the preposition, a and the ablative case plural of
batus, which in english is a measure, signifies an officer, that has the
ordering of measures, Esdra.
as a clerk of the market.

Abauia, my great grandames mother.

Abauus, my great grandfathers father.

Abauuculus, my great grandfathers brother

Abax, abacis, a cupbourd or dressar, also an astronomers table.

Abba, a word of the language of Syria, and signifies father.

Abbreuio, are, to abbreuiate, or make short.

Abdera, a city in Thracia, which was first builded by Hercules, in
remembrance of his minion called Abderitus, which was there eaten with the
horses of Diomedes. In this city were borne Democritus the great philosopher,
and Prothagoras the famous rhetorician. This city was afterward called
Clazomene. In Spain there is an other of that name, called now Almeria.

Abderita, a citezen of Abdera.

Abd^ere se ex co^spectu heri, to keep him away that his master se him not.

Abd^ere se literis, to live unknown in continual study.

Abdias, one of the.xii. prophets, and is interpreted the servant of our
lord.

Abdicatio, an act of the father, when he excludes his son and heir from
the inheritance of his possessions.

Abdico, aui, are, to expel or put out of favor, or resign an office, or to
refuse his son or kynseman.

Abdicauit filium, he refused him for his son.

Abdicauit se magistratu, he has resigned his office or dignity.

Abdico, ixi, cere, to deny or forsake.

Abdite, secretly.

Abditum, a secret place.

Abditus, ta, tum, hyd secretly.

Abdo, di, dear, to hyde.

Abdomen, minis, that which is under the mouth of the stomach, where it
appears outward under the grystell of the breast bone. which is also called
Hypocondria. It is sometime taken for the fat about the kydneys. Also for
the pappes of a sow with her milk, cut of from her belly the day after that
the has farowed.

Abduco, xi, cere, to lead away, or lead out, or pull away, or take with.

Abduce, Plautus.
for abduc, lead or have away.

Abduxi clauem, I took out the kay.

Abecedarius, he that sets any thing in order by letter.

Abededos, a city in Egypt, wherein was the palaice of Memnon, and the temple
of Ospris.

Abedo, dear, to consume.

Abel, the second sone of Adam, and is interpreted, brethe, vapor, or
vanity. He was borne together with his sustar Delbora.xv. years after Cain. he
is reputed to be the first martyr, being slain by his said brother, of envy,
for as much as almyghtye god accepted his offrynge, and rejected the offering
of Cain, when the said Abel was one hundred years old. And was from his
chyldhod of great virtue and faith. He was slain before the Incarnation of
Christ. 1900. years.

Abellinae, fylberdes of Abellino, a City in Naples.

Abemo, emi, ere, to take or put of a garmente.

Abemito uestem, put of thy cote.

Ab eo gratiam inibo, I will get his favor.

Ab epistolis, in such office as now be clarites of the signet, or inferior
secretaries.

Abeo, iui, uel ij, ire, to depart, or goo away.

Aberceo, to forbid. Eam abercet domo, he forbyddeth her his house.

Aberro, aui, are, to err or wander very much, to depart far of, or a sunder.

Aberun casso, sere, to turn up.

Aberuncare iram deorum, to withdraw the vengeance of god with prayers.

Aberunco, aui, are, to weed out, or pluck out.

Abessa, the name of a judge in Israel.

Abesse, to be absent.

Abeston, a stone of the color of iron, found in Arabia, which has growing
about it a thing like unto wulle, and that is called the down of Salamandre.
this stone being ones made hot, can never be cooled.

Abfore, to be away.

Abgrego, aui, are, to sever or take out of the floche, or to draw sheep.

Abhinc, before this time.

Abhorreo, rui, horrere, to abhorte, to hate, to dispyse, to flee froo, to be
unlike, or to discord.

Abhorresco, to fear to behold.

Abhorreo ab urbe relinguenda, Cicero.
I have no mind to forsake the city.

Abhorret ab illo mea sententia, mine opinion is contrary to his, or repugneth
against it.

Abhorret a suspitione, Cicero de amic.
it is contrary to my supposall.

Abhorret a charitate uulgi, Plaut. in Cistel.
he tendreth not, or passes nothing on the poor people.

Abhorret hilaritudo, thy myrthe is turned into sadness.

Abhortatio, a contrary advise.

Abhortor, tari, to give contrary advise, to dissuade.

Abiecto, aui, are, to cast often away.

Abiectus, a vile person.

Abiectus, ta, tum, naught set by, vexed with adversity.

Abies, a tree called a fyrre.

Abietarius, a carpenter.

Abiegnus, Varro.
a, um, of fyrre tree.

Abigeatus, tus, felony in stealing cattle.

Abigena bos, was among the diuinours called Augures, the ox, which was to
be sacrified, about whom the other beasts were set in an order.

Abigeus, a stealer of cattle.

Abigere ex aedibus, to drive out of the house.

Abigo, egi, gere, to drive away any thing, that is evil, Plaut. in Asin.
or oyous, also to drive away cattle by theft or deceyte.

Abi, a great river in England called Humber.

Adijcio, ieci, ijcere, to cast away, to renounce, to despise, to pour out,
sometime to give away.

Abijcior, ci, to be out of reputation.

Abijt hora, Teren. in Eunu.
the time passed.

Abijt sol, Plautus.
the son is gone down.

Abijt oppidum in uillas, the town is turned into fermes: as many be in
England. I pray god amend it.

Abijt in uulnus praeceps, he fell down suddenly, and lay on the side, wherein
he was wounded,

Aijt e medio, he vanysshed away, he was never more seen.

Abijt incepto, he left his enterprise.

Abijt in salem, it was turned into saulte.

Abit a sensibus, he is out of his wit.

Abibitur, I or he will depart or go away.

Abi in malam rem, Plaut. in Market.
go hense with a mischief.

Abi tu sane superior, sit thou higher, goo upper.

Abire pessum, to run hedlynge, to come to a myschiefe.

Abire a iure, to do wrong.

Abire, to cesse, to vanyshe, or to be appeased, to slyp away.

Mirabar hoc si sic abiret, I meruayled if it should so pass away.

Quid ad istas ineptias abis? what medleste thou with these fantasies.

Ab illo tibi soluam, I will cause him to pay you.

Ab labor, after labor.

A bonorum causa stare, to favor the part of good men.

Abintegro, yet again, eftesones.

Abintestato, intestat, or without testament.

Ab incunabulis, from his infancy.

Ab ineunti aetate, from his chyldhode.

Abitio, a departure, or goinge away, old wrytars took it for death, as we
may call it the decesse of one.

Abitus, a departing.

Abiudico, aui, are, to take away by judgment from oone, and give to an other
by the same sentence. Cicero co^tra Rull.
Id ab eo contra ius aequitatemque ad iudicauit, He took that away from him by
judgment against al law and reason.

Abiudicare a ulta, to put to death.

Abiudicabit nunque ab suo triobolum, He will never be of the mind to give three
halfpens of his own.

Abiudicatum, adjudged, given by judgment from one to an other.

Abiugo, aui, are, to unyoke, discharge or put a sonder.

Abiungo, xi, ere, to sever, or sunder.

Abiurati, sworn brotherne, or confederates.

Abiuratio, a forswearynge, an abiuration.

Abiuro, aui, are, to deny by an oath, or to keep a thing wrongfully.

Ablacto, aui, are, to weane.

Ablaqueo, aui, are, to ryd the earth from trees or vynes, and cut away the
upper roots, that they may bear no more fruit.

Ablectae aedes, houses well garnyshed to stere men to bye them.

Ablego, aui, are, to send away.

Abligurio, iui, ire, to consume goods in bankettynge, or farynge delycately.

Abloco, aui, are, to set or let to an other. to take from one and let to an
other.

Abludo, lusi, dear, to speak of a thing covertly, that other shall not espy
what the mat ter does mean.

Abluo, ui, ere, to wash of.

Ablutio, a washing.

Abluuium, a universal flood wherewith a country is drouned.

A media nocte, after midnight.

Abneco, are, to strangle.

Abnego, aui, are, to deny utterly.

Abnepos, otis, a son in the fourth degree in liniall descent.

Abneptis, a daughter in the fourth descent.

Abnormis, out of rule.

Abnuo, nui, ere, to deny or refuse with countenance or beck, to beck away.

Abnuto, signifies to beck away often times.

Ab octaua, after eight of the clock.

Aboleo, eui, uel ui, ere, to put out, or raze out, to anull, or undo for ever.

Abolesco, to bring to naught.

Abolitus, ta, Festus.
tum, rased out, put out of remembrance.

Abolla, a senators habit, or a sold youres cloak.

Aboloes, old wrytars used for ab illis.

Abominalis, le, abominable.

Abominor, atus sum, nari, to take for yllucke or have in detestation.

Aborigines, people, which first held the country about Rome, and lived
abroad, having no houses. They may also be taken for any other people, whose
beginning is not known.

Aborior, abortus sum, aboriri, to be borne before natural time.

Aborsus, an untimely birth, nyghe to the conception, which may be called
aborsion.

Aborsio, onis, and Abortiuus, the birth dystroyed with some hurt, or other
mysaduenture, or medicine.

Abortio, tiui, tire, to bring forth a child or it be perfect.

Abortium idem quod abortus.

Abortiuus, a, um, that thing which procures the said untimely birth.

Abortor, and aborto, idem quod abortio.

Abortus, an untimely birth, nygh to the lust time of delyueraunce, whereby the
child dies.

Abpatruus, my fathers great uncle.

A prima luce, after the spring of the day.

A primo cogitauit, he thaught at the first.

Abrado, si, dear, to pare, to scrape away.

Abradere be bonis, to poll, or spoil a man of his goods.

Abtaham, an holy Patriarch, was the son of Their, borne in Caldey, and is
interpreted, the father of many nations, or of people saying. this man as well
in virtue, and perfect faith, as in sondrye and mistical doctrines, was most
excellent, he taught the Egyptians astronomy and geometry. He died before the
incarnation of Christ. Josephus.
1838. years.

Ab re, out of the matter, or out of the purpose unseemly, inconvenient.

Ab re orare, to pray or desire in vayn.

Ab re tua, against thy profit.

Non ab re, not without a cause.

Abrenuntio, aui, are, to renounce or forsake.

Abripio, pui, ere, to take fro, or take by force.

Abripuit repent sese, he went away suddenly.

Abrogo, aui, are, to take away.

Abrogare fidem, to bring out of credence.

Abrogare legi, to dissolve or repel a law.

Fidem homini abrogare, to believe a man no more. to have one out of credence.

Vires benefiens abrogare, to esteem the benefyte of no value.

Abrogati, they which being at liberty, submyt them selves to an other
man's rule, by their consent.

Abrogatio, the dyssoluynge or repellynge of a law.

Abrotanum, an herb called southernwood.

Abrumpo, rupi, rumpere, to break of, pluck up, or cut of.

Abrupta loca, rocks and hills, here and there broken or dygged, so that oone
may uneath go or crepe up to them.

Abrupte, out of frame, not agreyng with the beginning.

Abruptum, that which has such a fall, or stepenesse down, that no man
may pass by it, but only fall down.

Abruptus, broken here and there, as rocks and great hills.

Abruptus sermo, a tale that hangs not together.

Abs, of, or fro.

Absarus, a river of Armeny, that incloseth the less Armeny.

Abscedo, cessi, dear, to go away.

Abscessus, and abscessio, a departing.

Abscessus, is of physicians taken for an impostume or botche, or for a course
of evil humors to some part of the body, whereby matter putrified is
engendered.

Abscido, di, scindere, to cut of.

Abscindo, signifies the same.

Abscio, iui, ire, to go out of remembrance.

Abscissior iustia, sharp justice.

Abscissus, a, um, broken, sharp.

Abscondo, di, dear, to hyde.

Absconsus, a, um, hyd.

Absens, it is, absent, or away.

Absentaneus, a, um, that which in absence is done.

Absentia, absence.

Absento, tire, to think contrary.

Absento, aui, are, to be absent.

Absimilis, much unlike.

Absis, uel Apsis, idos, the struck of a carte whele, wherein the spokes be set.

Absisto, tere, to depart from a place. sometime it sygnifyeth to absteyne or
leave of.

Absoleo, ere, to be out of use.

Absoletus locus, a place unoccupied, or neglected.

Absoluo, ui, ^re, to lose that which was bounden, also to perform or
accomplish. Also to spare or forgive, to pardon, to speed, to assoyle.

Absoluere, Plaut. in Capt. in Amphit.
to depeche of business.

Absoluere creditorem, to pay that he owes.

Absoluere pensum, to work out his task.

Absoluere suspitione, to discharge or put of all suspicion.

Absoluere vno uerbo, to tell at a word, to make an end shortly.

Absolute, perfectly.

Absolutio, a dyscharge, or depeche.

Absolutus, ta, tum, discharged, depeched.

Absono, aui, are, to dyscorde, or sown evil.

Absonus, na number, that which sowneth not well, or dyscordeth, or scantelye
may be hard.

Absonum fidei, not credyble.

Absonus voce, he that has an untunable voice.

Absorbeo, bui, uel psi, ere, to swalowe or sup of all, to devour or consume.

Absque, without.

Abs quiuis homine, Terent. in Adelp.
of every man what so ever he be.

Abs re stat, Plaut. in Ruden.
it stands upon the, or it lies in the.

Abstemius, he that drynketh no wine.

Abstentus, accursed out of the church.

Abstergeo, si, gere, to wype, to wype away.

Abstergere dolorem, to put away sorrow.

Absterreo, ui, ^re, to prohibit or let, or put fro.

Absterrere, to feate away, or drive away with fear.

Abstinentia, abstinence, a virtue in forbearynge to take an other man's
goods.

Abstinenter, with abstinence.

Abstineo, ui, ere, to absteyne, or forbear, or tempre.

Abstinere alieno, not to meddle with other men's goods.

Abstinere in commoditate,, Plaut. in Mil.
to behave him honestly.

Abstinere manum, Plaut in Rud.
to hold his hand.

Abstinere manus, to refrain from bribery.

Abstinere uerbis, Plinius in epist.
to take heed what he speaks.

Abstineas a me manum, Take heed that thou stryke me not. Sueton. in Clau.


Abstinuit diu publico, it was long or he came abroad.

Abstinens alieni, he that medeleth not with other men's goods.

Abstro, stiti, stare, to stand far of.

Abstorqueo, torsi, quere, to get by force or tourmentes.

Abstraho, xi, ^re, to take by force or by craft.

Abstraxi me illinc, I gat me from thense.

Abstractum, taken by force.

Abstrudo, si, d^^re, to hyde.

Abstrudere colaphos, to buffet or give blows.

Abstrusus, a, um, hyd, or shut up.

Abstulit, of aufero, he has byrefte, taken away, or borne away.

Absum, fui, abesse, to be away, or far of, or to fail, or to be distant, or
absent.

Abest mihi animus, I have no courage.

Absente nobis, while I was away.

Absit uerbo inuidia, a form of speaking, when oone would not be suspected of
arrogance in some thing that he will speak.

Absumo, psi, ^^re, to spend or consume.

Absumedo, dinis, dispense, waste of money, or other like thing.

Absumptio, a wasting, waste.

Absumti sumus, we are undone.

Absurd, without purpose or reason, to no purpose.

Absurdus, da, dum, inconueniente, foolyshe, discordynge, dyshoneste,
abhorrynge, or odious.

Absynthites, wine, wherein wormwood has been infused or sodden.

Absynthium, is commonly called wormwood. How be it there be thereof three
kinds: Seriphium, which seems to be our wormwood. Santonicum, whereof
comes worm seed: Ponticum, or Romanum, which has a less leaf than our
wormwood, and has a sweter odor.

Absyrtides, be ylandes in the Venetian sea.

Absyrtus, the brother of Medea, whom she did cut in to pieces, and threw
in to the sea, when she fled from her father with Jason.

Abuerto, tere, to turn from a place.

Abundans, a rich man.

Abundanter, abundantly.

Abundantia, abundaunce, more than suffycient, riches.

Abunde, abundauntly, plentuousely, enough, and more than inoughe.

Abunde est, it is enough.

Abundo, aui, are, to habounde, to have out of measure, more than inoughe. also
to be rich.

Abundare ingenio, to have a great wit.

Abuolo, aui, are, to flee away.

Abusiue, improperly, against nature, or custom.

Abusque mane ad uesperam, from morninge to night.

Abusum, worn out.

Abusus, us, and abusio, abuse, ill use.

Abutor, abusus sum, abuti, to abuse, to use a thing dyshonestely, uncomely,
contrary to that, that it serves for, out of order, or in vain. also to
were out.

Aburitur operam, he lost his labor.

Abydena, trifles, things of small estimation, wanton toys, things unseemly
for men to use.

Abydeni, a people in Asia, which having their city distressed with a long
siege, fell into a fury, or madness, and slew all their wives, their
children, and afterward them selfs.

Abydeus, a man borne in the isle of Abydos.

Ab^^dus, was a City in Grecia, upon the sea side, called Propontis, which
dyuydeth Europam from Asia, where the passage over excedeth not much thyrtye
furlonge, called Stadia, contrary unto that, stands an other town called
Sestus.

Abyla, a hylle in the Occean sea, against Spain, which is called oone of
Hercules pyllars.

Abyssus, Augustine.
is a depenes without bottom. Ambrosi.


A ante C.
AC, sygnifyeth sometime, and, as Doctus ac iustus es, thou art hunnynge and
just. Sometime it is taken for than, as: Haud secus ac iussi faciunt. They do
none other wise than they be commanded. Sometime it signifies as, as,
Superbis perinde, ac si rex esses. Thou art as proud, as if thou were a king.

Acadaemia, a vniuersytie, which took that name of a place nyghe to Athenes,
where Plato the great philosopher taught philosophy.

Academici, were a sect of philosophers, which followed and taught the
opinions of Plato.

Acamas, an elbowe of land in the isle of Cypres, toward the east.

Acanthide, the old name of the isle of Cypres.

Acanthis, idis, a^ bird that fedeth on thystles, and makes her neste with
claye, and is called in english, as I suppose, a lynnet. It was also a boy,
which as the poets do feign, was transformed into a flower of his name. It
is also a bushe, like a white thorn, with less leaves, mosy, and pryckynge.
Dioscorides says, that it is an herb, that grows in stony and moist
ground, and has leaves brother and longer than lettise, in form like to
rocket, somewhat black, and in broisynge soft ad fatty, having a stalk
of.ii. cubytes high, of thyckenesse of a man's finger, garnished under the
top with little long leaves, and pryckynge, whereunto grows a white flower.
It is supposed to be that herb, which is commonly called Branca ursina, It is
also called Acanthus and Acantha, in english bear foot, as some do suppose.

Acapis, a river in Asia.

Acapna, dry wood that smoketh not.

Acar and Acarus, a little worm that bredeth in wax.

Acara, a town in the myddel of Hungary.

Acarnania, a part of a royalme in Greece, named Epirus. It is also a littell
countreye in Egypt. and it is a city by Syracusis, in the royalme of Sicile.

Acarnanes, the people of that country.

Acarpia, lack of fruit.

Acarpos, unfruitful.

Acasta, a nymphe or maiden of the fayry.

Acatalectos, a verse wherein one syllable iacketh.

Acatium, the greatest sail in the ship. also a boat.

Accalaurentia, the name of her, that nourysshed Romulus and Remus, the first
buylders of Rome.

Acatia, the juice of a fruit in Egypt, but instead thereof, men now do take
the juice of sides which like to the other do refrygerate, bind, and stryke
heat backewarde.

Accedo, cessi, dear, to goo to, or approach. sometime it sygnifieth to give an
ear or harken, to take heed, and to make much of.

Accede adiutare, come help me.

Accedere ad amicitiam alicuius, Plaut. in trucul.
to alye him self with one.

Accedere alicui, to grant to another, or to be of an other man's opinion.

Accedere illi, to be of his opinion.

Accedere obuiam, to mete with one.

Accedere periculum, Plaut. in Epidi.
to take on him the daungier.

Accedit huc, more over than that.

Accedit pretio, the price increseth.

Huc accedit summus timor, more ouet the fear was wonderful great.

Accessit, he went.

Illi aetas accessit, he is become old.

Robur accessit, strength in increased.

Accessit ea res in cumulum, and that thing moreover is thereunto added.

Accelero, aui, are, to make have or speed.

Accelerare gradum to go apace.

Acceleratio, haste or speed.

Accendo, di, dear, to kendle, inflame, provoke, or give boldness.

Accensi, were soldiers appointed to be about great officers for defense of
their persons. Festus says, that it were they, which after the death of
souldyours were put in their places. Varro affirms, that they were ministers
ready at the commandments of principal officers.

Accento, tare, to sing often.

Accentus, an accent, or tunc, whereby a syllable is pronounced.

Accepso, instead of acceperim, I have taken.

Acceptabula, all vessayle or other thing, that may receive and keep what so
ever shall be put in to it.

Acceptilatio, an acceptaunce, a word of the law, which happens in this
wise. One says to an other: art thou contented with that that I have promised
the? or that by my bargayne I owe to the? the other says: yea, I am contented.
This is acceptilatio. Also wherein so ever I have bounden my self by receyuynge
of any thing, it may be called acceptilatio.

Acceptum, thankful, pleasant, alowable.

Acceptam facere pecuniam, to make a quitaunce for money received.

Acceptum fero, to knowledge my self to have received, that is not yet paid,
also to take thankefully,

Acceptum refer, to make a reckenynge of that which is received.

Acceptus, received, entertained.

Acceptus, ta, tum, accepted, acceptable.

Accepti and expensi ratio, account of receytes and expenses.

Accersio, sire, to send or call for one.

Accersi iube filiam, command thy daughter to be sent for, or called for.

Accersitus, called for.

Accerso, siui, sire, to call forth, or send for.

Accerso, fere, tertiae coniugat. to go to call, or fetch.

Accersere orationi splendore^, to make the ocation light to understand.

Accessio, an augmentation, also a goinge or coming.

Accessio febris, the course of the fever.

Accessio morbi, the beginning of a sickness.

Accessus maris, the flowynge of the sea.

Accidens, is an accident which may be or not be, without corruption of that,
wherein it may be.

Accidere, to happen.

Accidit, there happened, it is chanced.

Accido, cidere, to extenuate, or make feeble, to destroy.

Accido, di, d^re, to fall down in doing reverence.

Accinere, to sing to an instrument, or to sing a part, as a treble to a
tenor, or a descante to a plain song.

Accingo, xi, gere, to gyrd, to prepare, to make ready, to do some thing.

Accinctus, gyrt, ready, quick in his business.

Accio, iui, ire, to call to, to send for one, to come.

Accepto far, to acquyte one of his promise.

Acceptrica, she that uses to receive any thing

Accipio, coepi, cip^re, to take, to here, to suppose, to know, to
understand, to receive, to entreat, or entertayne.

Accipere auribus, to here.

Accipere ad verbu^, to take as he speaks it.

Accipere aliorsum, to take it other wise tha^ it was spoken.

Accipere causam, to hold excused.

Accipere cladem, to lose the battle.

Accipere conditionem, to take the offer.

Accipere cord, to perceive well.

Pol haud satis meo cord accepi quaerelas tuas, In good faith I do not well
perceive the cause of thy grief.

Accipere aequis auribus, to here indifferently

Accipere durius, to take it displesauntly.

Accipere dictis, to take with one gentylly.

Accipere dolorem, to take thought, to be heavy.

Accipere fidutiam, to be infeoffed.

Accipere grauiter, to take it heuyly.

Accipere in ciuitatem, to make one a cytezen. Also to open the town gates
against him that besieges it, to yield it up.

Accipere moderate, to take it patiently.

Accipere mandata, to take charge by commission.

Accipere nomen, to take account.

Accipere oculis, and animo, to se and remember.

Accipere potestatem, to have leave.

Accipere uerberibus, to beat one.

Accipere uulnus, to be wounded.

Accipe ad omnia, take this answer for all.

Ego a maioribus memoria sic accepi. I remember that I hard mine elders so
report.

Accipiter, a hawke.

Accipiter humipeta, a sparhauke.

Accipiter hierax, an hawk called a sakre.

Accipiter pecuniarum, a poller of people.

Accipitrarius, a faulconer.

Acclamo, are, to cry with reioysynge.

Acclamatio, a showte.

Acclino, aui, are, to enclyne, or bend to.

Accliue, stepe wise, bendynge wise.

Accliuis sieve accliuus, rysynge upward to a small top.

Accliuis arbori, leaving to a tree.

Accliuitas, a raysynge up of a hill.

Accludo, to shut to.

Accola, the next inhabitant called a borderar. Also he that comes out of one
countreye, and dwells in an other country or town.

Accola campi, he that dwells next to the field.

Accolo, to dwell by or nyghe, specially hills or waters.

Accommodo, aui, are, to accommodate, approper, to apply, make apt, set in
order, give or inclyne.

Acco^modare ensem lateri, to gyrde a sword about one.

Accommodare curam auribus, to here dylygently.

Accommodus, da, dum, apt, mete, convenient.

Accommodate, to the purpose, handsomely.

Accommodatus, ta, tum, applied to a thing, besemynge, couenable.

Accommodatus ad flagitia, disposed to mischief.

Accerdo, didi, dear, to give credence, to assent.

Accreduo, uis, uere, idem quod accredo.

Accresco, creui, crescere, to grow to.

Accretio and Acrementum, increace.

Accubatio, a sitting at the table, also the liinge in of a woman with child.
sometime the sitting on brood of birds and fowls.

Accubitores, they that sit at the table.

Accubitum, a bed or couche to lie on by day time, as it was the manner of the
old Romans, to eat lyenge on their beds.

Accubitus, the lyinge in the said manner.

Accubo, bare, to lie by, or to sit, or to lie down to eat.

Accudo, ere, to beat a thing on an anuile.

Accumbo, cubui, accumbere, to lie down, to lie by, to ly or sit down at
feasts and bankettes.

Accumbere mensam, to sit at one table.

Accumbere alicui, to sit by one at the table.

Accumulo, aui, are, to accumulate, or gather in heaps, to increase.

Accuro, aui, are, to take good head. Also to do a thing diligently.

Accurare prandiu^, to make ready the dinner.

Accurate Plaut. in Trucul.
diligently curiously, exactly.

Accuratio, diligence.

Accuratus, ta, tum, wherein is much diligence, curiouse, exact.

Accurata malitia, malice prepensed.

Accuratum habere, to prepense, or forecaste a thing curiously.

Accurro, ri, rere, to run to, to speed thither.

Accusabilis, le, worthy to be blamed.

Accusatio, an accusement.

Accusator, an accuser, a rebuker.

Accusatorius, a, um, which conteyneth an accusation.

Accusatorius liber, a byl of complaynt.

Accusatrix, a woman rebuker.

Accuso, aui, are, to accuse, to blame.

Acedaria, salettes, or meats lightly prepared.

Acedia, sloth, pensifnes, heaviness of heart, werynes.

Acedior, diatus sum, to be werye or wax slothful.

Acentra, and acentreta, things whereof the point in the mids is not known.

Aceo, acui, acere, to be sour or sharp.

Acephali, were heretics which denied to be two natures in Christ, affyrmynge
the nature divine to be in him only. This heresy was condemned in the
counsel of Chalcedonense.

Acephalus, la, lum, without a head.

Acer and aceris, a tree, the wood whereof is most gentle to work in, it
seems by the description thereof, to be that which is called wiche, also bows
be made thereof.

Acer, aceris, chafe of mylseede.

Acer, cra, crum, and Acer, acris, acre, sour as vyneger. sometime it
betokens strong, sore, also diligent.

Acer amator, a fervent lover.

Amor acer, ardent love.

Acer animus, a great or lusty courage.

Acer equus, a courageous or swyft horse.

Acer morbus, a greuouse sickness.

Acerse comes, he that never cutteth his hear.

Acerrima vxor, a very shrewd wife.

Acerrime, exceeding sharply or stiffly, eygrely or rigorously.

Acerrimi inimici, mortal ennemies.

Acerrimi testes, witnesses which do styfly abide by the matter.

Aceratum, mortar, or claye, myxt with hey or straw, wherewith walls are
daubed.

Acerbe, bitterly, vnripely, cruelly, vehemently.

Acerbitas, bytternes of taste, sharpnes of time, cruelty of man, heuines,
grief, pain.

Acerbo, baui, bare, to trouble, to make bitter, or abominable.

Acerbus, ba, bum, unripe, bitter, displesant, difficult, or peynfull, as,
Robustorum iuuenum acerba mors, The death of young men is peynefull, as who
says, they dye with great difficulty.

Acere, a city by Naples.

Acernus, na, number, of the tree called Acer.

Acero, rare, to myxt with chafe.

Acerosum frumentum, unclean whete, whete not well wynowed or fanned.

Acerosus panis, brown bread not ranged.

Acerra, a ship, wherein frankensense is put. some do name it an auitare,
which was set before a dead corpse, whereon incense was burned. some call it a
cup, wherein they did sacrifice wine.

Aceruatim, in heaps, without order, in a mengley.

Aceruo, aui, are, to gather into heaps.

Aceruus, a heap or gatherynge together specially of grain.

Acesco, sci, scere, to wax sour or tart, specially in licour.

Acesinus, a great river in Persia, which runs into the river of Indus,
wherein do grow canes of such greatness, that they do make thereof between
every knotte or joint, botes to row in.

Acesis, an herb which is yelowe in color.

Acestis, a great river in India.

Acerabulum, a measure conteyninge in it of wine two ounces and a half. It is
also a litell vessel, as a saucer, or other like. it is also a box or
goblette wherewith iuglars do make their conueyance. It is also a partition in
the leg of a fyshe called Polipus, which is like unto a littel cup or goblet.

Acetare, to move or stir.

Acertarium, a salate of herbs, it is also a garden, where salate herbs do
grow.

Acetositas, cygrenes or sowrenesse.

Acetosus, a, um, eygre, sour.

Acetum, vyneger.

Acetum in pectore). Nunc experiar, sit ne acetum tibi, cor acre in pectore,
Now will I prove, if thou haste any thing that does prick the in the
stomach.

Aceum, a city in Colchis, on the bank of the river called Phasis.

Achaei, people in Grecia. sometime they be taken for Greeks generally.

Achaemenes, was first king of Persians or Parthians, of whom diverse kings
of Persia, were called Achaemenes, and the people Achaemenii.

Achaeron, rontis, is of Poets taken for a river of Hell. In deed it is a
river in a part of Italy, whereof the people be called Brutii.

Achaia, a part of Grecia containing these countries, Attica, Boeotia,
Megaris, Actholia, and Phocis. It has on the west Epyrum, on the east, the
sea called Aegeum, on the north Macedonia, on the south the sea called
Creticum. There is an other Achaia in the part of Grecia, called Peloponesus,
now called Morea, where was the city of Patras, in the which saint Androwe
the apostle was martryd.

Achantia, a fyshe, which some men do suppose to be thornebacke.

Achar, a city in Siria, now called Nisibis.

Achateon, the main sail of a ship.

Achates, a precious stone, wherein are represented diverse figures, for some
have had in them the image of the.ix. muses, some of Venus, some have the
color of Coral, some ar bright as Cristali. It was one of the.xii. stones,
that god commanded to be put on the vestementes of Aaron. It was supposed that
magitiens by burning of that stone, Plinius.
and the smoke thereof cummynge, Solin.
did put away tempests and storms. Also of that name is a river in Sicil. It
was also the name of the companion of Aeneas the Troyan.

Achei, or Achiui, be not only the people of Achaia, but also among the
poets, be often taken for the general name of Greeks.

Achelous, a famous river in Grecia, which rounneth out of Pindus. Solin.
wherein is found the stone Galactides, which is black, but being broken,
it yeldeth licour as white as milk, and is of the taste thereof.

Acheloeus, of that river, sometime it is put for aqueus.

Achemenia, a country in Persia.

Acherontinus, and Acherontius, of the river of Acheron.

Acherusia, a fen in the royalme of Naples.

Acherusius, an hole or cave, which the poets did suppose was a way into
Hell, out of the which Hercules brought Cerberum the dog of Hell. And the
painims believed that all souls went by that way to the fenne or mere called
Stygiae paludes, where Charon received them into his bote.

Ach^^tae, greshoppers, which chyrpe loud and pleasauntly.

Achillea, an herb called yarrowe.

Achilleias, a kind of barley, peradventure that which is called beer corn.

Achilleon, some do suppose to be mylfoyle.

Achilleum, a sponge, which is very soft, and has small holes.

Achilles, one of the most valyante capitaynes of the Greeks against Troy, he
was son of Peleus, in his chyldehode he was instructed of Chiron in deeds of
arms and surgerye. after he slew the noble Hector, and Troilus his brother,
the one suddenly, the other cruelly. Wherefore afterward he by the slyght of
queen Hecuba mother to Hector, was brought into the love of Polyxena her fair
daughter, and under the color of marriage was slain by Paris, brother to
Hector. He was in heyghte as Lycophron writes.vii. cubits.

Achras, a wild pear.

Achylus, without lyppes.

Aciaeris, a hatchet of brass, which among the paynimes was used in
sacrifice.

Aciale, hard iron.

Acicula, a pyn.

Acidalia, the name of Venus, of a fountayn in a city of Bocotia, called
Orchomenae.

Acidula, pears that be sour. Also an herb called sorrel de boys.

Acidus, da, dum, sour or sharp.

Acidylus, a knot in the gyrdell of Venus.

Acies, betokens the edge of a knyfe, or other weapon or tool. Also the
front of an host, at the joining of battle. Moreover that part of the eye
which is called the sight.

Acies animi uel ingenii, the sharpnes or capacity of the wit, which some call
the spirit.

Aciem trahere, to set in edge.

Acinaceus, a, um, full of kernels.

Acinacis, a crooked sword that the Persians used.

Acini, be little kernels, which be in grapes, raisons, pomegranates, and
other beryes.

Acinosus, full of kernels.

Acinus, small basyll.

Acipenser, or Aquipenser, a kind of fysshe, which has the scales turned
toward the head.

Aciritani, were a people in Spain.

Acis, a river in Sycil, which comes from the mountain of Aethna.

Acitia, an ylonde, called also Melos in the sea by Candy.

Aclanes, he that never cries.

Aclassis, a garment unsown from the shulders.

Aclytes, a weapon used in the old time.

Acon, onis, a fyshe, which after the description of Paulus Iouius, I suppose
to be that which at London is called a shad.

Aconitum, an herb exceeding venomous, it has leaves like a cucumber, but
sumwhat less and roughe, the stalk one hand broad high, the rote like the
tail of a scorpion, and is white as alablaster. There is also an other kind
thereof, which has leaves like a plane tree, but the diuysions are thycker,
the leaf longer and more black, and has a stalk like a fern, one cubite in
heyghte the seed being in a long codde, the roots are black, and be like
to the hears or horns of a shrympe.

Acontiae, certain impressyons in the fyrmament, like to fyry darts, which
do seem to fly in the air.

Acopa, medicines to remedy weryNes or labor.

Acopis, a precious stoone like a glass, with small golden oroppes, wherewith
if oil be heat, and the body therewith anointed, it dissolueth all weariness.

Acopus, an herb called also Anagyris, full of branches, and has flowers
like to colewortes, and has an ill savor, the sede thereof is in long coddes,
hard and like in facion to kydneys.

Acor, ris, a tartenesse, like unto ripe wine or pomegranates, eygRenes.

Acorus, an herb with long leaves, like the blade of a sword. Leonicenus and
Antonius Musa do suppose it to be galyngale, and not that which is called
Gladiolus, in english Gladen. This root is hot and dry in the third
degree.

Acquiesco, eui, escere, to lean, as to lean my head or arm upon any thing.
Also it signyfyeth to assent to other men's sayenges. also to recreate.

Acquiro, fiui, re, to atteyne a thing that is sought for.

Acratismus and acratisma, a breakefast.

Acr^^on, pure wine, without alay, or unmixed.

Acre, swyfte, sour, cruel, valiant, vehement, diligent, circumspect.

Acre ingenium, a quycke wit.

Acres oculi, clear eyes.

Acredo, acritudo, acritas, sharpnes, or sowrenesse that is in fruits that be
not ripe.

Acredula, the wood lark.

Acrimonia, tartnes, which byteth the tongue, and perceth the heed, as in the
taste of garlike oynions and other like thingis. It signifies sometime
sharpenes in speaking or mind, sometime lyuelynes and quycknes of wit.

Acris, a river of Italy.

Acrisius, king of Argiues, the father of Danaes, on whom Jupiter begat
Perseus.

Acritas, sowrenes, cruelty, diligence.

Acriter, sharply, sowrely, styffely, swyftly, cruelly, vehemently, diligently.

Acriter animum intendere, to set al his intent or study.

Acriter iudicare, to judge with a great deliberation, and as nighe the truth
as he can.

Acrius, more sharply or styffely.

Acroama, a subtyl sentence or lesson, requiring much study and search. It is
also taken for all things to be recited or done, to delight the audience.

Acroamata, were certain lectures of Aristotle which he radde to his scholars,
wherein was the most subtle and counnynge part of philosophye.

Acrocaeraunia, mountains of wonderfulle heyght, between Armenia and Hiberia.

Acrochordones, a kind of wartes, so small at the roots, that they do seem
to hang by a synewe.

Acrocomus, one having long hear.

Acrocorinthus, an high mountain in Morea, between the two seas Aegeu^ and
Ionium.

Acrodria, be all fruits, which have an hard rynde or shale, as pomegranodes,
nuttes, the styns, pystaces, and other like.

Acropolis, a castle set on a hylle.

Acta, water banks, or which men do call strondes, whereon the water
flows. Also it is that which we call acts concerning men's lives, or private
busynes put in writing, also such deeds as have happened out of judgment.

Actitata, be those, which have happened in judgment, properly they which be
in doing.

Acta aetas, age when youth is past.

Acta agere, to do that which is all ready done.

Acta circunducere, to cancel a sentence ones determined.

Act, an elder tree.

Actaeon, the name of a man, whom Diana, because he did see her naked, turned
into an heart, and so was he torn and slain of his own hounds.

Actaeus, of Athens.

Actia, orum, plays made ones in five years.

Actio, onis, betokens sometime pronunciation, sometime an oration written,
sometime an action in the law, sometime an history, sometime a defense,
otherwhile a recompense in words for a benefit received, as Gratiaru^ actio
for thanks. Generally it is taken for act or deed in every thing.

Action, the beary of an elder.

Actiosus, busye.

Actitatio, a debating of a case in law, a pleding

Actitatus, determined by judgment.

Actito, taui, tare, to practyse specially in cyuile causes.

Actius, a noble poet that wrate tragedies.

Actiuus, active.

Actor, which does the deed. Also in the law the playntife, complaynant, or
demandaunt. Also a player of enterludes. also a man's factour or baylyffe that
has the charge of his business.

Actualia nomina, names which do proceed of act, as Rex a regendo, of
gouernynge. Dux a ducendo, of leadynge.

Actualis scientia, a science that declares things by their operation, of the
which are three parts, moral, dispensatiue, and ciuyle.

Actuarius, a substantive, signifies a notarye or scribe, or any other that
writes spedily.

Actuarius, a, um, active.

Actuaria nauis, a row barge, or other light ship which is rowed.

Actum de me est, I am undone.

Actuose, braggyngly.

Actuosus, full of acts, always in busynes.

Actuosus ignis, fire which always bourneth.

Actus, ta, tum, performed, also arrived, thrust in, brought to, or feared.

Actus, tus, a deed, the parts of a commedye or play, a days warke in
tyllage, which was accounted at.Cxx. feet square. Alsoo the measure of
ground contayninge.Cxx. fete square.

Actutum, anon, without taryenge.

Aculeatus, Seneca.
a, um, any thing that pricketh.

Aculeus, a prycke or stynge.

Acumen, the sharpnes of every thing. it signifies also clerenesse of wit,
also the sharp bylle of a bird.

Acumino, aui, are, to sharpen.

Acuncula, a small nedle.

Acuo, acui, acuere, to make sharp. by translation, it signils;ieth to prycke
forth or styre one to do a thing, to p^^ouoke. Ingenium acuere to quycken the
wit. Linguam acuere, to make the tongue to pronounce perfectly.

Stilum acuere, to write sharply or cursedly.

Acupedius, he that has a quycke or apt foot to run with.

Acupictores, imbrowderers.

Acus, aceris, chafe.

Acus, acus, a nedell, also chafe of corn, also an order in battle.

Acus, Fra^ciscus Massarius in.9. li. Pl.
ci, a fyshe of the sea, long, small, and smoth, and on the back has a color
between grene and blewe, and has a long beak and a sharp. It is called in
some countries here, an horn beak. In the time of spaunyng, the bealy of this
fyshe opens, and so the spaune issues, afterward the wound is closed. This
fyshe is hard of digestion, but it is moist, and of good juice in a hole body.

Acustici, they which do here all, and speak nothing them self.

Acute, quyckely, subtylly.

Acutulus, he that has a pretty wit.

Acutus, a, um, sharp, but in voice: it betokens high and small as a treble.

Acuti oculi, clear eyes.

Acuti cibi, sharp meats.

Acutum ingenium, a subtylle or quycke wit.

Acylon, an holy bearye.

Acyphantes, a city in Thessalye, which is also called Pindus.

A, ANTE D.
AD, by him self, or joined to an another word, signifies to or at, as Vado
ad oppidum, I goo to the town. Erat ad ripam fluminis arbor, There was at the
ryuers side a great tree. Sometime it signifies against, as Ad illum mihi
pugna est, Against him is my war. sometime it betokens in comparyson,
sometime cause, as, Ad quid hoc fecisti? For what cause, or whereto dyddest thou
this? sometime about, as Ad duo millia hominum occisa sunt, There be slain
about two thousand men. Also after, as, Ad haec, After this.

Ad is also sometime taken for Quantum ad. Cicero in Ver.
Vidi simul cum populo Romano forum, co mitiumque adornatu^, ad speciem,
magnifico ornatu, ad sensum, cogitationemque, acerbo and lugubri: I with the
people of Rome beheld the places of judgment and common assemblies, as to the
pleasure of the eye, sumptuousely garnyshed, but as to respect of wit and
imagination, lamentably and heuily decked.

Ad annum, during a hole year.

Ad assem, Plaut. in Ruden.
to the uttermost penny.

Ad annos sedecim, Plin. in Panegy.
.xvi. years after.

Ad breuissimu^, tempus, for a very short time.

Ad cyathos stare, to awayte on the cup.

Ad december annos, Sueton. in Caesare.
ten years after. Nescio quid intersit, utrum illuc nunc ueniam, an ad december
annos, Cicero ad Attic.
I wot not what diversity, whether I comme now, or ten years hereafter.

Ad decimum sextum calendas, about the xvi. calendes.

Ad dextram, ad sinistram, on the right hand on the left hand.

Ad diem, at the day appointed.

Ad desyderium, for the desire that they had Inde cum actae boues quaedam ad
desyderium, Tit. Liuius lib. 1.
( ut fit) relictarum mugissent. Than when sum of the nete which were driven
away, for the desire which they had of the other that remained (as they use to
do) did low or bellowe.

Ad ducentos, Cicero.
about two hundred.

Ad extremum, Ad postremum, Plau. in au Iular.
at the last, finally, in conclusion.

Ad exemplum, Plinius.
to the example or likeness.

Ad hoc exemplum, Plaut. in Market.
nunquam amaui, I never loved of that facion, or in that manner.

Ad haec mala hoc mihi accidit, Teren. in And.
besides these dyspleasures, this chanced unto me.

Ad horam nonam in anchoris expectauit, Caesar.
he lay at ankor until nine of the clock.

Ad hunc modum, this way, or in this manner.

Ad id tempus, Plaut. in Merc.
at that time.

Ad illam faciem, ita ut illa est, ut emere^ sibi mandauit mihi, He commanded
me to bye for him one, which had such an another face as she has.

Ad iudices dicere, to plead before judges.

Ad iudicem, Cice. pro Ros.
before a judge. Eius testis ad iudicem fidem informabit, His wytnes before a
judge, shall prove the truth.

Ad limina, a portat.

Ad lucem, until the day light.

Ad manum seruus, Cic. de orato. 2.
he that is a clerk to one, or writes for him.

Ad manus uenire, to come to hand strokes, to cope together.

Ad me, Ci. Attic. lib. 9.
with me. Commodum ad te dedera^ literas, cu^ ad me been mane Dionysius fuit. I
had scarsely sent my letters unto the, when Dionyse was with me erly in the
morning.

Ad meridiem, until none.

Ad meridiem spectat, aut uergit, it lies toward the southe.

Ad me domum, at home with me.

Ad multam noctem, Terentius.
late in the night,

Ad nummum conuenit, it is the true sum.

Ad pedem,
a proverb which signyfieth agreeable, as it were my shoe is mecte for my
foot. According to this proverb is the sentence of Paulus Acmilius, who
herynge his wife Papyriam commended for her beaultie and diverse other good
qualities, he held up his foot to them that praised her, and asked how they
lyked his shoe. They said it was a good shoe. Than said Aemilius, ye se that it
is a new shoe, and a well made shoe, but yet none of you do know where he
wryngeth me. but yet I do feel it.

Ad pedes, a lakay.

Ad pedes desilio, I light on my feet.

Ad pileum uocare, Eras. chil. 2. centu. 1.
to styre men to sedition, upon trust of liberty, or other commodities.

Ad quindecim talenta, about.xv. talentes.

Ad rauim poscere, Teren. in Heauton. Plautus.
to ask until one be hoorse

Ad rem facit, it makes for the mattier, or is convenient, or it serves for
the purpose.

Ad rem pertinet, it belongs to the purpose.

Ad rem suam sapere, Plaut. in Trucul.
to be wise for his own profytte.

Ad restem res redijt, the thing is in despair. Eras. chil. 1. cent. 5.
Which proverb came of them, which did hang them selves. because they had
not so good fortune, as they looked for, or that things happened not according
unto their expectation.

Ad summum, at the most.

Ad sapientiam huius, nimius nugator fuit, In regard of his wysdom, he was but
a fool.

Ad tempus, in season, sometime according to the time. also for a time.

Ad tria millia, about three thousand.

Ad uerbum, word by word.

Ad uiuum resecare, ^ Cic. de ^ mic. and de finib.
to towche it to the quycke. I proverb taken of paryng of nails, until the
blood does appear, which sygnifyeth to touch a thing nerer than need
requires. Plaut. in Bacch.


Ad unguem, Cicer. de amicitia.
perfitely.

Ad unum, not one left, at ones, unto the last.

Ad unu^ ide^ sentiu^t, they be al of one opinion.

Ad Calendas graecas, Plinius.
sygnifieth never, for the old greeks had no kalendes.

Ad horam, at time appointed.

Adad, in the Syrian tongue, is the son, also it sygnifieth only.

Adactio, compulsyon.

Adactus, ta, tum, compelled, put forth.

Adaeque, semblably, so much, as much.

Adaeque miser, so much a wretch.

Adaequo, are, to make or be equal.

Adaggero, rare, to gather or lay together.

Adagia, an old wife, which late had a child.

Adagum, a proverb, or as I might say, an old said saw.

Adam, the first man that was created, and does sygnify man, or red earth,
or a dweller, lived.ix.C.xxx. years. In the bible is mention made but of three
sons that he had, and one daughter, Cayne, Abel, Seth, and Delbora, which of
Philo is called Noaba. And the same Philo reherseth.xii. sons, and.viii.
daughters, borne after Seth.

Adamas, adamantis, a dyamonde, whereof be diverse kinds, one is found in Inde,
and is little, bright, heavy, and so hard, that nothing may break it, except
the blood of a got. An other is found in Arabia, which is less than the
other, and paler of color. Some be found in Macedonia, and they have more the
color of iron, made bright. Other be found in Aethiopia, and they be most
dark in color. And some be found in Cypres, and their color draws toward
the color of air, but they are soft. The virtues of this stone ar these, to
resyst against poison and witchecraft, it puts away fear, it causes him
that wears it, to vanquysh in contention, it helps them that be lunatike or
phrenetike. I have proved that a dyamonde laid by a nedelle, the lode stone
might not draw him up to him.

Adamanteus, and adamantinus, of a dyamond or as hard as a dyamonde.

Adamaster, a giant, which was of incredyble greatness.

Adamitae, were heretykes, which took these begynaynge of a Pycard, who came
into the land of Boheme, and said that he was the son of god, and named him
self Adam. And he commanded al men and women to go naked. And who so desired to
company carnally with any woman, he should take her by the hand, and bring
her to him, and say, that he feruentely desired her company, and than would
Adam say, Go together, and increace and multiply. This heresy was begun the
year of our lord.M.CCCC.xii. Sigismunde being emperor. And men suppose, that
yet it endures not only in Boheme, but also in other places.

Adamo, aui, are, to love very well, to desire fervently.

Adamussim, by rule, straight as a line.

Ad Apollinis, ad monetae, ad Saturni, ad Iunonis, at Apollos temple. etc.

Adaperio, rire, to open a thing.

Adapertilis, le, for apertum, open.

Adapto, aui, are, to join to.

Adaquatio, watrynge of cattle.

Adaquo, aui, are, to water horse or cattle.

Adarca, a salt foam, which comes of the rindes of canes or redes growyng in
fennes.

Adasia, an old eawe, which has late eaned, or had a lamb.

Adasso, old writers used for Adigo, to co^pel.

Adaucto, are, to augment or increace.

Adauctus, Non. Mar cellus.
ta, tum, augmented.

Adaugeo, ere, idem.

Adaxint, for adegerint, let them compelle or constrayne.

Addebat hoc, Teren. in Eunu.
he said moreover.

Addere animum, to give courage.

Addere gradum, to make him go faster.

Addico, xi, c^re, to say, to judge, to appoynte, or depute.

Addicere animu^, to give or apply his mind.

Addictus, he that is judged, appointed, or deputed, or bounden.

Addictus, ta, tum, openly sold. Also Addicere was, when the judge in the old
time delyue red the dettour to his credytours, to do with him what they lysted.

Addisco, didici, discere, to learn well, or add to in learning.

Additamentu^, a thing added to, an augme^tatio^

Additus, ta, tum, added or put to.

Additus, Vergilius
also for an enmy. Nec Teucris addita Juno, usquam aberit, Neither Juno enemy
to the Troyans shall lack or be away.

Addo, are, to give to one.

Addo, didi, dear, to add, join, or put to.

Addoceo, cui, cere, to learn.

Addormio, miui, ire, to sleep.

Addormisco, scere, idem.

Addubito, tare, to doubt.

Adduco, xi, cere, to bring to, or bring forth, sometime to draw or pluck
together. also to meue or persuade.

Adduci, to be meued or persuaded.

Adducta frons, a frownyng forheade, sum time adducere, is to extend or
thrust out.

Adduplico, are, to double any thing.

Adedo, edi, ^ere, to devour.

Adelphi, brethren, it is also the name of a comedy in Terence.

Ademptio ciuitatis, banyshement.

Adeo, so much, moreover, surely, without dout. sometime it signifies even,
as, Tute iam adeo eius audies uerba, Thou thy self even now shall hers his
words. Sometime it signifies, and that more is, as, Intra moenia atque adeo
in Senatu uidetis, Cicero in Catil.
ye see him in the city, and that more is in the senate. It has diverse
significations hard to be perceived, but by the examples. Adeo mihi uisus est
lepidus, He seemed to me so pleasant a fellow. Adolescens tuus atque adeo noster
te salutrat, your child and mine commends him unto you. Aliquid atque adeo
multa addunt de suo, some what they add to, and that very much of their own.

Id adeo ex me cognoscite, Thus much take ye of me. Id adeo (si placet)
consyderate, Hitherto (if it please you) consider. Haec Cicero. Terent.
Nihil hercle, aut si adeo, bidui, aut tridui est haec solicitudo, In faith
nothing, or at the most, this sorrow or care will not last passing two or three
days.

Adeo res redijt, the mattier is come to that point.

Adeo, iui, ire, to goo to, to demand, to attempt, to make assault.

Adij te heri de filia, I came yesterday to talk with the for thy daughter.

Adire discrimen, to put him self in peril.

Adire haereditate^, to enter i^to his inheritance.

Adire inimicitias, to enter into displeasure.

Adire ad pactionem, to comme to a point concerning the bargayne.

Adire periculum, to take a dangerous thing on hand.

Adeor, the passyue of adeo.

Adeousque, until that.

Adeps, adipis, the fat of all thing.

Adeptus, opteyned, gotten, or founden.

Ader, a place by Bethlem, where angels did sing at the birth of Christ, and
Jacob kept there his sheep.

Adesdum, Teren. in And.
come hither.

Adesse, signifies sometime presence, sometime aid, otherwhyle favor.

Adesse animo, to have his mind at lybertye, to take a good heart to him, to
be of good courage.

Adesse praesens, to be present.

Adesse coram, idem.

Adesse coram praesentem. Cora^ aderit praesens tibi, He shall come before the.

Adesse alicui, to defend or help one.

Adesse ad iudicium, to appear.

Adesse iudici, to be associate in commission.

Adest, he is at hand.

Adest ei animus, he has a good courage.

Adesto istic, tarry here.

Adesus, a, um, consumed.

Ad exitam aetatem, Festus.
for ad ultimam aetatem, at the vttermooste age.

Adfabrum, well wrought.

Adnabito, aui, are, to dwell by.

Ad haec, moreover.

Adhaereo, to clean fast, to set sure, to join to, to hold or to take to any
thing.

Adhaeresco, scere, idem quod adhaeteo.

Adhaese. Gell.
Neque adhaese locutus est, nor he did not mumble, but spoke out.

Adhaesio, a cleauynge together.

Adhaesus, a, um, cleaued to.

Adhalo, aui, are, to blow, or to breathe on a thing.

Adhamo, aui, are, to bynd to, or tie, or grappel.

Adhibeo, ui, ^re, to put to, to have by me.

Adhibere animu^, to take heed what is spoken

Adhibere aures, to harken, to give an ear.

Adhibere in consilium aliquem, to ask cou^ fsayle of one.

Adhibere modum, to use moderacyon or temperaunce.

Adhibere parsimoniam, to spare.

Adhibere sermone^, to devise or talk togider.

Adhibere testes, to bring forth wytnes.

Adhibere uim, to do a thing by violence, to enforce.

Celeritatem adhibere, to make haaste, or to use dilygence.

Coenae aliquem adhibere, when one bids an other to supper, which is
inferior to him.

Delectum adhibere, to put a difference, to discern between things, which is
the better.

Religionem adhibere, to make conscience of a thing.

Adhinnio, to ney as a horse does after a mare.

Cicero by a metaphor makes it to sygnyfye to rejoice. Cicero in Pison.


Adhoc, furthermore.

Adhortator, toris, he that exhorts or counsayleth.

Adhortatio, an exhortation.

Adhortor, tari, to exhort or counsel to the doing of a thing.

Adhuc, yet, hitherto.

Adhuc locorum, Plaut. in capt.
for adhuc.

Adiabene, a country beyond Armenia.

Adiaceo, cui, c^re, to lie by.

Adiantum, an herb growing about sprynges of water, having small leaves like
to Coria^der, some do now take it for Maydenheare.

Adiaphoron, indyfferent.

Ad^ides, short battes of a cubite long and an half, having pykes of iron in
them, and were tied to a line, that when they were thrown, he that did cast
them, might pluck them again to him, hurlebattes.

Adigo, egi, igere, to procure or styre, to bind by oath or promise, to bring
or drive to, to fasten or join to, sommetyme to compelle or drive one to do a
thing.

Adijcio, ieci, ijcere, to cast to, to add or put to, or increase.

Adijcere album calculu^, to approve a thing. Plinius in epist.


Adijcere animu^, to set his mi^d or love on one

Adijcere oculu^ haereditati, Plane uidebant adiectum esse oculu^ haereditati.
Cicero in Ver.
They saw plainly, that the other went about to get the inherytaunce.

Adimo, emi, imere, to take away, or diminishe

Animam alicui adimere, to slay one.

Adimereius, to prohibyte.

Adimere suum alteri, to take an other man's goods from him.

Adimere uestem, to pull of his garment.

Ciuitatem adimere, to banyshe one.

Adindo, didi, dear, to put in.

Adineo, iui, ire, idem quod adindo.

Adinstar, like to.

Adinuenio, to invent a thing.

Adinuentum, an invention.

Adipales, festis that pristes were wo^t to make

Adipatus, ta, tum, larded, basted.

Adipiscor, adeptus sum, to get optayn, joined with a person, it signifies to
overtake.

Adipisci senectutem, Cicer. de senect.
to come to age.

Adiposus, rich.

Adipson, a sweet root called l^korys.

Adipsos, a certain date tree growing in Egypt, the fruit whereof has no
stone. Plinius calls it Myrobalanum.

Aditiculus, a little entry.

Aditio, onis, an access, or repair.

Adito, aui, are, to goo to.

Aditus, access, coming to, or entry.

Adiudico, aui, are, to adiudge.

Adiugo, aui, are, to yoke or join to.

Adiumentum, help.

Adiungo, xi, ere, to join to, to apply, to win or obtain. Teren. in andria.
Errat long mea quide^ sente^tia, qui imperium credat grauius esse aut
stabilius, ui quod fit, quam id quod amicitia adiungitur, He is foul deceived
in mine opinion, that thinks, that rule to be more firm and stable, which is
gotten by violence, than that which is opteyned by frendshyp.

Adiurati, confederate or alyed together by oath.

Adiuratio, a conjuring.

Adiurgium, debate.

Adiurgo, are, to rebuke.

Adiuro, aui, are, to deny with an oath, to co^iure.

Adiuto, aui, are to help often.

Adiutor, an helper. Adiutrix.

Adiutorium, help.

Adiuuamen, help.

Adiuuo, aui, are, to help.

Adlino, nere, to anoint, or rub a thing with any thing, liquyde.

Ad liquidum, clearly, evidently, plainly.

Adlubesco, scere, to please or content one.

Admando, aui, are, to send to, to deliver any thing to one to bring to
another.

Ad manus, at hand, ready.

Admeti naenia, a proverb which signifies an heavy or sorrowful song, Eras.
chil. 2. cent. 6.
or a lamentable complaynte.

Admetus, was king of a people called Pherei, unto whom Apollo (being exiled
out of heaven by Iupyter) came for relief, and kept his cattelle, and by his
crafce, caused every cow to bring forth two calves, which thing Adinetus
thankefullys taking, entertained him honorably. That being well considered
of Apollo, he opteined of the destenies called Parcae, that when the day of the
death of Admetus should be wound upon their spyndels, he should escape death
upon this condytion, that if he could find any other, that would wyllyngely
dye for him, he him self should escape death at that time. When the day was
come that Admentus should fynysshe his life, all men and women (yea the father
and mother of Admetus) refused to die, only Alceste his wife preferred the life
of her husband before her own, who being dead, there was in the palayce of
Admetus contynual waylyng and heaviness, until Proserpina meued with
compassyon, sent Alceste again out of Hell until her husband. Of this
fable came the said proverb Admeti naenia.

Adminiculo, are, and adminiculor, aris, to aid to succor.

Adminicula uitae, all things necessary to the life of man.

Adminiculum, aid, supportation.

Administer, a steward of householde.

Administratio, exploytynge, or dooynge of a thing, service.

Administro, are, to do service, to exployte, to fournyshe.

Admirabilis. wonderful.

Admirabundus, he that does wonder or marvel at a thing. Ci. off. 1. de
not. deorum.


Admirabilitas, tatis, idem quod Admiratio. wondryng or meruaylynge.

Admirabiliter, Ci. Attic.
honorably. Nos Asia accepit admirabiliter, The country of Asia receyuyd us
honorably.

Admiratio, a wonderynge.

Admiror, aris, atus sum, ari, to wonder.

Admisceo, scui, scere, to myngle or myxte one thing with an other.

Admissarius, a stalyon horse.

Admissio, nyghnes about a prince, as admytted to be of his privy counsel, or
privy chamber. It also signifies the act of puttinge the male to the female,
or contrary wise.

Admissionales, vshers of the chaumber.

Admissum, being a substantyue, sygnifieth a thing committed or done.

Admissura, the act or time when beasts do their kind in generation, sesonyng
of a mare.

Admiste, an aduerbe, sygnifyenge one myxte with an other.

Admistio, onis, a mynglynge or myxture.

Admistura, idem quod admistio.

Admistus, ta tum, put unto a thing and mingled with it.

Admitto, misi, mittere, to admytte, to put to, to bring in, to suffer, to
sustain, or take, to let into a place. Plaut. in Men.
Also to offend. Quid tandem admisi in te? What have I offeded the? Admittere
diem, Plinius in epist. 21.
to open the wyndowe that the light may come in.

Admittere equum, to go to horsback, or take his horse. Cicer. de finibus.
Cu^ se deuoueret, and equo admisso in mediam aciem Latinorum irrubat, When he
had made his vow, and had taken his horse, he thraste him self into the
myddle of the host of the latynes. Caesar de bell. gall* 1.
Considius equo admisso ad eum accurrit, Considius took his horse, and ran
against him.

Admittere marem foeminae, to put the male to the female.

Admittere noxam, to do an offense. Plaut. in pen


Admittere sumptum, to do great cost.

Admittere uitam, Teren. in And.
to retain life, to live.

Salutatum ueniebant, admissus est nemo,

They came to salute him, Salust
but none was let in

Cum tu nocte socia per tegulas admittere, Cicero in philip.


When thou the night following were. let in at the roufe of the house. Ibid.


Admodum, very much, somewhat, resonably.

Ad modum, as it were.

Admolior, iris, itus sum iri, to put or add to.

Admoneo, ui, ere, to warn, to exhort.

Admordeo, momordi, dear, to byte sore.

Admoueo, ui, uere, to move to, or put to.

Admurmurare, is proprely, where men at that thing, which is done or spoken,
do murmr, blaming or reprouynge the thing. sometime it sygnifyeth in a good
part to commend secretly.

Adnato, tare, to swymme to a place.

Adnecto, tere, to knyt to a thing.

Adnexio, a knittyng or fastnyng to a thing.

Adnicto, nixi, nictere, to wynke on one. Festus.


Adnitor, niteris, niti, to lean to a thing, to bear or sustain it.

Adnixus, uel adnisus, a, um, cleauynge or ioynynge fast to a thing.

Adnotatio, a tytlynge, or short notynge of that which we do read or hear.

Adnumero, are, to add to.

Adolabilis, without grief or sorrow.

Adoleo, leui, lui, lere, adultum, to begin to grow, to do sacrifice with
incense, or other fumes, to burn sweet things.

Adolescens, it is, a young man, which is yet growing unto.xxi. years.

Adolescentia, is the age between chyldhoode, and man's age, which is
between.xiiii. and.xxi.

Adolescentior, aris, atus sum, to be wanton, or full of youth.

Adolescentulus, a ladde.

Adolescenturio, iui, ire, to play the boy.

Adolesco, leui, lescere, to grow.

Adonai, the name of god among the Jews, which signifies the lord of all
creatures.

Adonia, festyuall days, which were kept in the honor of Adonis the derlyng
of Venus.

Adonis, the name of a child, which was son of Cynare, king of Cypres, whom
Venus had for her derlynge, which was slain with a bore, whom the poets
feigned, that Venus turned into a purple flower, sum say into a rose.

Adonidis horti, gardeyns for a lyttel time piesaunt, which shortly decayen.

Adoperio, rire, to cover or hyde.

Adoptatiuus, he whom a man ordeyneth to be his heir, and takes unto him in
steed of his son.

Adoptio, an election of an heyr out of the cou^s of inherytance as by will or
gift.

Adoptitius, he that is adopted or taken in the stead of a son.

Adoptiuus, the son of him that is adopted.

Adopto, aui, are, to elect or appoint an heir. Also to ask help. Cic. fa. 5.
Ego quem potius adoptem aut inuocem, quamillum, quo defendente, uincere
didici? Whom should I rather ask help of, or call for, than him, who
defending, I learned to vanquyshe?

Ador, and Adoreum, a kind of wheat, callid also Far, which by the
descriptione seems to be the wheat, which we call ducke byll.

Adoratio, is an express motion or act of reverence done with the body
inclyned.

Adorea, and adoreola, a praise that is given to them that have victory. Also
a cake of fine wheat, which they used in sacrifice.

Adordior, iris, adorsus sum, riri, to speak to, to begin.

Adorior, Cic. de oratore.
riri, to go about to do a thing. Ne conuellere adoriamur ea, quae non possunt
commoueri: Let us not go about to take away those things, which may not be
meued or put away. Also it signifies to set upon one in battayl, or in any
form of hostilite. A tergo hosts adoriri iubet: Caesar. de bell. gal. 7.
He bad them to set on their enemies at their backs.

Adorno, aui, are, to apparayle, to prepare, to praise, to advance to honor.

Adoro, aui, are, to honor with inclination of the body, to beseech.

Ad pedes desilire, to alyght from his horse.

Ad plenum, perfectly, fully.

Ad primus, chief of all.

Adpulsus, Adpulsio, the dryfte of sheep to the water.

Adquiro, siui, ire, to get, to conquer.

Adquo, for quousque, until.

Adramelech, an ydoll of Syria, whom alsoo the Samaritans honored.

Adrastia, a country not far from Troy, also the name of a city there. It
was also callid a goddess, which took from manne both memory and wit.

Adrastus, was king of Argiues, whose daughter Argia was wedded to Polynices
the second son of Oedipus, and his other daughter callid Deiphyles was
wedded to Tideus the kings son of Aetholia. This Adrastus raised all the
Greeks against the city of Thebes, for to restore his son in law
Polynices to the kingdom. But after that Polynices and Aetheocles being
brethren, had slain one the other, after many conflyctes, the Thebans slew
down right the Argiues and did put to flight Adrastus, and slew his people, and
after that, the Argiues had never vyctory in any battle. whereof came this
proverb, Eras.
A drastia nemesis, th^^^^ll luck of Adrastus, which may be used there proud
men are beaten.

Adrepo, psi, pere, to reach at thing, to take it with violence, to crepe to.

Adriaus, a noble emperor of Rome, about the year of our lord.Cxix. he was
Traianus systers son, e man of excellent wit, and diverse in manners,
marvelous in lerning, specially in Mathematicalles, also in musyk, in karuyng
and grauynge. In deeds of arms cunnyng and valyant. A great fauorer of well
lernid men, and liberal toward them. He was so great a trauaylour, that there
were sewe countrayes, but that he went through them. He lived.lxii. years, and
reigned.xx. and died in torment of the bowels.

Adriaticum mare, the sea that dyuideth Italy from Dalmatia, wherein stands
the noble city of Venetia, some do call it the gulf of Venyce.

Adrumo, aui, are, to grudge or make rumor.

Adruo, ui, ere, to turn the earth in tyllage.

Adscisco, scere, to join, or take to, as when one joins an other with him
in authority, or takes one to aid him in his office.

Adscire, to join or put to.

Adscriptitij, were men of warte, which were taken into an army to supply the
places of them, that were slain, or otherwise lacked.

Adscriptiui, idem quod Adscriptitij.

Adsum, Fui, esse, I am here, or present, or at hand.

Adsitis domi facite, See that ye be both at home.

Ad summam, in conclusion, finally.

Ad tempus, for a time.

Ad uesperam, until the some went down.

Aduallas, a mountain, from the which the greafryuer called the Rene,
runs northewarde.

Aduatici, people of a country in France called Bosleduc.

Adubanus, the famous river called also Danubius and Hister.

Aduectio, a caryage over to a place.

Adueho, xi, here, to bring to, or carry to.

Adu^ena, a stranger.

Aduelitatio, a mutual reprochynge, or contention in words.

Aduenio, ni, nire, to come to.

Adue^titius, he that comes to a place by chance.

Aduentitia bona, goods which do come unlooked for.

Aduentitius morbus, syckenes that comes without our defaute, and of some men
is called an vncome.

Aduentito, aui, are, to come often.

Aduento, aui, are, to come nygh.

Aduentores, Plaut. in Mustel.
commune resorters or haunters to a place.

Aduentus, tus, a coming.

Aduerbialiter, like an aduerbe.

Aduersaria, a teckenynge book of expenses, wryte^ before that the book of
account be made.

Aduersarius, an adversary.

Aduersa^us, a, um, against or contrary.

Aduersus, a, um, that whereof only the forepart is seen, as auersus, whereof
only the hynder-part is seen.

Aduersus, contrary, or against. also face to face.

Aduersa aeruma, Teren. in Phorm.
adversity, damage.

Aduersa ualetudo, syckenes.

Aduerso flumine, against the stream.

Aduersis nulneribus, Plinius de uiris illust. Cice. fam. ep. 8.
with wounds in the forepart, overthwart the breast and face.

Aduersarium intendere, to be against one in his procedynges.

Aduersus gratiae homo, a rude froward fellow.

Aduersum cliuum, strayte up.

Aduerso animo, against my will, thy will, or his will, against his heart.

Aduersitor, a servant that seeks for his master.

Aduersitores, servants which do fetch home their masters after dinner or
supper.

Aduersor, satus sum, sari, to repugne or be contrary, or to refuse.

Aduersum, against. Quis est hic, qui aduersum mihi fit? Who is he that comes
against me, or marches toward me? Aduersum is taken also for erga.

Aduertebatur, one perceived.

Aduerto, ti, tere, to perceive, to turn to.

Aduertere animum, to take heed, or harken.

Aduertere oculos, Plin. in Panegy.
to perceive, to see, to behold.

Aduesperascit, the euenyng or euentyde is comen, or it waxes late, or it is
night.

Aduigilo, are, to watch or take good head.

Aduiuo, uixi, uiuere, to live yet.

Adulas, the hill called saint Gothard, entryng into Lumbardy.

Adulatio, flattery.

Adulor, arus sum, ari, to flatter.

Adulator, oris, a flatterer.

Adulatrix, a woman that flattereth.

Adulter, adultera, a man or woman auoutrer.

Adulterinus, na, number, counterfayt or forged.

Adulterinae claues, counterfayt keys.

Adulterium, auoutrye.

Adultero, aui, are, to counterfeit or forge.

Adulteror, ari, idem quod adultero.

Adultus, a, um, full grown.

Adumbratio, look in Adumbro.

Adumbro, aui, are, to make or give shadow, to represent or express, as
peynters do, that do shadow images in plain tables, to make them show
imboced or round. Some do suppose that it signifies, to trycke a thing, or
draw it grossly, as paynters do at the beginning. It signifies alsoo to
feyne or dissemble a thing.

Adumbrata opinio, a false opinion.

Adunco, aui, are, to make crooked.

Aduncus, crooked or hooked.

Aduno, aui, are, to gather together.

Adunum, eueryche one.

Aduocatio, pleadyng, also assistance.

Aduocatus, an advocate, he that defends an other man's cause.

Aduocito, tare, to call for one often.

Aduoco, aui, are, to call to, or call to help.

Aduolo, aui, are, to fly to or nygh a place, to go or come quyckely.

Aduoluo, uere, to wrappe round together.

Aduolutus genibus, fallen-downe at his knees.

Adoursem, old writers used for Aduersarium.

Aduorsor, for aduersor.

Aduo^um, after mine, thine, or his appetite, as I would have it.

Aduro, ussi, urere, to roste, to bourne.

Adustio, rostynge or burning.

Adustus, ta, tum, roasted or burned.

Adusque, until.

Adyticulum, a dyminutiue of Adytum.

Ad^ytum, the chauncell or other secret place of the temple, where none came
but priests. or persons sanctified.

A ANTE E.
AEACVS was the son of Jupiter and Europa, whom Paynyms did suppose, to be
of such justice, that he was appointed by Pluto, called god of Hell, to be
one of the judges there, with Minoes and Radamanthus, to discuss the
transgressions of men being dead, and to assygne to them punysshement
according to their merytes.

Aeantion, a town in the promontory or hylle of Troy, called Sigeum.

Aeas, aeantos, a river of a country called Epyrus, which rounneth out of
Macedonia, and fallyth into the sea called Ionium.

Aedepol, an oath among Gentiles, signifieng by Pollux house.

Aedes, a house, and if there be joined thereunto the name of god, or of a
saint, it signifies a church or a temple. Aedes saluatoris, saint Saviors
church. it is also a chamber. sometime a sepulcher.

Aedicula, an oratory, or place, where images were kept.

Aedificatio, building.

Aedificator, a buylder.

Aedificium, all the hole buyldyng of the house.

Aedifico, caui, care, to build.

Aediles, officers, whose charge was to see to the keeping up and maynteynynge
of the temples and pryuate howses, and to make prouysyon for solemyne plays.
Of them some were called Aediles curules, of a chair with crooked feet,
wherein they did sytte.

Aedilitas, and aedilitium, the office of the Ediles

Aedilitatem gerit sine populi suffragio,

Aprouerbe, Palut. in Stich. Eras. chil. 3. centu. 1.
which may be said unto him that meddleth in other men's mattiers, or
commands in an another man's house or office.

Aedilitius, he that had been ones in that authority.

Aedilitius, a, um, pertaynyng to Ediles.

Aeditimus idem qui Aedituus.

Aedititius, a judge or arbitratour chosen of the one part.

Aedituror, ari, to rule over the temple or house.

Aeditus, ta, tum, high and strong.

Aedituus, the prelate of the Temple or church, and may be now called the
person or paryshe priest.

Aedo, aedidi, to set forth or publysshe. also it signifies to bring forth
by generation.

Aedere scriptum, to show forth writing.

Aedere spiritum, to yield up the ghost.

Aedere facinus, Ci. Attic.
to do an ill deed.

Aedere stragem, to make a slaughter of me^.

Aedere nomina, to tell the names to be written.

Aedere praelium, to make battle.

Aedon, Vergil.
a nyghtyngale.

Aegae, a city in Cilicia, also an isle in the sea called Aegeum.

Aegaea, a cite in Macedonia, an other in Mauritania.

Aegealus, was a country callyed also Achaia in Greece.

Aeger, gra, grum, sick or sorrowful.

Aegeria, a Nymphe or goddess, with whom Numa Pompilius, the second king of
Romans, faynyd to have famylyar company and communycation, concerning
relygion and worshyppynge of Goddis, to the intent that he mough^ thereby
withdraw the people from the appetite of wars, whereto they were inflamed.

Aegeum mare, the sea which is from the mouth of the greek sea, up in Syria
and Arabia, wherein be many yles, besides Creta, now called Candy, Rhodes, and
Cypres.

Aegeum nauigat, he sayleth the Egyptian sea, A proverb applied to them, that
refuse no peril for much lucre or profytte, for as much as the said sea
is full of dangers.

Aegeus, the father of Theseus.

Aegides, of Aegeus, patronymicum.

Aegylops, wild ootes.

Aegimuros, an isle called also Capraria, beyond the isle called Corsica, or
Corse.

Aegina, a city ioynynge of Peloponeso or Morea, against the country of
Athens. also an isle from Pyreum.xii. miles.

Aeginenses, the people of Egina the city.

Aeginitae, people of the isle of Egina.

Aegineticus, a, um, of Egina.

Aegiochus, a name of Jupiter.

Aegipanes, beasts like to men, having feet like to gotes.

Aegis, gidis, an haubergeon, which only the goddis were painted with.

Aegium, a town in Peloponeso, now called Morea, where they fained that
Jupiter was nouryshed with a goote.

Aegle, a Nymphe.

Aegloga, a communycation of shepeherdes together.

Aegocephalus, a bird, which is without a spleen.

Aegocerus, idem quod Capricornus.

Aegonomus, a goteherde or keeper of gotes.

Aegos, a river in Thracia.

Aegre, with greatte pain or difficulty, greuousely, heuyly.

Aegrefero, tuli, far, to be sorye.

Aegresco, sci, scere, to be sick.

Aegrimonia, syckenesse, great heaviness.

Aegrio, I am sick.

Aegritudo, inis, grief of mind, or sorrow.

Aegritudinem leuare, to ease or help the syckenes or heaviness.

Aegrius, more sorowfully, more dyspleasantly.

Aegrorario, syckenes of body.

Aegroto, aui, are, to be sick, to faylle or be feeble of courage.

Aegrotus, sick, feeble of courage.

Aegrum, idem quod aegritudo, sorrow, displeasure.

Aegula, a kind of brymstone, wherewith in some places they do perfume wol to
make it white.

Aegylops, a fystula in the corner of the eye, by the nose of a man, out of
the which runs matter.

Aegyptij, people of Egyypte, not those vacabounde Magitians, which now
rounne into all countries, calling them selves Egyptians, where they be of an
isle removed from Egypt. Read the commentaryes of Volaterranus.

Aegyptini, people of Ethiope, marchynge on Egypt.

Aegyptius, and Aegyptiacus, a, um, of Egypt.

Aegyptus, a country called Egypt: on the weste it is bounded with Lybia, and
the country called Cyrenaica: on the north with the sea called Mediterraneum,
and part of Judea: on the east with Arabia, and the Arabian sea: on the south
with Aethiopia. This country although it rain there but seldom or never, yet
by the ouerflowyng of the river of Nilus, it is made so fertyle, that it has
abundance of all things saving vynes, and brings forth strange beastis. Of
the great cities, and other marvelous things in it, shall be remembered, where
their names shall be rehearsed.

Aegystus, he that slew Agamemnon, and made him cuckolde.

Aelius, the proper name of a Romayne.

Aelurus, Festus.
a catte.

Aemathia, a countreye in Grecia, after called Macedonia, the people whereof
were first called Pelasgi. Read more hereof in Macedonia.

Aemidum, swollen.

Aemilia, a country in Italy called also Flaminia and Romandiola.

Aemilius, the propre name of a Romayne.

Aemonia, a country called also Thessalia.

Aemulatio, envy or imitation.

Aemulor, atus sum, ari, to envy without malice, or to follow, or study to be
like an other.

Aemulus, he that follows or enuieth an other only for desire of glory.

Aenatores, blowers in trumpettes.

Aeneas, a noble man of Troy, which with Anthenor betrayed the city of Troy.

Aen^us, a, um, brason.

Aenigma, it is, a dark question, hard to be understand or assoyled.

Aenigmatistes, he that purposith hard questions

Aenobarbus, the name of a Romayn, so callid because he had a berde as red as
brass.

Aenum, a cawdron.

Aeolia, is a region of the Greeks in Asia, between Ionia^ and Troade^. It is
also a region conteinyng.vii. yles, between Italy and Sicile.

Aeolium mare, the sea ioyngng of Asia.

Aeolus, called the king of wyndes.

Aequabilis, equal.

Aequabilitas uitae, wherein is no variety or trouble.

Aequabiliter, equally, in even parts.

Aequaeuus, of one age.

Aequalis, equal, plain, of like age.

Aequales calculi, even judgments, A proverb applied unto them, which
lacked but little that they were not condemned. For asmoche as in old time the
judges gave not sentence openly, but being in diverse opinions, they did put
into a pot little stones of sundry colors, and of the which were most in
number, that sentence prevailed, and if they were equal in number, he that was
accused was acquyted. Which stood with good reason, as Aristotle shows in
his problemes.

Aequalitas, equalytie.

Aequaliter, likewise.

Aeqnamentum, indyfferency.

Aequanimis, he that is neither extollyd with prosperity, nor discomforted in
adversity.

Aequanimitas, taking in good part.

Aequanimiter, moderatly, patiently, coldly.

Aequatio, the equal diuysyon of a thing, or where one thing is made equal to
an other.

Aequare solo, to beat down to the ground.

Equator, toris, the line which divides heaven in the myddel callid also the
equinoctial line, into the which when the son comes, the days and
nyghtes ben of one length.

Aeque, justly, as well, even as well, sometime wyllyngly.

Aeque ambo pares, all of one greatness.

Aeque pauci, even as few.

Aeque utriusque necessarius, as much friend to the one as to the other.

Aequi bonique facio, I take in good part, I recke not or care not.

Aequidiale, the time when the days and the nyghtes be of one length.

Aequidium, Varro.
idem quod aequinoctium.

Aequilanium, seu aequilaneum, the half deal of the holle.

Aequilatio, of even largeness.

Aequilibris, bre, of the same weight.

Aequilibrium, of even weight or poyse.

Aequimanus, he that uses the oone hand as well as the other.

Aequimentum, hyre of a horse or other beast.

Aequinoctiale, the adjective of aequinoctiu^.

Aequinoctium, the time of the year, when the day is as long as the night,
which is twyse in the year. In spring time about the viii. calendes of
Aprille, and in Autumn about the viii. Calendes of October.

Aequiparatio, a comparyson.

Aequiparo, aui, are, to compare, or make equal

Aequipolle^tia, equalite in estymation or value

Aequipolleo, ui, ere, to have like power, or be of like estimation.

Aequipondium, of equal or like weight.

Aequitas, equity, justice, or euennes, lykenes of fascyon.

Aequiter, justly.

Aequiualentia, equal value.

Aequiualeo, ui, ere, to be equyualente, or of like valor.

Aequiuocatio, making diverse sygnifications to one word.

Aequiuoce, dyuersely sygnifienge in one word or term.

Aequiuocum, one word having diverse sygnyfycations.

Aequo, aui, are, to make even or plain.

Aequor, the sea, sommetyme other waters, sometime land.

Aequore aperto, in plain field.

Aequor maris; the ouermost or even part of the sea.

Aequoreus, a, um, of the sea.

Aequus, even or plain, equal, just.

Aequus animus, quietness of mind.

Aequo animo far, to take it in worth, or pacyentely.

Ex aequo loco dicere, oone companyon to talk with an other.

Aequum est, it is but reason.

Aequum esse alicui, to be content with one.

Aequum and bonum, is a discretion or moderation of right without rygour or
extremity of the law.

Aequum certamen, where one has no more advantage than the other.

A^r, the air: sometime wind, blast, breath or sound

Era, rae, money nu^bred, sometime images of me tall. also dernel, which
grows in corn.

Aeramentu^, any thing made of copper or bras.

Aerarium, a treasorye, where a common treasure of a city or country is kept.

Aerarij milites, soldiers waged.

Aerarij praefectus, high Treasourer.

Aerarij Tribuni, were treasourers which paid to the Soldiers their wages.

Aerarius, he that was put from his fredome, of a citesyn, and paid tribute as
a stranger.

Aeratus, mixed with copper, indetted.

Aereolum uel Chalcus, the.xxxvi. part of Dragma, by estimation the weight of
two barley corns.

Aerificium, Brutus Ci.fa. ep. 11.
the craft to make any thing of copper or brass.

Aeripes, which is as swyfte as the wind.

A^rius, of the air, or like to the air.

Aero, are, to dress with copper or brass.

Aeromantia, dyuination or conjecture of things tocome by the air.

Aerosus, a, um, that wherein brass or copper is, or whereof it is made.

Arugo, ginis, ruste or canker in metal, specially in copper or silver. It is
taken in Horace and Iuuenall for money.

Aeruginosus, rusty or cankred.

Aerumna, labor peynfull, care of mind with heaviness, infelicitie.

Aerumnalis, le, wherein is great peyn or labor.

Aerumnatus, brought to myserye.

Aerumnosus, a, um, miserable, full of pain, or travail.

Aerumnulae, little crooked staves, wherewith men do carry fardels and trusses
on their backs

Aeruscare, to get money by falsehode or vayn promyses.

Aes, aeris, is proprely copper or brass. It is often times taken for money,
sommetyme for trumpettes.

Aeratus homo, a man indetted.

Aere alieno exire, to come out of debt.

Aere alieno obruere, to ouercharge oone with dettes.

Aere alieno obstringere, Plautus.
to cause an another man to be bound or indetted for him.

Aere alieno premi, to be grievously indettid

Aere diruti milites, soldiers, which for some defaut, were put out of wages.

Aere meo. Multi. n. anni sunt, cum ille in aere meo est. It is long time
passed, that I accounted him in the number of my friends, or for one of mine.
6. Agricola.Ci. ad A^.


In aere meo est, he is in my debt or danger.

Aes caldarium, copper.

Aes coronarium, lattyn metal.

Aes circumforaneum, money borrowed of them, which are named bankers, and do
lend money by exchange.

Aes conflare, to cast metal.

Aes ducere, to melt metal.

Aes alienum, money that is borrowed. also det

Aes ductile, metal that wol be sone molten.

Aes alienum afferre, Ci. fa. ep. Salust. in catil.
to be indetted.

Aes alienum habere, idem.

Aes alienum cogere, conflare, contrahere, to be indetted.

Aes alienum dissoluere, exire, to pay dettes and be quytte.

Aes alienum exonerare, to discharge the det.

Aes alienum facere, Ci. Attic.
to borowe money.

Aes nostrum, money that other men do owe unto us.

Aes suum, money that other men do ow unto him, whom we speak of.

Aesculus, a tree not much unlike an oak, but that he is smother, and the
leaves are brother and thycker: He brings fruit in Autumn, wherewith people
were fed, before they vsyd to eat flesh. I wot not what it should be in
english, except it be the service tree.

Aesculapius, the son of Apollo and Coronides, and was called God of Physyke,
and honored in the form of a serpent.

Aeson, was the father of the valyant Jason.

Aesopus, an ancient writer of fables. Alsoo the name of a famous player in
tragedies.

Aestas, summer.

Aestimabile, that which may be valued.

Aestimare litem, to tax the damages and costs that a man has sustained
by wrong.

Aestimatio, a pain set, a valuation.

Aestimator, he that valueth or sets the price of a thing, a preyser.

Aestimo, aui, are, to esteem, to valewe, to preyse.

Aestiua, places to be in for shadow in the summer time, whereunto as well men
as beastis do withdraw them for heat.

Aestiuo, aui, are, to dwell or be in a place during the summer time.

Aestuaria, places whereunto the sea flows and ebbethe, or meeres fyllyd with
salt water.

Aestuo, aui, are, to wax hot, to bourne, to flow like the sea, to be in
anguyshe or trouble of mind.

Aestuosus, hot or fervent.

Aestus, tus, tui, heat of the wether, or bournynge of the son. Also the
vyolence or troublous motion of the sea, Plinius in epist.
sommetyme doubtfulnesse or flyttyng of the mind, a scrupule.

A^ta, a hylle in Thessalye.

Aetabula, chyldehoode.

Aetalia, an isle in the sea by Geane.

Aetas, Cicero.
age.

Aetas acta est mihi, my time is passed.

Aetas bona, the flower of youth.

Aetas grandis, auncientye.

Aetas decrepita, age wherein a man loses the use of his members.

Aetas ingrauescens, age increasyng.

Aetas matura, perfect age.

Aetas prima, youth.

Aetate adulta, of full age.

Aetate affecta, of old age.

Aetate confectus, very aged, in extreme age.

Aetate exacta, idem.

Aetate integra, in the flower of youth.

Aetate prouecta, aged or of great age.

Aetate anteire, to be elder.

Aetatem meam me uiduam esse mauelim, Plautus.
quam istaec flagitia tua pati, quae tu facis, I had leauer be a wydowe all my
life, than to endure this trouble that I have with the.

Aetatem uelim seruire, Plautus.
Litanum modo ut conueniam, I would do service all the days of my life, on the
condition that I moughte mete with Litanus.

Aetatis progressus, the course of age.

Aetatis satis habere, to be old enough.

Aetatem, Cice. pro Rabi.
an aduerbe, signifyeng long time. Iam dudum aetate^ lites sunt inter eos,
There has been variance between them long time.

Aetatula, chyldehoode.

Aeterne, euerlastyngly.

Aeterno, are, to make perpetual.

Aeternus, everlasting.

Ether, the fyrmament.

Aethera, rae, the air.

Aethra, signifies the same.

Aethereus, a, um, of the fyrmamente. Anaxas goras puts it for the element
of fire.

Aethiopia, a great country in Affrike, conteinyng many regions, called
Aethiope, wherein be found people, beasts, and serpents of meruaylous forine.
It has on the weste, the mountayns callid Athlantes, on the east it extends
to the marches of Egypt, on the south it has the sea occian, on the north
part, it is enclosed with the river called Nilus.

Aethiopem lauas, thou washest a Moren, or Moore, A proverb applied to him
that praises a thing that is naught, or teaches a natural fool wysedom.
This proverb grew of one that bought a Mooren, and thinking that the
blackenesse of his saynne happened by the negligence of his first master, he
ceased not to wasshe the Mooren contynually with such things, as he thought
would make him white, by the which labor and washing he so vexed the poor
slave, that he brought him into a great sycknes, his skin remainynge still as
black as it was before.

Aethiopicus, a, um, of Egypt.

Aethiopissa, a woman of Egypt.

Aethon, one of the horses of Phoebus.

Aethrusci, the old inhabyitantes of the country in Italy, called noweli.
Tuscana.

Aetiologia, a rehersynge of the cause.

Aerites, Dios. li. 5.
a precious stone founden in an egles nest, which has within it an other
stone, as it were with young, which makes a sound if the stone be shaken. If
the bealy of a woman with child do fall down low, this stone being hanged
about the left arm, it retayneth the child, but if the womans time be com,
and that she does travail, than being taken away, and bound to her thygh,
she shall be forthewith delivered without any pain. Also if a piece of this
stone be put into bread or a pouddynge, and given unto oone if he be a thief,
it shall never pass or go through him. Likewise the brothe, wherein it is
sodden, if a thief, or they, which be of counsel with him, do take it, he
nor they may not swalowe it. Prepared with wax and oil of Cypres, it helps
against the falling sycknesse. Hermolaus Barbarus says in Corolario, that
except this stoone be taken out of the egles neste, it has no virtue in
medicyne.

Aetius, was the name of oone of Alexandria, which was both a great orator
and a noble physytion. Alsoo of an heretycke, which affyrmed, that no sin,
how greatte so ever (...) were, should be reputed to him that ha^^e faith.
He succeeded immediately after Artius, the year after the Incarnation of
Christ. 358.

Aetna, Strab. li. 6.
is a meruayllous hylle in Sycyle, at the foot whereof, Solinus.
is a lyttelle town of the same name, and there is alsoo woddes and trees of
diverse kinds planted. On the top thereof is a barayne ground, myxte with
ashes, and in the winter time coueryd with snow, which conteyneth in
cyrcuyte twenty furlonges, which fylde is enuyronned with a bank of ashes, of
the height of a wall. In the myddell is also a round hylle of the same
color and mattier, that the resydewe is. Wherein be two greatte hooles
fasshyoned like unto cups, and they be called Crateres. Out of the which
ryseth sommetyme sundry greatte flames of fire, sommetyme horrible smooke,
sommetyme are blown out bournynge stones in infynyte numbers. More over,
before that the said fire appears, there is hard within the ground terryble
noise and rorynge in diverse horrible sowndes. And also, which is more
marvel, when the smoke and fire is most abunda^t and fervent, yet round
about the top of the said hill, are always seen snow and hoar frostes.
Plinius writes, that the fire appears always et night. lib. 2. cap. 109.
This hylle is now called Gibello monte.

Aetolia, a region in Greece between Acarnaniam and Phocida.

Aetolus, a man of Aetolia.

Aeuitas, eternity.

Aeuum, long or everlasting time.

A ANTE F.
AFer, or Apher, a man borne in Affryke.

Affabilis, a man easy to be spoken unto.

Affabilitas, gentylnesse in hearing, courtesy.

Affabre, counnyngly, craftily workemanly.

Affabrum, counnyngly or craftily wrought.

Affaniae, tryfles, things of small estimation.

Affatim, abundauntly.

Affatus, spoken unto.

Affecta, Suet. in Vesp.
almost fynyshed, or nygh at a point.

Affecta fides, credence almost lost.

Affectata oration, a curyouse form of speaking.

Affectate, curyousely, with to much diligence.

Affectatio, curiosity.

Affectio, Cicero.
affection, sometime trouble of mind.

Affecto, aui, are, to seek effectually, to trouble, when it is put with damno,
or other like.

Affecta aestas, summer well nygh passed.

Affector, Varro.
aris, idem quod Affecto.

Affectum bellum, Cicero.
wars nygh at a point.

Affectus, a, um, troubled or vexed.

Affectus, ctus, ui, and affectio, affection or natural motion, as gladness,
desire, and such like.

Affectus morbo, Plautus.
vexed with syckenes.

Affectus uirgis, beaten with rods.

Affero, fers, attuli, afferre, to bring to.

Affero ad te salutem, I come to salute you.

Afferre auxilium, to help, to aid.

Afferre dentes, Varro de re rust.
to byte.

Afferre manus, to set vyolent hands on one.

Afferre molestiam, to do dyspleasure to one.

Afferre morbum, to make sick.

Afferre pedem, Catullus.
to come. Abite, unde malum, pedem attulistis, Go hens from whense with a
myschiefe ye came.

Afferre uim alicui, to make assault on one.

Afficio, eci, ere, to move affection or dysposytion either to good or to ill.

Afficere bonis nuncijs, Plautus.
to bring good tidings. Vti bonis uos, uestrosque omnes, nu^cijs me afficere
uultis, As ye will that I bring to you and yours good tidings.

Afficere cura, to bring in care.

Afficere lucro, to make oone to win or gain.

Afficere stipendio, Plautus.
to pay to him his wages.

Affecit eum laetali uulnere, he gave to him his deaths wound.

Affecit praeda atque agro populares suos, Cicero.
He his countreye men rich both of lands and goods.

Afficit me dolor, it makes me sorye.

Afficit me gaudio, it makes me glad.

Affici, to be moved with affection.

Affigo, gere, to nail to, or fasten.

Affigere literas pueris, to make chylderne kunne by heart.

Affingere aliquid alicui, to lie or make a lie on one.

Affines, in fyeldes betokens adioynynge: in men it betokens alyaunce by
marriage.

Affinis negotijs publicis, he that meddleth with the affairs of a commynaltie.

Affinis rei capitalis, gyltie of a great offense, which deserves death.

Affinis sceleris, guyltie of the trespass.

Affinitas, atis, affinity, alyaunce.

Affinitate attingere, to be of alyaunce to one.

Affirmatio, affyrmaunce.

Affirmative, with an affirmance.

Affirmo, aui, are, to affirm.

Afflare, to blow wind.

Afflari sydere, to be blasted, as corn and flowers of trees sometime ben.

Afflatus, tus, a blaste.

Affleo, Plautus.
fleui, flere, to weep in the remembrance of a thing.

Afflictare, to tourment him self contynually.

Afflictatio, punishment of the body with siknes

Afflictus, Salust.
stryken down to the ground.

Affligo, flixi, gere, to throw or beat down to the ground. also to punyshe.

Affligam te ad terram scelus, Plautus.
si me uno digito attigeris, I will beat the down to the ground wretch, if
thou towchest me but with one finger.

Affluens, it is, aboundaunte.

Affluenter, abundantly.

Affluentia, abundance.

Affluo, xi, ere, to ouerflowe or abound.

Affodere, to dygge and lay more ground to that we have.

Affor, fari, to speak to one.

Affore, to be here or present. Hanc affore biduo. that she be here within
these two days.

Afformido, are, to before aferde.

Africa, the third part of the world, wherein is Carthage, Numidia, and all
the countries now callid Barbary, and also the great country called Aethiopia.

Affricanus, a man of Affrike. Also the most noble captain Scipio was called
Affricanus because he subdewed that countreye to the Romans.

Affrico, aui, uel ixi, are, to rub against a thing.

Affrictus, ta, tum, rubbed against a thing.

Affricus, a, um, of Affryke.

Affricus uentus, the south wind.

Affrio, aui, are, to grate or break small one thing with an other.

Affulgeo, Liuius.
si, gere, to shine against a thing. also to happen with gladness. Sardiniae
recipiendae repentina spes affulsit, A sudden hope ioyousely happened, that
Sardinia should be recovered.

Affundo, fudi, fundere, to shed lycoure on a thing.

A front and a tergo, before and behind. Sommetyme it is taken for a
proverb, applied to them, which do behold things passed, with those
things which may happen. Alsoo the time passed, with the time coming.

A ANTE G.
AGabus, an Hebrewe name, which signifies in latyne locusta, a fly that
dystroyeth corn. also Festiuitas patris, the myrthe of the father. Act. 11.
and. 21.
Of this name was a prophet in the time of the apostles, which prophesied of an
universal famyn to come, and that saint Poule should be bounden, and put in
gyues.

Agag, is a word of Hebrewe, which may be interpreted a solar in the uppermost
part or the house. Reg. 1. cap. 15.
Of that name was a king of Amalech, the fattest of all men, whom Saul king
of Jews took in battle, and slew him not, as god had commanded, and
therefore was God greuouselye dyspleased with Saul, as he declared by the
prophet Samuel, which showed unto Saul, that God more required the obedience
of his comma^dementes, than sacrifyce. And than Samuel did there cut in
pieces the said fat Aga^ in the presence of God in Galgalis.

Agallochum, mencyoned by Dyoscorides, seems by the description thereof to be
the soote wood, called now Lignum aloes.

Agamemnon, was son of Atreus, and king of Mycenae, who in the preparation of
the Greeks against the Troyans, for his wisdom and magnanymytie, was by the
consent of all the Greeks, chosen of them to be their general capytayne.
And according to their expectations, he most nobly gouernyd him self, and
that most puyssaunt army, during the siege of Troy by the space of ten
years. But being returned to his own royalme, and having with him
Cassandra, daughter of Pryamus king of Troy, his wife Clytemnestra conspyryng
with Aegistus, with whom she had lived in aduoultrye, caused her said noble
husband to put on a garment, which had no issue out for his head, than
Aegistus prepared for that purpose, whiles he was strugglyng therewith, struck
him through with his sword, and so slew him. And thus that noble prince,
after that he had escaped the most dangerous wars, the valiant hands of
Hector and his brethern, the manyfolde storms and peryls of the sea, wherein
he had trauayled by the space of one year, finally in his own proper royalme,
by treason of them whom he most trusted, was shamefully murdered. Such is the
vnsuretye of this wretched world. He was before the Incarnation of our lord
about.1194. years.

Agamnestor, was a king of Athenes.

Aganae, was a noble woman, the daughter of Cadmus, who slew her own son
Penthea king of Thebes, fynding him in the most lascyuious and abominable
ceremonies of Bacchus, called Bacchanalia. A notable exaumple of a paynym
lady, who only by the honestye of her nature, without knowledge of the laws
of god, being meued so vehementely against dyshonest wantonness, to punyshe
her own son, excluded from her all motherly pity, rather willing to have
her son dead, than to live abhomynably.

Aganippe, pes, a fountain in a countreye of Greece, called Aonia, which was
dedycate unto the Muses, whereof they be called Aganippides.

Agapis, is a stone of the color of saffron, the virtue whereof is to cure the
styngynge of scorpyons and serpents, if it be laid to the wound.

Agar, the maiden of Sara, on whom Abraham begatte Ismael.

Agareni, Paral. 1. cap. 5.
a people which were al dystroyed by Saul king of Jews.

Agaso, onis, a horsekeper or mulettout.

Agatho, the name of one of the sons of Priamus. also a boy whom Plato loved.

Agathocles, a king of Sicyle, which was the son of a potter, and by
subtylle wit and boldness of courage, grew by sundry dygnyties at last
to be king. And than becamme such a tyrant, that he slew all the noble
men, the counsayllours and learned men of Sycyle, and despoyled all the
rich men. Fynallye, he being attached in all the parts of his body, with
incredyble tourmentes, and a pestylencyalle humor, frettynge all his synewes,
he contynuyng long time in such peines, at the last dyed.

Agathyrsus, was one of the sons of Hercules, which dwellid in a part of
Scithia, and callid the people after his name, Agathyrsi, which in such wise
painted them selves, that the color moughte not by any means be washed or
put away, and therefore they were called Picti Agathyrsi. And some men do
suppose, that the ancient inhabytauntes of the south part of Scotland,
ioynyng to the marches of England, which were called Picti, were of the said
people called Athyrsi.

Agdistis, Leonicus. li. 1. ca. 37.
the Greeks feined to be a dyuel come of the sede of Jupiter, which fell from
him when he slepte. Who had both members of a man and woman, of whom other
dyuels being aferde, they did cut of the man's instrument, and threw it away,
whereof did spring an almond tree, and brought forth almondes when time served.

Age, goo to, take heed.

Age, age, well well. Age, age ut luber, Well, goo to, do what ye ^yst.

Age dicat, let him speak on, let him speak hardyly.

Age, and agite, go forth, forth on, or tell on.

Agedum, go to yet.

Agea, a way in a ship.

Agelastus, he that does never laugh.

Agellus, a little field.

Agenor, a king of Phoenicia, son of Balus, and father of Europa, whom
Jupiter ravished, and of Cadmus, who builded the city of Thebes.

Agendicum, a country in France called now Prouynce or Prouance.

Ager, agri, a field. sometime it signifies a territory belongyng to a town,
wherein is included fields, meadows, woddes, and waters. Sometime a manor with
the demeanes, sometime the arable field only.

Agere, Plautus.
to here, to perceive. Vos agite spectatores, ye that behold, here, or take heed. Hoccine agis, an non? Perceyuest thou this matter or no? Terentius.
also to conclude. Herus me relictis rebus, iussit Pamphilum hodie obseruare ut
quid ageret de nuptiis, scirem, My master has commanded me, that layeng al
things aparte, I should awayte upon Pamphilus, to the intent I might know,
what he would conclude touching the marriage. Terent.
Also to goo. Quo hinc te agis? Whyther go thou from hense? Sometime it
signifies to come. Vnde agis te nunc Dorpale? From whense come thou now
Dorpalus?

Agere aetatem, to live.

Agere ad praescriptum, to do that, that he was appointed.

Agere ambages, to go about the bushe, or to tell a lengar tale than needs.

Agere aliquem, Plin. in Panegy.
to pursue one.

Agere amicum, to do like a friend, or play the part of a friend.

Agere apologum, to tell him a fable.

Aliud agere, to think on an other thing.

Animam agere, to be in the point of death.

Agere causam, to plead.

Agere caudam, Plautus.
to wag his tail.

Agere conuentus, to hold a parlyament.

Agere cuniculos, to undermine.

Agere cum aliquo, to treat with one, or to speak. Cicero.
Cum mecum saepe ageres, ut de amicitia scribere^, where often times thou
did entreat, that I should write of frendeshyp. Plautus.
Illo praesente, mecum agito, si quid uoles. If thou will any thing with me,
speak it in the presence of that man.

Agere diris malis, to curse.

Agere de pace, to treat of peace.

Agere delectum, to chose men, as in mowsters for the war.

Agere equum, to spur his horse.

Agere ex insidijs, to do a thing by treason, or martial polycy.

Agere ex sponso, uel ex sponsu, to bring an action of covenant.

Agere ex syngrapha, to bring an action of det upon an obligation.

Agere fabulam, to play in a comedye, tragedy, or interlude.

Agere frondem, to put out leaves, spoken of a tree.

Agere furti, to appeal one of felony.

Agere gemmas, to bourgen.

Agere inter-homines, to live.

Agere iniuriarum, to sue oone for trespass or wrongs done.

Agere lege, to sue, to proceed by the order of the law.

Agere mensuras fideliter, to measure things justly.

Agere morem, to use for a custom.

Agere nugas, Cicero.
to mock, to trifle.

Agere orationem, to pronounce an oration.

Agere poenam ab aliquo, to punyshe one.

Agere primas parts, to be the chief personage.

Agere radicem, to take rote.

Agere reum, to sue one in the law.

Agere summo iure, to proceed with rigor.

Agere suo iure, to execute his authority.

Agere uineas, to lay ordinance to a thing.

Agit uigesimum annum, he is.xx. years old.

Pectus mihi agit nunc cubito, Plautus.
She hytteth me on the heart with her elbowe.

Quo hinc te agis? whither will thou?

Agunt adolescentiam, they occupy youth.

Agesilaus, was king of Lacedemonia, which from his chyldhod was of excellent
virtues, as in troth, justice, temperance, noble courage, liberality, and
contin^^e. Wherefore he was so much honored, and prospered so well, that he
subdued to the Lacedaemonians, innumerable cities and countries in Asia and
Greece. when one demanded a thing of him, which was unjust, saying, that he
had promised it, he answered: If it were just, I promised it, but if it
were unjust, I spoke it, but I promised it not. When the Lacedaemonians had
given to him the tresour of Agis, which was king before him, as soon as he
had received it, he incontinent did distribute it to them, whom he perceived
and knew to be poorest. when it was demanded of him, why he lay no more
rychelye than a private person, he answered: that a prince ought to excel
other men, not in delycacy, but in temperaunce and moderate living. He spoke
with no woman, except his wife, but either in the temple, or before al men,
thinking those two places to be void of suspicion, the one for holiness, the
other for multitude of witnesses. undoubtedly the life of this man was
wonderful.

Agesis, go to hardely, go to on goddis name.

Agger, eris, a hepe of stones or tourfse. also a bulwark, or a countremure to
a fortress or camp in battle. sometime it sygnifieth a caulsey.

Aggero, aui are, to heap up.

Aggero, ssi, gerere, to lay on a heap. also to bring to one. Plautus.
Namque ecastor, amor and melle and fell est foecundissimus, gustu dat dulce,
amarum usque ad sacietatem aggerit: For in good faith, love has abundance
both of honey and galle, in taste it is pleasant, but it brings with it
bytternesse, so much that it becomes lothesome.

Aggeus, a word of Hebrewe, in english merry, solemn, or compacyng. It was
the name of a prophet, one of the.xii. which prophesyed in the time of
Zorobabel king of the Jews, about a. 550. years before the incarnation of
Christ.

Agglomero, are, to make up on a heap, by adding to.

Agglutino, aui, are, to join together.

Aggrauatio, a grief, a burdon.

Aggrauesco, scere, to wax more grievous.

Aggrauo,aui, are, to be burdenous or chargeable. also to aggrauate or make a
thing more grievous.

Aggredior, gredi, to go to, or come to, to invade, to assail, to begin, to
attempt.

Aggrego, aui, are, to gather together.

Aggressio, look in Aggredior.

Aggretus, idem quod Aggressus.

Agilis, nymble, or light.

Agilitas, nymblenes, derteritie.

Agiliter, lightly, nymbly, quickly, quiuerly.

Agilla, an old town in Thuscane.

Agina, wherein the beam of a pair of balaunce is hanged.

Aginator, he that is meued with a littel gayn.

Aginor, Cicero.
nari, to merchandise vile things, or of small value.

Aginnu^, the country of Angolesme in France.

Agiographa, books of holy scripture.

Agis rem actam, thou lesest thy labor. the thing is done to thy hand.

Agit rem suam, he gothe about his own business.

Agit hic perpetuum diem sol, Plautus*
the son shyneth here all the day long.

Agito, are, to entreat well, to go, to do often, to prycke, to compel, to
trouble, to persecute, to vex, to consider, to reuolue, to solicit.

Iam calcari quadrupede^ agitabo aduersum cliuum, Plautus.
Now will I with a spur make my horse run up the hill.

Agitare conuiuium, to bankette and make good chiere. Plautus.
Age ergo, hoc agitemus conuiuium, uino, and sermon suaui: Therefore go to, let
us banquet, drink, talk, and make good chere.

Agitare custodiam, Plautus.
to take good head in keeping of one.

Agitare cum animo, Salust.
to reuolue in the mind.

Agitare diem, Plautus.
to pass forth the day.

Agitare feras, to course wild beasts.

Agitare imperium, to govern. In pace uero, beneficijs magis quam metu
imperium agitabant. In the time of peace, they governed more by gentylnes than
by fear.

Agitare iustitiam, Plinius in epist.
to exercise justice.

Agitare letitiam, to make joy.

Agitare mente, to conceive in the mind, to think.

Agitare praesidium, Salust.
to be in garrison.

Agitare uigilias, Salust.
to keep watch.

Agitare uitam, to live.

Agitatio, a me^yng or styrryng: also exercise.

Agitator, a dryuer of a carte, or of beasts.

Agitur de capite, aut de fama, he is in dangier of his life, or of his
credence.

Been mecum agitur, Val. Max. de militia Terent.
I am well at ease, I am well content, or I am in good condition.

Agitur res capitis, the question or matter in debate, concerns life.

Aglaia, one of the three Gracis, which is interpreted bryghtnes, clerenes,
beaultie, pleasure, or majesty.

Aglauros, was a maiden, which was daughter to Eritheus, king of Athenes:
whom Ouidius fayneth to be turned by Mercurius unto a stone.

Agmen, an host of men. sometime a violence, a course of water.

Agminalis, perteyninge to an host.

Agnascentia membra, members which are superfluous, as were ^one has three
legs, or six fyngers on one hand, and other like.

Agnati, kynsmen of the fathers side.

Ad agnatos, and gentiles deduci, to be committed to his kynsfolke, as mad
men were by the law civil: whereof was made a proverb, applied to them,
which do all things madly and without circumspection.

Ad agnatos and gentiles deducantur.

Agnatu^, that which is in birth more than the common course of nature uses
to bring forth.

Agnellus, a young lamb.

Agnitio, knowledge.

Agnomen, the surname that I have by my father.

Agnosco, noui, noscere, to know, to recognize, or knowledge.

Agnos, is a tree, which is a kind of wyllow, and is commonly called Agnus
castus, in english park leaves, it has leaves like to wyllowe, but that
they be always grene, and has not so sweet a smell, and flowers first purple,
and after white, and a sede like pepper. There is an other kind thereof, which
has more branches, the leaves whiter, and somewhat mosy, and the flower
purple. Both of them do grow about ryuars. It is called Agnos, which is in
english chaste, for it is said, that if a man or woman have it about them, or
under their beds, it shall keep them chaste.

Agnus, a lamb.

Ago, egi, agere, to do, to lead, to drive, to labor, to here, to speak, to
pronounce, to fain, to go. Nudi agunt, they go naked. to extend or sprede,
Radices agunt, Pom. M^
they sprede their roots. to treat of a thing, to give.

Ago gratias, I give thanks to bring forth. also to expel, Venena membris
agit, It expels poison out of the members.

Agolum, a staff to drive cattle with.

Agon, onis, a contention in furme of battle, or a wrastlynge: also the place
where it was exercised.

Agonalia, certain festival days kept among the Romans.

Agonensis porta, a gate of Rome, called* also Colina.

Agones, were sometime called hills.

Agonia, fear and heaviness, or vexation of mind. Also sacrifice done on hills.

Agonisma, the reward of vyctory.

Agonista, a champion.

Agonius, was named a god, which had preemynence over things to be done.

Agonizo, aui, are, to contend, or fight valyantely.

Agonotheta, (...) that makith a common game, and pays the reward to them
that do win it.

Agoraeus, a market man, a haunter of markets

Agoreus, was an image of Mercurius, which was in Pharis a city of Achaia,
set in the myddell of the market place, out of the which ydoll, the dyuell
gave aunsweres in form following. Leonicus de uaria historia. li. 1. cap. 36.
Before the feet of the ydoll was an altar of stone, whereunto were bounden
with lead, certain lamps of bras, He that came for an answer, burned franken
sense on the altar, and made his prayers, and after poured oil into the
lamps, and did put in to the ydolles hand a piece of money of that country,
which was of brass, and than secretly whispered in the images ear what so
ever he would demand, and forthwith stoppynge his own ears with both his
hands, went out of the markette place, and than opened is ears, and what
voice he hard first, he took it for a sure counsayl in all things that he
would do.

Agoranomus, he that sets the price of vittayle, a tasker.

Agraria lex, a law made for the common disposition of lands, as be our
statutes of enclosures and decayenge of husbandry: but among the Romans they
were such laws as did appoint, how much land a senator should have, and
not excede, and how much should be divided among the people.

Agrarius, a landed man, Also he that favors the laws that be made for the
orderyng of possessions.

Agrarius, a, um, perteyninge to lands or possessions.

Agrestis, e, wyld, grown without culture. Also he that is rude and beastely
without gentle manners.

Agricola, a husband man

Agricolator, the same.

Agricolatio, tyllage, or husbandry.

Agricultor, an husband man.

Agricultura, husbandry.

Agrigentinus, a, um, of the town of Agrigentum.

Agrigentum, a city in Sicil, which the Greeks do call Acragaritem, and the
countreye Acragen. The people there builded sumptuously, and fed delycatly. And
therefore Plato said of them in bourde: The Agrygentines did buyld as they
should live ever, and did eat as they should always dye. Of this city and
country was prince Phaleris the most cruel tyrant, of whom shall be spoken
in the letter P.

Agrimonia, an herb called commonly in english Egrymoyn, is the right
Eupatorium, as it appears as well by the description of Dioscorides, as by the
affyrmaunce of May nardus, Antonius Musa, and other most excellent physicians
of this time. The dec^ction of this herb, or the poulder thereof dried, is an
excellent remedy against oppylations of the liver by reason of fleume. It is
hot in the first degree, and dry in the second.

Agripetae, they that do ask their portion in division of lands.

Agrippa, Josephus antiq.
was the name of sundry kings, of whom one was most excellent, the son of
Aristobolus king of Jews, which was by Tiberius the emperor cast in prison,
where he lived miserably the space of.vi. months, And afterward Tiberius
being dead, the emperor Caius Caligula took him suddenly out of prison, and
made him king of jews, setting a crown of gold on his head, and for the
chain of iron, wherewith he was bounden, he gave to him a chain of gold of
like weight. So from extreme misery, he suddenly came to high prosperity. and
being returned in to his country, at the first lived honorably, and did
many good deeds, and did amplyate and adorn the city of Jerusalem with
buyldynges most magnifikelye. But at the last, being eleuate in pride, and
sufferynge him self to be honored and wondered at as god, sitting in a high
trone in the city of Cacsaria, apparailed in glystring gold, sodeynlye he was
stryken with an angel in the presence of an infynite number of people, wherewith
his body swelled, and worms issued out thereof with intolerable peynes, and
horrible stenche. In the which torments he looked on his flattering
counsaylours and servants, and said: Lo I whom ye called a god, am now in
the peynes of death. And in this wise he dyed, when he was of the age of.lvii.
years. A very notable and perpetual myrrour to all them, which flow in
prosperity, forgetting them selfs to be mortal, reioysynge in the
commendation of flatterers.

Agrippae, they which be borne with their fete forward.

Agrippina, the mother of Nero the emperor, whoo was daughter of the noble
Germanicus, and suster to Caius Caligula, emperor after Tiberius, was first
married to a noble man called Gneus Domitius, by whom she had Nero, who after
was emperor. After the death of Domitius, her brother Caligula abused her as his
co^cubine: and after his death, Claudius being emperor, when he had caused
his wife Messalina to be slain, for her most abominable avoutrics, he took
this Agrippina to wife, for her excellent beaultie, who afterward by her
crafty and shrewde wit caused her husband Claudius to mary his daughter
called Octauia, to her son Nero, and also to make him companion in the
succession of the Empire with his son called Britannicus. And lest Britannicus
in the life of his father should grow to the state of a man, and be able to
receive the empire incontinent ^^er his decesse, and expel her son Nero: He
first poisoned her husband Claudius, and afterward his son Britannicus:
But her falsehoode, abhomynation, and cruelty was not left unpunished. for
soon after, her own son Nero, notwithstanding that he joined her with him
in equal authority, and as some men supposed, abused her carnally, having her
in most mortal hate, caused her to be put into a barge upon the river of Tyber
under the color of solace, over the which barge was hanged great poyses,
which sodeynlye should have been letten fall to have killed her: and also in
the barge were certain holes closed for the time, which being open, the
vessel should have sunken. But fortune at that time other wise provided for
her, for the poyses fell not on her, but on other and slew them, and the barge
being sunk, she swam to land, and for that time escaped. whereof Nero heryng,
sent a captain with an hundred men to slay her, who entering in to the house,
where she was reposynge her self, without any warning struck her on the
head, but she holding forth her bealy, cried, stryke here, strike here the
place, which bare the monster of the world. By this story it may appear,
that of an ill mother came an ungracious son, and that the end of falsehoode
and cruelty, was vengeance against nature and al humanity.

Agrippina, mother of the said Agrippina, was daughter of M. Agrippa, and wife
to Germanicus, whom Tiberius by the commandment of Octauia^ had declared to be
his heir apparent to the Empire, and not withstanding was afterward poisoned
by consent of Tiberius: for whose death the said Agrippina took such
heuinesse, that she determined to dye. wherefore she absteyned from all meats
and drynkes, and notwithstanding that the Emperor Tiberius caused meat to be
put in to her throat, she would not receive it, but in that voluntary abstynence
finally dyed.

Agrippina Colonia, the city of Coleyne in Germany.

Agyeus, a surname of Apollo.

Ah, a voice of lamenting or sorowynge.

Ahenum, a pot to heat in drink.

Ahenus, a vessel of white brass or copper, which is bright both within and
without.

A ANTE I
AJAX, the son of Thelamon by Hesione, daughter of Laomedon king of Troy,
was the strongest man of all the Greeks next to Achilles. But after that
Achilles was slain, when Ajax contended with Ulysses for the armoure of
Achilles, and that Ulysses by force of his eloquence opteyned sentence on his
part of the judges: Ajax becam mad, and in his fury slew many beasts,
supposing that they had been Ulysses and his company. There was also an other
prince called Ajax, son of Oileus, and king of the Locrensis in Greece, who
was wonderful swyfte and expert in handiynge a spear: This man when Troy was
sacked, did violate the noble virgin Cassandra in the Temple of Pallas.
wherefore as he returned homewarde, on the sea, he and his ships were burned
with lightnynge. he was before the incarnation. 1190. years.

Ailoth, 3. Reg. (...)
was a city in Judea builded by Ozias king of Jews.

Ain, Terent.
for aisne, is it as thou say? Ain uero, idem.

Aio, ais, ait, I say, thou says, he says. Aiunt, they say.

Aioth, was the second judge of the Hebrews, a man of great strength and
valyant of courage, and had equal strength and aptness in both hands. This
man slew Eglon king of Moabites, by this means. When Eglon had long time
warred on the jews, and taken from them diverse cities, and kept them in
much myserye, this Aioth came to him to Hierico, bringing unto him certain
presents, which lyked him well, and desired to speak with him privily,
which was granted unto him. And all other being commanded to avoid, Aioth
sodeynlye struck Eglon unto the heart twyse, the last time with such
puissaunce, that the knyfe with the hyltes remained in the wound, and Aioth so
leaving him dead, departed without suspicion, and came to his people, and
declared what he had done. who being glad, armed them, and fell on the
Moabites, and slew of them ten thousand, and drove all the resydue out of their
country. And so the Jews being delivered by the wisdom and virtue of
Aioth, they made him their judge or prince, who governed them peasablye. 80
years, and dyed a very old man in much honor, before the incarnation of
Christ about a. 1399. years.

Aiutamini, Non (...)
for adiuuate,

Aizoon, an herb called also Semper uiuum, barba Iouis, and Sedum, in english
singrene or houseleeke. There be thereof three kinds, the more fascioned like to
a round tongue, growing thycke to gether, the leaves thick and full of juice,
and grows on houses or walls. An other is called the less, and has little
round leaves, and thycke, and is called in english prick ma ^ame. An other
there is, which is called Portulaca syluestris, wild purselane. Eueryche of
them be cold in the third degree.

A ANTE L.
ALA, lae, a wynge of a bird, and a wynge of a battle, which is properly of
horsemen. sometime a sail of a ship. It is also the part of the ear that is
open. Moreover Alae, be the nose thrylles. Ala is also the pinio^ of the
shulder of a beast

Alabandae, a city in Greece, in the country of Ionia.

Alabandicus, a, um, of that city.

Alabandina, a stone read, myxt with blue, it provoke bledynge.

Alabarches, he that has the rule over salt: and among the Egyptians it was
an honorable name.

Alabastrum, Alabrestites, alabaster.

Alacer, cris, cre, quick of spirit or of wit, lusty of courage, merry, and
he that lives in hope: properly he that is in a mean between glad and sorry.
sometime it betokens a man ready and willing, thereof comes Alacritas,
redynesse or promptnes of will, also feruentnesse of mind.

Alacre, promptly, couragiousely, gladly.

Alacritas, chierfulnes, courage.

Alacriter, idem quod Alacre.

Alania, a region of Scithia in Europa which stretches unto the great fennes
of Meotis.

Alani, people of Scithia, nyghe to the river called Ister or Danubius.

Alapa, a blow or stroke with the hand.

Alaricus, king of Goths, besyeged Rome, and did put it to the sack, and
burned it, the year of our lord. 408. in the which siege there was in the
city such famyne, that the mothers for hungar were constrained to eat their
own children. There was also an other Alaricus, which was vanguisshed by
Clodoucus king of France, the year of our lord. 238. in whose time the part
of France called Gallia Narbonensis, and all Spain were in the possession of
the Goths.

Alarij equites, horsemenne, which are in the wings of a battle.

Alata Castra, a city in Scotland called Eden burgh, or the castle of
maidens.

Alatus, a, um, wynged.

Alauda, dae, a lark. It was also the name of one of the legions of the
Romans.

Alauorsi, people in the uttermost part of the North.

Alba, a city nyghe to Rome, which was builded by Ascanius son of Aeneas.
There was an other city called Alba in Lumbardy.

Albanenses, were certain heretykes in the year of our lord. 1120. This sect
held sundry heresies: One was that the soul of man after his death was put
in to an other body. An other heresye, that baptism was of no efficacy. The
third, that there were two gods, oone good an other ill, of the good god
proceeded good things, of the ill god, ill things. The.iiii. that in hell were
none other peynes than be in this world. The.v. that the general judgment
is passed, and that there is none to come. The.vi. that it is prohibited to al
christen men to swear, and that it is not lefull for any manne to swear.
The.vii. that man has no free will, called in latin liberum arbitrium.
The.viii. that the matter whereof the world was made, was not made of god, but
is coeternal with god. The.ix. that there is no original sin, and that
children be not borne in original sin. Also that sin comes not of free
will, but of the dyuel. The.x. they denied that the bodies of men should
eftsoon arise at the day of judgment. The.xi. they abiecte all the old
testamente, as a vain thing, and of nonc authority.

Albani, people of Alba in Italy.

Albania, is a country in Asia, having on the east the sea called Caspium, on
the weste Iberia, on the north the hills of Caucasus. The people there were
first poor, and lived as shepeherdes, and were simple not knowing money, nor
any number above one hundred, but living by exchange, not knowing weight,
measure, nor husbandrye; but notwithstanding ready in wars. And honored for
gods the son and the moon, having among them as Strabo writes.xxvi.
languages. Of these people are supposed to come the Albanoises, which do now
dwell in Morea, sometime called Peloponesus, which be now under the Turks.

Albanus, a river not far from the city of Rome. Also the name of two
cities, one in Macedonia, the other in Armenia.

Albanus, a, um, of Alban in Italy. Albani patres, the senators of Albe.

Albarium, the parget of a wall.

Alba spina, Serapio supposes it to be that which the Arabians call Bedeguar,
some thinks the contrary, and that it is a bremble growing in hedges and
dyches, having flowers white and of good savor. some suppose it to be a kind
of thystel square and full of pryckes. Anto. Musa. Ruell.


Albedo, Albetudo, Albor, whytenesse.

Albegmina, part of the inward of beasts, which was offered to Dis, called
god of Hell.

Albenses, people of Alba in Lumbardy.

Albeo, bui, bear, to be white.

Albesco, scere, to be white.

Albeus, and Albeolus, a chesse bourde.

Albi calculi, white stones, with which the people of Creta did note or mark
the days, wherein they had good fortune: like as they marked ill days with
black stones, called nigri calculi.

Albia, a river, which passes through the realm of Boemia.

Albicera, a kind of olyue tree.

Albiceratae ficus, broad figs with a small stalk.

Albico, aui, are, to be white.

Albidus, a, um, somewhat white.

Albigenses, were heretics, which began by Tolouse in France, the year of
our lord. 120. which held the heresies of the Albanenses, towchynge the soul,
baptism, god, and the general resurrection. Moreover that it was not leful
for christen men to eat flesh.

Albinga, a town in Liguria.

Albinus, the name of an emperor.

Albion, was the most aunciente name of this isle, which conteyneth England
and Scotland: of the beginning of the which name have benne sundry
opynions. One late feigned by him which first prynted the Englysh chronicle,
wherein is neither similitude of troth, reason, nor honesty: I mean the fable
of the fyfty daughters of one Diocleci an king of Siria, where never any other
history made mention of a king of Siria being so named. and also that name
is greek and no part of the language of Siria. More over the coming of them
from Siria in a ship or bote without any marinours through the sea called
Mediterraneum, into the occean, and so finally to find this isle, and to
inhabit it, and have generation by deuelles, is both impossible, and much
reproach for this noble royalme to ascrybe her fyste name and habitation, to
such inuentours. An other opinion there is, which has a more hone ste
similitude, which is, that it was named Albion, ab albis rupibus, of white
rocks, because that unto them, which do comme by sea from the east or
southe, the banks and rocks of this isle do appear white. of this opinion
have I most marvel, because it is written of great learned men. first for as
much as Albion is no latten word, nor has the analogye, that is to say, the
proportion or simslitude of latin. For who has found this syllable, on, at
the end of a latin word. And if it should have been so called for the white
color of the rocks, men would have called it, Alba, or Albus, or Album. And
yet in Italye were towns called Alba, and in Asia a country called Albania,
and neither the one nor the other took their beginning of white rocks or
walls, as ye may read in the books of Geography. nor the water of the river
called Albis, seems no whyter than any other water. But where aunciente
remembrance of the beginning of things lacks, if it may be lefull to men to
use their conjectures, my conjecture may be as well accepted, as the conjecture
of Pliny, although he incomparably excelled me in wisdom and doctrine,
specially if it may appear that my conjecture shall approach more nere to the
symilitude of troth. Wherefore I will also set forth mine opinion, only to
the intent to exclude fables, lacking either honesty or reasonable
similitudes. When the Greeks began first to prospere, and that their cities
became populouse and waxed puissaunte, they which marcned on the sees, and
also the yles which were in the sees, called Hellespontus, Aegeum, and
Creticum, after that they could practice perfytely the course of saylinge, and
had founden thereby profit, they lyttel and little attempted to search and
find out the commodities of outward countries, and like as Spanyardes and
Portyngales have late done, they experienced to seek out countries before
unknown, and at the last passed the Straytes of Marocke, and entered into the
great occean sea, where the wynd so favoring them they found diverse and many
yles. Among the which they perceiving this isle to be not only the greattest
in circuit, but also most plentuouse of every thing necessary to man: the
air most wholesome and temperate, the earth apt to bring forth all thing that
may sustain a temperate air, the flesh of veoffes and muttons, most sweet
and delycate, the wull most fine, not lackyng any kind of metal, having
abundance of wodde and timber to build with: also great and fair ryuers,
with great lakes or mecres of fresh water, and as well in them, as in the sea,
wherewith the countreye is environed, was great plenty of fishes of diverse
sorts, most apt to be eaten. they wonderyng ^ reioysyng, at their good and
fortunate ariuayle, named this isle in greek Olbion, (...)
which in englysh signifies Happy, in latin Foelix, like aspart of Arabia
which is most fertile, is called Arabia felix. But in process of time, by the
resort of sundry people, having diverse langages. no marvel if one letter were
changed, and the first letter O, turned in to A, and so for Olbion it was at
the last called Albion, which word has no mauer of signification. the which
chaungynge of letters is not unlikely, sens at this present time the Northern
me^ of this realm do use A, in words where southern me^ do use O, as a bane, a
stane, a bare, a band, for a bone, a stone, a bore, a bond. And among the
greeks were like alterations of letters. And it may be more easily sustained,
that one vowell may be changed in a word, and specially A, into O, which in
some man's mouth, souneth often times like, than a syllable impertinente to
the proportion of latin, should be unaptly added to. Not withstanding
Pomponius Mela makes mention of a giant called Albion, who^ Hercules slew in
Gallia, which was son of Neptunus. who moughte with more reason be named the
first gyuer of his name to this isle, than that the other surmyses should be
likely. If any man can find matter more certain, of the original beginning
of this isle, I will not be offended but congratulate with him his good fortune
and diligence.

Albis, a river in Boemia, which comes to the city of Prage.

Albitudo, whiteness.

Albo, aui, are, to make white.

Albogalerus, a hat, which the great priests of Iupyter, called Flamines
Dialis, did wear.

Albor, the white of an egg.

Albosia, shyldes or targates.

Albucus, some do suppose it to be the herb, which is called Asphodelus.
some do write, that it is only the stalk of asphodelus, and that the hole
herb is called hastula regia. look after in Asphodelus.

Albugo, inis, a white spot in the eyes. also the white of an egg.

Albula, the old name of the river of Tiber. also a water in the field callid
Tiburtinus, which was medicinable for sore eyes.

Album, a table openly set up, wherein either the names of officers, or some
public decre is written.

Album plumbum, tynne.

Albumen, inis, the white of an egg.

Albunia, a wood and fountain by the river called Aniene in Italy.

Alburnum, the fat that is in some tree.

Alburnus, a mountain in Lucania.

Albus, ba, bum, white.

Albus fluuius, the river called Humber in the north part of England.

Alcaea, a lion.

Alcaeus, was a famous poet of them which are called Lirici, which made songs
to the harp, the year before the intarnation of Christ. 646

Alcanna, is that which is commonly called Cyprus.

Alce, a wild beast in the woods of Germany, in fascion and skin like to a
got, but greatter, which have no joints in their legs, and therefore they do
never lie, but only do lean to trees, when they do rest them, which the
hunters knowing, do fawe the trees that they lean to, half a sunder, where by
they fall down, and be taken.

Alcea, is one of the malowes, but the has leaves divided like veruin, Diosco.
and a flower like a rose, long rotes.v. or.vi, white and broad. Also Io.
Agricola says, that it is called of the apothecaries herba Simeonis.

Alcedines, and Alcyones, are birds of the sea, which do hatche their young
chickens on the land, and do lay their eggs on the sands, in the mids of
winter, and when the sea is most troublous, if they do lay, it becomes
sodeynelye calm, and the storms and wyndes do cease, until these birds
have al hatched, and brought up their chickens, and made them ready to fly,
which is in the space of.xiiii. days. This bird is lyttel more than a sparowe,
his feathers be purple of color, myxt with white, and has a long neck and a
small, his byll somewhat green, long and sclender, and this bird is seen very
seldom.

Alces, a beast in France like a mule, but he has his over lyp so long,
that when he fedeth, he goes backewarde, or else he can not byte of the
grass and herbs, which he should eat. The horsckynde of them have horns
on their over brows. Such a beast was late brought in to England, and scene
in the kings park at Westmister.

Alceste, seu Alcestis, look before in Admetus.

Alchabitius, is the name of a book, which is an introduction in the indyciall
part of Astronomy.

Alchech, in the Araby tongue, is the beast, which is called Linx, which is
begotten between a lion and a lybarde.

Alcibiadion, is that herb which Dioscorides calls Echion. Ericius Cordus a
famous physician of this time, supposes it to be a kind of our borage, the
flowers being somewhat like, but that they be deper in, and do not sprede so
broad, and be of a more pueple color. the sede thereof is like the head of an
adder, in so much as there do seem to be eyes therein. Some do suppose it to
be wild Borage.

Alcida, was a terrible monster, which was slain by Pallas.

Alcidamus, an ancient orator of the Greeks

Alcides, idem quod Hercules.

Alcinous, Homerus Odiss.
the name of a king of a people called Phaeaces, excellent in justice, which
had a fair and magnifi^e palayce, with orchardes which bare most
plentuousely fruytes twyse in the year.

Alcman, a famous poet.

Alcmenes, a cunning grauer.

Alcmeon, a philosopher, scholar to Pythagoras, which first wrate of the
Nature of things

Alcon, was a good archer of Creta, which beholdinge a dragon ready to devour
his son, did shote so craftily, that as the dragon was imbracynge of the
child, the arrowe passed unto his heart, and hurt not his son, so that the
dragon immediately dyed.

Alcoranum, the book of Mahumet, wherein are myxte most shameful lies and
abominations, with some part of scripture and necessary laws, though these
be feweste. For he gives liberty to men to have great numbers of wives, and
concubines without number. he imagines angels to be in love, and commyt
aduoultry with mortal women. he auaunteth, that he him self went up to god to
receive laws, and that he was borne thither by an ass that Jesus lent him,
that he found god beatynge an angel, between whose brows was the space of a
journey of many hundred of years: and such lies a great number be there feigned.
Not withstandyng in the same book he does prohibit aduaultry, and commands
straitely keeping of promise, and other things not to be dispraysed.

Alcybiades, was the name of a noble man of Athenes, comen of the blood of
Aaiax Thelamonius. This man in beaultie, goodly personage, artiuitie, prowess,
eloquence, and sharpness of wit, excessed al men of his time. In so much that
into what country so ever he came, he so adapted him self, to the manners
thereof, that he was every where wonderfully beloved and honored, specially of
the wise man Socrates, who most entirely loved him. But with those most
excellent qualyties, were joined sundry vices, that is to say, intemperate,
and dissolute lyuinge in lethery and ryote, deceyte and vnconstancye. In so
much as all men meruayled, that in one man moughte be such diverse natures.
He acheued many great enterpryses as well for his country, as against it.
finallye being exiled by the mean of Lisander king of Lacedemonia, he being
in Phrigia, the house wherein he lay, was of purpose set on fire, which he
escaped, and being half naked, and valiauntly defending him self against
his enemies, at the last was slain, and his head brought to Pharnabazus,
capitain of the Persians. This man flouryshed before the incarnation of Christ.
428. years.

Alcionae, the name of two ladies, whereof the one was wife to Ceisis, who
saying the body of her husband cast on land, threw her self into the sea,
whom the poets feigned to be turned into a bird of that name. The other was
daughter of Euene called also Marpesia.

Alcyonium, is the spume or foam of the sea indurate.

Alduasdubis, Caesar.
a country in France, called Ledoux.

Alea, a dye, playenge at dice. Sometime it signifies chance.

Alea fortunae, the chance of fortune. sometime peril.

Aleator, a dysar.

Aleatorium, a dice playing, or a dysyng house. Suetonius calls it Aleatorium
forum.

Aleatorius, a, um, belonging to dice.

Alebria, things which do nourishe well.

Alec, is a sauce made of the livers of fishes. also a fish called a hearing.

Alecto, one of the furies of Hell.

Alectoria, a stone found in a cocks gysar or mawe, of the greatness of a
bean, of the color of crystal.

Alecula, a sprote.

Alemani, people of Germany, called Almains.

Aleo, onis, a disar, or diseplayer.

Alephanginae species, is a barbarous word used of the Moors, whereby they do
signify the poulder of sote spices, as gynger, peper, cloves, maces, nutmigges,
cynamome, and other like.

Alere bellum, to maintain wars.

Ales, alitis, a bird. Sometime it signyfiet^ swyfte in fleinge or runnynge,
as, Alite plan ta, swyfte of foot.

Alesco, scere, to grow fat.

Aletudo, fatnes of the body.

Alexander, was the name of many noble princes, but among other one was most
excellent, which was the son of Philip king of Macedonia, whoo in his
chyldehoode was brought up by Aristotle in learning, wherein he profyted
wonderfully, and was of such courage, that after the death of Philip his
father, being but.xx. years old, he took on him the enterprise to conquer all the world, and first gatte Illiria, now called Slauonia, and after subverted
the City of Thebes, and brought in subjection al Greece, and entered into Asia,
and vanquished in sundry iourneys the great and puissaunte king Darius king
of Persia, and had his mother, his wife, and daughter prisoners, and never
would company with any of them, not withstandyng that they were most
excellently fair. Finallye he conquered. India, and all the east part of the
world. And all this did he in little more than.xii. years. But when he had
pacified the world from al rebellions, he fell into such cruelty and pride,
sleing his most trustye counsaylours in his furye, and commaundynge him self
to be called a god, he became so odious to his own people, that they desyryng
his destruction, at the last being in his most glory at the city of Babylon,
where he abode the ambassadors from al realms, at souper with one of his
physicians, was poisoned by drynkyng out of a cup, which was supposed to be
made of a horses house. Which was thought to be done by the deuyse of
Aristotle sometime his master, and Antipater his lieutenant in Macedonia, whom
a little before he had grievously thretened. Thus Alexander aboundynge both in
excellent virtues, and notable vices, after most happy fortune by his
outrageous pride and cruelty shortened his life, being at his death little
above.xxxiii. years old. Which was before the Incarnation of Christ 322. years.

Alexander seuerus, was emperor of Rome, the year of our lord. 224. This man
from his chyldehode was of wonderful gravity and prudence, in so much as
where the city of Rome was before brought by his cousyne the monstrous
emperor Heliogabalus into all abomination of living, and dyssolution of
manners, this man by his virtue, prudence, and contynual justice, reduced it
unto a perfect publyke weal, reformed the order of his army, stablysshed
laws, restored honestye, expellyd vicious persons and brybours, advanced men
of virtue and lernyng to great offices and dignities, renewed the senate,
prepared also a great and a noble counsel about his person, and so hated
corrupted judges, that he did not only put them to tourmentes, but when any
came in his presence, he was ready with his two fyngers to put out their eyes.
And yet this noble and gentle prince, by the false treson of one Maximus, whom
of a mulettour, he had made a great capytayne, he was in a sudden commocyon
slain of his own people at Moguntia in Germany, with his mother Mammea a wise
lady and virtuous. Sum supposed, that it was because by her counsel he
was becomme auaritious, and was not so lyberall as he and other emperors had
been before.

Alexandria, the name of diverse cities, of the which one was in Egypt,
builded by the greatte king Alexander. 320. years before the Incarnation of
Christ, in the space of seuentene days, althowgh it contained within the
walls, the space of syx miles in length yt was made in the form of a
mantell, and was dyuided with two brood ways, oone crossyng over the other
for easy conueyeng of caryage, every way being in breadth a hundred feet.
Which ways lay in such wise that the wholesome wyndes did blow abundantly in
to the city, and refresshed the air. This cite was set between the fennes of
Nilus and the sea, and had nyghe unto it the noble haven of Pharus, in the
which city every king of Egypt after Alexander, builded a royal palaice whereby
it showed so beautyfull and magnifyke, that the like thereunto was not in the
world. Moreover many excellent learned men were borne or brought up in that
city, as Philo the Jew, called the second Plato, Origenes, Clemens,
Antonius, Dydimus, Maximus, Theophilus, and Athanasius was there bishop. Also
saint Marcus the Euangelyste preached there, and was ordained bishop by the
apostles. It was destroyed by the Romans, and reedyfyed by Traianus the
Emperor. Afterward the year of our lord. 1230. Peter, brother unto the
king of Cyprus, with certain french men and Catalones, eftsoons distroyed
and robbyd it, so that unto this day it was never reducyd unto the first
estate: now is it in subjection of the Turks. There is an another city called
Alexandria in Lumbardye.

Alexandrinus, Caesar.
a, um, of Alexandria.

Alexa, a country in France, now callydde Laussoys in Burgoyne. Allsoo the
Town callydde Arras in the Countye of Artoyse.

Alexicacon, a remedy to put away myschefe, or any ylle thing.

Alexipharmacon, is properly a medycyne against poison. It is alsoo taken for
such things as be used to hang about men's necks, or their arms, or in
howses for a defense against poison, ylle spyrites, or grievous diseases, and
so doothe Theophrastus use it in his nynthe book, where he treats of
Tripolium.

Alexius, a man's name, of the which were two emperors of Constantinople.
Also there was one Alexius the son of Ephimianus, a noble Senator of Rome,
who having a wife of excellent beaultie, for the love of god left her, and
secretly departed in sundry pylgrimages in the habit of a poor man. And after
much pacyence, and long poverty, returned to his fathers house, being
there unknown, until after his death, that he was dysclosed by a letter, which
was found in his hand. At his buryenge God showed many wonderful miracles,
than being present Honorius and Arcadius emperors of Rome, the year of our
lord. 410.

Alga, reytes or wedes of the sea.

Algenses, fyshes called also Purpurae.

Algeo, si, gere, to be in peyn, properly for cold, to chylle for cold.

Algidense, a kind of radyshe, long and clear through.

Algidus, a mountain.xii. miles from Rome.

Algida sylua, a wodde at the foot of that mountain.

Algo, idem quod algeo.

Algor, grief. sometime it signifies cold.

Alguasen, an herb like to a lyly.

Algus, Plautus.
uel algu, cold.

Alia, uel Allia, a river not far from Rome, where the host of the Romans
was utterly distroied by Brennus, whom we say was a Bryton, son to Molimerus
king of this realm

Alias, an aduerbe, signifies or else, else where, an other time, sometime.

Alias res agis, Thou think on other matters. Vnde annulum istum nactus? dic
mihi. Ille alias res agere se simulare, Tell me, where gatteu^ thou this
ring? He made semblaunce as if he thought on an other matter.

Alibi, else where.

Alica, Ruellius.
is a thing made of wheat in this wise. They take wheat and stepe it in water,
and afterward do beat it, than they dry it in the son, and break it
gross, so that every corn be broken in four or five pieces. some do put into
it chalk, some cream of milk sodden to make it seem very white.

Alicarjae, common harlottes.

Alicarii, they that do sell alicam.

Alicastrum, a dyminutiue of alica.

Alicubi, somewhere.

Alicunde, from some place.

Alienatio, an alienation or alteration.

Alienator, he that alters a thing.

Alienatus, a, um, put away, altered, estra^ged.

Alienigena, a stranger borne.

Alienigenus, a, um, that which comes out of an other country.

Alieno, aui, are, to alienate, to put away, or put of, to alyene or alter
possession.

Aliena consilii, Salust.
unmeet for the counsel.

Alienior aetate, Terent.
of no^age, not of co^petent age. Alieno more mihi uiuendum est, I must live
after an other man's facyon.

Alieno animo esse, to be displesed with one.

Alienos agimus, we becomme strangers unto them.

Alienissimum reipub. tempus, the warst time that may be for a weal publyke.

Alienum suis rationibus, unprofitable for his purpose.

Alienus animus. Iam primum illum alieno animo a nobis esse, res ipsa indicat.
The thing self declares, that even now he has no favor toward us.

Alienus, a, um, diverse, unlike, not agreeable, out of acquayntance or favor.

Aliger, any thing that has wings.

Alimentarius, a, um, pertaining to living or sustynaunce.

Alimentum, sustynance, food, or living.

Alimodi, idem quod aliusmodi, of an another facyon or manner.

Alimonia, idem quod alimentum.

Alio, to an another place.

Alioqui, or else, except that.

Aliorsum, to some other place.

Aliouersum, toward an other place.

Alipedes, swyfte runnynge horses.

Aliptes, he that anoynteth a man, and a surgeon that heals wounds.

Aliqua, by some place.

Aliquando, sometime.

Aliquandiu, any while.

Aliquantisper, a little while.

Aliquanto, idem.

Aliquantulum, somewhat.

Aliquantum, idem.

Aliquatenus, in some part, by some reason.

Aliquid, some thing.

Aliquis, aliquae, aliquod, some.

Aliquis est, he is a man of no small reputation.

Aliquo, to some place.

Aliquorsum, toward some place.

Aliquot, some, nor many, nor few.

Aliquoties, at some times.

Alirei, Plautus uses for aliae rei.

Alisma, an herb called alsoo Barba syluana, water plantayne.

Aliter, or else, countrary wise.

Aliter ac, aliter atque, aliter quam, otherwise thanne.

Alites, great birds which are fed.

Aliubi, else where. Aliubi, for alicubi, sum where.

Alsunde, from an other place.

Alius, alia, aliud, other, or another.

Aliusmodi, in an other manner, of an other faciu^

Aliura, old writers used for aliter.

Alkakengi, is an herb called alsoo Halicacabus, and Vesicaria, and in greek
Physalides. out of the which grows a stalk, having on the top thereof, a
round thing like to a bladder, of color between read and yelowe, wherein
is a red beary, less than a cherye, which in diverse ways is wonderfulle
medycynable, against the strangurye or stoppynge of vryne, besides other good
virtues.

Alla bor, labi, to flow by, sail by, or row by.

Allatus, brought.

Allecto, aui, are, to allure or draw to by fayrenesse.

Allectus, allured.

Allego, aui, are, to send, to allege, or bring forth, to depute or give
authority.

Allego, lexi, ere, to ascribe, to chese, to assign

Allegoria, a figure or inuersyon of words, where it is one in words, and an
another in sentence or menynge.

Alleluya, praise ye our lord.

Alleuo, aui, are, to lift up.

Allex, and allux, the great toe, when he lies over the next toe.

Alliatum, a sauce made with garlyke.

Allicefacio, ci, re, to allure, to draw to.

Allicio, exi, licere, to allure.

Allido, si, ere, to squat, or throw any thing against the ground or walls.

Alligator, he that byndeth.

Alligatura, a bond.

Alligare aliquem furto, to appeache oone of felonye.

Alligare se furti, to charge him self of felony

Allino, leui, linere, to annoynte.

Allium, garlyke.

Allobr^oges, people of Sauoye and Pe^mountaygne.

Allcutio, a speaking to one.

Allocutum ire, to commune with one.

Allophylos, a stranger.

Alloquium, communication, speech.

Alloquor, to speak to.

Allubesco, to do it gladly, to obey, to favor, to consent.

Allucinatio, a blyndnes of mind.

Allucinor, to be deceived in opinion.

Alludo, si, ludere, to do a thing in iape, to speak meryly, or consent,
sometime it sygnifyeth to speak some thing, which secretly has some
understanding.

Alludere ad hystoriam, to speak or do some thing agreeable with some
hystorye before written.

Alludor, idem quod alludo.

Alluo, lui, ere, to flow nyghe to, to wasshe as the water does the ground.

Alluuies, is when abundance of water mixte with clay covers the ground.

Alluuio, onis, idem.

Alluuium, a flood caused by rain, or by ryuers when they rise.

Alma, a maiden hyd or secret.

Almities, quietness, secretenesse.

Almopia, part of Macedonia.

Almus, a, um, all thing that nouryssheth (...) proprely the earth is so callid
Alma tellus, because we have thereof our sustyna^ce. sometime it sygnyfyeth
quiet. Almus dies, a quiet day.

Alnus, an alder tree. sommetyme it sygnifieth a ship or bote.

Alo, alui, alere, to nourysshe or feed.

Aloe, Vergil.
aloes, is a juice of an herb congelyd like a gum, whereof be two sorts, one
is named Succotrina, which is like a liver, read, bryghte, and brokle. the
other is called Caballina, and is sandy and gross. The first cleanses and
confyrmeth the stomach of a man, and therefore is myxte with pourgatyue
medycynes, because they shall not anoy or hurt the stomach, the last is
occupied about horses and other beasts.

Aloe lignum, or lignum aloes, is a sweet and preciouse wod, which being
received inmedicin comfort the stomach, and all the inferior parts of a
man, and makes sweet breathe.

Aloeus, was the name of a gyaunt, son of Titan, on whose wife Neptunus begat
two sons at one burdeyne, Oetus and Ephialtes, which were called alsoo
Aloidae, and were great gyauntes, of whom Vergilius and Claudianus do make
mention.

Alogia, unreasonable or beastly fedyng, and in gurgitation of meat and drink.

Alogiani, were heritykes, which denied, that the son of god was Logos,
which some do interpret in to latyne Verbum, sum Sermo, and therefore they
reiecte the gospelle of saint John, and his Apocalypsis, saying, that they
were not his warkes.

Alonge, far of.

Alopecia, is a chaungyng of the color of the heed into more whitenes, when
the old hears do fall of by the roots.

Alopecidae, Gal. in definition.
dogs gotten between a wolf and a bytche.

Alopecurus, an herb like a foxes tail.

Alopecus, he that has a pylde head, that is to say, the hears falling with
scurfe.

Alps, the mountains, which do now depart Italy and France.

Alphabetarii, they which do learn first the order of letters.

Alphabetum, the order of letters, as A, B, C.

Alpheus, a river in Achaia, by the city of Pisa. Also the name of a mount.

Alphiton, meal of physicians. it is also taken for barlye meal fried.

Alphos, a morphy or staynyng of the skin.

Alpinus, a, um, of the mountayns of Alps.

Alpus, pale, careful, or studyous.

Alsine, an herb, whereof some do suppose to be two kinds: whereof one is that
which is called in latin Matrissylua, in english wod bind. The other is
called Alsine minor, the second mouse ear.

Alsiosus, a, um, cold of nature. also that thing which is soon hurt or
anoyed with cold.

Altanus, a wind which is on the deep seas.

Altar, an aultare.

Alte, on high.

Altellus, the surname of Romulus of founder of Rome.

Alter, rius, teri, an another, the other, one of the two.

Alius, an other, the other. Alter, the other, the second. Sometime it
sygnifyeth both. Vnus aut alter, one or both. Vnus and alter, the one and the
other.

Alter and uicesimus, one and twenty.

Alter quiquam, any other.

Alter, teris, sieve alteres, teris, poyses of lead, made to lift up in both
hands, to exercise men, which may not otherwise labor, where of there be many
now in England, specially in the chambers of students.

Alteras, old writers used for alias.

Altercatio, a contention in words, where one man purposes, an other replyeth.

Altercor, aris, to contend with words oone with an other on sundry parts.

Altercum, sieve alter cagenum, an herb called also Faba porcina.

Alternatim, by turn, one at one time, an other at an other time.

Alterne, idem.

Alternare, to do things by turn, now one, and than an other.

Alternatio, succession by turn.

Alternis, now one, now an other.

Alternis diebus, sundry days, where oone day is between.

Alterplex, icis, old writers vsyd for duplex, dowble.

Altero, aui, are, to alter or change.

Alterta, idem quod alterutra.

Alteruter, both the one and the other. also or the tone or the the other.

Althaea, the great malowes or holy hocke.

Alti lis, in plurali altilia, all thing that is franked to make fat, be it
beast, fyshe, or foul.

Alti lis gallina, a hen franked or fed.

Altimetor, an instrument, wherewith high things are met.

Altinates, people of Altinum.

Altinum, an old cite by the ryuage of Venice.

Altior, altius, higher.

Altiisonus, he that makes noise from above.

Altitonans, he that thondreth, which name the Paynyms gave to their god
Jupiter.

Altitudo, heyght, or depenes.

Altiuolans, all thing that flies high.

Altor, and altrix, he and she, which nourysheth and brings up one.

Altrinsecus, Apuleius
to the tone or the the other, to the tone part, between the one and the other,
in the higher part.

Altrouersum, Plautus.
on the other part, or on the other side.

Altus, Vergil.
a, um, high, deep, properly in the sea. it sygnifieth also excellent,
glorious, ancient.

Altum otium, long rest, great leisure.

Aluearium, and alueare, a place where hyues be set. also a stock of hyues.

Alueolum and alueolus, a baskette or maunde. also a culuer hole, a
chessebourde, or tables to play on.

Alueus, and aluus, a hyue for bees, a vesselle to wasshe in, the bealy of any
thing that lacks life, sometime it signifies a ship.

Aluini, they which have frettynges in their bealyes with contynuall flux.

Alumen, alume whereof be three sorts, one is called Scissilae or Plumae,
which naturally grows like a stoone, and not withstandyng may be dyuyded
with long strakes, which be seen in it. An other sort is boiled in a cauldron,
and therefore is called Alumen Catinae, and is made more pure by an herb like
to herb Iuc bourned into ashes, and lie made therewith. An other sort is
callid Alumen Zucharinum, which is made with alume relented, rosewater, and
the whytes of eggs, into the facyon of a sugar lofe, which harlottes do use
to paint their visages to deceive men, although they deceive not god, who for
their abhomynable curiosity, shall commytte them to the fyry flouddes of Hell,
there to bayne them perpetually.

Alumnari, to nourse or bring up.

Alumnatus, nouryshed.

Alumnus, a son or scholar that is brought up of a man, as of his own
father, either with sustynaunce, manners, or learning.

Aluta, lether proprely tawed. sometime it is put for a bag or a purse.

Alutamen, any thing made of lether.

Alutarius, a tawyer.

Aluus, a bealy, also a hyue.

Aluum bonam facere, to make soluble.

Aluum ciere, uel elicere, to make the bealye louse or soluble.

Aluum deijcere, to pourge the bealy.

Aluum sistere, to stop or bind.

Alyba, a countreye not far from Misia, where, as Homerus does write, were
mines of silver.

Alypos, in Dioscorides is of sum supposyd to be that, which is commonly
called Sena, wherewith Melancholye is pourgyd.

Alysina, an herb called water plantayne.

Alysius, the name of Bacchus.

A ANTE M.
AMabile, thankful.

Amabilis, le, amyable, worthy to be loved.

Amabo, of fellowship, a good fellowship, a familiar word vsyd among friends.

Amabundus, he that is a greatte lover, or amorouse.

Amalec, a word of hebru, which may be interpreted a people lyckyng or
strykyng. Exodus 17.
It was the name of a king in Siria, which resysted the people of Israel, when
they came out of Egypt, and slew many of them. Wherefore he was afterward
slain by the commandment of god. Deu. 25.
it is sometime taken for the country whereof Amalec was king.

Amalecitae, the people of Amalec, Reg. 1. 15.
whom god commanded Saul to destroy utterly. And because he did not, he was
reject of god.

Amalthea, a woman, which with her sister callid Melissa, nourisshed Jupiter
with the milk of a got. also the name of a prophetess.

Aman, Hester.
a name of hebrew, which sygnifieth troublynge or murmuring. Of that name was
one which came of the house of Agag, whom Assuerus king of Persia and Media
exalted above all his lords and counsailours, and wylled all things to be
done as he would command it. Wherefore Aman extollynge him self in
outrageous pride, because Mardocheus a Jew, uncle to queen Hester, wife to
Assuerus, did not humbie reverence to him, when he passed by, he caused
commyssyons in the kings name to be sent unto all countries, being under
the domynyon of king Assuerus, that all the Jews in every country should
be slain. But almighty God, beholdynge the malice and cruelty of Aman, gave
grace unto the virtuous queen Hester, to preuente his vengeable appetyte.
Wherefore after she had boden the king and Aman to dinner, she with such a
spyryte declared to the king the cruelle vengeance, that Aman had preparyd
to be done on her countreye men, and kynsfolke, that she so styrred the
kings indignation against Aman, that he commanded incontinent, that Aman
should be hanged on a gybet, which a little before he caused to be raised to
hang thereon Mardocheus, which gybet was fyfty cubytes hye, And his house and
all his possessions and goods were given unto queen Hester. And moreover,
letters were sent by pooste into all countries, that the Jews should live,
and alsoo that they should slay all their enemies, which was done, and
moreover ten sons of Aman were hangyd.

The noumber of them, which were slain by the Jews, were three score and
five ten thowsande. This is a noble storye, worthy to be contynually
remembered of them, which be in high auctorytie under pryncis, that they may
fear God, abhor cruelty, and always dread the mutation of worldly things,
and to consider that kings be not goddis.

Amando, aui, are, to countremaunde.

Amans, antis, he or she which loves truly and contynually.

Amanter, louyngly.

Amanthes, Solinus.
people in Aphrica in the furthermooste part of Ethiopia, who have such
plenty of precious stones and salt, that thereof they make great houses. Among
them is founden the carbuncle stone.

Amantior, more loving.

Amantissime, most louyngely.

Amantissimus, most loving.

Amanuensis, a clerk, or secretary always attendynge.

Amanus, a mountain called also Taurus.

Amaracinum, an olyle made of maioram.

Amaracus, an herb called soote maioram, or maioram gentyl it is also called
Sampsuchus

Amaramis, Josephus.
the father of Moses.

Amaranthi, be people of the country of Colchos, wherein was the sheep that
bare the golden fleese.

Amaranthos, and Heliocrysos, is al one herb, and is supposed to be that
which is commonly called Stoecas or Sticados citrina, there is thereof two
kinds. The flower of the one is yelowe, and has a soote sauoure, the other
has a purple flower, which has no sauoure. The yelowe is laid among
clothes to keep them from mothes, and therefore of sum it is called Tinearia.
The other is callid Flos amoris, the flower of love. Sum suppose it to be
gylofer gentylle, or flower gentylle.

Amarantus, an herb, which grows a foot in heyghte, and has leaves like
basyll, and has a flower fasshyoned like an ear of wheat, of crymosyn
color, which never dies, in french it is called Passeuelute. Some there be,
which do suppose it to be called in english Baldare.

Amare, bytterly.

Amaresco,sci, scere, to wax bitter, or to be bitter.

Amarico, are, to make bitter, to make angry.

Amarillis, the name of a shepeherde in the bucolicis of Vergyle.

Amariscus, an herb callid Mathis, or dogfenel.

Amaritudo, dinis, bytternesse.

Amaror, idem quod amaritudo.

Amarulentus, vexed with malice.

Amarus, a, um, bitter, very angry.

Amara mulier, a cursed queen.

Amasa, a name of hebrewe, which signifies the people that spares, or
lyftinge up the people. It was the name of a noble manne, son of Abigail
sister of David. Alsoo of a Capytayne, whom Ioab slew in kissing and
salutynge of him, under the color of frendshyppe.

Amasias, a name of hebru, signifies the strength of the lord. Of that name
was one king of Judea, son of Ioas. 853. years before the incarnation of
Christ, and reigned.xxix. years. A man very eloquent, and at the beginning of
his reign was of much humanite toward all men, and observed competently the
commandementes of god, but yet he did not utterly take away ydolatrye. He was
long time fortunate and waxed rich, but at the last he forgot god, and
became proud, and not being content with his astate, he wrate unto Ioas king
of Israelites, commandyng him and his people to be under his subjection. But
Ioas wrate unto him letters of defyance. Wherefore he gathered an army, and went
against the king of Israel. But when the battle was joined, such fear
suddenly came among his men, that all tremblyng they fled, or ever they came
unto strokes. And as Amasias would have fled, he was taken and brought unto
king Ioas, who thretenyd to kylle him, except he caused the gates of Jerusalem
to be opened against him, which was done. Not withstanding Ioas caused.CCCC.
cubits of the wall to be beaten down, and he entered into the city that
way in a charyotte, leadynge Amasias with him as a prisoner, and took all the
treasure of the Temple and of the kings house, and caused it to be brought
into Samaria. Afterward being delivered, his own people conspyred against
him, and slew him in the city of Lachis.

Amasenus, a river in Italy.

Amasis, was a noble king of Egypt, which made a law, that every year, each
man should make a reckenynge to the head officers of his realm, of his life,
and show whereby he lived, or by what occupation he was sustained, and he that
did not make such account, should be put to death.

Amasius, and Amasia, he or she that loves, or is louyd.

Amasso, idem quod amauero.

Amastris, uel Amastrum, the pryncypall city of Paphlagonia.

Amath, Josephus.
the son of Chanaan.

Amathus, untis, a city in Cyprus, dedycate to Venus. also the name of an isle
in the sea called Egeum, which was dedycate also to Venus, in the which was
plentye of all manner of metalles.

Amathuntius, a, um, of the said city.

Amathusa, the isle of Cyprus.

Amatio, a loving.

Amator, a lover, or he that is amorous.

Amatorculus, a small or simple lover.

Amatorie, like a lover.

Amatorium, a drink charmed, to make a man a lover.

Amatorius, a, um, that which pertaynethe to love.

Amaurosis, the dymnesse of the eyes.

Amazones, women of Scithia, which wan a great part of Asia, who slew all the
men children, and kept the women children, of whom they burned the right
pappe, because it should not let them to throw their iauelyns or to shoot.

Amazonicus, a, um, pertaining to the Amazones.

Amazonicus, ci, a country called afterward Cesaria.

Amazonius, a, um, idem quod Amazonicus, a, um.

Ambactus, Caesar.
a servant.

Ambages, a cyrcuyte of words, or a tale drawn in length.

Ambagiosus, a, um, that abounds in such form of speaking.

Ambarri, people of a country in France, now called Semar, and Monthar.

Ambarualis hostia, was a sacrifyce made for the fields with a sow great with
farrowe.

Ambedo, ere, to cate or gnawe about a thing.

Ambegni, were an ox and a ram, on every side of them, lambs were brought
took sacryfyced.

Ambest, idem quod circum est.

Ambesus, a, um, eaten round.

Ambiani, seu Ambianenses, people in France about Languedoke, called Amboise.
Sum suppose it to be Amie^s.

Ambidentes, sheep of two teethe, of some called hogs, of some theaues.

Ambidexter, he that uses both hands like well.

Ambigo, to compass, also to doubt.

Ambigue, doubtfully.

Ambiguitas, doubtfulnesse.

Ambiguum, a doubt.

Ambilates, people in lyttelle Brytayne called Darenchis.

Ambio, iui, ire, to compass, to seek for promotion, to desire, to pray, or
entreat.

Ambitio, onis, inordynate desire of honor or auctorytie.

Ambitiosus, he that ymmoderately desyrethe honor.

Ambitiosae preces, affectuall desires.

Ambitus, tus, a cyrcuite, enclosure. also the offense of ambition made by the
laws.

Ambitus, a, um, enuyronned or compassed.

Ambo, both.

Ambra, a very sweet thing, which is found on the sea by a country called
Zingi, in the cast part of the world, which for the graye color, is
commonly called of apothecaryes Ambra grisia, whereof is made very precious
and cordyall medycynes. it is hot in the second degree, and dry in the
first degree.

Ambratia, a city in Epiro, in a countraye, whereof the people be called
Thesproti. This city was first called Eponia and Paralia. Of this city
bears the name a goulfe or bosom called Sinus Ambratiensis, which is made as
well by art, as by nature wonderfulle strong, having a double wall, and
inclosyd on both sides with fennes, having none entry, but by one narowe way.

Ambratienses, people of Ambratia.

Ambrices, tyles, which be laid overthwart between other tyles.

Ambrones, people in France.

Ambrosia, was called of the Paynymes the meat of goddis. Sum do say, that
it is an herb of the kind of mugwort. it is proprely tansye, which is used
to be fried with eggs at Easter. This name of Ambrosia wandered as Plynye
says in diverse things. For were hit meat or drink or herbs, which for
the delycatenes thereof was offered to the goddis in sacrifice, they called it
by that name.

Ambrosius, the name of a man, of the which one most excellent was bishop
of Myllayne, the year of our lord. 373. who was a Romayne, borne of a noble
and auncyente house, and had been Consule there. This man being sent by
Valentinianus the Emperor to Myllayn, to pacify a sedition, which at that
time was among the people, after the death of Auxentius late bishop there of
the sect of Arrianes, when he in the church having the people before him,
perswadyd them unto concord, suddenly the voice of an infant was herd of all
men, which cried, Ambrosius is worthy to be bishop. By the which voice the
people were so fervently styred, that they all together consenced, that he
should be their bishop, although he was not yet baptized, but newely instructed
in the faith. And so he instantely refusing, they compellyd him to take it
upon him. And forthewith as soon as he was bishop, all the people of
Lumbardye agreed in one opinyon of true faith, he was of such holiness,
such gentylnesse, such excellent wisdom and learning, that not oonely in
his life, but also after his death, he was had through out the world in
honor and reverence. A rare form of election, and as rare a thing is it to
find a bishop or priest of Ambrose qualities, although he were half a paynym
and a temporal man, when he was chosen bishop, whereat they may be asshamed,
that be christened in their infancye, and twenty years or more priests, er
they be bysshoppes, and yet some not worthy to occupy that holy and reverend
office.

Ambuariti, people of a part of Brabande.

Ambubeia, the commune cykory with the long leaf, and the blewe flower, which
will be closed at the going down of the son, and opened at the rysynge.

Ambubeiae, drunken drabbes, which wander about the streets.

Ambulacrum, a pryuate place to walk in, an aley in a gardeyne.

Ambulatio, walking, and a walkyng place.

Ambulatiuncula, a little walk.

Ambulator, a walker or styrer.

Ambulo, aui, are, to walk or styre about.

Ambulare in ius, to come before a judge.

Amburo, bussi, rere, to bourne all about.

Ambustus, a, um, bourned up.

Amecus, and ameca, old writers used for amicus and amica. Galenus.


Amemelides, a kind of medlars, wherein be.v. stones.

Amen, a word of Hebrewe, which after the interpretation of Aquila,
sygnifyeth fideliter, after the.lxx. interpretours, it signyfyeth fiat, be it.

Amens, mad.

Amentia, folly.

Amentior, tius, madder.

Amentissimus, a, um, maddest.

Amentum, a thonge, or that which is bounden to the mids of a darte or
iauelyn, wherewith it is thrown the farther.

Ameria, an old city in Italy.

America, a country late found in the weste part of the world, by Americus
Vesputius the year of our lord a thousand four hundred.lxxvii.

Amerinum, a city in Italy.

Ames, itis, a perch for a hawk.

Amethystus, called also Anterites, is a precyons stone called an ametyst,
which is of a purple color, but the more it is myxte with rose color the
better it is.

Amethystinus, a, um, of an ametyst.

Ametor, he that lacks his mother.

Amia, a fish like to a Kuny, but he has no scales, but a plain skin,
which shines like to silver myxte with blue, and his tail is in facyon like
a new moon.

Amianthon, is of Eritius Cordus supposed to be a stone, whereof be made matches
like to thredes, which being ones on fire, ar never extincte or put out.

Amica, a woman that is loved. also a co^cubine.

Amicabilis, le, friendly.

Amice, idem.

Amicibor, for amiciam, I will clothe or put on a garment.

Amicinum, a canue or pot, whereout they power wine.

Amicio, cui, cire, to cloth, to put on a garment.

Amicior, ciri, to be cladde.

Amicissime, most frendely.

Amicissimus, a, um, idem.

Amiciter, friendly.

Amicitia, amity or frendshyppe.

Amicius, more friendly.

Amictorium, a lynnen rail that women do wear.

Amictus, a, um, cladde.

Amictus, ctus, a garment or apparayle.

Amicula, a diminutiue of amica.

Amiculatus, he that wears a short cloak.

Amiculum, a short cloak.

Amicus, and amica, a friend, a lover.

Amicus, a, um, joined to a thing lackyng life, sygnifieth profitable or
wholesome.

Amineae uites, vynes growing in a countreye by Salerne, in the royalme of
Naples.

Amissio, the loss of a thing.

Amissus, a, um, lost.

Amita, my fathers sister, mine aunte.

Amiternum, a town in Campania, where Salust was borne now called Aquilae.

Amites, perches whereon hawks be set.

Amitini, cousyns germains by brother and sister.

Amitto, si, tere, to suffer, to depart, to lose, to send, to let pass, to
take fro.

Amitere iusiurandum, Plautus.
to break an oath, to lose credence. Quod si non dederit, atque hic dies
praeterierit, ego argentum, ille iusiurandum amiserit, If he do not pay it,
and this day do pass, I shall lose my money, but he shall lose his credence.

Amittere libidinem, Iam non possum amisi omnem libidinem: I may do no more, I
am past all pleasure.

Ammi, Ammios, uel Ammium, a lyttel sede and white, and has the taste of
Origanum, and is hot and dry in the third degree. It grows most
commonly in Ethiopia. The Apothecaryes (says Joan. Agricola) has not the
very true Ammi, but instead thereof, they do selle the sede of cheruile.

Ammon, an hebrewe name, which sygnyfyeth the son of my people. By the
which name was called the son of Lot, Genesis 19.
which he gatte on his young daughter, when he was drunk. Of this Ammon came
the people in Syria called Ammonitae. Josephus does call them Ammanitae. By
this name was Jupiter also worshypped in Egypt.

Ammoniacum, called also gutta Ammoniaca, is a soote gum, which the
Apothecaries do call Beniewyne. it yssueth out of a caane, which grows
specially in Lybia, where the temple of Jupiter Hammon stood.

Ammonitrum, a bunche of white glass.

Amnestia, forgetfulness of things passed.

Amnicus, a, um, of the brook.

Amnis, a river or brook.

Amo, aui, are, to love hartyly.

Amodo, from henseforthe.

Amoeno, aui, are, to make merye or glad.

Amoen, meryly, pleasauntly.

Amoenitas, atis, pleasure, delectablenes or mirth.

Amoenus, a, um, pleasant or dylectable.

Amoenum ingenium, a pleasant wit.

Locus amoenus, a delectable place.

Amolior, I remove with great pain.

Amomum, is a little busshe wrappyd round together, like a cluster of grapes,
and has a little flower like a white vyolette, the leaves be like to the
leaves of Withwynde or white vine. The best comes out of Armenia, which is
yelowe as gold, the wood somewhat read, and very soote in savor. They be
deceived (as says Ruellius and Agricola) which do take it for the rose of
Jerusalem, called also our ladies rose.

Amor, love.

Amores, idem. Sometime wanton pastimes, or pleasures, wherein we delight.

Amorgis, such a kind of line, whereof is made Raynes or Cipres.

Amorrhaei, a word of Hebrewe, which sygnifieth cruel rebels, or great
bablars. Of that name was a people, which were neighbors unto the Jews, and
oftentimes subdued by them, Reg. 3.
and at the last king Salamon made them tributories unto him.

Amos, was father of the prophet Isai, and than it signifies strong or
puissaunt. There was an other Amos, which was one of the xii. prophets, and
that name signified burdeyned or charged, the first has in the beginning the
letter called Aleph, the other has the letter called Aijn. This man was borne
in a town called Thi^me, and was a shepeherde, and sent by god in to Samaria
to prophesye, and when he had there prophesied against.x. tribus, and somewhat
spoke of the other two, Amasias caused him often times to be beaten, but when
he could not resist the holy ghost, Ochozias, son of king Amasias, caused
him to be thrast into the temples with a great nail, and being half dead,
he was carried in to his own country, where he sone after dyed.

Amosio, Festus.
for annuo.

Amoueo, ui, uere, to remove, to put from a place, or a thing.

Amouere crapulam, Plautus.
to parbreake when one is drunk.

Amouere segnitiem, to cast away sloth.

Ampendices, old wrytars used for appe^dices.

Ampelos agria, a wild vine.

Ampelusia, an isle called now Tinge.

Amphesibene, a serpent, having two heads, whereof the one is before, the other
behind, where his tail should be.

Amphiaraus, was son of Oileus, an Argiue borne, and was a southsayer, whom
Adrastus king of Argiues would have taken with him, when he made war against
the Thebans, but he knowing that he should not return, hyd him self. At the
last was dyscouered by his wife, and compelled to goo with the king. And the
first day that he came to Thebes, the earth opened and swalowed him.

Amphibea, beasts or birds, which do live as well on the water, as on the
land.

Amphibolum, a doubtful sentence.

Amphibrachus, a foot of meter, being of three syllables, the first and last
short, the middel syllable long, as Cupido.

Amphictiones, was a noble counsel in Greece which assembled at a place,
called Termopolae. In this counsel were these.xii. sundry people of Greece.
Jones, Doors, Perrhebi, Boetii, Magnetes, Achaei, Phthiotae, Melienses,
Dolopes, Aenianes, Delphi, and Phocenses: of this counsel do make mention
Suidas, Strabo. li. 9. Dionisius. lib. 14.

Amphicyrtos, is the state of the moon, as well when he is somewhat increased
above the diameter or just middell, and grows toward a roundnes, as also
when he is in the wane, passed the myddell, and waxes holowe, and the ends
sharp.

Amphilochus, a philosopher.

Amphibologia, a form in speaking, where a sentence may be taken two sundry
or contrary ways.

Amphimacrus, a foot in meter, having the first syllable and the last
long, the myddel syllable long.

Amphimalla, clothe or garments frysed on both sides.

Amphimerinon, a fever cotidian, which comes of fleume.

Amphion, a man, which with natural eloquence, brought rude and wild people
to a civil form of living, and as some do suppose, found first harmony.

Amphipolis, a city nyghe to Macedonia.

Amphiroe, a nymph or maiden of the ryuers.

Amphisa, a river in Phocide, a countreye in Greece.

Amphitana, a preciouse stone, the brymme or edge whereof shyneth like to gold.

Amphitapetes, garments on both sides roughe.

Amphithearrum, a round place made with seats or scaffoldes, where men beheld
plays.

Amphitreatrales ludi, plays exercised in those places.

Amphitrio, onis, the husebande of Alemena, mother of Hercules.

Amphitrionides, he that comes of the line of Amphitrio.

Amphitryte, was the daughter of Nereus, (...) wife to Neptunus god of the sea,
and sometime it is taken for the sea.

Amphora, called also Quadrantal, an old mesure of Rome, which is a foot
square every way, and has in it.xlviii. of the old measures, called
Sextarij, of our english measure.v. gallons. In weight it conteyneth.lxxxli.
of wine.lxxii.li. of oil, of honey.Cxx.li.

Amphorarius, he that bearethe the pot, a tankarde bearar.

Amphrysus, a river in Thessalsa, by the which Apollo kept the sheep of
Admetus.

Amphitapa, idem quod Amphimalla.

Ampiruo, are is proprely where in daunsyng like meuynge or countenance that
one makyth, he unto whom it is made, shall do the semblable. It was first
used of the priests called Salij.

Amplant, old writers used for amplificant, they enlarge.

Ample, amply, largely.

Amplector, ti, to embrace, to love heartily.

Amplexa, Non. Mar cellus.
for Amplexare, embrace or take to you.

Amplexari, for amplecti.

Amplexor, Cic. in fa. epi. and ad Q. fra.
ari, to embrace or love well.

Amplexus, imbracynges.

Ampliatio, a deferryng of indgement concerning man's life.

Ampliatus, a man repried, whose judgment is deferred upon sum dyfficultie
or consyderation.

Amplificatio, an augmentation.

Amplifico, are, to augmente, to make better. sometime to extolle.

Amplio, aui, are, to make more, to draw to, to defer or delay a thing in
judgment, to repry.

Amplior, larger, greatter.

Amplissimus, a, um, greattest, largest,

Amplissimus ordo, was used for the senate of Rome.

Amplissimus magistratus, the highest office

Ampliter, largely, abundantly, magnifikely.

Ampliter occupatus, Plautus.
let with much business.

Ampliter testis, witness of all the hole matter.

Amplitudo, greatness of power or majesty. sometime it signifies largeness.

Terrae a^plitudo, the largenes of the country.

Ampliuagus, much wandrynge.

Amplius, more over, more largely.

Amplius horas quatuor fortissime pugnauerunt: Caesar.
They fought myghtely more than four hours. Coeperunt amplius tria millia
hominum: They took prisoners.iii. thou sand men and above.

Amplus, a, um, large, wide, great, abundant.

Amplustra, Amplustria, uel Aplustra, the tacklynge of the ship.

Ampron, a cord or chain fastened to the yokes, whereby beasts do draw a
wayne.

Ampulla, an oil pot. also a bottell or flagon. sometime it signifies a thing
that is blown or puffed. Sueton. in Domitian
Suetonius uses that word for a drinking glass. it may be called a vyole.

Ampullarius, a bottell maker.

Ampullor, I swell for pride.

Amputo, aui, are, to cut of.

Amula, a water pot, and it may be used for a holy water pot.

Amuleus, the great uncle of Romulus and Remus.

Amuletum, any thing that is ordained against poysonynge. It is also taken for
every thing which is hanged about ones neck or arm, to preserve him from
any inconvenience or sickness.

Amurca, the mother or ^ome of all oils.

Amussis, the masons or carpenters rule.

Amussitatus, a, um, made by line, well proportioned.

Amusus, he that knows no lernyng.

Amyclae, a city in Lacedemonia, where Castor and Pollux were borne. also an
other city in Italy.

Amyclaeus, a, um, of that city.

Amygdalus, an almonde tree.

Amigdalum, an almonde.

Amylu^, is a thing made of wheat three months, old, which is laid in water
until it wax soft, the water being changed.v. times in the day, and as
often in the night, and wha^ it waxes tender, the water is poured out fair
and softly. After when it is as soft as may be, than the water being softly
poured out, it is trodden with men's feet, eftsoon the water is poured out,
and trodden again, finally the bran, which swymmeth on the water, is taken
away with a syue and that which remains, being strayned, is laid on new
tiles, and set in the hot son, until it be through dried. This is very
medicinable against distillations into the eyes and pimples of the eyes, Ruell.
against spyttyng of blood, and myxt with milk, it causes one to be fat.

Amyson, a famous City in the realm of Pontus.

Amynthas, was the.xv. king of Macedonia.

A ANTE N.
AN, whiter, or if.

Ana, a river of Spain, which diuydeth the realm of Granato, from the realm
of Portugal, and it spryngeth in a country in the hithermoste part of Spain
called Amitanus ager, and sometime spreadynge him self into great pondes or
meeres sometime scante apperynge in little brooks, or else hydden under the
ground, at the last, it falls in to the great spaynishe sea.

Anabaptistae, is a sect of heretics, which began about the year of our lord.
1524. in Germany: whereof the first author was one Balthazar, which taught that
baptism did nothing profyt unto children, but that they ought eftsoon to be
baptized wha^ they come to years of discretion. wherefore they which were of
that sect of heretics be called Anabaptistae, which do signify rebaptisours.

Anabasius, he that rydeth by post horses. Hieronimus contra Rufinum.

Anabathrum, Iuuenal.
a pulpit or other like pla^e, which stands on high, whereunto a man must go
up by a ladder or grifes.

Anabula, Plinius.
a beast in Aethiope, having a head like a camel, a neck like a horse,
legs like an ox, and is of color a bright red, full of white spots.

Anacardus, uel Anacardu^, a tree unknown to the old Greeks, it grows in
India, also in Sicilia in the mountains, out of the which comes fire. The
fruit thereof is like the heart of a littell bird, and has a red juice, like
to bloudde. Ruell. and Io. (...).
The vulgar people of Sicile and Naples do call it Pediculu^ elephanti an
Elephantes louse. There is contained in the fruit, honey, which does
exulcerat, and burns the blood and other humors, roteth up wertes, and is
wholesome for the synewes which be hurt with could. By it self taken it is
venym, but there is thereof a confection made by Rasis against al cold diseases.

Anacephaleosis, a short recapitulation or repitition of things before
rehearsed.

Anacharsis, a philosopher of a meruaylouse wisdom, albeit that he was borne
in the barbarous country of Scithia whom Plini supposes to have first found
the potters whele. And being in the time that Solon made laws to the
Athenienses, he said: That laws were like to copwebs, which tied fast lyttel
flies, and the great flies brake them, and went clean through them: In like
wise the poor and mean men are fast wounden in the penalties and daungiers
of laws, but lords and men in great authority daily break laws, and are
not corrected.

Anachorita, an hermit, the interpretation thereof is, he that lives a part,
and out of company.

Anaclinterium, Spartian.
a mattresse.

Anacreon, an old poet, which song to the harp, he was borne in a town of
Ionia called Teum. This man being aged, was stra^gled with the kernel of a
grape, and so died.

Anadendromache, Gal. li. 14. Meth.
a plaster made of the leaves of holy hocke.

Anadiplosis, is a doubling of a word, as the last word of the first
verse, is the first word of the second verse, as, Certent and signis ululae,
sic Tytirus Orpheus,

Orpheus in syluis inter delphinas Arion.

Anagallida aquatica, called also Sion and Lauer, an herb which grows in
water, with a straight vprighte stalk, which is fattye, and has broad leaves
like alysaundis, but they be less, and have a good savor. Surgions do use it
to heal wounds.

Anagallis, an herb called vulgarlye morsus gallinae, in english (as I
suppose) Chickeweede.

Anaglypha, and Anaglypta, vessel or plate of gold or silver chaced, as
cups or bolles beaten with the hammer, and not ingraued.

Anaglyptes, he that works such vessel.

Anaglyptice, the craft to chase or imboce plate

Anagnostes, he that redeth to other men, as bible clerks, or any other
clerk, which redeth while an other writes.

Anagoge, the high and subtylle understanding of the scripture.

Analecta, fragmentes of meat, which fall under the table, and be afterward
swepte away.

Analectes, he that gadereth up brokelettes.

Analeptice, Gal. Met. li. 7.
a form of diet to nouryshe him, which is late recovered from sickness.

Analesia, is a sickness of the head, which takes away sensiblenes from
the hole parts of the head, and cummeth of the wekenesse of the stomach, or
of to much meat, or of to much lechery, or drinking much cold water, or to
much study, or of indigestion.

Analogia, conueniency or proportion, whose property is to confer that which
is doubtful, with that which is like to it, which is more certain, to make
it more plain.

Analogos, proportionable.

Ananias, the cloud of the lord, or divination of the lord. It was the name
of one of the three Hebrewe chylderne, 2. Para. 26
which by the commandemente of Nabugodonosor were put in a fournaise of fire,
and came forth without damage. Also it was the name of one of the captains of
king Ozias. Also of one of the disciples of the apostelles, which with Sapphira
his wife sold his land, and brought a portion thereof to the apostelles, and
kept back the residue. Wherefore being rebuked of saint Peter, they both
fell down dead, for that they would have deceived the holy ghost. Of that
name was also an other dysciple of Christ, which baptized saynct Paul. Moreover
a bishop, who commanded that sayncte Paul should be stricken on the mouth, when
he preached.

Anapestus, a foot in meter of.iii. syllables, having the two first feet
short, the last long.

Anapis, a river in Sicile, ten, furlonge from the city of Siracusis.

Anarchos, without a prince, or without a beginning.

Anas, anatis, a ducke.

Anastrophe, a tournyng out of a commune order, as Italiam contra, for contra
Italiam.

Anaticula, a little ducke.

Anatarius, a, um, of a ducke.

Anatinus, a, um, like a ducke.

Anathema, in holy scripture betokens separation, else where it signifies a
thing offered or set up in a temple or church, as things offered and hanged up.

Anathematizo, aui, are, to curse or give to the dyuell.

Anatiborum, Prouaunce in France.

Anatocismus, receyuynge of vsery.

Anatolius, was bishop of Laodicea, the year of our lord. 278. a very holy man
and of great learning.

Anatomia, or Anatomice, anotomye or cuttynge of men by physicians, to consider
the inward parts and members.

Anatorius, a keeper of duckes.

Anauros, a river in Thessalia.

Anaxagoras, a famous philosopher, noble of bloudde, but more noble in virtue
and wisdom, which abandoning all his possessions, gave him all holy to the
study of natural philosophy, and when one said to him: Haste thou no care for
thy country, he answered: yes verylye, I have exceeding care for my country,
poyntyng up to heaven with his finger. Also when he had been long out of his
country, and was eftsoon returned, and beheld his possessions distroyed and
wasted, he said: I had not ben saulfe except these things had been lost.

Anazarba, a town in Cilicia, where Dioscorides the noble physician was borne.

Anaxarcus, a philosopher, which falling in the indignation of a tyrant
called Nicocreon king of Cyprus, was by him apprehended, and put in to a
greatte mortar of stone, where he was beaten or pound with iron pestelles:
which tourmente he took so patiently, that he doubled these words worthy of
remembrance: Beat on, beat on Anaxarchus wind bag, for Anaxarchus thou
beatest not. By the which words he accounted his body but a bag full of
wind.

Anaximander, a philosopher, which first found the description of the
compass of the sea and land, and made first the sphere.

Anaximenes, a philosopher, disciple of Anaximander: who said, that the
beginning of all things was the air, And that the sters ^es did move
infinitely, not over the earth but about it.

Ancaesa, graven vessel.

Anceps, itis, doubtful. sometime it signifies double: also cuttynge on both
sides.

Anchialea, a city in Cilicia, which was builded by Sardanapalus, where also
was his sepulture.

Anchilops, Gal. in definition.
is superfluous flesh in the greater corner of the eye, whereunto humors be
gathered.

Anchises, the father of Aeneas.

Anchora, An anchore.

Anchorarius, a, um, pertcyning to an anchore.

Anchyle, is an incision or cuttynge of the cords of the neck or joints,
whereby the use of the member is let.

Ancile, a shield without corners, such one in the time of Numa king of Rome,
was seen fall out of the sky.

Ancilla, a maiden servant, it was properlye taken for a bond woman.

Ancillor, to serve humblye and diligently.

Ancillula, a lyttel or poor wenche servant.

Anclabra, vyssels, which priests used.

Anclare, seu antlare, to empty a vessel.

Ancona, a noble city and haven in Italye, in the country called Picenum,
which stands upon the sea called mare hadriaticum, and was so called
because that the sea banks there do bend in form like to an arm with the
elbowe. It was first builded by people of Siracusis a city in Sicilia, before
the incarnation of Christ. 179. years and the haven was augmented by the noble
Traianu^ emperor of Rome. After was it destroyed by sarasins, and eftesones
builded and inhabited, and is now a famous city.

Ancones, the coins or corners of a wall.

Anculi, and Anculae, gods and goddesses of serving women.

Anchusa, an herb, of whose root comes a red juice, wherewith sanguine
color is dyed.

Ancus, he that has a crooked elbowe.

Ancus Martius, was the fourth king of Rome and was son to the daughter of Numa
Po^pilius, and succeeded Tullus Hostilius, before the incarnation of Christ.
642. years. This prince as well in martial prowes, as in cyuile policy was
equal to any that were before him. Also he enlarged the city, and made a
bridge over the river of Tiberis: also a prison in the mids of the city, to
the terror of offenders, which than daily increased.

Ancyra, the name of.ii. cites, the one in Phrigia, the other in Galatia.

Andabatae, certain men that fought with swords winkynge.

Andegauia, a countreye in France called Angewe.

Andes, the people of Aniewe in France. it was also a village by Ma^tua in
Italy where Vergil the poet was borne. wherefore he is sometime called Andinus
uates.

Andianum uinum, wine of Aniewe.

Andrachni, in greek, is in latin Portulaca, in english purslane.

Andrago, a woman having a man's heart.

Andreas, was one of the.xii. apostelles. brother to Peter, who preaching at a
city called Patrias in the countray of Achaia, was imprisoned and beaten, and
at the last hanged on a cross, whereon he preached.ii. days, and than died.

Andricus, an hill in Cilicia.

Androdamanta, seu Androdamas, a precious stone, hard and ponderous, and is as
it were of the color and bryghtnes of silver, and in form is of diverse
lyttel squares. It is found in the sand of the red sea. it puts away the
fury of ire and the rage of lechery.

Androgeus, the son of Minos king of Crete, which by envy was slain of the
Athenienses. For the which many years after the sons of the Athenienses were
sent to Crete, to be delivered to the monster called Minotaurus, which was
afterward destroyed by Theseus. It was also the name of a noble Briton, when
Julius Caesar came hither in to this realm of Brytain.

Androgynae, people in Asia, being of both kinds in one person, man and
woman.

Androgynos, a man having both members of a man, and also of a woman.

Andromache, the wife of the valiant Hector.

Andromede, the wife of Perses, whom he saved from a monster of the sea.

Andron, a chaumber, wherinto men only do come, and not women. Also a space
between two houses, wherinto rain falls.

Andronitis, idem.

Andronae, feasts, whereunto only men do come.

Andros, an isle between Greece and Asia, directly against the city of Ephesum.

Androsace, Cordus and some other do suppose it to be that, which is also
called Cuscuta, in english withwinde, which wyndeth about lyn and hemp. Musa
and Maynardus do think the contrary: believe whom ye list, Dyoscorydes
descrybeth him in this wise: Androsaces is a bitter herb, spreadynge abroad
small stalks like rushes, without leaves, having little coddes on the
top, wherein be seeds. It grows on the sea costs of Siria.

Androsaemon, an herb called sayncte Ihon^s worte.

Andruare, old writers used for recurrere, to run again.

Anellus, a little ring.

Anemonae, wild popy, with red flowers, growing in corn fields.

Anethum, an herb called dyll.

Aneurisma, the cuttyng a sonder of the sinew, which conteyneth the receptory
of bloudde, or taking away the matter, wherein the spirits be contained.

Anfractus, wyndynges and tournynges, specially in the ground.

Angaria, a constraynt or compulsion.

Angariae, arum, some do expound it a provision of posts in sundry places for
spedines of messages.

Angarij, posts or currours which go in messages.

Angario, aui, are, to constrayne one to do a thing.

Angelica, called also Smyrnium, is taken of Mainardus for that which is called
Alexander. Io. Tanstetterus, a well learned man at this time, supposes that
which Dioscorides calls Morrida, to be our Angelica.

Angelus, an angel, In greek it properlye signifies a messager.

Anger, a certain serpente, after whose styngynge happens intolerable peynes.

Angerona, was called the goddess of pleasure, called also Volupia.

Angilae, people in Affryke, of whom the women, the first night that they be
wedded, do accompany with all men, which come to the wedding, but ever after
they be chaste.

Angina, of the Greeks called synanche, is an inflammation of the muscule of
the inner gargil. Of this disease be three kinds: the first is Synanche,
wherein appears neither swellynge nor rednes, but the body waxes lean, the
members are leused, and the breath is stopped. The second is called
Vtisynanche, there apereth rednes and swellyng, and let of speech with yexinge.
The third is called Parasynanche, wherein only the chekes do swell, the
other tokens do not follow.

Angiologia, is a point of surgery in the veins of the temples hyd, being
divided from temple to temple in depenes.

Angiportus, a great hole in the earth with many tournynges, or that which
has none issue out, or a lane in a town, which leads the next way to a
street, or that which lies on an haven, whereby merchandise is carried from the
water, or recaried.

Angleria, is now a castle in Lombardy, which sometime was a city forty
miles from Myllane, set on a very high mountain.

Anglia, the royalme of England, part of the isle called Britannia, the people
are called Angli, of a people of Saxony, which were at that time most of
reputation, and therefore their name lengest continued, as well in the people as
in the countraye. Read more hereof in Britannia.

Ango, anxi, angere, to tourment or vex.

Angon, the inner part of the elbowe.

Angor, anguyshe of body or mind.

Anguilla, a fyshe called an ecle, which as the best autors do affirm,
comes without generation or spawne: neither there is of that kind either
male or female, but they be engendered of that which is called the bowels of
the earth, which is of claye myxte with moist earth. And that apereth by
standing pooles, where after that the earth has been thrown out clean, after
diverse shoures of rain, eeles have been found in them. for in dry wether
they do not increase, though it be in a river. And they which finding
littell things like hears or easis joined with them, say that they be young
eeles, are deceived. In the river of Ganges in India, have been found
eeles.xxx. feet in length.

Anguimanus, an olyphant.

Anguinus, a, um, of a serpente, or wyndinge and crepynge like a serpent.

Anguis, a snake.

Angularis, re, cornerde.

Angulatim, corner wise.

Angulosus, full of corners.

Angulus, a corner.

Anguste, an aduerbe, signifienge strayghtlye, naroly, peynfully,

Angustia, straytnes, or perplexity of mind.

Angustitas, a strayte, or strayt place.

Angustus, a, um, strayt.

In angustum uenire, to be in some necessity: to have great lack of help.

Anhelator, he that fetches his wind often, or blows much, called a pursy
man.

Anhelitus, brethe or wind of a man.

Anhelo, aui, are, to fetch wind, or draw breathe.

Anhelus, he that draws his breath peynfully.

Ania, a Romayne woman, which being fair and young, after that her huscbande
was dead, was counsayled to take an other, but she would not consent thereto.
for if (said she) I shall hap to have as good as I have had, I will not be in
fear to lose him: if I shall have an ill husband, what shall I need, after a
good manne, to suffer a shrewe.

Anicetum, idem quod Anethum, dyll.

Anicula, a lyttel old woman.

Aniliter, like an old fool.

Anima, August. li. Definito.
is a substance created, invisible, most like unto the immortal god, having
none image or figure, but only of his creatoure.It is called in english the
soul. sometime it is taken for life. also it sygnifieth the breath. otherwhile
the wind. sometime the water.

Anima^ adimere, uel extinguere, to kill.

Animam debet, he owes more thanne he is worth. he owes so much, that he
has not his life but in lone.

Dic amabo, an foetet anima uxoris tuae? Tell me of good feloweshyppe, does thy
wives brethe stynke?

Animam comprime, Plautus.
hold thy brethe.

Si situlam iamiam caepero, nunquam aedipol tu mihi diuino quid credas post
hunc diem, ni ego illi puteo, si occepso, animam omnem intertraxero: If I take
the bucket, never believe me for a prophet after this day, if I draw not
clean out (if I ones begin) all the water of the well.

Animaduerto, tere, to consider, to take heed, to perceive, to set mind on a
thing, to behold, and to think.

Experrecta nutrix animaduertit dormientem, Plautus.
circumplicatum serpentis amplexu. The nourice awaked, and perceived the child
being on sleep, wrapped all about in the wyndynge of the serpent.

Date operam, Terentius.
and cum silento, animaduertite? Take you heed, and with silence perceive what
I will say to you. Cicero.
Ea sunt animaduertenda peccata maxim, quae difficilli me praecauentur. Those
offenses ought to be most sharply corrected, which most hardly are eschewed.
Caesar
Hac re animaduersa, Caesar iubet signa conuerti: After that the offense was
punyshed, Caesar commanded to advance the standarde.

Animaduertere in Aliquem, to punish one.

Animaduersi, they which are punysshed or corrected.

Animaduersio, consideration, punysshmente. sometime study.

Animaduersor, he that punishes.

Animaequius, a, um, pacient, or sufferinge.

Animal, all thing that has life, and is sensible, commonly it is taken for a
beast.

Animalis, le, that wherein is life.

Animans, idem quod Animal, sauinge that it is more larger. for it may
signify all thing that has spirit of life.

Animatus, a, um, that has soul or life. Also having a fantasy or favor to
a thing, or to be dysposed. Plau^^^.
Ita animatus fui, atque nunc sum, ut ea te patera donem. I had such a
fantasye, and yet have, that I would give the cup to you.

Amabo si quid animatus est facere, faciam ut sciam. If he be disposed to do
any thing, let me know it.

Animitus, from the very soul or life.

Animo, aui, are, to give courage or boldenes, to quicken.

Animos addere, to make one bold, or to prycke him forward to do a thing.

Animos comprimere, to abate ones courage.

Animos retardare, idem.

Animos efferre, to look high, or be proud.

Animos lactare, to draw men's hearts with fair promyses, to make fools
feign, to bring men in fools paradise.

Animi pendere, to be in doubt what to do.

Animi causa, for pleasure. Cur eam emit?

T. Animi causa. Plau^^^.
wherefore did he by her? T. for his pleasure.

Animo male est, it greueth him at the very heart.

Animo praesenti, with a bold spirit or courage.

Animo bono esse, to be of good chere.

Animo iniquo pati, to suffer impatiently.

Animo obsequi, to take pleasure, to follow appetite or will.

Animo morem gerere, idem.

Animum adijcere ad uirginem, to set his love on the maiden.

Animum adiungere, to apply or set mind to a thing.

Animum aduertere, to take heed.

Animum appellere, to dispose or apply him to do a thing.

Animum e^cere, to put away affection or fantasy.

Animum recipere, to take heart or courage Also to fetch brethe.

Animum sumere, to take a good heart.

Animus impotens, an vnpaciente courage. a proud or dogged heart.

Animus tibi pendet, thou stand in doubt what thou may do.

Anime mi, my dear heart.

Animule, idem.

Animose, couragiousely, Iustily.

Animositas, boldness.

Animosus, bold.

Animus, the mind, the will. sometime it is put for the soul. sometime for
affection or delectation. sometime for wind or blaste, some time for wrath.
sometime for a sown.

Anio, enis, a river in Italy in the field called Tiburtinum.

Anisum, an herb called anyse, whereof comes anyse sede, which is hot and
dry in the third degree.

Anna, a name of Hebrewe, which signifies gracious, pitiful, restinge, or
gyuinge. Of this name have been many noble women. One was a jew, wife to
Elcans, which being a long time barrayne, by continual prayer at the last
obtained of god to be fruiteful, and brought forth by her husband, the good
and holy prophet Samuel, who afterward was the chief priest and bushop in
Israel. Ano there was an old widow and a prophetess in Jerusalem, at the
time when Christ was presented in the temple: which woman served god day and
night, in prayer and fasting, and beholdynge Christ, declared all that was
prophesied of him, to them that abode the redemption of Israel. Another Anna
was daughter of Isachar of the tribe of Leui, or as Damascenus says, of the
tribe of Judah, and was married to Ioachim of the same tribe, which being long
barrayne, at the last brought forth the blessed vyrgin Mary, mother of Jesus,
god and man: and after the death of Ioachim she was married to Cleophas, and
after his death to Salome

Annals, histories of acts, yearly done.

Annalis, le, that which is done yearly.

Annaria lex, was a law in the.xii. table of the Romans, ^ex. Po^p. ^ext.
Cae^ ^lius.
whereby was appointed at what age and duringe what time, great offices in the
publyke weal should be taken and kept.

Annarius, a, um, aged, or that which is done yerelye.

Annas, was bushop among the jews, when Christ began to preach.

Annascor, to grow, or to be borne by a plate or man.

Anniculus, a, um, that which is of one years old.

Annilis, le, aged.

Annilis fabula, an old wives tale, or a tale without fruit.

Annitor, to resyste, or to help, to set to my mind.

Anniuersalis, the compass of the year.

Anniuersarius, a, um, that every year retourneth at one time.

Annona, vyttayles, sustinaunce, or living.

Sometime it betokens finding in meat, drink, and apparayle.

Annonarius, and Annotinus, a, um, perteynynge to vyttayle.

Annonariae expensae, expenses in vitayle.

Annosus, a, um, aged

Annotatio, a notynge or markynge of things for special remembrance.

Annoto, aui, are, to nots, to entitle.

Annotinae naues, shyppts that carry corn.

Annuatim, yearly.

Annularis, re, perteynynge to a ring.

Annuntiare, to declare a message.

Annuo, ere, to consent or grant.

Annus, is commonly called a year, not withstanding Annus is divided in.ii.
significations, one is called Annus uertens, which the Egyptians made but
of.ii. months, the Romans in the time of Romulus.x. months: After Numa
Pompilius, which reigned next after Romulus, added to.ii. months, and made
it.xii. months, which Julius Caesar accounted to contain. 365. days, and
the fourth part of a natural day. Annus magnus after the saying of Aristote
les, is the space, where in all the spheris sterres and planettes be returned
into the same state and point, as they were at the time, from whense we do
account, which some do suppose to be in. 2484. years, called uertentes, some
say. 5552. some ten thousand and eyghte hundred years. Josephus calls a
thousand years Annum magnum.

Annuum, a pention, or annuitie.

Annuus, a* um, that dureth one year.

Anodina, things, which do put away peine or grief.

Anomalum, unequal, diverse, roughe.

Anonium, an herb called dead nettle, or archaungell.

Anonymum, without a name.

Anophytus, spro^gen or grown upon a thing.

Anquina, the cord wherewith the sail is bound to the maste.

Anquiro. to seek.

Ansa, the care or handell of a pot, or cup. And sometime it signifies
occasion. sometime a buckle.

Ansanctus, on every part holy.

Ansatus, a, um, having an handell.

Anser, seris, a goose. They tread to engender in the water, they sit on their
eggs in cold countrayes.xxx. days, in warm countries or wether.xxv. days,
as Columella says. They were much made of by the Romans, for as much as
when the french men besieged the capitole of Rome, they which were within
being on sleep, the capitole had been betrayed and won, if that a certain
number of geese, perceiving the ennemies, had not cried, wherewith the Romans
being wakened, by the valiant prowes of M. Ma^lius, they slew and drove out
the frenchemen, and saved the capitol. wherefore geese were had in great
reputation, and provision was made that they should never lack meat.

Anserinus, a, um, like a gose, or perteyninge to a gose.

Ansula, the diminutiue of ansa.

Antacei, as Strabo writes, be fysshes in the river called Borysthenes, like
to Dolphins without fynnes, and be very delycate and pleasant to eat.

Antae, iambes, also posts on every side of the door.

Antaeci, people which dwell in the countrary Zon^ or gyrdell, to Anticthones.

Antandros, a city in Phrigia.

Antapocha, the counterpane of a deed in writing.

Antarcticus, the fifthe cercle in heaven, called the south pole.

Antarium bellum, battle before a City or town.

Antea, Ante, before.

Ante alios, above other, before other, more than other, or beside other.

Anteambulo, lonis, a lackey, or other servant that goes before his master.

Antecapio, coepi, capere, to prevent.

Antecedo, cessi, dear, to go before, to excel.

Antecello, lui, lere, to excel or have preemine^ce

Antecessum, paid before hand.

Antecoenium, a colation or drynkyng between dy^er and supper.

Ante eo, iui, ire, to precede or excel, or go before.

Antefero, to put before, or set more by.

Antefixa, things cast in mouldes, and set over doors.

Ante hac, before this time, or before that time.

Antelapides, stones set at both the sides of a door for strength.

Anteloquium, the first turn in speaking.

Antelucanus, a, um, that which is before day light.

Antelucani uenti, wyndes that do blow from the water, or from some creke.

Anteluco, an aduerbe, before day.

Anteluco, aui, are, to wake before day.

Anteluculo, before day light, or an hour before son.

Antenna, the crossepiece, whereto the sail is fastened.

Antenor, was of alyaunce to Priamus king of Troy, and after the destruction
of Troy, remained there with the Troyanes, which were left on live, and
afterward being driven thense by the sons of Hector, he fled with.ii.
thousand Troyans, and entered into the countreye called Venetia, and there
builded the noble city of Patauium, called commonly Padua, and there reigned
during his life.

Ante oculos, before his eyes, but it signifies further of than Coram oculis.

Antepagmentum, a portall.

Antepono, sui, nere, to prefer.

Antequam, before, ere.

Antequam de repub. dicam, ete I speak of the weal public.

Anterius, long before.

Antermini, the inhabitauntes of the marches or frontiers of a country.

Anterotae, love mutually set between two persons.

Anterotes, the warste kind of Amatistes, which has a white purple color,
toward a crystal.

Antes, outward pyllars or posts, whereby the house or frame is sustained.

Antesignani, they which be next the standerd, appointed for to defend it.

Antesto, to excel, or stand before.

Antestor, to assign a judge.

Antesum, antefui, ante esse, to excel an other in any thing.

Anteuenio, ueni, nire, to prevent.

Anteuerto, to preuente, to over tide one. sometime to do one thing before an
other: to do a thing first, and before an other man.

Anteurbanus, a, um, nygh to the city, as Anteurbanum praedium, a manor nygh^
to the city.

Antexpectatus, a, um, come before that he was looked for.

Anthedon, a kind of medlars, which has leaves like an almonde tree, the
fruit less than the common medlar, but much pleasanter, and will be lengar
kept.

Anthemis, an herb called chamomyl.

Anthenodorus, a philosopher of the sect of them, which were called Stoici,
flouryshed xv. years before the incarnation of Christ. Of whom this wise
sentence proceeded: Thou may think that thou art free from all couaytise,
when thou art come to that point that thou will desire nothing of god, but
that thou may openly crave.

Antherae, a certain salve, which has a floryshynge and orient color, read
Cornelium Celsum. All be it Joan. Manardus says in the fourth book of his
Epistoles, that physytions do call Antheras, compounde medycines for dyseases
of the mouth, wherein Roses be myngled. But he that reads Galenum de
compositione medicamentorum, shall find Antheras without the flowers of Roses.

Anthericon, idem quod Asphodelus, Daffadylles.

Antheus, was a man in Mauritania of meruayllous strength, before the
Incarnation of Christ.1588. years, with whom Hercules wrastlyd, who
perceyuyng that as often as he threw him to the earth, so often he eftesoones
recovered his strength: He at the last took him in his arms, and did lift
him above ground, and so held him until the soul went out of his body,
and there dyed. Antonius Sabellicus wrytetth, that Sertorius found the
Sepoulchre of Antheus, in a city called Tigena, in Barbarye, which was in
length.xl. cubytes.

Anthias, a fyshe, a great deuourer of man's flesh, having teethe like to
a comb, yet not withstanding in the parts where this fysshe breadeth, there
is no monster of the sea, and therefore he is called Sacer piscis, the holy
fysshe. He is alsoo called Callionymus.

Anthirrhinos, an herb like to lynne, having no root. It has a purple
flower, and grows commonly among corn. The seed is like to a calves head
with the nosethrylles open.

Anthos, is commonly taken for the flowers of Rosemary. All be it, it is the
general name of every flower.

Anthraceus, a colyar.

Anthracia, a bournynge cole.

Anthracides, a stone, in the which there seems to be sparks, as it were of
fire.

Anthracinus, a, um, black as a cole.

Anthropophagi, people which do devour men in eating of them.

Anthyllis, is the herb commonly called herb Iuye.

Antiae, the hear of a woman, that is laid over her forhead, gentylwomen did
late call them their rolls.

Antibacchius, a foot in meter, having the first syllable and the last short,
and the myddell syllable long.

Antica, all that is before us.

Anticipo, aui, are, to prevent.

Anticlus, was one of the Greeks, which was inclosyd in the brazen horse,
whereby the city of Troy was betrayed. And when the fair Helene, mystrustyng
that engyn, came unto it, and feining the voices of the ladies of Greece, Homerus
spoke as if every of them had spoken to their husbands, and none of them,
which were in the brason horse, regarded her: only Anticlus thynkyng that he
herd the voice of his wife named Laodomia, would have answered had not Ulysses
with his hand stopped his mouth, until Helene commanded by Pallas, was
departed, by the occasyon whereof Anticlus was strangled.

Anticthones, people dwelling in the vttermoste part of the world, directly
against us.

Anticyra, an I Will in Asia, where the herb called Elleborus grows, which
pourgeth melancholy, and there it may be taken without any danger. Whereof
grew this proverb spoken to men in their melancholy:

Nauiga ad Anticyras, Go sail to Anticyra. as who says, Pourge your
melancoly.

Antidicomaritae, a sect of heretyques, which affirmed, that the blessed
vyrgyn Mary, after that she had brought forth Christ, was carnally known of
Joseph, and had by him other chylderne. The author of the which heresy was
Heluidius, about the year of our lord. 406.

Antidora, gift for gift, one for an other.

Antidotarius, a book of medicines.

Antidotum, a medicine to expelle poison.

Antigerio, old writers vsyd for very shortly, forthewith, or the thing were
done.

Antigraphareus, a controller.

Antigrap^^eus, idem.

Antigraphum, an example.

Antila, a poumpe to draw water.

Antilena, a peutrell.

Antimetabole, a figure in speech, where words are repeted to a contrary
sentence, as, Non ut edam uiuo, sed ut uiuam edo, I live not to eat, but I
eat to live.

Antiochia, a noble city in Syria, called first Epiphane or Beblata, and
afterward was augmented by Seleuchus, son of Antiochus, one of the noble
companyons of great king Alexander.330. years before the coming of Christ,
who called it by the name of his father Antiochia. Thoroughe this City
rounneth the river called Orontes.

Of this city sayncte Peter the apostle was bishop seven years, and after
him saint Lucas the Euangelyste other seven years.

There was the first Synodus or Counsel celebrate, where the name of Christen
men first began. This City was in the hands of Chrystyan men oone
thowsande years, and there has been in succession. Cliii.bishops, and had
within it.366. Churches.

Antiochus, was the name of the kings of Siria, of the which the fourth of
that name, and syxte king of Siria, was called the great Antiochus, which
was before the coming of Christ.212. years. He was also called Hierax, which
sygnyfyeth a fawlkon, for the rauenye that he vsyd in taking from every
manne their possessions and goods. To this king camme Hannyball duke of
Carthage, after that the City of Carthage was delivered by appoyntemente, to
whom Antiochus showed his army gathered against the Romans, which was
wonderfully rychely armyd with gold and silver, and he reioysynge therein,
demanded of Hannyball, if he thought not that that was enough for the
Romans, meaning the puyssaunce of his army. Hannyball little esteemynge
the richesse, aunsweryd in skorne: yes althowghe the Romans of all other were
most couetouse. Fynallye, the Romans vanquyshed both Antiochum, and
Hannyball, who fled to Prusias, king of Bithynia. And Antiochus was
constrained to desire peace, and to relynquysshe to the Romans all his
interest in Europa and Asia, and to leave his son Antiochum in hostage, and
he him self to depart to the hyl^e of Taurus, and to be content with the
countreye there about. At the last being eftesoones styrred with a couetouse
mind, desiring to have a great treasure, which was supposed to be in
Perside, the chief city of Persia, in the Temple Nanea or Fortuna, was
deceived by the priests of that Temple, and cut in small pyeces, and cast
out to be deuowred of birds. And this was the end of a rauenouse and
couaytouse prince, after that he had most gloryousely reigned six and thyrty
years.

Antiochus illustris, the noble Antiochus, was son to great Antiochus, which
was left hostage in Rome by his father. This man gave his sister in marriage to
Ptolomeus king of Egypt, that by pretense of famylyarytie, he might take the
royalme of Egypt from him, which he did, for coming unto him under the
color of alyaunce, he slew Ptolome sitting at supper. He also subdewed the
Jews in Jerusalem, and robbed the Temple and City, and did set up
Idolles, and with sundry tourmentes, compellyd the Jews to break the laws
of god, and commytte idolatrye. But he escaped not unpunished, for when he had
reigned.xi. years, he fell into an horrible syckenesse and tourment, so that
wourmes yssewed aboundauntly out of his body, which so corrupted his flesh,
that it did stynke so greuouselye, that his army, nor no manne about him
might sustain the savor. At the last he retourning to the knowledge of God,
with great contrition dyed, oppressyd with tourmentes. Diverse other have been
of that name, some kings, some philosophers, which I pass over for as much
as I find not of them any thing notable.

Antipagmenta, garnysshynge of porches in stone or timber wrought.

Antipater, was the name of diverse kings, as well of Macedonia, as of Judea.
Also of a noble Capytayne, whom the great king Alexander made his
ly^utenaunte of Macedonia, whiles he was in his Conqueste, who did many
valiant acts in the absence of Alexander, and kept the royalmes and
domynyons of his master in good state with his wisdom and prowess. But
being at dyscention with queen Olympias, mother to great Alexander, who wrate
many great complayntes to her son against him. finally, dreadynge the
cruelty as well of Alaxander, as of his mother, it is supposed, that he
consented to the poysonynge of his master.

Antipater, was a philosopher borne in the city of Tirus, of the sect of
Stoici, which from the time of his birth, until his death, had always a
fever, and not withstanding he lived till he was olide.

Antipater, is alsoo an herb, which has an hard stem, and leaves like
Rosemarye, but they are brother, and not so long. The propretie thereof is,
that the flowers, which grow last, do spring up highest, therefore Pandecta
calls it Filius ante patrem, the son before the father.

Antipathia, a repougnauncie, or natural contraryetie.

Antipelargesis, one good turn for an other.

Antiperistasis, is that thing, whereby, where heat commethe, cold is
expellyd, where cold is, heat is expelled. By this well water in the winter
time is warm, forasmoche as the high parts of the air being cold, the
heat withdraws him to the loweste parts. Likewise in the body of man, the
spirit is kept in more feruente by the outward cold, by the joint consent
and tolleration of all parts of the body.

Antiphonae, ^e interpreted Antemnes, which be songen after Psalms. These
were first ordained to be songen in the Church by Saint Ignatius, the
dyscyple of saint Johan the Euangelyste, Archebysshoppe of Antiochia, the year
of our Lord, about.109.

Antiphrasis, a word or sentence, having a contrary meaning: as Parcae, the
mynisters of death be so called, because they spare to man.

Antipodes, people which do inhabyte the part of the world, in respect of
the roundnesse thereof, underneath us, that it seems that their feet be
against our feet.

Antiquarius, he that sercheth for antiquities, or redeth old warkes, or uses
to speak or write words of ancient time, which have been long out of
custom.

Antiquatio, an abolytion of a law.

Antiquitas, atis, auncientye.

Antiquitus, of ancient or old time.

Antiquo, aui, are, to make void, to reduce to the first state, to repel.

Antiquare legem, to abolyshe a law.

Antiquus, a, um, ancient or old. sometime it sygnifieth noble or
worshypfull. Also it signifies much set by. Nihil antiquius, nothing more
set by or favored.

Antiqua ratio, the manner of time passed.

Antiqua terra, a noble country.

Terra antiqua, potens armis, and uberae glebae, Vergil.
A noble countray puyssaunt in wars, and of a fertyle soil.

Antiqui homines, men of the old fasshyon.

Antiquum obtinere, to keep the old fasshyon.

Antiquus hospes, mine host of long time.

Antispasis, a pluckynge the contrary way.

Antistes, itis, a prelate.

Antisthenes, was a famous Philosopher in Athenes, three hundred syxty and syx
years before the coming of Christ, who to here Socrates, went every day on
his feet from Pyreus to Athenes, which was five miles out, and five miles
home. He first began the sect, called Cinici, but he did suppose the chief
goodness to be in Virtue.

Antistita, on abbess or prioresse.

Antistitium, prelacy or preeminence.

Antistitor, he that has over other preemynence, or that stands before them
that do work, Galen.
and controllyth them, a controller or ouerseer of workmen. Meth.


Antitasis, a pluckynge back.

Antithesis, a fygu^e, where one letter is set for an other, as olli for illi.

Antitheton, a figure, whereby one contrary is joined with an other. Ouidius in
Metamor


Frigida pugnabant calidis, humentia siccis.

Mollia cum duris, sine pondere habentia pondus:

Cold things contended with them that were hot, moist things with dry:
Hard things with soft, light things with h^uy, kept not one note.

Antium, a city in the part of Italye, called Latium, by the sea side.

Antlantes, images of antyque, Martial.
set over doors in the corners of the haunce.

Antlia, a poumpe, or like thing to draw up water.

Antonius, a name, by the which was called diverse Emperoures of Rome. And
among other, oone was called Antonius Pius, which succeeded Hadryane, the year
of our Lord. 141. and reigned two and twentye years and three months with
Aurelius and Lucius. His progenytours were Spanyardes, as Capytolinus says.
He was a meruayllous good manne, for after that he was Emperor, he gouernyd
with such moderation and gentylnesse, that he was therefore called Pius, and
father of the countraye, he was never cruelle for any pryuate or commune cause:
he vsyd often this saying: He had leauer save oone subject, thanne dystroye
a thowsande enemies. For his devout living, sweetness of manners, mercy,
Justice, and temperaunce, he was compared to Numa. Wherefore many kings and
pryncis of diverse nacyons, layenge war aparte by his commandment,
committed all their contencyons unto his Judgment, and held them therewith
contented. For both love and fear of him, caused them to exchewe wars,
honourynge him for his virtue as a god. Yet was not he so desirous of glory or
richesse, that he would attayn thereunto by other men's damage. He dyed at the age
of.70. years.

Antonius Musa, was physician to Octauyane the Emperor, whom he delivered of
a daungerouse syckenesse, and therefore the Emperor caused an Image to be
made of brass, and to be set up by the Image of Esculapius. There is now
living a physytion of that name in ferrare, who is right lykely to set
forth a wonderfulle knowledge in physycke, as well in speculation as also in
practyse, if ambition or avarice let him not, as it does other men of
great learning.

Antrax, acis, quycke silver earth.

Antropomorphitae, a sect of heretyques, which affyrmed, that God had a body
and members as a man had. This sect began in Egypt about the year of our
lord. 380.

Antrum, a den under the earth.

Antuacutum, Pthol.
the town of Andwarp in Brabande.

Anubis, was a god of the Egyptians, which they honored for Mercurius in
figure of a dog.

Annuicallia, and Annuifera, been herbs which are dry, but having roots,
which yearly do spring into new branches, as hyssope, penyroyall, sorell,
fenelle, and diverse other, whose stalks in winter are dry, and seem to be
dead, but toward summer there spring grene leaves and stalks out of the
roots.

Anularius, a ieweller that sellyth rings.

Anulus, a ring.

Anus, nus, an old wife.

Anus, ni, an arse.

Anxie, curiousely, with great pain.

Anxietas, care, heaviness, anguysshe or sorrow.

Anxietudo, idem.

Anxifer, he that causes sorrow.

Anxius, a, um, careful or heavy.

Anxia oration, an oration made with to much dilygence.

Anxur, a city called also Tarrasina.

Anygrus, a river in Thessalia.

A ANTE O.
AOnia, a part of the countreye called Boetia.

Aonius, a, um, of that country.

Aornos, a place whereunto no byrd may come.

A ANTE P.
APage, Plautus.
fie, fie. Apage, haud nos deceat fugitiuos imitari, Fie fie, it will not beseme
us to play the mychers. alsoo remove, put away, or drive away. Also it
has a sygnifycation of a more vehemencye, as, Apage hanc caniculam, Away
with this bytche, or, hense away with this bytche.

Apage a me, have away from me.

Apage te, get the hense.

Apage sis, let be, get the hense.

Apagina, Galen. in definitio.
is a cuttynge of the bone of, in the ouerpart apperynge, descendynge down in
the parts ioynynge to the rupture. Or it is when the end of a bone, where he
is joined with an other bone, Galenus Meth. 6.
is broken.

Apalaestris, he that can neither wrestle, nor do any other maystry.

Apamia, was a city in the less Asia, through the myddell whereof ran the
river called Marsia. It was the name also of an another city in Parthia.

Aparme, an herb, which sum men suppose to be burres, sum that herb
which is called Rubea tinctorum, in english madder.

Apathes, were philosophers, which of a froward and stubbourne nature, held
opinyon, that a wise manne had none affections or passions.

Apedes, a bird, whose fete be so little, that they seem to have none, I
suppose they be martlettes.

Apelles, was a name, whereby the Jews were called in derysion, as it were
Sine pelle, because the skin of their instrumente was cut of, when they
were circumcysed.

Apelles, was also an herelyke in Greece, the year of our lord.174. whose
heresye was, that he knew not the god, which he worshypped. And that Christ
was not god in very deed, but a fantasye apperynge to men as a man.

Apelles, an excellent paynter in the time of great Alexander, borne in the isle
of Cos, of whom only Alexander would be painted. When he dyed, he left an
image of Venus vnperfourmyd, whom never manne afterward durst enterprise to
fynyshe, for the incomparable beauitie thereof.

Apello, lere, pulsum, to amoue or put of from a thing.

Apeptia.i. cruditas, cruditie or lack of good dygestion.

Aper, apri, a bore. It is also a fysshe, which has a voice.

Aperio, ui, ire, to open, to dysclose, to expound.

Aperte, openly, plainly, evidently, without dissimulation or color.

Apertus, a, um, open, plain, evident, discoueted, without color or cloak.

Apes, uel apis, a be.

Apesus, untis, a mountain in Greece.

Apex, icis, the crown of the head; the top of every thing, It sommetyme
signifies a mytar.

Apexabo, a puddyng, called a bluddyng.

Aphaeresis, a figure, whereby a letter or syllable is taken from a word, as
Pone metum, for Depone metum, Mi for Mihi, Tun for Tune.

Aphiae, a kind of little fysshes in brokes like unto gougins, which are
supposed to have none other beginning but of abundaunce of rayn: for they be
found all times of the year, and the more that the water is troubled, the
better they are. Plinius calls this fyshe Apua. Theodorus names him Aplua. I
suppose they be dacis.

Aphilos, he that has no friend.

Aphracta, a little bark or brygantine.

Aphractum, a kind of ships, which the Rhodians vsyd.

Aphrica mayor, the third part of the world, which is severed from Europa
on the east by the river of Nylus: on the weaste by the pyllars of Hercules.
The hither part is now called Barbarye, and the people Mores. The inner part
is called Lybia and Aethiopia.

Aphrica minor, is in this wise bounded. On the weaste it has Numidiam, on
the east Cyrenaicam, on the north the sea called Mediterraneum. In this
country was the noble city of Carthage.

Aphricanus, was a nase given to two noble Romans called Scipiones, because
the one vanquysihed Hanniball, and subdewed Carthage: The other afterward
Carthage rebellyng, subverted and distroyed it utterly.

Aphricus uentus, a southwynde.

Aphrodisia, days dedycate to Venus, or Veneryall pastymes.

Aphronitrum, the foam of salt peter, called of the Arabiens Baurach.

Aphtha, is an exulceration or breakyng out in the mouths of children, which
do sou^e.

Apianus, a, um, that wherein bees do delight.

Apiarium, the place where as hyues be set.

Apiarius, he that nouryssheth bees.

Apiastra, a bird which does devour bees.

Apiastrum, an herb calllyd bawlme, also melyssa.

Apiceones, sheep having small bodies, and little woulle.

Apicius, was a Romayne, which delyted in delycate meats, so much that he
professed cookery, and infected Rome with gluttonye, which before was the
myrro^^^ of temperaunce. And when he had consumed in gourmandyse Millies
sestertium, which do amounte after the computacyon of Senalis, to two myllyons
and five hundred thousand crowns, which is after our rate, five hunderde
four score and three thowsande fyftye and four pounds. When he grew in
debt, and made his reckenyng, that there was left but Centies sestertium,
Seneca.
which amounts to this rate in our money, fyftye and nine thousand five
hunderde and five pounds, and eyghte shyllynges, fearing that in that
substance he should live in penurye, he wyllyngly drank poison and dyed.

Apicula, a young be.

Apiculus, the dyminutiue of apex.

Apidanus, a river in Thessalia.

Apina, a trysle.

Apinae, nuttes without shales.

Apinus, a tree whereof comes pytche.

Apionia mala, round appulles, which I take to be they, that are called
Pomeroyall.

Apios, wild radyshe.

Apium, Io. Agric.
properly our common persely.

Apiria, infynytenesse, where there is none end.

Apis, called also Serapis and Osyris, whom the Egyptianes honouryd for their
chyefe God.

Aplanes, the part of heaven, which never moves.

Apluda, wheaten branne.

Aplustre, and aplustria, orum, the tackelynge of a ship.

Apnoea, the vice of a short wind or breathe.

Apocalypsis, sios, a revelation.

Apocle^^, counsayllours of the pryuye counsel.

Apocope, a figure, by the which a letter or syllable is taken away, as
peculi, for peculij.

Apocopi, men being gelded.

Apocroti, men that be hard and miserable in living.

Apocryphi libri, books, the authors whereof be unknown.

Apocryphus, a, um, hid, not known.

Apocynon, a little bone in the left side of a frogge, wherewith it is
supposed, things may be done, which were not expedient to be openly known.

Apodixis, an evidence, a demonstration.

Apodyterium, the place by a bayne, where they which be bayned, do put of
their clothes.

Apogaei, wyndes that do arise out of the ground.

Apogeum, an habytacyon under the ground.

Apolactizo, are, to stryke with the heels. also to despise or set at naught.

Apollinares ludi, plays made in the honor of Apollo.

Apollinaris, an herb callid Henbane.

Apollinaris, a name of a man, whereby was callydde oone which was bishop
of Hierapolis, a city in the year of our lord.145. who was a greatte lernyd
manne, and wrate a greatte book of the faith of Christ, an another warke
against the Gentyles, dedycate unto Marcus Antonius the Emperor. Alsoo
against the heretyques called Cataphrigae. An another of the same name was
bishop of Laodicea, which alsoo was a noble lernyd manne, and wrate thyrtye
books for our faith against Porphyrium* Not withstanding he fell into
heresye, saying: that Christ received not flesh of the vyrgyn Mary, but
that in the act of his incarnation some part of the word was conuertyd into
flesh. He said that Christis soul was not of that part, which was
ra-tionall, but only of that part, which kept the body living, and therefore
in his Incarnation he took oonely the body and not the soul.

Apollinea, a city in Lumbardy, now called Vercellae.

Apollo, inis, whom the Gentyles honouryd for God, referrynge to him the
invention of Musyke, of poetry, and of physyke it is sometime taken for the
son.

Apollonia, a blessed vyrgyn borne in Alexandria, who for confessyng the faith
of Christ, the year of our lord.265. had all her teethe pullyd out of her
head, and after, when the tyrant menacid her, that except she would
blaspheme Christ, she should be bourned in a great fire, which was therefore
preparyd, After that she had aduysed her self, she brake from the mynisters,
and wyllyngly lepte into the fire, which was greatte and horrible. Her body is
buried at Derdona in Lumbardye.

Apolloniatae, people of Apollonia.

Apollonia, is also the name of a city in Epiro, now called Valonia, an other
in Creta, an other in Siria, also an isle by Thracia.

Apollonius, a philosopher borne in Grecia, about the year of our lord.90.
This man from his infancye so profytted in learning, that being but a child,
was a great philosopher, and followed the seete of Pythagoras, gooynge always in
lynnen, and never eating any thing, which had life. And not withstanding
that he was excellentely lernyd in the mystycalle knowledge of phylosophye and
natural magyke, yet to have more knowledge, he went into Egypt, Persia,
Ethiope, and Inde, and lernyd of the Bragmanes, and Gymnosophistae, and
returned into Greece and Rome, where he was had in greatte admyration for the
meruaylles, which he showed, and at the last being above the aege of eyghtye
years, he being in a greatte assemblye of people, sodeynely was conveyed
away, no man knows how or whyther, as Philostratus says, who writes
his life.

Alsoo sayncte Hierome makyth mencyon of him in his prologue to the old
Testament more haboundauntlye. There were of this name three greatte
physytions, oone the dyscyple of Erasistratus, whoo first of any physytion
wrate of the parts of man's body, he was called Apollonius Memphites. The
other two were of Antioche, the father and the son.

Apologia, a defense or answer to a rebuke.

Apologo, aui, are, to require or ask.

Apologus, a fable wherein beasts or trees do speak.

Apomel, uel apomeli, a drink made with honye combs sodden in honye, until
the wax be clean skymmed away, and than koolyd, be put in a fair erthen
pot.

Apophasis, a denyenge of a thing, also an inuentorye.

Apophlegmatismus, a medycine, which causyth one to vomyte up fleume.

Apophoretum, a present. Gal. in i^^troduct.


Apoplexia, uel Apoplecticus morbus, is a syckenesse ingendryd of haboundaunce
of gross humors, which do fylle those Receptoryes or vessels of the
head, from whense comes feelynge and mouynge of the body. And therefore
they which have this disease, be depryued of feeling, speech, and mouynge.

Apoplecticus, he which has the said syckenesse.

Apophthegma, atis, a short and quycke sentence.

Aporeta, caskettes or coffers, wherein were put secret things, or most
precyouse iewelles.

Aporia, doubt, necessity.

Aposiopesis, where somewhat is left out, specially in speaking, and left to
the conjecture of them that be herers.

Apostasia, rebellyon or forsakynge of a man's profession or aliegiaunce.

Apostata, a rebelle or runnagate. It is now vsyd for them, which do forsake
the relygyon of Christ.

Apostema, an impostume, wherein corrupted humors have recourse in any part
of the body.

Aposteparnismos, is a cittynge away of the bone with the wound.

Apostolus, an apostle. it proprely sygnifieth a messanger.

Apostrophe, a conuersyon in speaking from one to an another.

Apotelesma, a pronostication or declaration of the sygnifications of sterres
at a man's nativity, or the beginning of any thing, what thereof shall
happen.

Apotheca, a wine sellar or shop, wherein things be set to sale, a store
house.

Apotheosis, a dedycation or consecration proprely of men into goddis.

Apoximenos, he which wypeth away fylthe from ones body.

Apozema, a decoction of water with herbs or barley, which the greeks used instead of our syrupes.

Apparatus, tus, apparaylynge or deckynge.

Apparatus belli, preparation for wars, artyllery.

Appare, rui, rere, to appiere.

Apparere quaestioni, to serve process, as sergeantes and baylyffes done.

Apparitores, officers of Justice, attendynge on the great ministers, to sommon
or attache whom they will command.

Apparitura, the office of a sergeaunt or baylyffe.

Apparo, aui, are, to apparayle or trymme, to be ready to do a thing, to prepare
or ordeyne.

Appellatio, a namynge or appealynge to a higher judge.

Appello, aui, are, to name or call familyarlye to me. Also Vipian the greatte
lawyer will have it to sygnify to wowe a maiden to have her virginity.
sommetyme it sygnifieth to arryue, sommetyme to appeal to a higher Judge.

Appellare blande, to talk pleasauntelye with oone.

Appellare Caesarem, to appeal to the Emperor.

Appellare literas, to pronounce letters.

Appello, puli, pulsum, to arryue. sometime to apply or set the mind, to
dyrecte. also to approach.

Appellere animum ad aliquid, to set the mind to somewhat.

Appendeo, dis, dear, to hang by or nygh.

Appendicula, a diminutiue of Appendix.

Appendix, that which hangs at an another thing.

Appendeo, dis, dear, to hang up, to way in a balaunce or beam.

Appenninus, the part of the mountains of Alps, which begin by Geane, and
divides Italye, and extends unto the sea between Naples and Sicile.

Appetens, desirous of a thing.

Appetentia, inordynate appetite.

Appetitio, idem.

Appetitus, appetite.

Appeto, tij, tere, to desire much, to goo to, sommetyme it sygnifieth at
hand. Dies appetebat, The day was comme, or at hand. sommetyme to wound or
stryke at, as Leuans se alis, os oculosque hostis rostro and unguibus appetit,
Rysynge up with his wings, his talons and beak, he wounded the face and eyes
of him that faughte on the other part. Sommetyme to assaye to do a thing.

Appiades, were among the paynymes these goddesses, Venus, Pallas, Pax,
Concordia, Vesta. Of these do make mention Ouidius de art amandi.2. and de
remedio amoris. and Tullius.3. epist. fam.

Appia uia, the name of a high way at Rome.

Appiana poma, a kind of appulles as great as quynces, and having as great
a favor as they.

Appianus, a noble hystorian borne in Alexa^dry, who wrate most excellent
warkes of the civil wars of the Romans, which books I will counsel all them
that be studious in Tullies warkes to read diligently, whereby they shall
understand many thingis, that without them shall not be well understand.

Appion, a famous grammaryan borne in Egypt, against whom Josephus wrate his
warke De antiquitate Iudaeorum.

Applaudere, to move hands or feet for joy, or to beat any thing to the
ground.

Applico, aui, are, uel applicui applicere, to join to, to lay or set to, or
to apply.

Applicatus, joined to, sommetime occupied about a thing.

Applicat primum ad Chrysidis patrem se, He first made repair to Chrisis
father.

Applodo, plosi, dear, supra applaudere.

Appono, sui, nere, to put or add to, or set to, to appoint.

Apporto, aui, are, to bring to.

Apposco, scere, to ask more.

Apposite, aptely, conveniently.

Appositus, a, um, put to, or set to. sommetyme it signifies convenient, or to
the purpose.

Appotus, well weatte with drink.

Appraehendo, dear, to take, to attache, to lay hand on a thing.

Appraehendere palmam, to get the victory.

Apprime, chiefly, principally.

Approbo, aui, are, to approve or allow.

Approbus, very honest.

Appropero, aui, are, to make haste to come.

Appropinquatio, an approchynge or drawing to.

Appropinquo, are, to aproch, to draw nigh to.

Appulsus, us, coming of beasts to watrynge.

Apricari, to sytte or goo abroad in the air, or in the son.

Apricus, a place set against the son.

Apricus dies, a sunny day.

Aprilis, the month of Apryll.

Aprinus, bores flesh.

Apronia, an herb called alsoo Vitis nigra, a black vine, which rounneth
up, and wyndeth about trees and stalks of herbs, and has a leaf like an
yuye, but greatter, and bearyth bearyes in clusters, which at the beginning
are green, and black when they be ripe: alsoo the root is black without,
and within is yelowe like box.

Aprono in genua, Plinius li. 24. ca. 17.
I knele on my knees.

Aproxis, an herb, the root whereof kyndleth fire far of.

Aprugna, the venyson of a wild boore.

Aprunum uel Aprugnum callum, the brawne of a bore.

Aprurius, and aprugnus, a, um, of a bore.

Aprutium, a part of Italy, the people whereof were sometime called Samnites,
against whom the ancient Romans had long time wars. In it be these
cities, Aquileia, Adria, Sulmo, Ortona, Arpinu^, Aquinum.

Apsis, the name of a cart whele.

Apsorus, an isle in the Venetian sea.

Aptera, a city in the country of Licia, and a town in Crete.

Aptitudo, aptenesse.

Apto, aui, are, to join, to agree two things together.

Aprus, a, um, apt, agreeable, mete, necessary.

Apud, at, when it is joined with a person, it sygnifieth with.

Apud eum est primus, he is his princypell mynyon. Teren.


Apud me priores parts habet, he may do most with me. Teren.
Facio te apud illum deum, I will make him to take the for a god. Per eam te
obsecramus ambae, Terent.
si ius, si fas est, uti aduersa eius per te tecta, tacitaque apud omnes sint,
We both desire you, on her behalf, if it may be by any means possible, that
by your policy, her mysfortune may be keuered, and from all men kept secret.

Apud aliquem mentiri, to make a lie to one.

Apud nos imperium tuum est, we remember your commandment.

Apud animum meum statuo, I determyne in my mind. Salust.


Apud forum, in the market.

Apud aedes, in the house.

Apud horcum, in hell.

Apud quem, in whose presence.

Apud maiores nostros, Ci. in off.
in the time of our forefathers.

Apud se non est, he is out of his wit, or he is not in his right mind. Vix
sum apud me, ita animus co^motus est metu, spe, gaudio, mirando hoc tanto, tam
repentino bono, I am well nygh out of my wy^, my mind is so vexed with fear,
hope, and joy, with this good chance, which is so wonderful, so great,
and so suddenly hapnyd.

Apud te sis, think what thou haste to do, remember thy self.

Apud ignem, Salust.
by the fire. Apud aquam, by the water. Apud quem, by whom. Apud cum, by him.

Apud te exemplum experiendi habes, Plautus.
non eges foris, Ye have the experyence at home, ye need not to seek for it
abroad.

Apuleius, a philosopher borne in Aphrica, not withstanding he flourished in
Athenes, and after wrate in latin diverse styles, as De uita and moribus
Platonis, and de Deo Socratis, in a right eloquent and temperate style. In his
books called Floridorum, and De asino aureo. he wrate so affectately and
flouryshingly, that he is therefore more to be mocked than praised. He made also
a right commendable book of the names and virtues of herbs, he was about the
year of our lord.300.

Apulia, is a country which is a part of Italye, bordyng on the sea called
Mare Adria^icum. This country is populous, and has in it many towns and
castelles, and is aboundaunt of corn, wine, and oil, and good coursers for
the war. The chief city or see thereof is Brundusium, there is alsoo the
mount of saint Michael called Gargarum. This countreye is called also by other
names, as Iapegia, Messapia, Calabria, and Salentina, and the people are called
Apuli.

Apus, odis, a bird like a swalowe, but he has larger wings, and is most
commonly about the sea costs, where always he either flies or houereth in the
air, and bredeth in a rock.

Apyrena, sweet pomegranates.

Apyrotus, a stone that no fire may damage, or deface.

A ANTE Q.
AQua, water.

Aquae Augustae, a town in Gascoyns called Baiona.

Aquae Calidae, a city in England callid Bath.

Aquaelicium, rain water vsyd in medicine.

Aquae Sextiae, a town in Prouance now called Aquensis.

Aquagium, a cundyte.

Aquaintercus, water which runs between the skin and the flesh, the
dropsye.

Aqualiculus, a little trough.

Aqualicus, the panche.

Aquaricola, a place wherein water is cast.

Aquarioli, boys which do attend upon common harlottes.

Aquariolum, a washing place.

Aquarium, idem.

Aquarius, one of the.xii. signs.

Aquarius, a, um, pertaining to water, a^ aquarius sulcus, a forowe, by the
which water is drayned.

Aqua^icus, that which haunteth the water, or lives therein.

Aquatilis, the same.

Aquatio, a watringe.

Aquatus, a, um, that wherinto water is put. Vinum aquarum, alayed wine.

Aqueus, a, um, watery.

Aquifolia, a wyld medlar, or a tree like a wild medlar.

Aquila, an egle. It is also a fyshe of the kind^ of them, which have
gristelles.

Aquila, was also a name of a man borne in the country of Pontus, of a gentile
be commen a jew, which translated the old testament the second time out of
Hebrew into Greek.

Aquilegium, a gourde of water, which comes of rain.

Aquileia, uel Aquilegia, an aunciente city in the part of Italy called Forum
Iulij, the which city was sometime of such estimation, that therein was kept
the great mart of all Europa. And the great emperor Octauian delyted
principally to repair thither often. Afterward it was dystroyed by the Goths,
and the inhabitants fled thense, and were the first, which began to build
the city of Venice. But now it is so simple, that none dwell there but
fyshers and a few shepherdes.

Aquilex, he that sercheth for water, or conuayeth it.

Aquilifer, the standard bearer of the Romans

Aquilo, the northeast wind.

Aquilus color, russet.

Aquiminaria, all water pottes.

Aquitania, a country, which is accounted to be the third part of France.
It has on the west the occean sea, on the north the river of Loyre, or as
Caesar writes, the river of Gerond, on the east the part of France called
Lugdunensis, on the southe the mountains called Pyrenei, which divide France
from Spain. Albeit a portion thereof, conteyninge Cascoigne, Foix, Bigor, and a
few countries mo, is called Aquitania, in English Guyen.

Aquo, aui, are, to fetch or bear water.

Aquor, quari, to fetch or provide water.

Aquosus, a, um, full of water.

Aquula, a little water.

A, ANTE R.
ARA, an altar.

Arabarches, a lord of Arabia.

Arabes, in the syngular noumber Arabs^, the people of Arabia: all be it in
Arabia, are sundry sorts of people, which have diverse names, as, Sabaei,
Charaeni, A^taceni, Gebbanitae, Edumaei, Atramitae, Achomeni, Troglodytae,
Saraceni, uel Syraceni.

Arabia, in Hebrew named Saba, is a country in Asia, which is divided in to
three regions, Petream, desertam, and felicem. Petrea which signifies stonye,
marches on Egypt and Iudeam, and of Plinius is called Nabathea, the chief
city whereof is Petra, which now is called Arach, in holy scripture it is
called Petra deserti. By this country passed the chylderne of Israel when
they went out of Egypt. It is (as Strabo writes) plain, enuyroned with rocks
of a great heyghte, in the which be many springes of fresh water, without
that circute toward Judea, the more part of the country is deserte and
without water. There is the great mount or hill of Sina, called of Ptolomeus
Melanes, where the old law was given to Moses. and also where the body of
the holy vyrgin sayncte Catharine is buried. also an other mount called
Casius, where the great Pomp^ius is buried. Arabia deserta, which Strabo
calls Saenetis, has on the south the mountaygnes of Arabia foelix, on the
north Mesopotamia, on the west Petrea, the people of this country have no
certain habitation, and do dwell in tents, having no houses. Arabia foelix,
on the south, lies between the two seas Arabicum and Persicu^, which is so
plentyful, that it brings forth corn and fruits twyse in the year, having
plenty of all fruit and cattle, except horses mules, and swyne: all fowls,
except geese, cocks, and hens. Also there grows all kinds of spice and
sweet gummes, as frankensence, and myrre. The towns are unwalled, because the
people do always live in peace.

Arabrica, a town in Portugal.

Arachne, the name of a woman, which first invented spynnynge of lynnen, and
making of nets. It is also taken for lynnen yarne, or the woufe of clothe.

Arachneus, a little beast, which goes a soft pace.

Arachnion, fine threde.

Arachosia, a countraye in Asia.

Arachthus, a great river in the uttermost borders of Epirus.

Araciae ficus, fygges broad and white, which do grow on a little stalk.

Aracynthus, a mountain in Boeotia in Greece, where Minerua was specially
honored.

Aradus, a city in the isle of Tripolis toward Siria, where (as Possidonius
writes) was seen a serpent lie dead, that was in length one hundred and.xxv.
pacis, and of such greatness, that he moughte devour a man on horseback,
and every seal of his skin was greater than any shylde.

Aram, was brother to Abraham.

Aranea, a copweb. sometime a spyder.

Araneolus, a young or little spyder.

Araneus, a spyder. It is also a fysshe of the greatness of a gougeon, in
color diverse, having on his back nyghe to his head.iii. pricks.

Arar, a country in France called Sone.

Araris, a river in France, called now Sagona, which comes in to the river
of Rone, not far from Lions. This river is so quiet, that uneath it may be
perceived which way it runs. Over this river Julius Caesar made a bridge,
with his souldyars in one day.

Ararus, a river in Scithia, which runs through the realm of Armeny.

Arath, a Countreye in Armeny wonderful fertyle.

Arator, a ploughe man. Sometime a plough ox.

Aratro, aui, are, to ploughe eftsoon land that is sown, to make the ground
fat.

Aratrum, a ploughe.

Aratus, a poet of Asia, in the year before the incarnation.246. among diverse
other warkes, wrate certain verses of heaven, and the sterres, which warke was
translated by Tulli, and also by Germanicus, the son adoptyue of Tiberius the
emperor.

Araxes, a river in Armenia, over the which the great king Alexander made a
bridge, and like wise did Augustus the Emperor.

Arbea, a city in Judea, where Adam and other three patriarhes were buried.

Arbela, a country in Persia, where the great Alexander vaynquished king
Darius king of Persia.

Arbiter, tri, an arbitratoure.

Arbitrarium, arbitrabic.

Arbitratus, tus, arbiterment or judgment.

Arbitratu meo, in my judgment, sometime it signifies at my pleasure.

Arbitri, they which are present. Sometime witnesses.

Arbitris remotis mecum loquebatur: They which were present, being commanded
away, he talked with me.

Arbitrium, idem quod Arbitratus.

Arbitror, to trow, to judge, or awarde.

Arbor, and Arbos, a tree.

Arborator, a lopper of trees.

Arborescere, to wax to a tree.

Arboreus, a, um, of a tree.

Arboses, old writers used for Arbos.

Arbusto, aui, are, to set a field with trees.

Arbustum, a place where trees be set, properlye elmes, wythy, or salowe. It
may be taken for an orcharde, or a hopyarde, or a vine yard, where vynes do
grow up by trees. It is also a vine that runs up in heyghte or by a pole.

Arbutum, an appull called a wyldynge.

Arbutus, a wyldynge tree.

Arca, a coffer.

Arca Noe, was a greatte vessel, which god commanded Noe to make, to the
intent that he, his wife, his three sons, and their wives might be preserved
from the universal floudde, Philo. antiq. li. 1.
the year of the age of the world. 1652. and before the incarnatian 2310.
years. This vessel contained in length. 300. cubits of geometry, which
after the exposition of sayncte Augustine, were three hundred perch, every
cubite of geometrye, being six common cubits: in bread it was.50. perches,
and in depenesse from the hatches to the bottom thyrty perches, from the
hatches upward one perch. Noe at the time of the fynyshinge of this arc, was
of the age of six hundred years. Berosus writes, that after the floudde, this
arc remained on a mountayn in Armenia called Cordiei, where he in his time
saw part thereof.

Arca testamenti, was a coffer or cheste made by Moses in the deserte, wherein
were put the table of the old law, the rod of Moses, wherewith he showed
meruayles, and part of Manna, which god rayned in the deserte. This art was
made of strong wod and soote, and was keuered as well within as without with
fine gold, and on the top were two images of aungelles Cherubim: which ark
was in length five cubits, and in bread three cubytes. This was also called
Arca foederis.

Archades, be people of the countraye of Arcadia, which be also called
Prosilini, as Lycophron says, signyfienge that they were before the moon, for
as much as at the time of the floudde of Deucaleon, they saved them self on
the mountains, and therefore were acompted the most ancient people.

Arcadia, a country in Greece, set in the myddell of Peloponesus or Morea, so
called of Arcas the son of Jupiter, whoo reigned there. It was also called
Pelasgia, and Parrhasia, and Lycaonia: there was first invented the bagpyde.
Also there is the greatte fenne called Lernea, where the monster Hydra was
slain of Hercules, and the great river called Erymanthus, and a mountain of
the same name. There is also found the stone called Abeston, which being
ones het may never be quenched, and is of the color of iron.

Arcadicus, a, um, of Arcadia.

Arcane, secretly.

Arcanum, a thing secret, or of few known.

Archas, the son of Jupiter and Calisthona, daughter of Lycaon, was the
first king of Archadia, before the incarnation. 1470. years. This man herynge
that his mother (being a virgin consecrate) was defloured by Jupiter, when he
was begotten, and therefore expelled of the other vingines, would have slain
his mother, who being aferde of him, fled in to the wilderness, and did hyde
her self, till at the last she and her son were reconciled by Jupiter.
Afterward they both being dead, the Paynims feigned that they were
translated among the sterres, and set nigh to the Pole artike, and the mother
was called Vrsa minor, and the son Vrsa mayor.

Arcatus, a, um, bent like a bow.

Arceo, cui, cere, to strain, to put of, to drive away.

Arcera, a horse lytter.

Arcesilas, a philosopher of the sect of Academici, who was the scholar of
Crantor. There was also of that name a kunnynge keruer of images, specially the
image of Diana.

Arcesso, to accuse, to call for.

Arcessere, to purchase or get a thing. Causam sibi mortis arcessere: To be
the cause of his death.

Archarius, a treasorer, or cofferer.

Archelaus, a man's name, of the which were diverse famous men. One was a
philosopher, disciple to Anaxagoras, borne at Miletum, and master to Socrates,
and was the first that brought natural philosophy out of Ionia, to Athenis.
Of this name were diverse kings of Cappadocia, also one was king of
Macedonia, whom Plato calls a tyrant, and was slain by one Cratena his
minion. Of this man these things be remembered, that when he hired the famous
payntour Zeuzis to paynt his palayce: Socrates said meryly: that he did it to
provoke men to resort unto him, although they would not come for his sake, at
the least way they should gladly come to behold his fair house. Also when he
had with him at soupper diverse learned men, a poet there desired of him a
sum of money, he caused it to be brought to him, and forthwith gave it to
Euripides, who did not ask it, saying: Thou art worthy to take it, and he
to desire it.

Archemorus, son of Lycurgus king of Nemea, slain by an adder as his noryce
laid him in the gras by the ryuers side. for whose sake were made plays
called Nemei. He was also called Opheltes.

Archeptholomeus, was charyot man to Hector of Troy.

Archesilaus, a philosopher of the countreye of Acolide, who first invented
and used the form of disputation by opposynge and answering, as it is now
used, he brought in the sect called Media academica. And although he were a
wise man, yet dyed he by immoderate drinking of wine.

Archerypus, the first example or pattern.

Archias, called also A. Licimus, was a poet of Antioche, much favored and
honored of the noble men of Rome, specially of Lucullus and Tully, who
defended him in a noble oration, where he speaks much to the commendation of
poetry.

Archiater, tri, a chief physician.

Archidamus, a noble man of Sparta, who being demanded, how much money
would serve to the war of Peloponesus, answered, saying: that war fought
for no certayntie.

Archigenes, the name of a famous physician. It is also he that would be taken
for the wysest of his kynne.

Archigrammateus, a chancellor or chief secretary.

Archilochus, a poet of Lacedemonia, which wrate in the kind of verses
called Iambici, wherein he was so vehement, that where Licambes his wives
father, took from him his wife, and married her to an other manne, he so rated
him with versis, that he compelled him for sorrow and indignation to hang him
self. He was before the incarnation of Christ 650. years.

Archimagirus, chief cook.

Archimedes, a famous geometricien of Siracusis in Sicile, who by his art
resysted a long time Marcellus captaygne of the Romans, who besieged the
City of Siracusis: But finally the city being won, and he sent for by
Marcellus, was found drawing fygures of geometry in the ground, whereto he
was so attentife, that when he was boden to come to Marcellus, he answered:
that when he had finished the figure, which he was in making, he would
come: at the which answer the messager disdaynynge, slew Archimedes, for
the which Marcellus was excedyngly sorry. Some do suppose, that he first
invented the making of material spheris, and the globe. He also made a dove
of wood, which had in it such equal poyse, that it would hang in the air by
a long space. Also he made an horologe, wherein might be seen, the true course
of the heavens and spheris. He was before the incarnation about.192. years.

Archimimus, the master or chief of the players.

Architas Tarentinus, a noble philosopher of the discipline of Pythagoras, and
captain of the army of the Tarentines inuyncible. He was master of Plato in
geometry, whom he also delivered from Dionisius the tirant of Sicile. He was
before the incarnation of Christ about.370. years.

Architectonice, ces, ide^ quod Architectura.

Architectonicus, a, um, perteynynge to diuysynge of buildynge.

Architector, and Architectus, a diuiser of buildynge, or a master of the
warkes.

Architector, aris, ari, to make craftelye, or to deuyse building.

Architectura, the counnynge of diuysynge of buildynge.

Architriclinus, master of the feast.

Archiuum, the treasory of minumentes and evidences belonging to a king or a
city.

Archon, was the chief dignity in Athenes.

Archiontici, certain heretics, which affyrmed, that the universal states
of things was not made by god, but by princes, and they also denied the
resurrecton of the body.

Arcirna, a little carte, a whele barowe.

Arconicum, a minorall called Arsenyke.

Arctium, Io. Agric.
the great burre.

Arcto, aui, are, to strain often times.

Arctophylax, a certain figure of sterres, following Charles wayne, called
also Boots.

Arctos, a figure of sterres called Charles wayne. also Vrsa mayor.

Arctous, and arcticus, a, um, of the North.

Arctus, a, um, straight.

Arcturus, a sterre, which is at the tail of that, which is called Arctos, or
ursa mayor.

Arcuatim, bent like a bow.

Arcuatus, fascioned like a bow.

Arcubalista, a crossebowe.

Arcula, a little coffer or casket.

Arculus, a roll that women do wear on their heads, to bear water or milk
easelye.

Arcuor, ari, to be made bente like a bow, or to be vaulted.

Arcus, a bow, the vault of a roufe.

Ardea, a bird called an heron. It is also the name of a city in Latio,
being from Rome about.xxii. miles, wherein was the palayce of Turnus, whom
Aeneas vaynquished, and the people there were called Rutuli.

Ardeates, people of the city of Ardea.

Ardelio, a busy man medlyng with many things, and can skyll of nothing.

Ardens, it is, hastye in doing, quycke wytted burning, ardent.

Ardenter, fervently,

Ardeo, arsi, dear, to burn, to love ardentely or excedyngely, to make have,
to be consumed, to desire: also to shine. Tyrioque ardebat murice laena. His
mantell did shine of fine purple of Tire.

Ardere cupiditate, to covet ardently.

Ardere iracu^dia, to be inflamed with anger.

Ardere maxim flagitio, Plautus:
to have done, or be infamed of a myscheuous deed.

Ardeola, an hernsewe. It is also a byrd, whereof there be.iii. kinds: One is
called Pella, which ingendreth with much dyffycultie, and like wise sytteth:
in the time of treading the blood yssueth out of his eyes The other is called
Alba, or in a greek name leuce, which amounts to as much. The.iii. is
called Stellaris or piger.

Ardesco, to be hasty.

Arduenna, a great wod in Gallia belgica, which takes in space.500. miles,
coming from the river of the Rhene through the land of Luke unto the city
of Tournay.

Ardum, old writers used for arduum.

Arduus, high and difficult, hard to come to.

Area, a large place in a city kept ever clean. where merchants do
assemble, as I have seen in diverse cities in Almayne. Also it is every place
marked out to build or to set an house in. Also a floor where corn is
thrasshed. It is more over a quarter of a garden, wherein herbs be sown or set.

Areator, a threshar.

Arefacio, to make dry.

Arelate, a city in France called Orleaunce.

Arena, sand.

Arenaceus, a, um, sandy.

Arenarius, a, um, perteynynge to a fyghtinge place.

Arenarium, a pyt where sand is dygged.

Arenatus, a, um, pergetted with lyme and sand.

Arenosus, sandy.

Arenula, fine sand.

Areo, rui, rere, to be made dry.

Areola, a bed in a garden.

Areopagitae, were judges, which satte in a place by Athenes, and judged
causes of murder, and weyghty things concerning the common weal.

Areopagus, the village of Mars, where the said judges did sit in judgment.

Areopolis, a city in Araby, called also Aloab

Areopolitae, the inhabitants of Areopolis.

Aresco, scere, to wax dry, or to be made dry.

Aretalogus, a bragger or a vau^ter of his own virtues. Sometime a forger of
lies, to make men merry.

Arete, in latin uirtus, in english virtue. It was also the name of the wife
of Alcinous king of Phaeacis, of whom Homer writes in Odyssea.

Arethusa, the companion of Diana. It is also the name of a fountain in
Sicile, and of an other in Metia.

Arethyssa, and Arethusa, a river in the great Armeny.

Aretium, a City in Tuscana, fyfty miles from Peruse.

Aretinus, a, um, of that city.

Arferis, wine or water offered to the infernal gods, or rather dyuelles.

Arganthonius, an hill nyghe to Bithinia, by the city of Prusias, nygh
thereunto is a well, where Hilas the companion of Hercules was taken suddenly
away by the nymphs, when he was at that well to fetch water.

Argatilis, a kind of foul, which bredeth in water banks, making her neste
with lynnen threde in form of a ball, so close that the entering in to it
may not be found.

Argemata, Galen in Isagog.
a sore in the eyes, which being in the black of the eye, is white, in the
white of the eye, is read.

Argemone, Diosco.
an herb, which has leaves like wild poppy, ragged, also a pourple flower,
the top in a cod, longer than the head of popy, and broad above, a round
rote: the juice of it is of the color of saffron, and tarte.

Argentaria, a bank of exchange.

Argentariam facit, he makes or occupies a bank for exchange.

Argentaria cura, Plautus.
care for money.

Argentaria inopia, lack of money.

Argentariae illecebrae, things getting money.

Argentarius commeatus, provision of money.

Argentarius, a banker, with whom men do make their exchange of money.

Argenteus, a, um, of silver.

Argentina, a fair City in Germany, on the west side of the river of Reine,
called Strausburgh. it was also called Argentoracum.

Argentum, silver. sometime it signifies plate.

Argentum uiuum, quick silver.

Argestes, the wind which blows out of the southe weste.

Argeus, a, um, of the city of Argos.

Argia, a country in Peloponeso or Morea.

Argiae plurali, a city in Laconia.

Argiletum, the sepulcher of Argus. It is also a place, where potters claye is
dygged. It is also a street in Rome, where the book sellars dwelled.

Argiletanae, bokesellars dwelling in the said street called Argiletum.

Argilla, potters claye.

Argimissae, Stra. li. 13.
three little yles in Asia, by the yles of Mitele and Lesous.

Argis, at the city of Argos.

Argo, the ship wherein Jason and his company sailed in to Colchos, to win
the the fliese of gold.

Argonautae, were the companions of Jason, which sailed with him unto Colchos,
as, Castor, Pollux, Hercules, Thelamon, Orpheus, Zetus, Calais, and many other
noble men, as well of bloudde, as in prowess. This voyage was before the
incarnation of Christ. 1254. years.

Argos, a country and city in Thessalia, where reigned Inachus. In this
countreye be the famous mountaygnes of Olympus and Ossa. Also Argos was a city
not far from Athenes, an other in Achaia.

Argumentatio, the declaration of an argument

Argumentor, aris, ari, to argue or reason.

Argumentosus, a, um, that which is done with great reason.

Argumentum, is a reason making a proof, whereby one thing is gathered by an
other, and the which confirms that, which is doubtefull. sometime it
signifies a matter, sometime conjecture, sometime a short exposition of that
which follows, othewhyle sentence. Also a sign or token. Sine argumento,
without color.

Argumentu^ picture, the devise of the thing portrayed.

Argumentum scripturae, the matter which is written of.

Arguo, gui, ere, to reprove, to impute to accuse, to show.

Arguere aliquem pecuniae interuersae, to accuse one for stealing of money.
Plautus.


Argus, the son of Aristor, the.v. king of Argiues, after that Osiris went
into Egypt, which made the ship, wherein Jason and other sailed to Colchos,
the poets feigned, that he had an hundrede eyes, signyfyenge thereby his
wisdom and circumspection. Moreover that Juno appointed him to keep Io, whom
she had transformed in to a cow. But Mercurius being sent by Jupiter, with his
sweet armony brought Argus on sleep, and than slew him, and took Io from him,
and brought her in to Egypt. Than Juno took the eyes of Argus, and set them in
the feathers of a pecockes tail, wherefore the pecocke is called Auis Iunonia,
Iunos bird.

Argutatio, reasonynge, debatynge.

Argute, an aduerb, signifieng wittyle, subtyly.

Argutiae, sharp words or shreude.

Argutiosa, a pretty taunte, or quippy.

Argutor, aris, ari, to speak sharpelye, shrewdly or pertly.

Argutulus, somewhat perte, quick in aunswerynge.

Argutum, selender or small.

Argutum, caput, a sharp or piked head like a sugar lofe.

Argutus, a, um, reproved, sometime it signifies shrewde, and he that can in
speaking sharply inserche a man's wit. Also shyrle of voice, sometime lean.

Arguta diuisio, a subtyl division.

Arguti homines, they that speak much in few words.

Arguti oculi, rollyng eyes, or always moving.

Argyranche, the silver syckenesse.

Argyraspidae, men bearing shyldes of silver. These were soldiers of the
great king Alexander, which after his death were retained with sundry
princes, as the lance knights be with us.

Argyrini, a certain people in Epiro.

Argyritis, the spume or some of silver.

Ariadne, a lady, the wife of Theseus, whom he forsook, notwithstanding that
she had saved his life.

Aricia, a city in Italy.

Aricinum noemus, a wood by the said City, where Numa king of Romans feigned
to speak with Aegeria the fayry.

Aricinus lacus, Plautus:
a brook by Aricia.

Ariditas, dryness.

Aridus, dry.

Arida uita, a straight life.

Aridus uictus, Plinius.
hard fare.

Aridus homo, a dry fellow, of whom nothing may be gotten. some do call
him, a pelt, or a pynchebeke.

Aries, etis, a ram. Also a piece of ordyuaunce or ingine, made like a rams
heed, to beat down a wall. It is also oone of the.xii. signs that the sum
passes by. It is also a fish having horns like to a ram, which he
sometime holds with his head out of the water, and if he espy any man
swymmynge, he goes unto him, and pulls him under the water, and deuoureth
him.

Arietinus, of a ram.

Arieto, aui, are, to hit or throw down.

Arimaspi, people in Sithia, which have but one eye, and that is in their
foreheade, which do fight continuallye with griphons or gripes. Herodotus
says, that they have.ii. eyes, but they use to wynk with the one, that they
may have the other more steadfast when they do shote.

Ariminum, an old city in Flaminea, a country of Italy by the river of
Rubicon.

Arimpaei, people under the domynyon of the prince of Moscouites, which live
always in woods, and be gentyl in manners and just, which eat nothing but
bearies and maste. Herodo.


Arinca, Gellius.
called rye.

Arion, Plinius.
a famous harper, whom the mariners would have thrown in to the sea, for to
have his money: but he desyryng them to let him play a song on his harp or
he dyed, afterward lepte into the water, but a dolphin receyuynge him on his
back, brought him to land a live.

Arista, the berde of corn. Sometime it is put for wheat.

Aristathea, the malowe with the great leaf.

Aristarchus, a gra^marien of Alexandria, which taught the son of king
Ptolomeus called Philometor: he was of such judgment, that it was thought,
not to be the verse of Homere, which he did not approve. He dyed by
abstinence, because he would not sustein the pain of the dropsy, when he was of
the age of.72. years. He was before the incarnation of Christ.127. years.

Aristheus, the son of Apollo and Ceres, called of H^siodus Apollo
pastoralis, which was slain with dogs: the gentiles painted him, a young lad
berdlesse, standing between the.ii. tops of the mountayn of Parnasus, out of
the which ran the fountain of Castalius, having far from him the serpent
Pithon, whom he struck through with his arrowe. They did also dedicate unto him
the grype and the raven.

Aristides, was a noble manne of Athenes, in wisdom, justice, and temperaunce
excellent: For where in the governance of the common weal of Athenes, he was
joined with Themistocles, a man of great prowess and richesse, who saying in
the counsel, that he knew a thing, which was expedyente to the common
weal, but it was not necessary, that it should be openly known, and desired
to have one appointed, unto whom he should disclose it. The counsel assigned
to him Aristides, to whom he showed, that the nauye of the Lacedaemonians might
be shortly set on fire, and so should their puissaunce be abated, which
Aristides herynge, he returned unto the counsel, and said, that the advise
of Themistocles was profitable, but it was not honest. The Athenienses herynge
that it was not honest, iuged that it might not be profitable, and would not
let it than to be disclosed, such credence had they in Aristides. Also not
withstanding that the Atheniences had exiled him without any cause but only
because he excelled in Justice, yet at his departing, he prayed to god, that
what so ever they desired, it moughte come to good effect and conclusion. And
when he was called again out of exyle, he never remembered any old
displeasure, in so much that he always honored Themistocles, with whom he
ever contended in the weal publyke. Of his temperaunce this was a great
token, that not withstanding that he had been in the gretest dignity and
offices in the common weal of Athenes: yet dyed he so poor, that he left not
sufficiently to bury him worshypfully. And his daughters were married at the
charge of the city. And to his son Lysimachus was given by the people one
hundred Minae, which amounts of our money to.CC.xxxix. li. xi. s. viii. d. O
how may christen men be ashamed, wha^ they read this story, beholdynge in his
temperaunce Justice and charity, a more resemblance of Christis doctrine, than
is in them, which will do nothing vnhyred, measure justice by their
affections. Of this name were.iiii. other, which deserved not so good a
remembrance. He was before the incarnation. 474. years.

Aristides, a christian philosopher in Athenes, the year of our lord. 132.
made an eloquente defense for Christ's religion, and delivered it to Hadriane
the emperor, wherewith he was so persuaded, that he gave commandment to the
proconsull of Asia, that he should put no christen man to death, except he were
conuicte of some crime notable.

Aristippus, was disciple to Socrates, notwithstanding he did put the chyefe
goodness in volupte or pleasure, wherefore Diogenes called him the royal dog,
because he always followed them that were rich, and taught for money. On a
time he being on the sea, when a storm came, that the ship was in peril,
he was sore aferde. After that the peril was paste, men asked of him why he
feared so much sens he was a philosopher. The peril (said he) in loss of an
ignorant knave, and of a noble philosopher, is not of like estimation. The
folowers of him were called Cirenaici. Saynct Augustine says of him: It is
not requisite to answer Aristippum, who in every part lived so, as between
him and a beast was no diversity. His sect by other disciples of Socrates
and noble philosophers, was utterly exterminate. He had a daughter called
Arete, excellentely learned. He was before Christ. 366. years.

Aristobolus, was son of Hircanus, captain and chief bushop of the Jews. 92.
years before the coming of Christ. This man attempted to translate the
dignity of a bishop unto the dignity of a king, and was the first, which
after the returning from the captivity of Babylon, took on him to wear a
crown. He subdued the people called Iturei, in Siria, and compelled them to be
circumcided: but afterward by the ill counsayl of his brother Antigonus, he
put his mother and younger brethern in prison, and after slew his said brother
Antygonus in famyshynge him, for the which cruelty god so struck him with
vengeance, that hsi bowelles were rent in his belly, and he vometed up all the
blood in his body, and so dyed.

Aristocratia, the form of governance of a weal publyke, where they do
rule, which are of most virtue.

Aristolochia, an herb, whereof be three kinds One is called round, which
has leaves in fascion like iuy, but somewhat rounder, where in is a sharp and
delycate odor, the flower white like a little bonet upon a red knop, the
roots are round and many. An other called long Aristolochia has lengar
leaves, small branches, and a pourple flower, which stynketh: and when it
spryngeth, it is of the facion of a pear: the rote thereof is long, and of the
greatness of a man's fingar, both of them do bear bearyes like to capers,
within of box color, which are bitter and stynkynge. The third is long and
has small branches, full of leaves somewhat round, like to the less syngreene,
and has flowers like unto rewe, the roots long and small with a thick rynde,
and sote in savor.

Aristomenes, a man of Messene, which was called Iustissimus, most just.
This manne when he was dead, was founde^ to have his heart all hearye.

Aristophanes, a poet most eloquent in the tunge of Athenes, although he
was borne at the Rhodes: he wrate.liiii. commedyes, wherein he spared not them,
which than lived. he was in displeasure with Socrates, and therefore he
reprehendeth him in his commedy called the Clouds.

Aristopherum, a dyshe wherein meat is borne to dinner.

Aristoteles, son of Nicomachus the physician, borne in Stagera in Greece,
consumed his youth ryottousely, afterward he was scholar to the noble
Plato.xx. years continually. he excelled all men in sharpnes of wit, and
knowledge in diverse sciences, wherefore king Philipe of Macedoni sent his
son Alexander to him to be taught, saying: that he thanked god, that he had
a son borne in his time. This man began a sect, the folowers whereof were
called Peripatetici, and taught after the death of Plato.xxiii. years He was
banyshed out of Athenes, because it was supposed, that he demid not well of
their gods. It is written, that he dyed by this occasion: As he went by the
sea side, he perceived fysher men sitting and doing of somewhat. And when he
asked what they did they told him a ryddell, which when by long stydye he
could not assoyle, for shame and sorrow he dyed. Of him Quintilian writes in
this wise: what say you by Aristotle, whom I wot not, whether I may judge
more excellent in knowledge of things, or in abundaunce of writing, or in
swetenes of eloquence, or in sharpness of wit, or else in diversity of
works. Not withstanding he was little of personage, crook backed, ill
shapen, and stuttyng. He was. 345. years before Christ's incarnation.

Arithmetica, the Science of numbrynge, of whom it was first founden, it is
uncertain. Albeit Abraham first taught it unto the Egyptians. Long time after
Pythagoras declared it unto the Greeks. Plato wylleth that before all other
things, the numbers be taught unto children, whithout the which nothing
either private or commone can be well ordered. This science is divided into.
viii. parts, that is to say, Numbryng, Addition or putting to, Subtraction
or taking away, Mediation or partynge in the mids, Duplication or doubling,
Multiplication or augmentynge one number by another, Division or diuidynge one
number by an other. Progression, as one, two, three, makes six. More over in
this science Digitus is the single numbers unto ten, as 1. 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8.
9. Articulus is any of the hole numbers, as. 10. 20. 30. 40. and so forth.
Number compounde is of digitus and articulus, as. 12. 23. 34. 46. etc. This
science is of such excellency, that as well divines as philosophers do thereby
declare the most diffuse misteris of their ymagination. And Pythagoras
supposed, that the world, and al things were first created of numbers. And
Aristotle affirms, that the best proof of a natural fool is, that he can
not number truly.

Aritudo, drythe, or dryness.

Arma, orum, harnayes and weapon. also the instruments of al manner of crafts.
also standards and baners. sometime battaylles.

Ad arma uocare, to commander men to be in harneys ready.

Armamenta, tools, instruments, al store for wars or ships, armor,
tacklynge.

Armamentarium, an armory or storehouse for ships or ordinance.

Armarium, where books are laid, or other stuff of householde.

Armati, armed men.

Armator, an armorer.

Armatura, armure.

Armenia, of that name be, ii. regions, the one is called Armenia minor, the
other Armenia mayor. Minor has on the north and weste part Cappadociam, on
the East the noble river of Euphrates and Armeniam maiorem, on the south the
mountayn of Taurus.

Armenia mayor has on the North Colchidem, Iberiam, and Albaniam, on the
weste part Cappadocia, on the east part the sea called Hircanum, on the
southe Mesopotamiam, and the mountaygne Taurum.

Armeni, people of Armenia, which were christened of late years, but now they
are subjects unto the Turks. They in some thing erred from the church of
the Latins and Greeks, they have one great bishop, whom they call Catholicum,
they celebrate much like unto our fascion, but they do not keep holy neither
the nativity of Christ, nor his baptisine, saying that he neded not to be
purged or cleansed of sin. Also they take from all sacraments the virtue to
confer grace. also they eftesones baptize them, which come from the church
of latins to them, saying that we be not of the Catholic faith but they.
Also they say that no man may be christened, except he receive the sacrament
of the aultare. Also that infantes need not to be baptized, affyrmynge that in
them is no oryginall sin. Also that the holy ghost proceeds of the father
and not of the son. Also that the sacrament of the altar may not be
consecrate of bread clean without leven. also in the consecration they put no
water to the wine. Moreover they say, that the receiving of the sacrament
profyteth only to the body, and not to the soul. Also they say, that wha^
Christ descended into hell, he led with him all the souls that were there.
also that matrimony is no sacrament, and that it may be dissolved at the will of
the man or the woman. also that Christ did rise the saterdaye after Parasceue
or good friday. All these heresies and other which I pass over for
briefnesse, are condemned by sundry general counsels and the consent of all
Christendom.

Armeniacum malum, is a fruit accounted among the kind of Peaches: the
Italianes do call them Armelini, the french men sez abricotes. I know not
that there be any of them in England.

Armeniaca malus, the tree which bears that fruit.

Armentarius, the keeper of an armery. sometime Esquiar de Esquiry.

Armentum, store of horse or nete. sometime it signifies cattle.

Armiger, geri, properly an esquire for the body, or he which always
attendynge about a knight, bears his head piece, his spear, and his shylde.

Armillae, rings that gentle women used to wear about their arms, as at
this day some men and women do use, called bracelets.

Armille neut. genesis an instrumente of falshode or craft.

Armillum, a vessel, wherein they used in these sacrifice to put wine.

Armilustrum, was a festyuall day, in the which the Romans did sacrifyce
armed, and trumpettes did blow bluddy soundes. Also the place, wherein such
sacrifice was made.

Armipotens, puissant in arms.

Armo, aui, are, to arm.

Armocea, a wild radyshe.

Armoracia, Io. Agric. Ruellius.
idem.

Armon, a river that comes from the hills of

Arabye, and divides Moabitide, from Amonitide.

Armorica, the ancient name of Brytayne in France.

Armus, the shoulder of a beast, or the pynion of a foul.

Arnentis, Oppianus f. Massarius
a fysshe which Plinye calls Hippuris. Theodorus callyth him Equiselis,
which is like to a horses tail. She spauneth in spring time, and of a very
little fyshe shortly grows to be great, and uses to repair of ships
that be wrecked.

Arnion, uel Arnoglosso, an herb called plan tayne, which is cold and dry
in the second degree, the juice whereof in curyng of fevers certiane, and in
stoppynge of blood, is of sovereign virtue, like as the sede and the water
thereof is against the stone if it be drunk.

Arnobius, a noble rhetorician of Affrike, master to Lactantius, who wrate
against the gentiles, the year of our lord. 305. whose exposition we have
upon the psalter.

Arnus, a swyft river in Italy, which runs by the city of Florence.

Aro, aui, are, to ear or plowe land.

Aroma, atis, pleasant savor, also spice.

Aromaticus, a, um, sweet of savor, odoriferous.

Aromatites, a precious stone, which has the savor of myrre.

Aromatorius, and Aromatopola, he that sellith things having sweet savor.

Aros, an herb called wake Robyn. it is callid of some Serpentaria minor,
because it has leaves like to Dragons, but brother, and having black spots,
it grows about hedges.

Arpinas, a man or woman of Arpinum.

Arpinum, an aunciente town in Italye, famous and noble by the birth of
Plautus, Tulli, and Marius.

Arquatus morbus, the syckenesse called the Iaundise.

Arquites, old writers used for an archer.

Arquus, qui, the raynbowe.

Arrectarij parietes, walls made with timber and parget, to divide chambers.

Arreptitius, he that is obsessed with an ylle spyrite.

Arrha, and arrhabo, ernest money.

Arrideo, Plautus.
risi, dear, to smyle at a thing, sometime to like or content. Aedes mihi
arridebant, The house lyked me well.

Arrexit animos, it advanced their courage.

Arrige aures, Salust.
lay to thine ears, or give an ear to that which is spoken. Terent.


Arrigo, rigi, ere, to water ground.

Arriminensis synodus, was a general counsel kept at Arriminum in Italye,
the year of our lord. 360. the.xxii. year of the reign of the emperor
Constantius, where the greeks assayd by their subtyl wits to condemn the
noble counsel of Nicene, but by the wisdom of the Latins, that dyspution
was defeeryd, and at a general counsel at Rome, the opinions of the Arrians
were condemned.

Arripio, pui, ere, to take.

Arripere conditionem, Sueto. de claris gra^.
to take the offer.

Arripere maledictum, to take heed of an ylle report. Cicero.
Quare cum ista sis authoritate, non debes Marce arripere maledictum ex triuio,
aut ex scurrarum aliquo conuitio, Wherefore in as much as ye are in this
authority, or of this estymation, ye ought not Mark to take heed of an ylle
word spoken abroad, or of the rebuke of a raylyng knave.

Arripere sermone^, Plautus.
to take him at his word.

Arripere se for as, to get him out of the doors.

Arrius, an heeretycke, being a priest in the Church of Alexandria, the year
of our lord, CCC. and twenty, Constantinus magnus being emperor, this Arrius
was a fair personage, and having a very sharp wit, he was had in much
estimation. But falling at the last into pride and ambition of honor, he
purposed and held this heresye. That the son in deity was not equal unto
the father, nor of the same substance, but was a mere creature. Unto this
error he inducyd not only a great part of the world than christened, but
also a great number of noble clerks. for the which was callid the great
counsel of Nicene, where the emperor, was present with. 318. bishops. Where
after sundry and many assemblees and long disputation, it was at the last
determined, that the son was equal and of one substance with the father, as
touching the divinity. Which decree was approved by the^peror, and Arrius
with.vi. bishops, which obstinatly perseuered in their heresy, were banyshed.
Afterward Arrius, who with his foul heresy had corrupted the world finyshed his
life with an horrible death. for as he was disputyng, being provoked to the
stole, in exoneratynge nature, he poured out all his bowelles, and so dyed.

Arrius, an hystorian borne in Nicomedia, among other warkes, wrate in greek
the life of great Alexander. This man for his lerning and virtue optayned
great honors at Rome of the emperors Hadrian and Antonine, in so much that
he was one consul.

Arrogo, aui, are, to give to much, to presume.

Arrogans, arrogant, or presumptuous.

Arroganter, presumptuousely, proudely.

Arrogantia, arrogance, presumption.

Arrogare filium, to make one his heir by adoption.

Arrogare pretium, to inhaunce or set up the price.

Arrugia, a mine of gold, a coney.

Ars, artis, a craft, subtyltie.

Ars parasitica, the feate of flattery.

Arsaces, was the general name of the kings of Parthia.

Arsenothelea; a beast which is both male and female, as some do say that
a hare is, one year male, an other year female.

Artaba, a measure of the Egyptians, containing. lxxii. Roman measures callid
Sextarij.

Artamitae, an herb called alsoo Cecla minus, and Vmbelicus terrae.

Artaxata, a city in Armeny the great, at the river of Arexis.

Artaxerxes, a name, whereby many kings of Persia were callid, of whom one is
called in the Bible, Assuerus, an other which was his son by Hester, called
also Ochus. An other was called Longimanus, because that his arms and hands
were so long, that standing vpryght, he moughte touch his knees with his
hands. He loved peace, and was of much gentylnesse, wherefore he was well
beloved of all his people. He was before the incarnation of Christ. 485.
years, who had to surname Memnon.

Artemis, is a name of Diana.

Artemisia, was the name of a noble princess, who was wife to Mausolus, king
of Caria, and was of a notable chastytie, and in love toward her husband so
excellyd, that when he was dead, she caused his heart to be dried in a vessel
of gold into powder, and by little and little drank it up, saying: That
their two hearts should never depart asunder, and that she thought, that
there might be made no worthy sepulcher for it, but her own body. Not
withstanding she made for his body such a sepulcher, that for the excellent
workemanshyp that was in it, also the beaultie and costlynes, it was taken for
one of the meruayles of the world, and for the notable fame thereof, all
sumptuouse and great sepulchers were afterward called Mausolea. She found
also an herb called Artemisia, mugwort or motherworte in english, of great
virtue in women's diseases.

Artemisius, the month of May among the Macedonians. also an hill in Arcadia.

Artemius, a mountayn of Achaia in Argo.

Artemon, onis, a troukle, whereby ropes do run. It may also be taken for
any instrument that has troucles.

Artemon, was an heretyke, which affirmed, that Christ was pure man, taking
his beginning in our lady. This heresye being ones condemned, was eftsoons
reuyued by Paulus Samosatenus.

Arteria, a synew like to a vayn, wherein the spirit of life does walk, myxte
with blood.

Arthetica passio, called alsoo Morbus articularis, the ioynte syckenesse, is
thus dyuyded into Coxendix, Galen.
called Sciatica, which is in the huckle bone: Plautus
Podagra, the gout of the legs and feet: and Chiragra, the gout of the
fyngers.

Arthuntis, idem.

Arthurus, a king of England, when it was called Britannia, a man of excellent
prowess, who had.xv. great batayles against the Saxons, and vanquished them,
and finally drove the more part of them out of this royaulme. And also
subdewed Scotland and Ireland at that time being well inhabited and in culture.
And after kept a great and most honorable Court of valyant and noble
personages, wherein was such magnificence, that it gave occasion to frenchemen
and Spanyardes to exercise their wits in the aduaunsynge of Arthurs majesty
with incredible fables. which is no more to be meruayled at, than the
semblable inventions and fantasies of the greeks. Al be it this Arthur was a
very noble and famous prince, yet of them, which wrate hystories about his
time, he was unremembered. He floryshed about the year of our lord. 510.

Arthritica, some do suppose it to be that herb and flower, which is called
Prymerose.

Articularius, he that has the gout.

Articulate, articulately, as when one does express every syllable.

Articulatim, from joint to joint.

Articulo, aui, are, to ioyn one joint to an other.

Articulus, a joint. also a moment or parcel of time. also a color of
rhetoryke.

Artifex, a crafts man.

Artificium, the practice of a craft.

Artitus, well instructed insciences.

Arto, aui, are, to strain, to thraste together, to wrynge.

Artocopus, a baker.

Artocrea, may be called a pastye or pie, with flesh or fyshe baken.

Artolaganum, Plautus.
fine cakebreade.

Artomici, people of a country in France, called Arminake.

Artopta, a bakynge pan, wherein they bake tartes, or other things made of
fine paaste, sommetyme a brake, wherewith breadde is wrought in dowe.

Artoptesii, tartes or cakes baken in a pan.

Artoptitius panis, brown bread, or breadde of course wheat.

Artotyritae, people, which did offer unto god bread and cheese.

Artuo, aui, are, to cut asunder.

Artus, members.

Aruales fratres, were supposed to be the foster brethren of Romulus, to whom
he gave the dignity of priestehode, to make sacrifice for growing and
increace of corn, and preservation of the corn fields.

Aruina, talowe.

Aruisium, an hill on the sea cost of the isle called Chium, where grows the
wynes callid Aruisia uina.

Arunca, a town in Italy.

Aruncus, the berde of a got.

Arundinetum, a place where redes do grow.

Arundo, a read or cane.

Aruspex, he that tells of things to come, by lokynge in beasts bowelles.

Aruum, a falowe field.

Ars, arcis, a fortress or castle, specially standing high.

A ANTE S.
AS, assis, a pound weyghte. In the old time in the partition of land, or
other like thing inheritable, they called the hole As, and the parts diuyded,
ounces.

Asa, a word of the language of Siria, and sygnifieth a phisytion, or a healer
of sycknesses. Of that name was the.v. king of Judah, the son of Abia, 3. Reg.
15.
who reigned.xli. years, and was a good king, honored god, and distroyed
ydolles, and was fortunate in battle, so that he is comparyd to king David
in his personage and virtuous qualyties. He slew the king of Aethiopia with an
infynite number of people. Finally he dyed well and gracyousely in a dys^ase of
his feet. He was before the incarnation. 973. years. After whom succeeded his
son Iosaphat.

Asaph, an hebrew word, sygnifyenge gatherynge or fynyshinge. Of this name was
one, which was a singing man in the house of god, to whom king Dauyd
assygned certain titles of his psalms.

Asarotum, pauynge tyle with pyctures enelyd, which may not be swepte with a
besome, but the douste and other thing must beswepte with a wynge, and
gathered up.

Asarum, an herb, whose leaves are like unto yue, but they be less and
tounder, and has a good savor, the flower is purple, like to the flower of
Henbane, but it sauoureth swetely, and grows between the leaves by the root,
the stalk is edged, and somewhat roughe, the roots are small, crooked, and
like to grass, fulle of knottes. It is commonly called Asarabaccha, sum
call it wild Spykenarde.

Asarus, a river in Macedonia, which passes by the city of Heraclea.

Ascalon, an hebrewe word, sygnifieth a poysynge, or a balance, or fire of
infamy. Of that name was a city in the higher Idumea, which was from
Jerusalem. 90. miles, as Ege sippus says. The people of this city were
called Ascalonitae.

Ascaloniae, a kind of onyons called scalyons.

Ascania, one of the yles called Cyclades.

Ascanius, the son of Eneas the Troyan and of Creusa his wife, daughter of
Priamus king of Troy, who coming into Italye with his father, sustained
sundye labors, and finally after his father, reigned over the Latynes, with
his brother in law Syluius Posthumus, and builded the city of Alba longa, he
was also called Iulus, he began to reygne the first year of Sampson, and
reigned. xviii. years.

Ascarides, little round wourmes, which do bread in the long gutte of a man,
but specially of children.

Ascendo, di, dear, to clym, to ascend, to go up.

Ascia, a chyppe axe.

Ascio, aui, to chyp or cut with an axe.

Ascio, is, to know surely.

Ascisco, sciui, scire, to presume, to take upon me a thing.

Ascisco, ascisci, asciscere, to admit, to take to me

Ascitae, Arabians.

Asclepades, the name of a famous physician, also of a philosopher, which
being blind, was demanded in scorn, what his blyndnes did profytte him,
and he answered, that he had the more company by one boy that did lead him.

Asclepas, some men think to be the herb, which is commonly callid ground
yuy.

Asconius Paedianus, the most excellent expositor of the orations of Tulli,
when he was. 73. years old becam blind, and lived afterward.xii. years in great
estimation and honor. He flourished about the time of Nero the emperor.

Ascopera, a bag of lether.

Ascra, a town in Boeotia in Greece, by the mou^tayn callid Helicon, where the
Muses dwelled. In this town was borne Hesiodus the famous poet, and therefore
he is called some time Ascraeus.

Ascribo, psi, bear, to add to, to attribute, to impute.

Ascripti, were they that were appointed to inhabyte towns or cities made by
the Romans called Coloniae.

Ascripti milites, soldiers, whose names are regystred or entered with other.

Ascriptitius, he that is added to the number of other, whose name is registered
or inrollyd.

Ascriptiuus, idem quod ascriptitius, he that is registered with other.

Ascriptor, oris, he that follows the exaumple of an other, or he that writes
many copies of others examples.

Ascriptus, a, um, inrollyd.

Ascy^es, one of the kinds of dropsye, which is caused by lack of good
digestyon, whereby is engendered in all the members a salt and yelowe humor, at
the last falls into the bealy, and is turnid into water, and therein is
meued, as it were in a great vessel, when the body meueth, the belly being
swollen and great.

Asdrubal, was a name of diverse noble men of Carthage, among whom one had
married the sister of Hanniball, and after the death of Amilehar father of
Hanniballe, he ruled the city of Carthage, and sent Hanniball into Spain,
and there exercised him in contynuall labors. At the last in the myddell of
his friends and servants, he was slain by a Morayne slave, whose master he
had slain a little before. Which slave so little feared death, that when
he was put unto most horrible tourmentes, he being in them, showed always a
laughing countenance. Of this name were diverse other, whom I pass over, as
men of no great merit.

Asella, the arm hole.

Asellus, is a fysshe, which the Greeks do call Onon and oniscon, and has
the color dunne like an ass, and has in his head two stones facyoned like
mylstones. In the canycular days he can not be found, as Athenaeus writes.
Oppianus says, that he has his name of slownes. Many do suppose, that it is
the fysshe, which we call an haddocke, other do think that it is the codde
fysshe. Of the diverse kinds of them shall be written in their places.

Asia, is the third part of the world, dyuyded from Europa, by the sea
called Bosphorus Thracius, and the great river of Tanais, and from Africa, by
the famous river of Nilus, and is in quantity supposyd to be as great as
both Europa and Africa.

Asia minor, is a part of the other Asia, which now is called Turkay, and
contains in it these royalmes, Pontus, Bythinia, Phrigia, Caria, Lycia,
Lydia, and Lycaonia.

Asianus, a, um, of Asia.

Asia^icus, a surname given to one of the Scipions, because that he subdued the
less Asia.

Asilus, a greatte fly, which byteth beasts, and is called a horse fly. It
is also a worm that is found in fysshes.

Asinarius, an asseherde.

Asine, a town of Achaia in Greece.

Asinius Pollio, a noble Senator and orator Romayne, whom the Emperor
Octauian specially favored: He was very eloquent, but he was noted of to
much diligence, which took away the grace of his Orations. He was in his
Judgment very exquisyte, and vsyd to reprove other, which were much better
lernyd than him self, as Tullye, Caesar, Saluste, and Liuie. He made the first
commune lybrarye, wherein he set the Image of Varro, and had vyctorye over
the people of Dalmatia. To the honor of him the poet Vergille made one of his
eglogas. He lived to the age of.80. years.

Asinius Gallus, was son to Pollio, a man of great learning, who wrate a book
comparynge his father with Tullye, and also preferrynge him, which book was
afterward answered by Claudius the emperor, he was commanded to be slain by
Tiberius the emperor, for what cause it does not appear.

Asinus, an ass.

Asinus ad liram, an ass at an harp. A proverb applied unto them, which
have no judgment in wisdom or lernyng.

Asinus auriculas mouet, The ass waggeth his ears. A proverb applied to
them which althowghe they lack learning, yet will they babble and make
countenance, as if they knew somewhat.

Asinus inter simias, an ass among apes. A proverb where a good sely body
comes among shewde wytted fellows, and being scornyd of them, does not
perceive it.

Asion, an owl, which has feathers on every side of her head, like unto
ears.

Asiortum, a kind of spyders, with white strakes, of whom if one be stunge,
his knees shall how and wax faint.

Asmod^us, the name of a dyuelle, and sygnyfyeth a dystroyer, or abundance of
sin, or measurynge fire.

Asomatos, vnpalpable, or that can not be felt.

Asopus, a river in Achaia.

Asotia, ryotte.

Asotus, riotous, prodygal, wanton, inco^tynent.

Aspalathus, a thorn growyng in the east parts of the world, the rynde
whereof is somewhat read, and within, the wodde is of a sad purple, and
smells very sweet, and therefore is vsyd in parfumes.

Asparagus, an herb called of common apotecaries Sparagus, in english Sperage.

Aspasia, a woman of Miletum in Greece, of no table lerning in rhetorike, and
taught the eloquent Pericles duke of Athenes, and loved him. Wherefore not
withstanding that she was a captive, he took her to his wife. It is written,
that she was one of the concubines of Cyrus king of Persia, after whose death
Pericles took her, and afterward by her procurement, for displeasure that she
bare to the Peloponesians, he was the cause that the Athenienses made war
against them. Wherein is to be noted, that in a fair woman eloquence is of
such puissaunce, that if she will abuse it unto ylle affections, she may
pervert the wisdom of men, and be occasion of much unhappiness.

Aspecto, aui, are to behold steadfastly.

Aspectus, sight, beholding.

Aspello, aspuli, aspellere, to drive awey (...) one

Asper, Plautus.
unpleasant, as well in sight and hering, as in taste, also hard or grievous.

Asperum uinum, a rough wine.

Asper nummus, money new coined.

Aspersus infamia, stained with dishonor.

Aspergillus, an holy water stycke.

Aspergo, ginis, a springyng of lycour.

Aspergines parietum, sweating of stoone walls.

Aspergo, spersi, gere, to spring or cast water.

Aspergere comitatem seueritate, Cicero.
to myxt famyliaritie and gravity together.

Aspergere aliquid in epistolis, to touch a thing quyckely in a letter.

Aspergere maculis uitam alicuius, to make ill report of a man.

Aspergere aquam, to spring water, A proverb, which signifies to put one out
of fere.

Aspergit hoc mihi molestiae haec epistola, This letter has brought me i^to
this trouble.

Asperitas, sharpenes, rudenes of manners.

Aspernabilis, he that is worthy to be despised, or refused.

Aspernor, aris, ari, to despise, to refuse, to abhor.

Aspero, aui, are, to make sharper or hard.

Aspersus, a, um, sproungen or wette with any lyquour.

Asphaltum, a water in Siria, wheerin noothyng that has life may be drowned.
It is called Mare mortuum, the dead sea: it is supposed, that in that place
stood the cities of Sodoma. it is also a certain lyme myxte with brymstone,
which being ones het, may never be extincte.

Asphodelus, an herb called Da^^adyll.

Aspicio, spexi, spicere, to behold, to see.

Aspidisca, a little tergat or shield.

Aspilates, a stone like to silver.

Aspiratio terrae, vapor of the earth.

Aspiratio stellae, the influence of a sterre.

Aspiro, aui, are, to aspire, to look to come to a thing, to blow, to favor,
to give aid, to give all my study and wit tooptayn a thing, to touch, to goo
to.

Aspis, is a little serpent, which bredeth in Africa, whose styng is so
venomous, that nothing may cure it, except only a stone taken of the sepulcher
of an ancient king, which being washed, the water drunken with wine, the
inhabitauntes do affirm, that it only cures the said stroke. Plinius
says, that the male and female gothe always together, and if one of them be
slain, the other continually follows the sleer, and will never leave him,
until he have stryken him, although he be in a great assembly of people,
except he pass over a river. Not withstanding this name Aspis, is so
general, that it conteyneth diverse other kinds, of the which shall be written
hereafter.

Asplenium, Io. Agric.
an herb called also Scolopendra, has many leaves growyng out of one rote,
like to the wourme, which is called a palmer, that has many feet, and is
somewhat like unto fern, and has neither flowers nor sede, and is called of
the common apothecarie^ Citrac, some call it stone fern.

Asplenos, Ruell.
is an herb growing on stone walls, Diosc.
or among flyntes in the shadow, having leaves with many dyuisyons like to
Polypodium, many growing out of oone root, which nygh to the ground are
tawny colored, above grene, and has neither stalk nor flower, it is alsoo
called Scolopendra.

Asporto, aui, are, to carry away.

Assae, dry stoones.

Assaracus, the son of Trois king of Troyanes.

Assatura, roasted meat.

Ass^cla, a page, and he that follows in all thing the will of an other man.

Assectator, a companyon.

Assector, aris, ari, to keep company.

Assentatio, flattery.

Assentatiuncula, a flattering tale.

Assentio, si, tire, and assentior, to consent, or assent. Also to perceive.
Plautus.
Sed assentio aperiri for as, quae absorbent, quicquid uenit infra pessulos, But
I perceive the doors are opened, which deuouren all that commethe within the
boltes.

Assentor, aris, to flatter in commendyng an other man's acts that be ill.

Assequor, eris, qui, to follow, to get, to obtain, sometime to render as
much to one as he has deserved. Nullam partem uidear tuorum meritorum
assecutus, Cicero.
It may not be found in me, that I have rendered to you any thing after your
merits, or have done so much for you, as ye have deserved.

Assequi nomen, to get renoume.

Asser, eris, a pole.

Asserculi, and assiculi, little bourdes or lathes.

Asseres, bourdes.

Assero, ris, to sow or plant by. also to claym, to affirm or approve, to
manumise or make fre.

Asserere aliquem manu, to set one at liberty, or to manumyse a bondsman.

Asserere in seruitutem, Plautus.
to bring in bondage or seruytude.

Asserere ab iniuria, to defend from wrong or daungier.

Asserere se studijs, to leave all other busynes to apply study.

Assertio, an affiyrmance.

Assertor, oris, he that sets one at liberty, or defends him from bondage.

Assessor, oris, assocyate to a man in office or authority.

Asseruo, to keep diligently, to take heed of one.

Asseuero, as, are, to affirm.

Assidela, a bishops seat or chair, wherein he sytteth when he ministers.

Assideo, I sit with or by an other, or I am assocyate, to be continually at a
thing.

Assido, is, dear, to rest me, to sytte down, to sytte by.

Assidere li^eris, to be always i^ study of letters

Assidue, and assiduo, aduerbes, which do sygnifie continually, Cicero.
often.

Assiduitas, continuance in a thing.

Assidui fideiussores, sufficient sureties.

Assiduus, contynuall, or suffyciente, rich or well at ease.

Assiduus scriptor, an author approved, whose sentence is holden for certain
and true.

Assigno, aui, are, to assygne or appoint.

Assignare famae, to apply him self to get renoume.

Assilio, ui, ire, to leap forth. also assilire, is to leap, as a horse
leapeth a mare.

Assimilis, le, like, or semblable.

Assimiliter, all semblable.

Assimilo, are, to do a thing like to an another man, to imitate or follow one.

Assimulatio, Plautus.
a dyssembled countenance.

Assimulo, are, to fayn to do a thing, and not to do it. also to compare, to
counte^fayte.

Assipondium, a pound weight.

Assis, is, a sawen bourde.

Assisia, one of the n^mis of Pallas or Minerua.

Assisto, stiti, stere, to be here, to defend a man's cause.

Asso, aui, are, to lay bourdes: to ^oste.

Assoleo, ^ere, to be wont or accustomed.

Assolet, it is used.

Assono, are, to sown or make a sown.

Assauoce cantare, to sing without an instrument.

Assuefacio, wont.

Assuefactio, Vano.
a bryngyng of one in custom.

Assuesco,scere, Cato.
to use of a custom.

Assuetudo, wont, or custom.

Assuetus, accustomed.

Assuerus, sygnifyeth prince or head, he was king of Persians, who is alsoo
called Artaxerxes and Memnon.

Assula, a chyppe.

Assulatim, and assulose, in fascion of shyngle or slates. also piece meal, in
chippes.

Assumo, sumpsi, sumere, to take, properly it signifies to take to much on me.

Assumptio, a taking.

Assuo, ui, ere, to sow to, or piece.

Assure, a cite in Judea, builded by king Salomo^

Assurgo, rexi, gere, to rise to an another better than my self, to give place,
to grow upward.

Assus, a, um, tosted or roasted.

Assyria, a regyon in Asia, called now Syria, in english Surry, which
marches on the east upon Inde, on the west on the noble river of Tigris, on
the southe it has the country called Media, on the north it has the hylle
called Caucasus.

Ast, but, also therefore, as well, more over.

Asta, depart not, stand still.

Astacus, a lopsta^ of the sea, which in some things does vary from the
crauayse called Locusta, for his eight hinder legs be greater and brother: he
has two tethe as a crauayse, but the horns, which be above them, be shorter
and smaller, He has also fsoure other horns, like the other two, but they be
shorter and less, over them be his eyes, which are very little, the forhead
over the eyes sharp and rough, the breast brother than of a craueyse: All the
body within having more substance and shorter, his.viii. feet four of them
are forked, and four be close. This I suppose sufficient to know the fyshe,
he that will know more, let him read the comment of Marius, on the.ix. book
of Plinius.

Astaphis, raisons in confection.

Astare, to stand by, or to be present.

Astare aduocatus, to assyst or speak for one.

Astare in genua, to knele.

Astaroth, a name of hebru, which signifies riches or flockis. also maki^g
search, or the mouth of the law. it was the name of an ydol, which the jews
honored. Iud. 2. and likewise Solomon. 4. Re. 25. Also it was the name of a
city in Siria, which was given to the children of Gersom of the kindred of
Manasses. ^. Par. 6. Also of a countray, whereof mention is made Genes. 14.

Aster, a sterre.

Aster atticus, is also called Bubouium, of Plinius Inguinaria, has a stycky
stalk, on the top a flower purple or yelowe, divided l^ke to flowers of
wild camomyll, the leaves being long and rough, compasses the stalk like a
sterre.

Asterias, a kind of hearons, I suppose that it is an Egret.

Astericum, an herb called Pellitory.

Asterie, was daughter of Caeus, sister to Latona.

Asteriscus, a lyttelle mark in writing like a sterre.

Asterte, a goddess of the Sirians, to who^ Solomon, to plese his concubine,
raised an altar.

Asthma, atis, a syckenes, where one may not fetch his wind, but with much
difficulty, with weasynge of the breast: which happens by staytnes of the
pipes stopped with tough flewme, or of sum impostume grown in the pypes.

Asthmaticus, he that draws his wynd short.

Astipulator, he that is of one accord or consent with an other.

Astipulor, to lean to, to favor.

Asto, astiti, to stand by, to be present.

Astomi, people of Indie, having no mouths, which lyuen by air, and smelle
of sweet things.

Astraea, signifies justice.

Astragalizo, to play at dyce or tables.

Astragalus, the play at tables.

Astragalus, callid of common apothecaries Cicer montanum, an herb with an
hard stalk being in the leaf and branches like to Cicer, and has a little
purple flower, and a root like to radyshe, having certain things growyng to
it, hard like to horns wou^d together. It commonly is found in stony places,
where comes abundance of wyndes.

Astrea, was daughter to Jupiter and Themis, who for her equity was called
justice.

Astricte, close.

Astricta frons, a frownyng countenance.

Astringo, to join or bind together, to bind by covenant or promise.

Astringere fidem, to promise.

Astringere se furti, to confess to have done felony.

Astroites, a stone like to a fyshes eye.

Astrolabium, an astrolabe, or instrumente of astronomye.

Astrologia, the speculation and reasonyng concerning the celestial or heavenly
motions.

Astrologus, an astorologyen, he that studyeth the speculation of astronomy.

Astronomia, the part of astronomy that concerns iudicialles and practyse.

Astronomus, an astronomer.

Astrum, a celestial body compacte of many sterres, as a sign.

Astruo, to build, to join one house to an another, to fortify, to affirm.

Astruere dignitati alterius, Plinius in epist.
to augmente an other man's dignity or honor.

Astruitur his, is put for more over, or furthermore.

Astur, uris, a nowne possessiue, and signifies of Asturia, as Astur homo, a
man of Asturia. Astur equus, a spanyshe horse, callid a genet. Asturcones, idem.

Astura, a town and river in Italy.

Asturco, conis, a geldyng or genet of Spain.

Asturia, a countray in Spain between Galitia and Portugal, which sommetyme
was famous for my^es of gold, and aumblynge hackeneys called Asturcones.

Astu, craftily or subtylly.

Astus, craft, or subtlety.

Astute, craftyly.

Astutia, craft.

Astutiae, subtilties.

Astutus, a, um, subtle or craftye.

Astyages, was the last king of Medes, who was father to Mandane, mother to
the noble king Cyrus, who was.597. years before the incarnation, and
reigned.38. years, and at the last was deposed of his royalmes by Cirus. Read
more thereof in the story of Cirus.

Astyanax, actos, was son of Hector, whom after the winnyng of Troy, the
Greeks cruelly did throw down from a tower, so that his brains cleaued on
the walls.

Astypalea, an isle in the sea called Aegeum, It is also a mountain in Creta,
an another by Athenes.

Asuestinum, lynnen threde, which may not be bou^^ed.

Asylum, a saynctuarie.

Asylus, an image, whereunto men were wont to run for succor, as to a
sanctuary.

Asymbolus, he that comes to a bankette, without appointment, an vnboden
gest. also he that gothe scot free, and pays nothing.

A* ANTE T.
AT, a voice, which does sygnifye in the words that do follow, wrath or
indygnation. Sometime it signifies yet, or at the least way. Si non
propinquitatis, at aetatis suae, si non hominis, at humanitatis rationem
haberet: All thowghe he had not consyderacyon of kynredde, yet should he have
had regard to his age: and though he caryd not for the person, yet should he
have had respect unto good humanite. sometime it signifies sed. also at,
sometime it is put for saltem. Si non eodem die, at postridie, If not the same
day, at the least way, the next day following.

At at, tusshe, or fie.

At contra, contrary wise.

Atabulus, a fervent wind, which when it blows in the realm of Naples,
pestylence immedyately insueth.

Ataceni, people in Arabia.

Atalanta, was a maiden, daughter of Iasius a prince in Arcadia, who with
diverse noble men of Greece came into Aetolia to slay the great boore, which
distroyed that countray, which she with her own hands first struck and
wounded. But after he was slain by Meleager, son of the king of Aetolia,
who loved Atalantam, and took her to his wife, and had by her a son called
Parthonopaeus, which was slain at the battaylle of Thebes. An other Atalanta
was daughter of Caeneus, king of the i will called Scyrus, who contended in
runnyng with them which came to wowe her. And when she had vanquyshed many,
and put them to death (for that was the wager, or else to have her, who so
could over rounne her.) At the last a noble young man named Hippomanes, by
this means overcame her. Whiles they were rounnynge, he having three fair
appulles of gold, threw at sundry times the three appuls from him, which
she in taking up was thereby tarried, and by that means Hippomanes ouerranne
her. At the last (as Ouidius writes) as they two medlyd together in the temple
of Cybeles, that goddess having thereat indignation, transformed them both
into lions.

Atauus, a great graund father.

Atechna, things vnkunnyngly handlyd.

Ategia, a bouthe, or place made up with trees and boughs.

Ater, tra, trum, black or dark.

Ater panis, brown bread.

Athacus, a bird with four legs, having the longest behind.

Athalia, was daughter of the cursed queen Iezabel, and mother to king Acab,
king of Jews. This woman being also mischeuous, when that she herd that her
son Ochozias was slain, and Ioram with all his household to be distroyd, she
being inflamed with desire to reign, laying apart all womanly pity,
determined to distroye utterly all the posterity of David, but through the
goodness of god, Ioas the son of Ochozias an infant, was unawares to her
conuayed away by Iosabeth his aunte, and hyd in the house of Ioaides the
bishop, and there kept.vi. years. And after that this cursed woman Athalia had
reigned over Jerusalem.vii. years, Ioas, which was supposed to be slain, was
by Ioaide made king. 4. Reg. 11.
Whereof she being aduertysed, and cryeng to the people to sle Ioas, 2. Par. 22.
she was taken of the men of war, Joseph. 9. cap. 7.
and shamefully drawn to the gate of the city callid Mularia, and there was
slain. She was before the incarnation of Christ.900. years.

Athanasius, was bisshoppe of Alexandria, the year of our lord.348. A man in
holiness of life and great lerning very excellent, who sustained great and many
persecutions of the Arrianes, for when in the counsel holden at Laodicea, he
had confounded the Arrianes with most puissant arguments, he stired almost all
the world against him. Wherefore he fled, and.vi. years continual he aboode hyd
in a dry cestern, where he never saw the son shine. But than was he
discovered by a maiden, and fled eftsoon by the help of god, and wandered
about the world, not withstanding that princis, the people, and their hosts,
did continually persecute him, so that he might not find any place to abide
in. Also bringing against him a common harlot, which affirmed, that he had
accompanied with her. But he always sustayning all things with a wonderful
patience, at the last dyed, the year of our lord.379. Valentinianus and
Valens being emperors, and is accounted in the number of saints.

Athanatos, immortal.

Athenae, arum, the city of Athenes.

Athenaeum, a place at Rome, where all sciences were radde.

Athenodorus, a philosopher, which left with Octauian the emperor this
lesson, when he took his leave of him: Noble prince, wha^ thou art attached with
wrath, neither saynor do any thing until thou have perused the.xxiiii. greek
letters, and remembered the order of the places where they stand, to the
intent that the passion of pre, by withdrawyng the mind to an other thing,
might languishe and vanyshe away.

Atheos, he that does not believe that god is.

Atheromata, littell pousshes in the neck, and under the arms.

Ath^esis, a river in the cou^tray of Venetia, ru^nyng by the cite of Trent,
and through Verona and so passes into the sea callid Adriaticum.

Athleta, a great wrastlar, or a great runner at common games.

Athletheta, the judge in games of wrastlynge or runnynge.

Athletica, the craft of wrastlyng or runnyng.

Athos, a hill in Macedonia of a wonderful heyght,

Athraciars, art magike.

Athrax, a city in Thessalia.

Atinia, a kind of elm tree.

Atlanticae insulae, the yles called now Fortunatae, where fruits and herbs
do grow without labor.

Atlantides, the daughters of Atlas. alsoo certain sterres.

Atlas, antis, was brother of Prometheus, who^ as the Grees do suppose, did
first find out the course of the sterres, by an excellent ymagination. And
therefore the poets feigned, that he sustained the firmamente with his shulders.
It is supposed, that he was about 1599. years, before the incarnation. It is
also the name of a hill in Barbaria, high and small, which perseth the
clouds.

Atlantes, Moors dwelling about that hill.

Atocia, medicines, whereby the time of birth of children is prevented.

Atocius, a certain spyder, which is heary.

Atomus, a thing so small, that it may not be divided or made smaller. also
atomi, be motes of the sun.

Atnepos, potis, the fyfthe of lyneall dyscente from me, or my neuewes neuewe.

Atque, and so, as it were, even as. Locus est atque optabam. The place is even
as I wysshed. also than. ^autu. in ^e^d.
Illi sunt alio ingenio atque tu: They be of an other manner of wit than thou
art. Non Appolinis magis ueru^, ^erent. in ^^dri.
atque hoc respo^sum est: Appollos answer was never trewer than this is.

Atque adeo, ^aut. in ^asina.
and that more is. Esurio hercle, atque adeo nunc haud parum sitio: I am
hungry, and that more is, I am a thyrste not a little.

Atque eccum, but lo were he is.

Atque audin? but herest thou?

Atque uides? do thou not se ^

Aliter atque, other wise than.

Atqui, surely albeit, but yet.

Atraba, in a measure of the greeks, and contains.v. modios romanos, of
english measure, a busshell, a pottell, a pynte, and 4 ounces of measure.

Atrabaticae, black garments.

Atrabilis, melancoly.

Atractilis, an herb having a long ste^^ and roughe, with long leaves
growing by the top, the residue without leaves, the top full of pricks, and a
yelowe flower, women were wont to make spyndels of the stalks thereof.

Atractilis, an herb called of apothecaries Cartamus, in greek Cnicos, of
some men wyld safron. it is hot in the second degree. Paulus Aegineta puts
it in the third degree. the late experiencers do find, that the juice and the
seed purges aduste humors, and increases man's sede.

Atramentarium, an ynke horn.

Atramentum, ynke, blache that showemakers do occupy.

Atratus, a mourner that goes in black.

Atrebates, a country in France called Artoys.

Atreus, was the son of Euristheus king of Mycenae, and found first the
eclips of the son. Moreover for as much as his brother Thyestes had lain with
his wife, he slew his said brothers children, and causynge them to be
roasted, made his brother to eat them. Who knowing it, and asking therefore
vengeance, he had answer made of the god Apollo, that if he did carnally
know his own daughter Pelopia, he should on her get a son, which should
revenge him. So begat he Aegistum, whoo afterward slew his uncle Atreus, and
in like wise Agam^mnon his eldest son, after that he returned from the
battle of Troy. This was before the incarnation of Christ.1258. years.
Reading this tragedye mark well the success of abominable living and
crueltri^.

Atricapilla, a bird with black feathers on the crown of his head.

Atricus, a porter that keeps a gate.

Atri dies, dismal days.

Atriensis, an huisher of the hall.

Atrifer, a rushe that bears a black seed.

Atriolum, a lyttel inner court.

Atriplex, an herb called orache or arage.

Atritas, blacknes.

Atrium, an inner court.

Atrocitas, cruelty, fiersenesse.

Atrociter, cruelly.

Atrophia, an affecte or discrasye, wherein the body can not be nourished with
any thing, but consumes with leanness.

Atrophus, he that has that affecte.

Atropos, one of the fatal Ladies, which is feigned to break the chrede of
life: It is sometime put for necessity of death.

Atrox, ocis, cruel, terrible, or sour in countenance.

Atta, is he that goes so on the soles of his fete that he swepeth the
ground, rather than walks.

Attagen, and Attagena, a bird which is found in Ionia, and is very delycate,
and has feathers of sundry colors, and being at large is always singing or
chatterynge: when he is taken, he makes no noise, nor seems to have any
voice. They are deceived that take him for a woodcocke.

Attalus, a king in the less Asia, of meruaylouse richesse, of whom all
magnifyke and stately things, are called Attalica. Attalica uestis, a garment
of cloche of gold.

Att^men, but yet.

Attamino, aui, are, to foul or defyle.

Attegiae, arum, shepeherdes cotages.

Atte^ae, a city in Campania, not far from Naples, which now is called
Auersa.

Attelanae fabulae, were commedies or enterludes, which only were in iestes
and merye scoffs or bourdynges.

Attendo, di, dear, to take heed, to consider, to intend.

Attente, intentifly, with a fyxed mind.

Attentio, a mind set or fyxed.

Attento, to attempt.

Attentus, he that hereth diligently, attentive. Attentus adrem, careful to
get goods.

Attenuate, sclenderly, subtly, fynely.

Attenuo, to appayre, to make weaker.

Attero, triui, terere to rub against a thing. Atterere famam. Salust.
Post ubi eorum famam atque pudorem attriuerat, maiora alia imperabat: After
that he had made them consume their good name and honesty, he set them in
hand with other greatter attemptates.

Attestari, to call to witness.

Atthis, was daughter of Crancus, who (some do suppose) gave the first name to
the country called Attica.

Attica, a countray in Greece, wherein stood the famous city of Athenes, the
nouryce of all sciences.

Attice, an aduerbe, signifienge in the eloquence of speech of Athenes.

Atucismus, the form of that speech.

Atticisso, to speak like a man of Athenes.

Atticus, a, um, of Athenes.

Attigo, idem quod attingo.

Attiguus, by or nyghe ioynynge to.

Attila, was captain of the people called Hu^ni, and wan Hungary from the
Romans, and gave that name to it, where before it was called Pannonia. This
man called him self the scourge of god, and reigned about the year of our
lord. 400.

Attilius Regulus, was a noble consul of Rome who in the first wars of
Carthage, vainquished often times the Carthaginensis. At the last was taken by
a sleyght, and being bounden was sent unto Rome, to the intent that for him
they moughte exchange with the Romans for a great number of prisoners of
their people. But at his coming Attilius exhorted the Romans, that they
should not make such exchange, considering his age and debilitie. And so he
with a glad will returned to his enemies, knowing that he should be cruelly
put to death, so much he loved his country. wherefore at his coming, the
Carthagynensis caused his eye lyddes to be cut of, that he moughte never
sleep, and him to be put in a holowe tree, being stycked fulle of nails, the
points inward, where he continued until he dyed, whose valiant courage is
notably commended by Tully in his book of offices.

Attineo, ui, ere, to perteyne.

Attinet, it besemeth, it is convenient.

Attingo, tigi, tingere, to touch almost. Attingit me sanguine, Plin^^
he is nygh of my blud Attengere senectam, to come to great age. Attingere
parts naturae, Ver^^
to come to the knowle^ge of natural causes. Geo^^
Attingere studia, to savor of letters.

Attingitur, it is nyghe.

Attollo, to auaunce, to lift up, to bring to, to take away.

Attollere signa, to dysplaye standerdes and banners in the field.

Attollere partum, to nourysshe or bring a child from his birth.

Attondeo, d^re, to clyp or sheare a thing nigh.

Attondere arbores, Pla^^
to shred trees.

Attondere auro, to ryd one of his money, to take all away from him.

Attonite, bashefully.

Attonitus, a, um, amassed or abashed.

Attonsus, a, um, shorn or clypped.

Attrahere ad se aliquem, to make one come to him.

Attrecto, aui, are, to feel.

Attrectare uxorem alterius, to meddel with an other man's wife.

Attribuo, bui, bear, to attribute, to put upon one by blaming or accusynge,
to assign, to commyt.

Attributus, a, um, attributed.

Attributa pecunia, money delivered to be given to an other man.

Attritus, tus, rubbing or wearynge.

Attritus calciamentorum, the wearynge of shoes with much goinge.

Attropatia, part of the countraye of Media.

Attyla of some called Athyla, a valiant prince. which came out of the countray
of Scithia, and after that he had subdued Pannonia, he entered in to Italy,
and destroyed the city called Aquileia, and came toward Rome, whereof
Valentinianus the emperor being a ferde, sent unto him Leo that time being
bishop of Rome, with the consules and certain senators, who submytted them
selfs unto him. And when his host supposed that he would have had them in
contempt, and have continued his iornay to distroy Rome, contrary to their
expectation, he pardoned them, and departed. whereat all men meruailynge, and
demanding of him, why he so did, he answered: that whiles the bishop and
senator spoke unto him, he beheld standing on every hand of him, a man of
arms of excellent personage, every of them holding a naked sword over him,
menacynge to slay him, if he spoke any vnsyttyng word, or did make any farther
attemptate. Wherefore he discharged the Romans with gentle language, and
persuaded his host to hold them content. Afterward he entered into Germany,
and wasted the countreye, and in retourninge toward Hungry, he married a wife.
In the which marriage he so excessisly filled him self with meats and wynes,
that thereby he fell into a great bledyng. He was after the inca^nation of
Christ.401. years. And at the beginning called him self, the scurge of god.

A ANTE V.
AVARE couetously, nighly, nigardly.

Auarus, a, um, coueytouse of money.

Auarus, a nygarde, a sparar, a couetouse man.

Auaricum, Vieron in Berry in the royalme of France. Ptholomeus calls it
Varicum.

Auceps, a fouler or byrder.

Auctio, onis, an increase, or an open sale of pryuate goods.

Auctio hastae, port sale of the gods of me^ attainted for treason or felony:
but more properly of men and goods taken in wars and sold by the chief
captain.

Auctionarius, the salesman.

Auctionor, to sell by port sale.

Auctior, tius, greatter.

Aucto, aui, are, to gain, to win, to augment or multiply.

Auctuarium, uel auctarium, over measure or weyghte, surplusage in number.

Auctus, a, um, increased, advanced.

Auctus, tus, increase.

Auctus filiolo, he is rycher than he was, for he has a son borne.

Auctus damno, he has yet more harm.

Auctus honoribus, advanced to honor.

Auctus praeda, he is made rich with robbynge and pyllynge.

Auctus re fortunisque, he is very rich.

Aucupatorij, lyme twigs.

Aucupium, and Aucupatio, byrdyng or fouling.

Ancupor, to go a byrdynge, or a fowlynge, or hewkyng. Also it signifies to
search by crafty means.

Aucupare sermonem alicuius, to harken or take heed what one says.

Aucupari famam, to get renoume.

Aucupari tempus, to espy the time.

Audatia, hardines, courage, trust.

Audacter, and Audaciter, boldly, aduenturusly.

Audaculus, hardy, spoken in derision, or contempt.

Audax, acis, bold or hardy, or trusting well in him self.

Audens, hardy.

Audentia, hardynesse.

Audeo, si, dear, to dare, to presume.

Audio, diui, dire, to here, to consider, to perceive, to grant that which
is asked, to do the thing that is commanded.

Audin tu? herest thou not?

Audire been, to be well reported of, to have a good name.

Audire male, to be ill reported of, to have an ill name.

Audire Platonem, to be Platos disciple.

Audias pro audire poteris, thou may here.

Audiens dicto, ready to do that he is commanded, at commandment, obedient.

Audienciam facere, to command or make silence, as they do which are cryers
in places of Justice.

Audiri, to be believed.

Auditio, herynge or audience.

Auditorium, a place where men do here lessons or propositions.

Audirus, tus, herynge, one of the five wits.

Aue, be thou glad or joyful, as the vulgar people says, Rest you merry.

Auere te iubet, he greteth you well.

Auelio, here, to carry from one place to an other.

Auellana, a sylberde nut.

Auello, uulsi, uellere, to pluck away by violence.

Auellere se a meretrice, to withdraw him, or go away by force from an harlot.

Auena, otes. sometime it is put for an ote straw or a whete straw, or reed.

Auenaceus, a, um, made of otes.

Auenaria, a kind of grashoppes, which appear not, until the corn be ripe.

Auenarius, being among otes.

Auentinus, a hill at Rome.

Auenuiorum colonia, Auynion, a City in Prouaunce.

Aueo, uere, to couayt.

Auerni, Caesar.
people of a countray in France called Aue^gn.

Auernus, a lake in Campania, which was dedicate unto Pluto king of Hell,
where men supposed, that there was an entry or passage to Hell.

Auerrois, a great philosopher and phisiiyon, ennemy to Auicen, and also to
Christ, and for his great commentes written on Aristotle, he is named
Commentator. He was about the year of our lord.1145.

Auerrunco, aui, are, to turn away, to put away, or scrape of.

Auerruncare deum iram, to pacyfy gods wrath.

Auersor, aris, to abhor, to refuse.

Auersus. strange, unacquainted: sometime backward, or on the back half.
also angry Aduersus, and auersus, forward and backewarde.

Auersa pars, the backesyde of a thing.

Auersa pecunia publica, the common treasure to a particular advantage.

Auersis post crura planus, the feet turned backewarde.

Auerta, these peutrell of an horse.

Auerto, Vergil.
ti, tere, to turn away.

Auertere ab aliquo loco, to let or prohibit one to enter.

Auertere se ab aliquo, to leave him there.

Auertere hosts, to drive away ennemies.

Auertere se a sermon, to turn away from the tale.

Auertere culpa^ in alterum, to lay the blame or fault in an other.

Auertere haereditatem, to put one from his inherytaunce.

Auertere flumen, to turn the river out of his course.

Quod omen dij auertant, god keep us from that luck or chance.

Auertor, teris, ti, to disdain. sometime it sygnifieth to turn away, to
turn fro.

Auerruncus, god which puts away all evil.

Aufero, abstuli, auferre, to take away.

Auferre caput alicui, to stryke of ones head.

Auferre formam, to disfigure.

Auferre nomen alicui, to take from one his good name.

Aufer te hinc, Terent.
get the hense.

Aufer te domum, get the home.

Auferas iurgium, Plautus.
leave thy chyding.

Auferent quindecim dies hi ludi. those plais will let us these.xv. days.

Aufer nugas, leave these tryfelynges, leave your mockes.

Auferre litem, to get by action or process of the law. Plaut. in Rud.
Maiore mulcta mulctat, quam litem auferunt. He makes them to spend more,
than they may win by their suite.

Auferre petitionem, to have the thing that he asks. Plaut. in Cur.
Tuo arbitratu, dum auferam abs te id quod peto: Even as ye will, so that I may
have the thing that I ask or demand.

Auferre pignora, to take a distress or gage.

Auferre tacita, to make one to confess a thing secret. Plaut. in Asinar.
Suspendas potius me, quam tacita haec auferas: Thou may rather hang me,
than make me confess that secret.

Auferre inultum, to goo quyte without punishment. Ergo pretium ob stultitiam
fero, Terent. i^ Andria.
sed inultum id nunquam auferet: I am well rewarded for my folyshnes, but yet
he shall not go quyte.

Auferri sibi, Cic. (...) quest. 3.
to be vexed in mind, or from him self.

Aufugio, gi, ere, to flee hense.

Augeo, xi, gere, to increase.

Augere auxilia, to make a new host after a discomfite.

Augesco, sci, scere, to wax great, or be great, to be grown.

Augifico, for augeo.

Augmento, aui, are, to increase, or make more.

Augur, guris, he that tells by birds voices or by their flying or sitting,
what shall happen

Auguralis, le, perteynynge to diuynation. look Augurium.

Auguratus, the dignity of them, which were Augures, of whom was a college in
Rome, as there be now of pryestes in cathedralle churches.

Augurium, dyuynation or telling before of things which shall happen,
specially by the flight or voices of birds.

Auguro, as, are, to tell by such craft what shall happen.

Auguror, ari, Idem quod Auguro.

Auguror opinione, Cic. pro L. Mu^e*
I suppose in mine opinyon.

Augusta Cesaria, a city in Spain, upon the river of Iberus.

Augusta Emerita, a city in Portugal.

Augusta Taurinorum, Turine.

Augusta Triuerorum, the city of Trier.

Augusta Rauricum, a city in Almayne called Basyle or Basilaea.

Augusta Vindelicorum, a goodly and beautiful city in Germany, called
Ausbourgh.

Augusta Vessonum, Soisson in Champaign.

Augustalis, le, the Emperors palayce or pauyllion.

Augustae, nobly, with a majesty.

Augustinus, the noble and most famous doctor of Christis church, was borne
in Affryca, in a town named Gathensis, whoo was of such an excellent wit,
that in his chyldhode he learned all the.vii. liberal sciences, without an
instructour, and in all parts of philosophy was wonderfully learned, specially
in the doctrine of Plato, whereby he was the rather induced to embrace the
christen faith. Notwithstanding he favored the errors of them, which were
called Manichaei: But by the continual prayer of his good mother, called
Monica, and the persuasion of holy sayncte Ambrose, he at the last was
converted unto the true faith, they both replenyshed with the holy ghost,
did sing to gether the psalm Te deum, answeryghe mutually one to the other.
Afterward in prayer: writing and preaching he so much profyted, that he
was had in great reverence of all men, and wrate mo books than ever did any in
the church of Latins. Finally being of the age of.76. years, when he had been
bishop.40. years, he dyed in the year of our lord.437.

Augustonemetum, Neuers in France.

Augustus, noble or full of majesty. wherefore the emperors of Rome were and
yet be called Augusti.

Augustus, is also the month next after July.

Auia, a grandame.

Auiarium, a thycke wood without way. Also a place where birds be kept and
nouryshed. sometime busshes set for birds to haunt and sit in.

Auiarius, and Auiaria, he and she that has the charge of the keeping of pultry
or wildfoule. It may also be used for a pultar, which sells pultry.

Auicenna, or Abicena, a famous physytion, whom some men do suppose to be of a
cite in Spain called Hispalis or Siuile. some name him prince of Ab^alim, some
do say that he was king of Bithinia. Finally he was excellentlye learned, and
wrate in the Arabike tongue many noble warkes of philosophy natural and
metaphisike. Also he comprehended phisike in.v. volumes, wherein he calls him
self the interpretour of Galene: albeit men exactely learned in the greek
tongue, do write, that he failed in his interpretation, not truly declarynge
Galens sentence in many places. Notwithstanding sense his time, until within
these.xi. years or lyttel more, men partly for lack of understanding the
greek tunge, partly because the warkes of Galene were ill translated into
latin, also not susteinynge the flowynge copye of Galene, and thynking this
man more compendious in writing they have studied his warkes rather thanne
Galenes. whereby the cure of sickness has be^ found very uncertain. Not
withstandyng there is in his warkes much notable knowledge, not convenient to be
omytted of them, which would aspire to the perfection of phisike. He was
about the year of our lord.1151. and as some men do suppose, was poisoned by
Auer^ois, whom not withstanding he slew before that he dyed.

Auicula, a little bird.

Auide, affectuously, couetously, ardently, with great desire.

Auiditas, desire of a thing, couetise, ardente affection.

Auidus, a, um, couetise, desyrou^.

Auidus cibi, Terent.
hungry.

Auidis moribus, of an exceeding coua^tous appetite.

Auilla, a lamb lately y^aned.

Auis, a bird.

Auirus, a, um, that which is left by ancestars. Auitus ager, old inheritance.

Auius, a, um, Plautus.
whereby there is no passage or way. Vergil.


Auia uirgulta, Salust.
busshes so thycke that no man may pass.

Auius, he that goes out of the way.

Aula, a haule. sometime the palaice or court of a prince. It was also of old
writers used for olla, a pot.

Aulae, shaumles or waytes.

Aulea, tapesrye, hangynges of noble men's houses.

Aulerci, Caesar.
people of a city of Normandy called Roane.

Aulercij, people of Orliance in France.

Auletes, a pypar.

Auletris, tridos, a woman pypar.

Auleticus, he that plays best on a shalme or wait.

Auli, a kind of shel fyshe like unto muskelles.

Aulicotia, boiled meat.

Aulicus, Sueton. in Nerone
a courtiar.

Aulicus, a, um, of the court, as Aulicus apparatus, courtly apparayle, but
most properly of princes.

Aulis, idis, a little country or shyre in Boeotia in Greece. It was also a
great City and haven, where the princes of Greece assembled and conspired
together the destruction of Troy.

Auloedus, a mynstrell.

Aulon, the name of a mountain and City in Calabria, where grows excellent
good wynes. Also of two other Cities, the one in Macedonia, the other in
Cilicia.

Aulula, a little pot, whereof comes Aulularia, a commedy of Plautus, wherein
is declared the covetous mind of on, which hyd his money in a pot, thynkyng
that no man knew it but him self, and yet was he deceived of it.

Auocamentum, passetyme, recreation, that withdraws the mind from heaviness or
melancholy.

Auocatio, look Auoco.

Auoco, aui, are, to call away^.

Auocare animum, to withdraw the mind from a thing.

Auolo, aui, are, to fly away.

Aura, Sometime betokens a soft wind. sometime bryghtnes, sometime favor of
the people.

Aurea aetherea uesci, to live.

Auras uitales carpere, to live.

Auram captare, to have good hope.

Aurae popularis homo, a man that seeks favor of the people.

Auramentum, gyltynge.

Auraria, a gold mine.

Aurarn, gylters. sometime it signifies mainteynours.

Auratus, a, um, gylte.

Aurata, a fyshe of the sea, which I suppose to be a gylte head, for he has
in his forehead a thing congelat, which in the water shyneth like gold, and
also has a set of tethe like check tethe, wherewith he has been hard of
fyshers in the night to crushe cockelles, and such other little shell
fyshes, whereon he feeds.

Aureae, the hedstall of a horse.

Aureus, a piece of gold in money.

Aureus, a, um, of gold.

Aurichalcum, latten metal.

Auricomus, he that has hear as bryghte as gold.

Auricula, the ear lap.

Auricularius, a secretary or pryuy counselor.

Auricularius, a, um, perteyninge to the ears.

Auricularis confessio, confession made secretly, as priestis do here it.

Auricularis, re, Idem.

Auris, an ear.

Aurem uellere, to put in remenbraunce.

Aurem in utramuis dormire, to sleep surely to take no though or care for any
thing.

Aures sitientes, ears desirous to here.

Aures arrigere, Terent. in Andria.
to lift up the ears, to here attentively.

Aures calent illius criminibus, Cicero in Salust.
mine ears glowe or bourne to here of his mischeuouse acts.

Aures hebetes habet, Cic. pro G. Planco
he is dull in herynge, or he lysteth not to here.

Auricula infima mollior, a soft man, with whom a man may do what he lysteth.

Auribus accipere, Plaut. in Trinum.
to have herd.

Auribus capere spolia, to harken, and bear away our secresies, Plaut. in
Milit.
or secret counsel.

Auribus dare, to flatter, to speak that which shall content a man's ear.
Treboni.


Auribus aequissimis alicuius uti, Cicero.
to be favorably hard of one. Volsi.


Auribus prouehi, Apuleius
to be carried by the ears. It is properly used, where we will declare, that
being in journey with one, we delight so much in his communication, that we feel
no labor or pain by going or riding. So may we say Auribus prouehimur, in
hering of him, our peynes are relieved, or in hering him talk, our journey
seems short, or is abbreuiate.

Auribus lupum tenere, to hold the wulfe by the eats: which is a proverb,
and does signify to be in two sundry daungiers, and know not what is best to
be done.

Auriferum, that bears gold.

Aurifex, ficis, a goldsmyth.

Aurificina, a goldsmithes shop.

Aurifur, a thief that steals gold.

Auriga, a cartar, or a dryuer of a carte.

Aurigo, a syckenesse called the yelowe iau^dise.

Aurigor, aris, to drive a carte, or some thing like. Also to govern.

Aurilegus, he that has stolen gold.

Auripigmentum,

Auriscalpium, an ear pyker.

Auritus, great eared, or he that harkeneth dilygentely.

Auro, aui, are, to gylt.

Aurora, the morynge or son rysynge.

Aurum, gold.

Aurum obrizum, fined gold.

Aurum coronarium, was gold gathered of the people, to make crowns, to send
to emperors, after their victories.

Aurum captare, to hope.

Aurum Tolosanum habere, Eras^
a proverb, which signifies to peryshe myserably: which proverb had this
beginning: when Quintus Cepio took by assault the City of Tolosa in Italy,
there was found in the temples there, great plenty of gold, which being taken
away, all they which had thereof any part, dyed afterward myserablye. whereof
happened this proverb, that when any man fynished his life in myserye, men
would say, that he had gold of Tolosa.

Ausculto, aui, are, to here diligentely, or give good care. also to obey.

Auscultabitur, Pla^ i^ Merc^
he will do as ye bid him.

Auscultare alicui, to obey one, or be at his commandment.

Auscultare inter sese, to whyster one in an others ear.

Ausim, sis, sit, is put for audeam, as, at.

Ausitis, the countreye called Hus, where Job dwelled.

Ausonium, Italy. Ausones, were the auneyente kings of Italy.

Auspex, spicis, idem quod augur. Also it sygnifieth the person that makes the
marriage on the man's part. also the chief captain in wars.

Auspicalis, a little fyshe called also Remora, which cleauynge fast to the
kele of a ship, holds it still against the puissaunce as well of wyndes as of
ores. This fyshe is also called Echineis, read Plinium.li. 32.

Auspicato, happyly, with good luck.

Auspicatus, a, um, honorably enterprysed.

Auspicium, the sign or token showed by birds of things that shall follow.
Also it betokens fortune, conduct, or disposition of a captain. also it is
a token or signification of things to come. Sometime it signifies authority.
Vergil.
Communem ergo hunc populum, paribusque regamus Auspicijs. Therefore let us
govern this people mixed now together, with equal or like authority.

Auspicia optima, tokens of good luck.

Auspicia malo, with ill luck, or in an ill time. Plaut. in Aulul.
Nae ego aedepol uenihuc auspicio malo: I came hither in an ill time, or, an
unhappy or unlucky fortune brought me hither.

Auspicium liquidum, Plaut. in Persa.
a manyfeste sign or token.

Auspico, aui, are, to seek for a thing by divination.

Auspicor, aris, ari, to take likelihood. also to begin or enter into a
business.

Auster, stri, the southe wind.

Austeritas, sharpnes, cruelty.

Austerus, sour or sharp. also sore or without pity.

Austerus color, a sad color.

Australis, le, southern, or of southe part.

Austria, is a great countray on the vttermoste cast part of Germany, and was
sometime called Pannonia superior. It boundethe on the east upon the royalme
of Hungarye, on the west upon the countraye called Noricum and Taurisium in
duche, on the south upon Italy, on the north it is enclosed with the great river
of Danubius or Hister, in duch Donow In it is the noble city of Vienna, set
upon the said river: there is also a famous vnyuersitie, where specially is
taught the mathe maticall sciences most exactly and perfectly.

Austrinus, a, um, from the southe part.

Austro, aui, are, to make moist.

Austrum, the spoke of a whele.

Aut, Cicero in Bru.
or, either.

Aut certe, or at the least. Quo enim uincebamur a uicta Graecia, id aut illi
ereptu^ est, aut certe nobis communicatum: That one thing, wherein we gave
place to Greece, which is vainquished by us, either it is taken clean away
from them, or at the least we be therein equal unto them.

Autem, a conjunction discretiue, which is never put in the first place, but
in the second. It signifies but. Terent.
Ah quid faciam? quid meaautem? quid faciet mihi? Oh what shall I do? but what
have I herewith to do? what will he do to me? It signifies etiam. Abite, tu
domum, tu autem domum. Go your way, get the home, and also goo thou thy way
home. Porro autem, more over Tum autem, afterward. Autem is sometime used in
the repetition of a question, as, Non fecissent? fecissent autem: would they
not have done it? yes in says would they have done it. It sometime signifies
nothing, but fylleth up the number in the sentence.

Autenticus, a, um, of authority.

Author, Tit. Liui.
the first inue^tour or maker of a thing also a reporter of news. Paul. iure
consultus
also a ruler or tutor also he that does sell or deliver a thing on
warrantise. Cicero in Ver.
also he whom a man follows in doing of any thing.

Author tibi non sum te profugere, Plaut. in Cur.
I will not counsel the to run thy way.

Author id tibi sum, I will thus advise the.

Authore te, by thy counsel.

Authorem dabit rem, the deed shall prove.

Authors classici, authors received, and of all men allowed.

Authoramentum, an indenture or obligation, whereby a man is bounden to do
service. also ernest money, wages, or hyre.

Authoratus, he that is bound to serve specially in wars.

Authoratus, a, um, bounden by couenaunte.

Authoritas, Terent. in prol. An.
authority, credence, puyssaunce, judgment, the inioyeng of possession.

Authoritatem defungi, Plaut. in Paenul.
to deny to have don any thing, or to have been the cause that it was done.

Authoritatem defugere, Terent. in Eunu.
to refuse to do that he is commanded.

Authoritatem interponere, to command a thing to be done.

Authoritatis iure, by right of prescription.

Vsus and authoritas, properly in a thing by prescription.

Authoro, are, to bind one by covenant to do service.

Autocthones, people which began in the country that they do inhabit,
which name was given to them of Athenes.

Autodidactus, he that lerneth without a master.

Autographum, his own hand writing.

Autolycus, a master thief.

Automata, things without life, which seem to move by them selfs, as it may
appear in old horologes and images, which by vices do move. It is also taken
generally for all things which happen without any notable cause.

Autopyron, brown bread.

Autumnalis, le, belonging to Autumn:

Autumnus, the time of the year between summer and winter, which begins
the.vi. day of Auguste, and ends the.vi. day of Nouembre.

Autumo, to suppose, to affirm.

Auulsio, a pluckynge of, or pulling away.

Auunculus, the uncle of the mothers side.

Auus, the grandefather.

Auxiliaris, re, wherein is aid or succor.

Auxiliares copiae, succors from a stranger.

Auxiliarius, he that succureth, or comes in aid of an other.

Auxilior, aris, ari, to aid or help.

Auxilium, aid or help, succor.

Auxilio esse, to help.

Auxumae, the young fyshe which comes of the spawn of Tunyes.

A ANTE X.
AXAMENTA, verses made by the pryestes of Mars, called Salij, in quick
tauntynge of all men.

Axare, old writers used for nominare, to name or ask.

Axes, bourdes sawen.

Axilla, the arm hole.

Axioma, a sentence spoken and proved: as If Plato walkethe, Plato mouche. If
it be day, the sun is above the earth. It is put by Tully for that which
sophisters do call a proposition, which is a sentence true or false.

Axis, Iuuenal.
an extree of a carte, sometime the hole carte. sometime it is shyngle, wherewith
houses are covered in the stead of tyle.

Axis mu^di, is a line ymagyned to go straight from the north to the southe,
diuidynge the world as it were in two parts: at the ends are supposed to be
two points in heaven, which are called the North pole and the South pole.

Axona, Caesar.
a country in France called Desne.

Axungia, swynes grease, or barows grease being old.

A ANTE Z.
AZAN, an Hill in Arcadia, where Cibele, called the mother of the gods was
honored.

Azanium, was a well, the water whereof being drunk, caused men to hate the
savor and taste of wine.

Azotus, a city in Siria.

Azymus panis, unleavened bread.

B ante A.
BAAL, IN THE tongue of Siria, signyfyeth Lord, and is attribut to Jupiter.
After some interpretation it signifies having dominion, subjection, or
possession.

Babae, an interiection of wondering.

Babel, signifies confusion or myxture. It was the name of a toure builded by
Nemroth, be fore the incarnation of Christ. 2174. years. At the building
whereof was the first dyuysion of tunges: this was done in the land of Sennaar,
in the countray of Caldea.

Babylon, a great city in Caldey, and sygnifyeth confusion or translation:
where was a tower edifyed by Nemroth, which was in heyght five miles, Philo.
and a hundred threscore and ten paces. Ioseph^*
Afterward being enlarged by Semiramis, Diodo.
the wife of Ninus king of Assiria, it was so great, that it contained in
compass three score miles, and the walls were in heyght. 300. feet, and in
thyckenes or breadth. 75. fete, and had a hundred gates of brass, and there ran
through the myddell thereof the noble and most famous river Euphrates, which is
one of the ryuers, whereof the spring or head is in Paradyse.

Babylonia, the countray where the city of Babylon stood.

Babylonicus, a, um, and Babylonius, a, um, of Babylon.

Babylonica, are clothes wouen with sondrye colors.

Bacca, a bery, as a baye bery, an hawe berye, an eglantine bery.

Baccae, margarites, or perles.

Baccalia, a kind of bay trees or laurel, but it has larger leaves, and
great plenty of beryes. It is also called Augusta.

Baccar, aris, and Baccharis, is an herb having a leaf in facion and
greatness between violet leaves, and the herb which is called molein or long
worte, the stalk square and somewhat roughe, which is in heyght a foot and a
half, having a flower like purple myxte with white, the root black, but
that it sauoureth like unto Cinamome: some do call it Asdrabacca, some our
ladies gloves. it is also a wine pot.

Baccaricum, a sweet oyntmente, made of the rote of Asdrabacca.

Baccatus, a, um, garnyshed with perle.

Bacchanal, lis, the place where the solemnytie of Bacchus was kept.

Bacchanalia, feasts of the paynyms, which they did celebrate with all
abominations of lecherye.

Bacchatim, Coelius.
like a mad man.

Bacchius, a, um, of Bacchus.

Bacchor, aris, ari, to celebrate the feast of Bacchus, to do a thing like a
mad manne, or vexed with spirits, to be wood.

Bacchus, chi, called alsoo Liber and Dionysius, was the son of Jupiter by
Semeles daughter of Cadmus. The poets feigned, that after that Jupiter had
gotten Semeles with child, she desired him to company with her, like as he did
with Juno his wife in his divine majesty, wherefore he bringing with him his
thunder and lyghtning came to her: but she not able to sustain his presence,
fell in travail, and being delivered long before her natural time, than
dyed. Iupyter took the child, and delivered him to Mercurius, who by his
commandment carried it unto the cave of Nisa, which was between Pheniciam and
Nilum, where it was nouryshed and brought up by the Nymphs. Like foolyshely
other imagyned, that Jupiter made a hole in his thygh, and did put in the
child, where it remained until the full time of his birth was come. What so
ever his beginning was, this man among the Greeks, was the first that did set
vines, and made wine. also he first yoked oxen in the plough, and gatheryng to
him a great number of men and women, went a great part of the world,
distroyinge tyrants and monsters, and conquered the country of India: but his
people delytynge in wine, and drinking superfluousely of it, fell to
fighting among them selves. Wherefore he provided, that when they drank, they
should have in their hands nothing but canes, or other light sticks. He that
will knowmore of Bacchus, let him read. th.v. book of Diodorus Siculus, where he
shall find of him a fable more pleasant than true.

Baccifer, a tree bearing bearyes.

Baccula, a little bearye.

Bacenis sylua, a wodde in France called forest Neigre.

Bacillum, a little staff.

Bacrio, onis, a vessel of an old facion.

Baculus, a staff.

Bactra, a country in the furthest part of Persia, the people whereof are
called Bactri and Bactriani, in whom is such inhumanytie, that when their
parents be very sick or old, they throw them unto fyerce dogs, which do
rent them in pieces, and devour them.

Bactriani, people of that country.

Bactrianum, a country wherein were a thousand cities.

Badius color, bay color.

Badizare, Plaut. in Asin.
to go.

Baetica, is a countraye in Spain, which takes his name of a river called
Baetis, which does run through it, and was also called Turdetania, and is
the southe part of Spayn, where now be the cities of Cybile and Corduba, and
the royalme of Granado, and extends to the pyllers of Hercules.

Baeticatus, he that wears a black or brown garment.

Baeticus, a, um, black or brown.

Baetis, a river in Spain by Grando called now G^adalqueni^.

Baeuis, a river in Portugal.

Baganum, the city of Tourney.

Bagous, in the Persian tunge signifies a geldynge, or a man geldyd.

Bagrada, a river in Affrike by the city called Vrica, where Attilius Regulus
and the host of the Romans slew a serpent, which was in length. 120. fete.

Bahal, the ydoll of Tire.

Baiae, arum, a town in Campania, on the sea side, between Puteolos, and
Misenum, for the temperatenes of air and fayrenes of building, much haunted
of the aunicent Romans, where also ben hot waters natural, which are both
pleasant and wholesome, and therefore it has been supposed, that all other hot
bathes natural, were called Baiae.

Baiulo, aui, are, to bear.

Baiulus, a porter or caryer of burdeyns.

Balaam, signifies the age of the people, the devouring or destruction of
them. It was the name of a southsayer, Nu. 22. and 23.
who by Balac the king of Moabites, being desired to curse the Israelites, by
the way was let by an aungelle, whom the ass, whereon he rode, did behold,
and the ass spoke, and asked why he did beat him: also if ever he did so
before. And than he him self perceived the angel, who had him that he should
go to Balat, and that he should nothing speak but that he commanded him. And
so finally he blessed the Israelites, contrary to the expectation of Balac.

Balaena, a great fish of the sea which has an hole in his heed, whereby he
takith air, and spouteth out great abundance of water. Some do suppose, that
it is a thirlepoole, she has pappes like a beast. Plinius writes in hi.18
book, that there has been sound of them, which have been in length.240. fete.

Balanites, a stone, which is a light grene, and has a veyn in the middel
like a flame of fire.

Balanitis, a kind of round cheste^s, or chest nuttis

Balanus, a kind of acornes: it is alsoo a suppository to help them that be
costife. also a sweet ointment made of Myrabolanes.

Balatus, bleatynge of sheep.

Balaustium, the flowers of wild pomegranades.

Balbucinor, aris, to maffle in the mouth.

Balbus, he that can not prouounce well his words, when he speaks.

Balburio, iui, ire, to stammer or stutte.

Baleares insulae, two yles by Spain, in the sea called Mare mediterraneum.
The one is now called Maiorca, the other Minorca.

Balineum, a bayne or bathe.

Balius, a, um, bay color.

Balius, a horse of bay color.

Ballista, a crosbowe, or a brake. It may be vsyd for a gunne.

Ballistarium, the place where a great brake or slynge is laid.

Balito, are, to bleate often.

Balnea plural. a commune bayne.

Balnearia, all things belongyng to a bayn.

Balnearius, of a bayne.

Balneatorius, idem.

Balneator, the keeper of a bayne, or he that serves in a bayne.

Balneolum, a little bayne or bathe.

Balneum, a private bayne.

Balo, aui, are, to bleate like a sheep.

Balsamum, baulme.

Balsaminus, a, um, of baulme.

Baltheus, and Baltheu^, a belt, a sword girdell.

Bambalio, onis, he that stammereth or stutteth for fear.

Bambatium, cotton.

Bambia, a kind of olyue tree.

Banausus, Coelius.
an artificer, which works by fire.

Banchus, an haddacke.

Baphia, a dyehouse.

Baphicus, a, um, pertaining to dyenge.

Baptes, a stone grene of the color of a frogge

Baptae, Angel.
were certain comedies, wherein were reproved thingis dishonest and abominable

Baptismus, Politian.
and baptismum, Miscell. cap. 10.
and Baptisma, atis, baptism.

Baptisterium, a bathe or vessel to wash in the body, a dyenge vate, a font.

Baptizo, aui, are, to baptize, to deep.

Barathrum, an unmeasurable depenes.

Baratro, an vnthrist, that in lechery and gluttony deuoureth his substance.

Barba, a bearde.

Barba tenus, in or touching the bearde.

Barba Iouis, an herb called Syngrene, and grows on tyles.

Barba saenis, is an herb which grows among stones, the leaves whereof be
like unto long hears. It is also called Barba petrae, it has a yelowe
flower, and the root thereof is bitter.

Barbare, barbarouselye, rudelye, without eloquence.

Barbari, in the old time were all people, except Greeks, properly it be
they, which do speak grossly, without observing of congruitie, or pronounce
not perfectely, specially greek or latyne. Also they that abhorte all
clegancy. Moreover it sygnifieth them, which he without letters, fires or
cruel of manners or countenance.

Barbaria, the country where dwells people rude or beastely.

Barbaricarii, weauere of clothe of baudkyn.

Barbaricus, barbarous.

Barbaries, rudenes, lack of civility.

Barbarismus, the corrupt form of speaking or pronouncynge.

Barbatulus, he that has a young berde.

Barbatus, a, um, bearded.

Barbesola, a town in Spain called Barbesull.

Barbitium, the bearde.

Barbitos, an instrument of musyke, which I suppose is that, that men call
doulsymers, some think it to be a double harp, called a root.

Barbula, a little bearde.

Barbus, and barbo, a fysshe called a barbyll.

Barce, a city in Lybia, also an other city callid Ptolomais.

Bardana, the herb called the great burte.

Bardesanes, was an excellent astronomer.

Bardi, were certain wytches or prophets in Gallia.

Bardiacus, a certain garment.

Bardocucullum, a thrummed hatte, or a shepeherdes cloak.

Bardus, a fool. Sometime a mynstrell that syngeth iestes or fables.

Bariona, Iohnonson, or the son of John^, as Barptholomeus, Ptholomeus son.
Where by it seems, that Bar in the tongue of Siria or hebrewe sygnified son.

Baris, idos, uel baridis, a boat in Egypt, wherein they carried dead bodies to
buryenge.

Barnacida, a garment that children did wear.

Barrire, to bray like an olyphant.

Barritus, the brayenge of an olyphant.

Barrus, an olyphant. It also signifies a tothe. Martial.
Quid tibi uis mulier, nigris dignissima barris? What would thou have woman,
that art worthy black tethe?

Barsinon, a town in Spain called Barselona.

Basan, a countreye beyond the river of Iordane in Judea, which was dyuided
to two of the Tribes, which may be interpreted most fertyle and fat.

Bascanda, a certain vesselle, Martial.
which camme out of England, when it was called Brytayne.

Bascania, Coelius.
lyte tryfles, which smythes were wont to have hanging before their shop
windows to exclude envy.

Bascauda, a certain kind of vessel.

Basia, honest kysses, sweet kysses.

Basiatio, a kissing.

Basiator, a kysser.

Basium, a kiss.

Basilaea, a city in Germany.

Basilia, an isle in the north occean sea.

Basilica, a place where people do assemble for suites in the law, and civil
iugementes be exercysed, and counsayles holden. Also it may be taken for a
hall, or other large place, where suitors do attend, or men do wait on
rulers, or great feasts be kept. It also signifies a cathedral church.

Basilica nux, a wall nutte.

Basilicanus, ^laut. in ^ersa.
he that keeps the place called Basilica.

Basilice, Plaut. in Epid.
royally.

Basilice agere, to do a thing royally.

Basilicon, Plaut. in ^^urcu.
a kings robe.

Basilicus, a certain chance at dyee.

Basilicus, a, um, Plaut. in Trinum.
royal.

Basilica facinora, acts or gestes of kings.

Basilicae edictiones, Plaut. in Capt.
the kings ordynances or commandments.

Basilides, was the name of an heretyke, which affirmed, that Christ was not
crucified, but Simon Cyreneus, who (as the evangelists do write) was
constrained to bear the cross when our savior waxed faynte by effusion of
blood by his scourgynge. This man said also, that it was none offense to deny
Christ in the time of persecution. He also denied the last resurrection. He
also affyrmed, that virginity was of no greatter merit than marriage, but
equal with it. He was soon after the time of the apostles, about the year of
our lord. 110.

Basilidiani, the folowers of Basilides.

Basiliscus, called also Regulus, in english a cocatrice, which is a serpent
in the deserts of Africa, with a white circle about his head, having a sharp
head, red eyes, and is somewhat black of color, and is so venomous, that
he sleeth men and beasts with his breath, and with the sight of his eyes.

Basilius, a proper name of a man, of the which one was bishop of Cesaria, a
man in his time of incomparable virtue and learning. he was borne in the
country called Cappadotia, of a noble house, and as Gregorius Nazianzenus
wrytethe, his parents were christians and catholycke, his fathers name was
Basilius magnus, by the which name he was also called, he was taught of his
father, as well grammar as other lernynges called Quadriuales. After he went
to Cesaria, and from thense to Constantinople, where he learned rhetorike and
logyke more perfectly, and also philosophy. from thens he came to Athenes,
where diverse great lernyd men disputed with him, and finally were by him
vanquished. but whiles he exactly studied in philosophy, Gregory called
Nazianzens, being than hollye dedycate to the study of Scripture, and
serving God, loving Basile entierly, came in to the school, where he radde
in a chair, and taking him by the hand, brought him to a monasterye, where
he layenge aparte all books of philosophy, only intended to the redynge of
holy scripture. And at the last the spirit of god leadyng them, they divided
them selfs, Basyl going about the country callid Pontus, taught the people
the true faith. After he was bishop of Cesaria, and than was exiled by Valens
the emperor, which favored the Arrian heresy. he was of such a reverent
gravity with humblenes, that the people loved him, the emperor and men in
authority fearyd him, in so much as when he was eftsoons revoked from exile,
when other of the true faith were put out of the countray, Basile only for
fear was reserved. He was about the year of our lord. 367.

Basis, the foot of a pyller, or that which sustayneth any thing. Also it
signifies the foundation or ground of a matter.

Bassaris, idis, a priest of Bacchus.

Basterna, a certain sort of charyottes.

Basternae, people on the northesyde of Thracia about the river of Isther of
Danubius.

Bat, a word spoken reprochefullye or scornefully, as russhe, or tut. Sometime
it is vsyd for a word of silence, as peace, or huysht.

Batauia, a countray in low Germany, called Hollande.

Batauus, an Hollander, or man of Hollande.

Batalus, an effeminate person. Eras. chil.


Batilus, a fire pan.

Batiochus, a little pot, out of the which wine is poured at the table.

Batis, or batos, is the fyshe called raye or skeat.

Batrachion, or Batrachium, an herb, which I do suppose is that which is
commonly called goldknappe or yelow cray. It is also called of Democritus
Chrisanthemon, for it has a flower as yelow as gold, and the leaf is
somewhat like unto percily, but that it is much greatter.

Batris, a vessel with a long handell.

Battiola, a wine pot or flagon.

Battologia, a long patteryng or superfluous speaking.

Batuo, i, ere, to beat with a rod.

Batus and Ephil, hebrewe measures, the oone of dry things, the other of
lycour, by the computation of Senalis, contains.vi. galons one pottell, and
one quarte.

Bauaria, callid also Baioaria in duch Berne, in french Bauiere, a contray in
high Germany, lyeng in the east, on the south it boundeth on the mountains of
Alps, which dyuideth Germany from Italy, on the weste lies the country
called Sueuia, in douche Swane, on the east Austria, callid in douch Owstryk,
on the north the royalme of Boheme.

Bauari, uel Baioarn, people of Bauier.

Baubare, to bark like a dog.

Baxiae, slyppers, properlye of philosophers, or such other.

B ANTE D and E.
BDelium, is a tree growing in Arabia and Scithia, also a gum coming of
the same tree, like to wax, but clear as gum, within unctuous or fat,
very sweet of savor, when it is rubbed or burnid, and bitter in taste.

Beat, happily, fortunately.

Beatitudo, and beatitas, is a heap of good things gathered together, of it
self suffycient without lack, and a very perfection according to virtue.

Beatus, is he which has abundance of all thing that is good, and is
perfect in all things that be worthy praise, or ought to be desired of a good
man. sometime it is taken for fortunate or noble.

Bebritium, seu bebriacum, a town in Italye between Cremona and Verona.

Bebrytia, a countray called the great Phrigia.

Bebrytius, a, um, and bebryx, icis, of the country of great Phrigia.

Bedegnar, a word vsyd of the barbarous phisytions, is after the saying of
Serapio, the white brier, which, as Dioscorides writes, has a white flower
and sweet. Manardus supposes it to be a certain kind of thistels with sharp
pryckes and a square stalk, and now some do tak it for the thystell, which is
called Carduus benedictus.

Beelphegor, a gapyng ydoll.

Beelsebub, an ydoll called god of flies.

Beelsephon, lord of the north, an ydoll set up in the places of espyall.

Beemoth, the dyuell, and sygnifieth a beast.

Belbus, a beast called also Hiena.

Belerium, or Bolerium promontorium, is a place in Cornwall callid saint
Burien.

Belgae, were the people which do inhabyte in the countries and towns
enclosed with the Occean sea, and the ryuers of Rhene, Marn, and Seyne, wherein
be the cities of Trire, Colaigne, Magunce, and Reins. Also the countrayes of
Flaunders, Hollande, Gelder, Iuliers, Cleuis, Hennaw, part of Friselande,
Pycardy, the greatest part of Champaigne, and all the forest of Arderne. And
all this countraye was sommetyme called Gallia belgica.

Belgium, the town of Beauuoysyne.

Belial, the devil, which is interpreted Apostata, without yoke.

Bellaria, bankettynge dyshes, as tartes, march pains, and other like.

Bellarius, a, um, apt for the war.

Bellator, a warryour.

Bellator equus, e horse of war.

Bellatrix, a woman warrior.

Bellatulus, bellatula, a wanton word, which is as much to say, Plauns^
as ioly, proper, lyttel fair one, well favored child, lyttel sweet heart,
pretty maiden, pretty boy.

Bellax, acis, used or haunted in wars.

Belle, well.

Belle se habet, he does or fares well.

Bellerophontes, seu Bellerophon, the son of Glaucus king of Ephyra, who
being a man of much bealtie and prowess, was ardentelye beloved of Stenobea,
the wife of Pretus king of Ephyra, next after Glaucus, and when she desired
him to commytte adultrye with her, he fearyng the vengeance of Jupiter god of
hospitality, and remembrynge the frendeshyp showed to bym by her husband,
refusyd her, and did put her away from him, which she dysdaynyng, and being
in a wodde rage, accusyd him to her husband, that he had rauysshed her, but he
like a sober man, would not slay him in his own house, but delyuerynge him
letters to his wives father, sent him into Lycia, who perceiving thereby the
mind of Pretus, encouraged Bellerophon to distroye the two monsters callid
Solymos and Chymaera, and sent him thereto, that he moughte be slain under the
color of a valiant enterprise, but he acheuynge it noblye, retournyd with
honor.

Belliatus, Plaut. is Ruden.
a, um, beautified.

Bellica, was a pyllour in the temple of Bellona, called goddess of battle,
whereat they used, when wars were proclaimed, to cast a iauelyn.

Bellicose, valyantly.

Bellicosus, valiant in arms, fires or warlshe.

Bellicrepa, a certain form of daunsynge in harneyse.

Bellicus, a, um, pertaynyng to war.

Belliger, a warryour.

Belligero, are, to make war.

Bellipotens, puissaunt in arms or battle.

Bellis, seu Bellium, the white daysy, called of some the Margarite, in the
north it is callid Banwort. It is also a fysh with a long beak like a crane,
which is called of sum a hornebeake.

Bello, and bellor, aris, ari, to make war.

Bellocassii, Caesar.
a countreye in France now called Bayenx.

Bellona, called goddess of battle.

Bollouaci, Caesar.
a countreye in France, now named Beauuoys.

Bellua, a great cruel beast, or a monster.

Bellum, sygnifieth all the time that the wars do continue, also a battle
or war.

Bellum civil, war between men of one countraye.

Bellum intestinum, war in one country among the inhabitants.

Bellum nauale, war on the sea.

Bellum instruere, to prepare for war.

Bellicum canere, to blow to the field. It is also vsyd in this
signification, to animate or encourage.

Bello premere, to trouble one with wars.

Bellum componere, to make a conclusion of wars, to make peace between two
which are at war.

Bellum conflare, to stere up wars.

Bellum indicere, to declare war.

Bellum moliri, to prepare war.

Bellum ponere, to set aside war.

Bellum profligare, to fight out a battle.

Bellum merum loquitur, Cic. Atti.
he speaks only of war.

Belluatus, a, um, painted or kerued with great beasts.

Belluata taperia, tapestry, wherein is wrought or painted the figures of
beasts.

Baelon, a town in Spayn called Tariffa.

Belu^inus, a, um, beastly.

Belu^ina rabies, a beastly fury.

Beluosus, a, um, full of monsters of the sea.

Bellulus, a, um, somewhat fair, minyon, trick galaunt.

Bellus, a, um, fair, pleasant, good.

Bellus homo, an honest man.

Belus, was an ancient king of Assyria, to whom the first image or ydoll to
be honored, Cael. anti lect.
was made. It sygnyfyeth after sum men's opinion the compass of the fyrmament:
of some the air that incloseth al thing. it signifies also a pauement, also
the first entrye in at a door. also the fervent heat of the heaven. It is also
put for the air, which is under the firmament. it is also a river in Siria
which has sand of the nature of glass, also it tourneth all other metal
that comes into it, into glass.

Belzahard, is a barbarous word, but for the efficacy of the thing, it is
necessary to know the signification thereof. It is a special and soueraygne
medicine against poison being drunk. Abe^zoar.
Auenzoar writes, that against poison, which is excedyngly hot, he made it in
this form, three grains of barley, with five ounces of the water of a gourde.
But some men think, that the most excellent Belzaharde is this which
follows: Plin. li. 8. cap. 32. li. 28. cap. 9.
The property of the heart is (as Plinius does write) to be at contynuall
debate with the serpente, in so much as he pursues him, and seeks for him at
the hoole, where he lies, and with the breath of his nosethrylles compels
him to come forth. Now after that the heart has fought with the serpent and
caten him, he becomes thyrsty, and runs unto some water, and leapeth into
it, but he than does not drynk. For if he should take never so little water, he
should dye incontinent: than do issue out of his eyes dropes, which by little
and little do congeale, and wax as great as a chesten nutte. After that the
heart is comme out of the water, men do awayt where those dropes do fall, and
takes them, and lays them among treasure, as a thing most precious, and
against all manner of poison most certain remedy. This have I taken out of
the book of Joan. Agricola de recentioribus medicamentis.

Bembina, a town by the forreste called Nemaeus.

Bembinatus, of that town or wodde.

Benacus lacus, a lake in Italy called Gardae.

Been, well, honestly, or prosperousely.

Been accipere aliquem, to entreat one well, or intertayne him.

Been acceptus, well intertayned.

Been agitur, Plautus.
the thing is well done.

Been ambulato, god be with the.

Been audire, Plinius.
to be well spoken of.

Been cogitare de aliquo, to have a good opinion of one.

Been conuenire inter eos, they agreed well together.

Been curare aetatem, to live pleasantly.

Been de te mereo, I entreat the well, thou art beholden unto me.

Been far gratiam, Plaut in Rud.
to do pleasure to one.

Been habere, to behave me or him well.

Been hercle denuncias, Plaut. in Trinum.
thou tellest me good tidings.

Been hoc habet, Plaut. in Epid.
this mattier comes well to pass.

Been longus sermo, a very long tale.

Been magnus, very great.

Been mane, very tymely.

Been mereri, to do pleasure to one.

Been multi, very many.

Been nummatusm marsupium, a purse well storyd with money.

Been nummatus homo, a well monied man.

Been successit, it came well to pass.

Been uale, farewell, adewe.

Been ualere, to be in good health.

Been uertere, to turn to good. Precor deum ut haec res been uertat tibi, I
pray god this thing may turn the to good, or may be for thy profit.

Been uiuere, to make good chere.

Been uolo tibi, I would the good.

Benedice, an aduerbe, signifyeng in praysinge or saying well. Plautus.
Cum illiciebas me ad re blande and benedice, When thou dyddest train me unto
the with pleasant words and praysynge of me.

Benedico, dixi, dicere, to praise, to say well of a man.

Benedicus, a man well tunged, or fair spoken.

Benefacio, cere, to do well.

Benefacta, benefits, pleasures.

Benefactum, it is well done.

Beneficentia, is not only liberality in gyuing of money, or possessions, or
other like things, but also in helpyng a man with counsel, solicitation, or
other labor.

Beneficiarij, were they which in the wars were not charged with watch or
other labors pertaynyng to the field or host.

Beneficiarius, he that receives a benefit or good turn of an other.

Beneficiarius fundus, Alciat. in common. de uerb. sign.
land given in fee simple or fee tail to be holden of the donour by some
service.

Beneficium, a benefyt, a pleasure, or good turn.

Beneficus, he that is beneficial or lyberall.

Beneuolens, beneuolente, he that loves well an other.

Beneuolentia, favor, or good will, an intent to do well.

Beneuolus, favorable.

Benign, an aduerbe, which sygnifieth curteysly, graciousely, bounteousely.

Benignitas, bounteousnes, curtesye, lyberalytie, gentylnesse

Benignus, a, um, gentle, benygne, and bounteouse, or lyberall.

Benigna terra, a ground that is fertyle.

Beo, aui, are, to comfort, to make happy.

Berecynthia, called the mother of goddis.

Bercynthus, a mountayn and town in Phrigia, where Cybele was worshypped,
whereof she was named Berecynthia.

Berengarius, was the name of an heretycke, which affyrmed, that in the
sacrament of the aultare was not the very body of Christ in the substance of
flesh and bloudde, but only in a sign and figure. He was a french man borne,
and of little lernyng, saving that he was a subtle logician. Afterward he did
recant. And in the counsel of Lateranens his error was condemned, the year
of our lord 1082.

Berilus, is a precious stone in facion as it were six square, in color like
oil or water in the sea. His properties are to make them that do wear him
merry, it conserueth and increseth the love between man and wife. If it be
hanged about ones neck, it puts away dreams, it cures diseases of the
throat and chekes, and all those which come of moystnes of the head. It
helps women, which do travail with child.

Bersabe, a city in Judea, callid also Puteus iuramenti, the pytte of the
oath, where Abraham dwelled, which is the confynes of the land of beheste.

Bes, bessis, a weight of.viii. ounces.

Bestia, a beast.

Bestiarij, men which in old time fought with beasts in the sight of the
people.

Beta, an herb called betis. thereof comes a verb betisare, which
signifies to be unsavory in communication or writing. Eras. chil. And men
unsavory or vnwitty were in scorn called Betae. Laert. de Diogene.

Bethania, a town two miles from Jerusalem on the side of the mount Olyuete.

Bethasij, people dwelling about the town of Mastreyghte, within the diocese
of Luke in Germany.

Bethel, a city in Samaria, where the people dwelled, which were called
Iebusaei.

Bethleem, the cite of David the prophet, where he was borne and dyed, where
also our savior Christ Jesus was borne, there also dyed Rachel the wife of
Jacob the patriarche: it was assigned to the tribe of Judah, and was dystant
from Jerusalem.vi. miles, and was first called Euphrata, and signifies in the
hebrew tongue, The house of bread.

Bethsaida, or Bethesda, was a great ponde in Jerusalem, wherein the priests
washed the sheep, which should be sacrificed, and may be interpreted, The
house of cattelle. it was also the name of a town, where Peter and Philyp the
apostles were borne.

Bethsamis, a city in Galile, where Christ did many miracles.

Bethsamitae, people of Bethsamis.

Bethsura, and Bethsurae, a strong fortress of the Jews.

Beto, to walk forth.

Betonica, an herb called Betayne, which is hot and dry in the first
degree, and has innumerable virtues.

Betonica alti^lis, sieve coronaria, I suppose it to be gylofers.

Betphage, a town in Judea, and may be interpreted the house of a mouth or a
iawe.

Bettere, a town called Besics in Guyen.

Betula, a tree called byrche.

B ANTE I.
BIAEON, wheat, which is hard to be beaten out of the husks.

Bias Priencus, was one of the seven wise men of Greece, who beholdynge his
countreye gotten with enemies, fled. And other men, carieng with them such
of their goods as they might bear, he took with him nothing. And when it was
demanded of him, why he did so, he answered: Truly I carry al my goods with me,
meaning virtue and doctrine, reputyng the goods of fortuue not to be his.

Bibaculus, he that drinks often.

Bibax, acis, bibosus, a great drynker.

Bibisia, bybbynge.

Biblia, the wife of Duilius the Romayn, which was of so great chastity, that
she was at that time an example, when it was a thing monstrous to here of
unchastity.

Biblio, blere, to make a sown as a pot does, when drink is drawn into it.

Bibliographus, a writer of books.

Bibliopola, a stacioner, or a bokeseller.

Bibliotheca, a lybrary.

Bibo, bibi, bear, to drink.

Bibitur. Ci. in. Ver ^ct. 3.
Mature uemunt, discumbitur, fit sermo inter eos, and inuitatio, ut graeco more
biberetur: They come at the time appointed, and there was among them talking
and quaftyng, that every man might drink after the Greeks facion.

Bibractae, people of a countraye callid Beuray Dautume.

Bibrax, a town in France in the countye of Rochel called Bray.

Bibulus, a, um, that sucketh up shortly.

Biceps, cipitis, that which has two heddes.

Biclinium, a chamber with two beds.

Bicornium, that which has two horns.

Bicorpus, that which has two bodies.

Bicurgium, a city in Almayn called Herfford.

Bidental, a place where they used to sacrifyce sheep, when any house was
bournyd with lyghtnynge.

Bidentes, sheep with.ii. teeth, called in some place hogrelles, or hogattes.

Biducenses, people, of Normandy.

Biduum, the space of.ii. days.

Biennis, ne, any thing of.ii. years old.

Biennium, the space of two years.

Bifariam, in.ii. parts, or.ii. manner of ways.

Bifarie, the same.

Bifera arbor, that bears twyse in a year.

Bifidus, clefte.

Bifores, that has two doors.

Bifrons, that has two forheades.

Bifur, a double thief, or he that has stolen twyse.

Bifurcatus, a, um, double forked.

Biga, a carte drawn with two horses.

Bigamus, he that has had two wives.

Bigenera, beasts comen of two sundry kinds, as between a dog and a wolf,
or between an ass and a mare, and such like.

Biiugi, cattle or beasts, yoked two together.

Bilanx, ancis, a beam with two balances.

Bilbilis, a town in Spain.

Bilibris, bre, wayeng two pounds.

Bilinguis, dooble tongued.

Biliosus, he that is cholerike.

Bilis, without any addition, most commonly signifies choler.

Bilis atra, melancoly.

Bilis flaua, choler mixed with fleume.

Bilis rubea, choler mixte with bloudde, or read choler.

Bimaritus, he that has had two wives.

Bimembris, of.ii. parts, having.ii. members.

Bimestris, two months old, or two year, accounted of the moon.

Bimulus, of two years age.

Bimus, of two years.

Binus, a, um, two, idem quod duo.

Binae litterae, two letters.

Bini tabellarij, two messangers.

Bina iuga boum, two yoke of oxen.

Binarius numerus, the number of two.

Binominus, and binominis, he that has two names.

Bion, the name of a philosopher.

Biothanatus, he that is violently slain.

Bipalium, a mattocke with two bittes.

Bipara, she that has had.ii. byrthes.

Bipatens, open on both sides.

Bipennis, having two wings, also a twybyll wherewith carpe^ters do make their
mortaisis.

Biponnella, an herb callid Pympernell.

Bipertior, iris, iri, to divide in two parts.

Bipedalis, and bipedaneus, two foot long or brodde.

Bipes, pedis, having two fete.

Biremes, ships which have two raunges of oores.

Bis, twyse, Bis terque, ones or twyse.

Bis deni, twenty.

Bis tanto, twyse as much.

Bisaltae, a people in Scithia.

Bisellium, a seat or form, whereon two men only may sytte.

Bisextus, one day added to, in four years.

Bisextilis annus, the leap year.

Bison, it is, a beast having one horn, and a very long mane.

Bistonia, the countray called Thracia.

Bistonis, a city, and also a great mere or pole in the country of Thrace.

Bisulcus, a, um, cloven foted.

Bithymum, honey gathered by the bees of two sorts of time.

Bithynia, a royalme in Asia, which now the Turk has, on the North it has
the sea called Ponticum, on the Southe Misia and Phrigia.

Bithynium, a city in Bithynia.

Bitumen, a kind of natural lyme, whereof the old walls of the city of
Babylon were made.

Bituminatus, a, um, of the lyme or claye called Bitumen.

Biturges, Bourges in France.

Biuium, away having two paths.

Biuius, a, um, done two sundry ways.

Bizen, a City of Thracia, of Pliny called Bizian.

B ANTE L.
BLANDA, a town in Spayn called Blanes, they be also delectable things in
reading.

Blande, an aduerbe signifienge, with fair or pleasant words, graciousely,
amorousely, flatteryngely.

Blandimentu^, thing plesantly done or spoken

Blanditia, flatterye, pleasant motion, intisement by words.

Blandicus, he that flattereth.

Blandidicus, Plaut. in Trinum.
a fair speaker or flatterer.

Blandi loquentulus, a pleasant speaker.

Blandior, iris, iri, to flatter, to speak fair for advantage.

Blanditiae, flattering, fair speech.

Blandus, a, um, flattering, or fair spoken, pleasant.

Blapsigonia, loss of generation, properlye in bees.

Blasphemia, cursynge, reprochynge, commonly blasphemy. which is now only
referred to the despite of god.

Blasphemo, aui, are, to curse, to reproach, to speak in the derogatio^ or
despyte of an other.

Blatero, onis, a bablar, he that talks to no purpose.

Blatero, aui, are, to babble in vain, and from the purpose.

Blatio, iui, ire, to speak or talk like a fool, or without any purpose or
reason, to babble.

Blatta, is properly the long fly, that flees in the leame of a candell, and
is of the kind of mothes. It is also a sylke worm.

Blattaria, an herb called Moleyn.

Blatteus, a, um, purple.

Vestis blattea, a purple garment.

Blax, soft, delycate, wanton, that can not decaerne things, and he which
vaynely bosteth him self.

Blemmiae, monstrous people in India, which have none head, but their eyes and
mouth be in their breasts.

Blepharo, onis, he that has great brows.

Bleptae, a people in Aphrike, which have their vysages in their breasts.

Blaesus, he that stammereth, omyttynge some letters in speaking.

Blitteus, a, um, unsavory.

Blittea meretrix, an unsavory queen.

Blittus, an herb being of the kind of bietes, having no sent.

Blitum, an herb called spynache.

B ANTE O.
BOA, a serpent in Italy, so great and large that on a time when one was
kylde, there was a child all hole found in his bealy, Plinl^^ cap. ^^
as Pliny writes. Boa is also a syekenes, wherein the body is full of read
blysters.

Boalia, plays made for the health of oxen and kyen.

Boaria, an herb called a clote or burre.

Boarium forum, the market place where oxen be sold.

Boca, uel Bocas, a fyshe which has his back as it were painted with sundry
colors. Iouius says and affyrmeth, that he is taken in all costs in great
sculles, not withstandyng I do not yet find his name in english.

Boces, called of Theodorus Bocae, is a fysshe, that only has a voice, which
might seem to be dogfyshe, which is said does make a noise like the
barkynge of a dog, after he is taken.

Bocchyris, a man's name.

Bodellium, a kind of sweet smellyng gum.

Boebis, a lake in Thessaly.

Boe^mia, is a royalme called Beam, inclosyd with the bounds of Germany,
having on the east Hungary, on the southe Bauier, on the weste, the countreye
called Noricum, on the northeaste Polonia or Poole. It is equal in length and
in bredthe, each of them being about three days journey. And is enuyroned with
the famous foreste called Sylua Hercynia, and through the myddell thereof
passethe the great river called Albis, and an another river named Multania,
upon the ryuage whereof is set the pryncipall city named Braga or Praga.
The language there is not duche, but the slauoin tungue: not withstanding in
the churches (...) people art taught in the duche tunge, in the church yardes
they are taught in the beam tunge. They varye from the catholyke faith, in
sundry opinyons, and do skorne all ceremonies. In some places there they
pryuyly observe the sect of the Adamites and Waldenses in the act of
lecherye. whereof is written in the words Adamitae and Vualdenses.

Boeodurum, a City in Almayne, now called Patauia or Passaw.

Boeotia, a country in Greece, wherein was the city of Thebes: now it is
called Vandalia.

Bogud, a town in Affryke: also the name of a king.

Boiae, gyues or fetters.

Boij, people of Burbon in France, and Bauiar in Almayne.

Boletus, a mushrom.

Bolis, idis, a darte with wyld fire. also a plu^met and line wherewith shypmen
do sound in the sea, to find land.

Bolus, a mass or lump of metal or other like thing. also a throw or cast
at dyse. also a draughte with a net in waters. It is also a morsel.

Bombax, Plautus.
an aduerbe spoken of him, that sets naught by that which is spoken, as one
would say, when he is rebuked of a fault. And what than? or tushe, I care not
for that.

Bombitatio, the noyes that bees make.

Bombus, a great sown or noise, as it were of a trumpe, or gunne, a bounce.

Bombix, icis, a sylke worm.

Bombycinus, a, um, of sylke.

Bombycina uestis, a garment of sylke.

Bomolochus, a common scoffar, or he that susteyneth all villainy for to get
money. It was also taken for a boy, that stood at the altars end, to stele
away the candels.

Bona dea, was she that some called Farua, or fauna, of whom: Varro writes,
that in her life never man did se her, nor hard her named, but only her
husband.

Bona caduca, the goods of them that be damned, goods escheted.

Bona praedia, the goods which be liable to every action.

Bonaria, caulmnes of the sea.

Bonasus, is a beast in form like a bull, but brother and shorter, and has a
mane like an horse down to the shulders, but the hear is softer, and comes
down to his eyes: the hear of his body is like a bright sorrel, his mane is
darker colored. The flesh of him is pleasant in eatinge, and therefore he
is hunted, but he runs continually until he be weary, and in his runnynge
flyngeth, and shoteth forth his sharde and dunge three furlonge from him, as
Plinius writes.

Bonitas, goodness, honesty, and justice.

Bonum, good, which is contrary to ylle.

Bonus, a good man. also beneuolent, peasyble, lyberal, plain, easy to speak
to, worshypful, treatable, merciful.

Bona dicere, to report well.

Bona fide dicere, Terent. in Andria.
to say truly and plainly.

Bona pars, the more part.

Bona uenia, By your license, No displeasure to you.

Bona uerba quaeso, say well I pray you.

Bonae aedes, a substancyall house.

Bonae fidei possessor, a feoffee of trust.

Boni consulas, take it in good part.

Boni frugi, honest, of good conditions.

Bona ualetudo, good health.

Bonae notae uinum, wine of a good sort.

Bonae fidei emptor, he that means good faith, in byenge, intending no
deceyte.

Bonus horas male collocare, to loose time, which might have been better spent.

Bonis auibus, of good luck.

Bono animo esse, to be of good chere.

Bono animo dicere aut facere, to speak or do a thing for a good intent.

Bono ingenio esse, to be debonayre.

Bono publico facere, to do it for the commune weal.

Boo, as, are, to below like a cow.

Boo^tes, a sterre, which folowith Charles wain

Borbetomagus, or Vormatia, a town called Worms in Almayne.

Boreae, Jasper stones.

Boreas, the northesterne wind.

Boreus polus, the northesterre called the lode sterre.

Borith, an herb that fullers use.

Borsyrites, a kind of olyue having many boughs, white and spotted with
sanguyne.

Borysthenes, a greatte river in the countreye of Scithia.

Bos, bouis, a rother be, be it bull, ox, or cow.

Bos in lingua, A proverb touching them which dare not speak the truth, or
will not for because they have received money to hold their peace.

Bosphorus, the name of a part of the sea, which lies in two sundry costs,
one by Constantinople, the other more north.

Bosra, a city of Idumea.

Bostar, an ox house.

Bostrychites, a preciouse stone like to womennes hear.

Botrys, or botrus, a cluster of grapes.

Botrytes, a precious stone, like to a black grape

Botuli, they which have much blood.

Botulus, or botellus, a puddynge made of the inward of a rother beast.

Botytillus, a little cluster of grapes.

Bouatim, like an ox.

Bouicida, a slauter man.

Bouile, an ox stall.

Bouillae, arum, a town not far from Rome.

Bouillus, a, um, belonginge to neat.

Bouinator, he that with greatte noise cries out on an other man.

Bouinor, aris, to below out like a cow.

B ANTE R.
BRABEVTA, and Brabeutes, he that is ordained judge in any game of wrastelinge,
runninge, or leaping.

Bracca, that kind of mantell, which now comes out of Ireland, or a long
garment made of roughe frise.

Braccharij, the makers of such clothe.

Brachiale, the wrestbone of the hand.

Brachialia, bracelettes, which some gentle men and gentylwomen do use
about their arms.

Brachiatus, that which like an arm, holds any thing up, a prop, or shore.

Brachicatalecton, where one syllable lacks at the end of a verse.

Brachicatalecticum carmen, a verse lacking one syllable or mo.

Brachium, an arm.

Brachylogia, shortness of speech.

Bracmanae, philosophers of Inde.

Bractea, thyn plates of metal, horn, or wood.

Bractearius, a worker of plates.

Bracteator, the same.

Bracteola, little plates or aglettes.

Bracara Augusta, a town called Briga in Spain.

Bragada, a river nere to Vtica in Africa.

Branchiae, the gilles of a fish.

Branchos, the reume or catarre, which falls down by the chekes.

Brannouites, people of a country in France, called Le vafe de Moriane.

Brassica, colewurtes.

Brauium, or Brabium, the reward for wrastlinge, runninge, or leaping,
commonly called the chief game.

Brauum, the city of Burgus in Spain.

Breno, a captain or leader of the frenchmen called Galli, which builded
Verona, a city of Venice.

Brephotrophia, an hospital, where children be kept and nourished.

Breue, shortly.

Breuia, places in the water where oone may wade.

Breuiculus, a little short man.

Breuiloquium, a short form of speaking.

Breuiloquentia, the same.

Breuiloquus, he that speaks his mind in few words.

Breuiarium, a bridgment.

Breuitas, shortness.

Breuis, breue, short.

Breui postea, sone after.

Breuiori summa emere, to bye at a less price.

Breuissima terra, a little ground.

Breuiter, shortly. Breue. idem. quickly.

Briareus, a giant, which was of an exceeding greatness.

Brigantes, were ancient people in the north part of England.

Brigantium, a City in Galitia called Compostella.

Britanica, an herb like great sorrel, but blacker, thycker, and therewith
mosy, the root black and little, and in tastynge strayneth the tunge.

Britania, is the most noble isle of the world, wherein be contained both
countries England and Scotland: It lies from Germania west, from France and
Spain, weste and northewest. Plin. li. 4.
The form thereof is like a triangle, and as some have written, like the blade
of a gleyue. the length is extended into the North, to the furthermoste part
of Scotland called Calidonia, which Plinius, Solinus, and Martianus do
agree, to be eight hundred miles. also in bread, after Martianus, Mart. li. 6.
three hundred miles: accompting them Italion miles, which be not so much as
our English miles. The dystaunce between this isle and Calays sands, called
of Plinius Gessoriacum, in Gallia, where the narroweste passage is between
both countries, is. 50. Italion miles, after the same Pliny, it is now gessed
to be little above xxx. english miles. Of the first occasion of the name of
this isle there is not yet found any certain determination, for as much as
there remains not any autentique, and ancient history, making thereof
remembrance, the old books of the Britonnes (such as were) being all
destroyed by the Saxons, who endeavored them self to extincte utterly the
honorable renoume, with the name of Britons: Like as the Goths dealt with the
Romans. Also the part of Titus Liuius, where the conquest of Britain is
remembered with the histories of Julius Rusticus, and diverse other noble
wrytars, who wrate specially of this countray, are utterly perysshed. They
which do remain, as the Commentaries of Julius Caesar, Cornelius Tacitus,
Diodorus Siculus, and they which wrate of cosmography, have omytted the
origynall beginning of the name. The hystorye of Gildas the Briton, can not
be found, who not withstanding was after that the Saxons had invaded this
realm: and therefore might lack such books as might best instruct him. And
as for Beda, a virtuous and right well learned man, seems to have seen
nothing written of that matter. For where he says, that this isle took the
name of Britania, of the inhabytauntes of Britania in France, it is nothing
like to be true: for that country not very long before the time of Beda was
named Armorica and Armoricus tractus: at which time, and long before, this isle
was called of the most ancient wrytars Britania: and as Solinus writes, seemed
to be an other world, for as much as the west cost of Gallia was thought to
be the vttermoste bounds of this world. Also Julius Caesar writes, Caes. li 5.
that the places of this isle were unknown to french men, saving to a few
merchants, and yet they no farther knew than the sea cooste toward
France. Moreover the same Britons inhabitants of this isle did affirm, that
it was left among them in remembrance, that the innermooste part of the
countray was inhabited of them, which had their first beginning in the same
isle. This well considered, with the aucthoritye of the wrytar, who was both an
excellent prince and also a great learned man, and being him self in this isle,
it is not to be douted, but that he most diligently serched for the true
knowelege of the auncienty thereof. And if he might have founden, that the
inhabitants had come of the stock of Aeneas, of the which progeny he him
self came, he would have rejoiced not a little thereat, for the prowess and
valyaunte courage, which he him self commended in them. Moreover, that the
name began of Brutus, whom our wrytars have of their own heads ymagined to
have descended from Aeneas the Troyane, it is no more lykelye, than that this
isle was called Albion of Dioclecia^s daughter, or of white rocks, whereof I
have before written, and that for diverse causes. First all the old latin
historiens do agree, that the son of Syluius, which was the second in
succession from Aeneas, and of them named the son of Ascanius, was Aeneas
called also Syluius. whereunto the Greeks do also accord, but that they name
Syluius to be brother to Ascanius, and borne after the death of Aeneas: and
therefore was called Postumus. but neither the Romans, nor the Greeks do writ
of any man called Brutus, either son of Ascanius, or any other before Iunius
Brutus, which expelled king Tarquinus out of Rome: which name was also
given to him in derysion by the sons of Tarquine, because he seemed to them
folyshe and dull wytted. Moreover there is so much diversity between Britania
and Brutus, that it seems vnlykelye and against reason, that the one should
proceed of the other. For if Brutus had been the gyuer of the first name to
this isle, he would have called it Brutia, or Brutica, rather than Britania,
which has no manner of proportion or analogy with Brutus. But now, as I have
done in the word Albion, so will I here declare a reasonable cause of
conjecture, why this isle was named Britania. About.xxx. years passed, it happened
in wildshere at a place called Yuy church, distant about.ii. miles from the
City of Sarisbury, as men were digginge to make a fundation, they found an
holowe stone fast keuered with a another stone, which being broken there was
in it a book having little above xx. leaves (as they said) of very thyck
velome, wherein was some thing written: but when it was showed to pryestes and
chanons, which were there at that time, they could not read it: wherefore
after that they had tossed it from one to another (by the mean whereof it was
torn) they did neglect it, and did cast it a side. Long time after a piece
thereof happened to come to my hands, not with standinge that it was also rent
and defaced, which I showed and delivered to master Richard Pace, than chief
secretary to the kings most royal majesty, whereof he excedyngly rejoiced.
but because it was partly rent, partly defaced, and bloryd with weate, which
had fallen on it, he could not find any one sentence perfyte. Not
withstanding after long beholdynge of it, he showed me, that it seemed, that
the said book contained some ancient monumente of this isle, and that he
perceived, that the word Prytania was there put for Britaniae: but at that time
he said no more to me. Afterward I gyuynge much study and diligence to the
reading of hystories, considering whereof the word Britania first came,
fyndinge that all the yles in this part of the Oceane were callid Britaniae,
after my first conjecture of Albion, the said old writing was revived in my
remembrance, and by chance fynding in Suidas (whom I than understood) that
Prytania in greek, with a circu^flexid aspiration does signify mettalles,
fayres or martes, also revenues belonging to the commune treasour, I than
conceived this opinion, That when the Greeks flourished in wisdom and
prowess, and were most expert in saylynge, and being ones entered into our
Ocean sea, had founden in the yles there great plenty of time, lead, iron,
brass, and in diverse places gold and silver in great quantity, whereof there
came unto the comune treasores of their cities yearly great revenues, they
called all those yles by this general name Prytania, (...).
signifienge the place, by that which came out of it, as one would say, that
he went to the mart, when he goes to And warp or Barowe: or to the fair,
when he goes to Sturbrige, or to his revenues, when he goes to any place,
out of the which his revenues do come. And yet because this isle excelled all
the other in every condition, it was of some priuatelye called Olbion, that is
to say, more happy or richer, as I have before written, This is mine only
conjecture, which does nerer approach to a true similitude, than the other
inventions, except there be any aunciente hystorye, I mean before the time of
Geffraye of Monemouthe or Beda, which can more probably confute that which I
have declared: and to such will I gladdely give place. Finally I have always
thought and yet do, that it is more honorable unto this country, to have
received his first name by such occasion as I have rehearsed, and the
generation of the inhabitauntes thereof, to be either equal with the most
aunciente, or myxte with the most wise and valyaunte people of Greece,
vainquisshours and subduars of Troyanes: than to take the name and first
generation, either of a vain fable, or of a man (if any such were) which
after he had slain his father, wandered about the world, uncertain where to
dwell. Also to aduaunte us to come of the Troianes, causours of the destruction
of their own countreye, by fauourynge the ^uoutry of Paris and Helene, of whom
never proceeded any other notable monumente, but that they were also breakers of
their oath and promise. And yet this folly is found allmoste in all people, that
every of them do contend, to have their progenitors come first out of Troy,
the which fantasy among wise men, may be well laughed at. The faith of
Christ was first received in this isle after the incarnation of Christ. 156.
years.

Britannus, and Brito, a man of that country.

Brixia, Bressa, a city in Italy.

Bromus, one of the names of Bacchus.

Bronchoscele, Galen. in diffin.
a swellynge by the cheek.

Bronchus, is he that has the nether iawe farther out, than the over iawe.

Brochus. idem.

Bronteus, the surname of Jupiter.

Bruchus, a fly, which eatethe corn as it grows.

Bruma, winter.

Brumalis, le, belonging to winter.

Brunci, they which have tut mouths.

Brundusium, a city in the realm of Naples.

Brupeo, ere, old writers used for stupeo, pere, to be abashed.

Bruscum, a bunche or knur in a tree, specially in box.

Bruseum, an herbour or hedge made with thorns and briers wound together.

Brutij, people in the royalme of Naples, ioynynge to Sicile.

Brutus, dull and gross wytted like to a beast.

Bryon thalassion, or marinum, a thing growyng on the rocks, whereon the salt
water beats, somewhat like to moss, and is called of the northern men, slawke.

Bryonia, a wild vine, which grows in hedges, and has red beryes, the juice
whereof touching the skyn, will cause it to blyster. some do call it Bryony.

Brysso, aui, are, to bruise out.

B ANTE V.
BVA, the word of young children, wha^ they ask for drink: with us they use
to say bumme.

Bubalus, a beast called a bugill.

Bubastis, a city in Egypt.

Bubinda, Slane in Irelande.

Bubile, an ox house.

Bubo, a shriche oule. also a botche.

Bubonium, Dios^.
an herb, some call it Aster atticus, some Inguinali, Plini.
which has a little stalk hard, a purple or yelowe flower, on the top like
to chamomyle, and has a knap with lit tell leaves, in form of a sterre.
about the stalk are some leaves, somewhat long: it grows among stones in a
roughe ground.

Bubonocele, where the bowell is braste by the share of a man, toward his
privy members

Bubsequa, a cow herd.

Bubula, beofe.

Bubulcito, as, to play the herd man.

Bubulcus, a herd man.

Bubulus, a, um, that which longs to an ox or cow, as Lac bubulum, cow
milk.

Bucardia, a stone like to a bugles heart.

Bucca, the holowenesse of the cheke.

Buccea, a morsel.

Buccella, the same.

Buccellatum, bread called biscuit.

Buccina, a trumpet.

Buccinator, a blower in a trumpet, a spreader of fame.

Buccino, aui, are, to blow a trumpet, or set forth a man's praise or
dispraise.

Buccinum, the sown of a trumpet. it is also a shell such as be made at
sayncte Cornelys, wherein one may blow as in a trumpet,

Buccones, they which have great chekes.

Bucculenti, idem,

Buccula, a little cheke also that part of a helmet, whereby wind is taken.
also a hekfare.

Bucculus, a steer, or bullock.

Bucea, a thyn husk in a bean within the hull.

Bucentaurus, a great ship or carrike.

Bucentes, stinginge gnattes.

Bucentrum, a prick of a good.

Bucephalus, was an horse, which would not suffer any other person to come on
his back, but only the great king Alexander: on whom he syttinge, did
meruaylous battaylles, and escaped wonderful dangers. And fynaly being. xxx.
years old, not by wounds, but only by extreme labors and sundry bruises, at
the last died. Over whom Alexander builded a city, and called it Bucephala, by
the horses name, in India, where Alexander vainquished Porum. Bucephalus
signifies also an ox head.

Bucera armenta, herdes of neat.

Bucerum paecus, an herd of rother beasts.

Buceras, fenugraecum, fengreke.

Bucheides, an herb having leaves and flowers like to Satyrion, but it has
two roots like unto two hands, and in the leaves are black spots.

Bucolica, herdes of nete.

Bucolicus, a, um, perteyninge to the keeping of bullockes.

Bucolicum carmen, a poem made of herd men.

Bucolus, an herd man that keeps bullockes.

Budoris, a city in Almayn called Heydelbergh, belonging to the Palsgraue or
count palatine.

Bufo, onis, a tode.

Buglossa, or Buglossos, an herb called borage which although in french it
signifies langue du buef, and so do we call a common herb: yet by the
description of old writers it seems not to be that herb, but rather that
which is called Borage.

Bugones, bees.

Bulapatham, an herb called patience.

Bubine, nes, scalions.

Bulbito, aui, are, to cast durte on one: properly it is of children, which
nourisses do name cackynge.

Bulbosus, a, um, having lyttel round heads in the roots.

Bulbus, is taken generally for every root that is round, as an onyon or
turnepe.

Bulbos quaerit, he looks for onyons. and proverb applied to them, which
behold the ground as they go.

Bulenta, one of the co^nsaylours of a city.

Bulga, a male of lether, wherein clothes be carried.

Buli, Cael. lect. ant.
bowelles.

Bulimia, great famine or hunger. It also signyfieth the hungrye syckenes
called Apperitus caninus.

Bulis, a name of a city.

Bulla, a tablet or other thing hanged about ones neck, properly when it is
holow. A buble of water. so^time the head of a nail other whiles studdes in
gyrdels or other things.

Bullatus, he that is garnished with tablettis or studdes.

Bullatae nugae, Eras. chil.
auauntinges or bostinges, or else a vain clatteryng, wherein is no
substantial sentence.

Bullare, to buble, as water when it boyleth.

Bullio, iui, ire, to boil or sees.

Bullula, a little water bell, or boble.

Bumastos, a great teate.

Bumelia, a kind of ash.

Buphonum, an herb, whereof if cattle eat, they do dye of a grief in their
throat.

Buphthalmon, an herb, called also Cotula fe tida, and is like to comomyl, but
it grows more upright, maywede.

Bupina, great thyrste.

Bupodes, great fete.

Buprestis, a fly like to a black bytell, but he has lengar legs, which if
a beast does eat, he swells, and therewith dies.

Bura, or Buris, the hinder part of a ploughe which is crooked.

Burbarus, a fyshe, which by the description of Paulus Iouius, seems to be a
carpe.

Burcana, an isle in the Occean of Germanye.

Burdigala, Bordeaux in Gascoigne.

Burdo, onis, a mulet.

Burgundia, Burgoyne.

Burrum, a deep red color.

Busicon, a great fyg.

Bustiarij, sword players, which fought at the burning or buryeng of one.

Bustum, a place where dead bodies have been burnt.

Busyris, a tyrant, which was king of Egypt who fed his horses with men's
flesh, and was slain at the last by Hercules.

Buteo, a kind of hawks which has three stones, a bussarde.

Buthysia, was called a great sacrifice, such as Hecatumbe is.

Buttubata, a trifle of no value.

Butyrum, butter.

Buxentum, a town that the Greeks call Pyxunta.

Buxeta, a place where box trees grow.

Buxeus, a, um, of box.

Boxus, or Bussus, a box tree.

B ANTE Y.
BYRSA, a hyde of a beast.

Byrseus, a tanner or cordyner.

Byssinus, a, um, of fine lynen.

Byssina uerba, words, wherein is a magnificent eloquence, expressyng an
authority. Parysates mother to the kings, Cyrus and Antaxerxes used to say:
Plutarch.
that he that would speak to a king boldly, Apopth.
must have words like to fine threde. In latin more properlye Verba byssina.

Byssus, a manner of fine flax or lynnen.

Byzantium, a City of Thrace, now called Constantinople, which was sometime
builded by a king of Spartane, called Pausania, whereof the people and
inhabitauntes were called Byzantii, Afterward it was augmented by Constantine
the Emperor, and was the chyefe and head of all the empire oriental.

Byzari, fantastical men, and of strange inventions.

C ANTE A.
C BY HIM SELF signifies Caius, the proper name of a man, and therefore is
joined with an other name, as C. Iul. Caesar, Caius Julius Caesar. Cl.
signifies Claudius. Cabala, a tradition of the sewes, left among them by
Moses without writing, but from the father to his son, and so continually in
their generation, wherein is included the understanding as well of the secrets
of nature, as the mystical sense, included in the words of holy scripture.

Cabaesi, Cael.
measures that can not be filled.

Caballi, people of Asia.

Caballinus, a, um, perteyninge to an horse.

Caballinus fons, the river called also Helicon, about the which river was the
most commune haunt of the.ix. muses.

Caballus, a horse. yet in some parts of England they do call an horse a cable.

Cabus, a measure of the Hebrews, containing two sextarios and a half.vi.
ounces, and. 3. drammes of Athenes measure, which amunteth to four pound,
three ounces, and three drammes.

Cabyle, a city in Thracia.

Cabyria, a city of the lower Asia, although Cabyrii be people in India.

Cacabus, a pot or cauldron, wherein meat is sodden.

Cacabo, as, are, to call like a partriche.

Cacademon, an ill spirit. A dyuell which stirs a man to do evil. sometime
it is taken for ill fortune.

Cacalia, an herb called wild carwayes.

Cacaturio, to desire to go to the stole.

Cachexia, a spice of a consumption, which proceeds of an ill disposition of
the body, and the body and vysage is therewith very lean, and ill colored.

Cachinnatio, a great laughter.

Cachinnor, aris, ari, to laughe immoderately, and with a loud voice.

Cachinnus, a scorn, or a loud laughter in derision.

Cachinnos commouere, to make men to laughe.

Cachinnum sustollere, to laughe out of measure.

Cachrys, a round thing growyng on an oak, which I suppose to be that which
is called an oak appull.

Cacia, viciosity, or that which we commonly do call, a fault in a thing.

Caco, aui, are, to shyte.

Cacoblepa, a lyttel best in Egypt in the banks of the river of Nylus, which
has such venenositie in his eyes, that who that beholds him, dies
incontinent.

Cacochexia, an ill habit or deformity of the body, caused by syckenesse.

Cacochymia, ill digestion, or rather ill juice gathered in the condutes of the
body, for lack of perfyt digestion.

Cacoethe, a vice or sore engendered in one from his infancy, hard to be
recovered or cured.

Cacologia, ill speech.

Cacologus, an ill speaker.

Cacophaton, is an ill form of spenkyng, or where the words do not sown well
and conveniently.

Cacosyntheton, an ill or defourmed co^positio^.

Cacozelus, an ill follower or imitatour.

Cacula, a page.

Cacumen, the top of an hill.

Cacummatus, a, um, with a sharp top.

Cacus, a giant whom Hercules slew in Italy

Cadauer, eris, a dead body, or carrayne.

Cadere, to happen.

Cadere causa, to be nonsuite in an action

Cadere formula, idem.

Cadmaea uictoria. A proverb applied to that victory, whereof ensues more
harm tha^ good, or that it were better to lose thanne to get. Read hereof in
Chil. Erasmi.

Cadiscus, a vessel, whereinto are gathered scedules, bylles, or lottes, where
things are done by a consene of many counsaylours, or of the people.

Cadiuus, a, um, that which falls by it self.

Cadiua folia, leaves fallen down by the^ self.

Cadiua poma, appuls which do fall dowe without violence.

Cadmites, a stone which has lyttel blue sparks about it.

Cadmia, the owre of brass.

Cadmus, the name of a pryuce, son of Agenor, and brother to Europa, who
builded Thebes, and brought out of Phoenicia in to Greece sixtene letters, and
found out the fusynge and casting of mettalles. There was an other Cadmus,
which was the first that ever wrate in prose.

Cado, Plaut. in Amphit.
cecidi, dear, to fall, to dye, to the slain.

Cadit illi animus, his heart or courage fails, or is abated.

Cadere in deliberationem, to come to communication.

Cadit solutio in diem calende, the payment was the first day of the month.

Caduarij, men having the falling evil.

Caduca, things that will shortly peryshe or decay, old writers used them
for significations of that which should happen.

Caduceator, an ambassatour or herault at arms, sent to demand peace, or to
take a truse.

Caduceus, and Caduceum, a rod which poets supposed, that Mercury bare in
his hand in token of peace, as messanger of Jupiter.

Caduci, Vergil. 7.
they which are decessed.

Caducor, ceris, duci, to be overthrown.

Caducus, a, um, falling, decayenge.

Caduca haereditas, Cic. in Phil.
an inheritance which is fallen in excheate, for lack of heirs.

Caducae literae, Plinius.
letters which will be shortly put out, blind letters.

Caduci tituli, Plini. in pan.
honors and dignities, which endure but a little while.

Caducus labor, lobor lost.

Caducus morbus, the falling evil.

Cadulae guttae, drypinge of roast meat.

Cadurcenses, Cahors in France.

Cadurcum, a keuerlede of lynnen, most properly a quylt.

Cadus, a wine vessel, it may be taken for a pype. It also contains the
same measure that Amphora does.

Caea, an isle in the sea called Aegeum. It is also called Coa, where silk
wurmes were first found. The countreye of Hyppocrates the prince of physicians.

Caebus, an ape with a tail, we may take it to be a munkay.

Caeca dies, oculata dies, the day wha^ the money is paid, and the day when
it is not paid. Plautus in Pseud.
Eme die caeca hercle oleum, id uendito oculata die. Bye not that day that the
money is paid and laid out, but promising it at a day, sell it again when
the money is brought forth. Eras. Chil. Also the civil lawiars do call those
days and witnesses, which only be certified by them that are absent, Caecas
dies, and Caeca testimonia.

Caecias, the east northest wind.

Caecigeni, they which are borne blind.

Caecilia, a slow worm that is blind.

Caecitas, Lucre. 2.
blindness, not only of the bodily eyes, but also of the mind,

Caeculto, aui, are, to have a dym sight.

Caeco, aui, are, to make blind.

Caecus, a, um, blind, also dark.

Caeca uestigia, where one may not se his way that he rydeth or goes.

Caeci haemorroides, emeraudes or pyles, which are within the fundemente, and
do not appear.

Caeci morbi, sycknesses which be not apparent, the causes where of be hid from
physicians

Caecum intestinum, is a bowell, which comes from the right side, at the
point of the huckle bone, and goes to the left side in length, and is also
called Monoculus.

Caecum uallum, a trenche, which in time of war is pight privily with sharp
stakes which are hyd with brakes or bushes.

Caecus caeco dux, one blind man leads an other. A proverb signifienge, one
ignorant person to teach an other unlearned. One fool to give an other fool
counsel.

Caecutio, iui, ire, to see but little, to be half blind.

Caedes, death, slaughter or murder.

Caedem facere, to kill, to make a slaughter.

Caedo, dis, caecidi, caedere, to beat or whyp, to cut, Vergil.
to stryke, to kyl, to break. Sometime to sacrifice. Caedunt binas de more
bidentes: According to the custom they sacrifyced two hoggrelles.

Caedere calcibus, to kycke.

Caedere ianuam saxis, to break the door with stones.

Caeditur testibus, Cic. ad Q fratrem.
he is convict by wytnes.

Caedua sylua, wodes used to be cut, Copeyses.

Caelebs, he or she that is unmarried.

Caelibatus, the state unmarried.

Caelebs uita, idem.

Caementarij, daubers, pargetters, rough masons, which do make only walls.

Caementitius, a, um, of mortar.

Caementum, mortar, or any other gross matter, wherewith walls be made.

Caene, a city.

Caeneus, the surname of Jupiter.

Caepe, an oynion.

Caepi, the preterperfette tense of Capio, I have taken.

Caepula, a chybboll.

Caera, wax.

Caeratum, a seared clothe.

Caeratura, the waxinge.

Caere, were writing tables covered with wax.

Caerefolium, an herb called cheruyll.

Caereolus, a syze candell.

Caeremoniae, ceremonies.

Caerete, an ancient city in Tuscana.

Caereus, a taper, or wax candell.

Caereus, a, um, of wax. Also fat or tydy.

Caerinthe, three leued grass, which bryngethe forth white honey suckels,
called cliuer grass.

Caeris, a sor^ like an honey comb.

Caero, aui, are, to lay wax on any thing.

Caeroferarij, they which do bear candels in the church before the cross in
procession, or do any like service in the church.

Caeroferarium, a candell stycke, where upon tapers are set.

Caeroma, and Caeromatum, an ointment made with oil and netes dunge, wherewith
men that wrastled, used to anoynte their bodies, to make them the more deliver
and strong. Also it signifies the place where wrastlers were anointed.

Caerosus, a, um, that which is myxte with wax.

Caerulus, a, um, and Caeruleus, a, um, blewe of color.

Caesa, a weapon, sometime used in France. It is also a part of an oration,
not concludinge a sentense, as it were a piece of a sentence.

Inter caesa and porrecta, Eras. chil.
between the cutting and the gyuynge. A proverb signifienge tarienge and
doutyng what to do, and as it were the space between leaving of from the thing
which is begun, and the beginning of that which is newely enterprised.

Caesar, the emperor: it was the surname of a noble house of the Romans, of
whom came Julius Caesar, the first Emperor of Rome.

Caesarea, a city of the country of Palestina.

Caesar Augusta, a city in the realm of Arrogon, called Sarragosa.

Caesareus, a, um, perteynyng to the emperor

Caesaries, hear, or a bushe of hear.

Caesenna, a city in Italy.

Caesim, edglynge, or with the edge.

Caesim dicere, to speak now one word and than an other.

Caesio, a strype.

Caesitium, a shete, a clean napkyn or handekerchefe.

Caesius, graye of color or blunkette. Also he which has gray cyen.

Caesones, they which be cut out of the mothers or dammes bealyes.

Caespes, Caespitis, a turfe.

Caespitius, a, um, made of turfes.

Caespito, aui, are, to stumble.

Caestrum, a little tower.

Caestrum, is also an instrument, wherewith Iuory was bored. Also a weapon like
a dagger.

Caestus, tus, a weapon having great plummets hanging at it.

Caestus, sti, a gyrdell or corse, which the husband did put about his wife,
when he was married, and at night did pluck it of.

Caesuliae, they which have blewe eyes.

Caesura, a cut, a garse, an incision. also intaylynge, or caruynge in stone,
or timber. Also a piece as it were cut of from the remenaunte, properly of a
verse.

Caesuratim, briefly, succinetly.

Caesus, slain.

Caeter, cae^era, rum, the remenaunt or residu.

Caetera doctus, Cic. de ^^tura de^rum.
learned in other things.

Caeteroquin, or else.

Caeterum, and Caetera, be aduerbes signifyeng sometime moreover, sometime from
hensforth: sometime Caeterum is a conjunction, and signifies sed, but.

Caeus, uel Cous, a, um, of the isle called Caeauel Coa.

Caffrani, although it be neither greek nor latin, nor have not been known
but of late years: yet for as much as in the chartes and histories of the new
found countries, that word is frequente, I will therefore declare what it
signifies. Caffrani, be that sort of Idolatres dwelling in Inde the more,
which do wurshyp dyuelles in most terryble figure, beleuynge that they are
permytted of god to punish or spare men at their pleasure. wherefore unto them
they do sacryfice their children, and sometime their selfs: They have many
wives, but they company not with them, until that they be defloured by other,
hired to that purpose. Also they let their priests to know carnally their
wives with them, when they be absente. They have bulls and kyne in great
reverence, all be it they never eat flesh, but their sustinance is ryce,
sugar, diverse sweet roots, and do drink the lycour which comes of ripe
dates. Read more hereof in Calecute and India.

Caiani, were heretykes, which worshypped Cain, saying: that he was made of
the one virtue or power, that is to say of the dyuel, and Abell of the other,
and that the virtue of Cain prevailed so, that he slew Abel. They also do
say, that Judas was a godly man, and that his act was a benefyt to mankind:
for he perceiving how much the passion of Christ should avail, delivered
him to the Jews, that by his death, man might be redeemed. They also
affirmed, that the old law was naught, and denied the general resurrection.

Cain, Philo.
was the first son of Adam, who had to wife his own suster, which of Philo
is named Themech, and was the first that builded cities. And for envy that he
had to his brother Abell and malice, he slew him. wherefore being in
desperation he continually wandered, and his body trembled. finally he was
slain by Lamech, when he was of the age of. 730. years, after Philo.

Caius, a proper name of a man.

Caycus, the name of a river in Phrigia.

Cala, a byllette.

Calabra, a convocation place, where matters concerning devotion were treated.

Calaber, bra, brum, of Calaber.

Calabria, a country ioining to Naples, callid before Messapia, and afterward
magna Graecia.

Caladrius, a bird.

Calae, arum, a city in India.

Calagurium, a town in Biskay.

Calamarium, a pennar.

Calamintha, an herb, of the which are.iii. kinds, the one has leaves like to
great basyl, but that they be hoar, and has square stalks, with many knottes
or iointes, and that now is called commonly calamynte. The other is like to
penyroial or puliole roial, but that the leaves ar greatter, Diosc.
and that is commonly called wyld penny royal. Constant.
The third grows higher than any of the other, and has a larger leaf like
to wyld mint, and has a yelow flower, and is commonly callid nep or cat mynte,
because that carts do delight to rub them selves against it, and eat of the
branches. All the three kinds be hot and dry in the third degree.

Calamitae, little grene frogs.

Calamitas, general destruction, or mysery.

Calamitose, myserably.

Calamitosus, miserable, or full of adversity.

Calamistrum, a pin of wod or yuory, wherewith men and women do set or trym up
their hear.

Calamus, a read, or wheat straw* also a pen* it is also taken for a pipe or
whistel* also a fishing rod, and a twyg, whereon byrd lyme is put. Also small
branches of trees, also it is a pole to mete with, containing six cubits and a
span, a mete pole. it is also a mesure, which the Jews used, as we do a pole,
but there was of it two sorts, one was callid Calamus sanctuarij, which
contained.x. fete, and a half, the other was called Calamus uulgaris, or the
common pole or perch, which contained ix. fete, of our measure three yardes.

Calamus aromaticus, uel odoratus, is a cane or read growyng in Arabia, Syria,
and India, which has many knots or joints, and is of a pale red color* when
it is broken, it fallith in to long pieces as it were cut, and has within it
like unto copwebbes. Dioscori.
It sends forth of it a meruaylous sweet savor far of, Constaut.
and being tasted, ^fer.
it cleaves to the tunge, and strayneth it.

It is hot and dry in the second degree.

Calantica, attire or burlet for a woman.

Calanus, a philosopher of Inde, which in the presence of the great Alexander,
being of the age of.73. years, felyng him self sick, made a bonefyre, and
went into the top thereof, and burnyd him felfe.

Calaris, a city in Sardinia.

Calaster, tri, he that has a shyll and loud voice.

Calastri pueri, were children, which had sharp voices and loud, Vitruuius.
and were much sought for of great princis.

Calathis, the name of a city.

Calathus, a basket or hamper.

Calatores, servants, which were always called for.

Calcaneus, and calcaneum, the heel.

Calcar, a spur.

Calcar addere, to spur. It is used for a proverb, signifienge to prick one
forward, which is of him self well disposed to a thing.

Calcaria fornax, a lyme pyt, or kylle.

Calcarius, a lyme bourner.

Calcata, a house which is pargeted.

Calcatus, a, um, pargetted or white lymed.

Calceamen, and calciamentum, a show, pynson, or socke.

Calcearium, a showmakers shop, also a show.

Calceatus, tus, idem.

Calceatus, a, um, shodde.

Calceo, aui, are, to put on shoen, to show an horse or mule.

Calceolarius, a showemaker.

Calceus, a show.

Calceus lunatus, a show fasshyoned before like a moon, which only the
Senators of Rome did wear.

Calcitro, aui, are, to kyche or wynse.

Calcitro, onis, a horse that does flyng or kycke

Calcitrosus, a, um, that oftentimes flyngeth or kycketh.

Calco, aui, are, to tread or press down.

Calculo, aui, are, to cast account.

Calculosque, he that is much disesed with the ston

Calculosus, a, um, grauelly or stony.

Calculosus locus, a stony place.

Calculus, a peble stone. also the stone in the body. also a chesse man, also
account. also the lest weyghte or poyse that may be. Moreover a knyfe made of
a stone.

Calculum album deijcere, to approve or allow a thing.

Calculum ponere, to yield account.

Calculu^ permittere uel porrigere, to put it to ones liberty, to give a
sentence, or to give his voice in election as he lysteth.

Calculu^ reducere, to revoke a sentence, where of one repents, or to turn
that purpose, which was not well or co^modiously divised.

Calculo mordere, Eras. chil.
A proverb signifienge to hurt one in giving a sentence, or in election

Calculum albu^ addere, to approve a thing. which proverb happened of this
occasion. In the old time in iugementes, litell stones were put into a pot,
some white and some black, which the judges did take out of the pot, and if
the more part of the stones were white, he that was accused, should be
acquitted by judgment. If the more part were black, the party should be
condemned. If the white and the black were equal in number, than should he be
acquitted.

Caldariae, hot bathes.

Caldariae cellae, Budeus.
places ioynynge to an hot house or dry bayn, which be made warm by the
heat that proceeds from the said bayns.

Caldarium, a cauldron wherein water is hette.

Caldor, idem quod calor.

Calecut, is a famous city in Indie the more, joining unto the Indian sea,
where as is the greatest mart and recours of marchantes that is in all Inde,
from the countrayes not only adjoining, but also out of Arabia, Syria, Egypt,
Lybia, and Ethiopia, for to sell and by all manner of spices and sweet gummes,
musk, and ambregrise, and myrobalanes. The king of that country is
inestimable rich, and although he do wear no garments, yet (...) his neck,
arms, and legs be adorned with precious stones of wonderful greatenes and
beauty, as with diama^des, saphires, rubies, emerauldes, and balaises. The
king and people be idolaters, callid Caffrani. Also they use those manners and
detestable customs, which I have before spoken of, where I have written of
Caffrani.

Calefacio, to make hot.

Calefio, I am made hot.

Caleua, a town in England, callid Oxford, where in is the first and chief
university of christendom, flourishing in all kinds of lernyng.

Calendae, the first day of every month.

Calendarium, a calender, declaryng the days of the months. it is also among
the ciuilyan lawyers, as Budeus says, a denial or refusel to lend money. Not
withstanding by the examples which he brings, it seems to me (except I be
deceived) that it should rather signify such a book as merchants use to have,
wherein is written the names of their dettors, with the det, and day when it was
due. The examples be these. Vlpianus.
Calendarij quoque curatio and quaestura in aliqua ciuitate, inter honores no^
habetur, The having of the custody and order of the book, wherein dettes are
written, and the treasorership in any cite, is not reputed among honorable
offices. Africanus
Itaque ipsae pecuniae si adhuc calendario, id est nominibus faciendis
destinatae essent, fidei co^misso cedere sole^t. More over the goods if they
were assygned unto the calender, that is to say, to be lent out for again, ar
wo^t to be left unto them that are put in trust for the performaunce of a will.
This have I not written in contempt of Budeus, whom I know to be excelle^tly
lernid in greek and latin, but only to declare mine opinion, which I will be
content to change wha^ I here a better.

Calendula, an herb callid ruddes or marygoldes*

Calaenum, a city in the country of Naples.

Calent iuditia, the judges have much to do.

Caleo, ui, ere, to be hot or warm.

Cales, a town in France.

Calesco, to wax hot.

Calete, the town of Calyce.

Calidi pedes, light feet.

Calidus, da, dum, hot.

Caliga, a hose, or leg harnayse.

Caliga Maximini, A proverb applied to men of great stature and personage, and
having ill conditions or properties, or be had in contempt or hatred. Which
proverb grew of themperor Maximinus, who being in height viii. fete and an
half, his greaues were longer than any other man's more than one foot, not
withstanding he was of manners barbarous and beastly, and extremely hated of all
men.

Caligatio, a dymmynge of the sight.

Caligatus, hosed.

Caliginosus, dark.

Caligo, ginis, darkness.

Caligo, aui, are, to make dark, or be dark.

Caligare in sole, to be deceiuid in a plain matter*

Calligante animo, with a blind imagination.

Caligula, the surname of an emperor, called also Caius, who succeeded Tiberius
themperor and was son of the noble Germanicus, and had the name of Caligula
given to him by the me^ of war, which were with his father, forasmoche as to
allure the love of the people toward him, his mother sometime would show him to
the army, with greaues on his legs, like to the facion of war, which
greaues were named in latin caliga, and because they were litel, they were by a
diminutiue callid caligula which the soldiers in disport and reioycinge,
applied to his surname. This man at the beginning of his reign was of manners
right commendable, but sone after he became of conditions detestable, as well in
lechery as in beastly cruelty. Whereof happened this proverb. There was never
a better prince than Caligula at the beginning, nor a wars tyra^t than he at
his later ending. Whereby (not withstanding that at the beginning he was most
derely beloved of the Senate and people) afterward he was so deadly hated,
that they slew him, when he had reigned but four years, being than.xxviii.
years old, after the incarnation of Christ.xl. years.

Calim, old writers vsyd for clam, privily.

Caliphus, was the name of dignity of the kings of Egypt, from the year of
our lord.704. until the year. 1050. At the which time Almericus being king of
Jerusalem, and making war on Egypt, the Calyf sent unto the souldan of
Babylon for succou. ^3, which sent an army with one Sarraco, who first
expellyd the Christen men, and afterward did cast the Calyf in prison, and
taking on him the rule of Egipte, caused him self to be called souldan of
Egypt. Caliphus, is also the dignity of him, which is the chief bishop of
Ma^hometes law.

Calirrohe, the name of.ii. fountaynes, one by Jerusalem, the water whereof is
medicinable and heals diverse syknesses: An other is by Athenes, which
fountayn has.ix. heads.

Calisthenes, was a noble philosopher, disciple of Aristotle, whom the great
Alexander for his excellent lerning and wysedom took with him when he went in
his conquest, and had him in great honor. But afterward Alexander imbracyng
the pride of the Persians, and co^mandyng the Macedons to honor him prostrate,
after the form of the Persians, and would be callid the son of Jupiter,
Calisthenes rebuked and dissuaded him from that folly. Wherefore Alexander
commanded that his arms and legs should be cut of, and like wise his ears,
nose, and lips, and to be thrown into a dungeon. Whose grievous peynes and
deformity, one Lisymachus a noble man pitieng, gave to him poison, whereof he
died.

Calistho, the mother of Archas, which gave the name to the country of
Archadia, whom poets feigned to be transformed into a bear.

Calix, a cup. also a pot wherein potage is sodden. it is also the little
grene leaves on the top of the stalk, out of the which comes the flower,
Ruellius.
and after the seeds. it is also the skin of an apple or other fruit.

Callaria, a cole whitynge, mean between an haddocke and a whitynge.

Callens, wise, or perfect in a thing.

Calleo, ui, ere, to be hard as brawne. also to perceive, to know perfectly by
long experience

Callesco, scere, to become hard.

Calliblephara, medycynes to make hears to grow in the chekes or brows.

Calliblepharon, a medicine for the eyes, specially when the eye lyddes do
cleave together.

Callide, wyttyly, prudently.

Calliditas, slyenesse.

Callidum mendatium, a crafty lie.

Callidus, slye or crafty, sometime wise.

Calligono^, an herb commonly callid Sa^guinaria.

Callimachus, the name of a poet.

Calliope, one of the virgins which be named Musae.

Callipaeda, an old man playeng the boy, being wanton and busy.

Callipolis, a city in Thracia.

Callis, a way much vsyd.

Calliscere, to wax hard, proprely in the skyn and flesh.

Callitrichon, an herb called maydenheare.

Callosus, thycke skynned.

Callosa ulcera, soores having the flesh about them hard.

Callus, brawne, or hardenes of the feet made with going.

Callum obducere, to harden, to make to endure labors or peynes.

Callum ducere, A proverb signifienge to be long exercised or used in any
thing.

Calones, shows of wodde. also scullyons and boys, which do follow an host
to carry baggage, wodde, coals, or other like things.

Calophanta, a mocker.

Calopodium, a paten, or slypper.

Calopus, a beast in Syria, which with his horns throws down great trees.

Calor, and caliditas, heat.

Caldor, idem.

Calorificus, a, um, that which heateth or makes a thing hot or warm.

Calous, a, um, hot.

Calotechnus, a good workman.

Calpar, a run.

Calpae, one of the mountains which be callid Hercules pyllers, by the which
is the passage out of the Spanyshe sea, into the sea called Mediterraneum. Also
the name of a city within the realm of Granado.

Calta, an herb growing among corn, having a yelowe flower.

Calthae, is a yelowe flower like to a violet, having many leaves, and a
greatte savor, it flouryssheth at the latter end of summer. Ruellius
supposes (...) be marygouldes, because it spreads in Autumn, whereof I
marvel, sens they be found here in the beginning of summer, or soon after.
Never the less I suppose it to be a kind of yelowe violettes, which are called
hearts ease, some think it to be a stock gylofer, some a wall rose.

Calthula, a garment of the color of hearts ease.

Calua, the sculle.

Caluaria, the hole head of a man or beast, wha^ the flesh is away. It was
also a common place of burial. Some men do suppose, that it was the place
where Adam the first man was buried.

Caluaster, a man somewhat balde.

Calueo, I am balde.

Caluesco, to wax balde.

Calueta, downs or playnes, whereon do grow neither corn nor trees. They be
also called of Columella, Glabreta.

Caluire, Alciat. in common. de uerb. sign.
among the old Romans sygnified to deceive or disapoynt.

Calumarius porcus, a swyne fed with grains, and such other vile things.

Caluisius Sabinus, was a very rich manne in Rome, who had so small a
remembrance, that sometime he forgot the name of Ulysses, sometime of Achilles,
sometime of Priamus, which before he knew as perfectely as children do their
tutours. Not withstanding he would be seen to be lernyd, wherefore he found this
ready way, he brought diverse slaves, of the which one had the warkis of Homer
by heart, an other had likewise Hesiodum. Likewise to every of the.ix. poets
callid Lyrici, he appointed one servant to kan them by heart. And wha^ he had
gotten this company, at supper they should sytte under the bourde at his fete.
Of whom he receiving verses, would oppose them which sat with him. Yet sometime
he forgot the myddell of the verse. Not withstandyng he thought that he knew
as much as any man in his house. A merry fellow called Satellius perceiving
his folly, exhortyd him to wrastelle, he being lean, sick, and pale. Than
said Caluisius, Seneca.
How may I wrestle, sens uneath I may live for feebleness? O say not so, quod
Satellius I pray you, do not you behold what a sort of tal men ye have to your
servants? This historye have I written as well for the merry concept thereof, as
also that thereby men, which would seem wise or well learned, if they have
about them servants well learned or wise, they them selfs lackyng wisdom
and learning, may by this tale be warned, that they not withstanding (...)
espied and mocked for their vain arrogance.

Caluities, and caluitium, baldness.

Calumnia, a false or crafty accusation.

Calumniator, he that accuses or sueth a man unjustly.

Calumnior, aris, ari, to accuse or sewe a man unjustly.

Caluo, aui, are, to make balde.

Caluo, ui, ere, to deceive or disapoynt.

Caluor, eris, eri, to be disapoynted.

Caluus, he that is balde.

Caluum uellis, Thou pluckest of hear of a balde man's head. A proverb,
where one would have any thing of a man that he lacks.

Caluus comaus, a bald man with a bush A proverb applied to them, which
show them selves rich with other men's goods, or do set forth warkes for
their own, which other men labored or devised.

Calx, calcis, masc. gender, the heel.

Calx, feminine gend, lyme made of stones ^uened. it is taken sometime for the
end of a thing.

Calydon, a city in Greec.

Calydonia sylua, was a great foreste in Scotland, wherein were white bulls
and kyen, which had manes like to lions.

Calypso, the daughter of Atlas, a nymphe or woman of the sea.

Calypsos, the name of an isle. also of a woman which received Ulysses, when he
escaped drownynge.

Calyptra, a woman's cappe or bonet.

Camarina, a stynkynge herb, the air whereof provoke one to vomyte.

Cambalu, is a great city in the countreye of Cathay, which is in
circuit.xl. miles, which is strongely wallyd, and has.xii. gates, In the
myddell thereof is the palaice of the great Cham or Cane of Cathay, which is
there called the palaice of Justice, which palaice in circuit
contains.iiii. miles, and in it be four great pyllers of fine gold.

Cambio, iui, ire, to change. In the old time it signified to fight, to begin
a journey, or to turn in a journey.

Camboduum, a city in Westphalia, called Monachum and Munchen, which late was
distroyed, because that the people maynteined the heresy of the Anabaptists.

Cambyses, a king of Persia, (...) father of Cyrus. It is also the name of a
river in the country of Hircania.

Camelerij, they which do ride on camelles.

Camelelasia, a dryuer of camelles.

Camelinus, a, um, of a camel.

Camelus, a beast called a camel, which has a long neck and a little head,
and some have on their backs two bu^ches like to hillockes, some have but one.
They of the country of Bactria be higher thanne horses, and more swyfte, Col.
in so much as some will run above one hundred miles in one day.

Camelus bactriana, is a proverb, applied where one brings forth a thing
to be meruayled at or feared, which in deed is to be contemned and laughed
at. Some take it in the masculine gender for an ancre cable.

Camera, the faulse roufe of a house, sollar, or chamber, or vault.

Camerare, to make a sauce roufe of a house, or to make a sollar, or to sylde,
or make a vaulte.

Camerarius, a, um, what so ever grows hanging over perches, or on the roufes
of houses Camerata uehicula, chariottes or lytters coueryd with bourdes.

Camerium, a town of Italy, in the country of Picenum.

Camerinam mouere, is a proverb spoken to one, signifyeng that he hurts him
self, by that thing that he stirith or goth about to have done. And it proceeded
of a fen so called, which being dried up there hapnyd a great pestylence,
whereof the people adioynynge asked of Apollo, if they should make it dry for
ever. Who aunsweryd, Ne moueas camerinam, as he should say, styre not myschief
to thy self.

Camertes, the inhabitants of Camerinae, a town in Sicile.

Camillus, and camilla, was in old time a boy or wenche that served the
bishop, when he did sacrifice.

Camillus, was also the surname of a noble Romayn, which was dictatour five
times, and triumphed four times: who was of so gentle a courage toward his
country, that not withstandyng that the people of Rome had expellyd him, and
that he was in exile, yet wha^ the Galls had taken the city of Rome with an
assault, and compellyd the Romans to redeem their heads with gold, he
persuading the people callid Ardeates, with whom he lived in exyle, to succor
the city, entered with them or any was ware of his coming and slew the
Galls, and discomfyted them, and saved or rather restored the city from
bondage. He was before the incarnation of Christ. 350. years.

Caminatus, a, um, made like a sournays or chymney.

Caminus, a chymney or fournays.

Cammarus, or gammarus, a fyshe callid a creuyse, specially of the fresshe
water, a crenyse deau doulx.

Camoenae, the Musis.

Camomilla, and camoemelum, an herb called Camomyll.

Campana, a belle.

Campania, a countray in the royalme of Naples, called also now Terra laboris.

Camparius, the keeper of the fields.

Camp, a worm which eats herbs, and is rough with may fete, and is callid
a palmer

Campester, tris, tree, of the plain country. Campestria loca, plain
countrays.

Campigeni milites, those men of war, which be always about the standerd, and
by their prowess and actiuitie do keep the host in exercise of arms.

Campso, aui, are, to turn an other way.

Campsores, exchaungeours of money, or they which deliver money by usury.

Campus, a plain field great and large.

Campus Martius, a field nigh Rome, and ioynyng to the river of Tiber, where
the Romans not only exercised them selfs in running, leapyng, wrastlyng, and
swimming, but also had there assemblies for the election of great officers in
the commune weal.

Camuri boues, oxen or kien with crooked horns

Camus, a byt or snaffle. also a rain or cord, wherewith men being condemned,
were bound.

Canaan, the son of Cain, son of Noe, of whom comes Cananaeus.

Canabatius, and canabinus, a, um, of hemp.

Canabis, hemp.

Canabus, a wine sellar.

Canales, pypes, whereby water does run into a cundyte.

Canaliculus, or canalicula, a little pype.

Canaliculatus, fashioned like a pype.

Canaliculata folia, Plinius
leaves which be holowe and turned round like cundite pipes or wafers
Canalitium aurum, gold dug in pittes.

Canan, the country called Arabye.

Cananaea, Joseph. in antiquit.
a part of Siria now callid Judea.

Cananitis regis, idem.

Canariae insulae, are yles in the great occeane 400. miles from Spain,
which some suppose to be those that of the old writers are called Insulae
fortunatae. The new names of them be these, Lanzelota, Fortis uentura, Magna
canaria, Tenerife, Gomera, Palma, and Ferrea. In these yles of late years grew
great number of canes, wherein was sugar, but cither by distemperance of wette
wether, or by conyes, which some men suppose were brought thither, that
commodity is almost distroyed.

Canarius, a, um, pertaynyng to dogs.

Canatim, an aduerbe, signifieng like a dog.

Cancellarius, in the old time was taken for a scribe or notary, now it is
called a chancellor.

Cancellatim, lattise wise.

Cancelli, lattyses, or any thing mude lattyse wise. Also secret places to
look out. Alsoo wyndowes made with bars of wodde or iron with dyuersehooles.
Also little crabbes of the sea.

Cancello, aui, are, to raze or put out, to cut or tear any thing that is
written.

Cancer, cri, a kind of fyshe called a crabbe also a sign in heaven.

Cancer, eris, a disease called a canker.

Cancri, is the same that cancelli be.

Cancris, a pyll in medicine.

Candax, acis, a queen of Egypt.

Candefacio, cere, to make white.

Candela, a candell.

Candelabrum, a candelstycke.

Candeo, ui, dear, to glowe like a burning cole. also to be white.

Candico, aui, are, to be white, or to make white.

Candide uestitus, trymmely apparayled.

Candosoccus, a sea gulle, or a Camose.

Candidati, were among the Romans they, which labored for some of the
great offices in the public weal, and they were so named because they did
wear in the time of their election white apparayl. It may be taken by
translation at this time for them that in universities be called inceptours or
regent masters. Also for them that be lately christenyd, or newly entered into
some honorable or worshypfull state. Vegetius says, that Candidati were men
of war, which had a privilege before other.

Candidati Caesaris, were such as sued for great offices, and were reco^mended
of the emperor to them which had election. Who presuming always that themperors
reco^mendation should take place, did solicit but neglige^tly, Whereof happened
this proverb, Sic petis tanquam Caesaris candidatus,
When any man asked any thing in such form as he thinks that no ma^wyl deny
him. As who says, ye ask it as if themperor had spoken for you. They were
also callid Candidati principis, Budeus.
where that facion is used may never be publik weie perfect.

Candide, gentylly, or easyly.

Candido, aui, are, to make white.

Candidus, a, um, white, more than Albus, orient white. It is sometimes taken
for fortunate, gentle, or easy.

Candidus iudex, a gentle or easy judge.

Candidus lector, a gentyl reder, which does not openly reprove that which he
reads.

Candifacio, to make white, to bleache, to make to glowe like a burning cole.

Candifico, aui, are, to make white.

Candor, oris, brightness or whitenes.

Canentae, were of the old Romans named the apparayle pertaining to the head.

Caneo, and canesco, scere, to be hoore, or graye heared.

Canephora, a maiden, which bare on her heed a basket or coffer, wherein were
jewels or images of the goddis.

Cangrena, a soore called a canker.

Cani, be taken for white hears for age.

Canicae, branne, of wheat.

Caniceps, a beast, which has only the face of a dog.

Canicula, a little dog or bytche. also a sterre whereof canycular or dog
days be named Dies caniculares.

Caniculus, a whelpe.

Caninus, doggyshe, or of a dog.

Canis, a dog, a kind of fyshe, callid dogfish, a play at tables, a sign in
heaven, whereof there be two sterres, one called Canis mayor, the other Canis
minor.

Canis festinans caecos aedit catulos, The hasty bytche brings forth blind
whelps. A proverb applied to them, which being hasty in setting forth
their warkes do make them imperfect.

Canis reuersus ad uomitum, Salom^^ in pro^^
The dog turns again to eat that he vomited. A proverb referred to him,
Petrus epistola.
which being reconciled unto god, returns eftsoon to his old conditions
and vices.

Canina facundia, dog eloquence. A proverb applied to such as do never
exercise their tunge or pen, but in reproving or blaming other men.

Caninu^ prandiu^, a doggis diner. A proverb used where there is no wine at
dinner or supper, for dogs of their nature do abhor wine.

Caninus appetitus, is a sycknes with an insatiable appetite to eat. Galen.
It proceeds of five causes, of abundance of melancholy flowing from the
spleen to the mouth of the stomach, or of a cold distemperance of the stomach,
or of the lousnes of the body, the poores being to open, or of to much labor
resoluynge, or of the consumyng of natural moisture, where with the body is
nourished.

Canistrum, a basket.

Canities, hoorenesse, or whitenes of hears. it is sometime taken for gravity.

Canna, a poet, which was in the time of Martialis.

Canna, a cane or read: also a can or oil pot. Also a village in the
country of Galilee.

Cannabis, hemp.

Cannabinus, a, um, made of hemp.

Cannae, arum, a town in the country of Apulia, where a great hooste of
Romans was slain by Hanniball.

Cannetum, a place where canes or reeds do grow.

Cannitiae, thatched houses.

Cano, cecini, canere, to sing, to play on the shalme or other instrument.
Also to praise, to prophesye.

Canere classicum, uel bellicum, to blow to the field, or to the assault.

Canere eandem cantilenam, to tell one tale twyse, or to recite often times one
thing.

Canere fidibus, to play on a harp, or other instrument having strings.

Canere receptui, to blow the retraicte in battle.

Canere sibi, Cicer. de lege agraria.
to speak for his own profyt.

Canere sibi and musis, to sing or write for his own pleasure, and for them
that do favor him, nothing caryng for any other.

Canere signa, to blow whiles men do sight in battle.

Canere surdis auris, to give counsaylle in vain, to lose labor in speaking.

Canon, a rule, also the inner part of a tergate, which keuereth the hand
also the revenues in customs and fee fermes of townshyps.

Canonarij, gatherers of taskes and tallages.

Canonia, the transomes in a ship, whereon the hatches are made.

Canonici, be those sort of musicians, which do try musyke by raison, as the
Pythagorians did: like as Harmonici, judged by the dilectation of the ears,
according to the folowers. of Aristoxenus.

Canonium, a place assigned to devout persons, Coelius antiq. 3.
which lived under a certain rule.

Canopicon, is an herb, which is one of the kinds of spurge. Read more in
Pityusa.

Canopus, a sterre of a meruaylous bryghtnes.

It was also the name of him, which was master of Menelaus ships, which being
dead in an isle at the entrye of the river of Nilus, was the cause that the isle
was called by his name. And he was there honored for a god, of whom this pretty
hystory is remembered of Suidas, where it happened, that the people of diverse
countries contended for the preemynence of their goddis, which they honored.
it was at the last agreed, that those ydolles, which were vanquysshed by any
notable experience, should give place to the vanquisher. That perceiuyng an
Egyptian priest of Canopus, a wytty fellow, he gat a water pot full of small
holes, such as in that country served to make water to run pure, and stop
pynge the holes, and fyllyng it full of water, he painted it, and made it in
the form of an ydoll, and craftily did set it in the old image, knowing that
the Caldeys honoryng the fire for God, did carry it about into all countries,
and therewith consumyd all other ydols, made of mettalle or other mattier. But
when they came to Canopus, and did set the fire about him, the wax wherewith the
holes were stopped, did melt quyckely, and the water distillyng into the fire,
quenchyd it. Wherefore Canopus was demed vanquysher and chief of the goddis.

Canor, oris, melody, loud.

Canorosus, a, um, full of melody.

Canorus, a, um, loud or shylle.

Canta, old writers used for cantata.

Cantabri, people of a country in Spain called now Biskay.

Cantatio, a singing.

Cantator, a syngar.

Canterij, be the pieces, which do lie under a piece of timber when it is
sawen, which some do call strings.

Cantherius, a gelding of an horse only. it is also the rail of a vine born up
with forkis or posts

Cantharia, a stone which has the prynte of a black fly called a byttell.

Cantharis, idis, uel cantharida, ridae, a green wourme shynynge with a gloss
like gold, bred in the top of ashes, which laid to a man's body, makes it
to blyster. Some do say that it is a fly keueryd with a skale like a byttell,
but that he is green.

Cantharus, a pot or a judge. Also a beast, where of there is found no female.
also a kind of fyshe. also the black fly called the byttell.

Cantherij, gootes.

Cantheriate uineae, vynes raised upon frames or perches.

Cautherium, a manner of a chariot or wagan. also a perch or a rail.

Canthes, organ pipes.

Canthus, is the corner of the eye, as well that which is by the nose, as that
which is next to the temples. It is also the iron, wherewith the extremity of
whecles be bounden, the struck of a carte.

Canticum, a pleasant or merry song.

Cantilena, is taken of Cicero for a spceche or tale commonly or to often used,
and is of a small effect.

Cantio, a song.

Cantiuncula, a song of light matters.

Cantito, aui, are, to sing often.

Canto, aui, are, to sing or to charm. sometime to monyshe or exhort. Haec
dies, noctesque tibi canto, Plaut. in Trinum.
ut caueas: This I exhort the day and night, that thou may beware.

Cantus, a song.

Canus, an old man.

Canus, a, um, gray or hoore.

Cana fides, the faythfulnes of old time.

Cana ueritas, idem.

Canusium, a town in the country of Apulia.

Capacitas, aptues to take.

Capax, acis, that takes or conteyneth any thing, able to receive.

Capax amicitiae, he that consydereth what belongs to frendshyp.

Capedo, the greatness of a vessel, or like thing that conteyneth.

Capella, a young got.

Capena, a town by Rome.

Caper, a geldyd got. sometime it is taken for the bucke got. It alsoo was the
name of an old grammarian.

Capero, qui, to frown or lowre.

Capesso, si, fere, to take, or to go about to take, to receive, Plautus.
sometime it signifies to bring in.

Capetus, the name of a king.

Caphareus, a mountain in Greece.

Capharnaum, the chief city in Galilee.

Capidulum, a hoode.

Capillamentum, the hear of a man's headde. sometime the tops of herbs,
where the seeds do grow.

Capillatia uela, be clothes of hear.

Capillatus, a, um, that has hear.

Capillitium, the hear of the head.

Capillo, are, to make hear.

Capillotenus, just to the hear.

Capillus, the hear.

Capillus Veneris, an herb callid maydenhear

Capio, coepi, capere, to take wyllingely or vnwyllyngly. sometime it
signifies to delight, to mitigate, to deceive. Capti dolis, deceived with
cautels. sometime to conteyne. Dij boni, quid turbae? aedes nostri, uix capiunt,
Good lord, what a company? uneath our house will conteyne them. also to make.

Capere rationem, to find the mean.

Rationem coepi, ut and ama^ti obsequerer, and patrem non offenderem, I found
the mean to please my lover, and not withstanding I dyspleased not my father.
Also to know the cause why. Terent. in Heauton.
Scio tibi esse hoc grauius multo, ac durius cui fit: ueru^ ego haud minus
aegre patior id qui nescio, nec rationem capio, nisi quod tibi been ex animo
uolo. I know well that to you, whom the thing touches, it is much more
displeasant and grievous, but yet it greueth me no less, I can not tell why,
but only because I love you.

Capere conditionem, to accept the offer.

Capere fugam, to run away.

Mente capere, to have in mind.

Miseriam capere, to be in miserye.

Misericordiam capere, to have pity.

Coepit eum satietas, he was weary of it.

Capere somnum, to sleep.

Capere rationem oculis, Plaut. in Pseud.
to judge by sight.

Hi loci sunt atque hae regiones, quae mihi ab hero sunt meo demonstratae, ut
ego oculis rationem capio: These are the places and streets that my master
showed me, as far as mine eyes can judge, or as far as I can perceive.

Capere uoluptatem, to delight.

Capere uersoria^, to change a purpose, to turn sail, to do the contrary to
that he intended.

Capere usuram corporis uxoris alterius, to commit adultery with an other man's
wife. Plaut. in Amphit.


Capis, dis, a cup.

Capistro, are, to halter or put on a rope or cord.

Capistrum, an haltar.

Capitatio, head silver, or subsidye gathered of every man after the rate of
his substance.

Capitale, and capital, an offense punished by death

Capitale est, it is death, or deserves death.

Capitalem fraudem admittere, to do a thing worthy punyshement by death.

Capitales Triumuiri, iuges in causes of death.

Capitalis noxa, an offense worthy death.

Capitalis aduersarius, a mortal ennemy.

Capitalis dies, a day appointed to done to receive judgment of death.

Capitalis homo, a man that deserves death. also that is pro^e or ready to
murder.

Capitalis ira, mortal wrath.

Capitalis locus, the place of execution.

Capitaliter, mortally.

Capitatus, a, um, that grows great in the head.

Capitati caules, cabages.

Capite censi, were among the Romans the poor sort of the people, which
were dyscharged of al exactions, and remained in the city only for generation.

Capitellum, a little head or top of a thing. Also the highest part of a
pyllar.

Capitium, any thing that covers the head, commonly they do call it a hood.

Capito, onis, he that has a great head. also heady or obstinat in opinion.
It is also a fish which by his description, seems to be a cod.

Capitolinus, was the surname of him that found the head, when the capitol
should be builded.

Capitolium, the palayce of the city of Rome.

Capitosus, he that has a great head or a dull head.

Capitulatum, any thing that is grown to a head.

Capitulo, are, to divide by chapiters.

Capitulum, a little head, also a chapter.

Capnion, an herb called fumitory. Plinius li. 26.
It is also called Capnios.

Capo, a fyshe called a Gurnarde.

Cappa, the name of a greek letter, for which the latins use C.

Cappadocia, a country in Asia, and has on the south the mountayn called
Taurus, and the country callid Cilicia^: on the east the country of Armeny,
and diverse other nations: on the north the sea called Euxinum: on the weste
Paphlagoniam. and is divided from Armeny the more with the famous river of
Euphrates. In that countreye are bred plentye of excellent good horses. It was
sometime called Alba Siria, for as much as the people be whyther than they of
the other Siria. The people thereof are called Cappadoces, which were reputed
to be of so ill conditions, that among the commune people, if one had been seen
to be of ill facion, they would say that he was of Cappadocia. yet not with
standing in that country was borne the blessed martyr and valiant christen
knight saint George, whose noble virtues and constante faith is written in
the book of life, and also remains an immortal example among us. Also
Basilius magnus, and Gregorius Nazianzenus, holy bishops and most
excellent doctors.

Cappadox, ocis, a man of the countreye of Cappadocia.

Cpparis, a fruit called Capers, wherewith we do make salates and sauce for
mutton, which eaten before meals, be very good for the stomach, and against
diseases of the spleen.

Capra, a got.

Capraria, an isle in the sea called Ligusticum.

Caprarius, a goteherde.

Caprea, a beast which does se wonderful quickelye. It is also a kind of
vines so named. Moreover an isle by Naples.

Capreolus, a kyd. also a beast called a too. It is also the tendrell of a
vine, which windeth diverse ways, called also Pampinus. Also a forke to set up
a vine.

Capreus, a, um, that which is of a got.

Capricornus, a sign in heaven, containing xx. stertes.

Caprificacio, the paring away of the bark of a tree.

Caprificiales dies, the days called canicular days, which were dedicate
unto Vulcanus.

Caprificus, Plinius.
a wild fyg tree, which runs up by walls.

Caprigenus, a, um, that which is of the kind of a got.

Caprile, a stable or pen where gotes be kept.

Caprilis, le, of a got.

Caprillus, a, um, idem.

Caprimulgi, birds like to gulles, which appear not by day, but in the night
they come into got pens, and do suck the gootes, whereby the vdders of them
be mortifyed.

Caprinus, a, um, of a got.

Caprisans pulsus, is when the pulse semethe to rise, Galen. in definit
and suddenly is changed in to an other form of meuynge.

Caproneae, the top or little mane, that is in the forhede of a horse.

Caprotina, a surname of Juno.

Caprunculum, a great vessel

Capsa, a coffer or cheste.

Capsaces, a vessel wherein oil is kept.

Capsarius, he that keeps chestes or apparel.

Capsis, for cape siuis, take it and thou will.

Capsus, a covered carte.

Captatio, a purchase, the act or craft to get favor. also deceypte or
subtyltie.

Captator, oris, he that uses that craft.

Captio, onis, the act of taking or deceyuing, or that whereby any thing is
taken.

Captiosus, captious, or deceytful.

Captiuncula, the diminutiue of Captio.

Captiuitas, captivity or bondage.

Captiuus, a prisoner taken in wars, or a slave.

Capto, aui, are, to get the favor of one with fair words, pleasant deeds
or rewards, also to deceive or take quyckely.

Captare coenam, Martialis.
to get a supper of fre cost.

Captare impudicitiae, to ly in awayt, to take one in the act of lechery.

Captare sermonem, to harken pryuily what men talk.

Captura, the apprehendyng or getting.

Captus, a, um, taken.

Capti oculis, blind. also greatte iouers be called Capti.

Captus mente, out of his wit, or mad.

Captus, tus, chance, also deceyte, perceyuyng of a thing, or capacity.
Captus hominum, men's capacity. sometime dilectation. Non possum adduci, and
suscipere e pecunia captum, I may not be brought thereto, and take dilectation
of the money.

Capua, a city in the royalme of Naples.

Capula, a cup with an handell.

Capularis senex, an old mn ready to be laid in his biere.

Capulum, a rydyng knotte.

Capulus, and capulum, what so ever may receive any thing into it: properly it
is a beer, where in dead corpsis are borne. also the hyltes or handell of a
sword.

Capus, a capon.

Caput, a head. Also the beginning of every thing. also a chapter of a book.
also an author or begynner of a thing. sometime chief, otherwhiles peril.
sometime estimation.

Ad capita rerum peruenias, com to the point of the matter.

Capita frumenti and uectigalium, the articles concerning grain and revenues.

Capita rerum expedite, goo quyckely to the principal mattier.

Capite damnatus, condemned to dye.

Capite decernere. Cicero.
Vtina meo solum capite decernerem, I would god I might try it at mine own
peril.

Sieve capite manner res, when one knows not whereof the brute is spronge.

Capitis anquirere, to proceed in judgment against one for treason or felony.

Capitis arcessere, to appeache one of treason or felonye.

Capitis diminutio, a condemnation, whereby a man loses either liberty of his
person, and is made bond, or is banyshed his country, or put out of the
kings protection, or renouncyng his own family, is adopted or taken into
another, which is not now used,

Capitis iuditium, process crimynall.

Caput facere, to gather a soore to a head.

Capys, a man's name that builded Capua.

Carabus, seu caramus, a fyshe called a lopster, like to a creuyse, but that he
is greatter, and is read when he is alive.

Caraxus, was the brother of Sapphus.

Carba, a wind that blows from the southe

Carbasus, in plural. Carbasa, a kind of lynnen cypres: also the sail clothe
of a ship. It is sumtyme taken for lynnen clothe.

Carbaseus, and Carbasinus, a, u^, of fine threde.

Carbo, a cole. It was also the name of a Romayne.

Carbone notare, to mark with a cole. It is also a proverb signifienge to
condemn a thing. sometime to take a thing for ill luck.

Carbonarius, a colyar.

Carbonarius, a, um, perteynynge to coals.

Carbunculatio, a red wind, which burns trees.

Carbunculatio in uitibus, is a fault in vines when the clusters of grapes are not sufficiently covered with leaves, by the which occasion they be withered
and dried.

Carbunculo, are, to be burned like a cole.

Carbunculus, a botche which comes of inflammation. It is also a kind of
precious stones, which do shine like a burning cole. Moreover a defaulte in a
vine, and other trees, whereby they are burned, which happens about the
canicular days. Also it signifies earth, wherein is found black slat stones.
Also earth which with the heat of the son is so hot, that it burns all
things that be sown or set in it.

Carcer, eris, a prison.

Carceres, plural. the place where horses stand when they run for prices, and
from thense do take their course. whereof comes a proverb. A carceribus ad
calcem, from the beginnynge to the end of an enterprise.


Carcerarius, a, um, of a prison.

Carchedonius, a kind of carbuncle stones, which in the house seem of purple
color, abroad in the air they are fyrye, against the son they send out
sparks, and if wax be touched with them, it melts.

Carchesium, a standing cup with handelles.

Carchoquios, a kind of frogs, having on their belies yelowe spots.

Carcina, a city.

Carcinodes, the cancre in the nose.

Carcinoma, atis, the eating ^anker in the over parts of the body.

Carcinus, a crab.

Cardamine, an herb called water cressis.

Cardamomum, is a spyce, which is like a sede somewhat long, the best of it
is hard to be broken, and sone perseth the nose in smellyng in taste quick
and somewhat bitter. Instead of this spyce, which commethe out of Arabia or
Indie, they now do commonly use a spice, which the apothecaries do call grana
Paradisi, in english graynes.

Cardiacus morbus, Galen^^
uel Cardiaca passio, is a sickness procedyng of an humor in the celles of
the heart. Cels^^^
if the humor be of blood or choler, Confr^^
there is with the trembling of the heart an heat also, with much thyrste,
and a deep fetching of wind. if it be of gross blood and melancholy, than
is there fear, sorrow, and dulnes, without thyrste. Some time it happens by
dymynution of things necessary to the comfortynge of the heart, as good and
substantial blood and clear, coming from the liver. sometime humors sharp
and prychynge do gather to gether in the stomach, and causes that sickness.
Otherwhiles it happens in a fever, wherein the pacient sweateth much: Also of
the feebleness of the stomach, specially where the veins are lyttel, the pulse
feeble, sweat out of due measure and time, about the ouermost part of the
body, the neck and head, the legs and fete being than cold and dry.

Cardinalis, le, chief or principal.

Cardineus, the same.

Cardinum, an herb, which some do suppose, is cressis.

Cardo, dinis, the post whereon the door hangs, and is moved. Also a mere or
bounds, which passes through the field, from the southe to the north. It
is also the tenon, which is put into the mortayse.

Cardines temporum, Plinius.
the four times of the year: Spring time, Somer, Autumn and Winter.

Cardo causae, the issue of the matter.

Cardo rei, the effect of the matter or thing: the chief point of the matter.

Cardopos, an huche or coffar, wherein bread is layde^n I the north countreye
it is called an arc.

Carduelis, a bird called a lyuet.

Carduus, a thystell.

Care, derely, at a great price.

Carex, icis, sedge that grows in fen grounds or watery.

Carectum, the place where sedge does grow.

Careo, ui, ere, to lack, properlye those good things, which ones were had.
Sometime it signifies to be without a thing: as Careo culpa, I am without
fault.

Careo febre, I am without fever.

Cares, the name of a keruer, the scholar of Lysippus.

Caria, a region in Asia, having on the north syd^^he great river of Meander,
on the west the great sea called Icarius, on the east Licia, and diverse other
countries, toward the southe the mountain of Taurus. The people thereof were
called Cares, which were good men of war, and therefore they were every where
retained for soudiours, as Suyzars or Suychynars be now.

Carica, cae, a dry fyg, such as is eaten in lent.

Carica, little houses set on high places, which be strong by the natural
munition of the place.

Caricus, a, um, of the countray of Caria.

Carides, a fyshe called a prane, like to a shri^p.

Caries, a little worm that eats wood. It is also putrefaction or fylthe
grown by age or continuance.

Cariem trahere, to wax rotten, or to be putrified or vinnewed.

Carina, the kele or bottom of the ship.

Carinae, arum, a street in Rome, wherein Po^pey dwelled.

Carinatus, a, um, made in form of the kele of a ship or bote.

Carino, aui, are, to make any thing like to the keele of a ship.

Carinthia, a country by Oustrike, ioynynge on the southe to the mountains
called Alps, and Italy, on the East and North to Stiria. The form of
election of the new prince or governor there, declared by Pius in his
cosmographye, is very strange, and right pleasant to know. In the town
called Sancti Viti, is a great valey, where, in a medowe is set a stone of
marble, of a good height, whereupon ascends an husband man, unto whom by
inheritance that office belongs: On his right hand stands a black cow,
on the left hand an ill favored mare, about him stands a great multitude of
carles. On the other side of the medowe comes the duke, accompanied with his
noble men in their robes of astate, before him goes the earl of Goritia, the
great master of his house, between.xii. banners, bearing the princes standarde.
The other noble men do follow with the prince clad like an husband man, with
a sheep croke in his hand, like as he were a shepeherd. whom as soon as the
earl, which stands on the marble stone, does se coming, he asks with a
loud voice in the slauon tungue: who is this that comes with so proud a
gate? They which stand about him, don answer, that it is the prince of that
country. Than answers eftsoon the earl: Is he a rightuouse judge, sekinge
for the weal of the countreye, a free manne borne, and worthy to have honor?
Is he a true christen man, and defendour of Christis faith? They all answer:
yea, he is and shall be. Than says the earl, by what right may be put me
from this place? Than answers the earl of Goritia: Thou shall have for thy
place.lx. grotes, these two beasts ar thine (showing to him the cow and the
mare) the princes aparayle which he did late put of, thou shall also have, thy
famyly or kynne shall be free from all manner of tribute. Than the carle gyuyng
to the prince a lyttel blow on his check, byddeth him be a good judge, and
coming down from the stone, gives him place, and so departs, taking
with him the cow and the mare. Than the prince goes up on the stone, and
holding a naked sword in his hand, and brandishing it, tourneth to every
part of the stone, promysyng equal judgment unto all the people. Than is
there brought to him cold water in a husband man's cappe, which the prince
drynketh, signifienge that he condempneth drinking of wine. Thanne goes he to
a church of our lady there by, where after that he has hard mass, he puts
of the rusticall apparayle, and puts on other apparayle of honor, and
dynynge with his nobility sumptuouselye, he comes eftsoon to the medowe,
where he hereth matters, and mynystreth Justice. This hystorye I have thought
necessary to be known among us. wherefore I have not spared my labor to
delight other. The duke of this countreye is as it were chief master of the
game, unto the imperial majesty.

Cariophillon, a spice called cloves.

Cariosus, a, um, as earth is after that it is well dunged and stered. it is also
putrified or rotten.

Cariota, a date.

Cariotis, idis, idem.

Caritas, tatis, scarcity, derth properly of that which serves for the
sustinaunce of man.

Caritas, annonae, derthe of vitayle.

Carius, the name of Jupiters son.

Carmania, a country in India, which after Ptholomeus is divided in two
parts, oone part is very fertile, an other is very barain. The people in the
stead of garments do wear the saynnes of fyshes, and do eat only fish, and
their bodies be all roughe and keuered with hear, except their vysages, and
they have no towns nor other certain habytation, Strabo.
but are always wandrynge. Of this country I find one thing worthy of
remembrance. Who so ever will mary there, must bring first to the king of
that country, the head of an ennemy, which the king sets up in his
palaice, and takes first out the tungue, and causes it to be cut in
pieces, and mengled with bread, and gives part thereof to him which brought
the head. And if there be many heads, he deuideth the tunges among his
gentylmen, as most delycate meat.

Carmelus, the name of two sundry hills in Judea.

Carmen, minis, a verse or meire. Also the hole warke which is made in versis.
sometime it signifies a charm.

Carmentis, the name of a lady, which had the sprite of prophesy, and gave
answer in versis. She was also called Nicostratis, and was mother of Euander.

Carminare, to card wull, or other like thing.

Carminarij, they that do pick or make clean wull, or card.

Carmites, people of a country in France called Chartres.

Carmon, a place in Messenia, and the temple of Apollo in Laconia.

Carna, Macrob.
was supposed to be the goddess of man's life, of her they desired the heart
and liver to be preserved.

Carnarium, a larder, wherein hangethe salt flesh. Sometime it sygnifieth a
bouchers shambles.

Carnarius, a boucher.

Carnarius, a, um, that perteyneth to flesh.

Carneus, a, um, that which is of flesh.

Carni, the people of a country in Almayn called Carinthia, belonging to the
duke of Austrike. It is also the name of an other people in Italy, in the
country called Marca Taruisina.

Carnifex, ficis, an executioner or hang man, that cutteth men in pieces.
sometime a murderer.

Carnificina, the place where such execution is done. Also the office or act
of a hang man* also great murder, cruelty.

Carnificium, the same act.

Carnificinus, a, um, perteynynge to the act of murdering or sleinge.

Carnificor, aris, ari, to play the hangemans part.

Carniuorns, a, um, any thing that deuoureth flesh.

Carnositas, abundaunce of flesh.

Carnosus, fleshye.

Carnosium folium, and Carnosa radix, a thick leaf or a thycke root.

Carnotum, the myddell region of al France.

Carnuntum, a town in the border of Germany

Carnus, a, um, fat.

Caro, Donatus.
carnis, flesh, properly of that which is dead.

Caros, excess of meat and drink. Also an herb and seed called carwayes,
It is also an herb called caret, the rote whereof is like a persenepe, but some
are yelowe, and some red, and be in eating more pleasant than persnepes, and will
be sooner digested.

Carorae, Cel. ant. lect.
uel Carotici, be the greatte ^ynewes, which do hold up the neck, called
also Tenondes, which in Cornelius Celsus in some prynte be called Cerotes,
which would be amended and written Carotas.

Caroticae, Aristo* a^al^^;
be the great veins on every side of the neck.

Carpathium mare, the sea ioynyng to Egypt, wherein be the yles called Sporades.

Carpathos, an isle against Egypt, the mids between Rhodes and Candy.

Carpatinae, ploughmens boots, made of vntanned lether, they may be called
okers.

Carpentarius, a cartwright, or carpenter.

Carpentarius equus, a carte horse, or chariot horse.

Carpentum, a chariot, or waggen.

Carphos, an herb called Sengrene.

Carpinus, a tree, called among the french men carpi, or carme.

Carpineus, a, um, of carme.

Carpio, a fyshe called a carpe.

Carpo, psi, pere, to gether or pluck. Also to these out, to reprove, or
taunt, to use.i. fiuor, to pass over quickly.

Carpere agmen, to assail an host on every side.

Carpere cibum, to eat.

Carpere iter, to take a journey.

Carpere lanam, to tose wull, or card wull.

Carpere maledico dente, to reprove malyciousely.

Carpere uiam, to walk.

Carpere, uires, to debilitate or infeble.

Carpere uitales auras, to live.

Vnum quicquid quod quidem erit be^lissimum carpam. Te^^^^
One, which so ever shall be the fairest, I will chese.

Genio carpamus dulcia, let us make good chere.

Carpere exercitum in multas parts, to dyuyde an host or army.

Carpet citius aliquis, quam imitabitur: One shall sooner find fault, than do
like it.

Carpocrates, an heretic, which denied that Christ was god, affyrmynge that
he was pure man, of whom the sect was called Carpocratitae, or Carpocratiani.
They also affyrmed, that the world was made by aungelles, and not by god. they
reiecte the old testament, and do deny the general resurection. They also
denied that Christ was born of the virgin Mary, saying, that he was got ten of
the sede of Joseph. Also that his body suffered, and that only his soul was
received in to heaven. This Carpocrates lived about the year of our lord.142.

Carpophyllon, a tree, which has leaves like to laurel.

Carptim, pykinge out here and there.

Carptim breuiterque perstringere aliquid, to touch a thing summarily and in
few words.

Carptim dicere, to touch things here and there quickly.

Carptura, a gatherynge to gether of soundrye things.

Carra, rae, a city in Arabia.

Carrodunum, the chief city of Polonia called Cracouia, or Cracaw.

Carruca, a carte.

Carrucarius, a, um, perteynynge to a carte,

Carrus, a chariot.

Carteia, a town in Spain.

Carthaginenses, people of Carthage.

Carthaginensis, perteyninge to Carthage.

Carthago, was a famous city in Affrike called Cartage, almost environed with
the sea which city was in compace about the walls.360. furlunges, which
are.45. Italyon miles whereof.vii. miles and an half ran in length on the
rydge of an hyl, which went from sea to sea, where as were set the stables of
olyphantes, which was a very large place. Almost in the myddell of the city
was a castle or tower called Byrsa, having an hy! on the top, whereupon stood
the temple of Aesculapius, called god of medicine: underneath were havens or
kayes of the castle, and a littell isle called Cothon, which was round,
standing as it were in a great ponde, about the which were set the houses,
that served for the navy of Carthage. This city contynuwed wars with the
Romans.xl. years, and had many excellent men of war, of whom Hannibal was
the most noble and famous. That city had in subjection not only a great
part of Affrike, but also Sicile, the more part of Spain, and the yles of the
myddell sea, which now the emperor Charles enjoys. It was at the last
destroyed by Scipio, and the Romans, before the incarnation of Christ.144.
years. The country where it stood, is now called Tunyse.

Carthallum, a basket.

Carthumandua, a queen in this Britayne, of the people called Brigantes.

Cartilago, ginis, a gristell.

Cartilaginosus, a, um, full of gristelles, or of a gristell.

Caruncula, a little piece of flesh.

Carus, a, um, dear.

Carya, the name of a city in Greece.

Caryatides, the images of womenne holdyng garlandes, or other like thing, set
up to garnyshe houses.

Caryca, read in Carica.

Caryon Indicu^, uel nux indica, a great fruit like to a nut, which the
Arabians do say ar the dates of Inde, out of them comes a lycour more sweet
than butter. This nut is hot in the second degree, and moyest in the first.

Caryon myristico^, uel Mosthocaryon, is that spice which is also called Nux
muscata, in english nutmygges, which is hot and dry in the second degree.

Caryopos, the juice of a nut.

Caryorae, read in Cariotae.

Carynus, a, um, of a nut, as Oleum carynu^, the oil of nuttes.

Caryste, and Carystos, an isle in the sea called Euboicum, wherein is plentye of
marbyll of diverse colors.

Carystaeus, a, um, of that isle.

Casa, a cottage.

Casabundus, a, um, falling often.

Casaria, the woman that keeps the cotage.

Cascus, a, um, old.

Caseale, a stable.

Caseus, cheese.

Caseus musteus, Rowen cheese.

Casia, a spice which has the virtue of Cinamome, and is wonderful soote in
savor, it is called of the apothecaries Cassia lignea.

Casito, aui, are, to fall or drop oftentimes.

Casia fistularis, is that which is called commonly Cassia fistula.

Casius, a hill in the borders of Egypt.

Casner, in the osk tungue, is an old man.

Caspiae portae, are places broken in the rocks of the mountains of Caucasus
toward Hyrcania and Persia, which are in length^ (as Plinius says.) vii.
miles, as Solinus writes.viii. miles: in bread they are so narrow, that a
carte may hardly pass throw them. Martianus writes, that those gates were
fast shyt with great iron beams, to let that no man should pass. In the
spring time and summer all serpents do repair thither from all countries
about, wherefore the passage that way is peryllous.

Caspij, a people now in Iartaria, ioyuynge to the sea called Caspium. In them
is this in humanytie, as Strabo writes, that when their parents do excede the
age of.lxx. years, they put them into a close place, and do famyshe them, and
than do they lay them in a deserte, and do behold them far of. And if
birds do pluck them out of their couches, and devour them, they account
them blessed: if dogs or wild beasts do it, they do not account it so
happy. if both do it, they esteem those men unhappy. Other do write, that they
nouryshe dogs of purpose to devour them.

Cassa dote virgo, a maiden having nothing toward her marriage.

Cassa nux, a pypped nutte.

Casses, sis, nets, which may be called haies. Also an helmet: But than it
has cassidis in the genitive case.

Cassiculus, a little hay.

Cassinum, an old market plate.

Cassiopa, an haven on the Southe part of Sicile.

Cassiope, called also Cassiopeia, a sign in heaven that has.xii. sterres,
and is fygured like to a woman, sitting in a chair.

Cassita, a lark.

Cassiterides, be.x. Isles in the Spanysshe sea, wherein was dug much tynne,
and they be not far from the weste part of Spain.

Cassiterus, tynne.

Cassitias, the gum that droppeth out of a fyrre tree.

Cassius, a propre name of a man.

Casso, aui, are, to put out or make of none effect.

Cassus, a, um, void and of none effect.

Cassus lumine, dead.

Cassutha, Ruellius.
is that herb which is commonly called Cascuta, in english withwinde.

Castalius, a fountain in the foot of the hill of Pernassus, which was
dedycate to the Muses.

Casta mola, was a kind of sacrifice, that the virgins vestales made.

Castanetum, a place set with chesten trees.

Castaneum, a chesten or chest nut.

Cast, chastely, honestly, incorruptly.

Castellani, the inhabytauntes of a little walled town.

Castellatim, one little walled town after an other.

Castellum, a little walled town. It is also a cundyte, out of the which
water runs. it is also the name of a country called Iuliers or Gulike.

Casterium, a house, wherein the tackelynge of ships is kept.

Castigatio, Correction.

Castigabilis, le, that which may be corrected or amended.

Castigo, aui, are, to chastise with words, also to correct or amend, to
refourme, to punish.

Castitas, atis, chastity.

Castimonia, idem.

Castor, a beuer, which has the tail of a fyshe, in the residue is like to
an ottar.

Castor, and Pollux, were brethren both born at oone birth, which were
honored for gods.

Castra, orum, an army of men of war when they lie or abide in any place.
Also the place where the host lodges. Also the pauyllions being pitched. Also
they do signify Stationes, restinge places, where the hostre taryeth to
refreshe them, which among the old Romans contained.ix. miles, as Senalis
does write.

Castris exuere, to compel the ennemies to ^aise their camp. Ti. L^^^ bell. P^^
Nec ante abscessum est, quam castris exuerunt hostem: Nor they departed not
away, until they had constrained their ennemies to raise their tampe.

Castrametor, to lay or lodge an army.

Castrata respublica, a weak or feeble common weal.

Castrense peculium, that which a man of warhath gotten in the wars.

Castrensis, se, that which perteyneth to an host or army, or war.

Castro, aui, are, to gelde. Sometime to cut of generally.

Castrum, a castle or fortress.

Castula, lynnen clothe, wherewith maydene did gyrde them self under their
pappes.

Castus, a, um, chaste, honest, and continente, or uncorrupted.

Casu, by chance.

Casura, a fall or decay.

Casurgis, a city in Boeme, now called Praga.

Casus, hap, ruin, misfortune, or mysery, also a case.

Catabasis, the sun set.

Catabathmus, a place in Affryke ioynynge io Egypt.

Catachresis, a figure, whereby the property of a word is abused: as, Facies
simillima lauro, where facies only belongs to a man, and not to a tree,
although it does signyfye there a similitude or figure.

Catachysmata, among the Atheniensis the usage was when new servants were
first come into an house, as they stood by the chimnaye or herthe, there were
poured on their heads, fygges, nuttes, dates, beans, and peason, which were
catched up of the other servants. And the like was done on the new bryde in
token of good luck. And this was called Catachysmata, for catachysis, in
greek, is in english a pourynge out.

Cataclysmus, an universal floudde.

Cataclysta, a garment close all about.

Catacrysis, a condemnation.

Catadromus, the place where men do rum horses for prices or wagers.

Catagrapha, images lokynge diverse ways, and in diverse fourmes.

Catalecticum metrum, a verse wherein one only syllable lacks.

Catalepsis, occupation, or deprehension.

Catalexis, a finishynge of a thing.

Catalogus, speech or writing, where things be recited in order and number.
A rehersall or table of the number of things

Catalyma, refection. also an ynne.

Catamidio, are, to set one up with a paper on his head to be mocked or
rebuked for some offense, as they use to do with men perjured, or with forgers
of euydences.

Cataphora, Galen. in ^agoge.
a dead sleep, or dysposition to sleep or wake.

Cataphractus, armed and fenced on al parts.

Cataphracti equites, men of arms on barbed horses.

Cataphractae naues, keuered ships,

Cataphriges, were heretives, which took that name of one Montanus of Phrigia,
an arch heretic, who affirmed, that the holy ghost was given to them, and not
to the apostles. They baptized not in the name of the trynytie: they baptized
also menue after that they were dead, and damned the second maryages. This
sect began the year of our lord.170.

Cataplasma, a plaster made with herbs and sewet.

Catapotia, pyiles in medicine.

Catapulta, an arrowe, or a quarrel.

Catapultarium pilum, a bolte.

Cataputia mayor, the greatter spurge. look in Racinus.

Cataputia minor, an herb called the less spurge. look more in Tithymalus,
and also in Lathyris, which is the same herb.

Catarrhacta, a portculious. Also clouds. sometime caves in the earth, also a
web in the cie.

Catarrhactae, great courses of water, fallinge down from high places. Also
the places from whense they do fall.

Catarrhus, a rewme or stillinge down of water or fleume from the head.

Catascopium, a ship that watches or espieth for other, a brigandine.

Catasta, a cage wherein men be set, which are to be sold. also wherein they
were punysshed.

Catastroma, part of a ship or pauement.

Catastrophe, a subversion, or a volume.

Catatyposis, a figure, where one thing is described by an other.

Catechesis, an instruction or teaching properly by mouth and not by writing.

Catechiso, aui, are, to instruct, to infourme, or teach.

Catechumenus, he that is newely instructed.

Categoria, accusation.

Catellus, Catella, a little hounde, a brache.

Catena, a chain.

Cateno, aui, are, to chain to gether.

Catenula, a little chain.

Caterua, a company of men of war. sometime a multitude of people.

Cateruarij, they that do assemble in companis.

Cateruatim, by companyes.

Cathalanu^, a town in France called Chalon

Catharctica, purgative medicines.

Cathari, were heretics, which affirmed, that it was not lefull to a christen
man to swear, for any cause, or at any time. They also denied all the
sacraments of the church.

Catharmos, a certain purgation with fire.

Cathay, is a great region in the east part of the world, extendynge unto
the east occean sea, and on the southe unto the over India, and is also called
Synarum regio. It is divided into nine royalmes, which be all under the great
Cham. This country is wonderful rich in gold and sylke, and abounds in
grain and wynes and al other things necessary for man's sustynaunce. The
people for the more part does honor Christ as god, but they are not baptized,
they are courtayse and reasonable, and very kunning artificers,

Cathedra, a benche or stool.

Cathinea, a kind of earth, whereof latin metal is made.

Catholicus, universal, now it is used for him that keeps the faith, as the
universal church has observed it. Also the busshop of the Armenians was so
called.

Cathortoma, the right work of virtue, a deed justly done.

Cathortosis, a right affection.

Catillatio, a great reproach laid to gentylmen, which had robbed the
countries that were alyed to the Romans, and had riottouslye consumed the
goods.

Catillo, are, to eat like a glutton.

Catillones, lycke dyshes, gluttons.

Catillus, the over stone of a myl, called the runner. Also a potager.

Catina, a city in Sicile.

Catinus, a dyshe.

Cato, onis, was not first a surname, but a name of merit, for the aunciente
Romans called him Cato, that was wise by much experience. Of this name were
diverse, of whom two were most excellent persons: the one of them was called
Marcus Cato Censorius, because that he always used the gravity and rigor,
which was wont to be in the correctours of manners called Censores, and also
he him self being Censor was above all other most sharp and rigorous.
Valerius Maximus writes, that he was almost an old man er he learned latin
letters, and than it seems he was old er he learned greek. And yet
notwithstanding by gatherynge bridgmentes out of Tucidides and Demosthenes
warkes, he became the greatteste orator of his time, and was called the Roman
Demosthenes. He being made consul, wan moo cities in Spain, than he had aboden
days in that country, In the which journey he nothing retained to him self
of all that was found there, but meat and drink only: but made his
soldiers rich, gyuynge to every of them a pound weight of silver, saying:
That better it were that many Romans returned with silver to Rome, than a
few Romans with gold. He taught his own son grammar, not withstandyng
that he had a servant called Chylo, which was an excellent grammarian, and
taught a great school, saying: that it was not convenient, if his son were
slow in learning, that he should be rebuked or pulled by the cares of him,
which was of a seruyle condition. He also taught him the cyuile laws, and
all manner of exercise, not only to handle al weapons and to ride well, but also
to fight with the sistes, and to sustain both cold and heat, and also to
leap into waters, and to swymme against swift running streams. Being Censor
he spared none estate, whom he found corrupted in manners, or superfluouse in
living, whereby he brought into the city a meruailouse image of virtue. His
sentences rehearsed by Plutarch be wonderful, of the which I will remember
three for the excellency of them. Like as the diars (said he) do die most
osten that color, which they perceiuen most men do delight in: so young men
do most studiouselye haunte and embrace that, which they se old men and
counsailours have in most estimation. He also blamed the people of Rome, for as
much as they committed authorities and offices, often times to one person,
saying: They seemed not to esteem rule and auhoritie, or else that they
supposed that there were but a few that were worthy promotion. The one was a
sign of contempt, the other was discorage to good wits, and rebuke to their
country. Also when there were three ambassadors chosen to be sent in to
Bithynia, of whom one had the gout, an other had peine in his head, the
third was timorous, Cato laughinge, said in the senate: The people of Rome,
sends an ambassade, which has neither feet, head, nor yet heart. The life
of this man, and also of the other Cato, are worthy to be often times radde,
specially of cou^saylours and men in authority. He was before the incarnation
of Christ.182. years.

Cato Vticensis, was so called because he slew him self in the town called
Vtica in Affrike. His great graundfather was the other Cato called Censorius.
This man in childhood showed a wonderful constance and gravity, seldom very
merry, or seen to laughe, and if he did, it was a very little smyling, nor would
lightly be angrye, but if he were angrye, he was not shortly appesed. Also he
was hard to learn, but that which he learned, he perfectly retained, and was
very studious in all moral philosophye, practisynge in his acts and lyuinge
that which he rad of virtue and honesty, and also studied eloquence, only to
the entente that in counsaylynge and raysonynge he might add unto philosophy
more force and ornamente, and yet would he not show it, or practice it openly.
And when one said to him, me^ dysprayse thine obstinate silence, he answered:
I force not, so that they disprayse not my living But I will break out of this
silence, when I can speak that, which is not worthy to be unspoken. Being
Tribunus militum, that is to say captain of a thousand men, or as Budeus
resembles, marshall of an army, and being sent in to Macedonia, He with his
meruaylouse gravity, prudence, and peynefulnes, made all them, which were
under him, fierce and hardy against their ennemies, gentle to their fellows,
fearful to do injury, prompte to get praises: and him self labourynge with
them, and using his apparayle, feeding, and goinge, like unto them, he
contrary to men's expectation (not withstanding his seuerytie) wan the hearts
of them, goinge on foot and talking with every manne. And was of such
constance, and so far from ambition and flattery, that neither by Pompeye nor
Caesar in their chief pride, when all men either for dread or for favor
inclyned to their desires, he moughte be by no means persuaded, to agree to
their minds, in cases where it seemed to be against the weal publyke, nor any
manner of menacynge or dreadful tokens, might from that constaunce remove him.
In so much that when he hard, that Julius Caesar had vainquisshed Pompeye,
and that his friends would have sent to Caesar to desire his favor, Cato
answered: They which are vainquyshed or have any wise trespaced, ought to
make suite, but sense he in all his life was never vainquished, and in innocence
he surmounted Caesar, which in making war against his own countreye, had
condemned him self to have done that thing, which he had often denied.
Finally not for malice of Caesar, but because he would not behold the weal
publyke destroyed, he slew him self at Vtica, having with him at souper, the
evening before, the greattest officers of that city, and many of his friends.
Also this sentence being spoken among other: Only a good man is a free man,
all ill men are bond* when one happened to reason against it, Cato being
therewith chaufed, disputed with the other so vehemently and long, that all men
suspected, that he would not long live. He dyed before the incarnation of
Christ.44. years.

Catoblepas, a beast full of poison, called a basylyske.

Catularia, one of the gates of Rome.

Catulinus, a, um, of a catte.

Catulire, the desire of female kind, to company with the male kind, proprely
to go assaut, to rudder, to horsyng, or to blyssonynge.

Catulitio, the going assaut. etc.

Catullus, the name of a poet.

Catulus, a kytte^n or young catte. also it is put generally for the young
kind of all beasts. also for a dog.

Caturactonium, a city called Carlyle in England.

Catus, a cat. sometime wise or wyttye* also the name of a noble and wise family
in Rome.

Caua, a hole, wherein birds do bread.

Caucasus, an hill, one of the highest in all Asia, and stretches of a
marvelous length, and is named of some men Caspij montes, forasmoche as it
stretches forth by the sea callid Caspium. Not withstanding in the chart,
called Charta marina, the hylle of Caucasus is set on the North part of
that sea, and Caspij montes, are on the southe part, having on the north
Alania, and a part of Media, and on the southe Assyria.

Cauda, a tail of a beast. sometime a man's privy member.

Caudacus, gentle and pleasant.

Caudecae, Plaut. in rudente.
little coffers of wickers, or a iunket, wherein eles are taken in ryuers.

Caudeus, a, um, of the stem of a tree.

Caudex, dicis, the lower part of a tree next the root. also a table having
many leaves or tables. It also signifies a dulle fool, such as can neither
well speak nor do.

Caudicalis, le, pertaynyng to the stem of a tree.

Caudicariae naues, ships made of thyk plankes, or a ship which carries
vitayles.

Caudis, a town of the Samnites.

Cauea, a cave or dark place in the ground. also a cage or coupe, wherein
birds be kept. Moreover a place where a comedye or interlude is playde.

Cauaedium, is a place at large, having many porches, which serves to a
commune, like a markette place. It is also a little court with in a house.

Caueo, caui, cauere, to beware, to eschew. also to provide diligently, to
take heed. and joined with an accusative case, sygnyfyeth to bydde to beware.

Cave tibi, take heed of thy self.

Cave tibi illum puerum, beware of that child.

Cave facias, take heed what thou doste.

Caetera cauebuntur, the reaste I will provide for.

Cauere alicui, to give counsaylle to oone in matters of law, or concerning
contractes, to instruct one what he shall do.

Cauere capite, Pli. li. 54.
to put in sureties to appear in matter of life and death.

Cauere sibi ab aliquo, to take a quytance or other dyscharge for the payment
of money, or delyuerance of any thing. At uero, inquam tibi ego Brute non
soluam, Cicer. in Bruto.
nisi prius a te cauero, amplius eo nomine neminem, cuius petitio sit,
petiturum, Truly said I, Brutus, I will not pay the, except I have first a
quyttaunce of the, that thou shall not eftesones demand it of him, of whom
thou moughtest ask it.

Quid isti caueam? B. Vt reuehat domum, Plaut. in Bacch.
What shall I provide for him? B. one to bring him one.

Cauere testamenta, to give in charge by testament a thing to be done.

Caueri, to be taken head of.

Caueares hostiae and cauae, were parts of the beasts next to the tail, to
be sacrifyced for the bishops.

Cauerna, a cave or holow place in the ground, sometime Cauernae, do sygnifie
ears.

Cauernosus, a, um, full of caves.

Cauilla, uel cauillum, a mock or a skoffe.

Cauillatio, a cauillation, a subtle forged tale.

Cauillator, a mocker, a bourder.

Cauillo, aui, are, uel cauillor, ari, to ieste, to mock, to bourde.

Caula, a shepehouse, but propely a fold.

Caulescere, to grow into a stalk.

Caulias, liae, the juice which is pressed out of the herb called
Laserpitium.

Cauliculus, a tender stalk.

Caulis, a stalk or stem of an herb or tree. It is sometime taken for all
pot herbs, the rumpe of a beast, and for a shafte or iauelyn, it is alsoo an
herb called colewortes. Read Brassica.

Caulon, a town, which as Plynie says, is sytuate in the first region of
Italy.

Cauma, atis, heat.

Caunus, an isle in the occean sea.

Cauo, aui, are, to make holowe.

Caupo, onis, a howkster that sellethe meat and drink.

Caupona, a woman that sellyth wine. also the tauernar.

Cauponaria, tauerners craft.

Cauponius, a, um, pertayninge to the tavern.

Cauponor, to selle as houksters do.

Cauros, was an isle, which afterward was called Andros, and after that
Antandros.

Caurus, a western wind.

Causia, an hatte or cappe after the fascion of Macedony.

Causima, Cael. anti.
a dry wodde, that will burn quyckly.

Causon, is an hot continual fever, engendered of red choler and sharp, in
the veins next to the heart, and in the veins of the mouth of the stomach,
and in the holownes of the liver or lunges. The signs of the which fever is
intolerable heat, with continual thyrst, horror, a swyft pulse, keeping none
order, short breathe, the urine high colored and thynne.

Caussa, a cause or matter in suite.

Caussam accipere, to take the mattier in hand, also to take an excuse.

Caussam capere, to take an occasion.

Causa cadere, to lose his action.

Caussam agere. to plead a matter.

Caussam dicere, Plaut. in Capt.
to answer unto that, which is laid unto his charge.

Caussam dicere, to say contrary, to deny. Hoc si secus reperies, nullam
caussam dico, quin mihi and parentum, and libertatis apud te deliquio fiet, If
thou doste find it other wise, I will not say contrary, but that it is at thy
pleasure, that I shall lose both, my parents and liberty.

Causam dicere ex uinculis, to answer in ward, or being a prisoner.

Caussas nectere, Liuius.
to feign matters, to make excuses or delays.

Caussam orare, to plead.

Caussam quaerere, Ci. Attic.
to seek an occasion.

Caussam sustinere, to bear the blame.

Caussam tenire, to obtain in judgment.

Caussa mea, Terent. in Heauton.
for my sake. Syro ignoscas uolo, quae mea causa fecit: I will that ye forgive
Syrus all that he has done for my sake.

Caussa inferior, the less right, or weker title.

Caussa superior, the better right or title.

In caussa haec sunt, the raison is this.

Caussarij, they which be essoyned in our law, or excused for a special
cause.

Caussaria misio, a discharge of a soldier for a reasonable cause.

Caussarij milites, soldiers, which for causes reasonable, were discharged out
of the army, for sycknes, as Politianus writes.

Caussario, an inward sycknes.

Caussatiuus, a, um, that is cause that a thing is done.

Caussidicus, a man of law.

Caussificor, aris, to complain me of a thing that does grieve me.

Causso, aui, are, to cause.

Caussor, aris, to find the matter, or to bring for excuse.

Caustica medicamenta, medicines, which do bourne the skin or the flesh.

Cauteres, and cauteria, is a markyng iron, or an instrument, wherewith soores
are bourned.

Cauteriatus, a, um, marked or bourned with that instrument, or marked with an
iron.

Cautes, a raggyd rock, or hylle fulle of greatte stones.

Caute, wise, circumspectly, subtylly.

Cautim, idem.

Caute loquatior, Eras. in chil.
more clatteryng than a rock. A proverb applied to great spekers, gathered of
the continual clackyng that the sea makes, when it stryketh against a rock.

Cautio, is a promise or writing made diligently for the assurance of any
thing.

Cautio, onis, provision.

Cautio est, it is need to provide or beware.

Cautum est praedibus ac praedijs, assurance taken by bonds and sureties.

Mittere cautionem chirographi, to deliver writynge signed with his own hand
for assurance.

Cauto est opus procedere, it needs to be wisely handlyd.

Cautor alieni periculi, he that warns an other man of any danger.

Cautor formularum, he that can skyl of a kinds of actions to be sued.

Cautum est, it is ordained or provided by an act of parlyament or counsel.

Cautus, a man that is circumspecte.

Caua uena, the vain of the liver.

Cauus, a, um, holowe.

Cauus, an holowe place.

Causter, a floudde of Lidie.

Caystrus, foem. genesis city of Cilicie.

C ANTE E.
CEcrops, opis, was an ancient king of Athenes, whose image was made having
two heads, as some men do suppose, because he did first institute matrimony in
Greece. Other do write that it was because he was borne in Egypt, and also did
use both languages, greek and egyptian. He was before the incarnation of Christ.
1584. years.

Cecropidae, men of Athenes.

Cecropidis, a man or woman coming of him.

Cecropius, a, um, of Cecrops.

Cecriphalea, a rock in the sea, or an isle.

Cedar, a region of Araby.

Cedo, cessi, dear, to give place, to depart, to go away, to void, to
withdraw, to obey, to grant, Plaut. i^ capt.
to give, to succeed.

Cedere authoritati, to be of less authority.

Cedere ad factum, Sueto. (...) clar. gri.
to come to effect.

Cedere creditoribus, is proprely where one not being able to pay his dettes,
Plaut. in Pseud.
leaves all his goods or lands to his creditours.

Cedere ex transuerso, to goo sydelynge like a crabbe.

Cedere famae, to regard more his honesty.

Cedere intercessioni, to proceed no further, to admytte the contrary.

Cedere iuri, to give over a right or title.

Cedere pro, to be in the stead of an other thing.

Nam pro pulmentario cedit sicuti ficus, for it is instead of the meat, like
as figs be.

Cedere uita, and cedere fato, to dye.

Cede manum, give me thy hand.

Cedere possessione, to leave the possession.

Cedere periculo, to flee from the danger.

Cedere precibus, to grant to the request or prayer.

Cedere tempori, to accommodate him self to the time.

Cedere remedijs, the sickness is vanquished.

Cedit dies, Ci. de Se. Pli. ep. so.
among the lawyers is, The time is come, that the debt is due to be paid.

Cedit huic quaestus ille, he has that aua^tage by it. Cedit illi res, his
matter comes well to pass. Quin tu mihi argentum cedo, But yet give thou me
the money.

Cedunt mihi ea bona, those goods are come or happened unto me.

Cedo, in the imperative mode, tell thou, reherce, tell on.

Cedo cuium puerum? tell or say, whose child or servant?

Cedunt dies, the days pass away.

Cessit, it happened.

Cessit parum gratus, he had little thank for his labor.

Cessit in prouerbium, it became, or was turned into a proverb.

Cedentes cepilli, hears hanging down right.

Cedrati libri, books which will never perish, nor be eaten with worms.

Cedrelate, tes, a great cedre tree.

Cedria, the rosyn that runs out of the cedre.

Cedrides, the fruit or bearies of cedrus.

Cedrinus, a, um, of a cedre tree.

Cedrium malum, and Cedromelum, was of old time taken for an orange, as
Atheneus and Dioscorides do write.

Cedropolis, a town in Caria.

Cedros, an ylande in the costis of Germany.

Cedrosis, a white vyneyarde.

Cedrus, dri, is a tree having leaves like to juniper, bearies like myrtils, but
they be yelowe, sweet of savor and pleasant to eat, they bear all times of the
year new fruit and old, as the orenges do, and the leaf never fallith. The tree
sweateth out of him a lycour like to rosyn, marvelous odoriferous. In the
land of cypers there have been seen of them growing, which were in length.130.
fete, and in compass five fathom Of like greatness or greater be in Siria. The
wodde thereof never rotteth, nor worms may breed in it. Wherefore it is much
praised in building.

Cedris, dridis, the fruit of the cedre tree.

Cedro digna, things worthy perpetualle memory.

Celatura, grauyng in metal.

Celatus, a, um, hid.

Celeberrimus, a, um, most honorable, or most in reputation.

Celebrare nuptias, to make a feast at a marriage. Celebrare epulas, to make
bankettes.

Celebrare conuiuium, to make a great feast or bankette.

Celebrare exequias, and funera, to bring one solempnely to burienge.

Celebare ludos, to make plays with great assemblye of people.

Celebrare suum natalem, to make a great feast at the day of his birth.

Celebrare coetus hominum, to assemble a great number of people.

Celebratio, solemnisation.

Celebratus, a, um, much spoken of, or hau^ted.

Celebresco, I am in great fame, or am renomed.

Celebris, bre, famons, also swift, honorable.

Celebris locus, a place much hanted and known.

Celebritas, tatis, renoum. also a great assembly.

Celebriter, honorably.

Celebro, aui, are, to celebrate or bring in renoume, to make good report.
also to haunte, to honor or worship.

Celer, eris, swyfte, quycke.

Celeris copia. Plautus in Market.
Date dij quaeso conueniundi mihi eius celerem copiam, God grant that I may
very shortly mete with him.

Celeranter, for celeriter, hastily or quickly.

Celeratim, Actius.
idem.

Celeres, Sisenna.
old writers used for Equites, horsemen.

Celeritas, quyckenes, swyftenes.

Celeritudo, idem.

Celeripes, swyfte of foot.

Celeriter, celerius, celerrime, swyftely, swyftlyer, swyftlyest.

Celero, aui, are, to do a thing quyckely, to make haste

Celetes, runnynge horses.

Celeusma, the shoute or cry that shyppemen or botemen do make, when the
master does whystell or call.

Celeustes, he that calls on the maryners in comfortynge them.

Cella, a cellar, wherein any thing is kept, also where we be privily washed,
alsoo a secret place in the temple, a chauncell.

Cella penuaria, a garnere, or storehouse.

Cellaria, a wine sellar.

Cellarium, a stoorehouse.

Cellarius, he that has the charge of a cellar or storehouse.

Cellulae columbarum, culuer hooles.

Celatim, privily.

Celo, aui, are, to hyde, or will not know.

Celare aliquem. Ci. ep. fa.
Balbus noster me de hoc libro celauit, Our friend Balbus told me nothing of
that book.

Celox, a swyft ship, callid a Brigantine.

Celsus, high. it was also the name of a noble Romayn, which wrate in
phisycke and husbandry in most eloquent latyne.

Celtae, french men.

Celtiberia, Biskay.

Celtiberi, people of that part of Spayn, which is called Biskay.

Celtis, a kind of sweet trees growing in Affrik.

Celtogallia, is that part of France, which conteyneth Aquitania^, Lugdunensem,
Belgica^, and Narbonense^, whereof the french king has iii. partis h^oc.
Belgica^ for the more part has the emperor that now is, Charles the.v. Read
of eueryche of them in their letters.

Celydrus, a woman's apparayle.

Cemellio, a town in Liguria.

Ceme^ta, pl. little stones and rubbel, which are laid between great stones in
the making of a wall.

Cementum, mortar.

Cenchris, a byrd like an hawk, which makes a greatte sown when he cries.
Also it is the name of a town or country in Greece.

Cenina, a city of Italy.

Cenodoxia, vaynglory.

Cenomani, people of Lumbardy.

Cenotaphium, a monument of them which are dead.

Censio, sui, ere, to suppose, to show mine opinion or sentence, to determine,
to be disconte^t, to number people, to thentent to take them, which be apt
for the wars, or to leuy a tax or a subsidy; to speak or tell.

Ne uobis censeam, Varro.
si ad me referretis, lest I would be angry, Plaut. in Sticho.
if ye told me.

Quid grauare censeas? Tell me, what is that, Plinius. 8.
that greueth the?

Censeri, to be had in estimation, or to be set by, also to be meruayled at.

Censio, onis, a chastisement, a price, advise, or opinion.

Censor, a judge of men's manners. also such as was appointed to value men's
goods.

Censitor, idem.

Censorius, a, um, pertaynyng to them, which had ouersyghte of the manners of
the people, which were called Censores.

Censorius uir, he that has been a Censour, or is worthy for his gravity to
judge and correct other men's manners.

Censoria animaduersio, was a punishment of them, which were of ill manners.

Censoria nota, the rebuke or check of the master of manners.

Censualis, he that does assyste or accompanye the judges of manners called
Censors.

Censura, the authority or judgment of a censour. also correction of manners,
law or decree, concerning manners.

Censuram uini facere, to taste wine, to assay whether it be good or badde.

Census, sus, yearly revenues, also valuation of goods, also a subsidi, the
nu^bri^g of the people Censui agri, were those fields, which by the law
cyuile might be bought and sold.

Census equestris, was the estimation or value of them, which were in the
order of gentilmen, callid ordo equestris, which rate was 400. Se^tertia, and
that some amounted after the rate of our money at this day, to.2635. li. 6. s.
8. d. whereby it appears how rych Rome was at that time, sens that was the
general estimation of one order or state. Plutar^^


Census senatorius, was the estymation of them which were senators, and was
double the rate of equestris, and in Augustus time it was treble so much,
which amounted of our money now curra^t to.7900. and vi. li. not with standing,
that there were above.600. senators.

Census, si, he that is assessed or taxed.

Capite censi, taxed by the poll, or he that paieth head silver.

Centauri, a people in the country of Thessaly, whom the poets did fayn to be
the one half like a man, the other half like a horse. alsoo they be certain
great ships.

Centaurium, an herb, whereof there be two kinds, the great which
apothecaries do call Reuponticum, and the less which is callid Centory, also
Fell terrae, and Febrifugia.

Centaurus, a river, which was first callid Euenus

Centenariae coenae, were suppers, on the which by a law callid Licinia, was
bestowed but one hundred of the brason coin called Asses.

Centesimus, a, um, the hundred, as Centesima pars, the hundred part.

Centesimae ursurae, were gaynes of the hundred one penny for every month lone.

Centimanus, having an hundred hands.

Centipeda, a worm called a palmer, which is heary, and has many feet.

Cento, a quilt, or a jack, or other like thyng^ stuffed with lynnen, flox, or
cotton, or a ^ushen made of pieces of cloth of diverse colou^^s.

Centies, a hundred times.

Centralis, le, that which is set in the very ^^^^ddes of a thing.

Centrones, mount Sineis going into Lu^bat die.

Centrum, the point, which is in the very my^ddes of a thing.

Centum, a hundred.

Centu^uiri, Budacns.
where as the people of Rome were. ^^uided into.35. tribes, of every tribe were
three men chosen to be iuges in commune matters, which company was callid
Centumuiratus, and they were callid Centumuiri, although that there were.v. mo
tha^ a hundred in that company, and their judgment was named Centum uirale
iuditiu^, and Centu^ uiralis hasta, forasmoche as those judges, whiles they
sat in judgment, had a spear pitched up before them.

Centunculus, a vile garment.

Centuplex, plicis, an hundred fold, an hundred double.

Centuria, a part of an hooste, conteynyng an hundred men. also a portion of
ground in the field, containing an hundred acres.

Centuriata comitia, were general congregations of people to traite of common
affairs, ^udeus.
which assembly was not gathered by division of parishes or wards, but by the
rate of their substance, or by their age.

Centuriatae leges, laws which were inacted by the people assembled after the
rate of their substance or age.

Centuriatim, by a hundred together, also plentuousely, or in a great number.

Centuriatus, tus, the office of a centurio.

Centurio, onis, a captain over one hundred of foot men.

Centurio, aui, are, to divide men into a company, containing an hundred
persons, or fields into an hundred acres of land.

Centurupe, a field in Sicile, whereof is Centurupinum crocum.

Ce^tussis, a rate of money at Rome, which was of ten of their grotes called
Denarij, which amounts in the rate of our money at this time to.v. s. vi. d.
ob. half ferthyng, half an half farthynge.

Cepa, pe, and cepe indeclinab. an oynion.

Cepas edere, to eat oynyons: was a proverb spoken of them, which do seem to
weep or do weep often.

Cephale, or cephalis, signifies the head.

Cephalea, is a grievous and long continuynge pein in the head, of every light
cause sustening much grief, neither abidyng noise nor light, nor sweet sauors.
The pacient feleth as if his head were broken in pieces with hammers. It
hapnith sometime of cold, sometime of heat.

Cephalenia, an isle beyond Corcyra in the myddel sea, which is also callid
Ulysses isle.

Cephalocrustes, a worm, which is in the leaves of a peache tree.

Cephalus, the name of a man, and of a fyshe.

Cephenes, unprofitable bees, which make no honey, but only with the multitude
of them, do keep warm the young bees. it was sometime the name of Persians, as
Herodotus writes.

Cepheus, the name of a king of Ethiope.

Cephisia, the region Attica.

Cephisis, a lake nere to the sea Athlanticum.

Cepina, an herb called cyues.

Cepites, a precious stone, having many white strekes.

Cepius, a, um, of an oynion, or like to oynio^.

Ceporus, a gardener.

Cera, wax, also waxed tables.

Cerabaroa, is a country late found by the Spaniardes in the west occean, where
all the men do go naked, and have their bodies painted with diverse figures,
wearyng only garla^des made with sundry flowers, mixed with the cleys of lions
and tygres, in that country has been found plenty of gold.

Ceramicus, a place in Athenes, where me^ being slain in battle, were
buried. also an other place, where common women dwelled.

Ceramion, the same measure that Amphora is.

Cerastes, a serpent which has horns like a ram, the body very little, whereby
he deceives men, hidynge his body in the grass.

Cerasum, a chery.

Cerasus, a chery tree.

Cerates, a small weight or poyse, which is the fourth part of a scruple, the.
48. part of an ounce

Ceratia, is an herb which has but one leaf, and a great rote full of
knottes.

Ceratinae, is of Quint. callid a kind of argument, which can not be resoluyd.

Ceratium, is the fruit, which is callid Siliqua, look there, for the
description. By the weight thereof, the ancient physicians made all their
poyses, which tryers of gold do now call a cartacte, whereof Dragma
contained.18. as Leonardus Portius writes.

Ceratum, sieve Cerotum, a plaster made with wax, roseyn, or gummes. it is
callid in greek Dropax.

Ceratura, the dressynge of a thing with wax.

Cerberus, the porter of hell. also a dog with three heads, which Hercules
drew out of Hell, as paynyms supposed.

Cercius, uide Circius.

Cerea, a certain drink, which the Spanyardes used.

Cereales, were.ii. of these offices called Aediles in Rome, which had
authority over the markette.

Cercope, Coelius.
a little grassehoppe.

Cercopithecus, an ape with a tail callid a marmoset. it may be also taken for
a munkay.

Cercurus, a certain sort of ships.

Cerdo, nis, a cobblar. sometime generally all crafts using sowynge.

Cerdon, donis, an heretic, which affyrmed, that Christ was never borne of a
woman, and that he had no flesh, nor suffered any passion, but that he feigned
to suffer. Also he taught that the god, which was declarid by the law^
prophets to be god, was not the fader of our savior Christ, for he was
known, the other was unknown, the one was just, the other was good. also he
said, that the old testament was naught. moreover that some creatures of them
self ar ill, and that they were not made of that god, that was the chief
goodness, but of an other the beginning of al ill, which he names the principal
mischief. He was about the year of our lord. 144. whose heresies ben al
condemned by the general consent of al christendom.

Cerrale, pertaining to Ceres the goddess.

Cerebrosus, a man being braynsycke, or wyld brayned, trustyng only to his
own will.

Cerebrum, the brain.

Ceres, Diodorus Siculus.
called also Isis, was wife of Osyris, king of Egypt, who as the Greeks
supposed did first invent the sowyng of wheat and barley, which before did
grow wild among other herbs. Also that she first made laws, whereby justice
should be equally minystred to all men, violence and wrong being by fear of
punishment taken away. Herodotus writes, that the Egyptians do affirm, that
Ceres and Bacchus do bear the chief rule in hell.

Ceretani, a people in Spain.

Ceretum, a town in Italy.

Cereus substant. a taper, or other like candelle of wax.

Cereus, Horatius.
a, um, soft, also fat, also of wax.

Cerea pruna, wheaten plummes.

Cerinthe, an herb having the taste of wax and honey together, a honysuckle.

Cerinthus, the meat of bees, which is found in honey combs, separate from
the honey, which is in taste bitter, and is also moist.

Cerinum, Actius.
a garment of the color of wax.

Cerits, madness or frensy.

Cerium, a soore like a honey comb.

Cero, aui, are, to dress a thing with wax.

Ceroma, Cic. in ca.
an oil wherewith wrastlers were anointed.

Cerostrotum, an image of wax.

Cerno, Ci. Dolobellae, and ad Attic. Plin. 18.
creui, cernere, to se or perceive* also to consider, sometime to judge, or
determyn. sometime to try out. Also to syft or raunge flower of corn.
Otherwhyle to deuyse together, or talk one with an other.

Vere cundari neminem apud me^sam decet, Plautus in Trinum.
nam ibi de diuinis atque humanis cernitur: No man ought to be abashed at the
table, for there men do deuyse and talk of matters concerning as well god as
man.

Cernere falsam haereditate^ alienae gloriae, To get praise to him self of an
other man's actis. Cernere hereditatem, to enter into land fallen by
inheritance.

Cerno animo, I do foresee or consider before

Cernulus, Hier. con.
he that is busye to find fault in an other man. Ruffi nu^.


Cernus, nus, a certain show.

Cernuus, stoupynge or lokynge downewarde.

Cerrus, Rue^^
a great tree like to a poplar, having a long sem and a straight he bears a
kind of mast, rough without like a chestin, but not apt to be ete^, but only
of swine, and yet is it not very good for them, there hangs on the bows
long pendantes like dry russet moss, which is sweet in savor. The timber
thereof is not convenient for buyldyng.

Certamen, a conflict or byckring, a conte^tion.

Certamina sacra, were certain great games in Greece, where men contended in
featis of wit, strength, and agilitie. Of them were four: Nemaea, Pythia,
Isthmia, and Olympia, the price of Olympia was a garlande of wyld olyue, at
Isthmus a garlande of pyne apple, in Nemea of percily, in Pythiis, of apples
growing by the temple of Apollo. Vitruuius remembers, that the ancient
greeks ordained that the people there assembled, standing with palm in their
hands, should singe their praises, which had victory at those games, and also
when they returned home to their houses, the city or town, where they
dwelled, should receive them with much honor, they riding in chariots, and
during their lives, they should have pencions out of the common tresure.

Certatim, one contendyng or stryuyng with an other, who shall do most or best.

Certe, truly, verily, assuredly. Certo, idem.

Certatio, debate, strife, study, provocation.

Certisso, aui, are, to be certified or sure.

Certitudo, dinis, certayntie or surety.

Certo, without doubt.

Certo, aui, are, to strive, to contend, to fight, to sue one an another. Cicera
Certare damnis, to goo about to distroye one an other.

Certare pignore, to lay in a paun in co^tentio^

Certus, a, um, certain, sure, without dout. some time it signifies even as we
would have it.

Certae opes, richesse that is permanent.

Certi homines, sure men and faithful.

Certi, certain other.

Certiorem facere, to advertise, to let me to wete or understand.

Certo certius, as sure as may be.

Certum habere, to know surely.

Cerua, an hynde.

Ceruchus, a cabin in the highest part of a ship.

Ceruicale, and ceruical, a bolstar.

Ceruinus, a, um, of a heart.

Ceruisia, ale or biere.

Ceruix, icis, the hinder part of the neck.

Ceruici imponere, to lay on his neck, to charge one with a thing, will he
or no.

Ceruices dare alicui, to offer to one his heed.

Cerunina, care wax.

Cerus, a kind of oken trees.

Cerussa, ceruse or white lead, wherewith some women be painted.

Cerussatus, a, um, painted white.

Ceruus, a heart, or a forke, wherewith cotages were propped up.

Ceryx, cis, a pursyuaunt or bedell. It is alsoo a shell fyshe of the kind of
purples.

Cespes, pitis, a tyrfe* some do call them soddes, grass and earth together.

Cessatio, slackenes in doing, ydelnesse.

Cessator, he that is slow in doing his duty.

Cessio, where one claymeth a thing, which an other man has, who denies it
not, nor makes contrary claim.

Cesim ferire, to stryke edgelyng.

Cessim, in reculynge.

Cesso, aui, are, to cesse, to leave warke, to abide to do nothing, or to be
ydell.

Cesticillus, a garland of cloutes, which women do lay on their heedes wha^
they carry any thing.

Cestreus, a kind of codfish, which never eats any other fyshe, whereof came
this proverb,

Cestreus ieiunat, the codde fasteth, spoken of good and just men, which do no
rauyn, nor takes any other men's goods from them.

Cestrum, an instrument wherewith yuory is made holowe. also a (...) or a
wym^^e* also an herb, which is (...) Betayne.

Cestus, a gyrdell, wherewith the husband did gird his wife, which was set full
of studdes.

Cetariae, places nigh to the sea side, where Tuny and other great fishes be
taken and salted.

Cetarius, a fyshmonger or taker of great fishes

Cetra, a light tergate.

Cetrati milites, soldiers with light tergats

Cete and Cetus, a great fyshe callid a whale.

Ceu, Ci ad At.
as it were, euenas.

Ceua, a little cow that gives much milk.

C ANTE H.
CHaam, callid also Gog Chaam, is the name of a dignite of the great emperor of
Tartaria^s, callid also the great Chan of Catay or Cambalu, whose dominion
extends from the furthest part cast, unto the country of Russy northwest,
and so north unto the septentriall or north sea, and on the southeast unto the
south or India^ sea. on the southwest unto Persia. so that by the chart it
appears that there is under him as much mayn land within little, as is the
resydue of all Asia, Europa, and Africa.

Chabrias, a noble capitayn of the Atheniensis, of whom this invention in
arms is left in remembrance. When he came in the aid of the Thebans against
the Lacedaemonians, Agesilaus king of the Lacedemonia^s va^quyshing the array of
the soldiers retained, and putting them to flight, Chabrias restrained the
residue, causyng them to set their tergats against their knee, and thrasting
forth their spear, to abide and receive the brunt of their enemies, which
Agesilaus beholdi^g durst not go forth but caused the retreat to be blown.
This man in a battle on the sea, against them of Chius, was slain, chosyng
rather to dye honorably, than forsakyng his ship (as the resydue did) to throw
away his harneys, and swymme with his company.

Chaere, the imperative mode of a verb of greek which in latin is salve, god
speed, well met, and such other salutations.

Chaerephillon, an herb called Cheruyle.

Chalame, a city of Persy, which now is called Aetisiphon.

Chalasis, the knot, wherewith women's garments were knyt about their necks.

Chalastra, a certain apparayle.

Chalastricum nitrum, salt peter, which is very pure and like to salt.

Chalaza, a gatherynge under the skin like the disease called Bubo.

Chalazia, a stone like to hayle, and so cold, that no fire may heat it.

Chalazium, a little round werte in the eye lyddes, which may be moved with
ones finger hither and thither.

Chalcantum, cop^rose, or vitriole.

Chalcedonia, a cite in Asi against Co^sta^tinople

Chalchis, a fish of the sec, of the kind of turbut.

Chalcis, dis, the name of a city in Greece. also of an isle, and of a bird.

Chalcites, a stoone of the color of brass, but more black, whereof brass is
tried.

Chalcographus, a prynter.

Chalcos, seu Aereola, the.xxxvi. part of a dram

Chaldaea, a country, which as Strabo writes, does join to Arabia, and to
the sea called Mare Persicu^, Solinus and Plinius names that country
Chaldaea, where the great city of Babylon stood. In the new chartes it is in
this wise set, on the west it joins on Mesapotamia, on the north upon
Assiria, and Media, on the east upon Persia, on the south upon Arabia deserta,
and so is it far from Iudaea. They have a proper language, somewhat like to
hebru, but their letters ar unlike to any otherletters. Strabo names the
country, where the people callid Chalybes dwell, Chaldea li. 12.

Chaldei, be taken for great astronomers of the country of Assiria.

Chalestra, a city of Thessaly on the sea cost.

Chalybes, a people in the less Asia, in the country called Pontus, which
people do dygge great plenty of iron, they being naked. also it is the name
of a fludde in Spain.

Chalybs, lybis, steel.

Chalyx, a flynte stone, out of the which fire is stryken.

Cham aecissos, an herb called ground yuy.

Chamedaphne, an herb, which grows in length, wyndyng together in diverse
parts, and has leaves like to laurel or bays, and has a flower like to a
violet, and is called of some men perwyncle.

Chamaedris, drios, an herb callid Germander.

Chamaeleo albus, is a manner of a thystel growyng by the ground without any
stalk, putting up pricks like an hedgehog, having in the middle a knap full
of pricks on a short stalk, in the which do appear purple flowers, which
grow into plumes, and do fly away with the wynd, like as of other thystels,
and has a white root and sweet, and grows on old lands and bare hills.

Chamaeleo niger, is the co^mun thistle, which has a great stalk and long,
somewhat ruddy, having on the top a round knap with sharp flowers
chaungeable of color.

Chameleon, ontis, a little beast, having his skyn spotted like to a lybarde,
which changes into diverse colors, according to the thing that he sees.
They be engendered in India, and is of the quantite and figure of a lisarde, but
that his legs be lengar, and goth vpryght, and has a snowte like a swyne, a
long tail and small at the end, his eyes be never closed, he does never
eat or drink, but is nouryshed only by air.

Chameleuce, ces, an herb growing by ryuers having leaves like a poplar, but
much greater.

Chamaemelon, an herb called ca^^omyll.

Chamelopardalis, a beast which is as great as a camel, of skin and colors
like a Panther, having spots of sundry color, and has his forelegges and
neck long, and the heed like a camel, his fecte and legs like an ox.

Chamelus, a beast called a camelle, commonly known.

Chamemirsynne, is a bushe or tree, which has sharp pryckes in the leaves,
and read bearyes clustered. I suppose it to be a kind of holy or holme.

Chamaepyris, an herb, whereof be.iii. kinds, the one is commonly called herb
yuy, but it is not that which is described by Dioscorides, although it have been proved to have like virtue. The second is the small cipres set in pottes.
The.iii. is supposed to be that which is called saint Iohn^s worte.

Chamaeterae, maidens, which were wont to sit at their maystresses feet.

Chamezeleon, an herb called cinquefoyle.

Chamitterae, and Chamitteridae, little images made following a greatter image.

Chaniscus, the hyndermost part of a ship, by the which the anchor hangs.

Chanona, a tarte or marchpayn, or other like delycate thing.

Chaones, Strabo.
people of the country of Epirus in Greece. The country is called Chaonia.

Chaonides, wolves that do slay hearts.

Chaos, a confuse matter without for me, made first of nothing, whereof poets
supposed all other things to proceed.

Characatae umeae, vynes enclosed with canes or reed in the stead of pales.

Characias, an herb called spourge.

Characote, a frame, about the which vynes be wound and turned.

Character, a token, a note made with a pen, a figure, a style or form of
speaking.

Characteres, letters.

Charadrius, a great devouring byrd of the sea.

Charax, a fyshe called also Dentix, with teethe standing out of his lyppes,
and is a broad fysh, and somewhat red, with a chaungeable color.

Charaxes, the brother of Sapphus.

Charchesia, a cup long, and small in the myddell, and full of handels.

Chariophilon, a kind of ^oote spice that grows in India, I suppose it to be
cloves.

Charisma, grace, a thankful gift.

Charistia, plura, is as it were a Christmas feast or a wake, where kinrfolk do
resort together, bryngyng or sendyng presents mutually.

Charisius, the name of a grammarian.

Charistium, a grene marble.

Charitas, charity or love, proprely toward a man's country or neighbors.

Charites, the graces, which were supposed to be the daughters of Jupiter,
three in number, whose names were, Aglaia, Thalia, Euphrosyne. And where in
speaking or writing appeared to be a marvelous dilectation or swetenes, it was
said that therein was a grace, in latyne Charis.

Charmesynum, a kind of sylke, which delyteth the beholders. I think it to
be crymsyn.

Charon, it is, was named of the Paynyms, the boteman that carried souls over the
three ryuers of hell, Acheron, Stix, and Cocytus.

Charopus, amyable, pleasant, or having a good grace.

Charta, paper, alsoo a leaf of paper, or other like thing, wherein we do
write. Moreover any thing contaynynge the description of a place in pycture.
Also a maiden that had never child.

Chartaceus, of paper.

Chartariae officinae, paper mylles.

Chartilago, ginis, a grystell.

Chartophylacium, a place where wrytnges or monumentes are kept, as the place
called the rolls. And the master of the rolls may be called Chartophylax,
or Magister scrinioru^, which office had Vlpianus the great lawyer with
the emperor Alexander callid Seuerus.

Chartula, alyttell leaf of paper.

Charundas, the name of a man, which gave laws to the Atheniens.

Charus, well beloved.

Charybdis, a gulf of the sea by Sicile, wherein is daungerouse saylynge, by
reason of stremes flowynge contrary each against other, whereby ships be
therein devoured.

Chasma, a gapynge or opening of the firmament, or of the earth.

Chelae, the klees of a crab, crauayse or scorpio^.

Cheledonia, an herb called selandine: also a western wind.

Chelenophagi, a people in Carmania, which live by eating torteyses.

Chelonalopices, I suppose to be the birds which we do call barnacles.

Chelonium, the shell of a torteyse.

Chelydonij, little stones found in the mawe of a swalow.

Chelydros, a sea snayle.

Chelys, a torteyse: sometime it is taken for an harp or lute.

Chema, is a measure of the greeks containing two cochlearia, which receives
of wine in poyse or weight.ii. drammes.i. scruple.iiii. graynes, and.iiii. five
parts of a greyne.

Chemiscus, a part of the foreshyppe, whereby the anchor does hang, sometime
it is taken for all the ship.

Chemites, a manner of tomb, like to yuory.

Chennis, is an yland as Pomponius writes.

Chenoboscion, a place where grese be fed.

Chenopus, a goose foot.

Chenotrophia, a house or place where water-foule are kept.

Cheospes, a king of Egypt, which made the great steple at Memphis, whereon
were so many men workynge, that the same king spente only in persely,
oynions, and garlike a thousand and three score talents, which if it were the
great talent, it amounted of our money, to CCI. thousand five hundred and
fifty pounds.

Cherinthus, an heretic, which affyrmed, that Christ should come and raygne in
the world the space of a thousand years, and during that time men should
live in all carnal delytes, and afterward should come up to heaven, where they
should ever live in the plesures of gloteny and lecherye. Also he denied that
Christ was god, but pure man. Also that the world was made by god, but of
principates. He also received only the gospel of sayncte Matthew, and rejected
the other euangelystes, and the acts of the apostels. He was about the year of
our lord. 88.

Cherronesus. the part of Greece called now Morea. It is sometime taken for
the north part of the great Asia. It is also called Chersonesus.

Chersina, a kind of land snayles.

Chersydrus, a kind of serpents in Calabria which live both on land and
water.

Cherubin, one of the holy orders of angels, wherein is the science divine and
mystical.

Cherusci, Coelius. ant.
a people of Germany.

Chia, a serpents den.

Chibis, an herb.

Chiliarchus, a captain of a thousand men. It is the same office, which
Tribunus militum was among the Romans.

Chilias, adis, the number of a thousand.

Chiliastae, were christen men, which had this opinion, that Christ should
come personally, and reign as a king in this world a thousand years.

Chilon, one of the.vii. wise men of Greece.

Chilones, men having great lyppes.

Chilorus, a river of Macedony.

Chimaera, a got. Also a mountain in Licia. also a monster having three
heads, one like a lion, an other like a got, the third like a dragon.

Chimerinos, a cercle of heaven, in to the which when the son comes, the
days be at shortest.

Chymus, the juice procedynge of meat digested, which by the veins comes
into the members, and restores that which is consumed by heat.

Chiragra, the gout in the fingers.

Chiragricus, he that has such a disease.

Chirographum, and Chirographus, an oblygation or like instrument, whereby a man
is bounden, and has put to his hand.

Chirogylius, Leuit. 11.
and hedghog.

Chiromantes, he that tells men's fortune by palmestry.

Chiromantia, palmestry.

Chiron, nis, the name of a man, who first did find the virtues of herbs, and
taught Aesculapius physic, and Apollo to harp, and astronomy to Hercules,
and was master to Achilles, and excelled all other men of his time in virtue
and justice.

Chironia, is a foul sore hard to be cured, by lykelyhod it is that which
commonly is called, Noli me tangere. It is also a wild vine.

Chironium, an herb called Centauria mayor, Ruellius.
in english Centory the more. It is hot and dry in the second degree.

Chironomia, Constan.
a fascion of gesture with the hands used in dansyng, or in keruyng of meat.

Chironomus, he that daunseth with gesture of the hands.

Chirotheca, a glove.

Chirurgia, surgery.

Chirurgus, a surgeon.

Chius, an isle by Greece in the sea called Aegeum, which as Strabo writes, is
in compace. 900. furlonge: which is a hundred Italion miles. In this isle do
grow very good malmesyes and other hot wynes. It is remembered among the
authors in greek, that it might never be remembered, that within that country
was any aduoutry committed, or unlawful accompanienge with women among them
selfs, which is a thing worthy to be put in remembrance.

Chlamis, idis, a cloak which properly is worn, by men of war.

Chlamidatus, cloked.

Chlorion, a grene bird as great as a turtyll, which is never seen but in
summer.

Choa, a certain measure, also vessel, wherein was put licoure, which was
offered to ydols.

Choaspes, a famous river in Asia, which runs into the great river of Tigris.

Chobar, signifies all the great floudes, which be in the region of Caldee.

Choemis, was a space of ground among the Jews, conteyninge, iiii, miles
italyon.

Choenix, nicis, a measure of the Greeks, which conteyneth after Rullius.ii.
Sextarios, which amounts to.xl. measure ounces, or ynche measures, so is it
less than our quart. After Georgius Agricola it conteyneth three Cotylas, and
than is the measure uncertain, for as much as Galene says, that there were
diverse opinions of the measure of Cotyla. Read more in Cotyla, notwithstanding
this measure was so commune among the ancient greeks, that thereby they
measured as much meat as should suffyse their servants for one day, as
Suidas remembers in expoundynge a place in Homer.

Choenici ne insideas, was one of the counsels of wise Pythagoras, which
saynct Hierom does in this wise expound: be notmoch careful how thou shall live
to morrow. Plutarchus in this wise: Leave some for to morrow, for he says, that
in the old time it was not leful to take up the table without any thing left.
which exposition is contrary to saynct Hieromes. Chil. 1.
But Erasmus does declare it in this wise: men ought not by ydelnesse and
sloth eat that which other men pay for, but by his own labor or study
get some what, whereby he may honestly live. Now ye have all three
expositions, every manne take that which he lyketh best.

Cholera, one of the four principal humors called choler. It is also a
sickness of the stomach and bowels, wherein happens both vomit and flyx, with
tourment in the bowelles, sendinge forth choler upward and downwarde, first
watery, afterward like as flesh had been washed in it. That sickness inge^dred
with inordinate fedynge of long time, specially of raw fruits and mushroms,
much use of cucumbers and pompones, and all fruytes very cold, which eaten
after meals or the meat be digested, are corrupted in the stomach, and
ingendreth a venomous juice, which nature may not sustain, and therefore she
expels it with violence.

Cholericus, and Cholerica, he or she that is cholerike.

Cholerica tormina, tourmentes or frettinges, which come of choler.

Choliambi, a kind of verses, made of the foot of meter called Iambus.

Cholon, is the gut, wherein the ordure or dregs of the meat is fourmed, and
comes from the left hednay, and touches the spleen, and ryseth up to the
right side of the stomak, and comes by the liver, and receives a little
choler from the gal, by the sharpnes whereof the ordure is provoked to discende,
and made ready to pass.

Chomata, water banks to keep in ryuers that they ouerflowe not.

Chomer, idem quod Chodrus.

Chonca, a shell fish.

Chondrilla, is an herb of the kind of cichorye, by the description thereof it
is an herb growing in corn fields, having leaves like unto wyld cicory,
but that they be more full of milk, and the stalk is greatter, and more
tender and holowe: out of the which comes much milk. Saving that which
Diostorides does write of, has mastyr coming out of the branches, which
may happen to be, where the contray is very hot, which although it happen not
here, yet may our herb be Chondrilla, and have his virtues.

Chondrus, read more in Alica.

Choragiu^, stuff, properly wherewith that place is adorned, where as shall be
enterludes or disguisinges. Also the apparayle of the players.

Choragus, he that keeps such stuff or apparayle.

Chorannei, certain men that live in woods in Persia, which are so swyft,
that they take hearts with runninge.

Choraula, the craft to blow trumpettes, or to play on shaulmes, or other
like pypes.

Choraules, minstrels that do play for dansing.

Chorda, a string of a harp or lute, or other instrument.

Chordapson, the sickness called Illiaca passio. read more in Illica passio.

Chorea, a dance.

Chorebus, was one of Athenes, which first invented the making of erthen
vessel.

Choriambus, a foot in meter, which has the first syllable and the last
long, and two in the mydde^l short.

Chorius, a foot in meter, which by an other name is called Trochaeus, and is
but of two syllables, the first long, the second short.

Chorobates, a measure to meet ground with, or a masons rule.

Chorocitharista, he that leads a dance, and plays him self on an
instrument.

Chors, it is, a place enclosed, wherein cattle is kept, a barton called in
some place. Chortales aues, pultry fedynge abroad in a barton or court of
husbandry.

Chortos, hay or grass mowen.

Chorus, the company of players or dauncers, also a quyar.

Chorus, sieve Chomer, a measure of the Hebrews, which conteyneth ten times as
much as Batus, or Ephi, and amounts to.vii bushelles and a half of our
measure.

Chresis, is use. and Catachresis, is abusion.

Chreston, an herb called cykory.

Chrestus, the name of a noble author of Athenes.

Chria, a notable sentence, spoken shortly, to exhort to virtue, or dissuade
from vice.

Chrisis, unction.

Christus, anointed, the surname of our redemar.

Chromaticus, whose color never changes, but is always one.

Chronica, oru^, an hystory of acts done, with the times expressed, Chronicles.

Chronicus, a, um, temporal, or perteynynge to time.

Chrysanthemum, is the herb called crow foot which has yelowe flowers
commonly called gold knappes.

Chryse, an isle which Plinius and Solinus do set out of the mouth of the
famous river of Indus, where as Martianus writes, is such abundaunce of fine
gold, that thereof the isle took his name: for Chrysos is in english gold,

Chrysendeta, a cup having a border of gold, like as our masers and nuttes
were wont to have, and therefore they may be so called.

Chryses, the name of a prophette among the Gentiles. Also of a maiden given
by the greeks to king Agamemnon at the battle of Troy.

Chrysia, a City in Phrigie, and an ylande in Indie.

Chrysippus, a noble philosopher borne in Cilicia, in a town called Soloe, as
Solinus writes: but Laertius writes, that he was borne in Tarsus, he was of
the sect called Stoici.

Christis, the skym, which is on gold being molten.

Chrysoaspides, knights that had shyeldes of gold.

Chrysoberillus, a crystal stone, wherein the color of gold shyneth.

Chrysocolla, a stone, with the poulder, whereof paynters do make a golden
color: also goldsmythes do use it to sowder gold.

Chrysocoma, golden hear.

Chhrysocomus, he that has golden hear.

Chrysogonum, that brings forth gold.

Crysolachanon, Ruellius.
an herb called orage, in latin Atriplex.

Chrysolampis, a stone of fyry color by night.

Chrysolitus, a precious stone of the color of gold.

Chrysomela, yelowe quinces, of Vergilius they are named Aurea poma, as
Ruellius supposes.

Chrysoprassus, a stone grene as a leke, having speckes of gold.

Chrysostomus, the name of a bushop of Constantinople, and also of an
hystoryen, which were so called for their eloquence, for Chrysostomus is in
english, A golden mouth.

Chrysothemis, the daughter of Agamemnon and Clytemnestre.

Chus, uel Choa, is a measure of the greeks of the which there is three
sorts, one is called Attica or Medica, and conteyneth.vi. sextarios atticos,
which is of english measure one pottle and half a pynte. An other is called
Georgica, or of husbandry, and is of english measure.vi. pyntes a half and a
quarter, that is in poyse of oil.xi.li. and.iii. ounces: of wine.xii.li. and
di. of honey.xviii.li. and.ix. ounces. An other is Veterinaria, or of them
which cure cattle, which receives of our measure a pottell and a quarte,
and in weyghte of wine.xi.li. one ounce.ii. drammes.ii. scriples: of
oil.viii.li. of honey.xvi.li.di. one ounce.di. and one dram.

Chymosis, Galen. in defini.
is a moisture in the skin, which incloseth the eye.

Chytra, a pot with fete, or a trivet.

Chytracus, a trivet or cradel, whereon pottes are set to boil meat.

C ANTE I.
CIBALE perteyninge to meat.

Cibarium, meat.

Cibarius, a, um, vile.

Cibarius homo, a vile person.

Cibarius panis, Cice. tus. ques. 1.
ranged bread, or cribble bread.

Cibarium uinum, Varro.
small or ill wine.

Cibatus, tus, vittayles.

Cibele, les, the daughter of Minois king of Creta, now Candy, she being
cast out into a deserte, was nourished with beasts, and founden by a womanne
that kept sheep, she was by her nouryshed, after becam meruaylouse fair, and
also wise, and found first the pipe and rabour, and also the cymbales among
the greeks. Moreover the education of children, she tenderly loving them al,
in so much as for the death of a child, called A^ys, whom she much loved,
she became mad. Afterward she was honored of the gentiles for a goddess.
She was also called Rhea, mother of the gods, and Vesta. Her image being
specially honored in a city of Phrigia called Pessinuus, was by the counsel
of Sybilla, fetched thense by Scipio Nasica, and brought unto Rome, and there
had in great reverence.

Cibo, aui, are, to feed.

Ciborium, a kind of appuls of Alexandry.

Cibus, meat.

Cibi repositi, Quintili.
meat set up to be kept.

Cibum facere, Plautus in Trucul.
to make ready meat. Mane aliquid fie^ cibi, There shall be some meat made
ready betyme.

Cibum sub ducere, to take meat away from one.

Cicada, a grasshopper.

Cicatrico, are, to stryke one so that a mark always remains.

Cicatricosus, he that has many tokens of wounds.

Cicatrix, icis, a token or scar where a wound had been.

Cicatrizo, idem quod Cicatrico, also to heal a wound, so that only a seem
or scar may appear.

Ciccum, the tender rynde of a pomegranade.

Cicer, eris, a grain like to peason, whereof some are red, some black, and
some are white.

Cicercula, is less than Cicer.

Cicerculum. idem.

Cicerbita, an herb called southystell.

Cicero, onis, the surname of Marcus Tullius whose divine eloquence, abundant
learning, sharpness of wit, dexterity in acts, and most ardent love to the
comune weal of his countray, can not be sufficiently expressed by no mortal
man's tunge or pen. He was linyally descended from the ancient kings of the
people called Volsci, all be it time and occasion wearynge out dignities in
bloudde, his name continued long in the state of worship: his ancestors were
named Cicerones, because that Tullius Appius, a noble king of Volscis, one of
them had on his nose a mark like a chiche pease called Cicer. In his child hood
he so excelled in wit all other childrene, that the fathers of them meued with
his fame, went purposly to the schole to behold and here him. He so profited in
the eloquence of greek and also of latyne, that not only his companions were
in a meruaylous admiration of him, but also Apollonius, the most excellent
orator at that time, in herynge him being sore abashed, and not speaking a
great space, said at the last: Truly Cicero I praise the, and marvel at the,
but I lament the fortune of greeks, when I consider that by the, lernyng and
eloquence, which only was left unto us, is even now translated unto the
Romans. which saying of Apollonius, was founden afterward true. sor look
what subtlety is in logike, what commodity in moral philosophye, what
secret knowledge in philosophye natural, he knew it (as Tacitus writes) and
declared it in latin in most perfect eloquence. And which is to be wondered
at, not withstanding that being a very young man, he came to practyse in
Rome, and had studied abundauntly the civil laws, and was meruaylously
occupied in great and weyghtye causes, and after that he was senator, was
continually (as it seemed) most busy about the weal public: yet he that does
exactly read and study his warkes, shall think, that he never did any thing
but read great authors and write books. for there was no sect of philosophers,
none orator, no poet before his time, that eskaped him, but that he rad his
warkes, as in his books sufficientely it appears. And yet how many books mde
he? sens we have not the third part of them, yet such as we have of them, if
any man now did write so much and so well, we should think him to have
spente the more part of his time in writing. And yet noble Cicero, lord god,
how many things did he exploit by his wisdom and diligence in most weighty
affairs, as well in war as in peace? How did he by his dexterity and
prudence save the City and people of Rome from the most pernicious confederacy
and rebellion of Catiline, and many other of the nobility, which went about
to destroy the weal public, and rob the city? How preserved he the same
city and people, after the death of Caesar, that they were not oppressed by
Marcus Antonius? for his incomparable acts the hole Senate and people gave to
him first before any the name of father of the countray. what trouble and
misery sustained he, being exyled, by the procuremente of Clodius, only for
the putting of the said rebels to death? Such is the reward of people
unstable. Like wise for dryuinge Antonius out of Rome, and by his sharp
orations causynge him to be proclaimed ennemy to the weal publyke, he made
Antony so much his enemy, that in the treaty of peace between him and Octauius,
he demanded Cicero, to do with him at his pleasure. which being granted of
the unkind Octauius, whom Cicero had brought up, and by his means caused him
to be made the chief governor of the Romans: finally Antony sent one
Herennius, whom Cicero had saved from death by his eloquence, who pursued him
as he fled: which Cicero perceiving, abode his coming, lyinge in a horse
lytter for waikenes, and with constant eyes prepared his throat to Herennius,
who, all other men thereat abhorringe, struck of his head and his hands, and
brought them to Antony, who reioycynge thereat, caused the head and the hands
to be set over the place of civil iugementes at Rome, which beholden of the
senate and people was daily lamented. This have I purposely written, to the
intent, that this most noble counsailour should not be hyd to such as can
not yet understand his life written in greek or latin, and that all men
should be inflamed to read and understand his warkes, which before all other
gentiles, would be chiefly red and followed of Christen men, finding in them
incomparable wisdom and eloquence. And truly I will affirm Quintilianes
saiinge: He may well think, that he has much profyted, whom that Cicero
specially lyketh, he flourished about.xl. years before the incarnation of
Christ.

Ciceronianus, he that coueyteth to follow Cicero in eloquence.

Cichorea, and Cichoreum, an herb called succhory.

Cicina, a night crow.

Cicindula, a fly which shyneth by night.

Cicinia, a little lean serpent in Italy.

Ciclades, be yles in the sea Ionium called Ciclades, because they lie round
together, orels because in saylinge to them men must fetch a great compass
about, by reason of promontories: which are in number. 53

Cicones, a people of Thrace.

Ciconia, ^risot.
a bird which some do suppose to be called a storke, and is of the figure of
an heron, ^^nius.
but that he is greater, and is white, saving that the tops of his wings
are black, and his byll and legs are red. some think that they have no
tungues. they naturally be ennemies to serpents, and do slay them. Of them it
is written, that when they be old, their birds do feed them, and provide
meat for them, for the which cause the image of them was the token of justice.
and the ancient kings had it on the top of their septours, as they had in the
lower part the beast called Hippopotamus, which contrary wise sleeth his
father, and rydeth on his mother, whereby they were exorted to advance justice
and pity, and to oppress injustice and cruelty. Eras. in chil.
Of this bird came a greek word for a proverb, Antipelargein, which
signifies (as I might say) to be like a storke. which proverb is to exhort
men to be kind to their parents, or to their masters, which teaches them or
brings them up, requitynge them the benefyte, which they received of them.

Ciconius, the name of him that bylded Brixia.

Cicorium, an herb that grows every where.

Cicum, a thynne skin, which is within a pomegranade.

Cicur, every beast or bird, which ones being wild, is made tame.

Cicuro, aui, are, to make tame.

Cicuta, a venomous herb, which grows.ii. cubits in heyght, with a grene
stalk full of knottes, bushy in the top, having leaves smaller than
Coriander, and seeds greater than anyse seed, and is horrible in sauouor.
some do now use that name for hemlocke.

Cidaris, a cap, which the kings of Persia did use, and also the bushops in
the old law.

Cieo, Festus.
and Cio, ciui, to meue a thing, to call or name: also to trouble or make one
angrye. Quid negotij est, Plautus.
Pistoclerum Lydus quod herum tam ciet? What is the matter, that Lyous thus
trubleth or angreth his master? Bellum ciebant, they did set forth in bataile.

Ciere aluum, to provoke one to the stool.

Ciere urinam, to make one to pysse.

Cileo, ui, ere, to meue or stir a thing.

Cilicia, is a countray in Asia beyond the mount of Taurus, partly enclosed
with the highest part of the said mount, and hardest to pass by. Strabo
deuideth Cilicia in to two parts, one called Tracher, that is to say rough or
rocky: The other Campestris, that is to say plain. Josephus writes, that it
was of old time called Tarsus of Tarsis, oone of the sons of Iaphet, the
yo^gest son of Noe. Herodotus says, that the people were called Cilices of
Cilix, the son of Agenor king of Phoenitia, where before it was called
Hypatus. Saynct Hierom does interpret Cilicia, a congregation, a lamentation,
an assumtion, a lamentable calling, or vomyte. The people were by nature
inclyned to lien^ and stealing, whereof grew this proverb:

Cilex non facile uerum dicit, The Cilician not lightly says troth. A
proverb applied to a covetous man, which always lies for his particular
advantage, as now a days most part of men do, which live only by
selling.

Cilicinus, a, um, made of hearen clothe.

Cilicium, any cloth or garment made of hear.

Cilium, the over skin wherewith the eye is closed.

Cilix, icis, an inhabitaunt of Cilicia.

Cillibe and Cilliba, a round table.

Cilones, men having great round foreheades.

Cima, the tender part of the stalk of herbs.

Cimaria, things that be four square.

Cimbalaris, an herb which grows in stone walls, which has a little
leaf, somewhat in fascion like to an iuy, and has a little purple flower. It
is supposed to be the herb, which is called Vmbelicus Veneris.

Cimbices, Plutarch.
they which do make much of a little, or greatly esteem a thing which is of
small value.

Cimbri, were the people which did inhabit Denmark and Norway, who had a
meruaylous custom, which Strabo writes: that with their wives, who followed
them in wars, were also women kunnynge in divination, whose hear was white,
and likewise their gowns, under the which they had launde clothes made
fast with pynnes or taches, being gyrte with gyrdelles of brass, and went
bare foted. They always, as prisoners were taken, with naked swords beat them
to the ground, and drew them unto a brazen cauldron, which contained fyfty
Amphoras, of our measure.250. gallons, and having an haulte place made for the
purpose, they went up quickly, and liftynge on high the men that were taken,
they did cut their throtes over the cauldron, and by the droppynge of the
bloudde, they declared their prophesies. Some other opening men's bealyes,
serched their bowelles, and prophesied victory unto the people.

Cimeliarchon, Budeus.
a jewel house.

Cimeliarchus, master of the jewel house.

Cimex, a stinkynge worm bredynge in wood or paper.

Cimmerij, are people inhabitynge in the furthest part of Europa, not fer from
the great fennes called Paludes Meotidis, and about the sea called Bosphorus
Cimmerius, northeaste from Grecia. Plinius and some other do affirm, that by
the far distaunce of the son from it, that countraye is always very dark,
whereof happened this proverb:

Cimmerijs tenebris atrior, Blacker than the dark of Cimmeria. applied to
much darkness, or dulnes of wit, or lack of wisdom.

Cinabulum, a cradle.

Cinaedus, of Nonius Marcelleus is expound to be an exerciser of wonton
dau^ces and motions of the body in diverse fourmes. Perottus in Cor^^copie
declares it to be a person exercisynge acts of lechery detestable, and
against natural form and order, which I will not express, and if he had
omytted it also, he had nothing offended, being a thing worthy to be out of
remembrance.

Cinamomum, a kind of spyse odoriferous and dilectable, called Cynamome, of
some canell, It grows in Ethiope, like a low bushe in diverse stemmes,
which do not excede two cubits in heighte, having leaves like to organum,
the ryndes thereof is that which we have in use. It is hot and dry in the
third degree.

Cinara, an herb, which some men do suppose to be an artochoke.

Cincinnati, men that have curied hears.

Cincinni, hears that be curled.

Cinclidae, Ca(...)
are bays or parclosis made about the places of judgment, where men not
being sutars, may stand, behold, and here what is done and spoken among
the iuges and pledours. Such a like thing is at westmynster hall about the
common place, and is called the bekens.

Cinclidarius, (...) ant. 3.
was he which kept the place, where monumentes or records were kept, that
every manne should not enter without leave. As he which now keeps the
records in the tower, or the porter of the rolls may be so called.

Cincticulus, a short cote called a ierkyn.

Cinctus, tus, a short garment, which the consul did wear, when he proffered
battle.

Cinediae, stones found in a fyshes head.

Cineraceus, and Cinereus, a, um, of the color of ashes.

Cenericius, a, um, baken or roasted under ashes.

Cingo, xi, gere, to gyrde or compass about.

Cingria, a short pype having a small sound.

Cingula, a gyrth for beasts.

Cingulus, a gyrdell for men.

Cinifactum, brought into ashes, as things which are burned.

Ciniflo, onis, he that makes hot the instruments, wherewith men or women did
trym their hear.

Cinis, neris, ashes.

Cinna, a city of Thessaly. Also the name of a Romayne, which exceded in
cruelty.

Cinnabaris, a stone called a sanguinarye, it is also called in latin Sanguis
draconis, dragons blood. It is put in to sundry medicines to staunche blood.

Cinnamolgus, called of Pliny, and Cinnamomus of Aristotle, is a bird which
makethe her nest with cynamome.

Cinniligium, a gyrdell, which a bride or new wedded wife wears, a corse.

Cinnus, a hear of a man or woman's head, or a medley of diverse things
together.

Ciperum, a soote plant or herb, which is good to break and expulse the
stone.

Cippus, a pair of stocks. Also a little hill, which men call a barrowe. It
is also a cross or other mark, which shows the right way to a place.

Cio, ciui, cire, read Ci^o.

Circa, about, nighe.

Circania, a bird, which in his flight fetches a compass.

Circe, ^odorus ^ul. li. 5.
was daughter of Ceta, king of the isle of Colchos and Hecate the wyche, and
was the sustar of Medea. This woman knew the meruaylous operations of sundry
herbs, and how to cure al manner of poisons. Not with standing at the last
she slew her husband king of Scithes with poison, and vexed the people with
much tyranny. wherefore she was expelled the country, and fled in to a deserte
isle in the occean sea. Homerus names her the suster of Aeta, and shows how
Ulysses arryuynge in the isle, where Circe dwelled, diverse of his companyons
were by her transformed in to swyne, and afterward by the intercession of
Ulysses, she eftsoon restored them unto their pristinate form, and were more
beautiful and young in sight, than they were before.

Circerus, a great ship, which they of Asya used.

Circino, aui, are, to compass, to make a cerkle.

Circinus, an instrument called a compass.

Circiter, about, and is referred sometime to time.

Circiter caledas Iunias, About the first day of June.

Sometime it is referred to the place.

Circiter in media arce, About the mids of the castle.

Sometime to the thing. Circiter duo millia hominum caesa sunt, There were
nyghe two thousand men slain.

Circites, houpes of iron or brass.

Circitores, officers in cities, which do go about to se that good rule be
kept.

Circius, a southern wind, which is wonderful vehemente.

Circuitio, a compasynge, goinge about, or enuironynge.

Circuitus, a circute, a compace about.

Circius, the name of an isle in Misia.

Circuitores, the serchers of watches* also they which do go about the streets
to selle garments or lynnen clothe.

Circulatim, by cercles, or in the form of a cercle.

Circulator, he that goes about to show him self what he can do, or to
deceive the people with craft or subtlety.

Circulatorius, a, um, perteynynge to such auanters or deceyuers.

Circulatrix, she that goes about to get money with daunsynge or tumbling.

Circulo, aui, are, to compass or close with a dyche, or other like thing, or
to make a cercle or compass about a thing.

Circulus, a cercle or compass.

Circum, about.

Circumago, egi, agere, to lead about, to turn about.

Circumcelliones, tavern haunters, or raylers about.

Circumcidaneus, a, um, cut round about.

Circumcido, cidi, cidere, to cut about a thing.

Circumsisus, cut round about, circumcided.

Circumcirca, Ser. Sul. ad Cice.
all about.

Circumcise agere, to make an oration by pecis, Sueto. de claris rhetor.
without coming to the purpose.

Circumcidaneu^ mustum, wine, which after that the grapes are pressed, is
taken out of the same grapes, being cut and new pressed.

Circumcludo, si, dear, to enclose round.

Circumcolo, colui, colere, to dwell now here now there.

Circumcolumnium, a place set about with pyllars.

Circumcurso, are, to run hither and thither.

Circundo, are, to enuyron or compass about, as a ring does about a man's
finger, or a dyche about a close.

Circumduco, Paulus de re iudicata.
duxi, ducere, to lead one about. It is also to abolyshe or put a side an
act. Quod si is qui edictum peremtorium impe trauit, Vlpia de iudicijs.
absit die cognitionis, tunc circumducendum erit edictum peremptorium: And if
that he that has opteyned the peremptory decree, be absent the day when the
matter should be determined, than the peremptory decre is to be dissolved or
abolyshed. It is sometime to deceive by cautelles.

Circumducere alique^ argento, Plaut. in Pseud.
to get ones money by falsehod.

Circumductrio, deceyte.

Circumductus, a, um, led about. Plaut. in cap.


Circumeo, iui, ire, to go about any thing.

Circumfero, to carye or bear about. also to cleanse. Vergil. 6.
Idem ter socios, pura circumtulit unda: Also he cleansed his company three
times with clean water.

Circumferre se, to goo bragging about the streets.

Circum^ecto, Vergilius
tere, to turn hither and thither.

Circumflexus, bowed.

Circumfluo, to abound. It is also to flow or run about, as water about a
City or country.

Circumfluus, a, um, that flows about.

Circumforanei, malaperte guestes, and tellers of tidings in markettes.

Circumforaneus, a, um, that may be, or is carried about.

Circumfundo, dear, to cast water or other licour about.

Circumfundere hosts, to slay ennemies on all parts.

Circumfusus, Vergilius
a, um, gathered about, as people when they desire to se a thing. Sometime
wrapped about like an adder or serpente.

Circumiaceo, ieci, ijcere, to put about.

Circumlino, Pli. de uiris illustr.
to annoint about.

Circumlinitio, onis, bournishynge, clensynge, or polyshynge.

Circummissus, a, um, sent about.

Circummitto, to send about.

Circu^munio, iui, ire, to enclose, wall in, or dich in. Also to enuiron
strongely, to fortify with walls or men.

Circumnascor, to grow about.

Circumpedes, Cicero.
lackayes awaytinge at their masters styrop. also foot men of princis.

Circumscriptus, ta, tum, put out, rased, abolyshed.

Circumscripte dicere, to speak in a certain number and measure.

Circumscriptor, a deceyuour.

Circumscriptus, deceived or abused.

Circumscripta oration, a measurable oration.

Circumscriptio, abusyng, or deceyuynge.

Circumscriptio temporis, a certain measure of time.

Circumplector, to embrace or close in.

Circumscribo, psi, bear, to write, or draw about with a line. Also to deceive
one in bargaynynge with him. Fratrem circumscripsit in diuisione haereditatis:
He deceived his brother in partition of the inherytance. Also to gather,
co^prehende, or descryue thoroughly. Cuius scientiae summam breuiter
circumscribo: The effect of whose learning I will comprehend or descriue
shortly. Sometime to put out that which is written.

Circumsecus, Apuleius
on both sides.

Circumsedeo, cessi, cedere, to besiege.

Circu^sido, sedi, fidere, to go about to besiege.

Circumsisto, stiri, sistere, to stand about one to defend him.

Circumspectatrix, a woman that beholds about, or watches.

Circumspecto, Plautus.
are, to behold about.

Circumspectus, circumspecte.

Circumspicientia, circumspection.

Circumspicio, exi, cere, to look about.

Circumspicuus, a, um, that may be beholden on all parts.

Circumsto, steti, stare, to stand about.

Circumtego, Plautus.
texi, tegere, to cover all about.

Circumuado, to invade, or perse on all parts.

Circumueho, uexi, uehere, to carry about often times.

Circumuecto, tare, to carry about often.

Circumuenio, to compass a man, to deceive him, to close him in, as in wars,
to oppress.

Circumuenire iuditio, where judges do condemn one by a confederacy,
contracye to justice and reason.

Fenore circumuentus, oppressed with usury.

Circumuerto, tere, to turn about.

Circumuolito, aui, are, to flee about.

Circuo, iui, ire, to go about.

Circus, was a place in Rome walled about, wherein was fighting with the
fistes, runnynge with horses. About it were sundry galeries, where the
senators and gentylmen beheld the passetyme.

Circenses Iudi, were those games, which were exercised in Circo, and were so
called as it were Circum enses, among swords. for as much as before there
were any such place made as Circus was, the homely antiquity used to have
those games in the open field, enuirroned with ryuers, and swords the points
upward, that on every part he that was a cowarde, should be in danger.

Cirnea, a wine pot.

Cirratus, he that has his hears brayded.

Cirri, hears curled, or feathers that do grow on the top of a birds head,
as a lark or hearon. Also like things growinge on herbs, which may be
clypped of. also things like hears about oysters.

Cirsion, an herb, which is commonly called buglosse, not that which is called
languedebuefe, but that which has the great leaf, whose pricks are not so
hard.

Cirsocele, Gal^^ defi^^
is a lousyng or pullyng out of their place of those vessels, which do
nouryshe the stones of a man, and a gatherynge of ill humor in the bag.

Cirtacus, a kind of brawne.

Cis, a worm among corn, which I suppose to be called weuyls. also it
signifies on this side: as, Cis Rhenum, on this side the river of Rhine: Cis
Alps, on this side the mountains called Alps, Sometime it signifies less.

Cis nature leges, less than the laws of nature may suffer. Salust uses it
ones for beyond: Cis Rhenum, atque intra mare nostrum and oceanum: Beyond the
river of Rhine, and within our sea and the occeanse.

Cis paucos dies, Pla^^^.
within few days.

Cis undique, in all places about.

Cisalpina Gallia, was sometime that country, which is from the mountains
called Alps. unto the river of Rubicon.

Cisium, aut Cissium, a carte with two wheles.

Cisiar ius, a carter.

Cispello, ^^aut. in ^^mph.
puli, pellere, to keep one out that he come not into the house.

Cispius, a mountain in Rome.

Cissanthemos, an herb, which the apothecaries do call Sigillum Mariae.

Cisseus, a king of Thrace, father of Hecuba queen of Troy.

Cissites, a precious ston like an yuy leaf, bright of color.

Cissos, in greek is yuy.

Cissybium, a cup or boll made of yuy.

Cista, a cheste, coffer, or basket.

Cistella, a casket.

Cisterna, a cesterne.

Cistophorus, a certain ancient coin, wherein was a man having a panyar on
his head of the which.vii.M. and. D. were in the talent, called Talentum
Euboicum. This would be set for Costrophinari, in the.xvi. book of the digestes.
tit. depositi.L. publia.

Cistula, a casket.

Cita aluus, a louse bealye. Aluo cita est, He has a laske.

Citatim, quyckely, swyftly.

Citato gradu, with quycke speed.

Citatus, called, summoned, or cited.

Citerior, nerer.

Citerior Gallia, Lumbardy.

Cithaeron, onis, king of Plateae, in Greece, of whom this history is
remembered: Juno being on a time angrye with Jupiter her husband, departed
from him into Boeotia. Jupiter desirous to have her again, went to Plateas to
Cithaeron, being than reputed a man of great wisdom and much experience, to
ask his advise, who gave to him counsel in form following, he caused an
image to be made of wod, and to be cladde rychly, and in the apparayle of a
bryde to be set in a charyot, and that it should be publyshed among the
people, that Jupiter was determined to mary Plateam the daughter of Asopus. But
as this image was solempnely carried, Juno inflamyd with ielosy, met with the
chariotte, and entryng therinto, first did rent the clothes and apparayl
about the image, and tha^ finding that therein was but an image of tree, and
no bryde, delyted at the invention, wherewith she was begiled, and tournyng her
anger into laughyng, she was forthewith reconcyled to Jupiter.

Cithara, a harp.

Citharista, which only plays on the harp. It is also an angle of France
by Marcile, lyenge out to the sea.

Citharistria, a woman harper.

Citharizo, aui, are, to harp.

Citharoedus, an harper, which syngeth to his harp.

Citimus, a, um, the last, the next unto us.

Citius, sooner.

Citius dicto, sooner than one may speak it.

Citissime, as soon as is possible.

Cito, soon, shortly.

Cito, aui, are, to cite, to summon, or call. Cita re testes, to bring
witness, to recyteor name.

Citorus, a mountain where grows plentye of box trees.

Citra, on this side, sometime without.

Citra adulationem, without flattery.

Citra pulueris tactum, without any duste. A proverb applied unto them, which
comes to a thing without any labor.

Citrago, ginis, the herb which is commonly called baulme, of the
apothecaries Melyssa.

Citrea malus, an orange tree.

Citreum, an orange.

Citrum, a fruit called pome citron.

Citrus, is another manner of tree, whereof in the old ^yme were made fair
tables and cofers, as now ben of cypress.

Citta, a pie.

Cittium, a town of Cyprus.

Citus, quycke, hasty, swyfte, sometime diuyded or parted.

Ciuicus, a, um, is the same that ciuilis is.

Ciuica corona, a garlande of oken leaves, used to be given to them that had
saved a citesyn in battle.

Ciuilis, le, that pertayneth to a citesyn.

Ciuilis homo, a man expert in those things that appertayn to the ministration
of a common weal.

Ciuilitas, tatis, curtesy, civility, good humanite

Ciuiliter, like a citesyn, also curteysely or with good manner.

Ciuis, a citesyn or denysen. alsoo Ciuis meus, my country man.

Ciuitas, tatis, a city, proprely it is the multitude of citesyns gathered
together, to live according to law and right.

Cius, a river in Thrace.

Cizicus, a city in Asia, the less.

C ANTE L.
CLades, dis, a discomfiture in battle, a destruction of men, Plaut. in Amph.
loss.

Clam, priuilye, unawares. Is amare occoepit Alcumena^ clam uiro, He loved
Alcumena, unware to her husband. also by stelthe.

Clam alter alterum, the one knows not of the other.

Clam me profectus est, unawares to me, he went his ways.

Clam me, Plaut. in Aulul.
clam te, I or thou not knowing.

Clam omnes, unawares to every man, no man knowing or wyttynge.

Clamito, tare, to cry often.

Clamo, aui, are, to cry, to call.

Clamor, oris, a cry, a clamor, a noise.

Clamosus, a, um, clamorous or full of noise.

Clancularius poeta, a poet that writes, not showing his name.

Clanculum, secretly.

Clandestino, privily or secretly.

Clandestinus, a, um, privy or secret.

Clango, xi, gere, to sown a trumpet.

Clangor, oris, the sown of a trumpet. sometime the cry that gese or other like
birds do make

Clanius, a city of Champaigne, nere to the city Acertas.

Clare, clearly, apparently.

Clare audire, to here perfytely.

Clareo, ui, ere, to appear, to be well known, to be clear, to be renoumed.
Claresco, idem.

Clarifico, aui, are, to make clear or apparent.

Clarigatio, Alciatus i^ co^me^t. de uerb. sig.
a clerynge, a subsidy or task granted by a commune consent. It is also
authority given to arrest one.

Clarigo, aui, to demand a thing with a loud voice, it was properly a word
pertaining to the king of arms of the Romans, called Pater patratus,
Plinius li. 22.
when he went to the borders or marches of them, which had done injury unto the
Romans, and there with a loud and clear voice demanded of them amends.

Claritas, tatis, clerenes, sommetyme nobilytie or honor.

Claritudo, ide^ quod claritas, also brute, renom.

Clarium, a town in Grecia, where Apollo was honored, in that town was an
hole in the ground, out of the which ran a little broke, whereof if any man
did drink the water, he gave meruaylous answers, but he lived not long
after. Of this town was Apollo surnamed Clarius.

Claro, aui, are, to make noble or honorable.

Claros, a city in Greece.

Clarus, a, um, clear, honorable, famous.

Clara pugna, a battle worthy memory.

Clarus clamor, Clara uox, a loud cry, a loud or shyll voice.

Clara res, a plain matter.

Clarus genere, of a noble or honorable house.

Clarus, a river, which runs from the high mountayns of Alps into the
river called Danubium.

Classiarius, a man of war on the sea.

Classiarius, Vergilius
dylygent.

Classici, they which in a town were most rych and substanciall.

Classici authors, writers of most estimation.

Classici testes, witnesses having most substance

Classicum, a peale or noise of trumpets or belles, to call men together, or to
go to battle.

Classica bella, war on the sea.

Classicus, an offycer, which with a trumpet or tabore called people together.
sometime a man being in reputation.

Classicus, a, um, pertaynyng to nauyes.

Classis, is, a navy of ships. it is also an order of fourmes or stoles set
in a place, where men do sytte according to their degrees, authorities,
promotions, in kunnynge or substance. The people of Rome were divided by
Seruius Tullius, the.vi. king of Romans into tyue bands, which were called
Classes, and they which were of the fyfth band, were of no value. The three
places of judgment in Westminster hall, may be called Classes.

Clatrum, and clatrus, a lattyse wyndowe, or any thing made like a latrise, or
with bars called a grate. some do write it Clathrum, with an aspiration.

Clatro, aui, are, to shut a wyndowe, specially a lattyse wyndowe.

Claua, a clubbe.

Clauam extorquere Herculi, to take from Hercules his clubbe. A proverb
applied to him, which gothe about to get a thing, that an other man has, much
stronger tha^ him self

Clauarius, an officer, appointed to deal themperours gift of money or corn
among the souldyours.

Clauator, he that uses a clubbe.

Clauatus, set with nails.

Clauata uestis, was a garmente set with spangles like to the heads of
nails, as we do now behold in some vestementes in churches wrought in
branches and flowers, and if the garment were wide, it was called Latus
clauus, which in Rome no man might wear, except he were a senator.

Claudeo, to halte, sometime to err.

Claudia, was a gentylle womanne of Rome, which for the curiosity that: she
used in apparaylynge her self, was infamyd to be unchaste. But when the image
of Ide^a, called mother of the goddis, was brought out of Phrigia to Rome,
being carried in a barge by the river of Tyber, it happened to styck so fast in a
shalowe place, that it moughte not be removed with no force. This maiden
knelinge down, desired that goddess, that the being a clean virgin, and
falsely sclaundered, the said image would wytsaulfe to follow her to the
city, and thanne she only tyenge her gyrdelle to the barge, easylye drew it
to the land, which all the youth of the city were not able to do.

Claudianus, a famous poet.

Claudico, caui, are, to halte.

Claudicare in aliquo officio, to be neglygent in doing a man's duty.

Clauditas, halting, lamenes.

Claudius, was the proper names of diverse Romans, and also a surname of a
noble family in Rome, which were ever repugnant to the acts of the commune
people.

Claudo, si, dear, Salust.
to shytte, sometime to compass, also to put of, also to halte. sometime to turn
about. Claudite nymphae Dicteae, nymphae nemorum, iam claudite saltus, Turnc
about ye goddesses of Dictea, ladies of the forestes, turn your dance about.

Claudus, a, um, lame.

Clauena, the duchy of Cleues.

Clauicula, a little kay or clubbe.

Clauicula, or clauiculus, diminutiues of clauis.

Clauicularius, he that bears the kayes.

Clauiculus, the tendrell of a vine.

Clauiger, idem quod clauicularius.

Clauis, a kaye.

Clauola, a grief.

Claustrarius, a maker of kayes and locks.

Claustrinus, a keeper of the cloister, or of any other place, wherein any
living thing is enclosed.

Claustrum, a cloister, or other place where any living thing is enclosed.

Clausula, a little sentence, or a part of a sentence.

Clausura, a shutting in.

Clauulus, a diminutiue of clauus.

Clauus, a nail, also the stern of a ship, also a corn on a man's toe or
finger. Moreover claui, be little swellynges of hard flesh in the corner of
men's eyes. Also puffes growing in the stemmes of great trees. also in harneis,
that which is called the ryuette. Moreover clauus is a garmente pyrled or
poudred with spangles, like nails heads. Wherefore the proper garmente of a
senator, was called Latus clauus.

Clauus aeneus, a brasyn nail. Coelius writes it for a proverb, signifieng a
sure remedy against all mishappes, which proverb he says proceeded hereof.
In the old time hunters when they had overthrown a wyld swyne or heart in
places far from habitation, they drove into the beast a brason nail,
beleuyng that thereby the flesh should be kept from putrefaction, and of this
superstytion came the said proverb.

Clauum clauo pellere, Eras. in chil.
to drive out oone nail with an another. A proverb, signifieng one ill to
put away an other, oone labor an other labor, oone grief with an another
grief, one deceypte with an other deceypte, extreme pleasure with extreme
pain.

Clazomenae, a cite of Ionie, which Paralus builded.

Clazomenia, an ylande, which is called Marathusa.

Cleantes, the name of a noble philosopher, which succeeded Zeno in his schole.

Clearchus, the name of a philosopher, There was a noble capytaine of the same
name, of whom Xenophon writes in the expedition of Cyrus the less.

Clemens, it is, merciful.

Clementia, mercy. sometime patience.

Clementia aestatis, Plaut. in Sticho.
the temperatenesse of summer.

Clementer, mercifully, gentilly, without anger

Clementer tractare, to entreat gentylly or swetely.

Clementer uolo, I am well content.

Cleobulus, was done of the seven sages of Greece, who had a daughter called
Cleobulina, which was an excellent poet, and made a book of ryddelles
contained in three thousand versis.

Cleodamas, the name of a geometrician in the time of Plato.

Clena, a cloak.

Cleombrotus, the son of Pausanias, capytayne of the Lacedemons.

Cleopatra, the name of diverse great ladies, specially queen's of Egypt, of
whom one excellynge in pleasantnes and sharpenes of wit first allured unto her
Iulium Caesarem, afterward Marcum Antonium, companyon in thempire with
Augustus, whom she brought into such dotage, that in following her appetite,
be aspired unto the hole empire, wherefore he was afterward distroyed by
Augustus. This woman so much exceded in sumptuous gluttony, that she puttyng an
excellent perle into tarte vyneger, wherein being consumed she received it into
her body, the perle being estemyd at. 100. Sestertia, which is of our money.
This lady after the death of Antony, enclosed her self in a tumbe, being on
live, and having two serpents suckynge at her pappes, so dyed.

Clepo, psi, pere, to steal.

Clepsydra, a dyall, which dyuided the hours by the rounnyng of a certain
measure of water. It was also the name of a fountain in Athenes.

Cleronoma, heritage.

Cleronomos, an heir.

Clerus, chosen by lotte. Also a worm which destroys and corrupts honey
combs.

Clibananus, he that fyghteth in Iustyng herneysse.

Clibanus, an oven, or the mouth of a fourneyse.

Cliduchus, he that bears a mace.

Cliens, it is, is he which belongs or retains to some man in authority, to
have his defense and assistence in causes honest. it is also he which has
retained a lawyer to sustayn his matter, called a clyent.

Clientela, the noumber of clyentes or of servants retained, or duty.
sometime safeguard by reason of a great man's favor.

Clientulari um, an yearly fee, for counsel or assistence.

Clima, it is, is a portion of the world between southe and north, wherein is
variation of time in the length of the day, the space of half an hour, which
is set out in the tables and chartes of cosmographye.

Climactericus, a, um, signifies the degrees of man's life by seven years, in
the which he is in danger of death or misfortune.

Climactericum tempus, the said dangerous time.

Climacterum, idem.

Climax, a ladder, and the figure callid gradation

Clingo, gere, old writers vsyd for cingere, to gyrde.

Clinicus, a physician, that heals with medycines, also he that is so sick,
that he can not arise out of his bed.

Clinopale, wrastlynge in the bed.

Clinopodium, Ruellius.
the herb which is called Pulyole mountain.

Clio, the name of one of the Muses.

Clisis, declination.

Clitellae, a pack saddell. alsoo the name of a place in Rome.

Clitellarij, packehorses or mules, that do serve for carriage.

Cliterini, Coelius.
the cullions or stones of a man.

Clitomachus, the name of a philosopher.

Clitorius, a fountain in Greece.

Clitumnus, a river in Italy.

Cliuia, Festus.
all things hard to be brought to pass

Cliuosus, a, um, pytching down or stiepe down

Cliuus, seu cliuum, the pitche of an hylle. some time the side of an hyl.
sometime a lyttel hill, whereon is some thing builded.

Cloaca, a synk or gutter whereby water passes

Cloacare, to defyle or pollute.

Cloacarium, skot in a town for clensynge of commune draughtes.

Clodius, was a name of the Romans, whereof were two, which by their ill
acts gatte specialle remembrance. One was son to Aesopus the player in
tragedyes, unto whom the father left meruaylous greatte richesse, which he
shortly consumyd in bankettynge, wherein he was so su^ptuous, that unto them
which souped with him, he would give perles of great value, relented in vyneger
to eat. An another Clodius was of a noble house of the Romans, who so much
hated Tully, for bearing witness against him, when he was accused for
committing adultery with Pompeya, the wife of Julius Caesar, that afterward
being Tribune of the people, he never ceased to styre the people against
Tully, until he compellyd him to go into exyle.

Cloris, a maiden or nymphe, which was married to Zephirus, unto whom was
assigned for her dower, to have rule over flowers.

Clostrum, old writers vsyd for claustrum.

Clotho, one of the fatal ladies, having power over man's life, in
dyssoluynge thereof.

Cludo, si, dear, to shytte.

Clumae, the husks of barley.

Clueo, ui, ere, to contend or fight.

Clunaculum, a bouchers choppynge knyfe.

Clunes, the buttockes or haunches.

Clupea, a city of Affrike, next to Cartage.

Clymene, the mother of Promotheus, daughter of Oceanus.

Clypeus, a shield or tergat of footmen.

Clysmus, a purgation or washing.

Clyster, eris, and clysterium, a tergate.

Clytemnestra, the wife of Agamemnon.

C ANTE N.
CN, uel Cneus, the name of a man.

Cnicus, an herb called of the apothecaries Carthamus, of the which be two
kinds, the one is of the gardeyne, the other is wild. Of the first is a
notable confection made, called Diacarthami, which louseth the bealy, and
pourgeth watrye fleume. It is of some called wild saffron, and is hot and dry
in the second degree.

Cnipes, is a little wourme, which is found bred in an elm tree.

C ANTE O.
COaccedo, cedere, to be added to the princypall sum.

Coaccesso, cessi, cessere, to wax sour or tarte.

Coaceruo, aui, are, to heap up, or gather into heaps.

Coacta pecunia, money gathered for sum purpose.

Coactio, a particular receypte.

Coactores, particular receyuours.

Coactura, a great gatherynge together.

Coaduno, Bude^^
are, to assemble.

Coaequalis, equal.

Coaequare, idem quod aequare.

Coaequus, a, um, like, even.

Coaetaneus, of one age.

Coagito, idem quod simul agito, read Agito.

Coagmento, aui, are, to join together, or make like.

Coagulo, aui, are, to gather in to a courde or cream.

Coagulum, courde or cream.

Coalesco, ui, escere, to gather togider. to i^creas

Coarcto, aui, are, to strayn, or press together.

Coarctus in oppido, kept within the town by force.

Coarguere, to rebuke with other.

Coasto, to planke or bourde, or to join bourdes together.

Coaxare, to make a noise like a frog or tode.

Cocalus, a king of Sicile, to whom Dedalus fled out of Creta, wha^ Minos king
of Crtte pursued him.

Coccalus, a pyne appull.

Coccentum, a meat made of honey and popy sede.

Cocceus, a, um, and coccineus, a, um, of scarlet color.

Coccina, a scarlet vesture.

Coccinatus, he that wears a scarlet gown.

Coccinus, and coccus, scarlet color.

Coccis, igis, a bird called a cuckowe.

Coccum, grayn wherewith cloth and sylk is grained. Coccos baphice, idem.

Coccum cnidiu^, is a beary like to myrtils, blak and hard without, and within
white, the herb whereof some to call Thymaelea, some Oliuella, some Leo terrae,
some Linum syluestre. The bery is medicinable to purge choler, water, and
fleme, some authors do call it Granu^ cnidium.

Cochlear, a spone. It is also a measure, which conteyneth.iii. drammes, and
one scriple, and is the fourth part of Cyathus.

Cochlearium medicum, seu atticu^, conteyneth one dram, half a scriple.ii.
graynes.ii. five parts of a grain in measure, and in weight of wine as much,
of oil one dram, and two scriples.

Cochlium, a wyndynge stayre.

Coclea, a snayle having a shell. also a fyshe called a pyrwynke.

Cocles, itis, he or she that has but one eye.

Coclides, wyndyng stayres. also a stone found in Araby, which being boiled
seven days and as many nyghtes in honey, and all the earth taken from it, it is
made wonderful pleasant in sight, having being and spots of sundry colors,
and is so great, that sometime thereof is made horseharneys for kings.

Coctie, a part of the mountains of Alps.

Coctilis, le, sodden or baken.

Coctito, aui, are, to boil.

Coctinus, a, um, easy to be boiled.

Coctona, quynces.

Coctonum, cotton.

Coctus, a, um, sodden enough.

Coculum, a pot to boil in. sometime Cocula do sygnify styckes, which will
sone be on fire

Cocus, a cook.

Cocynthum, a mountain in Italy, that diuydeth two seas.

Cocytia, sacrifyces, that were done in honor of Proserpyne.

Cocytus, a river of Hell.

Coda, a tail.

Codatremula, a bird called a wag tail.

Codex, icis, the body of a tree, or a great book or volume.

Codicariae naues, ships or barges made of thycke plankes.

Codicilli, Suetonius.
epistles. sometime it is taken for letters patentes of a prince.

Codicillus, signifies properly a letter missiue.

Codiculus, a diminutiue of codex, when it is put for a book.

Codonia, an yland that the Almayns keep.

Codrus, the propre name of a king of Athenes, which to save his country,
wyllyngely lost his life.

Coea, of Politianus is vsyd for Coa, of the isle of Cos.

Coelator, he that graueth.

Coelatura, the grauynge.

Coelatus, a, um, graven.

Coelebs, a syngle man or woman, also every chaste person.

Coelestis, coeleste, heavenly, or of heaven.

Coelestis aqua, rain water.

Coeliaca, Alexander Trallianus.
is a pain in the bealy, with a contynuall flyt, diverse in color, with loss
of appetite, and coldness in the extreme partis, which syknes happens of the
feebleness of virtue digestive in the stomach and bealy. Some do suppose it to be
that, which is called Cholica passio, I think it rather to be Lienteria
uentriculi, read in Lienteria.

Coelibaris hasta, was the staff of a sauelyn, which had been in the body of
one of them, which were called Gladiatores, and was slain, with the which
staff the head of a maiden new married, was kempt and stryken, signifieng that
likewise as the staff had stiked fast in the body of him that was slain, so
should she styck fast, and be joined with him that married her.

Coelibatus, a syngle life without marriage.

Coelicola, he that inhabiteth heaven.

Coelicus, a, um, of heaven.

Coelifer, was the surname of Atlas, whom poets feign to bear heaven on his
shulders.

Coelipotens, almighty god.

Coelistomia, the pronouncyng of the voice low in the mouth, without perfect
digestion.

Coelites, heavenly creatures.

Coelitus, heavenly.

Coelo, aui, are, to grave in mettalle.

Coeloma, Galen. in definit.
it is, is a round and holowe soore about the cercle of the eye, nigh to the
sight.

Coelum, Plinius.
heaven or the firmament. also the palate or roufe of the mouth, sometime a
grauynge iron.

Coelum digito attingere, to touch heaven with his finger. A proverb applied
to them which suppose them selfs able to do things impossyble.

In coelo esse, A proverb signifienge to be in felicity, or to be most happy.

Coelus, the father of Saturnus and Titan.

Coemeterium, a churcheyarde.

Coemptio, where two or moo persons do bye together.

Coena, a soupper.

Coenacularia, the way or craft to ordeyn a supper. Coenaculariam facere, to
let a house in diverse parts to sundry persons, wherein are many parlers or
drinkyng houses.

Coenacularius, Vlp. de pi gnor. act. l. solutum
he that does let such houses to hyre.

Coenaculum, a parler or other place, where men do soupe.

Coenaticus, a, um, pertaining to soupers.

Apparatus coenaticus, ordinance for supper.

Sermo coenaticus, communication mete for suppers.

Coenatio, a lower parlar to soupe in, a summer parler.

Coenatiuncula, a little drinking house.

Coenatorius, a, um, belongyng to soupers.

Coenaturio, ij. ire, to labor or endeavor my self to soupe.

Coenatus, he that has souped.

Coenipeta, a goer about to soupers vnboden.

Coeno, aiu, are, to soupe.

Coenare alienu^, Plautus in persa.
to sup atan other ma^s cost.

Coenabis hodie magnum malum, thou shall have thy souper soon in shrewde rest.

Coenobium, a monastery or other place, where men live in commune.

Coenosus, a, um, full of mire, dyrty.

Coenula, a light souper.

Coenum, myer, or dyrte.

Coepio, Cato.
piui, pire, to begin.

Coepra, torum, things or matters begun.

Coepto, tare, to begin.

Coeptu, a, um, begun.

Coepulonus, a banketter or reuellar.

Coetus, an assembly of people.

Coeo, iui, ire, to come together, to assemble, to ioyn to, to draw together,
to gather together, to do the act of generation, to ioyn together in action by
maintenance or champertie.

Coire in foedera, to make alyance.

Coire societatem, Plautus.
to be familyar.

Coeli, the part of Siria, that joins to Araby.

Coerceo, cui, cere, to resteayn, to bind hard, or straight, to compelle or
constrayne, to keep within a compass, also to comprehend or co^tayn, to
correct or punyshe.

Coercere ignes, to stynte the fire, which burns a house, or other like
thing.

Coercitus, ta, tu^, restrained, compellyed, kept in.

Cogitate, aduysedly. Cogitatim, idem.

Cogitatio, onis, a thought. Cogitatus, tus, ide^.

Cogitatum, idem quod cogitate.

Cogito, Plaut. (...) mili.
aui, are, to think, to imagyne.

Cogitat curas, he thinks on his matters.

Cognati, kynsemen. Cognatio, kynrede.

Cognitio, Cicer.
a knowledge, it sometime signfieth judgment. Attis.
Qua lex earum rerum, quas Caesar statuisset, decreuisset, egisset, Consulibus
cognitionem dedit. The which law gave to the Consules judgment of those
things, which Caesar should have judged, decreed, and executed.

Cognitor, oris, an attorney or perctor in the law

Cognitus, ta, tum, known: Cognobilis, idem.

Cognomen, a surname which a man has of his ancesters. Cognomentum, idem.

Cognomines, diverse men of one surname.

Cognomino, aui, are, to give a surname.

Cognosco, noui, noscere, to know, to consider, to understand, to ly with a
woman, to judge a matter, or here a matter to judge it.

Cogo, egi, gere, to constrain, to gather together, to mylk a beast, to make
licour thyck or hard, to press, to set or bring in order. Cogere in arctu^, to
keep one strait, or from his liberte. Cogere in ordine^, to abate ones pride.
Cogere oues, to put up the sheep into a stable or fold.

Cohaereo, haesi, haerere, to be joined, to be familiar together, or to cleue
to a thing also to com to pass. Nuptiae non cohaerent. The marriage come not to
pass. also to agree together.

Cohaeresco, scere, idem.

Cohaeres, he that is joined with an other in inheritance it may be used for a
ioynttenant.

Cohibeo, ui, ere, to restrain, to keep of, to let, to restrain, to keep one
short, also to retain or keep to him self. Plaut. (...) miline.
Cohibere filium, to keep under his son. Cicer. (...) Sen.
Cohibere intra limen, keep you within the doors. Cohibere se, to moderate
himself, or to refrain.

Cohibitus, a, um, let, refrayned. Pla^^ Mer^^


Cohors, it is, was company of men of war. There were in every legion.x.
Cohortes, but the first excellyd the resydue, as well in preeminence as in
multitude. Therein was the chief banner of the Romans, wherein was painted
the egle. And the capitayn of that company called Centurio, was of more
reputation than any other Centurio, for as much as in that company required
to be men of good birth, well learned, and of valiant courage, also the
capitayn wise, valiant, strong in arms, and plitike in leadyng. In that
company were.1105. footmen, and.142. men of arms, and was called Cohors
miliaria. The second Cohors had.555. fotemen, and 66. men of arms. The third
had as many fotemen, and but.56. men of arms, but therein were the strongest
men, because it was set in the mids of the battle. The fourth had like
number of fotemen, and.lxvi. men of arms. The fyfth had as many fotemen and
horse men, but therein were chosen me^, because that likewise as the first bend
was on the right wyng of the battle, so the fifth was on the left wyng: for
five Cohortes or bendes made the first battle. The other five had equal
number every of them with the said fourth and fyfth bend, so that these ten
bendes made up a legion, contaynyng. 6100. fotemen, and 730. men of arms.
Cohors, is also taken for the domestical company of servants and ministers,
attendyng upon a man of high dignity or authority, and such was Cohors
Praetoria, the company which awayted on him that was Praetor or governor of
countries. Cohortes conscribere, and cohortes contrahere, have one
signification, to get together or assemble bendes or companies of men of
war. Caesar de ^el. civil. 1.
Ex finitimis regionibus, quas potest, contrahit cohortes ex delectibus
Pompeianis: Out of the countries adioynynge he gat bendes together of them
that had be chosen of Pompey. Salust. in Catal.
Ille cohortes ueteranas, quas tumultus causa conscripserat, in front, post
eas caeterum exercitu^ in subsidijs locat, He did set in the front of the
battle the bendes of old soldiers, which he had gathered together because
of the sodayn commotion, behind them he set the resydue of the host for
succors if need were.

Cohortes complere, to make up bendes of men of war, Salust. in Catalina.
after the rate of the company that is assemblyd. Catalina ex omni copia, quam
and ipse adduxerat, and Manlius habuera^, duas legiones instituit, cohortes pro
numero militum complet, Catalyne of all the men of war, that as well he had
brought with him, as also Manlius had there already, he ordained two legions,
and made up bendes according to the number of soldiers.

Cohors, seu cors, it is, a barton or place enclosed wherein pultry and al other
kind of pultry is kept.

Chortalis gallina, Varro.
and chortalis anser, an hen or goose that fedeth abroad.

Cohortor, aris, ari, to exhort.

Cohum, a thonge or lyngell, wherewith the ox bow and the yoke are bounden
together.

Coinquino, aui, are, to soil or stayn. also to defame a man or woman.

Cois, a garmente of fine sylke.

Coirio, an asse^bly, it is also a secret part or agreement among me^ to do some
act, which they would not have other me^ know: it may be taken for couine.

Coitus, tus, the act in generation.

Coix, a basket. it is also a certain kind of osyars, having a leaf like a
read, wherewith baskettes were made at Athenes.

Cola, a straynour.

Colaphizo, aui, are, to buffette.

Colaphus, and colaphum, a buffette or blow on the cheke.

Colasis, a kind of punishment that is don for chastysement.

Colchi, people in Asia, whereof the country is of Strabo callid Colchis, by
the sea callid Pontus, where the top of the hill callid Caucasus, turns to the
mou^tains callid Riphei, the one side bending to the sea callid Euxinu^, and the
fe^^ callid Meotis, the other side toward the sea called Caspium. In this
country is the famous river called Phasis. And it was the country of Medea
wise to Jason.

Coals, the yard of a man.

Colei, the stones.

Coleus, the cod which contayn the stones.

Colica, a passion callid the colyli, bred in the gut named colon, the grief
whereof in felt.iiii. fingers bread above the nauyl on the right side, extending
like a girdel until the left side. Constaut.
The occasion whereof percedeth of one of these causes, either by a coletik heat
drieng up the moisture of the ordure, which therefore may not pass out of the
bealy, or that the meat eaten was dry and bi^ding, letting the said passage,
or else that viscous and cla^my fleme is so augmented in that gut, that it
stops the issu thereof or that a gross and thik wind is there inge^dred
either by coldness of the natural complexion, or by weakness of the stomach in
digestion, or of the liver, or by meats fat and windy, or it happens by an
impostume in the said gut, or by wourmes wrapped in the ordure, or for the
insensiblenes of the gutte, whereby one feleth not the annoyance of the ordure.

Colicus, colica, he or she that has the colyke.

Coliculus, a tender stalk of an herb.

Colidos, an ylonde in the occean of Indie.

Colina, for culina, a kytchen.

Coliphium, a kind of bread, which wrastlers did eat, to make them strong.

Colis, the little tender stalk of colewortes or cabages, also the branche of
a vine.

Colitia, a great furrow for water to run into, for saving of the corn.

Colla, a kind of glewe.

Collabasco, scere, to be ready to fall.

Collabefactari testula, to be banysshed out of the city by lottes of shelles,
as it was used in Athenes. Se after in Ostracismos.

Collabello, aui, are, to join lyppes together, that is to say, to kiss on
the lyppes.

Collacrimo, aui, are, to weep with other.

Collactaneus, he that souketh with me of one nourse, a foster brother.

Collacteus, he that souketh of the same breast, and at the same time.

Collare, a collar for a hounde.

Collatia, a town by Rome, whereof one of the gates of the city was called
Collatina.

Collatina dea, was supposed to be the goddess over small hills.

Collatina porta, the name of a gate in Rome.

Collatinus, the name of a noble Roman, which was husband to the chaste
Lucrece.

Collatinus uenter, a great panche or bealye, which word Plautus vsyd.

Collatio, a task or sise: also a co^ferring together

Collatitius, a, um, that which is gathered and brought together.

Collatis signis pugnare, to fight i^ a field pight

Collaudo, aui, are, to praise that which other do commend.

Collectanea, things written gathered out of many warkes,

Collecte and collectim, compendiousely.

Collectio, a gatherynge.

Collectitius, a, um, that which is gathered.

Collega, a fellow or companyon in office.

Collegium, a company of them, which have equal authority. also a company
of men, which be of one mystery or craft.

Collibet and collubet, collibuit, collibitu^ est, collibere, Plaut. in Amph.
to like, to plese. Vtcunque animo collibitu^ est meo, Eue^ as it pleseth me,
or likes me.

Colliculus, an hyllocke.

Collido, si, dear, to beat or knock together.

Colligo, aui, are, to bind together.

Colligo, egi, igere, to gather together, to take away, to bring together. also
to prepare. Se colligit in arma, Vergilius Ci. tus. 4.
he made him ready to fight. Seipsum colligere, to bring home again the parts
of the mind that were dispersed.

Colligo rationem, I make account.

Colligere uestem, to tucke up his garment.

Collimare, to wynke with one eye, or to look straight on the mark.

Collina porta, a yate at Rome.

Collineo, as, are, idem quod collimo.

Collino, linis, lini, uel leni, linere, to rub or frot softly together many
things, as one makes an ointment of a thing.

Colliquiae, great gourdes of water, rounnynge through fields, after great
rain or snow.

Colliquo, Varro.
qui, liquere, to molte.

Colliquor, Vergilius
liqueris, liqui, to be molten.

Colliquesco, scere, idem.

Collis, a hylle. also Colles, the back.

Colloco, are, to set in a place.

Collocare se in arborem, Plaut. in Amph.
to clym upon a tree.

Collocare alique^ in sopore^, to stryke one in such wise that he is amassed,
and lies as he were on sleep, or to speak it more shortly, to lay one a
sleep with a stroke.

Colloces te in otium, draw the to ease.

Collocare in lecto aliquem, Pla^^^
to bring one to bed, Me^^^^
or to lay one in his bed.

Collocare filiam nuptui in dimidia part agri, to give halte his land in
marriage with his daughter.

Collocare patrimonium in salutem populi, to employ his inheritance to the
wealth of the people.

Collocare beneficium, to do pleasure.

Dotem in fundo aliquo collocare, to assign dowery to one in some land.

Male collocare horas, to bestow the time ill.

Insidias collocare, to lay in wait to do one harm or displeasure.

Praesidium collocare, to set a garrison in a place to defend it.

Spem in alique^ collocare, to put trust in one

Collocare se pala^ in meretricia uita, to give her self to live like a common
harlot.

Collocare se in otium, to dispose him to live quietly and without labor.

Collocare nuptum, to bestow a woman in marriage.

In luce benefacta collocare, to cause benefits or good tournes to be openly
known.

Collocare aliquem in aliquo gradu, to exalt or advance one to some degree or
dignity.

Collocatus, a, um, put or set in some place.

Collocupleto, tare, to enryche.

Collocutio, a communication.

Colloquium, idem.

Colloquor, queris, qui, to talk with one, or to talk together.

Colloqui alicui, to deuyse or talk with one.

Colloqui aliquem, to speak to one.

Collostrati, be children which do souke of the first milk of their mothers
as soon as they be borne.

Collostratio, a siknes, which children have by sucking curdy mylk of a woman
new delivered.

Colluco, aui, are, to make a glade in a thik wod

Colluceo, cere, to shine.

Colluctatio, a wrastlynge.

Colludo, dear, to play with one, or together, also among ciuilians it
sygnifieth to plead together by couyne, to the intent to deceyu^ some other
man.

Collum, a neck.

Colluo, lui, luere, to wash or rynce.

Collue poculum, Plant. (...) cap.
rynce the cup.

Collus, idem quod collum.

Collusor, Pla^^^
he that does any thing by collusyon or couyne.

Collusor, oris, a play fellow.

Collustrare, to behold on all parts.

Collustrare lumine, to make very clear.

Collutilo, aui, are, to dishonest or defyle.

Colluuiarium, a synke or gutter.

Colluuiaris porcus, an hog that walloweth in the mire, and there has meat
given him.

Colluuies, when the earth is covered with water by great flouddes.

Collybia, fygge tartes, fartes of Portingall, or other like things.

Collybistes, and Collybiste, he that delyuereth money by exchange, a banker.

Collybus, money received by exchange, or in bank, as men do which goo in to
strange countries, delyueynge money of this realm, to receive as much of
an other coin, where he comes.

Collyra, a lofe of bread, or a bunne.

Collyrida, a cake.

Collirium, a medicine for soore eyes.

Colere questum suum, to seek his own profit.

Colo, aui, are, to strain out licour.

Colo, ui, ere, to worship, to love, or favor, to haunt, to inhabit or dwell,
to till or husband ground, to lead, to have in estimation Hanc uitam colo, I
lead this life.

Colere officiu^, to do his duty or endeavor.

Colere pietatem, to have his parents in reverence.

Colere se, to apparayle him self.

Colere uitam, Plautus.
to live.

Colobium, Plaut. in Rude.
a iacket or cote without sleues.

Colocasia, a bean of Egypt.

Colocynthis, a kind of wild gourdes, called of the apothecaries
Coloquintida, which most vehemently pourgeth fleume, afterward choler,
finally blood. Many men by this medicine have finyshed their lives, when they
have thought thereby to have purged their bodies.

Colon, a gut, which goes from the left side unto the right, in the which
the dunge takes his form, and there is the disease called Colica, the
colyke. It is also a member or part of a sentence.

Colona^i^, rusticall people, tenauntes in villenage.

Colonarium, was a certain pention, which the Romans were compelled by the
three princes called Triumuiri, Aldatus ^ ^o^me^t. de ^erb. sig.
to pay for their houses at Rome. Also a rent paid for things belonging to
husbandry. Coelius.
It may be taken for such tenor, which with us was called villenage, where
the tenant was bounden either to ploughe, or to hedge, or to repe the corn of
the lord.

Colonia, people sent to dwell in a place, which is not inhabited, It is also a
city, the people whereof came from an other city builded before. It is sometime
a graunge where husbandry is kept.

Colonias nouas deducere, to make a new city, and to bring inhabitauntes of
an other city to dwell there.

Colonicus, a, um, perteynynge to husbandry.

Colonus, a husband manne. Also Coloni be they, which are sent to inhabit a
country or town. Also a high place in Athenes, where Neptune was worshipped.

Colophon, nis, a cite of Ionia in Greece, where as was the temple of Apollo
called Clarius, and Homerus the famous poet was borne.

Colophonem addere, to achyeue or bring to conclusion the thing that is
enterprysed or taken in hand.

Colophonia, is the herb called also Scammonium, whereof is made the vehement
purgation of choler: out of the root distylleth a gum, which in greek is
named Diacridion, which signifies a little tear, which word is now
corrupted, and for Diacridion, they call it Diagredium, which medicine being
given without discretion, kills many men.

Color, oris, color.

Colos. idem.

Coloratus, a, um, colored.

Coloria euestes, garments made of wull vndyed.

Colorificus, he that makes color.

Coloro, aui, are, to give or make a color.

Colos, the fundment.

Colosseus, and Colossicus, a, um, in form of Colossi, or great images.

Colossi, were images of horrible greatness like unto toures, whereof there was
oone of Apollo in the capitole at Rome, which was xxx. cubits high. Also at
Tarentum, was one made by Lysippus the famous mason, which was.xi. cubits
high. But at the Rhodes was one of the Sun, excedyng al other, which was in
heyghte.lxx. cubytes, made by Colassis, scholar to Lysippus: the thombe of that
image few men might fatho^. It was in making.xii. years, and the charge thereof
drew to.300. talentes, which amou^teth to three and fortye thousand, oone
hundred, and.xxv.ii. Strabo writes, that the image was of Jupiter, and was
made by Chares Lyndius: Besides this were a hundred less Colossi in the
Rhodes, and at Rome were many made of metal.

Colostrum uel Colostra, as Palladius says, was called of shepeherdes the
thycker part of milk, which I deem to be cream, other think it to be the
kurdes.

Colostrati infantes, children which have souked curdy milk.

Colotes, Quit. li. 2.
the name of a man that was a painter.

Coluber, a serpente, which lies in the shadow of woods.

Colum, a straynour, a colander.

Columbar, aris, a pyllory.

Columbaris, re, of a dove.

Columbarium, uel Columbaria, a douehouse or culuerhouse.

Columbaria, an ylande in the Tuskan sea,

Columbarius, he that takes doves.

Columbatim, in the manner of doves.

Columbinus, a, um, of a culuer.

Columbulus, a pygeon.

Columbus, and Columba, a culuer or dove.

Columella, the name of one that wrate of husbandry most eloquently.

Columellares dentes, cheke tethe.

Columen, luminis, the succor or stay, the wind beam of a house.

Columis, and hoc colume, hole.

Columna, a pyller.

Columnae Herculis, are two mountains, one at the uttermost part of Spain,
the other in the uttermost west part of Affrike, where as now are the
strayghtes of Cyuil or Marrocke. Some hold opinyon, that it is two yles in the
said straightes: some (as Strabo says) do affirm, that it were in deed.ii.
pyllars of brass in the isle called Gades longing to Spain, set there in the
temple of Hercules, in the honor of him: where they which trauayled by the
myddell sea, and were come to the vttermoste part thereof, and entering in to
the occean sea, came and did sacrifyce to Hercules. which opinion Possidonius
thought to be most true. They that suppose it to be two yles, do say, that the
one of them is in Europe, the other in Affryke.

Columnus, was in old time, that which we call now culmus.

Coluri, ar two great cercles in the sphere, which do declare the times called
Aequinoctia and Solstitia, that is to say, when the day and night is equal
in length. Also when the day is lengest, and the night at most length.

Colurnus, a, um, of hasyll.

Colus, a distaffe.

Colutea, the tree called Seen, whereof the leaves and coddes are ministered in
medicines, to purge melancholy.

Colimbades, olyues, or oil bearies condite in bryne or pickell.

Colyrides, lyttel small loves like maunchettes.

Coma, all the hear together, called a bushe. it is also sometime taken for the
laues of trees

Comagene, a part of Siria.

Comare, to have much hear, or a great bushe.

Comata, a shepeherdes name in Theocrite.

Comata Gallia, all France, on this half the mountains.

Comatulus, a boy with a fair bushe of heat.

Comatus, ta, he or she that has a great bushe. By translation it is said of
trees or herbs, that have long leaves or flowers.

Comb, Coe^^^*
a maiden that invented the armure of Aeneas.

Combino, aui, are, to combyne or confederate to gether.

Comburo, bussi, burere, to burn or consume with fire.

Come, an herb called gotes berde.

Comedim, old writers used for comedam.

Comedo, edi, edere, to eat.

Comedo, onis, he that consumes his own goods riottously.

Comedere patrimonium, to consume his inheritance in riotte.

Comedere beneficium, to forget a good (...)

Comes, mius, a companion or fellow. Also a name of dignity, which we call an
earl.

Comessabundus, Q. C^^*
using to banquet. also over charged with meat and drink.

Comessans, idem quod Comessor.

Comessari, to banquet.

Comssatio, a banquet after soupper, or a ryottous bankettynge.

Comessator, a riottour.

Comesse, for comedere, to eat.

Come, for comedit, he eats.

Cometes, and Cometa, a blasynge sterre.

Comis, gentle, full of good humanity.

Comitatus, tus, a fellowship.

Comiter, gentylly, courtaysely.

Comitialis dies, the day when people assembled at Rome, for the election of
officers.

Comitialis, morbus, the falling syckenes.

Comitia, a congregation or assembly of the people for election of officers, or
for prouulgation of laws, like to our parlyament.

Comitia edicere, to call or summon a parlyament.

Comitium, the place where the assembly was.

Comitor, ari, to accompany or go with one, or keep fellowship with other.

Comma, a point ending a sentence, where many sentenses be: as, Nihil tibi
profuit nocturnum praesidium palacij, nihil urbis uigiliae, nihil timor populi,
nihil concursus omnium bonorum? There is comma four times.

Commata, trenches, whereby water is let out of a ponde or river.

Commanducare, to chew meat.

Commanducatus cibus, chewed meat.

Commeatus, tus, a saulfe conduct, or leave to depart. sometime vytayles for an
army or multitude of men. Sometime for a passage of men. Plaut. in Milit.


Commeminere, to remember.

Commemini, I remembered, or do remember well.

Commemoro, aui, are, to remember.

Commendatitius a, um, that wherewith a man is remembered or recommended.

Commendo, aui, are, to commend or praise. sometime to recommende.

Commentaculum, a marshals or hushers rod.

Commentariensis, was called a gaylour.

Commentarium, uel Commentarius, a brigemente or other book, conteyninge
things briefly written. Also it signifies a comment also a book of
remembrance, or a register, or exposition.

Commenticius, a, um, feigned or devised for the time.

Commentor, ari, to think on, to make mention, to dispute, to write
commetaries or books for remembrance. also to deuyse.

Commentum, a comment or exposition, a matter feigned.

Commeo, aui, are, to go hither and thither, or to go to, or with an other.

Commereo, ui, ere, to deserve, to commytte. Si senserit te timidum pater,
^erent. in ^orm.
arbitrabitur co^meruisse culpam: If thy father do perceive the to be aferde,
he woll suppose, that thou art gylty, or have committed the offense.

Commereri culpam, to do an offense.

Commertium, an intercourse or liberty to carry merchandise from one place to
an other. Also a commutation or form of byeng and sellyng together. Also a
familiarite or custom.

Commessari, Q. Cu^ti.
to feed more than enough.

Commigro, ^aut. in ^ulul.
are, to go with one to a place. also to go from one place to dwell in an
other.

Commilitium, fellowship in wars.

Commilitones, fellows together in wars.

Co^miniscor, sceris, sci, to call to remembrance.

Comminuo, to cut in small pieces.

Comminus, forthwith at hand, hand to hand.

Commisceo, scui, scere, to myxe to gether.

Commiseresco, ^erent. in ^ecyra.
scere, to have compassion.

Commissa, confiscations.

Commissio, a conferring to gether by exercise, as two learned men together, or
herynge the one after the other.

Commissiones Praetorum, ^oelius.
were the celebration or publysshynge of plays made by the great officers
called Praetores.

Commissura, a joint of any thing that is closed and opened, as properly of
tables which be joined.

Commissus, a, um, committed to the keeping of one.

Commissum bellum, ^i. Liuius ^erent.
open war.

Commitigo, aui, are, to knock. Tibi uti commitigari uidea^ sandalio caput:
That I may se the knocked on the head with his slypper.

Committo, misi, mittere, to commytte, or inioyne, to offend, to join
together. Also to do and begin. Salustius.
Quibus dictis mox praelium commisere: That spoken they began battle. Also to
deliver, to compare, to bring in contention, to put to gether, to confisca^e
or sease for a forfayture, to provoke or steare. Cicer. in Ver. act. 3


Commodatarius, he that takes a thing of lone, he that boroweth.

Commodata res, a thing lend without advantage.

Commode, well, or to the purpose.

Commode cadere, to happen or succeed well or to the purpose.

Commode uerba facere, to speak things to the purpose.

Commoditas, tatis, a commodity.

Commoditas hominis, Terent. in Adelphis
the facility or curtesy of one, the which agrees to any request.

Commodo, aui, are, to do for an other man's commodity. Also to lend.

Commodare capillum, Plaut. in Mostel.
to kembe his head, or deck his bushe.

Commodare loquelam, Plaut. in Rude.
to speak.

Commodare operam, to help.

Commodum, profyt, or commodity Also good apt, or conueniente. Sometime it is
an aduerbe, and than it signifies the same time, in good time, leisure or
opportunity, scarsely. Commodum discesseras heri, cum Trebatius uenit: Thou
were scarcelye departed, when Trebattus was come.

Commodus, a, um, profitable or apt.

Commodus capillus, a bushe well decked or kempt.

Commodus homo, Plaut. in Pseud.
a tractable or reasonable man.

Commoda and faceta mulier, Plaut. in Mostel.
a pleasant and merry woman.

Commoda statura homo, Plaut. in Asin.
a man of good stature, nor to great nor to little.

Commodum id non est, Terent. in Eunucho
it may not be easily done.

Commodum obsonare, to use moderat fare

Commoereo, rui, ^^re, to be all heavy or sorry.

Commonefacio, feci, facere, to warn or advise one.

Commonefieri, to be warned.

Commoneo, ui, ere, idem.

Commonere aliquem, Terent. in Andria.
to remember one of a thing.

Commonere aliquem officium suum, Plaut. in Pseud.
to ad uertise one what he ought to do.

Commonstro, to show a thing that is hyd.

Commorior, ri, to dye with one.

Commoror, rari, to abide with one. alsoo to dwell in a place for a time: Also
to tarry one that is going. Plaut. in Amph.
Male facis, properante^ qui me commorare, sol abit: Thou do naught to tarry
me sense I go in haste, and the sun is how set.

Commotari, Plaut. in Amph.
to cause one to tarry. An te auspicium commoratum est? an tempestas co^tinet,
qui non abisti ad legiones, ita ut dudum dixeras? Did the token showed by the
vyrdes cause the to tarry? or else the wether keep the back, that thou
wenteste not unto the army, as thou saydest a while ago that thou would?

Commossem, for commouissem.

Commotria, a maiden that does array or apparayle her maystresse.

Commotus, Donatus.
a, um, meued, troubled, afraid, angry: also quick.

Commoueo, ui, ere, to trouble, to turn or change a man's mind, to hurt.
sometime to depart. Ci. Tyro.
Tu and cura, ut valeas, and te istincne temere commoueas: Farewell, and take heed, that thou depart not hense to hastily.

Communico, aui, are, to communicate or depart some thing with an other,
which. I have.

Communio, Cic. de oratore. 3.
mutual participation together.

Communis, commune, common.

Communes dies, were unlucky days to go about any thing, such as we call
dysmoll days, or cross days.

Communiter, in commune.

Commutabilis, le, that which may be changed easyly.

Commutatio, an exchaunce, oone thing for an other.

Commutatus, a, um, changed.

Commuto, aui, are, to change oone thing for an other.

Commutare uerba, to chyde, or to give a shrewde word for a good.

Como, psi, ere, to apparayle gorgiousely, to trym, properly it belongs to
women.

Comoedia, an interlude, wherein the common vices of men and women are
apparently declared in personages.

Comoedice, gentylly, and pleasauntly.

Comoedior, aris, to ieste or scoff.

Comoedus, a player in enterludes.

Comicus, a maker of enterludes.

Compactum, an agreement or appoyntmente.

Compacto rem agere, to conspire a matter, or to do a thing by one accord.
Plaut. in cap.


Compagino, aui, are, to put or join together a thing that is loused.

Compago, ginis, a ioynynge to gether of things.

Compar, aris, equal, or even like.

Comparatio, comparyson, preparation, or byenge.

Comparatiuus, a, um, comparatit^e, wherein begins excess in comparison.

Comparatus, a, um, ordained or received in an usage. Plaut. ^ Pho^.
Quam inique comparatum est, hi qui minus habent, ut semper aliquid adda^t
ditioribus? What an ill use is this, that they which have but a little, shall
give more to them that be rich? Ci. de^
Quando quidem ita ratio comparata est uitae naturaeque nostrae, ut alia aetas
oriatur ex alia: Sense the form of our life is so ordained by nature, that
of one age comes an other.

Compareo, rui, rere, to appear, or to be seen.

Comparebunt quae imperas: Plaut. is Amph.
you shall se al things done, that ye command.

Comparet ratio argenti: Plaut. Tri^^
It does apper how the money is spente. Cice^^.


Comparo, aui, are, to compare or make equal or more, to ordeyne, to prepare,
to join to, or by, also to get or purchase. to find the mean or devise.
Nunc hoc tibi curandum est Chrysale. Plaut. Bacc^^
C. Quid uis curem? M. Vt ad senem etiam alteram facias uiam, compara,
fabricare, finge quod lubet: Now Chrysalus thou must take good head.C. what
will thou that I should do? M. Deuyse yet to go an other way to warke,
ymagine, contryue even as thou thynkest best.

Comparare conuiuium, to prepare a ba^ket.

Comparare malum, Plaut.
to purchase an ill turn or a myschiefe.

Comparare se, to dyspose him self to any thing.

Compasco, to feed or keep cattle.

Compascuus ager, a common field.

Compedes, gyues or fetters.

Compedio, Va^^^
diui, dire, to give or fetter one.

Compeditus, a, um, fettred or gyued.

Compello, aui, are, to speak to, to accuse.

Compello, puli, pellere, to compel or constrain to join or bring together.

Compelluceo, luxi, lucere, to shine very bryghte.

Compellucidus, a, um, very bright.

Compendiarius, a, um, compendious or brief.

Compendium facere, to make brief, or be short in speaking.

Compendifacio, to make compedious.

Compendiosus, a, um, very profitable.

Compendium, a saving or sparynge, or advantage, a compendiouse or short
form in writing or other act.

Compensatio, onis, a recompenss, or satysfaction.

Compenso, aui, are, to make recompense or amends.

Comperendinatio, a delay, or prolongynge of time.

Comperendinatus, a, um, adiourned.

Comperendinaria dies, a day over in matters of law.

Comperendinati rei, they whose judgment is deferred until an other time.

Comperio, ij, ire, to know of an other man.

Comperior, iris, to find, or ymagine in mine own opinion.

Compertus furti, founden gylty of felony.

Compertum habeo, I know or perceive.

Compernis, he that has his knees nyghe together, or long feet.

Compesco, scui, scere, to assuage, to mitigate

Compesce in ilium unjust dicere, ^^^ut. in ^^cchi.
leave to say ill of him.

Competitor, he that sueth for that, which an other man sueth for.

Competit, it is mete or conueniente. Hocilli competit, that is mete or
convenient for him. Also it is sufficient.

Competo, tij, tere, to ask or sue for an office or other like thing against
an other that does the semblable.

Compilati, pollyd by extortion.

Compilo, aui, are, to take by extortion or wrong or as the vulgar speech is,
to polle and shave.

Compingo, pegi, pingere, to thruste. Quid faciam nunc, si tres uiri, me in
carcerem co^pegerint? How shall I do now, if the officers thruste me in to
prison. Sometime compingere is to compacte or put together.

Compingere axibus, to bourde or planke a floor or roufe.

Compingere in oculos, ^^aut. in ^^en.
to thruste it in his eyes.

Compita, many paths goinge in to one way, or places where many ways do
meet, or where two streets do cross.

Compitalia, feasts or drynkynges, made where as be many paths or high ways
in a place.

Compitalicius, a, um, belonging to the said feasts.

Complaceo, cui, cere, to please or like well.

Complacitum est, ^^aut. in ^^ph.
it lyketh or contenteth.

Complano, are, to make plain.

Complector, (...). fam. (...). 14.
eris, ti, to embrace or hold strait also to love well. also to entertayne:
Quare uelim eum quam liberalissime complectare: wherefore I would that ye did
entertayne him very lyberally. (...).
Peto ut eum complectare, diligas, in tuis habeas: I require you entertayne him
well, favor him, and take him among your friends. Nos inter nos esse
complexos: One of us to love well another.

Complector te amore, I love the h^rtely.

Complector cogitatione, I bear in mind.

Complector animo, I consider.

Compleo, eui, ere, to fulfill, or fill to the top, to fynishe or perform, to
make up or supplye that lacks.

Complex, plicis, partner, companion in act.

Complexus, imbracynge or collynge. Also agreement in words or sentences.

Complico, aui, are, to fold or wrap together,

Complodo, psi, dear, to clappe to gether the hands for joy.

Complures, Plautus.
complura, and compluria, many.

Compluries, very often.

Complusculi, Terent.
scula, many.

Compluuium, a gutter, wherein falls rain from many houses.

Compluuius lacus, a dyche whereinto water falls out of diverse gutters.

Compono, to put or join together, to make, ordeyne, or dispose. Also to
compare, to adorn, to gather, to recreate, to appease, to conclude, to accord
or agree, to redeem, to dissemble or feign.

Componere lites, to agree men to gether. which are at variance.

Compos, potis, he that has his purpose or desire. also ever content.

Compos animi, of sound remembrance, not mad.

Compos culpae, Plaut. in Trucul.
he that has done an offense, gylty or culpable.

Compos laudis, he that is praised.

Compos patriae, he that is come home into his country.

Compos praedae, he that has gotten the pray that he looked for.

Compos uoti, Ti. Liuius
he that has his own desire or appetite.

Vix prae gaudio co^potes: for joy they could not tell what they should do.

Compositio, onis, a making, an ornament, a composition or agreement.

Compositiones gladiatorum, were the bringynge in of swordplayers in to the
fighting place.

Compotatio, a banquet.

Compotio, Plaut. in Rude.
tiui, tire, to getee oone the thing that he desired.

Compoto, aui, are, t^ drink with an other man.

Compotrix, she that drynketh with an other.

Compraedes, pledges or sureties together.

Compraehendo, Cicero.
dear, to take hold on a thing to comprehend or contain. Also to favor and
defend.

Comprecor, cari, to desire or pray.

Compressis manibus sedere, To be ydell or unoccupied.

Compressus, a defloration, or rauishement.

Comprime, Plaut. in Trucul.
let be, pease.

Epistolam comprimere, to close a letter.

Comprime te, be stylle, leave of.

Vix comprimor, quin inuole^ illi in oculos:

I can uneath forbear to take him by the face.

Comprime, Peace, get the hence.

Comprimo, pressi, primere, to press or thrust together, to hold or refrain
also to defloure a woman.

Comprimere aliquem, Plaut. in rudente.
to beat or tourment one.

Comprimere animam, to hold in a man's breathe.

Comprimere manus, to hold his hands that he stryke not.

Comprimere se, Plaut in Casina.
to cease or refrain to do a thing.

Comptum, a certain offering of lycour, which was made with meal.

Comptus, tus, fresh apparayle.

Compulsus, a, um, compelled or hytte with any thing.

Compunctus, a, um, marked or spotted.

Compungo, xi, gere, to punche, or pryck, or stryke.

Computo, aui, are, to deem, to account, to decerne, to impute.

Comum, a City of France on this side the mountains, the inhabitants
whereof are called Comenses.

Conatus, endeavor, inforcement, power, might sometime diligence.

Concaleo, lui, ere, to be het, to be made warm.

Concalfacio, feci, facere, to inflame, to be stered or provoked.

Concalleo, lui, lere, to be made hard, as a man's hands with much
workynge, or his feet with much goinge.

Concameratio, a warke made like to a vaulte with arches.

Concastigo, gare, to chastise with an other.

Concateno, aui, are, to bind to gether with chains.

Concauus, a, um, holowe.

Concedo, cessi, dear, to grant, to permyt, or suffer, to depart away, to
go to a place, to consent.

Concede hinc, Plautus.
go hense a little.

Concedere fato, to dye.

Concedamus huc, let us be here.

Concedere octauam partem, to abate or remyt the eight part.

Concedere alicui, to give place to one.

Concede ad dexteram, go on the right hand.

Concede huc domum, go thy way home.

Concessit in ^ras, he is angry.

Concelebro, brare, to celebrate with other.

Concelebrare plateam hymenaeo, to make joy abroad with singing and daunsyng
in the honor of marriage.

Concelo, are, idem quod celare.

Concento, tare, to agree in one tune.

Concentus, tus, a consent, many voices in one tune, or accord in music.

Conceptaculum, or Conceptabulum, any thing holowe or apt to receive and
hold, Fe^^
as a vessel.

Conceptiuae feriae, Co^^
holy days kept at a time certain yearly.

Conceptus, a, um, conceived, purposed, sometime gathered. Ne cum a uerrice
torrens im bribus conceptus affluxerit, fundamenta conuellat, Lest when the
stream gathered by the shoures of rain, shall run unto it, it shall pull up
the foundation of that which is builded.

Concepta uerba, words expressed and pronounced.

Conceptis uerbis iurare, to take an oath, recitynge the words of the oath.

Conceptus, tus, and conceptio, the thing that is conceived.

Concernere, to concern.

Concerpo, psi, pere, to pull in pieces.

Concertatum, debated in reasonynge.

Concerto, tare, to contend, to fight.

Concertatio, debate, disputation.

Concesso, aui, are, to cease.

Concessus, a, um, granted, given.

Concessus, us, ui, permission, sufferaunce.

Concha, properly a muskle. sometime the shell of a muskle, oyster, or cockle.
Also every vessel that is holowe and open above, properly a bolle, wherein
linen clothes be washed. sometime a wine vessel. Also a trumpet, as it seems
made of earth, like to such as th^^ore men do use, which have the falling
sickness, and do come from the place in Duchelande, called sayncte Cornelius.

Conchula, the diminutiue of Concha.

Conchis, a meat made of beans.

Conchon, is called a vessel of the greeks, or the holownesse of the eyes.

Conchus, a perle.

Couchyle, and conchylium, a kind of shelfish, out of the which a lycour is
taken, wherewith sylke is dyed purple. It is sometime taken for the purple
color. Cae^^


Conchyliata uestis, a purple garment.

Conchyta, he that seeks for the shell fyshes, out of the which comes
purple: we may take him for a fysher of oysters and muskels.

Concido, cidi, ere, cisum, to cut in pieces, to dye. Virgis concidere, to
beat one until* he blede.

Concidit crimen, The action is abated or fallen.

Concido, concidi, ere, concasum, to fall down all together. Et muri ciuitatum
concident: And the walls of all Cities shall fall all together.

Concidere nucleum dentibus, to knak a nut with ones teeth.

Concidere and delumbare sente^tias, to make feeble or confound men's
arguments.

Concisae sententiae, brief sentences.

Consise, in pieces, sometime briefly.

Concidit animus, my heart is done, or my heart fails me.

Animo, uel mente concidere, to lack courage, or comfort.

Concidere in optima causa, to be uanquished in a good quarrel.

Concidit fides, he has lost his credence.

Conciliabulum, a counsayll house.

Conciliabundus, he that is redye to give counsel.

Conciliatrix, a woman that endeavors her to make agreement between men and
their wives.

Concilio, aui, are, to accord or make friends together, to geate.

Conciliare affinitatem, uel pacem, to make alyaunce, or peace.

Conciliare beneuolentiam, to get favor or love.

Conciliare odium, uel inimicitias, to get hatred or displeasure.

Conciliare pecuniam, Cicer. in ^er. act. 4
to gather money of the people.

Concilium, counsayl, or the assembly of counsaylours.

Concilium Antiochenum, a general counsel kept at Antiochia in Syria, in the
year of our lord. 346.

Concilium Ariminense, was a general counsel holden at Ariminum in Italy,
the year of our lord. 361. In the which, the articles of the counsel of
Nice, were confyrmed.

Concilium Arelatense, a general counsel holden at Orleance, the year of our
lord. 814.

Concilium Basiliense, a general counsel holden at Basil in Almayne, the year
of our lord 1345.

Concilium Chalcidonense, ageneral counsel holden at Chalcedon in Bithinia,
the year of our lord. 453: in the which counsel the heresies of Nestorius
and Eutiches were condemned, and all the books of the Maniches heresies were
burned.

Concilium Carthaginense, a general counsel holden at Carthago, in Affryke,
the year of our lord. 419.

Concilium Constantiae, a general counsel holden at Constaunce in Heluetia,
the year of our lord 1414. and dured.iii. years and mo.

Concilium Constantinopolitanum, a counsel holden at Constantinopole, the year
of our lord. 869.

Concilium Ferrariense, a general counsel holden at the cite of Ferraria in
Italy, where the churches of Latins and greeks became one church, the year of
our lord. 1438.

Concilium Lateranense, a general counsayl holden at Rome in the palayce of
the bishop of Rome, called Lateranum, the year of our lord. 1215.

Concilium Lugdunense, a general counsel holden at Lions in France, the
year of our lord. 1273 where the greeks accorded with the latins in
procedynge of the holy ghost from the father and the son in dignity.

Concilium Nicenum, the first general counsel, which was holden at Nicaea
a cite in Bithinia, the year of our lord.327.

Concinere, to agree in one song, or one tune.

Concinnatitius, a, um, compendiously and aptly gathered together.

Concinnatus, a, um, apparayled, trymmed.

Concinne, properly, honestly, trymly.

Concinnitudo, aptenes, or propernes, a conueniencie.

Concinno, Plaut. in cap.
aui, are, to make apt or proper, or fytte. also to make. Vt illi mastigiae
cerebru^ excutiam, qui me insanum uerbis concinnat suis: I will surely brain
this knave, that with his words makes me out of my wit.

Concinnare lutum, to make mortar.

Concinnare se leuem suis, to put his friends to no cost. Plaut. in Trinum.
Nunque erit alienis grauis, qui suis se concinnat leuem: He shall never be
grievous to other, which will not be bourdenous to his friends.

Concinnare struices patinarias, to make son dry bankettynge dyshes. Plaut. in
Men.


Concinnare uinum, Idem.
to mengle spyces with wine. Plaut. in Sticho.


Concinnare uestem, to amend a garmente.

Concinnare viam, to make rome that a man may pass.

Concinnare uxore^ lachrymantem, to make his wife to weep. Plaut. in Amph.
Lachrymantem ex abitu concinnas tu tuam uxorem: By your departing hense, ye
make your wife to weep.

Concinnus, a, um, proper, well facioned, mynyon.

Concinnitas, tatis, propernesse, featenesse, aptness.

Concio, ciui, cire, to call together a multitude.

Concio, onis, a pulpet or stage, wherein he stands that exhorts people.
Also an assembly or congregation of people, called together to here the
commandment of the king, or other in authority in the weal publyque. Also
it is the oration or proposition made unto them, called a concion.

Concionem habere, to make an oration or sermon to the people.

Concionalis, he that is wont to make orations or propositions to the people.

Concionatorius, a, um, perteining to a co^tion.

Concionator, oris, he that preaches or purposes an oration.

Concionor, aris, ari, to preach or purpose a matter to the people.

Concipere curam, to take charge of a thing.

Concipere dedecus, to take dishonor or shame.

Concipere furorem, to become mad.

Concipio, coepi, ^^pere, to conceive or apprehende, to deliberate, or
determyne in mind.

Concipere foedus, to make a leage.

Concipere iusiurandum, to swear in recytynge the oath, as it is ministered.

Concipere metum, to be aferde.

Concipere oculis, Plaut. in penu
to se or behold.

Concipere scelus, to ymagine to do an ylle deed.

Concire, Terent. in Heauton.
to move or steer. Disperij, scelestus, quantas turbas conciui insciens? I am
undone wretch that I am, what a busynes have I made unawares.

Concire lites, to move debate.

Concito, aui, are, to steer.

Conclamare ad arma, when all the world cries war.

Conclamata uasa, proclamation made trust, to gather bag and baggage, as is
used in the raysynge of a siege, or remouynge of a camp in battle.

Conclamatum est, it is at a point, or paste remedy.

Conclamito, tare, to make many cries.

Conclamo mare, to cry to one. Vbi abijt conclamo, Plaut* in milit.
heus quid agis tu in tegulis? When he was gone, I cried unto him, ho syrra,
what doeste thou among the tyles? Also to make a cry or proclamation. Vis
conclamari auctionem fore quidem? wylt thou have it proclaimed, Plaut. in Men.
that there shall be port sale.

Conclaue, a privy or secret chamber. sometime a bankettynge chamber.

Conclauia, Fectus.
many chaumbers or places under one kaye.

Concitare equum, to threaste the spurs to an horse.

Concitare equum in aliquem, to spur his horse, and run ageynste one.

Concitare sui expectationem, to cause men to have a trust or expectation in
him.

Concitare inuidiam in aliquem, to bring one in to an hatred.

Concitare odium, idem.

Concitare somnum, to cause one to sleep.

Concitare vrinam, to make one piss.

Concita^us; ta, tu^, stered, provoked, meued.

Concitatior cursus, a more vehement or quicker course.

Concitatio, a sterynge, a provoking.

Conclauium, idem quod conclaue.

Concludo, fi dear, to conclude, or make an end, sometime to hyde.

Conclusa oration, pro numerosa.

Conclusio, onis, a conclusyon, or end of a matter.

Concolor, of the same color.

Concoctio, digestion in the stomach.

Concoquo, coxi, coquere, to digest.

Concoquere odia, to suffer dyspleasures or malice.

Concordare, to be at a concord or agremente.

Concordia, concord, or agreement.

Cocorditer, by assent or agreement.

Concorporo, aui, are, to make one thing of diverse.

Concors, dis, of one mind or will, agreeable of one assente.

Concratitij parietes, walls made with lathes or bourdes upright and ouerwhart.

Concredo, didi, dear, to deliver or commyt a thing upon trust.

Concredere uites teneriores calido solo, to plant vynes in an hot ground.

Concrepare, to make a great noise, or to creke as a door does in the opening.

Concresco, creui, crescere, to grow together.

Concretio, a gatherynge to gether and waxynge hard.

Concretum, congeled or conglutinate.

Concretus, a, um, joined or congeled together, as a thing that is liquide, to
be made hard.

Concreta labes, a spot which will never away.

Concubinatus, hordome, fornication.

Concubitor, oris, he that meddleth with a woman.

Concubina, a woman used in the stead of ones wife.

Concubium, the first sleep in the night, or the depest of the night.

Concubia nox, idem.

Conculco, care, to tread under the foot.

Concumbo, bui, bear, and Concubo, aui, are, to lie to gether, to accompanye to
gether, in the act of generation.

Concupiscentia, a feruente desire, or appetite carnal.

Concupitus, ta, tum, desired fervently.

Concupisco, piui, piscere, to coueyt, or desire fervently.

Concupio, piui, pire, idem.

Concuro, rare, to care for a thing.

Concurro, Plaut. in Bacchi.
rere, to run with an other. some time to accord.

Concursare, to run often together.

Concursus, sus, a runninge of people together to one place.

Concursio, idem. Concursatio, idem.

Concutio, tij, tere, to shake.

Concussus, a, um, shaken.

Condalium, a ring.

Condecenter, agreably.

Condecentia, a besemynge.

Condecet, it well becomes.

Condecoro, aui, are, to make klenly or honest, to polyshe. also to honor a
thing in making it more commendable.

Condemno, aui, are, to condemn.

Condensare, to make thycke.

Condico, Ti. Liuius
xi, cere, to appoint, to ordeyn, to promise, to ask again, to deny, to
assign by mouth, to denounce or declare.

Condictio, onis, an action in the law, or appointment to a day certain.

Condictum, a promise.

Condign^, worthyly, honestly.

Condignus, a, um, worthy and according as it is estemyed.

Condimentum, that wherewith things be preseruid from corruption, or else made
dilectable in taste, sauce, seasonynge.

Condio, iui, uel dij, dire, to season meat, to powder, or otherwise order it,
to preserve it from corruption.

Condire tristitiam hilaritate, to temper wisely sorrow with mirth, or to
mitigate.

Condiscipulus, a schoolefelowe.

Condisco, scere, to learn.

Co^ditaneus, a, u^, that which is to be preseruid.

Conditio, onis, condition, fortune, estate, election or choice.

Condition uti, not to refuse the offer.

Conditionem accepit, he took the bargayne or promise, or he agreed.

Condititia cibaria, powdered meat or otherwise preseruyd.

Conditinus, a, um, that which may be powdered or kept.

Conditor, oris, a maker.

Conditorium, a sepulcher, a place wherein ordinance for war is kept.

Condere captiuos in custodiam, to put the prisoners in saufegarde.

Conditura, sauce, or pickle made with spices.

Condiuincum, Nauntes in France.

Condo, didi, dear, to lay saulfe, or hyde, sometime to make or build.

Condocere, to teach.

Condocefacio, feci, facere, to make to know.

Condolet caput, Plautus.
my head aketh.

Condonatus, pardonyd.

Condono, are, to give, to forgive a debt or duty, to pardon.

Condormio, ire, to sleep with other.

Condormisco, scere, to sleep a little, to nap.

Condrillon, wild cykory.

Condris, an herb called falls dittayne, because it is like dittayne, but it
has less leaves.

Conducibile, profitable.

Conducit, it is profitable.

Conduco, xi, cere, to bring with me, to hyre, to take a house or land, also
to gather, to convert. Conducere, is also to profit.

Conduci non possum, Plaut. in Asin.
I can not be made to believe, no man can make me believe.

Conductitius, a, um, that which may be hired or taken, or is vsyd to be hired.

Conductor, he that hyreth a thing.

Conductus, a, um, to be set to hyre.

Conduplicatio, doubling.

Conduplico, care, to pay the double of a thing.

Condus, a steward of householde, or he that keeps the store of householde.

Condyloma, matis, a swellynge of the tuell or fundement, procedynge of an
inflammation.

Condylus, of Fest. Pom. is expowned a ryng, some other do declare it to be the
roundnesse of the bones in the knee, the ancle, the elbow, the knuckles of the
fyngers.

Confarratio, a marriage between a man and a woman, which was done with
certain solemnities in the presence of the bishop.

Confecta, thingis voided or concluded by reason*

Confectum, is declarid by Nonius, exanimate or killed.

Confercio, to stuff or porre.

Confero, tuli, far, to put together, to set forth to prepare, Plautus.
to devise, to talk together, to put in. Ne posterius in me culpa^ conferas,
Put not at the laus the defaut in me. Consilia con ferunt, They keep their
counsels together. To lay to, Terentius
or ioyn. Nouissima conferam primis, I will lay to, or join the last to the
first. also to profit, to lay together. Sitque utrique proxi mum horreum, quo
conferatur rusticum instrumentum, Columel.
To both, next there must be a barn, wherein may be laid up together,
instrumentis longyng to husba^dry. also Confero, I give. Multa contuli in
Catone^, I have given or attribute much to Cato. I have favored much Cato.
Co^tuli me domu^, I went home. Contuli me ad Catonem, I went unto Cato.

Confero me in campum, uel ad campum, I go into the field.

Confer amorem, to love.

Co^ferre animu^ alio, to set his mind else wha

Confer capita, to assemble for counsaylle, to lay their heads together.

Confer gradum, Plautus.
come forth.

Confer in pauca, to conclude shortly.

Confer manus, to assail each other.

Confer pedem, to come to the point, proprely in contention, where the
parties do join.

Confer se in pedes, Plaut. in Bacch.
to run awey, to take his legs.

Confer studium, to employ his study.

Confer tempus in aleam, Plinius in pan.
to spend the time in playenge at the dyce.

Confer uerba ad rem, Terent. in Eunucho
to do as he says.

Confert, it is profitable.

Conferum, in a bushement.

Confertus, a, um, Caesar in comment.
full. also in a flock or multitude, in abusshement. Vt nunquam conferti, sed
rari magnisque interuallis praeliarentur, That they might fight, not a
multitude together, but a few at ones, and a great distance on sunder. Ti.
Liuius.
Turba confertaiter clausit, The people gathered in a bushement, stopped the
way.

Qua part hostiu^ acies co^fertissima uisa est, Caesar.
erupit, He brake out on that side, where the host of the enemies femed to be
most thycke of people.

Confertissima turba, in the thyckest prease.

Conferua, an herb which grows in fresshe waters like to a spounge.

Confessio, a confession.

Confessor, oris, a confessor.

Confestim, eftsoons.

Confibula, a clapse or tache.

Conficientissimus literarum, Ci. pro L. Flacco.
he that puts all thing in writing.

Conficio, Lactantius. Cic. off.
feci, ficere, to perform or fynyshe, to perysshe or be consumed, to distroye
or slay, to explycate or declare. Honestaris pars confecta est, qua^ tibi cupio
esse notissimam. The part of honesty is declared, which I would should be
unto the perfectly known. also to bring to pass. Si me amas, confice, If thou
love me, bring it to pass, also to gather money. Permagnam dices ex illa re
pecuniam confici post, Thou wylt say that a great su^me of money might be
made of that thing. Conficere, to break. Nucem dentibus conficere, Plinius.
To break a nut with his teethe. also to consume or wa^te. Qui cum hic non
uideant me, Terent.
credant me conficere argentum suum, Who because they se me not here, they
believe I wast their money. also Confici to be made. Quomodo potest ex multorum
deorum aceruo, unus deus confici? By what means may there be of a heap of
goddis one only god made.

Conficere pensum, Plautus in Market.
to spyn out her threde, it is translated into this sentence. To have done or
brought to an end that thing, which he was commanded or appointed. Plaut. in
persa.


Conficere prandium, to have dined. Pallium ad phrigionem fert confecto
prandio, Plaut. in Men.
when dinner was done, or when he had dined, he carried her mantyll to the
brouderer.

Conficere solicitudines alicui, Terent. in Andria.
to bring one into heaviness, or to make him sorrowful.

Confidens, it is, he that regards no laws, nor fears any thing, sommetyme
it sygnifieth constant, assured.

Confidenter, constantely, assuredly. sometime hardily, boldly, aduenturousely.

Confidentia, trust, hope, certain assurance. also mad hardynes.

Confidentiloquus, he that speakethe boldlye, without fear.

Confido, Plautus.
di, dear, to trust, to be sure, to dare.

Co^figo, fixi, figere, to styk or thrust into a thing

Confingo, finxi, fingere, to said a thing to be true. Confingere dolum, to
find a mean to deceive one.

Confinis, ne, next to, or adioynyng.

Confinium, a border or march of a country or land.

Confirmitas, assurednes.

Confirmo, are, to confirm or assure a thing, to be as it is spoken.

Confirmare animum, Ci. Tym.
to take courage.

Confirmare se, to make him self strong after his syckenes.

Confiscare, to sease for a forfayture.

Confit, it is made together.

Confiteor, eris, to confess.

Conflages, places whereinto many wynde^ do blow.

Conflagro, are, to be on fire, to be inflamyd.

Conflare, to blow together, to blow like as one blows the fire. Also
Conflare, to gather. Co^flauit ex his omnibus populum, Of all those he gathered
a great multitude. also to make. Vergilius.
Et curuae rigidum falces conflantur in ensem, And the crooked sithe into the
hard sword is made.

Conflare inuidiam, nimicitias, odium, To styre or procure envy, hostility,
hate.

Conflare mendatium, to imagine a lie.

Conflata pecunia, money coined.

Conflauit aes alienum, he is run in debt.

Conflatile, that which is apt to be wroughte like metal.

Conflictatio, Donatus.
is where as one thing beats against an other.

Conflicto, aui, are, to fight often.

Co^flictor, aris, to be vexid or troublid, to fight.

Conflictatus graui morbo, to be tourmented with grievous syckenes.

Confligo, fligi, gere, to fight as men do in battle.

Confluens, where two rivers do mete together.

Confluere, to come or run together, or flow, to assemble together out of
diverse countries.

Confluges, places, into the which many ryuers do flow.

Confluuium, and confluxus, a metyng together of many streams.

Confluus, a, um, that which flows together.

Confodio, dear, to dygge.

Confoedusti, Terent. in Andria.
old writers vsyd for them which were joined in leage, confederates.

Confore, to be brought to pass.

Conformis, me, of a conformity, or like in fascion, conuenyent.

Conformo, are, to bring to a facion or figure, to make apt or like to a
thing.

Conforto, aui, are, to comfort.

Confragosus, a, um, rough, as a ground, which is not plain, ill to go in.
also hard to be understand, rude in language.

Confringo, fregi, fringere, to break or bruise.

Co^fringere re^, to spend away al his substance.

Confringere tesseram, to be out of favor, or no more welcome to one. Plaut.
in Castle.


Confugio, fugi, gere, to flee with other. Confugere ad aliquid, to resort for
succor or excuse

Confundo, fudi, dear, to confound, to meddle togider, to trouble al, also to
myxe out of order.

Confutatio, Liuius. 6.
a disproui^g of that which is spoken

Confuto, aui, are, to reprove or vanquysshe by words. also to stir.

Congedus, a river in Spain, nere to a town called Bilbilis.

Congelatur, it is frosen or congelyd.

Congelo, aui, are, to congele and wax thycke.

Congeminatio, a doubling.

Congemino, nare, to double.

Congeneres, they which have wedded the daughters of one man.

Congenulo, aui, are, to knele.

Congeries, an heap.

Congermino, nare, to grow jointly together.

Congero, gessi, gere, to gather together, or heap up.

Congerro, Plaut. in Mostel.
onis, a merry companion, he that keeps company only in pastyme and merry
devising

Congestitius, a, um, cast up in a heap.

Congestus, a, um, made in an heap.

Congiarium, an alms, or other lyberall gift, given by the prince unto his
people, be it in money corn or vytayles.

Congius, a measure containing.vi. Sextarios and receives in weight of
oil.ix. li. of wine x. li. of honey.xv. li. and is of our mesure a pot tell and
one pynte.

Conglacio, aui, are, to frese or let to frese. Conglaciat Tribunatus Curioni,
Cicero.
Curio lettethe the office of Tribune to frese, as who says, he does
nothing in the office worthy of remembrance.

Conglobare, to bring or come round together

Conglobatim, in a round form, like to a bottom of threde.

Conglutinatio, a ioynyng or glewyng togider.

Conglutino, nare, to join together as it were glewed.

Congraecor, cari, to eat and drynk excedyngly after the common word, to make
good chere.

Congratulor, aris, ari, to rejoice with an other man of his good fortune.

Congredior, eris, gredi, to goo with an other to fight or dispute.

Congrego, aui, are, to gather together.

Congrestus, us, a battle, also company with other. Congressio, idem.

Congrex, of the same flock.

Congruens, according, like.

Congruo, grui, ere, to agree.

Congruum, agreeable.

Congrus, and conger, a fyshe called a conger.

Coniectarium, effectual, or perfect.

Coniecto, aui, are, to suppose, to judge.

Coniector, oris, an interpreter of dreams, a coniecter, that does coniect
what shall happen.

Coniectura, a conjecture.

Coniecturale, that which is coniected, or gathered by conjecture.

Coniectus, us, a certain direction of reason unto the truth.

Conifera arbor, a tree which bears fruits being smaller at the one end
tha^ at the other like a pyne appull.

Conijcio, ieci, ijcere, to cast, to coniecte.

Coniecit se in fugam, he put him to flight.

Coniecit se intro, he went his way in.

Coniecit se in pedes, he took him to flight. he took him to his legs.

Conijcere pecuniam, to bestow money.

Conijcere in letitiam, to bring to a gladness.

Conijcere in saginam, to put to fattynge, to go where he may fill his bealy.

Conijcere in uincula, to cast into prison, or to lay a man in the stocks or
gyues.

Conijcere tela, to cast darts, or to shoot.

Conisco, care, to bousshe one at an other with their heade^, as ra^mes do,
bulls, and dear.

Coniugalis t^orus, the chamber where the husband and wife do lie.

Coniugata, be those words, which being of one kind, be derived one of an
another, as of Iustitia, iustus, and iustu^, whereof an argument may be made in
this wise. If justice is to be chiefly honored and louyd of men, a just man is
to be had in estimation and reverence among men.

Coniugatio, a ioynyng together.

Coniugium, marriage.

Coniugo, aui, are, to yoke together, or mary.

Coniugus, a, um, that which joins.

Coniunctim, together.

Coniunctio, onis, a ioynyng together, sometime affinytie, Cic. fam. epi. 5.
sometime familyaritie or acquayntance. Vetustus est amor, consuetudo, studia
paria, quod uinculum, quae res deest nostrae coniunctioni? There is old love,
acquayntance, studies like, what bond, or what thing lacks, that we should
not be familiar? Speroque and opto, nobis hanc coniunctionem uoluptati fore, I
desire and also I trust, that this alyance shall be joyful unto us.

Coniunctura, idem.

Coniunctus, a friend, or very famylyat and well trusted.

Coniunctus, a, um, joined.

Coniungo, xi, ere, to join together.

Coniux, iugis, a wife.

Coniuola, Pom. Fes.
hid, secret.

Coniuratio, a conspiracy.

Coniuro, aui, are, to conjure or conspire with other for an ill purpose.
sometime to swear.

Coniza, of some is called herba pulicaris.

Connatio, a swymmynge together.

Connato, tare, to swymme together.

Connecto, nexui, nectere, to bind together.

Connexio, Quintil.
a binding together, also a conclusion.

Conniuentia a sufferance of a thing, or a faynyng not to see or espy.

Conniueo, and conniuo, is, iui, uel xi, to wynke, and is used to be spoken,
when men woll let things pass that ought to be looked on.

Connubium, matrimony, wedlock.

Connubo, bear, to mary together.

Conoides, the female of the cypress tree.

Conon, nis, the name of a king of Athenes.

Conopoeum, a canapy, proprely such one as hangs over beds, and is wrought
like a a uet, to keep out gnattes, which do stynge men in their beds.

Conor, aris, ari, to endeavor or enforce to bring a thing to pass.

Conari alicui obuiam, to make haste for to mete with one.

Conquassatio, a bruysyng together.

Conquassare, to break to pieces. sometime to vex, to shake.

Conquassatio, a shaking, a vexation, or trauaylynge.

Conqueror, queri, to complain.

Conquiesco, eui, escere, to cease, to leave of.

Conquinisco, quexi, niscere, to ducke with the head.

Conquiro, quisiui, quirere, to seek all about, to search for.

Conquisitor, a sercher. also an officer, which is sent to attache a man for a
great offense.

Conregione, Fectus.
old writers vsyd for e regione, on the other side, or against a thing.

Consalutare, to salute one an other.

Consalutatio, a salutyng together.

Consanescere, to become hole.

Consanguineus, cousyne.

Consanguinitas, tatis, kynrede.

Conscelerate aures paternas, violate your fathers eres with tellyng things
abominable

Conscendo, di, dear, to clymbe.

Conscientia, Ci. ad At. Ti. Liuius.
conscience.

Conscindo, scidi, scindere, to cut with other. also to scorn or rebuke one
privily.

Co^scindere sibilis, to whistle one out of a place

Conscio, sciui, scire, to know with other.

Conscium facere aliquem, to make one priuye to a matter.

Conscisco, sci, scere, to consent, determyne, or grant to a matter willingly.
also to draw to. Diligens pastor stabulu^ cotidie co^uerrit, Columel.
nec patitur stercus humore^ consciscere, A dilligent shepeherde every day
swepeth his stable, and lets not the dunge draw moisture unto it.

Consciscere mortem, to kill wylfully.

Conscius, conscia, that knowith with an other.

Conscius sceleris, party or privy to the offense, accessory.

Conscius mihi sum, I know certainly.

Conscribello, are, to write together.

Conscribo, psi, bear, to write things together also to inrolle or register.

Conscriptio, an enrollement.

Conscripti, they whose names be written or registered to supply a number, which
do lack, or such as be new chosen or added unto the other. Tertullianus.


Consecranei, such as be dedicate to one sect or opinyon.

Consecro, Ci. ad At.
aui, are, to dedicate or consecrate. also to put in remembrance by writing.
Cicer. ad


Consecrare memoriam nominis, Q. fratre^.
to put his name in perpetual remembrance.

Consectanei, they which be of one sect.

Consector, aris, to follow all together.

Consenesco, senui, senescere, to be or wax old.

Consensio, a consent or accord of one mind or purpose.

Consensus, consent.

Consentaneus, a, um, agreeable.

Consentio, in, tire, to consent.

Consepio, piui, ire, to enclose with an hedge.

Conseptum, an enclosure, or place inclosyd.

Conseptus, a, um, enclosed.

Consequentia, thingis which do follow or insu.

Consequiae, sequeles.

Consequor, to follow immediately, to obtain or get, to express. Verbis
consequi no^ possu^t They may not be expressed in words.

Consero, seui, serere, ^ sow, or set herbs together.

Conserere manus, to fight hand to hand.

Conseruo, Cic. off.
are, to keep, to preserve, to gather goods.

Conseruus, and conserua, a fellow or companion in service.

Consessus, sus, men sitting together. it may be taken for a sessions or
sittyng of men, which be commyssioners.

Consido, sidi, dear, to sit or abide together. it may be used to sytte at a
sessions.

Consignatus, Cic. Aca.
a, um, sygnified, testified.

Consignifico, are, to show by tokens.

Consigno, Cicero.
are, to seal and close up, as letters. also to signify or declare proprely by
letters.

Consiliarius, a counselor.

Consilio, iui, uel lui, lire, to leap together.

Consilior, aris, to take counsel.

Consilium, a counsel. It may be taken for commissioners or judges assigned.

Consilium est ita facere, I have pourposed so to do.

Consimilis, le, in all things like.

Consisto, Cice. pro Ros.
stiti, fistere, to stand fast or sure, to abide boldly by a thing.

Consistit aluus, the bealy is costyue.

Consistit morbus, the syckenes is at the extremity.

Consistere mente, to be of sound memory.

Consistorium, a counsel house, specially in a pryncis house.

Consobrini, cosyns germayns of two brethern or two systers.

Consoceri, they two, whose son and daughter are married together.

Consolabilis, he that may be comforted.

Consolabundus, he that comfort a man.

Consolatio, comfort in adversity.

Consolida, the name of an herb, called confery or camfry.

Consolor, aris, ari, to give comfort, or take comfort.

Consomnio, are, to dream.

Consono, nui, are, to make one sown together. also to accord or agree.

Consors, it is, a fellow or companyon, sometime it signifies like.

Consortio, Ci. off. 3.
onis, fellowship.

Consortium, fellowship or comapany.

Conspectus, tus, a beholdyug or sight.

Conspergo, spersi, spergere, to scatter or sperkle about abundantly.

Conspicilia, spectakles.

Conspicilium, a loupe to look out of a house, or wall.

Conspicio, spexi, cere, to see or behold.

Conspico, spexi, ere, and conspicor, aris, ari, to behold.

Conspicuus, a, um, circumspect, witty, or of a sharp and quycke w^tte. also
apparaunt or plain to perceive.

Conspirare, to wind round like an adder.

Conspiratio, nis, a conspiracye.

Conspiro, aui, are, to conspyre or consent. alsoo to blow together.

Conspondio, di, dear, to promise mutually.

Consponsi, they which have mutually promised one to the other.

Consponsor, oris, he that byndeth him self by promise, to him that has made
like promise

Conspuo, ere, to spyt on one.

Conspurcare, to violate, defile, or make foul.

Consputo, to spet often on one.

Constabilio, liui, lire, to make sure.

Constans, it is, constant, or steadfast.

Constanter, constantly, steadfastly.

Constantia, constance, or stedfastnes.

Constantinopolis, a city in Thracia, sometime called Byzantium, and before that
Lygos, It joins to the sea called Pontus Euxinus, on the narowest part
between Europam and Asiam, which sometime was the chief palaice of the most
christen emperor Constantine, and is now the pompous den of the great Turk
enemy to Christ's faith, by the vengeance of god, provoked by the
vnfaythefulnes, arrogance, and beastly living of the princis and people there
inhabiting. It was taken of the Turks the year of our lord. 1452. Mahumetes
being great turk, and Constantine being emperor of Greece.

Constantinus, was a name of diverse emperors of whom the first was most
excellent, and was son of Constantius (a noble and valiant prince, fellow in
the empire with Maximinus) and of Helene, a woman borne in England, than called
Brytayn. This man after he had attained the monarchy, had the faith of
Christ in such reverence, that he daily most studiousely labored for to
augmente it, not withstandyng that in his time were diverse heresies, and
horrible contentions among the bishops, which he either dissolved, or at the
least ways did reverently moderate with a wonderful temperance. He reigned. 30
years and was buried in Constantinople. He dyed in the year of our lord. 330.

Constat, it costeth, it is sold for.

Consternati, me^ overthrown. sometime abashed.

Consternatio, onis, an abashement.

Consternium, a place where men when they were hayned, laid their garments.

Consterno, aui, are, to straw, to paue, to keuer the floor with any thing.

Co^sterno, straui, sternere, to make one abashid

Constituo, stitui, stituere, to ordeyn, to govern, to provide, to covenant,
to form, to be advised or determined to do a thing.

Constituere in diem tertium, to determyn to do a thing three days next
following.

Constituere disceptatione^, to make his plea formal, or to foresee that which
shall come in contention.

Constituere iudicium, Ci. in parti. ora.
after our manner of speaking is to demurre in law, or dwell in law, to remytte
a thing to the better opinyon of the Judges. Salust.


Constituere maiestate, to confirm or advance the reverence dew to the
supreme authority.

Constituere quaestionem, to decree, that upon strait examination, execution
be done.

Constituere statum causae, is when the judge does determine, where it be a
matter in law, or a matter in deed, which is in controversy.

Constituere uadim onium, to put in pledgis.

Constitutio corporis, the complexion.

Constitutio causae, which our lawyers do call the matter in debate.

Constituere testem aliquem in aliu^, to cause witness to be brought forth.

Constituere pecunia^, to promise money to be paid, which was before due by an
obligation

Constitutu^ patrimonium, Cicero. Existim at patrimonium fore suum per te
constitutum, He recogniseth, that the la^dis which he has, camme by your
means, or that ye were the cause, that he came to his lyuelode.

Constitutio, sometime signifies an ordinance, sometime an invention.

Constitit nusquam, it is no where.

Constitutus, a, um, ordained.

Corpus been constitutum, Cicero.
a body well complexioned.

Consto, stiti, stare, to persyst or abide in a thing, to stand together, to
be manifest or known, to agree, to pertayne.

Constant sententiae, the opinions do agree.

Constat animo, he is of steadfast mind.

Constat pedibus, he is sure of his feet, or hole in his legs or feet.

Constat hoc mihi tecum, we he both agreed.

Constat ratio, there is a reasonable cause.

Constare sibi, to abide in his opinyon.

Constet modus, let there be a measure.

Constitit nunquam Pli. in epi.
he abode in no place.

Constrepo, pui, ere, to make a noise together.

Constringo, strinxi, gere, to bind fast, to wring hard. Co^stringere
supplicio, to cause him to die

Construo, struxi, struere, to build, to ordeyne.

Construere pecuniam, to gather money.

Constuprare, idem quod stuprare.

Consuefacio, to accustom.

Consuesco, sueui, suescere, to be wont. sometime to use carnally. Cu^ eius
consueuit matre clan culum, Terent.
He had company with his mother privily. Also to use for a custom, sometime to
live. Nec magis humo quam stagno cousueuerunt, Columel.
They live as well on land, as on water.

Consuetudo, dinis, custom or usage, also company or conversation, sometime
familyaritie.

Consuetus, a, um, accustomed.

Consul, lis, a chief offycer among the Romans, whereof were two, which had
the chief rule in the city for one year.

Consularis, he that had been consule, or were mete to be consul.

Consulatus, tus, the office of consul.

Consulo, lui, sulere, with a dative case, to give counsel, with an
accusative case, to ask counsel, also with a dative case, it signifies to
provide, to help to. Grauiter de se consulere, to do some hurt to him self.

Consulto, taui, tare, to give or ask counsel often, to delyberate or show
mine advise often.

Consulto, delyberately or advisedly.

Consultor, oris, he that gives counsayl, sometime he that asks counsel.

Consultus, ta, tum, wise, or well aduysed.

Consultus, tus, and consultum, the thing that is consulted sometime an act of
counsel.

Consummatus, a, um, perfect at a poyut.

Consummo, aui, are, to sum up in a reckenynge, to fynyshe or perform, or
make up, or make perfect.

Consumo, Terent. in Andria.
sumpsi, sumere, to consume or dystroy, sometime it signifies to finishe or
make up, or to bring to a point, also to spend.

Consumere diem in apparando, to spend all the day in preparynge.

Consumere fidem, Salust.
to lose credence.

Consumere operam, Terent. in Heauton.
to employ labor.

Consumere orationem, to tell a long tale without a conclusyon. Sa. in lug.


Consuo, ui, ere, to sow together, or join.

Consurgo, surrexi, gere, to arise to gyther with other.

Consyderate, with a consyderation.

Consyderatus, he that does a thing with consyderation.

Consydero, aui, are, to consider.

Contabesco, Plaut. in Market.
scere, to wast away, or relent, like salt put in water.

Contabulare, to bourde, or to lay bourdes on a roufe or floor.

Contabulatio, a floor bourded.

Contactus, ta, tum, touched.

Contacti relligione dies, Plautus in Pseud.
days reputed of the paynyms to be unfortunate to begin any enterprise.

Contagium, and contagio, onis, and contages, an infectiue syckenes. also any
infection.

Contamino, aui, are, to violate or defyle, with myxtyng things together, to
dishonest.

Contechnor, Plaut. in Pseud.
ari, to invent some thing, to deceive

Contego, texi, Terent. in Hecyra.
tegere, to hyde a fault, that it be not espied.

Contemero, aui, are, to vyolate.

Contemno, tempsi, temnere, to despise, or contepmne, which is less than
despysynge.

Contemplatio, onis, a beholdynge, specially in the mind, with devotion to
god.

Contemplator, he that beholds with great affectyon.

Contemplo, are, and contemplor, aris, ari, to behold intentiuely with great
affection.

Contemporanei, they which be at one time.

Contemptibilis, he that is to be despised, or not regarded.

Contemptim, dysdaynfully.

Contemptor, aris, to set little by.

Contemptus, tus, despite, contempt.

Contemptus, a, um, contemned, not esteemed.

Contendo, di, dear, to contend or tesyst, or strive to cast or shote a darte
or arowe, to continue, to make have, to enforce.

Contendere aliquid ab aliquo, to require some thing of one.

Contendere sacramento, to wage the law.

Contentio, onis, resystence, strife, or debate. also a sharp oration apt to
confirm or repreue, a continuance, an inforcement or setting forth with
vehemence.

Contentus, a, um, that which is contained, also content, or satisfied.

Contereo, rui, rere, to make aferde.

Contero, triui, terere, to wear out with occupienge, also to make war.

Conterere aetatem, to spend his life.

Conterere die^, Plaut. in Bacch.
to spend the day unprofitably.

Conterere operam, to lose labor or pain.

Conterere questu^, Terent. in Hecyra.
to spend all that he has gotten or won.

Conteris tu tua me oratione mulier, Plaut. in Castle.
Thou make me weary woman with thy talkyng.

Conterraneus, country man.

Contestari, to ask together witness.

Contestari litem, to perpleade, where the one has full purposed, the other
has fully answered.

Contestatus, a, um, proved by witness.

Contexo, ere, to join together.

Contexere dolos, to find crafty means.

Contextus, tus, a ioynyng or sowyng together.

Contextu pennarum corpori tegmenta faciebat, He made him garments with the
feathers of fowls sown or glewed together.

Contextu longiore loqui, to speak with a long deliberation or tracte of time.

Conticeo, ticui, cere, to hold my peace with other.

Conticesco, scere, to keep silence with other.

Conticinium, bed time, or the first part of night, when men prepare to take
their rest, and all thing is in silence.

Contignatio, onis, the roufe of an house.

Contigno, aui, are, to raufter a house.

Contignus, a, um, that which touches or is next to a thing.

Continens, it is, firm land, that is none isle, also continual, sometime ioynyng.

Continenti biduo, two days continual.

Continenter, continually, co^tinently, or firmly

Continentia, continence, a virtue, refusyng things that are pleasant. also
resistance of ill.

Contineo, nui, nere, to refrayn, to keep back, to contain, to keep together,
to withhold, to let.

Continebat me tempestas, Plaut. in Amph.
the foul wether let me.

Continere se domi, to abide at home.

Contingo, tigi, tingere, to touch.

Contigit, it has happened.

Continue, continually.

Continuo, aui, are, to continue.

Continuus, a, um, contynuall.

Contollam gradum, Plaut. in Aulul.
I will go forward.

Contor, tari, to abide, to inquire diligently.

Contorqueo, Vergilius in georg.
torsi, quere, to pluck up, and draw with him.

Contorquere telum, Vergilius Aenei. 2.
to shoot an arrowe or darte, and therewith to hit or perce a thing.

Contortae res, things wounden and twysted. also such matter, as one part
can not agree with an another.

Contortuplico, are, to wray or wynd a thing, that with great pain it may be
vnwounde.

Contortuplicata nomina, Plaut. in persa.
names so diffuse, that they may uneath be pronounced.

Contra, against a place, a person, or a thing, on the other part.

Contracto, aui, are, to attayn, or comprehend.

Contractio animi, Ci. tuscu. quaest.
stonieng of the mind.

Contractio neruoru^, shrinking of the sinues.

Contractus, tus, contract, bargayn.

Contractus, a, um, gotten.

Bona contracta, goods gotten by conquest.

Contradico, dixi, dicere, to contrary in words, to say contrary.

Contraeo, to go contrary or against a thing.

Contraho, Pli. in ep.
traxi, trahere, to gather together, to commmyt, to make a contract or bargayn,
to draw together. also to shrynke. Nerui contrahuntur, the synewes be shrunken.

Contrahere aes alienum, to be indetted.

Contrahere animum, Cic. tus. q.
to take thought.

Contrahere bona, Ci. in off.
to get goods.

Contrahere frontem, Ti. Liuius
to lowre.

Contrahere tempus, Quidius in Metamo.
to abridge the time.

Contrahere ualitudinem, to get syckenes.

Contractio, fear.

Contractio frontis, frownyng or lowrynge.

Contrarius, a, um, contrary.

Contrasto, are, to be against one, to repugne.

Contrauenio, ire, to happen contrary or come contrary.

Contrecto, tare, to touch often.

Contribuo, buere, to attribute.

Contribuere in regna, to dyuide it into royaulmes.

Contribuere se alicui, to become one of his, to be at his commandment.

Contristo, tare, to make one sorry.

Controuersia, a controversy or variance.

Controuersor, aris, to contend or vary.

Controuersus, litigious, or full of controversy.

Controuersus, a, um, contrary, or in contrary wise. Res controuersa, mattier
in controuersye.

Contrudere in naues. to bring into the ships. also to put or thruste in.

Contrunco, care, to mynyshe.

Contubernalis, a fellow or compaynyon, or of one company.

Contubernium, a fellowship or a company.

Contueor, Plaut. in Sticho.
eri, to defend, to see, to regard very steadfastly.

Contumacia, dysobedyence, a self will, or frowardenes.

Contumaciter, Ci. in clo.
dysobediently.

Contumax, macis, disobedient or froward in oppinyon, he that will not be
persuaded. sometime it signifies constantly suffryng.

Contumelia, a reproach, a thing done or spoken to a man's rebuke, an injury.

Contumeliosus, he that uses to speak rebukefully.

Contundo, tudi, tundere, to break to pieces, or stryke down.

Contundere facta alicuius, Plaut. in Sticho.
to put an other man's acts out of estimation or remembrance.

Contuor, Plaut. in Asin.
eri, to see.

Contuosi oculi, eyes lokyng narowe.

Conturbo, Ci. as At.
are, to trouble. also to spend in wast Conturbare fortunas, to spend al his
goods in waste.

Conturbare rations, to spend all that he should have made reckenyng of.

Contus, a long spear or moryspyke, also a long pole with iron at the end,
wherewith shipmen do gauge the water.

Conuador, dari, to co^pel one to find sureties.

Conuallis, a valey having hills on both sides.

Conuaso, aui, are, to gather by stelth.

Conuector, Cic. Atti.
oris, a maryner that conueyeth over many.

Conueho, uexi, uehere, to carry or bring from many places unto one place.
Plinius. 11


Conuello, Plautus in Amph.
uulsi, uellere, to shake or pull out of his place. also to take from one by
robbery.

Conuellere gratiam, to bring out of favor or credence.

Conuenae, people assemblyd of diverse countries, dwelling in one country or
town.

Conueniens, convenient.

Conuenientia, a congruence. also a coming together of people.

Conuenire, to come together, or to assemble in one place. Also to agree, to
sewe at the law, or bring in judgment, also to determyne to speak with one,
to accord.

Conuenit inter me atque hunc, It is agreed between him and me. De precio
conuenit, We are agreed of the price. In manum conuenit, She is my wife.

Conuenire in manum, to be affianced or betrouthed on the part of the woman.

Conuenit, I am contented. Also it is conuenyent, meet, or sitting.

Pax conuenit, Salust. in Catal.
peace was accorded.

Conuentae, couenantes of marriage.

Conuenticulum, Cice. p^^ Sexto.
a congregation, a little assembly, most commonly for an ill purpose.

Conuentio, onis, and conuentum, a covenant.

Conuentus, an assembly of people, warned by the chief officers commandment.

Conuentus maximus, may be taken for a parlyament,

Conuentus iuridici, may be used for the four terms.

Minores conuentus, Salust. in Iugurt.
sessions of the peace.

Conuentus, a, um, accorded.

Conuenta pax, Plaut. in rudente.
peace accorded.

Conuerro, rere, to swepe together in to oone place. also to rub.

Conuersatio, conversation, or familiarity.

Converse, Cato.
klenly.

Conuersor, aris, to be conversant.

Conuertere se in fugam, to run away.

Conuerto, uerti, tere, to convert or turn.

Conuersio, alteration or change.

Conuexitas, the imbosing or roundenes of the backsyde of that which is holowe.

Conuexum, the outward part and roundnes of a thing that is holowe.

Conuexus, a, um, imbosed round and holow within.

Conuiciator, he that speaks to men's rebuke.

Conuicinium, a neyghbourhod.

Conuicior, aris, ari, to speak in reproach.

Conuicium, a reproach or rebuke.

Conuicium dicere, to speak to a man's rebuke.

Conuicium facere, to do a thing to a man's rebuke.

Conuinco, cere, idem quod uinco.

Conuictor, oris, a daily companyon at table, or a daily guest.

Conuictus, tus, a living to gether in house, or at one table.

Conuiua, and Conuictor, a beden guest, he that is invited or beden to dinner or
supper.

Conuiuam abducere, to bring one to a dinner on banquet.

Conuiualis, le, perteynynge to feasts.

Conuiuator, oris, a feaster or banketter.

Conuiuiones, companyons at drinking or bankettynge.

Conuiuium, a feast or banquet.

Conuiuo, uixi, uere, to live together with one.

Conuiuor, aris, ari, to feast or bankette, or to take meals with other men.

Conuoco, are, to call to gether, or to assemble many together.

Conuolo, are, to fly together.

Conuoluo, ui, uere, to wrap or wind about a thing.

Conuoluolus, a lyttel worm with many feet and heary, that eats the leaves
of vynes.

Conuoluulus, or Cissampelos, is an herb, which has a leaf like to yuye,
but much thynner, and a flower like a lylly, and wyndeth about like a vine,
some has white flowers, some violet. I suppose it to be withwind

Conuoti, sworn brethren, or men making one auowe or promise.

Conifera arbor, a tree which bears fruit of the form of a pyne appull.

Conus, properly the pyneaple tree, by translation it is a figure in fascion
like to a pyneaple. Also the crest of an helmet or salet.

Conoides, pineaple trees female.

Conuulsio, is the same syckenesse which in greek is called Spasmos, Hippocr.
which is an affecte of the synewes and muscules, Aph. li. 10
wherein some time all the body, sometime part of the body is drawn or
stretched, will he or no that suffers: If it be in part of the body, it is
called in english the crampe: If it be in all the body, it has yet no name in
english, because it happens seldom. The cause of this grife is of two contrary
and diverse occasions, either of repletion, or of to much emptiness and lack
of nourishement.

Coos, uel Cos, uel Co, uel Coum, the name of an isle nyghe to the Rhodes.

Cous, a, um, of that isle.

Copen, old writers used for Copiosum, plentuouse.

Cophinus, a basket.

Copia, plentye, eloquence, power, leave or license, multitude. Also aid.

Copiam dare, Terent. in Heauton.
to give power, or license. also to give occasion.

Copia est, Idem.
Nam apud patrem tua amica tecu^ sine metu ut sit, copia est. For thou may
now bring to pass, that thy wenche may be with thy father without any
dread.

Copia est, I may or might: Ego in eum incidi infelix locum, Terent. in Phorm.
ut neque eius sit amittendi, nec retinendi copia: I am unhappily come to that
point, that I may neither leave her, nor keep her.

Copia uix fuit eum adeundi, with great difficulty or pain might I come unto
him.

Copia cuntandi non est tibi, Plaut. in Epidic.
thou haste no leisure to tarry.

Copia est tibi magis, Plaut. in cap.
thou may more easily

Copia nulla est tibi in illo, he can nothing help the. Plaut. in Epidi.


Copiam efficere alicui, to find the means that one may come in. Plaut. in
milite.


Copiam facere argenti, to lend one money.

Copiam facere, Pli. in epi.
to communicate any thing with an other.

Copiae cornu, was the horn of a got, with whose milk Jupiter was nourished
in Creta now called Candy, of two maidens, one called Adrastea, the other Ida,
daughters of Melisseus, the which horn Jupiter gave to his said nouryces
inreward, having therewith this commodity, that what so ever thing they wyshed
for, it should abundantly come out of that horn. Whereof it came afterward
into a proverb, that when men would declare to be plenty of any thing, they
signify it in these two words Copiae cornu.

Copi, for copioso.

Copio, are, to gather much together.

Copiosa, some plenty.

Copiose, aboundauntly.

Copiosus, a, um, plentuous.

Copis, plentuouse.

Copula, Plautus.
a couplynge or ioynyng together, couples or fetters.

Copulatiuus, a, u^, that coupleth, or may couple.

Copulo, aui, are, to couple together, to bynd or join together.

Coquina, a kytchyn.

Coquinaria, cookery.

Coquinarius, a, um, pertaynyng to cookery.

Coquinor, aris, ari, to do the office of a coke.

Coquito, tare, to boil often.

Coquo, coxi, coquere, to sees or boil, to make ripe, to make ready, to digest.

Coquus, a cook.

Cor, cordis, the heart, sometime it is taken for the mind.

Cor ne edito, Eras. in chil.
do not tourment thy mind with care and heuines, it was one of Pythagoras
counsayles.

Cora, a city that Dardanus builded, of which the inhabitants are called
Corani.

Coracinus, a, um, of a crow.

Coracesius, a part of the hill Taurus.

Coralium, a stone called coral, which being in the sea is a tree or
bousshe, and out of the water it becomes a stone. Solinus writes, that it
also changes his color, after that it is out of the water. It is founden in
diverse places, as Hermolaus writes, that is to say in the red sea, in the
Persian sea, and about Sicile, also in the north sea about the yles callid
Orchades, not far from Scotland. he says also, that whiles it is in the
water, it is grene of color. Auicen affirms to be three kinds thereof, white,
red, and black. also that it is cold in the first degree, and dry in the
second. But Constantyne says, that it is also cold in the second degree.

Corallobachates, a stone with golden rays.

Coram, before, openly, in presence.

Corambla, an herb that makes the eyes dusks and weak of sight.

Coraxicus, a part of the hill Taurus.

Coraxis, a mountayn in Asia, also a flood.

Corbis, a basket.

Corbita, a great ship called a foyst.

Corbito, Plaut. in Casina.
tare, to cast into a basket.

Corbona, the treasure of the temple among the Jews.

Corbula, a little basket.

Corchorus, a vile herb called chickeweede.

Corculum, sweet heart. Also wise men were so called among the Romans.

Corcyra, an isle in Greece.

Cordapsus, a syckenes that is now called Illi acus, which is a pain in the
guts.

Cordate, wisely.

Cordatus homo, a wytty man, and of great memory.

Cordi est, it is to my mind, it contenteth me.

Cordilla, the young fry of the fyshe called tuny.

Cordolium, sorrow, grefe at the heart.

Corduba, a city in Spain.

Cordumenum, a spice called Cardomomum, whereof one kind is that, which is
called in english graynes.

Cordus, a, um, that thing, which springs or comes late in the year.

Cordi agni, latewarde lambs.

Cordum foenum, latewarde hay.

Coreaceus, a, um, of lether.

Corgo, old writers used for Profecto.

Coria, Victruui.
coriorum, are in building certain setting or layinge or things in one
order, either in height, or in thyckenes.

Coriago, aginis, the syckenes of cattayl, wha^ they are clunge, that their
skynnes do cleave fast to their bodies.

Coriandrum, an herb and seed called colyander.

Corianum, that which is commonly called Coriandrum, in english Colyander.

Coriarius, a tanner.

Coriatium, of lether.

Corinthiacus, a, um, that which is of the city of Corinthus.

Corinthia uasa, plate of the metal of Corinthe, which was a myxt metal.

Corinthus, a city in Achaia, which was in that part of Greece, that is now
called Morea, whereof came a proverb. Non est cuiuslibet Corinthu^ appellere.
It is not in every man's power to aryue at Corinthus: which does signyfie.
It perteyneth not to every manne to attempt things dangerous, or hard to
achieue. Vide originem in chiliadibus adagiorum Erasmi, uel in Aulo Gellio.

Corium, a bow case.

Coritus, the skin of a beast, also lether, the pane of a wall made with lyme
and sand.

Corna, nae, the name of two cities.

Cornelia, the proper name of diverse noble women, of the which one was suster
to Scipio, and mother to Tyberius Gracchus, and Caius Gracchus, who being men
of excellent eloquence in the latin tunge, were therein tought only of their
said mother: This woman was of a meruaylous temperaunce. For on a time she was
in company with other ladies of Rome, whoo beholdynge her to be but meanly
apparayled, they demanded of her if she had no better raymente: she poyntynge
to her two sons, which than went before her, answered, saying: here is my
fresh apparayll, wherein I do delight. The same noble woman knowing that her
husband did privily company with her bond woman, dissembled and would not here
of it, thinking that it were inconueniente, that her husband, who had been
oftentimes in the greateste and most honorable romes in the city, and also
had vainquished many great princes, should be rebuked by her. And after his
death she married that woman in a worshyppefull place, gyuynge with her a great
sum of money. whose example very few women have followed sense her time.

Cornelius, a proper name of diverse noble Romans, of whom mention shall be
made in their surnames.

Cornetum, a grove of hauthorne.

Corneus, a, um, of hauthornes.

Cornicen, a blower in a horn.

Cornicor, aris, ari, to make a chatteryng like a choughe, or to gape for a
pray, as Erasmus does expound it.

Cornicularius, a certain office in arms, concerning capital sentences.

Corniculum, a garment perteyninge to soldiers. Also sometime a town in Italy.

Cornicum oculos, configere, to prycke out the crows eyes. Eras. in chilli.
Is a proverb used, when we would signify, that one with a new deuyse, had
obscured the doctrine or estimation of them, which had been before him, and had
made them to seem, that they knew or se nothing. It may be also said, where
one man will make all other men blind, that have been before him, and does
reprove or dissolve that, which has benne allowed by wise men.

Cornigenus, a, um, of the kind which has horns.

Corniger, geris, al thing that bears a horn.

Cornix, nicis, a bird called a crow.

Cornu, a horn, by translation the corners and wyndynges of ryuers. Also the
two wings of a battle be called Dextrum cornu, and sinistrum cornu,

Cornucopiae, was a horn that Hercules plucked from Achelous, which horn the
Nymphs or immortal ladies filled with sweet flowers and fruits: There is
before an other opinion thereof.

Cornupes, pedis, every beast that has horn on his feet.

Cornupeta, a beast that stryketh with his horns.

Cornus, nus, a tree called in french vng Corneillier: there be none of them
in England: and therefore it lacks an english name.

Cornutus, a, um, that which has horns.

Corolla, a garlande.

Corna, the fruit of Cornus, and be called Corneilles in french, which be
like to olyues, but that they be red and somewhat lengar.

Corallarium, an addition or advantage.

Corona, a crown, a garlande, a chaplette, a company of people standing
round like a cercle. Also the cerkle about the moon.

Coronae militares, were garlandes of diverse sorts. One named Triumphalis, was
first of laurel or baye leaves, afterward of gold, which the chief Capytayne
waare on his head, when he had the hoole vyctorye against his ennemies, and
his servants did wear garlandes of olyue. An another was called
Obsidionalis, which was given to the chief captain, when he had raised any
siege, being about any of their towns or fortresses, and that garlande was of
the grass growing in the place where the siege was laid. An other was called
Ciuica, which was of holly being ever green, and was wouen with oken leaves,
this garlande was given to him, which had saved a Romayne, that he were not
taken of many ennemies fyghtinge valyantly for him. Muralis was given to him
that first did skale the walls maulgre the enemies: and therefore it was
made like unto imbatilmentes. Castren sis was given to him, which first
entered by force the camp of the ennemies. Naualis was put on his head,
which in battle on the sea, first bourded the ship that was assailed.
Oualis was worn of the chief captain, when the victory was without
shedinge of blood, or that the battle lacked his circumstance in the
appointment. Muralis, Castrensis, and Naualis, were of goulde, Oualis was of
the little sweet bushe called Myrtus.

Coronamentum, a multitude of crowns or garlandes.

Coronarius, ria, a maker of crowns or garlandes.

Corone, a town in Greece, in the parts now named Morea.

Coronea, a City in the parties of Boeotia in Greece.

Coronis, nidis, the nose of a ship. Also an end, the extreme part, the
top, the horn, or other like

Corono, aui, are, to crown, or set on a crown or garlande.

Coronopus, an herb which by the description of Dioscorides and Theophrastus,
I do suppose to be Dent de lion.

Corporalis, le, corporal.

Corporatio, Corporatura, the quantity, state, or facyon of the body,
corporature, corpule^cy

Corporeus, a, um, that which is of a bodily substance.

Corporo, Ennius.
aui, are, to kill.

Corpulentus, corpule^t or gross in body, sleshy.

Corpus, corporis, a body. sometime it signifies but sleshe only. also
sometime all manner of substance.

Corpusculum, a little or small body.

Corpore uiciati, they which do lack some member at their nativity.

Corrado, rasi, dear, to shave or scrape, to take away, spoil, sell, or
alienate.

Corrector, toris, a correctour or amender of faults.

Corrigia, a thonge of lether, a lachet of a shoo.

Corrigo, rexi, rigere, to correct or amend.

Corrigiola, Dioscori.
an herb which runs on the ground like grass, Ruellius.
but it has leaves like rue, but somewhat longer and softer, under the which
the sede spryngeth, and has flowers partly white, partly red. But Manardus
says, that it has leaves like to an ash. and therefore is called Fraxinella.

Corripio, pui, pere, to rebuke, properly it is to take a thing quickly, and
with haste

Corripere sese ad aliquem, Terent. in Hecy.
to go to one hastelye.

Corripere sese intro, to enter hastily.

Corripere se repe^te, Plaut. in Market.
to go his way sodeinly.

Corripitur febre, he is taken with a fever.

Corripitur, somno, he is fast a sleep.

Corriuales, they which do love to gether one woman.

Corriuare, is properly of beasts, to go to gether to watrynge.

Corriuor, uari, is of waters wha^ they of small brokes do become ryuers.

Corroboro, are, to make strong or bygge, to harden.

Corruda, an herb called wild sperage.

Corrogo, are, to gather greetsu^mes of money.

Corrugi, furrows made in hills, to convey water, to wash the owre of
metal.

Corrumpo, rupi, rumpere, to corrupt, to viciate, to distroy, to suborne, to
tempt, or procure by gifts,.

Corrumpere igni, to burn up. Salust.


Corrumpere oportunitates, to lose opportunity or occasion.

Corrumpere rem familiarem, Salust. in Iuguri.
to waste his substance.

Corruptela, corruption or defylynge.

Corruptor, a distroyer, a waster, a corrupter of things.

Corruptus, ta, tum, corrupt, viciate, rotten.

Corruo, rui, ruere, to fall down to gether, to fall grievously, to fail.

Corruerunt opes, the goods were wasted.

Cors, cortis, idem quod Chors, a court, which serves for pultry, to feed at
large.

Corsica, an isle in the myddell sea between Geane and the isle of Sardinia,
called Cors.

Corsicum mare, the sea about the isle of Cors.

Cortex, corticis, a rynde or bark.

Corticatus, ta, tum, having a rynde or bark.

Cortina, a dyers fat. Also it is the table of Apollo, from the which he gave
answer. Cato takes it for a vessel, out of the which oil is let run.
Also that which is called a corteyne of lynnen clothe or sylke. Also places
divided with cortaynes be called Cortinae.

Cortinale, the place where vessayles be set, wherein wine and honey be sodden.

Cortinon radyshe sede.

Cortona, a city in Tuscane.

Cortyna, or Gortyna, a City in the isle of Candy.

Corus, the northwesterne wind, a southwest wind.

Corusco, aui, are, to brandishe or glytter.

Coruinus, a, um, of a crow. Coruinus, was also the name of a noble oratoure.
Read in Messala.

Coruns, a crow.

Corybantes, the priests of the ydoll Cybeles, which as mad men waggynge
their heads and daunsynge, playinge on cymbales, ran about the streets,
provoking other to do the semblable.

Coryces, curious persons, craftye inuestigatours or serchers of matters. Also
a hill in Crete lyinge on the sea side.

Corycium, a gardeuiandes or walet, or other like thing to put in vytayles.

Corycum, the name of a city and mountain in Sicyle.

Corydalus, a lark.

Coryletum, a grove of hasylles.

Corylus, a hasyll and a hasyll nut, or fylberde.

Corymbi, bearies of an yuy, or other which do grow in the same form.

Corymbifer, an yuy tree.

Corymbites, a kind of spurge.

Coryphaeus, the chief in every order, or in knowledge.

Corythus, a town in Tuscane nere to Arctiu^

Corytus, a bow case, or a quyuer for arowes.

Coryza, the pose or distillation out of the head into the eyes and nose.

Cos, or Ceos, or Cea, an isle not far from Greece, where Hippocrates the
physician was borne.

Cos, cotis, a whet stone.

Coticula, a little whetstone.

Cosmeta, a chamberer, or woman that apparayleth her maistres.

Cosmicus, a, um, worldely.

Cosmitto, for Committo.

Cosmographia, the description of the world.

Cosmographus, he that describes the world.

Cosmus, a proper name.

Cossi, worms bred in trees, which the people of Phrigia did eat for a
delycate meat. Also men or women that have their bodies riueled or sull of
wrynkels.

Costa, a rybbe.

Cosyros, an isle in Affrike.

Cotaria, a quary where whetstones be founde^.

Coticula, a touch stone, whereon they try gold and silver.

Cothurnus, a slypper, specially high solyd, sometime it is taken for a high
and arroga^t form of speaking or writynge.

Cotidie, daily, day by day.

Coton, an haven made with stone. Also a town in Siria, of the which a
certain kind of small fygges, are called plurally, Cotona, uel coctona.

Cotonea, a quince tree.

Cotoneum, a quince.

Cottalus, the sound which a stroke makes with any thing.

Cotula, is an herb, which has leaves like camomyll, and a yelow flower like
to an ox eye. Of this be diverse kinds, one is called Buphthalinos, an other
Cotula fetida.

Coturnix, nicis, a byrd called a quayle, which (as Plinius and Solinus do
write) appears not until in the end of summer, and thanne they flee over the
sea easily without making haste, and when they perceive land, they do assemble
in flocks, and fly much faster. They write also, that these birds do feed
on seeds of venomous herbs, and therefore in the old time they were not eaten
of wise men: for that bird has the syckenesse called the falling evil.
Auicen in the second cano^, and Galene de complexionibus, and Lucretius. li.
4. do affirm, that this byrd fedeth on the herb called Elleborus, or
Veratrum, which of it self is venomous: all be it physicians do give it
sometime for the purgation of melancholy. Auicen in the said place writes,
that it is to be feared in carynge of quayles, lest thereby may be engendered
the crampe and sickness called Tetanus.

Cotyla, or Cotyle, was a measure, which after the saying of Galene, was in
some place xii. ounce measures, in some place.xvi. Julius Pollux says, that it
is the third part of Choenix, that which is called Georgica, or perteynynge
to husbandrye, receives in weight of wine.i.li. and half an ounce, of
oil.xi. ounces, of honey.i.li. di. and.vi. dra^mes, of our measure a pynte and
one ounce measure. That which is called Veterinaria, or belonging to horse
leaches, is in measure xii. inches, and conteyneth of wine.xi. ounces, and.ii.
scriples, oone obolum, and one siliqua: of oil.x. ounces, of honey.i.li.iiii.
ounces di. one dram, and one scriple. It is of our measure just half a
pynte. Cotyla, is also a vessel or cup to drink of, such as Diogenes used,
before he learned of a child to drink out of his hand. Also Cotyle some time
sygnifieth all the holownes of a cup. also the joint of a man's thyghe.

Cotylum, a place in the mountayn of Ida, out of the which runs three great
rivers, Sea mander, Granicus, and Acsopus.

Couinum, a manner of a charyot.

Couinarius eques, a horseman that faught leaping out of a chariot unto a
horseback.

Counium, a town in Dors. shyre called Dorchester.

Counos, the isle of Shepey in Kente.

Cous, a man of the isle of Cos.

Coxa, the haunche, properly the bones of the buttocke.

Coxendix, dicis, the hyp or houkill bone.

Coxendicis morbus, the ache of the hyp. commonly called Sciatica, which
comes of a gross fleumatiue humor, which lies about the synewe called
Ischias, in the holowe bone of the hyp.

C ANTE R.
CRABRO, onis, a great waspe called a hornet.

Cracentes, Pom. Feft
men that are lean. Sometime it is taken for graciles.

Crambe, a kind of colewurtes.

Cramben repetitiam, is called of Iuuenalis a declamation to be often herd,
with much tediousnes to the herers.

Cranaus, a king of Athenes, whoo succeeded Cecrops.

Craneum, a place of exercise at Corinth.

Cranium, the foremoste part of the skull.

Crantor, oris, the name of a philsopher.

Crapula, an inflammation and head ache, which comes of excess of
drinking. It is also taken for drunkenness.

Crapulam edormiscere, to sleep out drunkenness until he be fresh again.

Crapulam exhalare, to vomyte when one is drunk.

Cras, to morrow, in time coming.

Crasis, a greek word, signifies complexion, temperature, or mixture of
natural humors

Crassamen, and Crassamentum, the thycknesse of any thing

Crassa Minerua, a gross wit, which does no thing exactely.

Crassesco, sesci, sescere, to make fat or full of flesh, or thycke.

Crassiore Musa, with a more plain or intelligible sense.

Crassities, and Crassitudo, fatness, thyckenes grossenes.

Crasso, are, to make fat.

Crassus, Plaut. in Pseud.
a, um, fat, fleshye, thycke, gross, poysy.

Crassae compedes, weyghty gyues

Crassus, was the surname of noble Romans, of the which two specially are
worthy to be remembered, for the notable qualities which were in them. The one
of them was named Lucius Crassus, which next to Tully was the most excellent
orator that ever was among the Romans, of whom and of Quintus Sceuola, Tully
in his book called Brutus, writes in this wise: Think not (I say) Brutus,
that in this City were ever two more excellent persons, for where it is well
known, that of all counsaylours, the one (that is to say Sceuola) was most
eloquent, the other (that is to say Crassus) was in counsaylinge most
excellent. Like wise in all other things they were unlike one to an other. But
so as ye could not tell, unto who^ of them ye would wyshe to be like. For
Crassus of all them that were delycate and ioly, was the most sober. Sceuola of
al them that were sober, was the most fresh and pleasant. Crassus with
gentilnes had sufficient severity: in the great severity of Sceuola, there
lacked no gentylnesse. This commendation of Tully declares these two men
worthy to be counsaylours in a weal publyke.

Crassus, called Marcus, being none Emperor, was the rychest man of a pryuate
peron that was of the Romans. Plutarchus writes, that he was sent general
capitain against the Parthians. He had in his treasure seven thousand and a
hundred talentes, which do amounte of our money to a thousand thousand, a
hundred thousand, three hundred and fifty pounds, over and besides that he had
given the.x. part of his moueables to Hercules in offering. and had made a
feast to all the people of Rome, appoyntynge to every man the rate of three
Minas, every Mina being of our money.xxxv. s. xi. d. q. which is in three
Minas.v.li.vii. s. ix. d. ob. q. for every man's portion. which consyderyng the
multitude of people, which were at that time in Rome, being than the greatest
city and most populous in all the world, it seems that the sum was
inestimable. He would say, that he ought not to be called a rich man, except
he could with his yearly rent maynteine a legion, which contained.vi.
thousand foot men, and.v. hundred men of arms commonly. By the which words
of Pliny recited in his.xxxiii. book* the.x. chapter, it may well be supposed,
that where a little before, the same Plinye estemeth the riches of Crassus to
be.xx. thousand Sestertia, which in the rate of our money is six score
and.xi. thousand, three score and five pounds, the same sum was the yearly
revenues of Marcus Crassus, every Sestertium being.vi. li. xi. s. ix. d. ob.
the which revenues were not only of his possessions, grain, fruit, and
cattle, but also of the labors of a great multitude of bond men, which he
did let to hyre unto them that had need of their service, they being
instructed in all manner of sciences and arts. Of whom there were.v. hundred
carpentars, of all the other a much greater number, all that they gained, came to
his cofers. Moreover he practiced usury, lendynge lightly to all men that would
borowe, but if they brake promise with him, he was in exacting thereof extreme
and rigorous. He gat infynite substance by the possessions and goods of men
attaynted in the time of Sylla, who favored him. Therewith he was excedyng
conaytous and unstable, but using much lyberalitie and affability toward
the people, he was always in great estimation among them, he was also
eloquent, and would plead in every commune cause. Finally being stered with
couaytous, and envy, which he had to the great honors that Caesar and
Pompey had obtained, he procured war against the people called Parthi, by
whom both he and his son, with.xxx. thousand Romans wereslayne, and many
also were taken, which (as Plutarch writes) happened by his negligence, he
being more industrious about the gatherynge of money, than he was in
gouernynge and ordering his army. He dyed before the incarnation of Christ.
51. years.

Crastino, aui, are, to defer from day to day.

Crastino, idem quod Cras.

Crastinus, a, um, perteininge to to moreowe, or time to come.

Crater, is a basin of a water cundit, whereinto the water runs out of pipes
or cocks.

Cratera, uel Crater, teris, a great cup. Also a great hole on the top of the
meruaylous hill of Aetna in Sicile, out of the which yssueth flames of fire.
It is also the vessel of a well.

Craterra, ^would^
a buckat to take up water.

Crates, grates of iron or wood. They be also the watling of a wall or house
klayed or thatched. Also the name of a philosopher, which to the entente he
moughte the more quyetlye study philosophy, he being rich, threw al his
goods into the sea, saying: hense with a mischief ye ungracious appetites, I
had leauer drown you, than ye should drown me. Supposing, that he moughte
not have virtue and riches to gether.

Crathis, the name of two ryuers, the oone in Greece, the other in Calaber.

Craticula, a gredyron, whereon meat is broiled

Cratinas, a river in Affryke.

Cratinus, a poet, which wrate comedies.

Cratio, iui, ire, to cover with grates, to wattil.

Cratippus, the name of a philosopher.

Cratos, power or dominion.

Cratilus, the name of a philosopher, to whom Plato wrate a book.

Crea, the shyn, behind the which is the cause of the leg.

Creator, the first maker of a thing.

Creator urbis, the founder or first buylder, the first maker, or causer.

Creatu^a, a creature or thing made of nothing.

Creber, bra, brum, frequente, or accustomed. Also standing or being thycke
to gether, as trees.

Crebresco, brui, brescere, to be wont, to be commune.

Crebritas, and Crebritudo, oftnes, or thicknes in being or growing together.

Crebro, often,

Credibile, that which may be believed.

Creditor, oris, he unto whom a man owes any thing.

Creditum, that thing that is owed.

Credo, didi, dear, to believe, to trust, to commyt, or deliver a thing to be
saufly kept, to publyshe.

Credere uerba alicui, to tell to one his counsel.

Creditur tibi, Plaut. i^ Sticho.
I trust the.

Creditur male, it is ill lent.

Creduis, Plaut. i^ curcul.
uel Creduas, for credas.

Credulitas, tatis, light believe.

Credulus, he that believes lightly.

Cremasteres, Colum. ^ capi. 25.
the synewes, whereby the stones of a man or beast do hang.

Crementum, increase.

Cremera, a river.

Cremium, fried meat burned to the pan.

Cremo, are, to bourne.

Cremona, a town of Italy.

Cremor, oris, the juice of barley steped in water, beaten and pressed.

Crenae, the dentes about the leaf of an herb or tree like to a saw. Also it
is the scores which men unlearned do make on styckes for their remembrance.
Also Crena, is the nocke of a bow or arrowe.

Creontes, the name of a king, whose daughter Jason married, when he had left
Medea.

Creophilus, the name of a poet.

Creo, aui, are, to give the first being unto any thing: also to geat a
child, to cause.

Creare magistratum, to ordeyne an officer.

Crepa, of old writers used for Capra, a got

Crepare, ^^^gilius
to be broken, also to speak or preach

Creperus, a, um, doubtful, ambiguous.

Crepida, and Crepis, pidis, a shoow with latchettes, some take it for a corked
shoe or slipper, because of the noise, which it makes when a man goes.

Crepidarius, rij, he that makes shows or slyppers.

Crepidatus, ^^oratius.
he that wears slyppers.

Crepido, inis, a creke on the waters side, whereon the water beats. Also the
mouth of a well, and the extreme part of any place.

Crepidula, a little slypper.

Crepitaculum, a tymbrell, or other instrument which being touched with the
hand, makes a sound.

Crepito, any, are, to make a noise or bou^sing.

Crepitare dentibus, (...) in ^^ente.
to crashe with the tethe.

Crepitat mihi uenter, my bealy courleth.

Crepitulum, an ornament of the head, which with meuynge of the head, yeldeth
a sown.

Crepitus, a bounse or great din or noise.

Crepo, Vergilius
pui, pare, to make a great noise, or sound, also to be broken.

Crepuit foris, the door craked.

Crepundia, Pla^tus in Amph.
tryfles or small gifts given to litell children, as lyttel belles,
tymbrelles, and such like toys. Also the first apparayle of children, as
swathels, wast cotes, and such like. And by traslation they say, A crepundijs
erat uirtuti deditus: From his chyldehode he was ever given to virtue.

Crepusculum, the break or first spring of the day, called the twylyghte.

Cresco, creui, crescere, to grow or increase.

Creuit haereditatem, he is increased in his lyuclode, or he has inheritance
fallen unto him.

Creta, an isle lying between the part of Greece called Peloponesus, now Morea,
and the Rhodes, and it has on the north part the sea called Aegeum and
Cretense, on the southe the sea of Aegypte and Africa, it is now called Candy.
In this isle was Iupyter nouryshed, whom the paynimes named their chief or
principal god. There also Minos reigned, and Radama^thus governed under him
with most exquisite justice, as ye may read in their places. Of whose laws
other countries took their first pattern, and yet not withstanding the people
of that country were noted of old authors to be vicyouse and shameful liars,
as Epimenides the great philosopher, wrate in a verse recited by saynct Paul
in his epistoll to Titus, saying Cretes always ben liars, ungracious beasts,
and slothful paunches.

Creta, is also chalk.

Cretatus, a, um, laid with chalk.

Cretaeus, and Cretensis, a man of Crete or Candy.

Creterra, a bucket to draw up water.

Crethmos, uel Cretamus, an herb growyng on the sea rocks, which we call
Sampere. it is of some called Creta marina, the leaves are kept in bryne or
salt to be eaten with flesh, as a sauce.

Creticus, a, um, of Crete of Candy. Also a foot in meter, which has the
first and third syllable long.

Cretizare cum Cretensibus. Eras. in chilli.
A proverb vvsed where a craftye man will deceive him that is crafty: a these
steal from a thief: or a liar lie before them, which use to make leasynges.

Cretosus, a, um, full of chalk.

Cribro, aui, are, to syfte or sarce.

Cribrum, a sieue or a sarce.

Crimen, minis, a fault, an offense, blame, matter laid against on by action
or suite. sometime a faulse suspicion.

Criminale, criminal, wherein is an offense or fault.

Criminatio, blame, false report, or reproach.

Criminor, aris, ari, to blame, to rebuke, to lay to ones charge, to accuse.

Criminosus, a, um, rebukefull, worthy blame.

Crimissus, a river of Greece.

Crines, hear of the head.

Crinire, to lay forth the hear.

Crinita stella, a comete or blasynge sterre.

Crinitus, he that has much or long hear.

Crinon, a red lyly.

Crisa, the name of a town builded by Crisus, Phocus son.

Crispina, by the description of Io. Agricola, seems to be the bryer called
Respis.

Crispulus, he that has his hear kurled.

Crispus, kurled. It was also the name of Salustius: read in that place.

Crista, a krest, or any thing growing on the head of a foul or beast, as
a cocks comb or the feathers on the head of a bird, called a coppe.

Criticus, he that judges the acts or warkes that men do write.

Critici dies, the days wherein physicians give judgment of the contyn^aunce
of the syckenesse.

Crito, a philosophers name of Athenes.

Critobulus, was a physician, of whom Pliny speaks. li. 7.

Crobylon, a caul to were on ones head.

Crociatus, a, um, colored like saffron.

Crocinum, idem.

Crocitus, the noise that a raven or crow makes, called crokynge.

Crocitatio, idem.

Crocodilus, an ill beast, which is bredde in Aegypte, and lives partly in
water, partly on land, and is in facion like a dragon, but he has small
eyes, very long tethe like to a saw, and lacks a tunge, and meueth only the
ouermoste saw, and not the nether, and has great nails and strong on his
fete: there has been seen of them.xx. fecte long, and the skin on his back
is vnpenetrable. He deuoureth not only men, but also bestes, which do come
nighe to the river of Nilus or other there about. And yet not withstandinge
the Egyptians did honor that beast, in so much as if any were killed, they
caused him to be salted and buried. They bring forth eggs no more than geese
eggs, and that.lx. at a time, the male and female syttyng on them by turn.
Read more in Trochilus of this beast.

Crocodili lachrimae, Crocodiles tears. A proverb applied unto them, which
hatynge an other man, whom they would destroy, or have destroyed, they will
seem to be sorry for him. It is taken of the propertys of Crocodilus the
monster, who beholdynge a man coming, whom he would devour, he wepeth, and
after that he has eaten the body, he washes the head with his tears, and
than eats it also.

Croco, and Crocito, to make a noise like a raven.

Crocomagma, matis, the duste or refuse of saffron.

Crocotirium, cakebreade.

Crocotulae, garments of the color of saffron.

Crocotularius, a diet.

Crocus, and Crocum, saffron, which of al me^ is known. It is hot and dry
in the first degree.

Croceus, a, um, of the color of saffron.

Crocuta, Constant.
a beast, which Solimus calls a monster, begotten between the beast called
Hyena and a lyo^esse: he never closes his eyes or wynketh, on both sides of
his mouth he has as it were but one tothe, they break all things with their
tethe quyckelye, and swoloweth, and forthwith dygesteth it. The nature of them
is between a dog and a wulfe, but he is much worse than any of them. He
counter fayteth the voice as well of men, as of other beasts.

Croesus, Const^^.
was king of Lydia, son of Halyattes, who subdued many greatte countries in
Asia and Greece, and gathered innumerable riches. He on a time demanded of the
wise man Solon: Who was the happyeste man that ever he see. He said, Tellus a
man of Athenes, whoo had honest and good sons, and they also had like good
children, al which he saw in his life. And when he had lived a good time
honestlye, he at the last fighting against the ennemies of his country,
after that he had vainquished them, he dyed a fair death, and in the same
place was honorably buried of the Athenienses. And wha^ Croesus asked, who was
most happy next Tellus, he said: Cleobis and Bito, which were Argiues, and
had a competent living, and were of such strength, that in all games in
proving of strength, they obtained the price. On a festival day of Juno
their goddess, their mother being an old woman, would be carried unto the
temple in a wayne, but the oxen, which should draw it, were not come from the
field, wherefore her two sons, taking the beam of the wayne, drew their
old mother therein.vii. miles and more, and so brought her to the temple of
Juno, all men meruaylinge and co^mendynge the young men, al womenne praysynge
the mother for bringing up of such children, the mother being surprysed with
joy, as well for the act of her sons, as also for the fame and commendation
thereof, standing before the image of Juno, prayed, that her sons might have
that thing given them, which were the best thing that ever might happen to
men* when they had sacrifised, eaten and drunk with much pleasure and joy,
they fell on sleep, and never awaked,* whose images all the people of their
country did set up with much honor at Delphos. Croesus being abashed,
said unto Solon: My friend of Athenes, set thou so little by our felicity,
that thou preferrist before us these private persons? Solon answered, Truly
Croesus, in process of time many things are seen, which men would not se: and
many things be suffered, that men would not suffer. And after that he had much
spoken of man's calamity, at the last thus he concluded his saying: The end
of every thing is to be looked on, whereto it shall come, for god pluckith up
by the roofes many men, unto whom he gave all fortune at pleasure. Cresus made
hereto no countenance, but estemyng Solon to be but a fool, consyderyng that he
passing so light upon the things, which appeared to be good, bad him to take
heed of the end of all things, he setting little by Solon, let him depart.
A good space after, Cresus by the comfort of the answers of Apollo at Delphos,
attemptynge war against Cyrus king of Persia, at the last was taken of him,
who causid a great pyle of wod to be made ready, and Cresus being in gyues to
be set on the top thereof, than forthwith Croesus remembryd the words of
Solon, that no man living was blessed, or on al parts happy, and therewith
lamentyng, he cried, O Solon, Solon, Solon. Which Cyrus heryng, caused to be
demanded of him, who it was that he named. Croesus with much difficulty at
the last told what he was, and finally declared all that before was rehersyd.
Which after that Cyrus had herd, he recognisyng him self to be also a man,
soore repented, that he went about to bourne him, which was equal to him in
honor and richesse, and commanded him to be taken from the fire, which than
began to flame, and so with great difficulty he was delivered. And
afterward Cyrus entertained him honorably, and vsyd his counsel, which in
many things he found very profitable. Much more Herodotus the noble
hystoryan writes hereof in Clio, which I would god were radde oftentimes of
kings and their counsaylours, for whose commodity I have written this Epytome
or abbreuiation, to no man tedious, which has a good nature.

Cromis, was he, to whom Hercules gave the horses of Dyomedes, which would
cate men.

Cronia, were the feasts dedycate to Saturnus, which were also called
Saturnalia.

Cronium, is the north sea called Mare concretum, or glaciale, the frosen sea.

Crotalum, an instrument, which the Egyptians vsyd in sacrifyce, made of two
plates, which beaten together, made an harmony.

Crotalus, he that has a sownynge voice, and a shylle.

Croton, look after in Ricinum.

Cruciabilitas, tourment, affliction.

Cruciatus, tourment.

Cruciatio, idem.

Crucifigo, fixi, figere, to crucifye.

Crucio, are, to tourment.

Crudaria, a vein of silver.

Crudelis, le, cruel.

Crudesco, dui, descere, to be raw.

Cruditas, tatis, rawnesse of humors, or ylls dygestyon.

Crudus, a, um, raw, fresshe, or new made, not ripe.

Crudus homo, whose stomach can not dygest well.

Crudus ensis, a cruel sword.

Cruda poma, fruits that are not ripe.

Cruentati oculi, eyes red as bloudde.

Cruento, aui, are, to make blouddy.

Cruentus, a, um, blouddy, cruel.

Crumena, a pourse.

Cruor, blood, which comes out of a wound.

Crus, cruris, the part of the leg, which is from the knee down unto the
ankle, called the shanke.

Crusculum, a little or small leg.

Crusta, the utter part of every thing that is not eaten. Also the scurfe of a
scab or wound* also plaster of a wall.

Crustarius, a pargettour.

Crustata, whereon is laid plaster, or thynne shardes of stone.

Crusto, aui, are, to lay plaster or parget.

Crustulata, a meat made of crustes of bread.

Crustulum, a crust of breadde, of a pastye, or of meat roasted, Vergilius.
broyled, or fried.

Crustum, idem.

Crustumnia pira, pears red on the one side.

Crustuminium, a town in Italy.

Crux, crucis, a cross, galowes, or other like, also all manner of tourment.

Cruci dare aliquem, Flaut. in milite.
to hang one.

Crypsorchis, is where a man's stones are removed out of their place.

Crypta, a voult low in the ground.

Crypticus, a, um, secret or hyd under the earth.

Cryptoporticus, a place under the ground, with wyndowes like to a parler,
where men do dyne in the summer time for heat.

Crystallina, vessel and cups of crystal stone.

Crystallus, and Crystallum, a stone callid cristal.

C ANTE T.
CTenes, the foreteethe.

Cteniatrus, a horse leach, he that heals diseases of horses and cattle.

Ctesipho, or Ctesiphon, the name of a warkeman, which made the great temple
of Diana at Ephesus, a work wonderful, and renomed through the world, the
which was after burned of one Herostratus, only because he would for some deed
be spoken of.

C ANTE V.
CVbatio, a lyenge.

Cubatus, tus, a sitting on brood, as a hen does.

Cubicularis, re, that pertayneth to the cha^bes.

Cubicularius, a servant that awaiteth in the chamber, a chamberlayn or grome
of the chamber.

Cubiculum, a bed chamber.

Cubicus, a, um, square as a dye.

Cubile, a bed. sometime it is taken for a closet.

Cubitale, a foresleue of a garment, which keuereth the arm from the elbowe
downewarde.

Cubito, aui, are, to lie often with one.

Cubitor, toris, an ox or horse, which will lay him down when he should
warke.

Cubitus, and cubitum, an elbow. sometime a mesure called a cubite, that is to
say, one foot and an half, but a cubite in geometrye contains.vi. of our
common cubits.

Cubo, bui, bare, to lie down, properly it is of sick men, or of women with
child.

Cubus, is a figure four square on all parts like a dyce.

Cucubo, aui, are, to make a noise like an owl.

Cuculio, onis, a keuerynge of the head, which men did use when they walked in
the night.

Cuculus, and cucullus, a bird called a cuckoo.

Cucullus, a hoode, which men or women do wear for the rain, or when they
mourn.

Cucuma, a vessel of brass or tynne, fascyoned like a cucumer, wherewith
bathes were filled and emptyed.

Cucumer, eris, and cucumis, a fruit called a cucumber.

Cucumerarius, a gardyn, where cucumbers to grow or be kept.

Cucurbita, a fruit called a gourde. Also Cucurbita, and cucurbitula, is a
cup, wherewith surgions do draw out blood with scarifieng of the skin,
called cuppynge.

Cucurbitarium, a place where gourdes be sowe^

Cucurbitarius, a lover of gourdes.

Cucurio, iui, ire, to make a noise like a cock.

Cudo, cusi, cudere, to stryke as smythes do* also to coin.

In me haec cudetur faba, this thing shall light on my neck.

Cuias, cuiatis, of whense.

Cuius, a, um, whose.

Cuium pecus, Plaut. in Men.
whose cattall?

Cuiusmodi, what, what fascion, what manner.

Cuiusmodi homines erunt? Cice. pro Cluen.
What manner of men shall they be?

Cuiusquemodi.) Vereor enim cuiusquemodi es Rosci, Cice. pro Roscio.
ne ita hunc uidear uoluisse seruare, ut tibi omnino non pepercerim, I fear
me, that in what so ever state thou art in Rosce. lest it shall be thought, that
I would so excuse or defend him, forasmoch as I have not always spared the.

Cuiuscunquemodi genus hominum, Salust. in Catal.
of all manner of sorts of men.

Culcitra, a mattresse.

Culcitrula, a little mattresse.

Culcitula, a little staff. Festus.


Culeus, among the Romans was the greatest measure, and receives twenty of
the measures called Amphora, which amounts to two thousand, eight hundred,
four pound of measure, every pound being xii. ounces* of our measure.v.
score galons. It was alsoo a sack of lether, whereinto they which had slain
their fathers or mothers were sown, and with them also were put alive, a
cock, a serpente, and an ape, and thrown all together in to the river of
Tyber. And this was the punyshement of paricides or murderers of their parents.

Culex, culicis, a gnatte.

Culicem colant, camelum deglutientes, they strayn a gnatte through their
tethe, and swolow down a camel. An apt proverb applied by our fauiour Christ
unto the Pharyseys, which did aggrauate small offenses, and mayntayned great
enormities. It may be now used against such persons, which seek out and
do punyshe small offenders, and let the great trespassours against the law go
quyte unpunished. also them, which are scrupulous in things of little
importance, and in ambytion, auaryce, extortion, aduoutrye, theft, murder,
treason, or heresy, they find no danger of conscience.

Culigna, a bolle or dyshe to drink of.

Culina, a kytchyn. sommetyme the meat that is dressyd.

Culinor, aris, ari, to do the office of a cook.

Culleolum, the utter shale of a nutte, which is grene.

Culmen, minis, the roufe of a house.

Culmus, the reed or straw of corn, from the root to the care.

Culpa, is an offense done not wetynge, or not intendyng to do hurt.

Culpa carere, Plaut. in capt.
not to offend.

Culpam commereri to commyt an offense.

Culpam in alteru^ confer, to lay the blame to an other.

Culpa teneri, to be in fault.

Culpito, tare, to blame often.

Culpo, pare, to blame.

Cultellum, a little knyfe, or a whyttyll.

Culter, and cultrum, a knyfe.

Cultrarius, was he that killed the beast, and diuyded him in the sacrifyce to
ydols. it may to now taken for a slaughter man.

Cultus, tus, apparaile, sometime it is taken for honor done to god.

Culullus, an erthen cup, such as the galye cups be.

Cululus, a little chalyce or cup of earth, which the bishop used in
sacrifice.

Cum, with, when, whiles, where, forasmoche, as well. Cum mihi tum illi, as
well to me as to him. In Cum, is some thing less understand, in tum, some
thing more. Quod cum omnibus confitendum est, tum nobis praecipue, Which thing
ought to be confessed of al men, and of us most specially. also Cum signifies
albeit. Nam cum sedulo, munditer nos habemus, uix aegre amatorculos inuenimus,
Although we appoint us never so clenlye, Plaut. in (...).
yet uneath find we any lovers. The ancient writers, when it signified, when,
where, and for as much, they wrate it Quom.

Cu^ dicto, forthwith, as soon as it was spoken

Cum imperio est, he bears a rule.

Cum maxim, excedyngly.

Cum maxume, to much.

Cum potestate est, he is in authority, or in an high office.

Cum primis, very. Cum primis nobilis, dery noble. Cum stomacho, dysdaynfully.

Cum tempore, in a certain space.

Cum tua pace, Terent. in Elecyra.
saving your displeasure.

Cum uenia tua, with your license.

Cuma, a town in Greece.

Cumae, a city in Campania.

Cumanus, a man of that city.

Cumatilis, le, a color called blewe.

Cumera, a great vessel, wherein corn was kept either of wykars or of earth.

Cumerum, a vessel used at weddynges.

Cuminum, an herb and sede called cummyn.

Cumueni, Bigor in France.

Cumulate, abundantly.

Cumulatim, in an heap, or heaped up.

Cumulatus, a, um, augmented.

Cumulo, aui, are, to make an heap, to fylle, to add more.

Cumulus, an heap.

Cumae, and cunabula, cradels, wherein children be rocked. sometime it is taken
for the age of infancy also for the beginning of things.

Cunctanter, slowly, soft and fair.

Cunctatio, and contatio, a taryeng, an abidyng, a prolongyng of time, a
doubtyng.

Cunctator, oris, a taryer, a differrer. it is also he which speaks little,
and taryeth long in his speaking, as some do, more to seem wise, than that
they be wise.

Cuncti, altogether.

Cunctor, and contor, aris, to tarry, to prolonge time, to abide, to doubt.

Cunctus, a, um, all together.

Cuneus, an axe to cut wod, which is small and thyn before, and broad and
thycke after, that the wod may ryue the better. also a wedge to cleave wodde
with. By translation it is a company of footmen in battle, that gothe in a
like order, small before, and broad behind. There was a like form in the
Theater or place, where men beheld plays. It is some time taken for a company
of people.

Cuneatim, in the sourme before declared.

Cuneatus, a, um, that which appears to be in the said form of Cuneus.

Cuniculum, an hole in the ground.

Cuniculus, a beast called a cony.

Cunila, is an herb, whereof be iiii. kinds, one is called Capitata, which is
our sauerye. An other gallinacea, which some do call Origanu^ heracleoticum, in
englysh the maioram, which has the small leaf. The third is that, which is
also called Origanu^, which I suppose to be penny royal with the broad leaf.

Cunire, to shyte.

Cunilago, a kind of sauery. Pom. Fest


Cunnus, a woman's wycket.

Cupa, a cup.

Cupedinarius, an huckstar that sells meat and drink.

Cupes, Cupedia, and Cupedula, delycate meats, or desire of deynty meats.

Cupido, dinis, the son of Venus, god of love.

Cupido, in the feminine gender, vehement de sire or appetite.

Cupide, desyrousely.

Cupiditas, tatis, couaytise.

Cupidus, a, um, desirous. sometime it signifies a lover.

Cupiens, he that desires a thing.

Cupiens tui est, he loves the heartily.

Cupienter, with great desire.

Cupitus, a, um, desired.

Cupressus, a cypress tree.

Cupressinus, a, um, of cypress tree.

Cuprum, metal called copper.

Cur, wherefore, or why.

Cura, care, thought, study, diligence, warke or labor, also love.

Curabitur, it shall be done.

Curae habere, Curae esse, to care fore.

Curas adimere, to set all care aside.

Curam figere, infigere, defigere, configere, to set care and study on a thing.

Curis laxari, to be out of care.

Curatio, cure, charge.

Curatio mea est, Plaut. in paenu.
it is mine office or charge.

Curator, gardeyn in socage, or he to whom the custody of a mad man or
foolysshe is committed. also he to whom any thing is committed, to survey, or
to provide things necessary for a well public, or to order such thingis, as
he has in charge, concerning as well private thingis as they that do belong to
a co^minalte. he may be properly called a surueyour.

Curatorius, a, um, belonging to the said office.

Curatus, in good point or state.

Curatus, a, um, done with dylygence.

Cures, a city of the Sabines.

Curculio, onis, a little worm in grayn called a myte or wyuelle. It is also
the wesyll of the throat of a man, whereby he draws wind.

Cur cura, an ylande in the sea Adriatike.

Curetes, were the priests of Cybeles, which first inhabyted Italye. they
were also called Corybantes. There were other people so called, which were
next to Aetolia, also other in Dalmatia, Leonicus in uaria histor.
now callid Slauonia. Curetes called also, Idaei dactyli, were.v. brethern in
the isle callid Creta, unto whom Rhea caused her son Jupiter to be brought,
fearyng the ire of Saturnus her husband. Their names were these, Hercules,
Iolaeus, Paeonius, Epimedes, Iasius, and Idas.

Curetis, was the old name of the isle called Creta.

Curia, Romulus the first king of Romans divided the people of Rome
into.xxx. parts, and because the cure or charge of the weal public was
depeched by the consent and sentence of them, he called them Curias, and
afterward he added unto them other five, and that every manne in his own
Curia, should observe holy days, and do sacryfyce. Curia, was also the
court of the Senate, and sommetyme vsyd for the court or sessyon of (...)
^udges, which have (...), whom we name judges (...)

Curiae dominicales, may be taken among those courts, which we call court
barons. Of the occasion and beginning of Curiae dominicales, read the coment
of Zasius upon the title of the law civil, De origin iuris. Curiae ueteres,
where priests minystryd about their ceremonies.

Curia hostilia, was a place builded by Tullus Hostilius king of Romans,
where the Senate did sytte about the affairs of the city of Rome.

Curiata commitia, were great assemblies called of the people, out of every of
the.xxxv. diuysyons called Curiae, which being set in xxxv. sundry
particions, affyrmed or denied such laws or constitutions as were purposyd
unto them, and the laws so made, were named Leges curiatae.

Curiales, they which be of that court.

Curio, of Varro is taken for a place, where priests consulted of things
concerning divine ceremonies also a curate, or he that has the spyrytuall
charge in a parysh also it was the surname of a familye in Rome, whereof were
many excellent orators.

Curio magnus, as Sipontinus writes, is taken of Plautus for oone made maygre
or lean with care and busynes.

Curionem agnum, Plautu^^ (...) be.

Curionatus, the office of a (...)

Curionium, the money (...) acurate for doing his office (...)

Curiositas, tatis, curiositi^^ (...)

Curiosus, is of Robertu^ (...) his dictionarie of latin and (...) to be the
master of the (...) to send in haste (...) affairs. But of what (...) it. I
know not.

Curiosus, a, um, (...) sommetyme on the ill part, (...) is vsyd, than is
(...): sometime on the better (...) very careful and busy about (...) either
our selfs, or (...).

Curious, the surname of noble Romans, of who^ chiefly was one callid Marcus
Curious, a man of marvelous honesty, constance, and gravity, which after many
great victories, which he (being capitayn) had against the Samnites. Sabines,
and the noble king Pirrhus. he divided among the people of Rome, the feldes,
appointing to every man.xl. acres, and retained by their consentes as much to
him self, and wha^ they would have given to him more, he refused it, saying, He
was an ill citesyn, that thought it not enough for him, which was enough for
other. When the ambassadors of Samnites brought him a great sum of gold, he
syttyng by the fire boylyng of rapes, said unto them: I had leauer eat in my
erthen dysshe, and have dominion over them, that have so much gold. When he
was accused of with holding of money, he brought forth a tree^ barrelle,
which he occupied when he did sacrifice, and took a solemn oath, that of
all the pray that was gotten of them, whom he vanquysshed, he kept no more
but that barrel to his own use.

Curmundula, pears very delycate, having so thynne parings, that men did
eat them vnpared.

Curo, aui, are, to care for a thing, to take heed, or be diligent about a
thing, to be doing of a thing. Terent. (...) Andria.
Cura ut ualeas, Look to thy health. Curasti probe, thou haste done every
thing well. sometime to prepare, to heal one that is sick, to take refection
or comfort.

Curabo, I will do my dilygence. Curabo illi pecuniam, I will provide that he
shall have money.

Curabitur, Terent. (...) Heauton.
it shall be provided, it shall be done with dilygence.

Curareaedes, to take heed to the house, that nothing be lost.

Curare aliena, to meddle with other men's business. Plaut. in Sticho.


Curare amicos, to entertayne friends or atquayntaunce.

Curare faciendum, to cause or make it to be done.

Curare fidem, to keep promise.

Curare munus suum, Plaut. in Trinum.
to do his office.

Currens, he that runs.

Currentem incitare, to exhort or set forward him, that of his own courage
is well dysposed to a thing.

Curriculo, quyckely.

Curro, cucurri, currere, to rounne. it is also to pass away fast, as a ship
does.

Curriculum, a short space of time. Also a runnynge place.

Curriculus, a little carre.

Curruca, a little bird, which hatcheth and brings up cuckowe birds* it
is supposyd to be an hedge sparowe.

Currus, a carre.

Cursim, runnyng, with all speed, very spedily.

Cursito, aui, are, to run often.

Curso, aui, are, to run always or often.

Cursor, oris, he that runs in post.

Cursorius, a, um, pertaynyng to runnynge.

Cursura, a course.

Cursus, us, idem.

Curtus, a, um, short.

Curta supellex, little or small substance.

Curuamen, minis, a crokednes.

Curuesco, uesci, uescere, to be crooked.

Curuipes, he that has a crooked foot.

Curulis, and curulae, were little carres or drays, having in them chayres of
yuory, wherein they satte, which were head officers in Rome. sommetyme it is
vsyd of poets for the same officers.

Curuatio, curuamen, curuatura, a bowynge or bendynge.

Curuo, aui, are, to bow, or make crooked.

Curuus, a, um, crooked.

Cuscuta, a weed, which twyneth about herbs, having a red stalk.

Cuspidatus, ta, tum, poynted.

Cuspidatim, poyntyng, or poyntwyse.

Cuspis, idis, sometime signifies the point of any weapon. sometime the
steel, sometime a spear head.

Custodi^, the custody, keeping, or ward. sometime he that keeps, sometime he
that is kept: sometime the prison.

Custodia, iui, dire, to keep, to observe, to retain.

Custoditio, the keeping.

Custoditus, a, um, kept.

Custos, custodis, a keeper, a warden, or garden.

Cuticula, a thynne skin.

Cutiones, they which in selling make many prices er they come to a point.

Cutis, the inner skin.

Cuturnium, a vessel, out of the which wine was poured in sacrifices.

C ANTE Y.
CYamea, a stone, which being broken, (...) like to a bean.

Cyaneae, or Cyanitae, ylandes or rather rocks under Bosphorus Thracius.

Cyaneus, a, um, and Cianus, a, um, a bright blue color like a saphyre loupe.

Cyanus, a blewe flower Arowynge among corn, called a blewebottell.

Cyathisso, are, to syppe or to quafte all out, or halues.

Cyathus, a cup. it is also a measure containing of oil one ounce and an
half, of wine one ounce.v. drammes, and done scriple, of honey two ounces and
di^.

Cybele, and Cybeles, was the wife of Saturn, and was named of paynymes, the
mother of the goddis, which has diverse other names, as it shall appear in
their places.

Cybium, a fyshe which is four square.

Cyborium, a kind of appuls of Alexandry.

Cyclades, ben fifty yles in the sea called Egeu^

Cyclaminus, is an herb, which the apoticaries do name Panis porcinus. An other
is of the same name, which they call Sigillum Mariae.

Cyclas, cladis, a woman's gown with a long train.

Cyclops, clopis, an ancient people inhabiting the isle of Sicile, which were
like giantes, having but one eye in their forheades.

Cyclus, a round place in Athenes, where things were sold. also a coin or
poyse.

Cydarum, a boat.

Cydnus, a river in Cilicia, which rounneth from the great mountain callid
Taurus, and passes through the city called Tharsos, which river is so cold,
that when the great Alexander, in his journey against Darius, went into it to
refresh him, he was so mortified with cold in all his body, that he should have
died, had not that excellent and faithful physician Philyp recovered him.

Cydon, one of the notablest towns of Candy.

Cydonium, a quynce pear.

Cygneus, a, um, of a swanne.

Cygnus, a swanne.

Cylindraceus, a, um, in the form of a laugat.

Cylindraceus, a, um, like a roller.

Cylindrus, an instrument, which is round like a pyller, and turns, wherewith
^loddes of earth are broken, called commonly a roller.

Cyllene, an hylle of Archadye, where they say Mercurius was nouryshed.

Cyllenius, one of the names of Mercury.

Cylydros, a serpente that rolleth him self as he gothe.

Cyma, young colewortes, also the tender part of the stalk of every herb.

Cymatilis, chamblette.

Cymba, a boat.

Cymbalaris herba, an he^be that grows in mudwalles, having a leaf like to
yuy, but much less, and a little purple flower.

Cymbalistae, they that play upon cymbals.

Cymbalum, an instrument of musyke.

Cymbium, a piece or cup to drink wine in.

Cymbrica Chersonesus, the country of Denmark.

Cyminum, cummyn.

Cyminus, a lake in Italy.

Cynaethium, a city of Archady.

Cynanche, a syckenes called the squynce, which is in the throat and jaws.

Cynara, an herb now called Artochokes.

Cyneas, was an excellent wise man, who being sent from king Pirrhus
ambassador to Rome, the next day after he came thither, he saluted all the
senate and gentylmen by their names. Seneca in prologo libri primi
declamationum, says, that he saluted the senate, and all the people standing
about to behold him, by their names.

Cynegetica, volumes written of huntyng.

Cynici, were a sect of philosophers, which do signify doggish for the
similitude of their conditions with dogs: for they barked at all men, and
occupied women openly, and lived without any provision, the first author thereof
was Antisthenes, next him followed Diogenes.

Cyniphes, bytyng gnattes with long legs.

Cyniphia, the skin of a got.

Cynnaberis, is that which apothecaries do call Sanguis draconis.

Cynocephalus, sieve Canips, is a beast like an ape, but greater and more
puissant, and has the head more like a dog. Diodorus Siculus says, that in
body and form they be like to a man, and has a like voice. I suppose it be
those, which we do call Baboris. Horus Apollo writes, that they pysse.xii.
times in the day, and as often in the night, declaryng every hour of the day
and the night by making their urine* also that the dog of that kind so
lamenteth the wane of the moon, that during the time that she is dark before
the change, he looks never upward, nor eats any thing, but hangs down
his head; and shows a countenance of sorrow* also people under the great Cane,
having heads like dogs be so called.

Cynodontae, are dogs teethe, which do grow in the latter age.

Cynoglossa, an herb called hounds tunge.

Cynomyia, a fly that does suck the blood of beasts* some call it a horse
fly* all be it by the etimologye of the word, it might be better called a
dogflye.

Cynorrhodos, eglantyne.

Cynos, in latin is Canis, a dog, also a city in Locris.

Cynosarges, a place in Athenes, where chylderne were exercysed, which were
basstardes.

Cynosbatos, the wild eglantyne, which does bear little things like to
spounges, and also a flower like theother eglantyne.

Cynosura, a figure of sterres in heaven, callid Vrsa minor.

Cynozoon, a stynkynge herb.

Cynthia, one of the names of Diana.

Cyparissus, a cypress tree.

Cyperus, is that which of the apothecaries is called Iuncus oderatus.

Cyperus Babylonicus, Galyngale.

Cyperus, and cyperis, an herb having leaves like sedges* also a root like
gynger.

Cypria, was one of the names of Venus.

Cyprium, metal called copper.

Cyprus, an isle in the sea called Carpathium, against the cou^tray callid
Siria, on the north it has Ciliciam, on the southe and the east Egypt. It is
in length after the description of Strabo.175. miles, after.viii. furlonges to
a mile. Some supposed, that it was at the first a portion of Siria, divided by
erthquakes. This country abu^deth in wine, oil, metal, and vitriol, and
canes, whereof sugar is made. Also Venus was there had in much reverence, in so
much as men before they did set forth their daughters in marriage, offered
them to such strangers as came into the country, to be by them defloured,
and afterward married them to husbands.

Cyprinus, and Cyprius, a, um, of Cypers.

Cypseli, birds called martlettes.

Cypselos, the wax of the eat.

Cypselus, was king of Corinthus, father of Periander, one of the seven sages
of Greece.

Cyrserum, a great ship or carryke.

Cyrenaica secta, was a sect of philosophers, who affirmed the chief
felicity to be in carnal disertation, of the which sect Arisrippus was
chief.

Cyrene, nes, a famous city in Libia* also a city in the isle of Cypers.

Cyreneus, a man of that city.

Cyrnea, a goblet to drink wine in.

Cyrnus, the isle which is called Corsica or Corse, Cyrnij, people of the isle
of Corse.

Cyrrhea, a city in the mountain of Helycon.

Cyrrus, the name of ii. rivers, one in Armenia, the other in Media.

Cyrus, was a noble king of Persia the son of Cambises and Mandanes, which
was daughter of Astyages king of Media, who because that he dreamed, that he
saw spring out of the secret places of his only daughter, a vine, with whose
branche all Asia was keuered, he caused the child to be thrown in to a
deserte, to be deuowred of beasts: but by gods prouydence a bytche gave it
suck, until it was found by a shepeherd, who brought it up. At the last he
was king of Persia and Media, and subdued the more part of Asia. This man
excelled all men in his time in goodly personage, gentylnesse, prowess,
lyberalitie, wisdom, and memory. Sollinus writes, that of the exceeding
multitude of men, which were in his host, he so retained the names, that
coming daily among them, he named every manne by his propre name, when he
spoke unto them, The resydue of his wounderfull virtues be written by Xenophon
most eloquentely in greek. At the last he being insatiable in couaytynge
countrayes, was slain by Tomiris the queen of Scithia, with.CC. thousand
Persians.

Cyssus, uel Cysthus a kind of yuye that grows alone also the name of a
river.

Cythera plural. an isle against Candy.

Cytherea, one of the names of Venus.

Cytheron, an hill in Boeotia.

Cyrinus, the first bud of the flower of pomegranate.

Cytisus, an herb, which is good to give to cattle against the rotte.

Cytrago, Coelius.
ginis, the herb, which is commonly called baulme, of the apothecaries Melyssa.

Cyttarus, the high part of the fyrmament* alsoo the hooles of a honye comb
be called Cyttari, and also wherein akornes be set on the stalk.

Cyzicus, the name of an isle by Greece.

D ANTE A.
DACIA, A. CVNtreye beyond Hungrye, on the north part of the river of Dano,
or Danubius. Now is Denmark callid by that name, which in the old time was
callydde Cymbrica Chersonesus, and the people were called Cimbri.

Daci, and Dani, people of the country of Dacia.

Dacicus, a, um, pertaynyng to that country.

Dacus, a, um, idem.

Dactylides, grapes being long like a finger.

Dactylus, a finger, a foot in meter, having one long syllable, and.ii.
short. it is also a date.

Daedala, Leonicus in uarsa histor.
were feasts celebrate yearly in honor of reconcilynge of Juno to Iupyter read
before in Citheron. Also Daedala, was the general denomynation of images
wroughte, of whom it seems to some that Daedalus took his name. Daedala of
Lucretius is vsyd for Terra, for the diversity of things and fourmes, which
be in it.

Daedalus, the name of an excellent carpentar of Athenes, which first found
the saw, the twybyll, and the augor, and made the place in Crete called
Laberynthus.

Doemogorgon, onis, whom Paynyms called the god of the earth, first creator of
the earth.

Demon, monis, as Proclus writes, is taken in diverse significations, one is
that, which every where has souerayntie, and provides next unto god, and so
Jupiter callith Saturn Demon. Also that which for every man particularly
provides* also the reasonable soul is of Plato in his book called Timaeus,
callid Demon animalis, and in his book called Symposium, the love of the mind
about the contemplation of the divine pulchritude, or unspeakable beauty is
callid Demon. Porphyrius supposid, that Demon in every man was nothing else
but understanding. Plato also affirms in his book callid Phoedo, that unto
the souls, which to come into this life, is given Demon, which is the
beholderand sercher of his thoughts and deeds, which after that the soul is
departed from the body, remains still with him, and forthewith brings him
sodaynely before the Judge, where by his testymony he either delyuereth or
condempneth him. These words of Plato approaches nygh to the assertion of
christen doctors, which do affirm, that God appoynteth to every reasonable
soul, a good angel and a bad. Sommetyme Demon, is taken for god, and
therefore Apuleius entitled his book De deo Socratis, and not De daemone
Socratis, although Socrates him self always so named that thing, that
restrained him from doing or admitting any thing that was ill or inconvenient.
Porphyrius has of Demon many other opynions, which I pass over, because
they may engender in busy wits, rather error than wisdom. More over this
would be also remembered, that Demon being a Greek word, is dyuersely written
in Grecke, one way with their little o, called omicron, and than does
signify that which the latynes do call Genius. Cicero names it Lar, which
sygnifieth pryuate gods or spyrites appointed to every particular person or
house, which in effect is our good angel, or our badde. Sometime it is
written with the great O, called of the greeks Omega, and than does it
signifye, God, wisdom, Daemoniu^
or fortune. Likewise Doemonium in the neutre gender sygnifieth god, godheade,
the power of god, which does order and govern the hole world. Daemonius.
Daemonius in the masculine ge^der, had diverse significations, and the one
contrary unto the other. for it signyfied happy, like to god, divine, or
marvelous, contrariwise, miserable, unhappy, unfortunate. Therefore where this
word Daemoniu^ is written among the ancient greeks, that only sentence,
wherein it is, will not be well understand, without consydering what gothe
before, and what follows after. Not withstandyng among christen authors,
Demon and daemonium, be indifferently taken for a devil or damned spirit.
This have I remembered not for children only, but also for such as perchance
be right well learned in the latyne tunge, and yet in such words made of
greek, may happen to mysse the proper significatio^s of them, not readyng greek
authors in their own tongue.

Daemoniacus, and daemoniosus, possessyd with an ill spirit.

Daemonicus, a, um, dyuellysshe.

Dagnades, a kind of birds, which the Egyptians vsyd to tie with their
garlandes, Pom. Fest.
when they were drinking, which with contynuall syngyng, bytynge, and
pluckyng at them that drank, would not suffer them to sleep.

Dahae, people in Scithia, valiant and cruel in battle.

Dalida, uel Dalila, an harlot dwelling in Gaza, in the country of the
Phillistians, which deceived the strong Samson. read more of her in Samsons
description.

Dalmatia, is part of the great country called Illiria or Slauonia. It has on
the west Croatia^, on the east Bossina^, on the north the great mount called
Albanus mons, and the country called Seruia, on the southe the sea called
Adriaticum, or the goulfe of Venyce.

Dalmata, a man of that country.

Dalmaticus, a, um, of that country.

Dalmaticatus, apparailed ike a Slauonoyse.

Dama, a falowe decre.

Damascus, a famous and most ancient city in Siria or Surry, dyuyded from
Judea with the mountayn called Antilibanus, and boundeth upon Arabia petreia.
To this city is the greatest resort of merchants from the parts of the
south and east that is in the world, for spices, and clothes of sylke, and of
gold, It is supposed to be the first city that ever was inhabited, and also
that in the fyeldes of Damascus, called Ager Damascenus, god made Adam the
first man.

Damascena pruna, ar damsins, which do grow about Damascus, and be greater and
lengar than other damsyns when they be dried, we call them prunes Damascene,
which of Galene are more commended than other of that kind, they louse the
bealy, but they restrayn distyllations.

Damasonium, is now called among the Greeks, that most excellent and precious
fruit, which is called Myrobalanum, which kind is now called Myrobalanum
Indum.

Damia, one of the names of the goddess Cybele.

Damatris, the priest of her temple.

Damnas, for damnatus, is sometime vsyd among old Ciuilions. Marcu^.
Quisquis mihi haeres erit, dare damnas esto, fideique eius co^mitto, uti det
quantas summas dictauero, Who so ever shall be mine heir, shall be bounden to pay
it, whom I put in trust to pay al such money as I shall appoint.

Damnatior, Cice. in L.
more worthy death.

Damnatus, Pisonem.
condemned, reproved, compellyd, bounden by necessity. Terent.
Tuus est damnatus gnatus, non tu, Thy son is bounden to do it, and not thou.

Damnifico, feci, facere, to do harm.

Damno, aui, are, to condemn, to dis^herite, to compel, to deliver, to blame,
to reprove. Damnari causa indicta, to be condemned being absent, or not
suffered to speak.

Damnari uoti, to perform the auowe, and optayn that, wherefore the auowe was
made. Inter ipsam dimicationem, Ti. Li^^^. 7
aedem Iunoni Monetae uouit cuius damnatus uoti, cum uictor Roman reuertisset,
Dictatura se abdicauit, In the myddle of the fight, he auowed to make a temple
to Juno Moneta, which vow after that he had performed, and having his desire
was returned to Rome, he surre^drid the great office of Dictator. Damnari
uotis, is taken of Virgil, to auowe or bind with a vow.

Damnosus, a, um, harmefull, or hurtefull, or having much harm.

Damnum, harm or hurt.

Damni dati formula, an action of trespass, for taking away any thing from
us.

Damno auctus, he that is indamaged.

Damnum contrahere, to get loss or harm by any thing.

Damnum dare, to hurt, or to do harm.

Quid facias illi, Terent. in Andria.
qui damnum dederit, aut malum? whate will thou do to him, that does hurt or
displesure?

Damnum resarcire, to recompense for harms that are done, to make satisfaction
or amends.

Damoetas, a shepeherdes name in Vergil.

Damon, a philosophers name of Pythagoras sect.

Dan, a town, which is in the bounds of Judea, on the north part.

Danae^, was daughter of Acrisius king of Argiues, unto whom being closed in
a strong toure Jupiter came in the form of a shure of golden rain in at the
top of the house, and lyinge with her, gat on her Perseum, afterward a valyant
knight, which gave that name first unto the country and people of Persia. By
this fable is signified, that Jupiter sent treasure privily unto Danae^ and
also to them which had the keeping of her, wherewith they being corrupted, did
suffer Jupiter to enter into the tower and accomplish his pleasure. The fable
declares the force of money and gifts in the assaultynge of chastity.

Danaides, the daughters of Danaus.

Danaus, the king of Argyues, that had fyfty daughters, the which al, saving
one, slew all their husbands in one night.

Daniel, elis, an holy prophet of the trybe of Judah, a noble man horn, and
of the kind of honorable personages, that served the king: he being a young
child was brought unto Babylon, and became a man of such temperaunce, that
among the jews he was taken for to be Eunuchus, or a man gelded. He
continuallye bewailed Jerusalem, and in fastings refrayned from all
concupyscence. In form of body he was dry and lean, but in the favor of
god he was beautyful. He by his prayer restored Nabuchodonosor, in to his
first figure, where he was tra^sformed of god in to a monstrous beast, not
with standing that a little before, he by the same Nabuchodonosor, king of
Babylon, was thrown in to a dungeon among hungrye lions, which never would
touch him to hurt him. He being afterward delivered, prophesied both of the
coming of Christ, and of the empires of Babylon, Media, Persia, the Greeks
and the Romans, and finally died at Babylon, and there was buried. he lived
before the incarnation of Christ. 619. years.

Danisma, usury.

Danista, an vsurar.

Danisticus, a, um, perteynynge to usury.

Danubius, a famous river called Dunow, after the description of Pliny has
his beginning in Germany out of an hill called Arnoba, Li. 4. ca. 12
and passing by countries innumerable, reteyneth his name: but as soon as he
enters into Illiria, he is than called Ister, and receives in to him.lx.
other ryuers, well nigh the one half of them, being nauiagable. finally being
in six wonderful great arms, he falls in to the sea called Pontus. The
same is affyrmed by Tacitus, saving that he names the hyl, where Dunow
springs, Arbona^, and not Arnobam.

Danunt, Plautus does use for dant, they give.

Dapalis coena, a supper, whereat be many and diverse incares.

Dapatice, feastfully, plentuousely.

Dapes, delycate and precious dysshes, or bankettes.

Daphne, the proper name of a lyttel maiden, and also of a wood.

Daphnis, nidis, in latin is a laurel. Also the son of Mercury. It was also
a dylectable place without the city of Antioche. Also it was the name of a
portion of Lycia by the sea side.

Daphnites, one of the names of Apollo.

Daphnoides, an herb like to laurel, now called lorell or laury, which
causes a vehement purgation. In the plural number, they be the beryes of
laurel.

Daphnon, a place where laurel grows.

Dapifer, he that bears a dyshe at a banquet.

Dapino, to give, as it were a delycate dishe.

Dapsa, a sacrifice, which was made in winter, and in spring time.

Dapsile, abundantly.

Dapsilis, abundant, liberal, or large.

Dapsilis lectus, an excellent good bed.

Dapsilia dicta, Plaut. in Trucul.
words frankly spoken.

Dardanarij, forestallers of markettes, which do bye before hand, to sell
dear afterward.

Dardania, the country where Troy stood.

Dardaniae arts, wytchecrafte.

Dardanus, the name of a prince, reigninge in that part of Phrigia, where
Troy stood, which was of him called Dardania.

Daricus, money of Persia.

Darideus, the name of a king of Persia in the time of Tyberius, Caius,
Claudius the emperors.

Dariorigum, Vanes in Britayne.

Darius, the name of diverse kings of Persia.

Daseia, thycknes of breath.

Datarius, a, um, given. Also an officer in Rome which subscribed the date of
letters.

Datatim, one gyuyng to an other, as at the tossynge of a ball.

Daucus, yelowe caret, whereof the roots sodden in brothe, are pleasant and
wholesome. Constantine says, that it is hot and dry in the second degree.
Other kinds there be^ of this herb, which I will not speak of, because they
are not so necessary.

Daunia, a part of Italy now called Apulia.

D ANTE E.
DE, of, but joined with a verb or nown, it signifies withdrawynge or taking
away, as Decortico, I bark or take away the rynde. Depilo, I pluck away
the hear: sometime it signifies downward, as, Deorsum descendo, I go
downewarde. Sometime contrary, as, Dehortor, I give contrary advise: Dedoceo, I
teach contrary. Terentius
Sometime it signifies for, as, Quantum me amas de fidicina hac? How well
do thou love me for this synging wenche?

De die, Cicero.
to day. Ergo ne una, orationis pars de die dabitur mihi: Plautus.
Than shall I not be suffered to speak one little word to day.

De die uiuere, Cicero. in phil
every day, or from day to day, to live.

De compacto, Pla. in cap Terent. in Hecy.
by agreement.

De filia te adij, I come to speak with you for your daughter.

De illis uerbis cave tibi, Plaut. in Bacch.
beware how thou speak such words.

De imperio decertatur, Plaut. in Men.
they fight for the empire, or chief rule.

De improuiso, Plautus in Trucul.
at adventure, vnsoughte for, or unlooked for.

De industria, Terent. in Heauton.
of purpose.

De integro, eftsoon from the beginning.

De manu in manum, Cicero.
from hand to hand.

De istac te amo, Terent. in Eunucho
I love the for her sake.

De mea sententia, by my counsel.

De meo, Plaut. in persa.
of my good.

De tuo, of thy good.

De meo exemplo aedificet, Plautus in Mostel.
let him build according to my plat.

De more, as it has been accustomed.

De nihilo nihil est irasci, Plaut. in Epidic.
It is folly to be angry for nothing.

De nocte abijt, Plaut. in rudente.
he went away at night.

De nocte uigilare, to wake in the night.

De pace legatos mittebat, he sent ambassadors to treat of peace.

De praefacili exores, Thou shalt lyghtely opteyne.

De proximo senex, Plautus.
the old man that dwells hereby.

De repent, suddenly.

De subito, idem.

De scripto dicere, to speak that which was before written unto him.

De sua sententia, of his own head or fantasy without other counsel.

De sententia alicuius, by ones counsel, as one aduysed him.

De uia languebat, he was sick by reason of his journey.

Dealbo, aui, are, Ti. (...)
to make white, to blaunche.

Deambulatio, a walking forth, or abroad, out of the house.

Deambulatorium, an aley to walk in. it may sometime be used for a galery.

Deambulatorius, a place wherein men use to walk.

Deambulo, aui, are, to walk up and down.

Deamo, aui, are, to love or favor.

Deartuo, aui, are, to ioynte, or to cut of by the joints, to dismember.

Deauro, aui, are, to gylte, to lay over al with gold.

Debacchor, aris, ari. to rage, as it were in a drunkenness, to be wood angry.

Debellare, to vaynquishe,

Debeo, bui, ere, to ows.

Debilis, weak or feeble.

Debilito, Festus.
tare, to make feeble or weak.

Debitio, onis, the act of owing.

Debtor, oris, he that owes, a dettour.

Debitum, a det or duty.

Debiti iudicatus, condemned in an action of debt.

Deblatero, Non. Man
rare, to speak folyshely, to babble rebukefully.

Deebrior, aris, ari, to be drunk.

Debris, Sol. ca. 4^
a town in Aethiopia, where as be the people called Garamantes, in the which
town is a well whereof, the water in the day time is cold as yse, and in the
night is boylynge hot, the country being the hotteste part of all
Aethiopia.

Decachinor, aris, ari, to skorne.

Dechachordu^, an instrument with.x. stringes.

Decacumino, Pom. F^^
aui, are, to strike of the top.

Decalcatum, washed over with lyme.

De caltaria in carbonariam, out of the lyme kill into the cole pyt. Eras. in
chil.
A proverb, whereby is sygnified from one myschiefe to an other.

Decalogus, the book of holy scripture, containing the ten commandments.

Decaluo, to make very balde.

Decaphorus, Ci. ad At.
a lytter borne by ten men.

Decapolis, a country in Judea, beyond the river of flume Iordane,
containing.x. cities.

Decaprotiae, Aldatus (...).
general receyuours of tributes and finances, which stand always charged with
any thing that is minished or lacks.

Decapulo, aui, are, to empty pots or cups.

Decarchus, a capitayn over ten men of arms.

Decedo, cedere, to depart from a place, to minishe or appayre, to give place
to an other, to dye.

Decedamus hinc, go we hense.

Decedere de suo iure, to remytte somewhat of his right.

Decedere de suo more, T^. Liui.
to change his custom.

Decedere instituto suo, Ci. in Ve. (...).
to do other wise tha^ he was wont.

Decedere itinere, Plautus.
to turn out of the way for some purpose. Ci. in Ve.


Decedere officio, Terent. in Adel.
to do against his duty, to do no more his duty,

Decedere uia, to goo out of the way, or to give the way to an other of
courtesy.

Decedet nihil de summa, Cic. At. 1.
there shall be nothing minyshed.

Decedi, Cic. de se^^^tute.
to have place or way given. Haec enim ipsa sunt honorabilia, quae uidentur
leuia atque communia, salutari, appeti, decedi, assurgi, deduci, reduci. For
those things ar honorable, which seem to be of small effect and commune, to
be awayted on, to be sued unto, to have the way given, to be risen unto, to be
brought unto the court, and brought again home.

December, the number of ten.

December, the name of one of the twelve months.

Decemiugis, a teme of ten horses.

Decempeda, a perch or polle.x. foot long.

Decempedator, he that meteth with a polle.

December tabulae, were the old laws of the Romans fetched out of greece,
whereunto afterward were two tables added by them, which were called December
uiri.

Decemu^ri, after that the laws of the Greeks were brought unto Rome by
Spurius Posthumous, Publius Sulpitius, and Aulus Manlius, ambassadors sent
for that purpose to Athenes, than were there ten men chosen and appointed,
which of the same laws and ancient customs of the city, should make laws,
write them, and publyshe them. And their authorite was above al other, that
they might make laws, and if need were, interpret them. And where before
were but ^. tables of laws, they added unto them.ii. mo, and so al those laws
together, were called Leges duodecim rabularom, and the dignity of those men
was called Decemuiratus, Dece^uir.
and every of them (...) called Dece^uir, and their authority Dece^^iraleius.

Decendium, the spare of ten days.

Decennalis, le, of ten years.

Decenium, the space of ten years.

Decens, it is, convenient,

Decentes, Terent.
comely semely, or as it is convenient.

Decenus, Hecyra.
a, um, a (...).

Decermina, things pulled (...), in making things clean.

Decerno, creui, cernere, to decre, determyne, purpose, or discuss. Also to
contend, to try by battle.

Decernere quaestionem, to ordeyne. that an examination be made.

Decerpo, psi, pere, to pull or pluck of.

Decerto, aui, are, to contend or fight together.

Decessio, a departing from any thing.

Decet, it besemeth, it is convenient.

Decet me haec uestis, this garmente becomes me well,

Dedecet, it is inconvenient, vnsyttyng.

Decido, di, dear, to cut of. Also to decide or discuss a matter in variaunce.

Decido, ere, to fall of, or away.

Decidere ab arch^et^ypo, to vary from the copy or pattern.

Decidere a spe, to be disappoynted of that, that he looked for.

Decidit fructus, he lost all the profit that should come of it.

Decidua, are those things that fall away, as leaves of trees.

Decidus, a, um, subject to falling. Sometime it signifies hangyng down.
Testes pecori armentoque ad crura decidui: The stones of sheep and ruddar
bestes ben hanging down to their shankes. In the first sygnification, Omnibus
caua cornua and in mucronem demum concreta sunt, Plin. 11.
cernis tantum solida, and omnibus annis decidua: Al have their horns holowe,
but being sharp at the ends, there be they concrete or without holownes,
only decre have horns full and massy, which every year do fall of or to
speak it more properlye, which heads every year they do cast.

Decies, ten times. Leonardus Portius, in his book De sestertio, writes, that
he had observed, that where Decies and other aduerbes of number, (...)
having that termination, when they were added to an other number for
multipiyenge thereof, they sygnified no^ more than they represented, as decies
centena, ten hundred. Decies millena, ten thousand. But when they were founden
by them selves to signify the quantity of a thing that followed, (...)
they were multiplied by an hundred thousand, as Decies sestertium, ten hundred
thousand sestertij. Duodecies talentum, for xii. hundred thousand Talenta. Of
the first he brings examples of Martianus Capella, Macrobius, Plinius, Varro,
and Columella: Of the second he brings out of Tacitus, Tranquillus,
Plinius, and Ciceto in secunda Philippica Afterward he supposes, that in the
old time, when the said numbers were multiplied with an hundred thousand,
they did than put an, N, between the^e, and the, s. as Deciens, duodecie^s,
milliens, and to the proof thereof he brings in Varro de analogia, and
Pedianus in secundam actionem Ciceronis in Verrem. Concerning the computation
of Decies Sesterium, the same is affyrmed by Budeum, and the reuerente father
Cuthbertus Tonstallus, at the writing hereof most worthy bushop of Durham,
in his book De supputatione.

Decima, a tenthe part.

Decimanus, sieve Decumanus, a, um, great, as, Decumana porta, the great yate or
entry into a camp of an army.

Decimo, aui, are, to take away the tenth part from the resydue.

Decimari legiones, was when the tenth person of every legion was put to death.

Decimus, a, um, the tenthe, the chief or principal, as, Decimum quodque
ouum, every tenth egg.

Decimus quisque fluctus, every tenthe river.

Decipio, cepi, cipere, to Deceive.

Decipula, a gyn or trap to take birds.

Decircino, aui, are, to vnbowe, or to bring out of compass, or roundnes.

Decius, the name of a noble house of the Romans.

Declamatio, onis, an exercise in feigned orations, or among our lawiars a
moote.

Declamatorius, a, um, perteynynge to such exercise.

Declamo, aui, are, to declame or exercise in pleadynge feigned arguments,
which among the lawyars of this realm is called mootynge.

Declaro, aui, are, to declare, to open a thing which is dark.

Declino, aui, are, to eschew, to leave, to turn away, to lead away, to
alienate.

Decliuis, Plinius.
ue, that which is ready to fall.

Decliuis aetate, Varro.
fallen in age.

Decoctor, oris, he that has wasted all his substance, and is brought to
extreme poverty, specially by lechery and discplayinge.

Decollo, aui, are, to stryke of a headde by the neck. Also to fayl, to
deceive or disappoint.

Vna est, Plautus.
quae decollauit, One woman there is, which has deceived him.

Decolor, oris, ill colored.

Decoloro, aui, are, to stayne, to spyl the color.

Decolorus, a, um, lacking color, or ill colored.

Decoloratus, a, um, idem.

Decoquo, coxi, coquere, to boil, or to sethe very much. Sometime to change,
or digest perfectely. Also to consume or waste a man's substance, or to bring
detriment or loss.

Decoxit domino suo foetura, the increase of cattle came to little advantage
unto his master.

Decor, decoris, the grace that one has, that what he does or speaks,
becomes him well.

Decore, honestly.

Decoro, aui, are, to beautify or make fair or pleasant to the eyes or ears.

Decoro, aui, are, penultima correpta, to do honor to a man. as, Magnum
principem decorat sapientia: wisdom does much honor unto a great prince.

Decorum, a semelynesse, or that which becomes the person, having regard to
his nature, degree, study, office, or profession, be it in doing or speaking,
a grace. sometime it signifies honesty.

Decorus, a, um, honest, semely, fair.

Decortico, aui, are, to bark a tree.

Decotes, thredebare garments, or garments worn to the vttermoste.

Decrepitus, a very old man.

Decrepita senectus, extreme age.

Decresco, scere, to wax less.

Decretorius, a, um, judicial. Also decreed, stablyshed.

Deretorij dies, days in the which physicians may perceive the importance
of a syckenes by certain tokens in the paciente, which be also called Dies
craetici.

Decretorium tempus, Decretorium sydus, whereby judgment is given of the
increase that shall succeed of any thing.

Decretum, a decre, a thing determined.

Decubo, aui, are, to lie down.

Decubo, cubui, cumbere, to lie down. Also to dye.

Deculto, aui, are, to hyde under.

Decumanus, a general receyuour or collectour of taxes or subsidies, or other
like exactions.

Decumbo, bear, to lie down.

Decuplatus, a, um, ten times doubled, or ten fold.

Decuplo, aui, are, to double.x. times. If it be an aduerbe, it signifies ten
times, or ten fold. Decuplum, like wise.

Decuppa, he or she that sells wine by the pot

Decuriatio, making of knights or capitains.

Decures, old writars used for Decuriones.

Decurio, ouis, an office or dignity, hauyuge authority either over ten men
of arms, Cicero. in Pasonem.
or the tenthe part of a company. Also it was taken for the lord
Chamberlayne to the emperor. also they were in other cites the same that
Senators were at Rome. Sueto. in Demit.


Decuria, was the order, office, or company, which was under the office of
Decurio. Also the company of iuges, as we have of the kings benche, commune
place, and Escheker, and Decurio, he that is chief of them.

Decurro, cucurri, currere, to run down. by translation it signifies to run
from the one end to the other: to just.

Decursio, Ti. Liuius. de bell. Ma (...). 10.
iustes, as at the tilte or randon.

Decursionem indicere, to proclayme iustes.

Decursorium, a tournayeng of many together in form of battle. Suetonius in
Neron.


Decurtatus, a, um, shortened, abbreuiated.

Decus, decoris, honor.

Decussatim, in ten parts, or in even portions cut.

Decusis, ten hole parts or ten Asses. Also pieces equally cut, more over
the diuysions of timber sawen in equal parts. It is also a form in any
thing representyng the letter, X, which parted in the middel, makes an other
figure called Quincunx, V.

Decusso, aui, are, to cut or draw out in length, or to cut or divide in ten
parts.

Decutio, cussi, cutere, to strike of.

Dedecet, it is not honest or convenient.

Dedecoro, aui, are, to dishonor, dyshoneste, reprove, or defyle.

Dedecus, coris, dishonor, dishonesty, reproach

Dedico, aui, are, to dedicate, or tell a message.

Deditio, a rendrynge up of a place besieged.

Dedignatio, disdain.

Dedignor, aris, ari, to disdain.

Dedisco, didici, dicere, to vnlerne or forget.

Dedititius, a, um, recreante, or he that yeldeth him self.

Deditus, a, um, given, rendered.

Dedita opera, by his own consent, of his free will, purposely.

Dedo, didi, dedere, to give utterly or for ever, or to become subject, to
render up, to yield him self to an other in battle.

Deditionem facere, signifies the same.

Dedere aliquem morti, to slay.

Dedoceo, cui, cere, to teach a man otherwise than he has before learned.

Dedoleo, lui, lere, to cesse from sorrow or peyue.

Dedolo, aui, are, to hew or cut like a carpe^ter.

Deduco, xi, cere, to bring down, or to lead or draw, or bring from one
place, or one thing to an other. Sometime to move from his purpose. sometime to
bring home honorably from any place. Also to abate of a sum.

Deducere riuos, to turn the river.

Deducere uocem, to speak small.

Deducta eo res est, the thing is come to that point.

Deerro, aui, are, to go out of the right way, or reason.

Defaecatus, a, um, fined or clean from the lies or dregs, as wine, which
is not troubled

Defaecatus animus, a clean and uncorrupted mind.

Defaeco, aui, are, to draw from the dregs, or to let wine lie until it be
fine.

Defalco, aui, are, to cut of, take away, or mynishe, which now may be said
defalcate.

Defamo, aui, are, to defame.

Defatigatio, werynesse.

Defatigo, gare, to make one werye, or to fatigate.

Defectio, where a country, fortress, or army does forsake their lord or
captain, and takes the contrary part. also lack or default.

Defector, toris, he that so departs or rebelleth, or goes from one to an
other.

Defectus, a, um, that which lacks any thing.

Defectus, tus, lack, rebellion, or departing against covenant or promise.

Defectus solis and lunae, the eclyps of the sun and the moon.

Defectus animi, sownynge or lyenge in a trance.

Defecta corpora, bodies consumed with syckenesse.

Defendo, di, dear, to defend, to put of, to prohibit.

Defensito, aui, are, to defend often.

Deferro, detuli, defer, to bring to, to dysclose, to accuse, or appeal, to
bestow, to give office or dignity, to attribute.

Defer ad aliquem, to report unto one.

Defer alique^ furti, to appech one of felony.

Defer mandata, uel postulata, to do a message.

Defer nomen, to complain.

Defer primas, to give place or pr^emine^^^ to one.

Deferunt de me apud uos, Cicero de lege agra
they report of me falsely unto you.

Deferueo, ferui, ere, to be cold or paciente.

Deferuesco, sci, scere, to wax pacient or cold, to appease him self, or with
draw his fury.

Defetiscor, sci, Priscianus
to be weary.

Defessus sum, idem.

Deficio, feci, ficere, not to suffice, to lack, to leave, to disagre, to
rebel, or depart from him, with whom he is retained, or goethe from one
captain to an other, to reuoite. Also to forsake or fail. Cicero.
Prudentia nunquam deficit oratorem. Prudence never fails an orator. Quem
sanguis uiresque deficiunt: Whom blood and strength fails. Caesar.
Ab co defecerat, he went from him to his ennemy.

Defigo, fixi, figere, to drive in a nail or other thing.

Defigere all quem colaphis, Plautus in persa.
to give oone a cuffe on the ear, or to beat oone with the hands.

Defigere curas, to set al care on any thing Defigere in animis, to make it
cleave in men's minds.

Defigere in oculis populi, to make all the world look on it.

Defigere oculos, to look desyrousely on a thing.

Defigi diris precationibus, to be accursed.

Defixerat pauor cum admiratione, fear and wonder struck them to the hearts.

Defixa radicibus, styckyng hard to the rotes.

Definio, iui, ire, to defyne, determyne, or dyscusse.

Definite, expressly, shortly, or at few words.

Definite and distinct, particularly and specially.

Definitio, onis, a defynition, which expresses in few words, what it is
that is spoken of as, Homo est animal rationale, mortale: a man is a thing
lively, reasonable, and mortal.

Definitum est, it is concluded.

Defioculus, he that lacks sight in one eye.

Defit, there lacks.

Deflacco, aui, are, to wear out.

Deflagro, aui, are, to burn excedyngely, or to be burned.

Deflecto, xi, tere, to bow down.

Deflectere ex itinere, to turn out of the way.

De recto deflectere, to go out of the right way.

Deflexit de uia consuetudo, the custom is changed or turned.

Deflectemus in Thuscos, let us turn our way to the Tuscanes.

Defleo, eui, ere, to wayle or lament, to besory.

Defloccatus, Plaut. in Epidic.
worn for age. sometime passed the flower of youth.

Defloreo, and Defloresco, ere, to fade, or to fall away as flowers do, or to
lose beaulty. some time it signifies to burgen or flower.

Defluo, xi, ere, to flow downewarde, to fall of or away, or come to nothing.

Defluus, a, um, that which flows or falls away from any thing.

Defluuium, Defluxus, the falling of the hear.

Defodio, di, dear, to bury or hyde a thing in the ground, to dyg down, or
in to the earth.

Defoetus, a, um, destitute.

Defore, never to be here after.

Deformis, me, foul, deformed.

Deformo, aui, are, to destroy or wast, to make in picture the form of a
thing.

Deformare areas, to set out quarters in a garden.

Defraudo, aui, are, to begyle, to mynisshe or take away the profit of an
other.

Defrico, aui, are, to rub much, or to rub of.

Defrigo, xi, gere, to fry much.

Defringo, xi, re, to break down or cut down.

Defrugo, aui, are, to wear out laud, or make ground barrayne by any means.

Defruor, frui, to take the fruit of any thing.

Defrutare, to boil new wine.

Defrutum, new wine boiled until the oone half thereof be consumed.

Defugeo, gi, ere, to refuse.

Defunctorie, Vlpian.
remysly, lightly, without study, diligence or care.

Defunctus, a, um, dead.

Defuncta morbis corpora, Liuins.
bodies recovered from sickness or diseases.

Defunctus fato, Idem.
escaped his destiny.

Defundo, fudi, dear, to power down.

Defungor, geris, to use no lengar, to leave or resygne, to perform, to
escape. Also to be discharged properly of an office or commandemente.

Defungi in hac re, Terent. in Phorm.
to be out of this business, to be discharged of this matter.

Defungi regis imperio, to do the kings commandment.

Defunctus iam sum, I have now done my duetye.

Degener, is, he that in his manners is unlike to his ancestors, or base of
lygnage.

Degenero, aui, are, to be unlike to his ancestors in manners. It may be
said of fruytes, which wax wild.

Degero, Plaut. in Aulul.
gessi, gerere, to carye away, and waste.

Degerere laborem alicui, to ease one of his labor.

Deglabro, aui, are, to pluck of hears.

Deglubo, by, bear, to pull of the rynd, or other like thing, to blauncue.

Deglutino, aui, are, to louse that which kleueth fast, or is glewed.

Dego, gi, gere, to dwell in a place, to bring to an end.

Degere aetatem, to live.

Degere uitam, idem.

Degere tempus, to pass the time.

Degrummor, Lucill^^.
ari, to direct, to lay by line.

Degulo, Affra^^
aui, are, to consume in gloteny.

Degummo, Pom. Fe^
mi, mere, idem quod Degustare, to taste.

Dehinc, from henseforthe, more over.

Dehisco, sci, scere, to gape, or open by it self, or kleue as a tree does.

Dehiscit fios, the flower spredeth.

Dehonestamentum, a disfigurynge, or dishonestie.

Dehon esto, aui, are, to dishoneste.

Dehonestus, a, um, dishoneste.

Dehorroi, tari, to dyscourage, to exhort to the contrary.

Deianira, the wife of Hercules.

Deidamia, the concubine of Achilles, on whom he begat Pirrhus.

Deiectus, ^xe. pro ^^cina.
and Deiectio, a casting out of possession, or a disseison.

Deiectio alui, a siege caused by medicine.

Deiectus arborum, falling of trees.

Deiectus gemmae uel collis, the imbosment of a stone or tree.

Deierator, toris, a great swearer.

Deiero, aui, are, to swear depely, or a great oath.

Dencio, ieci, ijcere, to throw down, to cast down, to turn away, to put
out of office. Clad At. (...) 16.
Also to disease or put out a man of his possessyon.

Deijcere aluum, to go to the stool.

Deijcere de gradu, to bring out of a constante mind. Also it signifies to
put out of his place, to depryue of dignytie or autorite. Deijcere de
possessione, to put out of possessyon.

Deijcere de sententia, to make one change his opinion.

Dein, moreover, furthermore.

Deinceps, one after an other, in order, from henseforthe, or thensforth,
afterward.

Deinsuper, upward

Deintegro, eftsoon.

Deiphile, the mother of Diomedes.

Deiphoebus, the name of a son of Priamus and Hecuba.

Deiugo, aui, are, to unyoke, to vnioyne, to disseuer.

Deiungo, xi, gere, to vnioyne.

Deiurium, a great and solemn oath.

Deiuro, to swear depely.

Deiurus, he that swears solemnly.

Delabor, delabi, to be let down, to fall down of a high place, to be wasted,
consumed, or come to naught, to decay.

Delacero, are, to tear in pieces.

Delachrimo, idem quod delacrimor.

Delachrimor, aris, ari, to weep or send out dropes like tears.

De lana caprina. A proverb where men do contend for a trifle, as who says,
whether a got bears wull or hear.

Delanio, aui, are, to cut in pieces.

Delapidata, pauementes.

De lapide emptus, A proverb signifieng a person of most vile condition, like
as slaves boughte standing on a stone in the market place, were most vile.

Delasso, aui, are, to make weary.

Delatio, an accusation secretly made, or a secret complaynte.

Delator, oris, a secret accusat, a complayner.

Delauo, uare, to wash mightily.

Delebile, that which may be put out, or put away.

Delectamentum, pastyme, solace.

Delectatio, delectation in the senses of hering saying, taste, and smelling.

Delecto, aui, are, to delight, to lead, to allure to a thing.

Delector, aris, ari, to take delectation or pleasure.

Delectus rerum, choice or election of things also of men apt for the war.

Delectum habere, sometime signifies to take musters for the wars.

Delego, aui, are, to assign to some office, message, or other necessary and
great busynesto commit a cause or matter to be determined, to send in
ambassade or message.

Deleneo, niui, nire, to pacify, appayse, or set in quiet.

Deleo, leui, ere, to distroye, to put out any thing that is written, to
remove, or put away.

Deleterion, venom.

Deletile, that distroyeth or puts out.

Deliacus, a, um, of the isle of Delus.

Delibatio, tastynge, or the taking of assay. It is also sacrifyce of meat or
drink.

Delibatorium, a place apt for such sacrifyce.

Deliberabundus, he that advises him, or asks counsale in every thing.

Deliberatio, aduisement, or consultation.

Deliberator, he that takes leysour to be advised what he shall do or say.

Deliber^^ ^^ratio, wherein any thing is consulted.

Delibero, (...) to be aduysed, to take advise, to (...) to doubt, to consulte.

Delibo, aui, ari, to taste a thing. sometime to violate, ^^urte, to distroy,
or corrupt, to sacrifice, to ^^aine water by forowes, to take away by little
and little.

Delibare de gloria alterius, to minish or take away some portion of an other
man's praise or honor.

Delibro, aui, are, to pull of the bark or rind of a tree.

Delibutus, a, um, oynted.

Gaudio delibutus, Gellius.
replenished with joy.

Delibutus periurns, Salust.
stained or defiled with perjury.

Delicate, wantonly.

Delicatus, a, um, delicate wantonly brought up.

Delicia, Festus.
the timber which makes the end of a house above, called a gable.

Deliciares regulae, the tyles at the gable end

Delici porci, Varro.
young suckynge pigs.

Delicium, cij, and Deliciae, arum, delyces, recreations, pastymes, pleasant
fantasies, generally all thing, wherein one takes syngular pleasure or delight.
sometime it is taken in a good part, sometime in a bad. And when it is spoken
by one, of any person whom he specially loves or favors, it may be
interpreted in this wise: Meum delicium, or meae deliciae, my derlynge, my
sweet heart, and such other like elegancies of Venus secretaries. And when it
is spoken of a thing, than in this wise: Quid agit Comum, tuae meaeque
deliciae? How is it with Comum our most pleasant and dilectable place of
resort?

Deliciarum causa, for pastime or recreation.

Delicias, facere, to be wanton, to be squaymysshe, to play the cockney.

Delico, aui, are, to explane.

Delictum, an offense when a thing is undone, omission.

Deligo, legi, ligere, to chose or pick out.

Delimo, aui, are, to fyle or shave of from any metal.

Delingo, xi, gere, to lycke of.

Delinimentum, delectation, an allectyue, or sweetness in feeling.

Delinio, iui, ire, to annoint, to rub pleasantly, to touch.

Deliniare, to draw as a paynter doethe, er he do lay on colors.

Delinitus, touched swetely, anointed, pacified, appeased.

Dilinquo, liqui, linquere, to omyt to do well, to offend.

Deliquium, lack.

Deliquium animi, wha^ a man is in a swoun.

Deliquium solis, the eclips of the son.

Delirans, dotynge.

Deliratio, Cicero.
dotage, folly.

Deliramentum, idem.

Deliro, aui, are, to go out of the right way, properly to go out of the
forowe, and make a baike, as pioughmendo. Also to dote.

Delirus, he that swarueth from reason, a dotarde or dotynge fool.

Deliteo, tui, ere, to lie hyd.

Delitesco, idem.

Delitum, blotted.

Delius, a, um, of the isle called Delus.

Delius natator, was one perfect in swimmynge, which became a proverb, that
wha^ a thing was spoken or written, hard to be understand, and required a
cunning expositout, than would they say, Delio natatore eget It requires a
counynge or subtylle exposytour.

Delos, an isle by Greece, where Apollo and Diana were borne, and is one of the
yles called Cyclades.

Delphi, a city and people in Greece.

Delphicus, a, um, of that city.

Delphicum oraculum, the answer made at the temple of Apollo in Delphos.

Delphinus, a greatte fyshe of the sea called a Dolphin, whose mouth is almost
at his bealy, or else no fyshe might escape him, he is so swyfte in
swymminge, but he can not take any fyshe but lyinge vprighte, his tungue is
moveable and apt for voice, contrary to other fyshes, and has a camoysed
nose, and a compased back. He delyteth in musyke.

There has been known to love children, and received them to ride on their
backs by the space of.xxx. miles in the sea, which have been beholden of much
people. who that reads Plinium and Appianum in uaria historia shall find of
this fish things to be wondered at.

Delphos, a city in the country called Phocis, on a mountain in Greece
called Parnassus, there was the great and famous temple of Apollo called
Delphicus, where the devil gave aunsweres by women, which there served for the
purpose.

Delta, is the letter D, in greek. It also signifies the number of four, as
in latin letters it signifies five hundred. Also at Memphis the most famous
city of Egypt, the river called Nilus makes a place in the furme of this
letter, which is this (...) wherefore that place was called Delta.

Delubrum, a place wherein be diverse images of god and saynctes.

Deludificor, cari, to begyle.

Deludo, si, ere, to mock, to deceive, to abuse.

Delumbis, be, weak. sometime wanton.

Delumbatae radices, roots nypped of, or broken, to the intent that they shall
wax greater

Delumbo, bare, to debilitate, or make feeble, or of no strength.

Deluo, lui, ere, to wash clean, or wash out.

Delutamentum, clayenge.

Deluto, aui, are, to lay claye on any thing.

Demades, a great orator in Athenes, who in sudden orations without any
study, excelled Demosthenes, in so much as Plutarch writes, that when
Demosthenes was constrained to speak unto the people unprovided, who being
tymorous sometime stayed in the myddell of his oration, Demades would arise out
of his place, and fynishe that oration, which Demosthenes had begun, wherein
appeared the diversities of wyts, which now adays is also perceived. But Demades
was of so corrupt manners, that Antipater was wont to say of him, when he was
old and decrepite, that he was like to beasts, which were offered in
sacrifyce, of whom nothing remained but their tungues and bealyes. finally the
end of his auaryce, prodygalitie, flattery, and falsehoode was this He with
his son called Demea, coming under color of frendshyp into Macedonye, where
in deed he had secretly conspired with Antigonus, ennemy to Antipater king of
that country, he and his son were taken by Cassander, chief capytain of
Antipaters army, and first his son Demea was slain in his arms, that the
blood sprange into the fathers face, and than him self after many reproaches
touching his treason and unkindness, was also cruelly killed.

Demagis, much more.

Demando, aui, are, to commytte any thing to one for to do.

Demarchus, a ruler of the people.

Demeauculum, a place to descend into, a cellar.

Demeare, to go down, or go away.

Demens, mad, he that regards not what he does.

Demensum, Terent. in Phorm.
a certain quantite of meat, drink, or grayn, given to every servant, to find
him one month. it is also a measure conteynyng four Romaye bushels. Plaut. in
Men.


Demensus, a, um, measurerd.

Dementer, madly, foolyshly, unadvisedly.

Dementia, madness.

Dementio, tiui, ire, to be mad.

Demento, aui, are, to be mad, to make mad, to make foolyshe.

Demereo, rui, ere, to win or get.

Demereor, eris, reri, to bind by frendshyp, to win ones favor, to make a
friend, to deserve thank.

Demergo, si, gere, to drown a thing, or deep it in water or other lycour.

Demergere semen, to cast sede i^to the ground

Demersus, a, um, drowned.

Demersus aere alieno, deep indetted, or in great debt.

Demersae leges opibus, laws subdued with money, or laws laid in water for
money.

Demeter, the name of Ceres.

Demetio, to mete dyligently, to esteem.

Demetior, idem.

Demeto, tii, tere, to repe. sometime to gather.

Demetrias, a town of Thessaly.

Demetrius, was a proper name of diverse Greeks, of whom two were excellent,
the oone a king of Macedonye, the other was a noble oratoure surnamed
Phalareus. The king Demetrius was son of Antigonus king of Macedonye, where
he alsoo raygned: He was of a goddlye stature, and of so excellent favor and
beaultie, that no paynter or karuer might truly counterfaite him. for it
seemed, that there were in his vysage both terriblenes and mercy, gravity and
gentylnes, wherewith was joined a princely majesty. He was in time of
recreation of all kings most pleasant, when great affairs were in hand, he
surmounted al other in study, dilygence, and greatness of wit. He had his father
and mother in wonderful reverence exceeding all men. Not withstanding he was
noted much of incontinence. he was full of prowess and valiant, and
delivered Greece from Ptholomees tyranny, and vanquished him on the sea, he
also subdued Athenes, and all the countreye of Boeotia, with the city of
Thebes, he had war at one time with Ptholomeus king of Egypt, Lysimachus
king of Asia, and Seleuchus king of Syria, and Pyrrhus King of Epyrus, and
oftentimes vanquyshed their armies, but in conclusyon he being vanquyshed by
Seleucus, was by him committed to an honorable prison, that is to say, kept
in a town of Syria, called Cheronesus, where he had appointed unto him fair
palayces, pleasant orchardes and gardeynes, and had the company of such as he
lysted, where, with ydelnesse and excess of voluptuous pleasures, he fell
sick and dyed, wham he was of the age of.lxiiii. years.

Demetrius Phalareus, was a noble philosopher and orator, disciple to
Theophrastus, of whom Tully writes in his first book of offices, saying, that
he was a subtle disputer, but no vehement orator, yet was he sweet and
dilectable. he for his excellent virtues was governor of the Athenie^ses ten
years. And because he had greatly enryched the city of Athenes in yearly
revenues, and adorned it with commodious buylding, the people in the honor of
him did set up.CCC. and.lx. of his images made in metal. But afterward he
being absent, by the means of certain envious persons, the people condemned
him to dye, and also pullyd down his images, and sum they did break, and
some sold, only oone was kept hole in the castle, whereof herynge Demetrius,
he said: yet have they not plucked down virtue, for the which they did set
up those images. This man caused Ptholomeus the king of Egypt to make his
great libratye, and to send to the Jews to have their laws and prophesyes
translated into greek, who sent unto him of every trybe, twelve great learned
men, who did accomplish his desire, and are called Septuaginta
interpretes, all though there were of them. lxxiiii. persons. This manne
lived before the incarnation of Christ.277. years.

Demigro, aui, are, to change habytations or lodgings, to remove from one
place to annother.

Demigrare ab improbis, to forsake unthrifty or ill company.

Demigrare de statu, to change the fascion or form of living.

Demigrare de uita, to dye, to deceasse.

Deminuo, nuere, to mynyshe or make less.

Demiror, aris, ari, to marvel much. sometime it signifies to know not.

Demisse, aduerb. with great humility.

Demissae aures, hangyng ears.

Demissi homines, men fallen from richesse to poverty. Cice. pro murena.


Demissio, abashement, lack of courage, falsnes of heart.

Demissitia tunica, a long cote.

Demissa loca, low grounds.

Demissa toga, a long gown.

Demisso capite, the head hangyng downward

Demissis labijs, having babberlyppes, baberlypped.

Demissis humeris uirgo, a maiden having low shulders.

Demissus, a, um, humble.

Demitto, Vergilius georg. 2.
misi, tere, to send down, to humble my self, to lay down. also to dygge.

Demittere equum in flumen, to make his horse to leap into the river.

Demittere in pectus, to set at his heart, to keep in remembrance.

Demittere animum, to abate courage, to lose courage.

Demiurgus, an offycer or magystrate among the people, which purposed to them
al things, whereupon they should treat, as the speaker of the parlyament among
us.

Demo, mere, to take away or abate.

Demere fidem fabulis, to make that me^ shall not believe tales.

Demere soleas alicui, to pull of ones shoes.

Demere ungues, Plaut. in Aulul.
to pare ones nails.

De capite demptum, appayred in substance or valewe.

Democratia, Tit. Liui.
a form of a common wealth, where the people have authority without any
other state.

Democraticus, he that favors the commonwelth, where the people have
authority.

Democritus, an excellent philosopher, who being a child, lernyd of certain
wise men of Chaldea astronomy, and their divinity, after ward he went into
Perse to learn geometry, and than into Chaldea, to know dyuine mysteries,
long after he returned to Athenes, where he gave his possessions and richesse
innumerable unto the weal pulyk, reserving a little gardeyne, wherein he
might at more liberty, search out the secrets of nature. He wrate many
wonderful warkes in natural phylosophye and physycke. Also when he beheld
the City of Athenes, he contynually laughed at the foolysshe diligence of
them. which spared for no peynes to get authority and riches, which they
were not sure to keep, other which labored to get their chylderne great
possessions, who either dyed before the fathers, or else ouerliuing their
fathers, shortly spent ali that their fathers left unto them. But the
Athenienses, not perceiuyng the cause of his laughter, thinking him to be
mad, caused Hippocrates the phisytion to go unto him. Who perceiuyng the
occasion of his laughter, said, Democritus is not mad, but the Athenienses
be mad, at whom he does laughe. He was before the incarnation of Christ.
492. years.

Demodocus, the name of an harper, of whom Homer makes mention.

Demogorgon, was an enchaunter, which was supposed to be of such excellencye,
that he had authority over all spirits, that made men aferde.

Demolior, iri, to throw down any thing that is builded.

Demolio, idem quod demolior.

Demoliri culpam, Plaut. in Bacch.
to dyscharge him of the fault or blame.

Demolitio, a subuertion or beatynge down of a thing.

Demonstratio, onis, a showing.

Demonstratiuus, a, um, that shows, or is showed, or mete to be showed.

Demonstratiuum genus, a form of speaking, wherein orators did either
commend or dysprayse any man openly.

Demonstro, aui, are, to show openly.

Demophon, the son of Theseus and Phedra king of Athenes.

Demorior, iri, to dye utterly.

Demoror, aris, to tarry long, to keep back, or cause to tarry.

Demosthenes, was the most excellent orator of the Greeks, and was first a
dyscyple of Plato, but after he followed Ebulides an orator, and vsyd such
wonderfulle diligence and labor to attain to the perfection of eloquence,
that where he had an impedymente in his pronuncyation, he by putting small
stoones into his mouth, and inforcynge him to speak treatably, He at the
last attained to most perfect form of speaking. Of his wisdom
remains among other this praty exaumple. When king Philyp, the father of
great Alexander besieged Athenes, and sore distressed it, upon certain
treatises offered by them, he required to have delivered unto him ten orators,
of the which Demosthenes was one, and than would he raise up his siege. That
herynge Demosthenes, and coming into the common counsel, he rehearsed this
fable. On a time the wolves exhorted the shepherdes to be in league with them,
whereunto the shepeherdes accorded, than the wolves required to have delivered
unto them their mastiues, which were the cause of debate between them, the
shepeherdes thereunto granted, and delivered to the wolfes their dogs, the
most vigilant kepers of their flocks, afterward the wolves being without any
fear, not only did eat now and than a sheep, to alay their hunger, but also
for their pleasure did tear and rent other in pieces. In likewise said
Demosthenes, king Philyp, after that he has taken from you your orators,
which by their wise aduertisementes have hitherto preserved you from his
tyranny, he will do the semblable. Which the Athenienses herynge, they agreed to
his counsel, and valyauntly defended and preserved the city. This man was
before the incarnation of Christ.345. years.

Demotus, put abacke.

Demoueo, uere, to remove.

Demoueri gradu, to be driven back, to be constrained to recule.

Demptus, ta, tum, put out.

Demulceo, cere, to stryke gentylly and softely with the hand, as we do to
children or hounds, when we make much of them.

Demum, at the last. sometime it signifies only, or always, finally.

Demussata contumelia, dysplesure done by dissymulation.

Demuto, tare, to change his manner or facion.

Denaria, To^stallus.
the number of.xxxix. M. of the coin called Denarij.

Denarius, in weight is the seventh part of an ounce: In coin it was as much
in poyse and valuation as our grote, which wayeth of our money now
current.vi.d. ob. and the vii. part of an half penny.

Denarius, a, um, that which conteyneth the number of ten.

Denarro, aui, are, to tell in order.

Denascor, denasci, to cease to be, to dye.

Denaso, to cut or pull of the nose.

Denato, aui, are, to swymme down.

Denego, aui, are, not to give, or to deny to give.

Deni, ten together. Vxores habent deni duodenique inter se communes, Cas. li.
5.
Ten or twelve to gither have wives in common among them.

Denigro, aui, are, to make black.

Denique, in conclusyon, finally.

Denominatio, the namynge of a thing.

Denomino, aui, are to name.

Denormo, are, to set out of rule, or order.

Denoto, aui, are, to blame.

Dens, dentis, a toothe. also every thing, wherewith an other thing may be
holden fast.

Dens arator, the coulter of a plough.

Dense, an aduerbe, sygnifieth thycke or close together, as when many be
assemblyd in a little room.

Densitas, tatis, and densitudo, dinis, thyknes.

Denso, aui, are, to thycken or make thycke.

Densus, a, um, thycke, hard, closed together, compact, plentuouse.

Dentale, the share of a plough.

Dentatim, in order like teethe.

Dentatus, he that has great tethe, strong tethe or many teethe.

Denticulare, to thruste in his teethe.

Denticulus, a, um, dentatus, a, um, dentosus, a, um, toothed.

Denticulatae falces, syckles.

Denticulatus, he that has little teethe.

Dentifrangibilium, a thing wherewith teethe are broken.

Dentifricium, a medicine wherewith the teethe be rubbed, to make them white.

Dentiloquus, he that speaks between the tethe or lyspeth.

Dentio, ire, to put forth tethe, or breed tethe.

Dentiscalpium, an instrument, wherewith tethe be scraped.

Dentirio, onis, a putting forth or growing of teethe.

Denubo, psi, bear, to marye, or wed on the woman's part.

Denudo, aui, are, to dyspoyle or make naked.

Denumero, rare, to pay money.

Denunciatio, menassynge.

Denunciatio testimonij, Caesar.
an iniunction to appiere.

Deuncio, aui, are, to show or tell a thing to an other man, or denounce.
also Denunciare testimonium, to bring wytnes into the court of judgment, as
they do in the Chauncerye, where witnesses are compellyd to come.

Denuntiauit ut adesset, he summonyd him to appiere.

Denuntiare inimicitias, to declare him to be his ennemy.

Denuntiare bellum, to proffer war or battle.

Denuo, again, eftesoones.

Denus, a, um, the tenthe.

Deocco, care, to harrowe land, or break it with rollers.

Deonero, rare, to dyscharge or dysburdeyn.

Deoratus, desired, hartyly prayed.

Deoro, aui, are, to desire heartily. Among out lawyers is to plete or to
conclude in pledyng.

Deorsum, downewarde.

Sursum deorsum, up and down, hither and thither.

Deorsum uersum, down right.

Depaciscor, sci, to make covenant, to agree upon certain couena^tes, to
promise, or to patise

Depactus, a, um, couenanted or patised.

Depactus est cum hostibus, he patised with the enemies.

Depalmo, aui, are, to buffette.

Depango, xi, gere, to plant or set.

Depasco, paui, pascere, to eat as a beast does, to feed beasts in pasture.

Depasce possessionem alienam, to feed his cattle on an other man's pasture.

Depascor, idem.

Depastus, ta, tum, eaten with beasts.

Depastio, feeding of cattle.

Depaupero, rare, to impouerysh or make poor

Depecto, xui, uel xi, tere, to kembe diligently.

Depectus, uel depexus, a, um, kempt, trimmed

Depeculor, aris, ari, to rob a common weal, a prince, or a place hallowed.

Depeculator, a robber.

Depello, puli, pellere, to put down, put away, or remove, to put aside.

Depelli portenta, wha^ monstrous or strange things do happen, betokenyng some
ill adventure, to happen, to repeal it by prayers, auowes, or other good deeds.

Depulsio, idem quod propulsio.

Depulsus, put down.

Dependeo, ere, to hang down of a thing, to depend.

Dependo, di, dear, to pay.

Dependere opera^, to take peyn about a thing

Dependere poenas, to be punysshed, to suffer peynes.

Deperdo, ere, to lose.

Deperio, ij, ire, to peryshe, to dye, to love inordinately, to be lost.

Depesco, scui, scere, to drive cattle.

Depessus, rent, torn.

Depexus, well trymmed.

Ego ne si uiuo adeo exornatum dabo, adeo depexum, ut usque dum uiuat meminerit
semper mei? Terent.
Trow ye that I will not so deck him and trymme him, that he shall think on
me, as long as he lives?

Depilis, without hear.

Depilo, aui, are, to pull of hear.

Depingo, gere, to depaynte, to describe.

Deplano, to make plain.

Deplanto, to plant, or set.

Depleo, pleui, plere, to fylle.

Deplortus, a, um, without hope of recouerye or remedy.

Amedicis deploratus, forsaken of phisitio^s.

Deploro, aui, are, to lament, to bewail.

Deplure, to rain down right.

Deplumis, me, that which has few feathers or none.

Depono, posui, nere, to lay down, to deprive or take away, to put away, to
leave.

Deponere arma, to put of his harneys.

Deponere bellum, to ceaste from wars.

Deponere exercitum, to discharge the army.

Deponere imperium, to leave the rule or governance.

Deponere inimicitias, to leave all malice.

Deponere negotium, to leave busynes.

Deponere semina, to plant.

Deponere soleas, to put of ones shoes.

Deponere onus, to discharge a bourdeyne, or charge. Deponere aliquid apud
alique^, to lay a thing in guage or pledge, or to deliver to one a thing to
keep.

Depositarius, he unto whom one has delivered a thing to keep. also to whom
any thing is laid in gauge.

Depositus, a, um, laid down, left in an another man's keeping. sometime it does
signify desperate, Ci in Ver.
or he which is in desperation. Itaque mihi uideor magnam and maxim aegram
and prope depositam reipub. partem sucepisse, Therefore me seems I have taken
in hand a great part of the weal public, not only being feeble, but also
almost i^ extreme desperatio^ Depositum substantiuum, that which is left in the
custody of one. also a guage.

Depopulatio, destruction or desolation of a country, depopulation.

Depopulor, ari, to destroy or waste a country.

Deportati, they which are exyled, having no property left in any goods or
lands, after the definition of lawiers, how be it other authors do use that
word generally for men exyled.

Deportatus, banyshed.

Deporto, aui, are, to carry or bring away, to banyshe. sometime it signifies to
report.

Deportare exercitum, to bring home again the army. Deportare triumphum, to
bring home the victory. Captiuos Romam deportare, to carry prisoners to Rome.

Deposco, poposci, poscere, to desire much or require. Deposcere omnibus
pollicitationibus, to demand or solicit with fair promyses.

Depositorius, he that leaves a thing with an other man.

Depositum, that which is left in an other ma^s keeping, or that is laid to
pledge.

Depostulare, where the inferior requires a thing of his superior.

Depraedor, ari, to rob a country or town.

Deprauatus indulgentia, marred with to much liberte. Deprauati mores, ill or
lewd co^ditio^s.

Deprauate, contrary to right or rayson.

Deprauo, aui, are, to make ill, to deprave.

Deprecatio, when we confess that we have offended.

Deprecator, he that sueth or entreats for an other man that he should not be
punyshed.

Deprecor, cari, to beseech, to refuse, to desire the contrary to put away, or
deny that which we would not have, to have in detestation, to resyst to deliver
a man by prayer.

Deprecari ueniam, to ask forgyuenes.

Deprecari alicui ne uapulet, to make a request or desire for one that he be
not beaten.

Deprecari iniuriam, to require that he will not do to him any wrong.

Deprecari auaritiae crimina, laudibus frugalitatis, To require to have oone
excusyd for his nygardeshyppe: because that his temperaunce in living is
worthy commendation.

Deprecari maleuolentiam, to excuse him of blame, for the joy that he has of
an nothers mysfortune.

Claudij inuidiam Gracchi charitas deprecabatur, Gracchus was so well beloved,
that for his sake, the fautes of Claudius were hid and not spoken of.

Deprecari munus, to excuse him in taking on him an office or charge.

Deprecari culpam to excuse him self, and desire that the fault be not laid
to him.

Deprecari periculum, to pray that he fall not into peril, or that he be in
no danger.

Deprecari mortem, to desire pardon of death, or to endeavor him to save ones
life.

Depraehendo, di, dear, to take a man unawares to know, to perceive.

Depraehensus est in sermon, he was taken in his words.

Depraehensus est in scelere, he was taken with the fault.

Depressus, a, um, low.

Deprimo, ere, to keep down, to thruste down.

Deprimere naues, to make ships to synke and be drowned.

Deprimunt me quae porto, My burdeyn makes me to stoop.

Depromo, to draw out, to declare, to fetch out

Depromere ex libris, to fetch out of books.

Depromit ex sensu suo, he fetched it from his own wit.

Depropero, Plaut. in paenu.
rare, to make much haste.

Depso, psi, psere, to wark a thing with the hands, to the intent to make it
soft, to kneade dowe, wax, or other like thing.

Depuber, depuberis, a child or young beast, which are not come to ripe
years.

Depudet, he has laid aside shame.

Depudico, aui, are, to dyshoneste or vyolate a woman.

Depugnatur, the battle was fought.

Depugnatus, a, um, well fought.

Depugno, aui, are, to fight valyantly.

Depulsio, a puttyng of, or lettynge a thing that it can not approach. Ci.
phil. 8.
Quae causa iustior est belli gerendi, quam seruitutis depulsio? What better
cause is there to fight, than that we would let, that we were not brought into
seruitudo.

Depurgo, aui, are, to cleanse any thing under foot.

Depurgare crimen, to dyscharge him of the fault which is laid unto him.

Depuro, to make clean or pure.

Deputo, aui, are, to cut of, to esteem, to judge, to repute.

Deputare rations, Terent.
to reckon or make account.

Depunio, nere, to beat.

Derado, si, dear, to shave of, or bark of.

Derbices, people in Asia, about the sea called Mare Caspium, which have this
custom, that when their friends come to the aege of lxx. years, they slay
them, and eat them, calling all their neighbors unto the feast. Old women
they slay not, but oonely do strangle them, and afterward do burye them.
Semblably, if men dye before the said age, they alsoo do burye them. They
punysshe every offense, be it never so lyttel, with death.

Dercaei, a people of Greece, in the coostes of Thrace.

Derce, a well most cold in summer.

Derelinquo, Cice. post redditum.
liqui, linquere, to forsake utterly.

De repent, suddenly.

Derelictus, ta, tum, forsaken. Pro derelicto rem aliquam habere, to forsake a
thing.

Derelictui habere, Au. Gel.
to care not for a thing, or to neglect it.

Deribitores, they which do number an army, and do pay to the soldiers their
wages.

Derideo, risi, dear, to laugh to skorne, to mock.

Deriduculum, a scorn or mock.

Deripeo, Plaut. in Men.
ripui, pere, to take away, to dispile.

Deripere aliquem capillo, to pull one down by the hear of the head.

Derisus, a, um, mocked at or had in contempt.

Derisus, us, mockery.

Derisor, a mocker.

Deriuo, aui, are, to deriuate from one to an another, to lay to one, as to lay
to a man's defaute, or charge, to take from one, and give to an other.

Derogito, Plaut. in Asin.
to make instaunt desire, to pray hartyly.

Derogo, aui, are, to mynyishe, to derogate, to take away.

Derogare fidem alicui, to put no trust in one.

Deruncinare, to cut or pulle of that which is superfluous.

Deruo, ui, ere, to fall down.

Des, a poyse of eight ounces.

Desaltare, to dance.

Desaeuio, saeui, uire, to be wod angry, sometime to cease to be angry.

Descendo, di, ere, to go down, to descend, sometime only to go.

Descendere in altum, to go deep down.

Descendere in aciem, to go into the battle.

Descendere in sese, to humble him self, or to consider in him self the baseness
of his estate.

Descendere in causam, to come in strife.

Descenditur gradibus, one goth down by steps.

Descensus, fus, a going down.

Descentio, idem.

Descio, iui, ire, to know not.

Descisco, Persius.
iui, sciscere, to disagree, to leave one, and go to an other, to rebel.

Desciscere a se, to change his form of living or fascion.

Describo, psi, ere, to write out of a copy, to order or appoint, to paynt or
write aduysedly, to declare or describe.

Descriptio, a copy, a description.

Describere pecuniam in civitates, to assesse sums of money in a tax to be
paid in sundry cities.

Describere rations, to make accomptes in an order.

Describere in genere, to dyuyde a thing into diverse kinds.

Latronem and sycarium aliquem describere, to sygnifie one by the name of
thief or murderer without rehersyng his proper name.

Descriptius, in better order.

Descriptio populi, a deuydyng of the people into diverse parts or bands in a
quarrel between two persons.

Descriptiones temporu^, the hystory of things which have happened, according
to the order of time.

Deseco, aui, are, to cut in sunder, to cut of.

Desecare prata, to mow meadows.

Desectio, a cutti^g or mowing down of straw or grass.

Desedeo, Columel. li. 6. cap. 3.
dear, to sytte down.

Desero, ui, ere, to leave or forsake.

Deserere pignus, to lose his gage.

Deserere uadimoniu^, to make defaut, where one is bound to appear before a
judge, or other great officer.

Deserto, aui, are, to forsake.

Desertor, he that leaves his country, and gothe to his enemies.

Desertus miles, a soldier which departs without license.

Deserta regio, a countray not inhabited.

Desertus ager, a fyelde out of tylthe.

Desertus, forsaken, not inheritable, where no man dwells, a desert or
wyldernes.

Deseruit me fides and fama, I have lost my credence and good name.

Deseruio, uiui, ire, to obey or serve humbly, sometime to do ill service.

Deseruire studijs, Pli. in epi.
to apply lernyng or study.

Deses, Terenti^^.
desidis, unoccupied.

Desiccare, Plautus.
to dry up.

Desideo, sedi, desidere, to sytte stylle, to abide in a place, to be ydell.

Desidia, slothfulness.

Desidiosus, a man full of ydelnesse, slothful.

Desido, sedi, ere, to sit still or contynually, to sit on a thing, to sit on a
chamber stole. It is also properly when the earth does gape or think. Terra
desedit, the ground opens or gapeth.

Designata, for praedestinata.

Designatio, a diu^^e or ordinance, an appointment.

Designator, toris, a marshall, which sets or appoynteth every man to his
place, conuenyent to his degree or office.

Designatus, assygned, ordained.

Designati Consules, Praetores, Tribuni, they which were elected and appointed
to succeed the^ which at that time exercised the said offices.

Designo, aui, are, to assign, to note or sygnify, to do a thing newly, also
to chose a thing, and appoint it for some purpose.

Desilio, lui, ere, to leap or light down.

Desinas, hold thy peace.

Desino, sii, nere, to leave, to cease.

Desinere artem, to leave the craft.

Desinit in uiolam, it draws to the color of vyolette.

Illae orationes legi sunt desirae, those oratio^s are no more radde.

Descistere conatu, to leave his enterprise.

Desistente autumno at the end of Autumn or harvest.

Desipio, pui, ere, to do folyshly, to wax folyshe.

Desisto, destiti, Terent. in Phor.
desistere, to leave of.

Desistere litibus, to leave suite.

Desita ars, a science out of use, not spoken of. Primus Papisius est uocari
desitus, He was the first which was left to be called Papisius.

Desolatus, a, u^, that is made desolate or distroyd.

Desolo, aui, are, to make desolate.

Desolor, ari, to com forte.

Despectio, onis, a dispiti^g, a loki^g downward

Despecto, aui, are, to look behynd.

Despectus, tus, regard or sight, sometime despite.

Despectus, ta, tum, despised.

Desperanter, desperately.

Desperatio, onis, despair.

Desperatus, a, um, desperate, also wherein oone has none hope.

Despero, aui, are, to despair. imperfection, corruption.

Vitium offerre uirgini, to defloure a vyrgin.

Vito, care, to eschew or beware.

Vitrearius, a glassemaker, or a glasyer.

Vitreolum, an herb growing on walls, whet with vessel being skoured, is
made wonder full bright.

Vitreus, a, um, of glass.

Vitrinus, na, number, idem.

Vitricus, a father in law, or stepfather.

Vitriolum, a diminutine of uitrum.

Vitrosus, a, um, which has plenty of glass.

Vitrum, glass.

Vitra, a fyllet or headbande.

Vitula, an he flat, or young cow.

Vitulari, to rejoice.

Vitulatio, reioycynge.

Vitulinus, a, um, of a calfe.

Vitulinae carnes, beale.

Vitulus, a calfe, not only of a cow, but also of an elyphant, and of great
fysshes. It is alsoo a fyshe called a seal.

Vituperium, a rebuke.

Vitupero, rare, to rebuke.

Vituperatio, a rebuke given.

Vituperator, he that rebukes or blamethe annother.

Vituperones, rebukers.

Viuacitas, and uiuatia, among old writers bodyly strength.

Viuacissimus, most lively or strong of nature.

Viuaciter, strongely.

Viuarium, a place, where wild beasts, birds, or fysshes be kept. It may be
called as well a ponde, as a park, a counnyngar, a walk for birds.

Viuatior, more lively.

Viuatus, and uiuidus, full of life or naturalle strength.

Viuax, uacis, lively, strong of nature.

Viuerra, a ferrette.

Viuidus, da, dum, lively, quycke.

Viuior, and uiuissimus, old writers used for more living or most living.

Viuiradix, dicis, a young vine set with the rote it is also every plant,
whereof the rote is quik though the flemme or spring be dead or corrupted.

Viuitur. Quid agitur? T. Viuitur. How is the matter? T. I live as well as I
may.

Viuo, uixi, uiuere, to live, to have a merry life.

Viuere diem, to live without any prouysyon or stoore.

Viuus, ua, uum, that which lives, also quyck, natural, strong, vehement, or
great.

Vix, vnethe, scantly, hardly. Vix dum, idem.

Vix tandem, in conclusyon.

Vix, for Non. Vix Priamus tanti, totaque Troia fuit, King Priamus and all
Troy was not so much worth.

Vix, with much a do. Si idem istuc imitamuur, ita tamen uix uiuimus. Although
we do the like, yet with much adoo we live.

V ANTE L.
VLcero, rare, to make a scabbe also to exasperate or make grefe.

Vlcerariae herbae, herbs that make blysters.

Vlciscor, sceris, sci, to avenge.

Vlcus, ceris, a hid myschiefe. It is also corrupt matter gathered within the
skin, and covered with a scabbe. It is any manner of soore where the skin is
broken.

Vlcus tangere, to rub one on the gall, to speak of a thing which is
dyspleasaunt to one for to have remembered.

Vlex, an herb like to r^semary, which draws to it gold.

Vliginosus, sa, sum, soked with long aboode of water.

Vligo, ginis, natural moisture of the earth always remaining.

Vlius, a name of Apollo.

Vllo, old writers used for ultus fuero, I shall be revenged.

Vilus, la, lum, any.

Vlmus, a tree called an elm.

Vlmeus, mea, meum, of elm.

Vlmarium, a grove of clmes.

Vlna, a fathom, also an elle.

Vlpicum, great garlyke.

Vls, of whom comes ultra.

Vlterior, ulterius, further, more beyond.

Vltimus, ma, mum, last, sometime it signifies first.

Vltima platea, at the end of the street.

Vltimis aedibus, on the back side of the house.

Vltio, vengeance.

Vltor, and ultrix, he or she that takes vengeance.

Vltra, beyond, more, moreover. sommetyme shrewdly or frowardly.

Vltro, wyllyngly, without desire or cohertion.

Vltro citroque, hither and thither, sometime it sygnifieth from one to an
other.

Vltroneus, a, um, wyllyng, with a free will.

Vlubrae, a city in Italy.

Vlula, a shryche oule.

Vlulatus, a barkynge.

Vlulo, lare, to howl as a dog or a wolf.

Vlua, teke or weedrs of the sea.

Vlysbona, a city in Portugal, called Iushbon.

Ulysses, the son of Laertes and Autholia king of the yles of Ithaca and
Dulichium, a man excelling all other greeks, which came against Troy, in
eloquence and subtiltye of wit, who after the subuercion of Troy, when he had

wandered ten years on the seas, and marches thereof, and had seen many
countrayes. Finally he returned home, and there a good space of time remained
unknown, and suffered many dysplesures of the wowars of his wife the chaste
Penclope, whom by the help of Thelemachus his son, and his swyneherdes, he at
the last slew. Not withstandyng afterward he him self was slain by Thelegonus
his bastard son, with an arrowe, not being known of the same Thelegonus.

V ANTE M.
VMbella, a little shadow. also a skryne to keep away the light of the son.

Vmber, of the country of Vmbria.

Vmbilicatim, in the facyon of a nauyll.

Vmbilicatus, ta, tum, made like a nauyll.

Vmbilicus, the mids of every thing. alsoo the nauyll. alsoo a little
cerkle made in the ground, to know which way the wind stands. Also it is
a little smothe stoone, or pyppell stone, a bose, such as is set on the
back of a book.

Ad umbilicum adducere, to bring to a point Vmbo, bonis, the bose of a bucklar
or shield.

Vmbra, a shadow. It was also that, which was called a ghost of a man being
dead, which not only paynyms but also christen men supposed did appear
vysybly unto men.

Vmbraculum, a place, where men might be out of the son, or that which
made shadow.

Vmbraticus, ca, cum, like a shadow.

Vmbraticus homo, a man living at ease, and out of all labor or business.

VMbraticae arts, crafts exercised in the shadow, as the more part of handy
crafts.

Vmbratilis, le, that which is done in the shadow, or as it were with ease,
and without any sweat or pain.

Vmbratiles res, tryflynge things or trifles.

Vmbratilis pugna, exercise of fetes of war out of battle as in a house.

Vmbri, people in Italy now called Spole tani.

Vmbria, a part of Italy.

Vmbrifer, ra, rum, making shadow as a great wodde does.

Vmbrina, and umbra, a fysshe, which by the description of Paulus Iouius,
seems to me to be an Halybutte, for the greattenesse and delycacye of the
head, and symylitude to a sturgyon.

Vmbro, brare, to shadow.

Vmbrosus, umbrosa, brosum, having much shadow.

Vmbro, bronis, a river in Lumbardye, called also Lamber.

V ANTE N.
VNA, together. Vna cum Cicerone, together with Cicero.

Vnanimis, and unanimus, of oone mind and will.

Vnanimus consensus, one hole consent.

Vnanimitas, tatis, concord.

Vncia, an ounce. also an ynche.

Vnciarius, a, um, of an ounce.

Vnciatim, ynche by ynche.

Vncinatus, a, um, hooked or crooked.

Vncinus, a little clubbe or batte crooked at the end.

Vnciola, an ynche.

Vnctio, an annoyntynge.

Vnctuarium, a place nyghe to a stoufe or hot house, where men be anointed
after that they have swette.

Vnctum, the leaf of a hog, which is the fat that lies by the back and
rybbes, which husbands use to roll up, and keep for to make saulues, orels
or frye meat, as frytowes and pancakes.

Vnctura, an annoyntynge.

Vnctus, ta, tum, anointed or greased.

Vncus, a batte or crooked clubbe. also any thing crooked at the end.

Vncus, a, um, crooked.

Vnda, water, proprely a wawe.

Vndabundus, da, dum, making great or many wawes.

Vndans, wawynge or mouyng like to wawes.

Vndatim, like to wawes of the sea.

Vndeunde, of what place so ever it be, or from whense so ever it comes.

Vndecunque, idem.

Vnde, from whense, whereto, whereby, whereof, wherefore, what to do. Vndegentium,
idem.

Vndecim, eleven.

Vndecimus, ma, mum, the eleventh.

Vndenus, na, number, idem.

Vndelibet, from whens thou wylt.

Vndeuigesimus, a, um, the nynetenthe.

Vndeuiginti, nynetene, lacking one of.xx. The like signification is, where
unde is joined to any great nu^bre, as triginta, quadraginta etc.

Vndeuis, idem quod undelibet.

Vndique, on every side.

Vndicola, he that dwells on the water.

Vndisonus, na, number, that makes a noise like to wawes, when they rise and fall
in the water, or does roore as the water does at a great floudde.

Vndiuomus, a, um, that which casts water out from him.

Vnedo, a kind of wild fruit like appuls, which is bitter, and hurts
both the head and the stomach.

Despicabilis, to be despised.

Despicatus, tus, despite, disprayse.

Despicatus, he by whom no man sets.

Despicientia, despectio, despyte.

Despicio, spexi, cere, to look or behold down, to despise. also for Aspicere,
also to set little by

Despicor, cari, to despise or disprayse.

Despicus, a watch man, to see who comes, as it is in Calyce.

Despolio, aui, are, to dispoyle or to rob.

Despoliare digitos, to pull the rings from ones fyngers. (...). in ^^ite.


Despondeo, di, ere, to affiaunce or betrouthe. also to promise ones son or
daughter in marriage. Despondere animum, to be in desperation, or weary of life,
to despair of any thing that a man seeks for.

Despondere sapientiam, to despair to come to great wisdom.

Despondere prouinciam, Cicero de prouinc. consu.
to give charge or rule of a country.

Despondere sibi domum alicuius, to make him self assured to have an other
ma^s house.

Despondebitur, one shall make them agreed.

Desponso, are, to affiance a woman.

Desponsus, and desponsa, affianced or promised in marriage.

Desponsatus, idem.

Desponsata and destinata laus, praise looked for and dew.

Despumo, aui, are, to skym or clarify any likor.

Despuo, ui, ere, to spet down, or spet on a thing

Despuere in mores, to blame the manners or conditions of one.

Desquamo, aui, are, to skale a fyshe.

Desquamare pisces, to take of the skaales from fyshes.

Desquamare arbores, to bark trees.

Desquamare uestem, to burle clothe.

Destino, aui, are, to purpose, to appoint, to depute, to prepare, to chese, to
tie to a thing, to send, to set a price. Quanti destinat aedes? For how much
will he sell his house?

Destinare puellam, to promise the maiden in marriage to one.

Destinare diem necis alicui, to apoynt a day when one shall be killed.

Destinare animo, uel animis, and in animo, to purpose in his mind.

Destinatio, a purpose to dye.

Destituo, ui, ere, to forsake, to leave, to deprive, or take fro, to louse, or
unbind, to set down a man. Destituit omnes seruos ad mensam ante se, Cecilius.
He did set down all his servants at the table before him.

Destituere spem, to disapoint one of the trust that he had in him.

Destituit aliquem, he brake promise with one

Destituit ciuitatem, he dysapointed the city.

Destitutus, ta, tum, forsaken, destitute.

Destringo, xi, gere, to bind hard or cut.

Destringere, for Abradere, also to abate.

Destrinxit aciem, it blemysheth the sight.

Destructile, that which shall be distroyed.

Destruo, xi, ere, to distroy or throw down that which is builded.

Destruere testes, to distroy the witnesses.

Desubito, suddenly, unprovided.

Desubulo, aui, are, to perce, properly with an awle or bodkyn.

Desudasco, scere, to labor until he sweat.

Desudo, aui, are, to sweat much or labor.

Desuesco, su eui, escere, to dysvse or bring out of custom.

Desuefacio, Desuefio, idem.

Desuefactus, out of custom or use.

Desuetudo, dinis, a dysvse.

Desuetus, ta, tum, out of use.

Desultor, toris, he that can vaulte a horse, and leap from one horse back
unto an other. Also those men of war, that in time of battle would leap
down of their horses quyckely, and fight on foot, and leap up again as
quyckely, were called Desultores.

Desultorij, equi, horses which seruid for that purpose.

Desultura, lyghtynge up and down, ^autynge of an horse.

Desum, defui, deesse, to lack, to fail.

Desum ere, to take, or to chese.

Deesse caussae, not to defend one, not to take ones part.

Deesse occasioni, not to take a thing when occasion happens.

Deesse officio, not to do his duty or endeavor.

Deesse sibi, to be negligent in his own business.

Defuit animus, his courage failed.

Non desunt qui interpretentur, some men to interpret.

Desuper, from above.

Desursum, idem.

Desyderabilis, le, worthy to be wysshed for or desired.

Desyderatio, and desyderium, desire, love, study, delight, sommetyme it
sygnifieth absence. Multarum rerum desyderio te angi, necesse erat, Needs must
ye be grieved with the sorrow full remembrance of diverse things.

Desyderati, men dead or slain in battle. In eo prelio trecenti capti, quin
quaginta millia de syderata sunt, In that battle three hundred were taken, and
fifty thousand slain and dead.

Desyderium, idem quod desyderatio, sommetyme absence.

Desydero, aui, are, to desire, to with for a thing also to require, to look
for. Lepidus qdego desyderaba^, fecit, That I desired Lepidus did. Ne^^ nunc
uires desydero adolesce^tis no^ plusque adolescens, tauri uires desyderabam,
Nor I now do more wyshe to have a young man's strength, than when I was
young, I wyshed the strength of a bulle. Virtus nullam aliam mercedem suorum
laborum desyderat, praeter hanc laudis and gloriae, Virtue requires none other
reward for her labor, but this only of praise and renoume. Quis ab eis ullam
rem laud dignam desyderat? Who looks for of them any thing worthy
commendation? Si erit bellu^, ut uideo fore, parts meae non desyderabuntur, If
we chance to have war, as I perceive there will be, there shall lack nothing
in me, in doing my duty: or sor my part I will not fail.

Curia uires meas non desyderat, The senate has no need of mine aid.

Desydero abs te aliquid, Me seems thou doste not as I would have the to do.

Desyderauit no^nunque Agrippae patie^tia^, He was sorry that Agrippa was no
more pacyent. Vt ego tuum dolorem, amoremque desydero, I find lack that thou
do not love, nor art not soory.

Desyderata in magno philosopho grauitas, The gravity which is required to be
in so great a philosopher.

Desyderio urbis flagrari, to be very sorye for the city.

Detectus, ta, tum, dyscouered, disclosed, made apparent and manifest.

Detectus caput, he that has his heed vncoueryd.

Detego, tegi, tegere, to dysclose or dyscouer.

Detegere stomachum, to utter his somake or mind.

Detendeo, di, dear, to stretche out, or stretche forth.

Detentio, a withholdyng or retaynyng.

Deter, lackyng somewhat, ill. Deterior, warse.

Deterrimus, warste.

Detergo, and detergeo, si, gere, to wype of, to make clean, to scour.

Detergere fastidia, to put away lothsomnes.

Deterior, deterius, wars, in wars condition.

Deteriore iure esse, to be in wars condition.

Deterrimus, a, um, warste.

Deterrime, an aduerbe, which sygnifieth in warst condition, most
vngraciousely.

Determino, aui, are, to determyne, to discuss.

Detero, teri, terere, to bruyse, to beat out, as grain is beaten out of
the ear with thresshinge or treadyng, to empayre.

Deterere calces, to wear out shoes.

Deterere sumptu^, to lose his cost or expencis.

Deterreo, ui, ere, to put in fear, to let by fear.

Deterritus, abashed.

Detestabile, abominable, detestable.

Detestatio, abhorrynge, execration, summonynge with witness. also Apuletus
takes it for geldynge.

Detestor, ari, to abhor. Among Ciuilians Detestari is to summon a man with
wytnes.

Detestari inuidiam, to eschew reproach.

Detexo, xi, xere, to wayue, or to wind.

Detineo, nui, ere, to withhold, to restrayn from liberty.

Detondeo, detondi, dear, to sheare or clyppe.

Detono, aui, are, to make a great sound.

Detorqueo, torsi, quere, to bow, to turn out of the right way. also to turn
a thing from the one side to the other.

Recte facta detorquere, to interpret in an ill part that which is well done.

Praue detorta opinio, an opinion mystaken, and far from the true meaning.

Detractio, pluckyng away or from one. it is also dispraysing or ill report. it
signifies alsoo withdrawyng of any thing necessary.

Detractio sanguinis, lettyng of bloudde.

Detractio alieni, the taking away of an other man's goods.

Detractor, toris, he that reports ylle or speaks ill of one.

Detraho, traxi, trahere, to draw or pluck of.

Detrahere alumnu^ ma^ma, to wean a child.

Detrahere de coelo, to pull out of heaven, or from heaven.

Detrahere alicui, to report ill or say ill of one.

Detrahere de authoritate Senatus, to have the senate in contempt.

Detrahere de se, to blame him self.

Detrahere de pecunia, to abate of the money

Detrahere de suis commodis, to mynysh his commodity or profit.

Detrahere in iudicium, to bring in judgment.

Detrahere sanguinem, to draw blud of one.

De fama alicuius detrahere, to mynysshe the estimation of one.

De po^dere detrahere, to abate of the weight

De suo iure detrahere, to remit or abate somewhat of his right.

Fide^ uerbis alicuius detrahere, to cause one not to be believed.

Ex summo detrahere, to abate of the sum

Ex redditu detrahere, to minish his revenues

Precio detrahitur, the price is abated.

Detrectatio, a refusell or denier to do a thing.

Detrectator, toris, he that refuses.

Detrecto, tare, to refuse to do a thing. it alsoo sygnifyeth to abate.
Aduersae res etiam bonos detrectant, Adversity abateth men's reputation,
although they be good men.

Detrimentum, detriment or damage.

Detrimentum facere, to sustain damage.

Detrimentosum, that which is cause of much damage or hurt.

Detrudo, si, ere, to thruste down: sometime to constrayne or enforce, to
cast or put one out of any place.

Detrudere comitia in aduentu^ alicuius, To defer or put of the parliamente
until his coming.

Detrudi in carcerem, to be put in prison.

Detrudere regno, to put one out of his royalme.

De sententia detrudere, to make one to forsake his opinion.

Detrudunt naues scopulo, they pulled back the ships from runnynge on the
rock.

Detrullo, aui, are, to put from one vessel into an other.

Detruncatio, a cuttynge short.

Detrunco, aui, are, to cut of short, or in pieces. also to lop or shrede a
tree.

Detruncare uitem, to cut a vine.

Detulit, he brought.

Detulit illi laudem, he referred all the praise unto him.

Detrubo, aui, are, to beat down, or to pulle from a thing, to throw down
one from a high place.

Deturbare aliquem aedibus, to thruste oone out of the house.

Deturbare de mente, to make one mad.

Deturbare possessione, to put one out of posession.

Deturgeo, gi, gere, is when a thing which is swollen or blown, does
assuage it self.

Deturpo, aui, are, to make foul or defyle.

Deua, a river in Scotland called Dee, and the town called Dondee is also
Deua.

Deuana, a town in the North part of England called Dancaster.

Deuasto, aui, are, to waste.

Deucalion, was the son of Prometheus, a man of much wisdom and virtue,
whoo saved much of the people of Greece in the time of an universal floudde,
whereby the more part of Greece was drowned: The poets feign, that after the
floude, he asked counsel of the goddess Themis, how man kind might be
restored, and it was answered: If he and his wife Pyrrha did cast the bones of
their mother behind them.

Deucalion being very wytty, perceived that the earth was mother of al
things, and that stones were the bones of the earth. Therefore he threw stones
behind him, and they became men, and his wife did like wise, and they became
women: But in deed he saved the people by bringing them up to the hill called
Parnasus. He was before the coming of Christ. 1534. years.

Deueho, xi, ere, to carry from a place.

Deuello, uulsi, uellere, to pull away.

Deuenio, ueni, nire, to come down from high to low, from riches to poverty,
from prosperity to adversity: sometime generally to come.

Deuenusto, aui, are, to make foul.

Deuerbero, aui, are, to beat much.

Deuerbium, the last end of a word.

Deuerro, ri, ere, to swepe ^^^ane.

Deuersus, turned downewarde.

Deuestio, stij, ire, to unclothe.

Deuexitas, holownes.

Deuexo, aui, are, to vex much.

Deuexus, a, um, holowe or like to a valey.

Deuictus, overcome.

Deuincio, xi, cire, to bind fast.

Deuincit se sceleri, he brings him self in danger for the offense or
missedede.

Deuinco, uici, uincere, to vaynquishe.

Deuinctus, bounden, properly in duty or office.

Deuio, aui, are, to go out of the way.

Deuirgino, aui, are, to defloure a maiden.

Deuito, aui, are, to eschew.

Deuius, a, um, out of the right w^^^e.

Deuium iter, a way not haunted or used to be gone.

Deunx, deuncis, xi. ounces, and a measure. which was as much as a temperate
man used to drink at.xi. draughtes. It is sometime taken for the.xi. part of
any thing.

Deuoco, aui, are, to call aside, or call way, (...) call or fetch down.

Deuocare in suspitionem, to bring in supition.

Deuolo, aui, are, to flee or run from a higher place to a lower, to go with
speed.

Deuoluo, ui, uere, to tumble or roll down: by translation it signifies, it
is fallen, or come from one to an other, or happened.

Deuolui ad otium, to be given to ydelnesse.

Deuolui retro, to be turned back.

Deuolutus, ta, tum, toumbled down.

Deuoluta est hereditas, the inheritance is fallen or come.

Deuona, a town in Almayn called Newemark between Nurenberg and Rentzburg.

Deuoro, aui, are, to devour. Sometime to bear.

Hoc taedium mihi deuorandum est, this labor must I sustain.

Deuorare dicta, to take good heed unto words.

Deuorare hominum ineptias, to set little by men's folly.

Deuorare libros, to read over many and sundry book hastily.

Deuorare molestiam paucorum dierum, to pass lightly over a thing, which is
a little while grievous.

Deuorare nomen alicuius, to forgette a man's name.

Deuorare orationem, to here a tale without taking any heed.

Deuorare pecuniam, to consume al his substance.

Deuorare spe lucrum, to couayte a thing so much, that he thinks that he
all redye has it.

Deuoratae urbes, cities being sunk with earth quakes.

Deuoti, men which promised to live and dye in the service of princes or
capitaynes.

Deuotio, onis, a curse, a vow to dye, or to make a man dye.

Deuotiones, dyuilyshe inuocations to the damage of one.

Deuoto, aui, are, to bind by a vow.

Deuotorius, a, um, concerning a vow or curse.

Deuotoria carmina, inuocations, curses.

Deuotus, faithful and obedient. Also given or determined to do some thing.

Deuotus, a, um, vowed or cursed, dedicate.

Deuoueo, ere, to vow or curse, to consent to dye.

Deuouere se, to make a vow to dye in any quarrel, or for saufegarde of other.

Deuotus, he that makes the said vow.

Deuouere se amicitiae alicuius, to give him self hole to the love of one.

Deuro, ussi, urere, to burn.

DEVS, God.

Dextans, tantis, a weight being.x. ounces. some have taken it for.x. dosayne.

Dexter, tra, trum, right or apt.

Dexter, dextri, of the right hand. sometime it signifies apt, convenient,
quycke, and diligent, prosperous, favorable.

Dextera, uel Dextra, the right hand: sometime on the right side.

Dexteram tender, to give to one his hand.

Dextram dare, to help or aid.

Dextram dextrae committere, to promise faith and troth in hand.

Dextere, properly, aptely, featly.

Dexterior, Dexterius, more proper or apt.

Dexteritas, tatis, aptenes and redynes in the thing that a man goes about.

Dextero, aui, are, to lead in the right hand, to couple horses, in a teeme.

Dextimi, horsemen being on the right wynge in battle.

Dextimus, old writars used for dexter.

Dextrale, a bracelet to wear on the right arm.

Dextrocherium, the same.

Dextrarij, horses joined in a teeme.

Dextrorsum, toward the right hand.

Dextrouersum, idem.

D ANTE I.
DIA, an addition to women's names, when their folyshe lovers will make them
equal to goddesses. It is also auyle by Greece called Naxus, Fynallye this
word Dia is a word set before al noble confectio^s devised by the Greeks, as,
Diacalaminthe, Diacitonites, Diapapauer. etc.

Diabathra, a certain sort of shoes used in Greece.

Diabethe, a sickness which causes, that one can not hold his veryne.

Diabolus, the dyuell. How be it in greek it signifies properly a falfe
accusar.

Diacodion, is a syrup made with the heads of the herb called popy, and
water, which profyteth against reumes, and to cause one to sleep.

Diaconus, a deacon, in Greek it signifies a mynister.

Diacytoniten, or Diacydonium, a confection made with the juice of quinces and
honey or sugar, which is an excellent medicine to feeble stomakes.

Diadema, a high cap, whereon an Emperor or king wears his crown.

Diaeta, a parler to soup in. Also diete in eating or drinking. Also a place
where judgments were given.

Diaetarij, servants that do awayte on the table. Sometime such as do haunt
dyners and suppers to the intent to steal somewhat.

Diaetetica, that part of phisike which cures by dyete.

Diagridion, a certain confection made with Scammony, for to pourge choler.

Dialectia, is the art, which teaches to invent quyckely, to dispute aptely,
and finally to try what is true and what is false. It is commonly called
logike.

Dialecticus, a logician.

Dialectus, a manner of speech, as we would say diversities in english, as
Northern speech, Southern, Kentyshe, Deuenyshe, and other like.

Dialexis, disputation.

Dialis, Jupiter. Also it signifies of one day, as, Consul dialis, a consul
of one day.

Dialogus, a disputation between two.

Diameter, a line, which divides any figure in to two equal parts.

Diana, the daughter of Jupiter, which fleinge the company of men, to the
intent that she would not be meued with carnal lusts, she continuallye
exercised her self in hunting wild beasts, and for her chaste life, she was
honored of the paynyms for a goddess. she is also taken for the moon.

Diapasma, is a composition of diverse sweet pouldres to cast on the body, to
the intent that superfluous sweat may be put away. It may be also taken for a
sweet persume or pomeambre.

Diapason, a concord in musyke of five tunes, and two half tunes.

Diapente, of five.

Diaphanum, clear through out, as crystal.

Diaphonia, a discord.

Diaphora, a difference.

Diaphoresis, Linac. in ^eth. Gal
digestion, or euaporation.

Diaphoreticus, ca, cum, that which does dissolve and send forth humors or
vapors.

Diaphragma, ^andinus.
is a skyn in the lowest part of the breast, Alex. Be.
which divides the place where the heart and lunges ben, from the stomach
and bowelles, so that the vapors rysinge upward shall not come to the
spiritual members, whereby the mind and rayson might be indamaged.

Diapyganon, a confection made with the herb called Rue, which is also called
Diaspoliticon, an excellent medicine against lack of good digestion, against
pain in the breast, the sides, the liver, and the raynes, it mollifyeth the
belly, comfort the stomach, and makes good digestion.

Diaria febris, a fever which dureth but oone day, if the sick man do keep
good diet.

Diarium, provision for one day: Also a book declarynge what is done day by
day.

Diarrhaea, a laske or flyxe without inflammation or exulceration, which of the
late physicians is called fluxus humoralis.

Diastole, a distintion or point, whereby oone word or sentence is distinete
from an other.

Diatesseron, of eight.

Diatretum, a cup imboced, and cunnyngely wroughte.

Diatritos, abstinence by the space of iii. days

Diaulus, a measure of ground conteyninge.ii. furlonge, every furlonge being
of a hundred five and twenty fete.

Dibapha, any color in silk or clothe, which is twyse steped in the dye
vate, we call it a deep color.

Dica, a cause, an accusation, a judgment.

Dicam impingere, Terent. in ^horm.
to bring an action against one.

Dicam scibere alicui, Plaut. in ^ulul.
to enter an action against one.

Dicacitas, tatis, scoffing or bourdynge.

Dicaculus, and Dicacula, merry in talking.

Dicaearchus, a just prince. Also the name of a philosopher.

Dicassis, for dicas, tell on.

Dicax, cacis, a rayler or reprocher.

Dice, for dic.

Dichas, a measure of two palms, or.viii. fyngers.

Dico, caui, care, to vow, to offer, to dedicate to give for ever.

Dicamus tibi hunc totum diem, this day is youres to do with us what it shall
like you.

Dicare operam suam, to offer his service.

Dico, xi, cere, to say, to tell, to bid, to promise, to affirm, to defend:
as, Cicero dixit causam Milonis: Cicero defended Milos cause. Also to appoynte,
to call a thing by name.

Dicere causam, to make answer to an action or playnte.

Dice illi, for dic illi, tell him hardely,

Dicere diem, to sewe a man, or call him up, (as we use to say) by action,
write, or commandment, properly to cause a man to be bounden to appear and
make answer.

Dicere Dictatorem, to name or make a Dictatour.

Dicere dotem, to assign dowry.

Dicere doti, Terent. in Heauton.
to assign dower by promise.

Dicere ex animo, to speak as a man thinks.

Dicere ex tempore, to make an oration with out study. Also to speak
unadvisedly.

Dicere ius, to give commandment or sentence on a pain. Sometime it
signyfieth to govern by laws a town or country.

Dicere contumeliam, to outrage or rail on one.

Dicere leges, to appoint laws, or conditions of peace, as by the va^quisher
to him that is vaynquished.

Diem dicere nuptijs uel operi: to appoynte a day for meryage. etc.

Dicere mulctam, to set or assesse a fine or sum of money to be paid by
him, which has committed a trespass.

Dicere in utranque partem, to susteyn the saying of both parties.

Dicere nummos, to promise money.

Dicere sacramento, to take an oath, properly as they do, which be retained in
wars.

Dicere salutem, to salute or recommende him unto one: also to pray god to send
him good health and well to do.

Dicere sententiam, to give sentence or judgment.

Dictamen, a thing written by an other man's instruction.

Dictamum, an herb, whose leaves are like penyroyall, but greatter and
somewhat hoar and mosy, and byteth the tunge like gynger, but it has neither
flower nor seed. Consta^tinus calls it Dictamum, and says that it is hot
and dry in the third degree. There is in this herb wonderful and incomparable
virtues, as well against all poison, as also in drawing forth any thing,
which stiketh fast in any part of the body.

Dictator, the hygheste office in the publyke weal of the Romans, which was
also called Magistor populi, the master of the people, which for the space of
six months, had the authority of a king. And therefore that dignity was
never given but only when the state of the city was in any ieoperdy.

Dictatura, the office or dignity of Dictatour.

Dicta, signified merry sentences.

Dictata, interpretations, expositions, or declarations, made by masters unto
their scolers which they do write.

Dictatum, a mynute given by one to an other to write a letter by.

Dicte, a city in the isle of Crete or Candy.

Dicteria, merry quippies or tauntes wyttyly spoken.

Dictito, onis, a word, a form of speaking

Dictio, aui, are, to speak of or in diverse places, to tell a thing often.

Dicto, taui, tare, to rehearse to one that which he shall write. Also to
inuestigate or expound the sense of any author. Also to bring to remembrance.

Dictare rationem, to yield account.

Dictum, spoken or said.

Dictum factum, sodaynely.

Dictum puta, I know what thou would say.

Dicto obediens, he that does that, which he is commanded.

Dicturio, iui, ire, to go about, or prepare to speak.

Dictynna, one of the names of Diana.

Dictynnus, a hill, wherein the temple of Diana was situate.

Dictys, one of the Centaures, and an histographier of Candy.

Didascalus, a schole master.

Dido, the name of a lady that builded Carthage.

Didrachma, two of the coins called Drachmas, of our money now.xi. d. ob.

Diduco, xi, cere, to bring into sundry parts, or to divide or pull aparte,
to open a thing that is shut.

Diducere argumenta in digitos, to mark and deuyse an argument on his fyngers
ends.

Diductum stare, to set one foot here, an other there.

Didymae, arum, ylandes of Aphrike, that bound on Egypt.

Didymus, is in latin Geminus, in Hebrewe Thomas, in english, a twynne in
birth, or bouble a man.

Diecula, a little while.

Dierecta, in an ill time.

Dies diei, a day. Sometime it signifies time or season.

Dies critici, the days in which physicians do give a certain judgment in
sickness.

Dies legittimi, among lawyars be called ordynary days, or days in court.

Die decies, ten times in a day.

De die, for Interdiu, in the day time.

Diem de die expectabam, I looked from day to day.

Diem dicere, a^i, Dicere diem.

Diescit, it is day, it waxes day.

Diespiter, one of the names of Jupiter.

Dieteris, the space of two years.

Diffamo, aui, are, to sprede by fame.

Diffarreatio, a certain sacrifice, which was between a man and his wife.

Differitas, old writers used for differentia, dyfference.

Differentia, a difference.

Differo, distuli, differ, to spare or defer. sometime to bring from one
place to an other Sometime to report abroad: sometime to deuyde or cut a sonder:
Cicero.
sometime to set in order: sommetyme to dyffer or be in dyfference. At uide quid
differat inter mea^ opinionem and tuam: But see now what dyfference is between
thine opinion and mine.

Differ^ ^mam alicui, to sprede ones name abroad.

Differ sitim, to endure thyrste.

Differ uadimonium, to give a day over to him, which is bounden for his
apparaunce.

Differri, to be so vexed in mind, that a man woteth not what to do.

Diffibulare, to unbuckle, to open, to vngyrde.

Difficile, aduerbium, hardely, difficultly.

Difficilis, le, hard, uneasy.

Difficul, for difficile,

Difficultas, difficulty.

Difficulter, with great pain or labor.

Diffidentia, mistruste.

Diffidenter, without great trust or hope.

Diffido, dear, to mistrust.

Diffindo, di, ere, to cleave in sunder.

Diffindere diem, look in Diffundere.

Diffindere medium, to cut of in the myddel.

Diffindere minute humum, to cut clean by the ground.

Diffisum saxu^, a stone clefte or cut on sunder.

Diffinio, iui, ire, to diffyne or declare in few words plainly the
signification of a thing.

Diffinitio, onis, a diffinition or declaration of the nature, qualite, or
proper signifycaon of a thing by generaltie, specialtie, and difference.

Diffiteor, fisus sum diffiteri, to deny.

Difflo, are, to blow down.

Diffluo, xi, ere, to flo

Diffluere otio, to be drowned in ydelnes.

Diffringo, fregi, fringere, to break in pieces.

Diffugio, gi, gere, to fly hither and thither, to refuse to do.

Diffugium, Refuge.

Diffundere diem, ^daeus in ^^ota.
to put of a matter until the next day. But Policianus, in Miscellaneis does
affirm, that it ought to be rad Diffindere diem, as well in the digestes, as
in all other authors: who of them say most truly, I remyt it to the
judgment of the reders

Diffundo, si, dear, to scatter.

Diffusum uinum, wine drawn into the vessel.

Diffusiora consepta, great grounds, in closed.

Diffusa, sus, a great Sow and a fat.

Diffuse, an aduerbe, sygnifieng, scatered here and there.

Digama, a woman that has had two husbands.

Digamus, he that has had two wives, commonly called Bigamus.

Digamma, among latins is the letter F.

Digeries, a disposion or order.

Digeri, to be resolved.

Digero, gessi, gerere, to dispose, to order, to interpret or make plain, to
deuyde, to dygest, to carry hither and thither, to declare.

Digerere crines, to trymme the hear.

Digerere mandata, to do in order that oone is commanded.

Digerere cibum, to digest meat.

Digestio, an order of things. It is also digestion of meat and drink in to
the veins and members.

Digitalia, things worn on the fyngars, as thymbelles.

Digitalis, le, perteynynge to the fyngar.

Digitali crassitudine, the thyckenes of a finger.

Digiti, (...)
are muskylles, or a like kind of shell fyshe.

Digitulus, a little fyngar.

Digitus, a fyngar. It is also a measure, whereof four do make.iii. inches,
and it is the xvi. part of a foot.

Digitis extremis uel summis attingere, to touch a thing with the fyngers
tops, used for a proverb: where one has uneath attained to any part of a
thing.

Digitum tollere, to favor or consent.

Digitum tra^suersum, signifies in a sentence a little or small distaunce.
Digitum transuer sum ab eo, non discedebat: He went not from him a fyngar
bread.

Digladiari, to fight together with swords. by translation to contend or
strive.

Digladiatio, a fight, a strife, a debate.

Dignatio, great estimation: sometime favor or familiarity with noble men.

Digne, worthily.

Dignitas, tatis, honor given or due to a man for his merits: sometime a state
of nobility, or great authority: sometime beauty properly of a man, specially
in gesture and communication.

Dignatio, idem.

Dignitas uultus, a sygnification of honesty or worship.

Dignitatem suam tueri, to save his honor.

Dignari, to be reputed worthy.

Digno, aui, are, and Dignor, ari, to judge oone to be worthy, or to be esteemed
worthy.

Dignosco, noui, scere, to discern or know by diverse means,

Dignoro, aui, are, to mark as men mark beasts to know them.

Dignus, a, um, worthy, meet or apt.

Digredi in latus, to turn on the one side.

Digredior, dieris, gredi, to depart or go away.

Digressio, a departing.

Digressus, idem.

Digredi ad pedes, to light on foot.

Dijouis, Jupiter.

Dijudicatus, ta, tum, determined by sentence.

Dijudico, caui, care, to judge betwyxte two things.

Dilabor, eris, labi, to slyp or go away, to fall down as a house does:
sometime it signyfyeth to fail, to decay.

Dilacero, aui, are, to tear or rent in pieces.

Dilaneo, are, idem.

Dilapido, aui, are, to consume goods, or spend riottously or wastfully.

Dilapsa and diffluxa, fallen and scatered here and there.

Dilatio, delay.

Dilapsi domos, departed home to their houses without any business.

Dilato, aui, are, to stretche out in breadthe.

Dilemma, it is, an argument, which on every part taunteth him, to whom it is
spoken.

Diligens, it is, diligente or loving.

Diligenter, diligently, advisedly.

Diligentia, diligence or love.

Diligo, lexi, ligero, to favor or love meanly sometime to divide.

Dilorico, aui, are, to undo, or cut a cote, or other thing being sowed.

Diluceo, cere, to be bright or clear.

Dilucescit, the day appears.

Dilucide, evidently, clearly.

Dilucido, dare, to declare or make a thing plain to understand.

Dilucidus, clear, bryghte.

Diluculo, an aduerbe, which signifies betime in the morning.

Diluculo, laui, lare, to wax day, to appear to be day.

Diluculum, that portion of day, which is before that the son ryseth.

Diludium, the leuynge of play, or the space between recreations or plays.

Diluo, ui, ere, to wash or make clean, to put away, to release, to alaye as
wine is alayde with water, or to temper, to purge, or discharge a crime, or
fault laid to one.

Dilutum, is wine or other lycour, wherein any herb or other thing is deaped
by a certain space, which some phisions call infused.

Dilutus, ta, tum, alayde or tempred.

Dilutus color, a faynte color or imperfect color.

Diluuium, and Diluuies, is when the earth is surrounded or drouned with much
rain.

Dimano, aui, are, to flow abroad, as diverse streams out of one spring.

Dimembro, aui are, to deuyde.

Dimensio, measurynge.

Dimensum, and Demensum, measured.

Dimetior, dimensus sum, dimetiri, to measure or meet.

Dimetiri digitis, to account on his fingers.

Dimeriens, that wherewith a thing is measured.

Dimicatio, battle.

Dimicatio prelij, the rage or whurle of the battayl.

Dimicatio capitis, a battle for the saving of a man's honor.

Dimico, aui, are, to fight or contend with some thing.

Dimidiatus, a, um, the half deal of that which is not severed or divided.

Dimidio, an aduerbe signifieng half.

Dimidio plus, dimidio minus, half more, half less.

Dimidius, a, um, the half deal of that which is divided.

Dimidium plus toto, is spoken where a man intends to show that the mean is
best.

Diminuo, ui, ere, to mynishe, or cut of.

Diminutio, the minishinge or abatynge.

Diminutus capite, and Diminutio capitis, Vide ante, Capitis diminutio.

Dimissus, a, um, is some time taken for abject.

Dimissoriae litterae, letters missiue, sent from one to an other.

Deiecit uultum, and dimissa uoce locuta est, She did cast down her look, and
with an humble voice said.

Dimissio, a leave to depart.

Dimitto, si, tere, to send diverse persons into diverse places. some time it
signifies to let to depart, to give leave, to cease, to leave, to let pass,
to suffer, to humble. Also to give, to let down, to forgive.

Dimittere literas, to send letters.

Dimittere boues in pascua, to put kyne to pasture.

Dimittere consilium, to dissolve a counsel.

Dimittere e manibus, to let one escape.

Dimittere sanguinem, to let blood.

Dimittere de summa, to abate of the sum total.

Dimittere debitorem, to release a dettour.

Dimittere creditorem, to pay his det to his creditour.

Dimittere facultatem rei gerendae, to lose or let slyp that power, which one
has to do a thing.

Dimitri osculo, to kiss at departing.

Dimixos, a lamp with two lyghtes.

Dimoueo, uere, to remove or put out of a place or room.

Dim ouere perfrangereque custodias, to break the prease, and pass through
the kings guard.

Dimulgo, aui, are, to publyshe abroad.

Dindymene, and Dindyme, one of the names of Cybele, called the mother of the
gods.

Dindymus, the rydge of the hill of Ida in Phrigia.

Dinumero, rare, to pay money.

Diobolaris, a common and vile harlot.

Diobolares meretrices, harlottes, which be hired for little money.

Dioecesis, sios, a jurisdiction, a governance. Also the diocese of a bishop.

Diodorus, a philosopher of Socrates sect. and Diodorus Siculus, Ci. in B^^ and
(...)
a story writer: and an other Diodorus a stoycke philosopher of who^ Cicero
writes.

Diogenes, a famous philosophers name.

Diomedes, a noble captain of the Greeks at the siege of Troy.

Dione, a goddess of the sea, mother of Venus

Dion, was sone of a noble man of Sicile called Hipparinus, and brother to
Aristomacha, wife to the elder Denyse. wherefore he was long time in great
favor with him, in so much as Denyse commanded his officers, that they should
give to Dion all that he would ask. But after that Dion had been the herar of
Plato, and followed his doctrine and gravity. Denise no more favored him.
Semblably the second Denyse, not withstandyng that Dion with all diligence
endeavored him self to bring him up in virtue and honor: yet because he was
grave in manners and of great severity, and was not pleasant, the favor
little and little relented, and at the last Denyse gathering suspicion of
Dion, sent him in exyle: who retournynge after diverse conflictes for the
liberty of his country, being often betrayed of his friends, and deceived by
them, whom he trusted, fynallye was slain in Siracusis, the chief City of
Sicile. He was a man of excellent virtue and wisdom, and of a great courage,
and therefore was above all other favored of Plato. But by to much liberty in
speech, and procuring liberty unto the commune people, more than was
necessary, he brought him self to perpetual inquietnes, and at the last to
confusion. The time of his being shall be declared in the ly^^ of Plato.

Dionysius, read in Bacchus. It was also the name of two kings of Sicile,
which for their cruelty and avarice were called tyrants. The first was
son of Hermocrates a rich man of Sicile, whom for his valiantness in arms
the Sicilians ordained to be their captain against the Carthagynenses,
which invaded them, and menaced to distroye their country, and take from
them their liberte. But after that the enmies were vanquished, Denyse, which
preserved his con^ray from bondage, of a benefactour became a cruel tyrant.
This man desyrouse to se the wise Plato, who thanne was famous, with
importunate requests caused him to come to Sicile from Athenes. But having
with him communication, in the which Plato commended rightwyse governance,
and dispraised tyranny, Denyse being therewith offended, would have slain him,
but being let by the intercession of Dion and Aristomenes, he gave him to
Polydes the ambassador of the Lacedaemonians, to sell when he came in to Greece.
the residue ye may read in myboke of the knowledge, which makes a wise man. The
other Dionysius or Denyse was son to this man, like in conditions, but that he
was better learned. He also made means to have Plato come unto him, and a good
space had him in much reverence, and herd his lesso^s in philosophy. Finally
suspectinge him, that he conspired against him with Dion, and other, whom he
had expelled, vnethe at the desires of Architas prince of Tarentum and other,
he suffered him to return unto Athenes. So lightly are the minds of great
men toward learning satisfied, and for small occasions offended, except such
as do set all their delight in virtue, and do esteem it above other plesures.
the time of this man shall appear in the life of Plato. The father was noted of
rauin and cruelty, for the which he was ones driven out of Sicile, and by
pouertye constrained to teach children in Italy. Also he was reproved for
having his ears always open and ready to here detractours, (...) for his
timorous and suspitiouse living, that he would be enuyroned with a great guard
of strangers and bondemen, mistrustynge his own people and kysemenne: that he
would speak to the people from the top of a tower: that he would have his
berde neither shaven or klypped by any man, but only with walnut shales very
hot, he caused it to be burned. And yet at the last was he slain of the
people, curiosity not so saulfly keeping him, as Benevolence might have done,
if he had followed the doctrine of Plato, as he seemed to do.

Dioptra, a geometrical instrument, to dyscerne altitudes and distaunce.
Victruuius uses it for wayinge or pluckyng up of water.

Dioscorides, called also Pedacius and Phacas, was a worshypfull knight of
Egypt, who ioyninge learning to chiualry, being in the host of the Romans
in sundry countries, in times vacant from battle, made diligent search of
the figures and virtues of diverse herbs and other things necessary for
medicine, and most truly wrate of them in greek, as Galenus testifies. He
lived under Cleopatras and Antonius.

Dioscoron, an isle in the borders of Italy.

Diospolis a city of Egypt. There be.iiii. other of the same name in Egypt,
but very small cities in comparyson of this.

Diotae, vessels of earth with handels, wherein wine was kept.

Diphthera, a shepeherdes cote made with sheep skynnes.

Diphthongus, two vowelles joined to gether called a diphthonge, as ae, oe, au,
ei.

Dipois, idis, any garment lyned, but it is taken for a doublet.

Diploma, it is, a charter of a prince or city, or a wryt.

Dipondium, a weight of two pound.

Dipsacon, white brere.

Dipsacus, a wild tasyll.

Dipsas, a little worm like a serpente, of color white, the tail divided
with.ii. black lines. Pau. Aeg.
He is also called Praester, he that is stungue of this worm, feleth forthwith
intolerable heat, and therewith so great drith, that no drink may extincte
his thyrste, although he shall never cesse from drinking, and so dies he
without remedy, as some do suppose.

Dirae, cursinges.

Dirce, a woman's name, the wife of Lycus king of Thebans.

Direct, or Directo, an aduerbe signifienge right or straight, or in a right
form.

Directus, a, um, straight or right.

Diremptio, a breaking or dissoluynge, or separation.

Diribitores, distributers of money, or pay masters.

Diribitorium, the place of payment.

Dirigeo, gui, gere, to strynke for cold, or for fear.

Dirigere acumina ad caelum, to raise their tops high or upward.

Dirigere aciem, to set a battle in order.

Dirigo, exi, gere, to make straight, or right, to order.

Dirimo, remi, ere, reptum, to break or leave of.

Ea res consilium diremit, that thing brake or dissolved the counsel. Also
to put of, or deferte.

Dirimere bellum, to cause war to cease.

Dirimere controuersiam, to make the parties agreed.

Dirimere actionem, to delay a matter.

Dirimere litem, Cicero.
to make an end of a matter in varyaunce or suite.

Dirimere societatem, to break fellowship.

Diripio, Vide in deripio.

Diripere oppidum, Plinius.
to sack a town.

Diris, an high hill of Mauritania, now called Atlas,

Diritas, ratis, cruelty, vengeance.

Dirumpo, rupi, rumpere, to brass or break a sunder.

Diruncio, iui, ire, to wede out, or purge that which is naught.

Diruo, rui, ruere, to break down to the ground.

Diruptus, ta, tum, braste or broken.

Dirus, a, um, vengeable.

Dirutus, ^a, tum, broken dow^^ to the ground dystroyed.

Dis, diris, called the god of riches: sometime it signifies rich.

Ditior, rycher.

Discalceatus, vnshodde.

Discalceo, ceare, to pull of ones shoes.

Discapidino, aui, are, to unclose or open.

Discedo, scessi, dear, to depart. some time it signifies an exception, as,
Quum discesserim a fratre, nemo est mihi te charior. Except my brother, no man
is to me more dear than thou art. Also it signifies division or opening: as,
Quum terra discessisset magnis quibusdam imbribus, discendit in illum hiatum:
when the earth by occasion of much rain opened, he went down in to the cleft
or swalowe.

Discedere a sese, to forgete him self, or to be out of his mind.

Discedere superiorem, he went away vaynquisher.

Discedere inferiorem, he went away vanquished.

Discedere ab armis, to put away their harneyse.

Discedere ab officio, to do no more his duty

Discedere a iure, to do against the law.

Discedere a sententia, to change his opinion,

Discedere in diuersa, to be of sundry opinions

Discedit usus fructus, he loses the possession and profit.

Discescit mos, that manner or use is left.

Discessio, a departing.

Discessus, us, idem.

Discessio facta in eius sententiam, the more part went on his side, and was of
his opinion.

Disceptatio, disputation or contention.

Disceptatio libera, judgment according to the conscience of him that judges.

Disceptatio legittima, judgment according to the law.

Disceptator, a judge, arbitrour, or days man.

Discepto, aui, are, to dispute or contend, to arbiter or judge.

Disceptare armis, to try by battle.

Discerniculum, a pynne or other like instrument, wherewith women did diuyde the
shed of their hear before.

Discerno, decreui, cernere, to depart or sunder one thing from an other.
Also to strive or vary, to know distinctely.

Discernere armis, to fight in battayll.

Discerpo, psi, ere, to pluck or tear in pieces.

Discinctus, dyssolute, or negligent, or unable for the wars, cowarde.

Discindo, scidi, scindere, to cut of.

Discingo, xi, gere, to vngyrde.

Disciplina, learning, as it is perceived of the scholar, doctrine as it is
tought of the master. It is also a good form of living.

Disciplinosus, apt to learn.

Discipulus, a scholar or disciple.

Discludo, si, dear, to shut out.

Disco, didici, discere, to learn.

Dedisco, ere, to forget that which was* ones learned.

Discobolus, he that throws a dishe.

Discobinatus, wounded or cut.

Disconuenio, ni, nire, to disagree or dyscorde.

Discolor, diverse of color.

Discoquere, to make to boil.

Discorda, dyscorde.

Discordo, are, to discord or agree ill.

Discors, dis, dyscordant, agreynge ill together

Discrepo, aui, are, to disagree or discord.

Discrete and Discretim, Severally.

Discrepantia, difference.

Discretio, onis, a separation. some time election of good from evil,
discretion.

Discretus, severed or parted. Valla says, that it is he that discerns the
qualities of men, and value of things.

Discrimen, minis, diversity or difference. also the shedynge or partyng of
the hear. alsoo it sygnifieth peril or danger, sometime battayl.

Discriminale, an instrument wherewith the hear is parted or shadde.

Discriminatim, distinctly a sunder here and there

Discriminatus, ta, tum, distinct, in a diversity.

Discrimino, aui, are, to deuyde.

Discrucior, ari, to be much vexed or troubled in mind.

Discubo, bare, to lie down, to sleep.

Discumbo, cubui, cumbere, to sit at meals.

Discumeatus, opened with a wedge or other like thing.

Discupio, to desire very much.

Discurro, rere, to run hither and thither, to wander.

Discursus, runnynge hither and thither.

Discussoria medicamenta, Plaut. in (...).
medycines, which do dissolve or break things congelid or tough

Discus, a dyshe. also a round stone having an hole in the myddle, which in
old time men used to throw up into the air, to the intent to exercise them
self.

Discobolus, he that throws such a stone.

Discutio, ssi, tere, to cast or shake down, to remove, to examyne, or
dyscusse. also to dissolve humors gathered into an impostume.

Disertus, well spoken.

Diserte loqui, to speak well and to the purpose.

Disijcio, disieci, disijcere, to cast a sunder.

Disiecta milites, the host dyspersed.

Disiunctio, a separation.

Disiunctus, ta, tum, separate.

Disiungo, xi, ere, to vnioyne, to separate.

Dispalescere, to publyshe abroad.

Dispalo, aui, are, to wander hither and thither.

Dispalati, scattered.

Dispando, si, dear, to stretche out.

Dispar, unlike, unmeet.

Disparo, rare, to sever.

Disparatum, is that which is separate from any thing by layeng to his
contrary.

Dispartior, tiri, to divide, or be dyuyded.

Dispello, dispuli, dispellere, to expelle or put from many places, or many
ways.

Dispendiosus, sa, sum, harmefull, unprofitable.

Dispendium, loss by negligence or superfluous expenses. Also it signifies
harm.

Dispendo, di, ere, to spend. also to stretch out.

Dispenno, ere, to stretche.

Dispensator, toris, a steward or other offycer, saying out money for
householde, a dispenser of things.

Dispensatio, laye^g out of money for an other man

Dispenso, aui, are, to lay out money.

Dispendo, di, ere, to lose.

Dispereo, rij, rire, to be lost utterly.

Dispeream, I pray god that I die: It is a word vsyd in the stead of an oath, in
the affirmance or denyenge of a matter.

Disperij, I am undone.

Dispergo, spersi, gere, to sow abroad, or to scatter.

Dispertio, tiui, ire, to give part to one, part to an other. Iniuriam
dispertiuisti, pinguiorem agnum isti habent, Thou haste not parted it equally,
for they have the fatter lamb.

Dispesco, cui, ere, to drive beasts from their pasture.

Dispesso, ssi, ere, to sprede abroad.

Dispicientia, circumspection, aduysement, diligent consyderation.

Dispicio, xi, cere, to discern, to espy, to consider.

Displicio, cere, to dysplease.

Displina, she that has dyspleased.

Displodo, si, dear, to spread.

Dispolio, idem quod despolio.

Dispoliabulum, Plaut. in Bacch.
a despoylle, a place where all myschiefe or robbery is done.

Dispondaeus, a foot in meter, that has four syllables long, as Oratores.

Dispono, sui, ere, to dyspose, to order.

Disposite, ordynately.

Dispositus uir, he that sets his words in good order.

Dispudet, I am ashamed, or he is ashamed of that which is done.

Dispulue^o, are, to make a thing in poulder.

Dispumo, are, to skymme of.

Dispunctio, an examination.

Dispungo, Budaeus in annota.
xi, gere, to put out things written, setting pryckes under every letter.

Dispungere rations, to examyn an account

Disputo, taui, tare, to dyspute, to make plain to be understand, to rayson.

Disquiro, siui, rere, to inserche dylygentely, to inquyre.

Disquisitio, where every man's opinion or sentence is demanded upon a
mattier in judgment. Budeus in anno.


Disraro, aui, are, to make thynne that which is thycke.

Disrumpo, for dirumpo.

Dissecatus, ta, tum, cut as a body is in an anotomye.

Disse co, caui, care, to cut in pieces.

Dissectio, onis, an anotomy.

Dissemino, are, to sow over all.

Dissentaneus, a, um, not according.

Dissentio, tire, and Dissentior, tiri, to think contrary or to dysagree.

Disseparo, aui, are, to dysseuer one from an another.

Dissepimentum, the partition in a wall nutte, wherewith the kernel is dyuided.

Dissereno, aui, are, to wax fair wether.

Dissero, rui, rere, to sow seeds, sometime to dyspute or declare.

Disserto, idem.

Dissertabundus, a great dysputour.

Dissertatio, disputation or treaty of any thing.

Dissertio, a partition of lands.

Dissideo, ere, to be at varyance or dyscorde.

Dissidiosus, one that loves discord or varia^ce.

Dissidium, variance or dyscorde.

Dissidentia, idem.

Dissignatio, a gatheryng together of people to wonder at one which is of
myscheuous condytions.

Dissignatores, men that had the ordrynge of plays used to be made at the
buryell of notable personages, which did appoint the standynges and seats
to every state.

Dissigno, aui, are, to make a sign or token, sometime to appoint.

Dissilio, liui, ire, to leap down from a place. sometime to braste, to
leap here and there.

Dissimilis, le, unlike.

Dissimiliter, in a diverse facion.

Dissimilitudo, dinis, diversity, variety in form

Dissimulanter, without any semblaunt or countenance. Dissimulatim, idem.

Dissmulatio, dyssemblyng. Dissimulantia, ide^.

Dissimulator, toris. Vt qui dissimulatores studiorum fuerint, They made
semblaunte as they had not studied.

Dissimulo, aui, are, to dyssemble, to make as if he knew nothing, to show
countenance contrary to his thought.

Dissipatio, a scattering, or bryngyng one thing into many small pieces, or a
wasting.

Dissipalis, le, easy to be broken in pieces.

Dissipo, aui, are, to scatter or sprede abroad. also to bring unto naught, to
break into pieces.

Dissitus, ta, tum, set far of, dystant.

Dissocio, are, to break company.

Dissoluo, ui, uere, to lose or vnbynd, to speed, to pay several dettes, to pay
that which is owid

Dissoluere aliquem, Plaut. in Market.
to dyspatche one from long taryenge.

Dissoluere religionem, to do against the relygyon, to break the religion.

Dissoluere interrogationem, to assoyle a question.

Dissoluere, to depeche him self of busynes.

Dissolutis criminibus, after that he had made answer to that which was
laid to his charge, and was thereof acquyted.

Dissolutio stomachi, uide Nausea.

Dissolubilis, le, easy to louse.

Dissolui, to be paid or dyscharged.

Dissolute, an aduerbe which signifies dissolutely, without care.

Dissolutio, a dissoluyng or lousynge.

Dissolutio criminis, a pourgation.

Dissolutus, ta, tum, loused. also he which lives at his own pleasure,
contrary to the laws or good customs.

Dissonantia, a dyscorde in voices.

Dissono, naui, nare, to dyscorde.

Dissonus, na, number, that which does not agree.

Dissuadeo, si, dear, to dissuade, to assay to turn one from his opinyon or
purpose.

Dissuasio, the act of dissuadyng, dissuasion.

Dissuasor, soris, he that dissuadeth.

Dissuauiatio, the act in kyssyng swetely.

Dissuauior, ari, to kiss swetely, and with much delectation.

Dissuefacio, and dissuesco, scere, to leave the old manner and custom.

Dissue tudo, lack of use.

Dissuetus, ta, tum, unwont, not accustomed.

Dissulto, aui, are, to leap hither and thither.

Dissuo, ere, to undo a thing.

Distaedet, I am weary of a thing.

Distantia, dystance.

Distendo, di, dear, to stretche out, or retche, to fill as a bottell is filled.

Distentus, full, bollen out.

Disterminatio, a dyuision of ground.

Distermino, aui, are, to dyuide one place from an other.

Distero, striui, sterere, to break small, to pound or braye a thing in a
mortar.

Distichon, two verses contaynyng one matter.

Distillatio, onis, a distryllyng, specially from the head, called a reume or
catarre, the pose.

Distillo, aui, are, to distyll, or drop down.

Distinct, distinctely, seuerallye, where every thing is in his place and
order.

Distinctio, a dyuersitie, distinction, separation.

Distineo, nui, ere, to let or withholde with business or urgent causes, to
hold or put back.

Distineri, to be let.

Distinguo, xi, ere, to dyuyde. also to make distynction.

Distito, aui, are, to stand aparte, or be dystant one from an other.

Disto, aui, are, to differ, to be distant, or to be a certain space from a
thing.

Distorqueo, Ter^^^ i^ Eunuc^^
si, quere, to set awrye. Ah illud uide, os ut sibi carnifex distorsit, O,
look how the hangeman sets his month awrye.

Distortus, wry, out of fascion, defourmyd.

Distractio, separation, alienation, or pulling away, or a sunder.

Distractus, ta, tum, pullyd on sunder.

Distraho xi, ere, to pluck away, or to dyuyde, or to withdraw a thing,
sometime by translation it is taken for to sell, also to fynyshe or conclude
matters in variaunce.

Controuersias distrahere, to end controversies or suites.

Distribuo, ui, ere, to distrybute, or give in sundry parts.

Distribuere causam, to diuyde his pleadyng into sundry parts, or to make
many plees of one matter.

Distribute, in parts or portions.

Distributio, partition, distribution.

Districte, straytely.

Districtus, let from doing of a thing.

Distringo, xi, gere, to bind fast, or to strain hard, to rub of or cleanse
the fylthe or soil of the body, to thretten to strike, or to draw out a
sword. Gladium distrinxit, he drew out his sword. sometime to gather, as
Sereno coelo manibus distringi oliuam oportet, Colu^^el.
In a fair clear day the olives must be gathered by hand.

Distringere crustam panis, to chyp bread, or to part of the cruste.

Districtus negorijs, let with busynes.

Distrunco, care, to cut of a piece of a thing.

Disturbo, aui, are, to cast down, to let the enterprise or purpose of one.

Disulcus, an hog, which has the bristels of his neck diuyded.

Diteo, and ditesco, sci, scere, to make rich, or be rich. Dito, taui, tare,
idem.

Dithyrambus, a verse made in the honor of Bacchus.

Ditio, onis, a dominyon.

Ditior, rycher.

Ditissimus, rychest.

Ditrochaeus, a foot of four syllables in verse, having one long, an other
short, an another louge, the fourth short.

Diu, long time. also the day time, whereof comes Interdiu, in the day time.

Diua, a woman saint.

Diuagor, ari, to wander from place to place.

Diuarico, aui, are, to stryde, or to spread wide one from an other, as
boughs of a tree.

Diuello, li, ere, to pull away by violence.

Diuendo, didi, dear, to sell to diverse persons, or in diverse parcelles.

Diuerbia, the parts of a comedy or interlude, where many persons speak
together.

Diuersa pars, the contrary part.

Diuersito, aui, are, to turn often to a thing, or to resort.

Diuersitas, diversity.

Diuersor, ari, to resort, or repair to a place.

Diuersorium, an Inn, whereto men in journey do resort to bayt or be lodged, a
lodgyng.

Diuersorius, a, um, pertaining to anyune or lodging.

Diuersus, a, um, diverse or separate.

Diuersum distrahi, to be drawn hither and thither. Diverse, idem.

Diuerticula, bywayes, or side ways, out of the high way.

Diuerticulum, a bayte.

Diuerto, ti, tere, to turn from one thing to an other, to take lodgyng or to
bayte.

Diuerto ad te, and apud te, I comme to lodge with the, or to tarry for a time
with the.

Diuertere uia, to turn out of the high way.

Dives, diuitis, rich.

Dives auis, whose ancetours were great me^.

Diuexo, aui, are, to vex or trouble.

Diuexare rem suam, to waste his substance.

Diutius, lengar. Diutussime, longest.

Diuidia, Plaut. in Bacch.
tediousnes, sometime it betokens discord, busynes, trouble, variance.

Diuidiculum, an head of a cundyte.

Diuidium, a partition or dyuident.

Diuido, si, dear, to dyuyde or part in sunder.

Diuidere sententiam, where in a counsayl one in his rayson seems partly to
affirm, partly to disaffyrme any thing, which is to be done: he that
reasons next, requires him that has spoken, to diuyde his argument, and
abide upon one part, which he will either confyrme or reprove, like as our
lawyers use to do, when diverse titles are brought in one pleadyng, they pray
the court, that the contrary part may abide upon one of them, whereunto they
will answer.

Diuiduum, that which may be severed or divided.

Diuinatio, onis, a foreiugement or conjecture. also where a matter comes in
judgment, without writing or witness on any of the parts, that judgment may be
called Diuinatio, a dyuynation.

Diuinipotens, he that has power in dyuyne things.

Diuinitas, godheade.

Diuinitus, godly, or of god.

Diuino, aui, are, to tell truth, as well of things present, as of things
passed: for the more part it sygnifieth to coniecte of things present, what
shall happen.

Diuinus, a, um, that which pertayneth to god, divine.

Diuisio, onis, whereby we declare what is in varyaunce, or whereby we express,
of what things we will treat. also a diuysion into sundry parts.

Divisor, oris, among the old Romans was he which at the election of great
officers, divided or gave money to the people, in the names of them, which sued
for the office, to the intent for to attain it.

Diuisus, a, um, dyuided.

Diuisus, idem quod diuisio. Diuisura, idem.

Diuitiae, diuitiarum, diuitijs, diuitias, richesse.

Diuito, aui, are, to make rich.

Dium, the day light under the fyrmamente. when we say. Sub dio aliquid
fieri, it sygnifieth some thing to be done abroad, or out of the house.

Diunt, old authors used for dent or dederint.

Diuortium, a divorce or separation of a man and his wife. sometime a
departing from any other thing.

Diurno, aui, are, to live long.

Diurnus, na, number, perteynyng to day, as Diurni libri, books contaynyng the
acts done every day. sometime a days hyre.

Dius, dia, come of a gentle stock.

Diutinus, na, number, long contynuynge.

Diutissime, very long, or to long.

Diutius, lengar.

Diutule, a little while.

Diuturnitas, a long space of time.

Diuturnus, na, number, long contynuynge.

Diuulgatio, a publycation, or making a thing common to all men.

Dinulgo, aui, are, to publyshe abroad, to set a thing in such condition as
every man may use it at his pleasure, to make a thing common

Diuus, ua, uum, worthy a divine remembrance. Now they take Diuum and diuam,
for a man or woman saynct.

D ANTE O.
DO, dedi, dare, to give. also to offer or proffer. Terentius
Vt res dant sese, As things offer them selves. also to bring. Magna^ dabit
ille ruinam arboribus, He shall bring a great fall unto trees. Vergilius
also to say, tell, or declare, to do. Quamobre^ has parts didicerim paucis
dabo. For what cause I learned that part, I will tell the in few words. Pol
haud paternum istud dedisti, Terent.
In faith thy father never taught the to do this. also to obey, to conform. Da
te mihi, Conform the to my will.

Do manus, I reder me, or I am vanquished.

Do lego, I give by testament or last will.

Dare auribus, to flatter, or speak to please.

Dare damnas, to pay damages, or to make satisfaction.

Dare facultatem, to give liberty or power to do a thing.

Dare fidem, to promise faithfully.

Dare in pedes, to flee or run away.

Dare in ruborem, to make ashamed.

Dare insidias, to deceive one.

Dare in uiam, to take a journey.

Dare iusiurandum, to take an oath.

Dare malum alicui, to do one a shrewd turn.

Dare mancipio, to deliver on warrantyse.

Suo periculo is emat, qui eam mercabitur, mancipio neque promitter, neque
quisque dabit, He that will have her, Plautus in persa.
let him bye her at his own peril, for no man shall promise or deliver her on
warantyse.

Dare manum, to put in his hand priuyly, as they do to men of law, or privy
solicitours, or corrupt officers.

Dare mutuum, to lend.

Dare negotium, to assign or appoint bissynes, or a thing to be done.

Dare operam, to apply, to give or take heed, or to help.

Dare potestatem, to commit authority or power, or remyt a thing to an other
man's pleasure or liberty. Suarum omnium rerum illi potestatem dederat, He gave
him the rule of all that he had.

Dare poenas, to suffer punyshement.

Dare se alicui, to follow one, or to observe his commandments.

Dare ueniam, to forgive.

Dare uerba, to deceive by fair promyses.

Dare uitio, to dysprayse, to blame.

Danunt, idem quod dant, they give.

Datarius, a, um, that which is to give.

Datatim ludere, to toss from one to an other as men play at tenyse.

Datu meo, of my gift.

Datum est, it is predestinate.

Doccus, a timber piece.

Doceo, cui, cere, to teach or give knowledge, or to inform, to advise, to
prove.

Docere fabulam, to play a comedy.

Docibilis, apt to be taught.

Docilis, le, lightly taught or instructed.

Docilitas, aptnes to learn.

Docte, connnyngly.

Doctor, he that teaches other.

Doctrina, ae, doctrine, which proceeds of the teacher. Disciplina, lerning
taken of the skolat.

Doctus, ta, tum, lernyd, that is to say, knowing a thing without experyence.
Vide peritus.

Documentum, a lesson.

Documentum statuere, to give to oone the first instruction.

Documento habere aliquem, to take example by one, to beware by an other man.

Dodona, a city in Greece, whereby was a wod, in the which men thought that
trees spoke.

Dodone, the daughter of Jupiter and Europa.

Dodra, was a drink made of nine things, herbs, juice, water, wine, salt,
oil, bread, honey, and pepper.

Dodrans, antis, a poyse wayenge nine ounces. It is alsoo nine of the measures
called Ciathi. Also it is sometime taken for the nynthe part of any thing
dyuyded. It also signyfyeth the length or breadth of twelve fyngers. Caulis
Dodrantalis, a stalk or stem.xii. fyngers high.

Dogma, atis, a certain determination, which in sects of philosophers every
one had, with out the which the sect failed. sometime they be called Placita.

Dogmatistes, he that induces any sect or new opinion.

Dolabra, a carpenters axe.

Dolabro, aui, are, to hew as a carpentat.

Dolenter, sorowfully.

Dolentia, grief.

Doleo, ui, ere, to feel pain or grief, to be sorry.

Dolere caput, pedes, oculos, the head, fete, or eyes to ache.

Doleo tuis rebus aduersis, I am sorry for thy mysfortune or trouble.

Doleo tuam uicem, I am sorry on thy behalf.

Dolium, any great vessel of wine as a tun, pype, butte, or hoggeshead. In
the old the old time it contained.xxx. of the measures called Amphoras.

Doli^ris, great as a tun.

Doliaris heluo, a gorbealyed glutton.

Doliarium, a wine sellar.

Dolichus, a space of ground contaynynge.xii. furlonges.

Dolio, iui, ire, to grave in metal.

Dolo, aui, are, to cut or hew with an axe or since.

Dolare opus aliquod, to make a thing rudely or grossly, as it were to rough
hew it.

Dolobella, Varro.
an hatchet.

Dolon, the proper name of a man of Troy, that was very swyft of foot.

Dolones, a scurge, having a dagger, or other like thing closed within it. It
is also a certain tacklyng of ships. Seruius.
also a little sail called a trynket.

Dolopes, Liuius.
a people of Thessaly.

Dolor, is, grief or pain of body or mind, also sorrow.

Dolorificus, ca, cum, that which makes grefe or sorrow.

Doloro, aui, are, to cause one to have sorrow or pain.

Dolose, deceytfully.

Dolosus, deceyptfull or crafty.

Dolus, deceypt.

Dolus malus, every crafty deceypt to compass a man, whereby he receives
damage, mal ingin.

Doma, atis, a solar or flat keuering of a house. It is sometime taken for the
house.

Domator, Sueton^.
idem quod domitor.

Domesticatim, by householdes, house by house.

Domestici, householde servants.

Domesticus, ca, cum, pertaining to household. sometime it signifies tame,
famyliar. Domestica exe^pla, example of their own kynrede.

Domi, at home.

Domi nobiles, honorably in their own country

Domi bellique, in deeds as well of war as of peace.

Domi and militiae, as well in peace as in war.

Domicilium, a mansion place.

Domicoenium, an home supper.

Domina, the lady or maystresse.

Dominatus, tus, domination, or authority over other, maystershyp. Dominatio,
idem.

Dominum, a lordshyp or rule over other.

Dominor, ari, to rule or have soueraynty.

Dominus, a lord or master, to whom other do service. also an owner.

Domiporta; a pyllar or other like thing, that beaneth up an house.

Domis, was taken of old writers for dominus

Domitalis, apt, to be tamed or broken.

Domitio, Lucretius.
onis, a retournyng home.

Domitor, toris, a tamer or breaker of that, which is wild.

Domitura, the act of tamynge or breaking of any wild beast.

Dominus, ta, tum, made tame, subdued, or vanquyshed. Tibullus.


Domnonij a people of a country in England called D^^onshyre.

Domo, aui, are, to make tame, sometime to vanquyshe.

Domare hosts, to vanquyshe enemies.

Domuitio, a departing home.

Domo, Cicero de diuina.
from home.

Domu^, to the house, or home, sometime at home.

Domuncula, a little or poor house.

Domus, mus, mui, a house generally. sometime a temple or church. also a family
or kynrede. also a man's country. also a nest of birds.

Domus, Liuius.
the accusatif case plurel, home to their houses.

Domus, mi, mo, a dwelling house.

Donarium, a house, where such things were kept, that were given to the
goddis. It is sometime taken for a gift or reward.

Donatio coronae, garlandes that in the old time were worn in plays.

Donatio, a gift.

Donatio propter nuptias, a woman's dowerye.

Donatistae, were cher^^^es, which affirmed, that the congregation of christen
people was no where but with them. Wherefore those, which came from the
catholyke part unto them, they did eftsons baptize them. also they affirmed,
that in the church were not people good and ill, but only good, and that they
only pertayned unto the church. The author of this heresy was named Donatus,
and was of the country of Numidia, about the year of our lord. 353.

Donatiuum, a gift in money or grain, given by emperors unto the people. Also
to soldiers above their wages.

Donatiuus, he that is able to give.

Donatus, he to whom any thing is given.

Donax, cis, a reed or cave, whereof thy made arowes.

Donec, until, sometime as long.

Donec uiuo, as long as I live.

Dono, aui, are, to give lyberally or freely.

Donare ciuitate, to make a cytesyn. Donare aeternitate, to make a perpetual
memorial of one

Donum, a gift.

Donysa, a isle in the sea Aegeum.

Dorcas, cadis, a bucke or a do.

Doors, was a general name of diverse people in Greece, as of Creta, Rhodus,
Sicilia, and diverse other countrayes, so called of a people inhabiting by the
mountayn callid Oeta, which wandryng like to the Goths, by fors wanne certain
places in the said countrays, and finally subdued the old inhabitants.

Doria, and Dorica, names of countrays joining to Athenes.

Dorica lingua, the langage of the people called Doors, and was the.v. tunge of
the Greeks

Dorica, was a certain form of musyk, which represented a wonderful
gravity, and therefore was assigned to noble personages, and used in Tragedies.

Dorion, a town of Achaie.

Doriphori, were certain gentylmen attending about the persons of kings,
which bare iauelyns in their hands. Such of late years princis have also
used to have, and ar called spears, although they bear only in their hands
battle axes.

Doris, a nymph of the sea, and is interpretate bytternesse.

Dormio, miui, ire, to sleep.

Dormire in urramuis aurem, Terent. in Heauton.
is a proverb which signifies to be without any manner of care. It may be
englyshed, To sleep soundly on both sides.

Dormisco, scere, to begin to sleep.

Dormitator, a sleaper.

Dormito, aui, are, to sleep soundly.

Dormitorium, that which pertayneth to sleep.

Dorodocia, corruption of Judges with gifts and rewards.

Doronicum, a precious and holsom rote brought from Mauritania, which is of
the quantity of a man's finger, and knottye as it were joints. And is put
into confections made for the diseases of the stomach, and lack of perfect
dygestion. Ruellius supposes it to be that, which of the Greeks is called
Arnabo, of some Carnabum, or Zamabum, It is hot and dry in the third degree.

Dorophorus, he that carries a present.

Dorpia, were certain days, which the Athenie^ses kept solemn, in open
feasting and ba^ketting

Dorsualia, panels, which horsis do wear on their backs, when they carry or
draw.

Dorsuarius, a, um, that which bears or carries any thing on the back.

Dorsum, a back of man or beast.

Dorsum in mari, Seruius.
a heap of sand gathered in the sea, which watermen do call a shelpe^.

Dorsus, idem.

Dorylas, the name of a river in Phrigia.

Dos, dotis, dowery, land given in marriage to the husband for cause of the
marriage only, it is also a quality of a person given of nature.

Doors animi, indowmentes of the soul, that is to say, the giftis of grace.
Dotes corporis. indowme^tes of the body, that is to say, braulty, strength,
health. etc. the gifts of nature.

Doralis, le, that pertayneth to dowry, as Bona dotalia, dotalis fundus, goods
or lands given in marriage with a woman.

Doto, aui, are, to indowe.

Doxa, in greek signifies opinion, sometime glory.

D ANTE R.
DRacena, the female dragon.

Dram, the.viii. part of an ounce in weight or mesure. It was also a coin
sygned with a bullock, which counteruailed as much as a poyse grote,
being.viii. grotes the weight of an ounce.

Dram auri, was.xii. silver dragmas, of our money now.v.s.ix.d.

Draco, onis, a dragon. It was alsoo the name of him, which first did give
and write laws to the people of Athenes, wherein he appointed death for every
small theft. wherefore it was said, that he wrate his laws with the blood of
men.

Draconarius, a standerde bearer.

Dracones, of Pliny be taken for old branches of vines, also it is an herb,
which is otherwise called Pyretum, it bourneth and byteth the tunge, as well
the leaf as the root, in english Pelytory of Spain.

Dracontias, a stone taken out of the head of a dragon, the head being
suddenly stryken of, or else it resolves in the brain, while the dragon dies.
it is also called Draconites.

Draconites, idem.

Dracontium, an herb called Dragons.

Dracunculus, a little dragon. it is also an herb called Dragons, named also
Dracontea.

Dragma, a grype or handful.

Draguntea, an herb called Dragons.

Drama, matis,, where in a comedy or interlude, diverse personages be brought
in, some abydyng, some departing.

Drangiana, a prouynce in Asia the more.

Drepanum, the name of a city in Italy called now Trapani.

Dromedarius, and Dromada, a certain kind of camelles, which have two bunches
on their backs, and are meruaylous swyft, and may sustayn to be three days
without drynk when they be iourneyed.

Dromus, the place where men do run horses, to try the swyftnes of them.

Dropax, a noble ointment made with pytche, excellentely commended of Galenus,
and other famous physicians.

Druides, were sometime in France called Gallia, one of the two estates, of like
condition as the spirituality is now among us. They had in great estimation
woddes of greatte oaks, where they used their sacrifices and superstious
ceremonies. And they had in a meruayllous reverence al thing that grew on an
oak, specially mysselden, affyrmynge that it was sent from heaven. Their
sacrifice was in this form: First under an oak, whereon grew mysselden, they
caused meat to be prepared and set, than to as there brought forth two white
bulls, whose horns were than new bounden, that is to say, were first set in
the plough or wayne. Than the priest being clad in white, clymmed up to the
tree, and having a byll of gold in his hand, he did shread or cut of the
mysselden, than offered they the sacrifice, prayeng unto god, that the gift
which should be given, might be to them that received it, prosperous and
fortunat, supposing that the beast, which was barrayne, if he drank of the
mysselden, should be fruyteful, and that it was a sure remedy against all
poison. It is supposed, that their superstition came first out of this isle
called Britayne.

Drupae, Ruellius.
are olyues or oil bearies, which are between grene and ripe, and do begin
to wax black.

Drusus, the name of a Romayn, of right noble lygnage and eloquence, but he was
proud and ambitious.

Dryas, the proper name of a man of Thessaly, friend of Nestor.

Dryades, were fayries of woddes.

Dryinus, a little worm, sometime found in the roots of an oak, which is so
mischeous a poison, that if one tread on him barefoted, forthwith the skyn
comes of, and all the leg swellyth. And which is more to be meruayled at,
they which do handle him, that is hurt, loses his skyn. About the place where
the said worm has bitten, there is a rednes with a swellyng, and there rises
lyttel wheales, out of the which comes a watery humor. also there happens to
him, which is hurt, frettynges in the stomach and bealy. Galen. Pau. Aeg.
One remedy therefore is akornes beaten in a mortar, and drunk with wine. Also
the root of an holy bruised and laid to the place, does mitigate the pain.

Drylon, a river of Slauony.

Drymodis, afterward Pelasgus, is now called Archady.

Dryopteris, Dioscori.
is an herb, which grows on old oken trees among the moss, and is like to
fern, but the creues or incisions of the leaves be less, and the rotes be
rough and twisted together, and in taste somewhat sweet. Some call it Osmende
royal.

Dryos, slyme growing in oaks.

D ANTE V.
DVBENVS, Pom. Fes.
was of the old Romans taken for Dominus.

Dubio, Plautus.
aui, are, to be in doubt.

Dubiat quid agat, Vergilius.
he is in doubt what he should do.

Dubitatim, Dubie Dubitanter, doubtfully.

Dubitatio, and dubietas, doubt.

Dubito, aui, are, to be in doubt, or to tract time, to mystruste. Dubitatur,
men doubt.

Dubious, a, um, doutfull. Dubious, is he that has two ways, and woteth not
which to take.

Dubia coena, a banquet, whereat are so many and diverse meats, that a man
knows not of which he may eat.

Dubiae res, things doubtful or dangerous.

Ducatus, tus, the gouerna^ce or condute of men. Also a duchy. also Ducatus,
ti, a coin called a ducate.

Ducatus praestare, to be capitayn of an host, to bring men to battle.

Ducenarius, a capytayn of.CC. men.

Ducenti, tae, ta, two hundred.

Ducentesimus, a, um, the two hundred.

Ducenties, two hundred times.

Duceni anni, two hundred years.

Duco, xi, cere, to lead them that be willing, to have respect to a thing,
sometime it signifies to allect or styre with some pleasant mean. also to
reuolue, also to draw, as a man drawith a sword. also to get. sometime it
signifies doing, as Ducere somnos, to sleps. also to build or make up. sometime
to turn awey, as Ducere uultus, to turn away the visage. To delay or prolong
to go down. Ego me duco ab arbore. I went down of the tree. also to wed, or do
the act of marriage sometime to suppose. Hanc esse in te sapie^tia^ existima^t,
Cicero de amicitia.
ut oi^a tua in te posita esse ducas, Men think that wisdom to be in you,
that ye think all that which is your own, to be in your self and not in
fortune.

Ducere aetatem, to spend ones time. Ducere anima^, to live. Ducere animo, to
consider, to think. Ducere animum, to recreate the mind. Ducere aqua^, to
convey water from a spring.

Ducere bellum, to prolong battayl or war.

Ducere colorem, to wax ruddy.

Ducere da^no, to take it for a damage or loss

Ducere aliquem ex aere, to counterfaite one in mettalle.

Ducere diem ex die, to put of from day to day

Ducere fossam, to cast or make a dyche.

Ducere honori, to esteem it honorable.

Ducere horas extremas, to lie in dyenge.

Ducere infra se omnia humana, to esteem all things less than him self.

Ducere lateres, to make tyles.

Ducere laudi, to turn it to praise.

Ducere lineam, to draw a line.

Ducere minoris, Plautus.
to esteem it les, to set les by.

Ducere mortuum, to be dead. Meos ne ego ante oculos illam patiar, alios
amplexarier? mortuum hercle me duco satius. Shall I suffer him to embrace her
before mine eyes? by god I had rather be dead.

Ducere mucronem, to draw a sword.

Ducere nocte^ iucundis sermonibus, to pass forth the night in pleasant
talking.

Ducere nomen ex re aliqua, to be named after some thing.

Ducere officij, to suppose it to be his duty.

Ducere parui, to set little by.

Ducere prae se neminem, to set by no man but him self.

Ducere principium, to begin, or to take a beginning.

Ducere probro, to dysprayse.

Ducere pro falsis, to take it for lies.

Ducere similitudinem ex aliquo, to take a pattern of a thing.

Ducere somnos, to sleep.

Ducere spiritu^, to fetch or draw breath, to live.

Ducere sulcos, to make furrows.

Ducere suspiria, to sygh.

Ducere utilitatem, ex re aliqua, to get profyt by a thing.

Ducentur suspitiones ex ipso facto, of that act men shall gather suspicion.

Ducere usuras, to continue payment of money taken by usury.

Vallum ducere, to make a trenche.

Vultum ducere, to frown or lowre.

Duci errore, to be deceived, to be in a wrong opinion.

Duci ineptijs ac fabulis, to take pleasure in fantasies and fables, to believe
leasynges and flatterynges.

Duci uentre, to love good morsels.

Rationem salutis ducere, Steph.
to regard health.

Nihil ducere in bonis praeter uirtutem, to esteem nothing to be good beside
vertus.

Duco, Verro.
aui, are, to govern.

Ductarius funis, a torde that is drawn.

Ductilis, and ductile, easy to be drawn.

Ductim, with leisure.

Ductito, aui, are, to lead about often.

Ducto, aui, are, to lead about, to take a wife, also to esteem.

Ductare restim, to lead the dance.

Ductor, toris, a guide.

Ductus, ta, tum, led.

Ducta cicatrix, a wound clean healyd, nothing remainyng but a seame or mark.

Ductus, tus, tui, a cundyte, whereby water does rounne.

Ductus aquaru^, the course of water by trenches or pypes.

Ductus oris, the fascion of the face.

Ductus literarum, the order of letters in any writing.

Dudum, but late, sometime long agone, or a great while.

Dudum, sometime it signifies before. Incertior multo quam dudum, more
uncertain than it was before.

Duella, the third part of an ounce.

Duellator, a warryour.

Duellica ars, the feate or science of arms.

Duello, aui, are, to fight within lystes, or in battle.

Duellum, battle between two.

Duellona, men in old time called Bellona.

Duicensus, Fe^^s.
the task of two men jointly, as of the father and the son.

Duidens, a sheep of two teethe.

Duillus, a citesens name of Rome, which first triumphed for victory on the sea.

Duis, of the a^cie^t writers was vsid for dederis

Dulcadium, every sweet meat.

Dulce, and dulciter, swetely, gentylly.

Dulcedo, dulcitas, Dulcitudo, and Dulcor, swetenes

Dulceo, cere, to be sweet.

Dulcesco, sci, scere, to become sweet.

Dulciarius, a pastlar.

Dulciarius panis, a marchepayne made with almondes and sugar.

Dulcidulus, a, um, a little sweet.

Dulcifluus, flowynge swetely.

Dulciloquus, he that speaks swetely.

Dulcis, ce, sweet, pleasant, contrary to sharp or vehement.

Dulcisonus, sownynge swetely.

Dulco, caui, care, to make sweet.

Dulia, the service of a bondsman or slave.

Dulichium, an isle in the sea Malyake, or as some say Ionio.

Dum, sometime sygnifieth when, or whiles, as Dum dormis, fures domum intrant,
whiles thou sleapest, thieves enter into the house. sometime until, sometime as
long. Vsque ne ualuisti? C. Perpetuo recte dum quidem illic fui, Dyddest thou
well all that while? C. ye always well, as long as I was there. also it
signifies wherefore. also, so that. Sometime it does but make up a word, as
Adesdum, paucis te uolo, Come hither, I would a few things with the. Nihil
dum, not yet.

Dumetum, a thorny or bushy ground.

Dummodo, so that.

Dumosus, a, um, roughe of brembelles and thorns.

Dumtaxat, only, at the least way. Non dumtaxat, for non solum.

Dumosus, a, um, full of brembels or briars.

Dumus, all kinds of thorns or briers.

Donum, a country in England called Durha^.

Duo, dui, ere, to give.

Duo, Duae, two.

Duodecim, twelve.

Duodecies, twelve times.

Duodecimus, a, um, the twelfe.

Duodecies, Sestertium.xii. hundred thousand Sestertia.

Duodeni, twelve to gethether. Vide deni.

Duodeuiginti, eyghtene.

Duodeuiceni denarij.xviii. pense.

Duodetriginta, xxvii.

Duonum, old writers used for Bonum.

Duplares, knights or such soldiers as had double alowaunce.

Dupliciarij, idem.

Duplaris numerus, a noumber doubled.

Duplex, duplicis, double or two: or twyse as much.

Dupli, double so much.

Duplicato, at the double.

Dupliciter, two ways.

Duplico, aui, are, to make double.

Duplio, onis, the double.

Duplus, a, um, double.

Dupondius, and Dupondium, two pound weyghte.

Durabile, durable.

Duracinae uuae, grapes with thycke skynnes.

Duram, some think to be the name of a river, near to the which the Gyauntes
made the tower Babell. ^^lel. 3.
Some woll it to be a field, as in Danyell.

Duramen, and Duramentum, the arm of a vine.

Durateus, a, um, wooden, or of wood.

Duratus, ta, tum, hardened.

Dure, and Duriter, hardely or cruelly, with much pain.

Dureo, rui, ere, to be hard or cruel,

Duresco, sci, scere, to wax hard.

Dureta, the Spanyardes call a vessel, that they use to wash and bain them in.

Duria, or Turia, the name of a river nere to Valentia

Duricia, and Duricies, and Duritas, hardenes, rudenes, rigor.

Duricoria, things which have hard skins.

Duricors, dis, hard hearted.

Duriusculus, a, um, the diminutiue of durus.

Duro, aui, are, to endure or continue, to sustain or suffer, to harden or
make hard.

Durus, ra, rum, hard, peynefull, or cruel.

Dura prouincia, a sore charge, a thing hard to be brought to pass.

Duri oris uir, a rygorous person.

Duro ingenio, dull wytted.

Duumuiratus, tus, an office, wherein the authority is committed to two men.

Dux, ducis, a captain or leader.

D ANTE Y.
DYastole, Galen. in definit.
is a lyftyng or rysyng up of the heart, the arteryes, the brain, and rymes
which do enclose the brain, and that is in length, bread, and depenes,
sensible to feel by the poulses.

Dynasta, uel Dynastes, a lord of great power, a prince, a ruler.

Dynastea, a rule or governance.

Dynastia, might, power.

Dyrrachium, a city in Cicyle, which first was called Epidamnus.

Dys, in composition, signifies yuell, difficile, or impossible.

Dyscolia, difficulty.

Dyscolus, intractable.

Dysenteria, is a perylous flyxe with excoriation or rasynge of the bowels,
continual tourmentes, and some blood yssuynge forth. Galenus.
The causes thereof be sharp or venemons humors, Alex. Co^.
procedynge of yelowe choler unnatural, sharpenes of the blood, salt fleume,
melancholy aduste. sometime of ill medicines or impostumation of the liver.
sometime by defaulte of the members annexed. sometime by the ill habit of all
the body.

Dyspnoea, is difficulty in fetching of brethe. The causes thereof be these:
stoppynge of the ways, whereby the brethe should pass: destillations, or
reumes hot and sharp, or cold and fleumatike. some time lepry by knorres in
the throat, or lunges, comen of a melancholy matter.

Dysuria, Galen.
a sycknes, which lets a man that he can not pysse. The causes thereof be
these, Extention or bollynge out of the bladder after vehemente retention or
keeping back of urine: congelynge of blood or matter in the neck of the
bladder or instrumente of urine: of stones or impostumation there. Also of
stones, gravel, apostume, werte, or hard flesh bred in the reins of the
back.

E ante A.
E FOR THE more part signifies of.

E conspectu fugere, to go out of sight.

E diuerso, on the contrary part, or on the other side.

E facili, easyly.

E longinquo, fer of.

E me ne quidem metuas, as for me be not aferde.

E Pamphilo grauida est, she is with child by Pamphilus.

E Pamphilo peperit, she had a child by Pamphilus.

E proximo aspicere, to se nighe hand.

E proximo uicinus, my next neighbor.

E regione, face to face, one dyrectly against the other, or on the other side
directely.

E re nata, considering the matter. Ere nata melius fieri haud potuit,
considering the matter, or as the case required, it might be no better.

E renibus laborat, he is sick in his back, or grieved with the stone.

E re tua, perteynynge to thy profyt.

E re publica, concerning the common weal.

E uia languet, he is weary of his iournaye, or sick with goinge or ridynge.

Euestigio, forth with.

E ANTE A.
EALE is a beast in Inde found about great ryuers, Sol. ca. 65 Plinius. li. 8.
ca. 21.
like to a horse, save that he has a tail like an Oliphant, in color black
or day, and has jaws like a bore, and therein tuskes a cubite long and more,
which are apt to what use the beast will, for they do not stand fast, but are
bowed as he lists, so that when he does fight, he sets up the one, and
holds down the other, to the intent that if the one in fighting waxes dull,
or is broken, the other shall serve him.

Eantes, the name of a storye writer, which was in that age, that Pygmalion
reigned in the east part.

Eatenus, unto that, in that manner of will, till that time, until, until than.

Eatenus, ne, quid, pro solum.

E ANTE B.
E BEATI, they which from great prosperity are fallen into mysery.

Ebeo, are, to bring out of prosperity.

Ebenus, uel Ebenum, a tree which is black in color, and is odoriferous, wha^
it is burned it has virtue to cleanse the eyes. This tree grows in India,
Vergil. 2.
which being cut, waxes as hard as stone. Georg.
Sola India nigrum fert ebenu^: India alone brings black ebenns. it is also
written with, h. read Hebenus.

Ebibo, ebibi, ebibere, to drink all out.

Ebionitae, were heretics, which denied that Christ was god. And affirmed that
al parts of the old law, ought to be kept with the new law. And they
received only the gospel of saint Matthew, and rejected the other, and also all
the epistols of sayncte Paul. The author of that sect, was one Ebion, about
the year of our lord.88.

Eblana, a city in Irelande called Dublyn or Deuyllin.

Eblandior, diri, to get a thing by slattery. also to like.

Eblandiri solitudidines ruris, to make, that lack of company in the country
shall not be greuouse.

Eblanditus, ta, tum gotten by flattery.

Eboracum, or Eburacum, a city in England called York.

Eboratus, a, um, of yuory without.

Eboreus, a, um, of yuory.

Ebosus, an isle between Sardinia and Africa, the earth whereof will not suffer
any venomous thing to live, where also do bread such number of conies, that
they distroy the isles nexts adioyninge.

Ebriatus, drunk. Ebrietas, tatis, drunkenness.

Ebrio, aui, are, to make drunk.

Ebriolus, la, lum, a little dunke, or a little person drunk.

Ebriosus, a, um, often drunk.

Ebriulo, are, to make drunk.

Ebrius, ia, um, drunken. sometime abundant.

Ebron, a mountain in Palestina.

Ebudes, yles in the sea about England, where the people do live by white meat
and fish. I suppose they be the yles nyghe wales and the west countreye.

Ebuleus, the son of Jupiter and Proserpine.

Ebullio, liui, lire, to buble up, as water does when it rayneth.

Ebullirio, bublynge.

Ebullo, are, to buble out, or braste out.

Ebulus, an herb called walworte, which is like to young elder tree.

Ebur, and Ebor, oris, yuory: Dioscorides callith it Thamaeacte.

Eburatus, covered with yuory.

Eburneus, ea, um, Eburnus, of yuory.

Eburones, people of the countreye called Liege or Luke, beyond Brabant.

E ANTE C.
ECardia, a kind of amber which has in it the figure of an heart black or
green.

Ecastor, an oath, by Castor, which may stand for, By my fay.

Ecbasis, a figure in speaking, called digression, where a man leaves for
the time the pryncipall matter.

Ecbatana, the chief city of the realm of Mede. there is a city in Siria of
the same name some time called Ephiphania, and may be written Egbatana.

Ecce, an aduerbe demonstratiue, which signifies Lo, see, properly where a
thing sodaynely happens.

Ecce tibi, will thou see, take heed.

Ecce me, lo here I am.

Eccere, an aduerbe of swerynge, signifieng as much as Per Cererem. Some use
it for ecce, lo now, or se now.

Eccentrici orbs, are spheres one inclosyng an other, so that the one is over
the other, and the one is contained within the holownes of the other.

Eccillum, Plautus.
for ecce illum, see him.

Eccistam, Terentius
for ecce istam, see her.

Ecclesia, an assemblye, a counsel. Among christen authors, it signifies
the congregation of people in the faith of Christ.

Ecclesiastes, a preacher.

Eccubi, lo where.

Eccum, eccam, eccos, eccas, lo he is here, lo she is here, lo these men be
here, lo these women be here.

Echemythia, taciturnitie or stylnes,

Echeneis, a fyshe called also Remora, which cleauynge to the keele of a ship,
will retain him, not withstanding the violence of any wynd that blows.

Echi, Columel.
little narrow valeyes or dales between two hills.

Echidna, a water serpent.

Echinades, ben ylandes in a river of Greece called Achelous, which divides
Aetolia from Acarnania.

Echinatus, ta, tum, having a rough and pry king shale or shell.

Echinata folia, Plinius.
leaves having pricks.

Echimus, Hermola. in Corell. cap. 201.
the kouerynge or vttermoste shale of a chesten nut, or other which is roughe
and prickynge. It is also a sea fyshe which has on him a shelle with pryekes,
and has the pryckes instead of fete, but he goes not but only tumbleth,
for when he is taken, the pricks seem to be worn and made blunte. some have
very long pryckes and little shells, and they be called Echinometrae. These
fisshes be of sundry colors, some white, some red, some purple, some blue, and
some grene, as Perottus writes in his Cornucopiae, that he saw them, but he
says, when they be dead, the fresh and dilectable color vanishes away.
It is also a beast called an yrchen or hedgehog. It was also a vessel of
brass among the Greeks, whereinto the saying of witnesses were put and
sealed. Also a part of hey, and a sort of pottes. Also a certain form of
bracelettes, which women used to wear.

Echion, an herb called also Alcibiadion, growing in ways and roughe
grounds, like to languedebease, and has flowers like borage, but er they be
full spread, they be purple of color, and the seed thereof is like the head of
an adder.

Echioni, Thebanes, so called of Ethion, one of the five that help Cadmus, to
build Thebes.

Echites, a stone specked like a serpent.

Ecnephias, a storm, where a cloud is broken and falls.

Echo, a sound, which reboundeth to the noise or voice, that is made in a
valeye, or in great woods.

Eclegma, aris, a medicine, which must not be eaten or chewed: but being in
the mouth suffered to still down in to the stomach by littell and little. The
Arabian physicians do call it Lohoch.

Eclipsis, a wanynge or faylinge.

Econa, an image.

Econcula, a little image.

Econtra, contrary wise.

Econtrario, idem.

Ecpetala, Coelius.
were cups among the Greeks, which were large and wide. Our flat bolles,
wherein we drink wine, may now be so called.

Ecphractica medicamenta, medicines, which deopilate, or open the condutes or
passages in the body which are stopped or farted.

Ecph^^sis, a plain interpretation of the letter, leaving no part vndeclared.

Ecquando, at what time, or lo when.

Ecquis, but lo who, se who.

Ecquid, but what, lo what.

Ecstasis, a stoonyinge, a damp, a traunse, wha^ a man forgets him self.

Ectasis, a figure, whereby a syllable naturally short, is produced or made
long.

Ecthlipsis, where the letter M, joined with a vowell, is not sonned.

Eccrapeli, they which abhor the common fastion or old vsages.

Ectropium, when the nether lyd of the eye falls, and cannot join with the
our lyd.

Ectypum, that which is made according to a pattern.

E ANTE D.
EDACITAS, insatiable fedynge.

Edax, edacis, a great eater or consumer.

Edo, edonis, the same.

Edearrae, they which have the ordering of the kings meat.

Edem, signifies pleasure dilectation.

Edentatus, he that has his tethe taken out, totheles.

Edento, aui, are, to make toothles, to beats out ones tethe.

Edentulus, totheles.

Edera, yuy.

Edessa, a city beyond the river of Euphrates.

Edico, xi, cere, to command, to ordeyne, to declare or publyshe.

Edicta, ordinances or commandments of them, which be in great authority.

Edictio, idem quod edictum.

Edicto, tare, to declare or pronounce often times.

Edilia, all things that appertein to be eaten.

Edissero, ui, rere, to explane or declare, to tell or rehearse. Edissere nobis
fabulam hanc, Tell or rehearse unto us that tale.

Editio, a setting forth or publyshynge of a thing, as of books or
proclamations.

Edititius iudex, Cice. pro planc.
a judge named and chosen of the one part.

Edituus, a sextan of a church.

Edo, es, edi, esum, uel estum, to eat or feed.

Ede nasturtium, is applied to a dulle and gross person: and for as much as
Nafturtium, called Cressis, being eaten, does make the nose tynkell, and
thereby causes the dull spirits to wake, therefore by this proverb is meant:
Pluck up thy spirits: or, Awake dullarde or luske.

Edor, ederis, edi, to be eaten.

Edo, edidi, edere, to execute or do a thing, or to cause a thing to be done,
to bring or set forth, to deliver in writing, to publishe.

Edere animam, to dye.

Edere annos, to tell what age a man is of

Edere authorem, to name the author.

Edere caedem, to make a great slaughter.

Edere cantus, to sing

Edere certamen, to fight valyauntly.

Edere clamorem, to cry out.

Edere exemplum, to show an example.

Edere facinora, to do myscheuous deeds.

Edere foetus, to bring forth fruit.

Edere fronde^, to burgen, to put out leaves.

Edere indicium, to tell or disclose who were his companyons in any ill deed.

Edere iudicium, to rehearse or gyeue judgment.

Edere leges, to give laws.

Edere librum, to set forth a book.

Edere luci, to bring to lyghe.

Edere ludibrium, to mock at a thing.

Edere ludos and spectacula, to cause plays and pageantes to be showed to the
people.

Edere mandata, to declare his message as he was commanded.

Edere nomen, to give a name to one.

Edere nomina, to bring forth names in writing, as we use to do in taskes,
subsidies, and mousters.

Edere operam annuam, to serve one year.

Edere opera uirorum fortium, to do valiantly and as men of great prowess.

Edere oracula, belonged to god, or that which was taken for god, to make
answer to the thing which was demanded.

Edere ouum, to lay an egg.

Edere partum, to be delivered of child.

Edere postulara, to deliver a byll of request containing many things.

Edere praelium and bellum, to make war.

Edere pugnam, to fight.

Edere rations, to make account.

Edere risus, to laughe.

Edere scelus, to do a myscheuous deed.

Edere scriptum, to show by writing.

Edere signum, to make a token.

Edere specimen, to show a proof.

Edere spiritum, to dye.

Edere stragem, to make a great slaughter of men,

Edere strepitum, to make a noise.

Edere testes, to bring forth wytnes.

Edere uitam, to dye.

Edere uerba, to speak.

Edere uoces, to cry.

Edere urinam, to pysse.

Edoceo, cui, cere, to instruct or infourme one of a thing.

Edolo, aui, are, to hew or cut clean and smothe.

Edom, Esawe was so called, and the country where he reigned.

Edomus, a hill next to Pangeum in the borders of Thessaly.

Edones, people of Thrace, near to the sea cooste.

Edonides, were women, which styred with a divine furour, did celebrate the
mysteries of Bacchus.

Edonij, people of Thrace.

Edonus, a hill where the same people inhabyteth.

Edormisco, scere, to sleep soundly

Edormiscere crapulam, to sleep until he be sober again, when that one is
drunk.

Edormire crapulam, to sleep out a surfeit.

Educo, Vergi^^
xi, cere, to bring forth. also to draw out, as, Hoc dicens, eduxit corpore
telum, That saying, he drew the weapon out of his body. Sometime to reyse up.
some time it signifies educare.

Educatio, nourishynge or bringing up of children.

Educo, aui, are, to nouryshe or bring up from chyldhode.

Edulco, aui, are, to make very sweet.

Edulis, le, that may be eaten.

Edulium, is what so ever is set on the table at dinner and supper to be eaten,
save the bread.

Eduro, rare, to make very hard.

Edurum, not hard.

E ANTE E, and F.
EETON, Andromaches father, that reigned at Thebes in Cilicia.

Effari, to speak, but properly it perteyned to bishops and Augures, when
they did dedicate any place, or consecrate any thing.

Effartio, effarsi, ire, to stuff or fyl a thing.

Effascino, aui, are, to bewyche a thing, whereby either the form is changed,
or the thing dies, or is in some wise destroyed. By this word Solinus makes
mention, that in Africa be certain kynreds, whereof the men and women, if they
praise fair trees, goodly corn, pretye children, galante horses and fat,
forthwith they dye: Plinius writes of some, which beholdynge any person
stedfastely with an angry countenance they do distroye them. Like experience
have been seen in this realm, as credyble persons have reported.

Effata, were certain prayers, which the diuynours used to make at the end of
their divination or telling the success of things.

Effaxillo, aui, are, to cut of by the arm pyt.

Effectus, effect.

Effectum dare, to bring to pass.

Effero, extuli, efferre, to carye forth, or put out, to deuulgat or tell
abroad, to advance or promote. Some time to overcome or subdue. Also to
commend: some time to hold up, to set forth. Some time to mynishe orappayre.

Efferre aliquem laudibus, to extol one with praises.

Efferre cadauet, to carry a body to be buried

Efferre clamorem, to cry out.

Efferre in humeros, to bear on his shulders

Efferre manum, to lift up his hand.

Efferre sese, to advance him self.

Efferre pedem, Plaut. in capt.
to go out or go forth.

Seruate istum sultis intus serui, ne quoquam pedem efferrat, Keep him in, syrs
if ye woll, that he go forth no whether.

Efferre se letitia, to be glad without mesure.

Efferri funere, to be carried to buryenge solemnly.

Effero, aui, are, to make images of wyld beasts. also to make wood as a
beast.

Efferueo, ere, to boil much.

Efferuesco, scere, to begin to boil or sethe.

Efferuescentia uerba, hot angry words.

Effexis, for effeceris.

Efficatia, effect or virtue.

Efficax, acis, effectual.

Efficientia, idem quod effectus.

Efficio, feci, ficere, to bring to effect.

Efficere argentum alicui, to get money for a man by some mean or deuyse.

Efficere morbos, to iugender diseases.

Efficere nuptias alicui, to be the cause of the marriage of any.

Efficere pollicita, to keep promise.

Id similitudinem panis efficiebat, it served in the stead of bread.

Efficiam tibi, tua ut sit, I will bring it to pass, that she shall be thine.

Effigies, Plautus.
a sign made to the similitude of a man or beast.

Effigia, the same.

Effigio, are, to counterfayte ones image in payntynge or keruynge.

Effilatum, that which is sowed or stitched on a garment, as a guard or purfle.

Effilo, lare, to sow.

Effingo, xi, gere, to make like.

Effio, fieri, to be done.

Efflagito, aui, are, to desire or ask a thing importunately.

Efflictim, excedingly.

Effictim amare, to love ardently, out of measure.

Effligo, flixi, fligere, to tourment.

Efflo, Plaut. in persa.
aui, are, to blow away, or blow forth.

Efflare animam, to dye.

Efflauit animam spes, I have no manner of hope or trust.

Effloreo, and Effloresco, to bloo, as a flower does at the first coming out.

Effluo, uxi, ere, to flow or run out, as water does out of a fountain.

Effluet, Plaut. in Trucul.
it shall be told abroad, I will not keep counsel, all men shall know it.

Effluxerat, it was out of remembrance, it was forgotten.

Effluxit, Terent. in Eunucho
it is quite gone.

Effluit aestas, the summer is passed.

Effluunt uoluptates, pleasures do pass away lightly.

Effodio, ssi, and di, ere, to dyg out.

Effoeminati, men wanton and delicate, or tender, endurynge no hardness.

Effoemino, aui, are, to effeminat or make delicat

Effoeta, she that has latelye brought forth a child. Also a woman paste
teemynge.

Effoetus, ta, tum, hatched, as a bird that is come out of the egg. Also
barrayne, cousumed, feeble.

Terra effacta, land spente or worn with bearing of much grain.

Effoetum corpus, a weak body.

Effreno, nare, to vnbrydle.

Effrenus, na, number, without a bridle, rash in manners.

Effringo, effregi, gere, to break to pieces.

Effractus fame, made feeble for lack of meat

Effugio, gi, ere, to escape.

Effugit memoria, it is forgotten.

Effugere nuptias, Plaut. in Bacch.
not to be married.

Effugium, discomfiture or flight.

Effundo, fudi, dear, to pour out. sometime it signifies to consume, to put
out.

Effundere aerarium, to waste the treasure.

Effundere extremum spiritum, to dye.

Effundere honores in mortuum, to make for him that is dead a sumptuous buryal,
or an honorable entierement.

Effundere patrimonium, to spend and consume his inheritance.

Effundere peditatum, to di^^co^^fit the fotemen.

Effunduntur omnibus portisad opem ferendam, they gathered to gether in greatte
routes at every gate to defend the city.

Effuse, effusius, effusissime, out of measure, exceeding, abundantly: more
vehemently.

Effusio, pourynge out sometime it signyfieth prodigality, or outrageous
expenses.

Effusus, sa, sum, discomfited, scattered, put out, or poured out.

Effusa laetitia, exceeding joy or myrthe^.

Effusi in fugam, they ran away on every side.

Effusus cursu, he that runs with all his might.

Effutio, iui, ire, to speak unadvisedly, or foolyshely, or hastily, or that
which should be kept secret.

E ANTE G.
EGELASTE, a town in the higher part of Spain.

Egelidor, ari, to relent or dissolve, as yse that thaweth.

Egelidus, da, dum, neither hot nor cold, but a little out of the cold.
sometime it is taken for cold.

Egens, lacking.

Egens est consilij, he lacks counsel.

Egenus, nedy, or lacking somewhat.

Egeo, egui, ere, to need or lack.

Egeria, was an ydoll, to whom women with child did offer, supposing that
thereby they should travail easily.

Egero, si, rere, to bear out.

Egerit aquam fons, the fountain pousheth out water.

Egesta, a city in Sicile, which Aeneas builded.

Egestas, tatis, necessity, or lack of things necessary, poverty.

Egestio, onis, distribution abroad. It is also the putting forth of ordure or
dunge.

Egestosus, a, um, very poor.

Ego, I.

Egomet, I my self.

Ego ne? whoo I? Potin est hic tacere? P. ego ne? optime. Can this fellow keep
counsel? P. who I? in the best wise.

Egredior, eris, gredi, to go forth, or go out.

Egregie, excellently.

Egregius, a, um, excellent.

Egurgito, aui, are, to draw out, as lycour out of a place.

E ANTE H and I.
EHEM, is a word spoken, when a man is moved with some thing, which is newly
happened.

Eheu, alas.

Eho, an interiectio^ of calling, it signifies how

Ehodum ad me, how come hither to me.

Eho tu, how syrra, when one calls a man to him, forgettyng his name.

Eia, sometime it exhorts, sometime it blames.

Eia haud sic decet, well. it would not be so.

Eia uero age, dic, well, go to, speak on.

Eiectitius, a, um, being cast out.

Eiecto, tate, to throw out.

Eiectus, ta, tum, cast out.

Eijceo, ieci, ijcere, to cast out or put out.

Eiulatio, a brayeng out with lamentation.

Eiulo, aui, are, to cry out, to wayle.

Eiurare, to do beside the law, to renounce.

Eiuratio, renouncing.

Eiusmodi, and Eiuscemodi, the same.

Eiusdem farinae, of the same sort or condition.

Eiusdem notae, of the same estimation or state.

E ANTE L.
ELabor, eris, elabi, elapsum, to slyp orslyde. sometime to escape.

Elaboratus, Ci. in (...)
ta, tum, perfectly or kunningly wrought or done. Omnes apud hunc ornati,
elaboratique sunt uersus, All the verses that he writith, at elegant and
cunningly made.

Elaboro, aui, are, to labor.

Elacatena, a sauce used in the old time.

Elactesco, scere, to turn into milk, or wax white as milk. Ruell^^^^.


Elaeomeli, is a certain kind of gum, thicker than honey, thynner than rosen,
fatty and unctuous, which runnith out of the stemmes of old trees, which
grows in a countreye called Palmyris in Syria.

Elamitae, be called the princes of Persians, of Elam the son of Sem, as
Iosephu^ says.

Elangueo, ere, to be sick.

Elanguesco, scere, to wax feeble.

Elaphoboscon, an herb, which some do call Gracia dei,

Elapsus, a, um, escaped out of some daungier.

Elapsa est spes, hope is lost.

Elapsa ex oculis hominum anguis, the adder stale away out of every man's
sight.

Elate, of Dioscorides, is that wherein a palm or date tree bearing fruit is
wrapped. Galene takes it for the tender and young branche of a palm.
Hesichius does affirm the same.

Elaterium, wild Cucumbers, which has leaves like to gardeyne cucumbers, but
the fruit is much less like as it were long akornes, and has a great root
and a white. They be called of some men Cucumeres anguini. There is also a
medicine so called, made of the juice of them, to pourge choler and fleume
upward and downewarde.

Elatine, is an herb, which has leaves like to pelytory of the wall, but
less and rounder, heary and thyn, having branches half a foot hye, five or
syx coming out of the rote, full of leaves, byndinge in taste: it grows for
the more part among corn. Ruellius says that it is communely called
Campestre Rapistrum, wild rapes.

Elatio, Cic. offi. 1.
is taken sometime in a good part, sometime in an ill part: in a good part, In
hac elatione and magnitudine animi, facillime pertinatia, and nimia cupiditas,
principatus, innascitur: Cic in To
In this hyghnes of heart and greatness of courage, there is breadde very
lightly wylfull appetite, and to much desire of great authority. In an ill
part. Parium comparatio, nec elationem habet, nec submissionem: The comparyson
of them that are equal, has in it neither arrogance, nor yet submission.

Elatus, high or advanced, properly in heart or courage. sometime it
sygnifieth proud or arrogante.

Elauo, elaui, elauare, sieve elauere, to wash clean, to rynse clothes.

Elauare se bonis, to be clean washed from all his goods, to spend all, and
leave nothing.

Elea, a city in the country of Lucania.

Eleates, a man of that city.

Electio, onis, an election, an approbation.

Electo, aui, are, to chose.

Electrum, that which is in english called amber, Plinius.
whereof beads be made. It is also taken for a metal, part gold, part
silver.

Eleemosina, alms.

Elegans, it is, elegant, fresh, gorgious, clean. polyte.

Elegantia, elegancy, gorgiousnes, cleannes, beauty in words.

Elegia, a lamentable song or verse.

Elegiacus, ca, cum, perteynynge thereto.

Elegiographus, a writer of lamentable verses, or balades.

Elego, elegi, eligere, to chose.

Elegus, idem quod Elegia,

Elei, people in Greece in the country sometime called Peloponessus, now Morea.

Elelisphagos, the herb called saulge.

Elementa, the first or pryncipal matter, where of all things do take their
beginning, which be.iiii. in number, fire, air, water and earth. Also the
letters where of syllables be made, are called Elementa.

Elenchus, an argument, reprouynge subtyllye an other argument. It is also a
table in a book, to show the places by letter or other wise. It is more over a
great perle, or other precious stone, which women were wont to hang at their
ears.

Eleo, eui, ere, to spot or soil.

Eleoselinum, is an herb which is called Smalache.

Elephantezographi, be called these peynters, which paynte with yuory.

Elephantia, Constant.
seu Elephantiasis, a kind of lepry, wherein the flesh does swell, and is
full of spots, and is engendered of black choler.

Elephantiacus, a lepre.

Elephantiae be serpents so called because he whom they do byte, Solinus.
falls in to that kind of leprye called Elephantia.

Elephantini libri, among the old Romans were books, wherein their laws
were written, which concerned the nobility.

Elephantinus, pertayninge to an olyphant.

Elephas, a puissant beast called in english an Olyfant, Aristo. de natura
anima. li. 2. ca. 1. 5. 6. li. 9. c. 46.
which is the greattest of all four footed beasts, whose fore legs be
lengar than his hinder legs, and has ankelys in the lower part of his
hinder legs, and also five toes on his fete vndeuyded, his snout or nose is
so long, and in such form, that it is to him in the steed of an hand, for
he neither eats nor drynketh, but by brynging his nose to his mouth,
therewith he helps up his master or keeper, therewith he overthrows trees.
He has but.iiii. tethe on every side of his mouth, wherewith he eats or
gryndeth his meat. He has alsoo two greatte tuskes, the male greatter than
the female, and they are bowyng downward His tungue is very lyttel, and further
within his mouth than in other beasts, so that uneath it may be seen. Of all
beasts he is the most gentle and tractable, for by many sundry ways he is
taught, and does understand, in so much that he lerneth to do due honor to a
king: he has a great perceiving, and excels in sharpness of wit, the
female, which he ones seasoneth, he never afterward touches. The male
Olipha^t lives.CC. years, at the least C.xx. years, the females almost as
long, but the flower of their age, they say, is about.lx. years.

They can not suffer winter nor cold. He loves ryuers, and will often go into
them up to the nose, wherewith he blows and takes wind, but swym he can not
for the weight of his body will not let him. Plinius and Solinus do write, that
they use none aduoultry: and if it happen that they mete with a man in
wyldernes being out of any way, gentylly they will go before him, and bring him
into the plain way. In battle joined they have no little regard to them
that be wounded, for they bring them that be soore hurt or weary into the
mydle of the host to be defended They are made tame with drynking the juice of
barley. They have contynuall war against dragons, which desire their blood,
and therefore lyinge in a wait as the Olyphant passes by, the dragon (being
of an exceeding length) wyndeth his tail about the hinder legs of the
Olyphant, and lets him to go, and than thrasteth his head in to the
Olyphantes nose, and exhausteth his breathe, or else byteth him in the ear,
whereto he may not reche with his nose, and when the Olyphant waxes faynte, he
falls down on the dragon, which is full of blood, and with the poyse of his
body breaks him, so that his own blood, with the blood of the Olyphant
runs out of him mengled together, which is called Cinnaberis, in english
Synopre.

Eleuies, a purgation.

Eleuo, aui, are, to lift up. sometime to take away, to mynishe, to extenuat.

Eleus, a river which watreth a great part of Media.

Eleusina sacra, ceremonies of Ceres the goddess.

Elices, furrows in the fyldes, to conueye water.

Elicio, cui, cere, to draw out, to get out or pick out a thing or a word.

Elicito, to draw often.

Elico, aui, are, to turn up so down.

Elico, onis, he that turns things out of order.

Elido si, dear, to hytte against a thing, to break, to press out, to
exclude, to strangle, to kill.

Elidere ignem e silice, to beat fire out of a flynte.

Elidere sonum, to make a noise in beatinge one thing against an other.

Eligo, legi, eligere, to chose.

Elimino, aui, are, to put or cast forth from a place fer of.

Elimo, aui, are, to fyle or make clean.

Elinguis, without a tungue, specheles.

Elinguo, aui, are, to pluck out ones tungue.

Eliquo, aui, are, to melte.

Elis, a city of Archady.

Elissa, one of the names of Dido.

Elix, Colum^^
licis, a furrowe made for water to pass.

Elixo, aui, are, to sethe or boil.

Elixus, a, um, sodden boiled.

Elleborus albus, an herb called lyngwort, the root whereof is called nesynge
powder.

Elleborus niger, an herb called bears foot.

Ellobia, things which were hanged at the ears of women.

Ellum, Dona^^^.
for ecce illum, see where he is.

Elocutio, onis, a proper form of words and sentences.

Elogium, a testification or wytnes in words, of praise or disprayse, of
honor or reproach. It is sometime a superscription on a tomb.

Elongo, aui, are, to remove far of, to make long, to defer.

Elops, a fyshe called also Accipenser.

Eloquentia, eloquence.

Eloquium, speech in a pleasant manner.

Eloquor, eris, qui, to speak, properlye it is, when I set a thing forth in
speaking, that the herers may understand it, as I conceive it.

Elotae, among the Lacedaemonians was as much to say, as commune mynisters,
or servants, as sergeantes, or such as in London they do call yomen.

Elpenor, a companyon of Ulysses, which with other, Circe turned into an hog.

Eluceo, cere, Verg^^^
to shine.

Elucesco, sci, scere, to be very bright.

Elucido, aui, are, to shine or make bryghte outward.

Eludo, si, ere, to mock or deceive. Also to leave playenge.

Elucefico, caui, care, to depryue of light.

Elucus, he that is sick of the drink of yesterdaye. Also a lover of trifles.

Elugeo, gi, gere, to leave morning.

Elumbus and Elumbis, he that has feeble loins, and can not stand vpryght.

Eluo, lui, luere, to wash out.

Eluo, aui, are, to live in glotony, or to spend superfluously.

Elusa, an isle against Cipers.

Elusco, aui, are, to make one purblynde.

Elusis, and Elusin, a city in the province of Attica, not far from Athens.

Elutheria, fredome, gentylnesse.

Eleutherius, the name of a man, and is interpretate, free, gentle.

Eluto, aui, are, to soke out water.

Elurrio, aui, are, to power out of one vessel into an another.

Eluuies, ordure or fylth caused of abundance of water or other lycour.

Elychnium, the match which is in a lamp, and stands in oil.

Elysium, a place where poets did suppose the souls of good men to dwell.

Elysii campi, the same place.

E ANTE M.
EMaciatus, ta, tum, made lean.

Emacio, aui, are, to make lean.

Emacitas, affection or desire to be always byeng of some thing.

Emancipati, are they which are out of their fathers rule, Festus.
or they which are made subjects to an other man. Cicero in Catal.


Emancipator, a feoffour or alienour.

Emancipatus, ta, tum, alyened.

Emancipo, aui, are, to infranchise or make fre, or set at liberty. sometime it
is used in the contrary sense, to bind or make bond. It is most commonly where
a man disposseseth him self and puttith an other man in possession of la^d.

Emaneo, mansi, nere, to well out of a place.

Emano, aui, are, to issue or flow out.

Emansor, oris, he that wandreth long, and at the last returns home, a
l^rker.

Emargino, aui, are, to take away scurfe about the brymmes of wounds or
s^ores.

Emasculo, aui, are, to geld, or to take away the courage of a man, or to abuse
a man child in lecherye.

Emath, a city that is now called Antioche.

Emathia, a part of the royalme of Macedonia.

Emaus, a notable cite of Palestine, which now is called Nicopolis.

Emax, cis, he or she that is ready to bye any thing.

Embamma, matis, sauce.

Embata, a ship called a barque.

Emblema, blematis, pictures made of wodde, stone, or metal of one color,
set in wodde, stone, or metal of an other color, as we see in chesse
bourdes or tables called counters, it is much vsyd in Italy. It is of some
taken generally for small images, flowers, or other like thing attached to
any other thing, as on cups of gold or silver.

Embolismus, the addyng of a day in the year.

Embolium, the argument or first entry into a play or interlude.

Embrio, onis, sygnifieth the child conceived before it receives perfect
shappe of a man or woman.

Emedullo, aui, are, to take out marrow.

Emendico, caui, care, to ask in form of beggynge.

Emendo, aui, are, to amend.

Emergo, emersi, gere, to issue or come out of the place where a thing is
drownyd.

Emergere ex aliquo negotio, to depeth him self of the business.

Emergere ex incommoda ualitudine, to be recovered of a noyous disease.

Emerseram commode ex A^^tio in Appium, Cicero.
I departed in good time from Antium to Appium.

Emereor, emereri, to dese^^e to the uttermost.

Emeriti senes, old w^rne soldiers, which were pardoned of wars, and not
withstanding had pencyons, which were called Emerita stipendia.

Emeritum stipendium, the last wages that a man takes in wars.

Emeriti senes, old men excused from labor by age.

Emico, care, to shine forth, to hold up the finger, or some other thing, to
dance or leap.

Emigro, grare, to go from one place, to dwell in an other.

Emineo, nui, eminere, to show or excel above all other, to be higher than
other.

Eminulus, a, um, a little rising in height.

Eminus, far of.

Emissarium, a s^use, or place to let water out of a ponde or river.

Emissarius, sometime it signifies him, which is sent before in battle to
espy, or to skyrmyshe. sometime a servant, which is always at hand, ready to
be sent forth. also it signifies such a person, which is ordained of him
that is in any great office or authority, to advance his bryberye. also it
signifies a horse stalyon, which serves to get coltes.

Emississius, a spyall.

Emitto, misi, mittere, to send forth, to publyshe, to manumyse.

Emmanuel, is interpreted, God is with us.

Emo, emi, emere, to bye.

Emodus, a hylle, which about the border of Indy, is dyuided into two boughtes.

Emolumentum, profit gotten of labor.

Emorior, emori, to dye utterly.

Emortualis dies, the day of death.

Emoueo, uere, to put away.

Empedocles, the name of a philosopher, which supposed all things to have
their being of amity and varyance.

Empetron, is an herb which is commonly called Sampier, which grows on the
sea rocks, and is kept in salt or brine to serve for sauces. it is medicinable
against the stone. It is also called Calcifraga, of some Creta marina.

Emphasis, an express signification of that, which is intended.

Emphracta, Galen. in definit.
ships or barges coueryd.

Emphysodes febris, a vehement heat which causes to be in the mouth wheales
and inflammations.

Emphyteosis, the making of a thing better tha^ it was, wha^ it was received or
letten, as land.

Emphyteota, he that takes a thing, and promyseth or couenanteth to make it
better than he received it.

Empiricus, a practyser, properly of phisyke.

Emplasticum, a plaster.

Emplastratio, is graffynge between the bark and the wodde.

Emplastrum, a plaster.

Emporetica charta, paper wherein marchantes or grossers do put their wares.

Emporium, a place wherein is kept a mart or fair.

Emporeuma, shypmanshyp.

Emptitius, a, u^, that which is or may be bought

Emptito, aui, are, to use to bye.

Empyrema, a collection of matter in the bulk of a man's body. Galen.


Empyrium coelum, Met. li. 1.
the heaven, which is next above all the seven spheres, and signifies the fyry
heaven.

Emunctorium, an instrument, wherewith the snuff of a candell is taken away, a
snuffer.

Emunctae naris, Terent.
of a clean and sure judgment.

Emunctus auro, Horatius.
spoiled of his treasure.

Emungo, xi, gere, to snuff a candell. alsoo to make clean a man's nose sometime
it signifies to dispoyl a man of money, properly by craft.

Emussicata, made or wrought by rule.

Emutio, tire, to hu^me or make any other sown like a man that is dumme.

E ANTE N.
EN, lo, see.

Enaema, Galen. iu definitio.
a medicine of a dusky color, good to heal fresh wounds.

Enarratio, a plain declaration or exposition.

Enarro, rare, to tell a thing at length.

Enascor, sceris, sci, to grow or spring of a thing

Enato, tare, to swymme out.

Encaenia, an innovation or renewyng. It was among Jews the feast of
dedycation of their temple.

Encanthis, a disease in the eyes.

Encaustes, he that forms or facioneth a thing with fire.

Encaustice, making of images with the fire.

Encaustum, vernyshe, enamyl, or other picture, wrought with fire.

Enchiridion, a handle of a thing, sometime a dagger. sometime that part of
an ore, that the waterman holds. It is usurped for a book in so little a
volume, that a man may always carry it with him.

Enchiros, a beast bred in the orient, as great as a bull.

Enchrista, thynne oyntementes.

Encimibomata, maidens kyrtels or petycotes.

Encyclios, and Encyclia, the circle or course of all doctrynes.

Encyclopaedia, that learning which comprehends all lyberall scyences and
studies.

Endelechia, a consummate perfection, which Aristotle did put besides the
four elementis.

Endeploro, aui, are, to make intercession with tears.

Endoprocinctum, when men went out of the camp unto battle.

Endromis, a certain garment which is heary and rough like to yrysshe
mantelles, which men used in baynes and places of exercise.

Endymion, the name of a man, which found the course of the moon. Wherefore
the poets feigned, that the moon loved him, and descended down to kiss him,
whiles he slepte.

Enectus, slain.

Energia, a demonstration, when a thing is so descriued, that it seems to the
reder or herer, that he beholds it, as it were in doing, an efficacye or
operation.

Energificus, effectual.

Eneruis, and eneruus, without synewes.

Eneruo, aui, are, to debilitate or make feeble.

Engaddi, a city in Judea, from whens the precious balm comes.

Enim, forsothe. sometime it is expletiue, and does but fill up a sentence, to
make it sound well. sometime it is a copulative.

Sed enim, but for as much.

Enimuero, forsothe.

Enipeus, a river of Thessaly, nere to which the batayl was fought between
Caesar and Pempei

Eniteo, tui, ere, to endeavor, to enforce to do a thing

Enitor, teris, enixus sum eniti, ide^ quod eniteo.

Enixa, a woman late delivered of child.

Enixe, and enixum, diligently, with all force.

Enixus, us, delyuerance of child.

Enixa opera, trauayl, wherein a man imployeth all his puissance.

Enna, a city of Sicile, situate in a high place.

Ennius, an old latin poet, borne at Tarentu^, a city now in the royalm of
Naples, as some do suppose at a town called Rhudii in Italy, and was brought to
the cite of Rome by Cato the Censor. for his lerning and most honest conditions
he was interly beloved of Scipio Affrican, wherefore he causid his image to be
set on his sepulcher. he made many books in sundry kinds of versis, but the
style that he vsid was very ancient and homely, but they contained much grave
and substancyall sentences of greatte wisdom. He dyed at the aege of.lxx.
years.

Enoch, a man's name in holy scripture.

Enodis, enode, without a knot.

Enodo, aui, are, to cut away the knottes, or to vnknytte.

Enormis, me, great out of measure.

Enos, was a great city nygh to the mountayn called Lybanus before Noes flood,
wherein dwelled Gyantes, which had dominion over all the world from the son
going down to the son rysynge. Berosus. li. 1.
They trusting in the greatness of their bodies and strength, inuentynge armure
and weapon oppressed all men, and gyuyng them selves to all bodylye lusts,
they found pauillyons, instruments of musyke, and all wanton pleasures. They
also did eat men, procured delyueraunce of chylderne before their full time,
and prepared them into delycate meats. They companyed carnally with their own
mothers, their daughters, their systers, with men and with beasts. And no
myschiefe there was, which they did not ^ommyt, despisours of god and all
relygion.

Enotesco, scere, to come to knowledge.

Ens, entis, the being of every thing.

Ensis, a sword.

Enterocele, a disease, when the bowels be fallen into a man's codde.

Enthymema, matis, an imperfecte syllogism lackyng the mayor, or the minor.

Enucleate clearly.

Enucleo, aui, are, to take out the kernelle of a nutte. It is alsoo to
declare or make plain a sentence.

Enyalius, the son of Bellona.

E ANTE O.
EO, is, iui, ire, to goo.

Eo inficias, I deny.

Eo obuiam. I go to mete with one.

Eo uenum, ire uenum, to be sold.

Eo, therefore, forasmoche, unto that.

Eo loci, in that state.

Eodem loci, in the same place or state.

Eo secius, never the less.

Eo usque, in so much.

Eon, the compass of the eye.

Eous, the east.

E ANTE P.
EPACTA, things added to.

Epaminondas, was a Theban borne, son of an honest gentylman called Polymnus:
he was in sundry qualities excellent, as well of the body as of the mind.
For in all kinds of musycke he was perfectely instructed, and therewith daunced
excedyngely well. He wrastelyd and ran no man better, and in arms he was
strong, valyant, and hardy, and in marcyall polyrye equal to any than
living. Also he was wonderful well learned in philosophy, specially in that
which was taught of Pythagoras, which was the most dyffuse ^ pure doctrine,
contaynynge most secret and divine mysteries, whereunto he added most noble
virtues, for he was temperate, wise, of great gravity, vsyng time wisely,
perfect in chiualry, of courage invincible, so diligent in obseruyng troth,
that he would at no time lie, neither in game nor in erneste. He was also
continent, merciful, and wonderful pacient, suffering wrongs not only of the
people, but also of his friends. Moreover he was secret and trustye, so
faythefull and loving to his friends, that when any of them were taken in
wars, or any of their daughters ready to be married, and they not able to set
them forth according to their degres, he would assemble the residue of his
friends, and exhort them to give to him which lacked, according to their
powers. And he him self would lyberallye give to the quantity of his
substance, which was but lyttel, although he were in great authority (for he
refused al rewards, saving thanks only.) And when he had made a good
sum of that which was granted, before he received it, he brought him that
should have it, unto them that should give it, that he of them might receive
it, and know how much he was beholden to every of them. he oftentimes
refused great sums of money and rich presents sent to him by pryncis, all
thowghe he were poor, saying: If the thing were honest which he was
required to do, he would do it because it was good without any reward: if it
were ill or not honest, all the goods of the world, should not make him to do
it: If it were profitable unto his country, he was bounden and redye to do it
freely. If it were otherwise, all the riches of the world moughte not
counteruayle the love that he bare to his common weal. In eloquence no
Thebane moughte be compared unto him, and his sentences were grave and very
compendious, wherewith in counsayles he vanquished and did put to rebuke great
and famous orators. In battle he overcame the Athenienses and Lacedemones,
and in one day had the vyctory of all Greece. At the last in a battle at
Mantinea, between the Thebanes and the Lacedemones, he was stricken and wounded
unto death with a long spear, the head remaining stylle in his body, yet
retained he life until it was told him that his host had the vyctory,
than said he: I have lived long enough, for I dye unvanquished, the iron
being drawn out of his body, he dyed, before the incarnation of
Christ.CCClxxii. years. This one thing is to be well considered (as Probus
faith) The city of Thebes before Epaminondas was born, and also after that he
was dead, was under the rule and in subjection of other people. But during the
time that he was a governor in the weal public, that city was head and
pryncipall over all Greece, by the which it may be well perceived, that one such
noble man is more tha^ a hole city

Epanalepsis, a replication or repetition.

Eparcus, the president of a prouynce.

Epatica, an herb called lyuerwort.

Epauxis, an increase.

Ephabus, the son of Iupyter that builded Memphis in Egypt.

Ephebia, the age wherein one enters into the state of a man.xv. or.xvi. years.

Ephebus, he that is of that age.

Ephemera febris, is a fever so called, because that it is apt to be curid in
one day, Galen.
but being neglected, Met. li. 10.
it comes to be in diverse sorts of fevers, and according to the natures of
them co^tynueth lengar The cause thereof is of sundry occasyons, sometime of
outward heates, sometime of much labor or werynes. Alex. Tral lian. li. 5.
sometime of oppilation, sometime of replecion, specially of diverse meats and
drynkes, otherwhiles of long abstinence or watch, or of corruption of that
wherewith the body is nouryshed.

Ephemeris, a book wherein is written that, which is done daily, or a book of
reckenyng.

Ephemeron, is that which apothecaries do call Hermodactilus, an extreme purger
of fleme.

Ephesus, a noble and ancient city in Asia the less, it is interpreted by
saynet Hierom. My will, there runs by it a great river called Caystrus, out
of the which be derived many other ryuers. In this city was the famous temple
of Diana, which was numbered among the seven wonders of the world. It was
edified by all Asia in a Cxx. years, and was set in a ferme or maryce, the
foundation being first laid with coals trodden or rammed hard, tha^ flyces of
wolle laid thereon, and all this was to save it from erthquakes. The temple was
in length. 425. foot, in bread. 220. In it were 127. pyllours, every of
them.lx. foot high, made by kings, the roufe was of cedre trees and the
doors of cypres. This temple was burned by a leude person of purpose to get a
renoume in hystories thereby, for as much as he was covetous of glory, and
having none excellent quality to attain thereto, he puttyng wild fire into
the roufe, did burn all the temple. his name was Herasostratus, as Strabo
writes. Thereof proceeded a proverb, Herasostrati gloria, applied to them,
which do seek for a renown or praise of a myscheuous act.

phi, a measure contaynyng.iii. busshels.

Ephialtes, is a disease, where one slepyng thinks, that a great weight lies
on him, and takes his wynd from him, it is of some callid the mare, which is
none other thing but a fumositie risynge from the stomach or heart up to the
brain, there oppressynge the virtue animal.

Ephimeron, the great wild lylye.

Ephippium, the harneys of a horse or mule.

Ephira, rae, or Ephire, res, a town of Achaie, which now is called
Corinthus.

Ephod, a stole, which a priest wears about his neck, when he is at mass.

Ephori, were certain men in authority among the Lacedaemonians, as Tribuni
were among the Romans, to whom men might appele from the king, as in Rome
they might appele from the co^sules unto the Tribunes. It was alsoo the name
of a writer of hystories scholar to Aristotle.

Epibata, a soldier on the sea.

Epibarra, the ladder that goth up to the top castle of a ship.

Epicedium, verses in commendation of a dead man.

Epicharmus, the name of an excellent philosopher of Syracuse.

Epicheremata, arguments made in reasoning.

Epicoenum, of both kinds male and female.

Epicterus, the name of a stoike philosopher.

Epicurus, the name of him, which did put the principal goodness in
voluptuositie.

Epidamnus, Stra. li. 7.
a town in the southwest part of Greece on the sea side, called also
Dyrrachiu^.

Epidaurus, a city in Greece in the country called Achaia, wherein there was a
famous temple dedicate to Aesculapius, to the which a great multitude of sick
people did resort, and some in their sleep had showed unto them that medicine,
whereby they shoulds be cured of their syckenesse.

Epidicticon, demonstratyue.

Epidromes, the armynge of a net.

Epigastrium, all the belly, from the boulke down to the privy members, which is
called also Abdomen.

Epiglossis, or Epiglottis, a small thing in the innermost part of the tunge,
like a little tunge

Epigramma, a superscription.

Epigrammatarius, he that writes verses called Epigrammata.

Epigriphus, he that has a crooked nose.

Epijcia, or Epijces, is that part of justice called in latin Aequum and bonum,
in english there is not yet any one word sounden therefore, but that thereby may
be understand, that equity which omitteth part of the rigor or extremity
of a law that is written, or co^formeth justice to the occasion newely happened,
which was not remembered of the makers of the law applyeng it to the thing
whereof least detryment may seem to ensue.

Epilepsia, called also Morbus comitialis, and Morbus sacer, and morbus
Herculeus, in english the falling sycknes, or foul evil, is after Alexander
an affection of the heed and brayn in the part wherein is contained
understanding, the chief of al sencis. Galen says it is a cold humor, wherewith
the celles of the brayn are not perfectly stopped, prohibiting the soul to
execute his operation, until nature has eft sons openid the natural cu^dites
of the brain, removing that humor. It happens (as Constantinus writes) of one
of three causes, either of a humor fleumaticke or melancholye bredde in the
hyndermoste part of the brayn, or of a wind gross and cold, oppressing the
brain, or of humors abou^dyng to much in the stomach, so that the sum thereof
ascends up to the brain by the synewes, by whose grossenes the ways or
passages of the vital spirits are stopped.

Epilepticus, he that has that disease.

Epilogus, a conclusion in writing or speaking.

Epimelis, is a kind of medlar tree, the fruit whereof has in it three stones.
lo. Agric.


Epimenides, a noble philosopher in the isle of Creta, now callid Candy, who
being a young man sent by his father to seek for a sheep, being weary, and for
the heat of the day, he went into a den or holowe place in an hylle to rest
him, where he slepte continually.lvii. years, and than being awaked, he went
forth to seek for his sheep, and not finding him, he returned home, and
fyndyng an other man dwelling in the house, which was his fathers and beholding
every thing alteryd, he went into the city, where at the last he found his
younger brother, being a man of great years, of whom he knew all that was
happened, and after became a meruaylous philosopher, and wrate of the nature of
things, and of the divine generation, and had the gift of prophecy as some do
suppose. He lived as Lacrtius writes.Clxxix. years, after other men's
sayings.Cxciiii. years, and was before the incarnation of Christ.Cxlvii. years.

Epimythion, the declaration of a fable in a moral sense.

Epinicia, verses contaynynge praises.

Epinicium, feast or joy made for victory, as bon fyres and bankettes thereat.

Epinyctides, a wheale or poushe, which ryseth on the skyn by night.

Epiphanes, notable or famous.

Epiphania, a manifestation, it is also a solemn feast in the church.

Epiphonema, an exclamation.

Epiphora, a syknes of the eyes called the droppynge of the eyes.

Epirrhedium, a waggen or carte.

Epiroticus, ca, cu^, of the contray called Epirus.

Epirus, a regyon in the southeweste part of Greece, ioynyng to the sea callid
Ioniu^, and marches on the north upon Thessaly, on the east upon Achaia, on
the weste upon Albania.

Episcopatus, a bysshopryche.

Episcopium, a bishops palayce or house, or a place to espy out of.

Episcopius, a, um, pertaynyng to espiall.

Episcopus, a bishop, sometime an espy. sometime a clerk of the market.

Epistathmi, by the interpretation of Budeus, are harbigers, appoynters of
lodgings, for the trayn of princis, whereunto Budeus deuiseth a latin name
calling them Designatores mansionarij, or cretarij, but in mine opinyon the
greek name may be vsyd well and properly.

Epistola, a letter sent from one to an other.

Epistolium, a little epistle.

Epistomium, a spoute sendynge forth water from a cundyte, a tappe or other
like thing.

Epistylium, the chapter of a pyllar.

Epitaphium, a scripture written on a grave or sepulcher.

Epithalamium, a song being sunge at a wedding, or verses made in the praise
of them that are married.

Epithema, a medicine laid to the region of the heart or liver, to cool it.

Epithetes, a deceyuour.

Epitheton, an addition, properly applied to a thing for some notable quality,
which it signifies, as Senum mare, the rough sea, Garrula pica, the chattering
pie. Crudelis Nero, the cruelle Nero. Campi florigeri, the flourysshing fields.

Epithymia, miae, concupiscence, desire.

Epithymum, Ruellius.
is the flower of the harder time like unto sauery, the tops being thin and
light, and having the stalks like unto hears. The difference between that
and the other flower of time, is, that this is green of the color of an
herb, the other is white. It grows most specially in Creta, Constant.
now called Candy. It is hot and dry in the myddell of the third degree,
and purges melancoly or black choler.

Epitogum, i^, a garment worn upon a gown.

Epitome, mes, a brydgement or breuiate.

Epitritus, a foot of four syllables, of which one differs ever from the
other three.

Epithyrum, a mean to conserve olyues.

Epitrope, procuration, wardshyp.

Epityrum, a chese cake.

Epothedice, good breakers of horses.

Epos, epodos, a kind of verse or song, which contains things concerning as
well god as man also which has the first verse lengar than the second, as,

Beatus ille qui procul negotijs

Vt prisca gens mortalium.

Epulae, arum, meats, also a bankette made to many persons.

Epularis, are, belonging to a feast or banquet.

Epularis sermo, communication mete for a feast or banquet.

Epulatorius, a, um, apt to be eaten at a feast or banquet.

Epulis, flesh that grows on the gummes about a man's teethe.

Epulo, nis, plurali epulones, men boden to a great feast, or they which come
vnboden, to eat the reuertion. Among the Gentiles they were called by the
priests, to eat that which was left of the sacrifice.

Epulor, ari, to eat at feasts or bankettes.

Epulum, a great feast, whereunto all the people assembled, which among the
old Romans was made either to the honor of some of their goddis, or at the
buryenge of some notable personage. It may be now taken for a church feast,
Ci. pro L. Planco.
or feast of a brotherhead, or dinner made at a buryal or interment. It has been
sometime used to be taken for a banquet.

E ANTE Q.
EQuappium, an herb callid also Hipposelinon, in english Alysander.

Equa, a mare.

Equarius, Val. Max.
a, um, pertaining to horses.

Equarius medicus, a horse leache.

Eques, a horseman contrary to a foteman. some time it is taken for a knight:
but I suppose that among the Romans Equites, were taken for them, which we
call gentylmen.

Equester, stris, stre, pertaynyng to Eques, as,

Equestris ordo, the state or degree of ge^tylme^

Equestres copiae, the number or company of horsemen.

Equestria, the placis assigned to ge^tilme^, where they sat to behold any
solemn sightis or placis

Equiceruus, a beast in the orient having horns and a long mane to the
shulders, and a beard under his chyn, and feet round like a horse, and is as
great as an heart.

Equidem, verily, truly. sometime in a sentence it sygnifieth nothing but to
supply the number in a sentence.

Equiferus, Plinius.
a wild horse.

Equila, Varro.
a little mare.

Equile, a stable for horses.

Equimentu^, the hire of a stallio^ to seson a mare.

Equinus, na, number, of a horse.

Equio, iui, ire, wha^ a mare desires to be sesoned.

Equiria, runnyng with horses, a play dedicate to Mars.

Equisessor, a man on horseback.

Equisetum, an herb called horsetayle.

Equiso, onis, a horsbreker, sometime a horskeper

Equitabilis, le, able to be ryden. also a place, in which horses might
easily walk.

Equitatio, a riding.

Equitatus, an host of horsemen. also the act of ridyng, sometime the state or
order of ge^tylmen.

Equitium, the esquyry or company of the stable.

Equitius, the proper name of a man, and surname of a family in Rome.

Equito, aui, are, to ride.

Equuleus, a horsecolt. also a manner of torment made of burning plates, like to
a horse, where in men were tourmented.

Equulus, a nagge or little horse.

Equus, a horse.

Equus carpentarius, a cart horse, or charyotte horse. Equus citatus, a horse
taken up.

E ANTE R.
ERadico, Plaut. in Epidi.
care, to pluck up by the roots.

Eradicare aures alterius, to pulle oone hard by the ears.

Erado, rasi, ere, to scrape of, or out of a thing.

Eranthemum, a kind of camomylle having purple flowers.

Erasi, Pli. in pa^ neg.
men put out of wages.

Erasinus, the name of a river.

Erasistratus, a noble physician of the house of Aristotle, who for healinge of
king Antiochus received of Ptholomeus his son, a hunderde talentes, which to
amou^t in our money.xiiii.M.CCC.lxxv.li. he was before the incarnation of
Christ.CCxliii. years.

Erasus, a, um, rased or scraped out.

Erato, the name of one of the Muses.

Eratosthenes, the name of a philosopher.

Ercinia, a wonderful great wod in Germany.

Erciscere, to deuyde properly lands.

Erciscunde familiae, of household to be diuyded or parted among diverse heirs.

Ercius, one of the names of Jupiter.

Erebus, one of the ryuers of Hell.

Erectiore ai^o esse, to have a more lusty courage.

E regione, on the other side, on the contrary side

E re mea, uel tua, for my profyt or thine.

E re nata, by occasion whereof.

E re publica, for the profit of the public weal.

Erenibi, people in Arabia, which go naked.

Eremodicium, defaut of appearance at the day when one is bound to appear,
which in the digestes, tit de minor, infra. Et in cod. de iudicijs, Budaeus in
anno.
is corruptly rad Hermodicium.

Eremus, a desert or solytary place.

Eretum, a street in the Sabines town.

Erga, toward. Erga festum natalis Christi, against Christmasse.

Ergasterium, a warkehouse.

Ergastes, sieve Ergasticus, a workman.

Ergastularius, the gayler or keeper of the prison.

Ergastulum, a house where men were compellyd to work on stone or metal. now
it is taken for a prison, and sometime for the prisoners.

Ergastulus, a gayler, sommetyme it signifies a labourer.

Ergasylus, the proper name of a man.

Ergatum, an engyne to draw up things of great poyse or weight called a crane.

Erginus, was a tyrant, which Hercules subdued and slew.

Ergo, therefore. sometime it is spoken disdaynousely. Fac ergo quod lubet, than
do as the list. sometime exhortyng. Ergo age, go to. sometime it signifies
because Illius ergo, for his sake. Virtutis ergo, because of virtue.

Erguminus, a man possessed with an ill spirit

Erib^^a, the stepmother of Mercury.

Erica, an herb growyng in wodes, and is like to Maioram.

Erice, the sweet broom, which has leaves like to rosemary, but that the
leaves are some what pryckynge.

Erichinus, a fyshe of the sea called a rochet.

Ericthonius, the first king of Athenes, which invented a charyot.

Eridanus, a river in Italy, now called Padus in Italyon Po, nigh to the city
callid Patauiu^

Erigero^, Io. Agric.
an herb callid also senecio, grou^dswel

Erigo, rexi, rigere, to set up, to lift up.

Erigere scalas ad moenia, to set up ladders or a ladder to the walls of a
town.

Erigere ad spem, to put in hope.

Erigite animos, lift up your spirits.

Erimantus, a dyuynour.

Erinaceus, an hedgehogge or vrchyn.

Erinnys, the name of one of the furies of hell.

Eriphyle, the wife of Amphiaraus, and sister of Adrastus, which betrayed her
husband for a bracelet at the siege of Thebes.

Eripio, pui, pere, to take away, to deliver. sometime to make haste.

Eripe fugam, flee away in haste.

Eripuisti a me librum, thou haste taken my book from me.

Eripuisti me a periculo, thou haste delivered me from peril.

Eripuisti mihi pecuniam, thou haste taken my money from me.

Eris, an herb growing in Egypt, and may be interpretate contention.

Erithace, the meat of bees while they do warke

Erodius, a foul, the greattest that flies, and overcomes and eats the
egle.

Erogatio, distribution of things to other men, a lyberall gyunge.

Erogito, tare, to desire heartily.

Erogo, aui, are, to employ or bestow on a thing.

Eros, love.

Erotema, it is, a demand.

Erotematicus, he that often demands.

Errabundus, much wanderyng, or vacabunde.

Erratica, herbs which do grow of them selfs without culture, ye may call
them weeds.

Erraticus, ca, cum, that crepeth here and there, as Vitis erratica, a creping
vine, that shoteth out in diverse places.

Erratica herba, a runnyng wede.

Erratio, a going out of the way.

Erratus, Terent. in Adelphis
dus, Erratun, ti, n error or sin. Erro, aui, are, to err, to wander.

Errrare de uerbis alicuius, to mysvnderstand the words that one speaks.

Errones, starters aside, vagabundes.

Error, properly where falsehode is affirmed or taken for truth, or truth
for falsehod. some time ignorance, also deceypt.

Erubesco, bui, bescere, to be ashamid, or to blush

Eruca, an herb called Rokat. also a worm called the canker worm, which
commonly is upon colewortes.

Eructo, taui, tare, to belke or break wind out of the stomach.

Erudero, aui, are, to throw out, or carry away rubbel, as mortar, stones, and
other like things of old buyldyng decayed or pullyd down.

Erudio, iui, ire, to teach any art of science.

Eruditio, doctrine or teaching.

Eruditus, lernyd or taught.

Erugo, an unkindly moisture, whereby corn growing is putrified.

Eruila, a grain called tares.

Eruilia, some do suppose to be french beans.

Erumpo, rupi, rumpere, to braste out. sometime to leap forth.

Erumpet in neruum istaec fortitudo, is a proverb, which is dyuersely
expound, for it may signify: This courage of thyn may bring the to a halter, or
to sytte by the heels: or it may signify. This great strength or courage of
thine will come unto nothing. which proverb is taken of archers, which
oftentimes when they put forth most strength, they break the string of their
bow, and the arrowe falls down at their fete, whereby the shote is lost, and
comes to nothing.

Erunco, caui, care, to wiede out.

Eruo, ui, ere, to draw out with force.

Eruptio, is when an host issues hastily out of a camp or fortress, and
fallith on their enmies.

Eruum, a kind of pulse, called also Orobos, there is of it both white and
read.

Erymanthus, Plin. li. 4*
a mountain in Archady, where Hercules ouercamme a boore, that distroyed the
fields. There are also a wodde and a river of the same name.

Eryngium, or Erynge, a kind of thystels having long leaves, a long stalk
with a round knap full of long pryckes in the form of a star. The rote
whereof being condite or co^seruyd in honey with cynamome and cloves, comfort
nature, and styreth courage. It is called Yringium, and Centum capita.

Erysipelas, Galen.
an inflammation with rednes, wherewith is a fever or horror in the body.

Erythace, bees meat, while they labor.

Erythacus, a bird called Robyn redbreast.

Erytheus, was a king of Athenes.

Erythios, an herb called read beetes, as I do suppose.

Erythraeum mare, the red sea, so called of a king called Erythrus, which in
englysh signifies read. For in deed the water of that sea is of the color of
water, as diverse greatte authors, and also experyence do affirm.

Eryx, the name of a mountain in Cicyle, and of a city thereon builded, wherein
was edified a temple to Venus, whereof Venus is called Erycina.

Quid geminas Erycina meos sine fine dolores? O Venus, why doste thou
contynually double my sorrows.

E ANTE S.
ESalas, Epiphanius
was a prophet in Jerusalem the tribe of Judah, Hierony.
in whom was such abundance of the spirit of prophecye, Eusebius.
that he prophesied so much of Christ, that he seemed to be rather an
Euangeliste, than a prophet. He was of such holiness, that in the time of
king Ezechias, when a city was besieged, he by his prayer optayned of god,
that water sprange up in little quantity, so that the people did not perish
for lack of water, And when the enemies sought every where to assuage their
thyrste, they moughte not find water. And when the enmies had won the city,
and besieged Seloum, as often as the Jews came for water, the water ran out
of the earth abundantly, and they took water, but the strangers when they
came, could not find it. This holy man for his liberty of speech in rebukyng
the sin of the pryncis and people, and prophecienge of the vengeance of god
upon the cou^tray and people, was cut in two partis with a saw, and buried
under an oak, but afterward he was tra^slatid and laid by the sepulture of
ki^gis, he was before the incarnation of Christ.96. years.

Esalon, is a bird, which breaks crows eggs, and her birds be distroied
by the wolf, and likewise she kylleth the wolfes whelps, if she may come by
them.

Esau, the son of Isaac, and brother of Jacob.

Esca, all manner of meat, as well for men as beasts.

Escarius, a, um, pertaining to meat.

Escaria mensa, a table whereat men do eat meat.

Esculentus, ta, tum, any thing to be eaten.

Esculus, an oak bearing akornes.

Esito, aui, are, to eat.

Esse in amicis, to be one of his friends.

Esseda, Cic. fam. epist.
a wayne.

Essedarius, a charyot man.

Essedo nes, a people which do eat their friends when they be dead, and drynk
in the sculles of their heads.

Esseni, or Essei, people inhabytynge the innermost part of Judea toward the
west, Plinius. 5.
which do live without women, Solinus.
and do contemn gold and silver, and all other riches, and do live by eating
of dates. There resorteth continually unto them by the ordinance of god men
from diverse parts, so that their company do never fail, but none is received,
except the merit of his virtue and chastity does advance him.

Esto, be it.

Estrix, a woman rauenour or deuourer.

Esuriales feriae, wake days.

Esuries, Varro.
hunger.

Esurigo, idem.

Esurio, Plautus in persa.
onis, an hungry fellow.

Esurio, iui, ij, ire, to be a hungerde.

E ANTE T.
ET, and, as well. Te admirantur and ciues and hospites, as well thy country
men as strangers do wonder at the. Sometime it sygnyfyeth but, by an
interrogation, sometime that is to say. Annos natus iam sexaginta, and senex.
Now three score years old* that is to say, an old man.

Etenim, for also, semblably, surely.

Etesiae, wyndes which do commonly blow in summer, about the Canycular days.

Ethalia, the name of an isle in the sea called M Ligusticum, which is by Ieane.

Ethanion, the name of a certain vessel.

Etheocles, the son of Oedipus and Iocasta his mother.

Ethicus, moral.

Ethmus, the myddell bridge of the nose.

Ethnicus, a Gentyle.

Ethologos, he which with voice, gesture, and countenance expresses the
manners of men.

Ethopela, an imitation of other men's manners.

Ethici pictores, paynters, which in pictures do lively set out the manners and
affections of men.

Etiam, also, more over, yea, ye forsothe.

Etiamne, is it so? is that inoughe?

Etiamnum, yet, until than, until that time.

Etiamnunc, until now.

Etiamsi, although.

Etruria, a country in Italy called Tuscana.

Etrusca lingua, the Tuscane tungue.

Etrusci, Tuscanes.

Etsi, albeit.

Etymologia, true saying, or true exposition, or reason.

E ANTE V.
EVANDE, Mars daughter of Thebes the wife of Aesopus: and the wife of Capanei
was also so called, which loved her husband so fervently, that when she hard
he was taken at Thebes, she fell nere dead in a swowne, and after when his
funeral was celebrate, she lepte in to the fire.

Euado, si, uadere, to escape, to pass, with daungier, to appiere, to clyme,
to deliver, to be, to come to.

Euadere ad frugem bonam, Cice. pr^^lio.
to come to good thryfte, to thryue, to wax honest.

Euaenetus, a king of the Lacedaemonians.

Eualeo, lui, ere, to wax hole or strong.

Eualesco, scere, to wax very strong.

Eualuo, aui, are, to put out of the doors.

Euan, an exclamation to the praise of Bacchus and is as much to say, as Bone
puer, O good child.

Euander, the proper name of Carmentis son, and is interpretate a good man. He
left his country Archadia, and came into Italy, and entering into the mouth
of Tiber, and expulsynge the inhabitauntes, rested in the hill Palatine, where
he began to build the town Palanteum.

Euaneo, and Euanesco, scere, to vanyshe away.

Euangelia, orum, pluraliter. were sacrifyces and solemn prayers made after
good tidings.

Euangelium, good tydinges. It is also a reward given for good tidinges. now
it sygnifieth the gospel.

Euanidus, a, um, unfruitful.

Euanno* are, to van corn or other like thing.

Euapelus, a fool or ydeote.

Euax, Plautus.
an interiection of reioysynge. Euax iurgio uxorem tandem abegi. Heida, I have
yet at the last driven my wife away with chiding.

Euboea, an isle in the Greek sea, and the name of the city situate in the
same.

Eubulus, the name of a story writer, and is interpretate prudent.

Eucarpia, a city of Phrigia, where grow great plenty of very fair grapes.

Euceria, oportunitye.

Eucharistia, good grace, a rendrynge of thank. It is now taken for the
sacrament of the altar.

Euchila, meats of good juice.

Euclides, the name of a famous geometrician.

Eudoxia, good renoume, or good fame.

Eueho, uexi, uehere, to carry out. sometime it signifies to extol or lift up.

Euemerus, the name of an old story writer.

Euenire, to happen by chance.

Euenit ex sententia, it came to pass as I, thou, or he would have it.

Euenit praeter sententiam, aut praeter spem, It happened other wise than I,
thou, or he thought, or trusted.

Euenus, a river descendynge from Thrace, and deuidynge Calydonie.

Euenta, things which happen in conclusyo^.

Euentus, tus, hap. sometime it is taken for the end or conclusion of a thing.

Euentum praestare, to warrante all that which shall happen.

Euerriator, he that has goods of the testatour with condition, that if he
perfourm not his last will, or do disturb it, he shall lose all that he has.

Euerriculum, a fyshynge net called a drag.

Euerro, ri, rere, to swepe clean.

Euersio, destruction.

Euersus, a, um, dystroyed.

Euerto, ti, tere, to turn up set down.

Euestigio, by and by, at an instant.

Euganei, people of Venece.

Euganei montes, mountains in Italy by Padowe.

Euge, well done.

Euhoe, Plaut. in Men.
a noise, which they do make that are in great heaviness and waylynge.

Euidens, entis, euydent, apparaunte.

Euidenter, clearly.

Euilla, a country in the oryent, about the which the river Phison, which we
call Ganges, that comes out of Paradyse, does run.

Euiratus, of womanly or chyldishe conditions. also he that lacks his
genitours.

Euiresco, scere, to become grene.

Euiro, aui, are, to take away a man's members of generation.

Euiscero, aui, are, to bowell or draw out the guts of any thing.

Euiscus, called also Althea, an herb named great malowe.

Euito aui, are, to fly, to eschew or beware.

Eulogium, a word well spoken, a praise, a benediction.

Eumelus, the son of Admetus king of Thessaly, gotten on Alcesta his wife.

Eumenides, furies of hell.

Eumolpus, a man's name of Athenes, whom Suidas writes to be the son of
Museus the poet.

Eumonides, a man's name of Thebes.

Eunomia, Budeus.
a just constitution or ordinance of laws. Also due obedience of the laws.

Eunomius, was a great heretic of the sect of Arrius, whereunto he added of his
own malice, that the son was in every thing unlike to the father. And that
the holy ghost had no medlynge with the father nor the son. Moreover he
affyrmed, that all they which kept the faith that he taught, should be
saved, had they committed never so great a sin, and continued in it. He was
about the year of our lord.353.

Eunucho, and Eunuchiso, to gelde men.

Eunuchus, a man gelded.

Euocati, soldiers, which for sum necessitye be sodeinly called out of the
fields unto battle.

Euoco, aui, are, to call out, to call forth, or call away.

Euocare testes, to bring forth witness.

Euolo, lare, to fle away. Also to escape. It signifies sometime to take away
by stelthe.

Euolao, uere, to turn hither and thither.

Euoluere se turba, to wind him self out of trouble.

Euomo, mui, mere, to vomyte, to cast out.

Euomere iram, to wreake anger.

Euomere uirus, to spyt out his poison.

Eupalia, a town in Locris, which some call

Eupalion, and some Eupolyon.

Eupatorium, an herb called agrimony.

Euphonia, good sound.

Euphorion, a poets name of Calcidony, who^ Gallus did translate.

Euphragia, an herb called eyebryght.

Euphrasinum, an herb called buglosse.

Euphrates, one of the ryuers, that come out of Paradise, which passes
through the city of Babylon.

Ephrosine, bourage.

Euphrosyna, the proper name of a woman. Also the name of one of the three
graces called Charites.

Eupilis, a lake in France Cisalpine.

Euripides, the name of an excellent poet among the Greeks, which wrate
tragedies most excellently.

Euripus, a small cundite rysynge of a greatte heyght. Also a dyche made to
enclose places to play in, in the stead of hedges* some do take it for a
small ponde or stewe. Also an arm of the sea, or a narrow passage between
two places.

Eurotonus, a northeast wind.

Europa, is the third part of the world, and is divided from Asia with the
great seas called Hellespontus, Propontis, and Bosphorus Thracius, and Pontus
Euxinus. And has the vttermoste bounds in the northeaste the river called
Tanais. And from Affrike it is dyuyded by the sea called Mare mediterraneu^. It
was also the name, of a fair maiden daughter of Agenor king of Phoenicia, who^
Iupyter transformynge him self in to the form of a bull, did rauyshe, as
poets did write: which of some is interpreted, that Jupiter carried her away
by force in a ship, in a deck or maste whereof was a baner or stremer, wherein
was painted a bull.

Eurotas, a river that runs before the town of Lacedemonia.

Eurus, the cast wind.

Euryale, the daughter of king Minois. there was an other of that name, he
daughter of Proetus king of Argiue.

Euryalus, the name of oone of the princes of Peloponnese. Vergil feyneth a
Trojan to be so called.

Eurydame, was the wife of Leutichis, king of Spartans.

Eurydice, the wife of Orpheus.

Eurylochus, the king of Phlegia, which destroyed Thebes, before Cadmus bulded
it.

Eurynomus, a dyuell whom as the aunciente Greeks did suppose eat and
consumed the flesh of dead men, leauyng the bones bare. whom they painted in
a terrible figure, having long tethe or tuskes, sitting in the skin of a
vulture, of color between black and blewe.

Eurypylus, one of the sons of Hercules that reigned in the isle Cous.

Eurythmia, is a beaultye in the true furminge of the members, where the heyght
accords with the bread, and the bread also with the length. finally all
thing answering to his just proportion.

Euterpe, one of the Muses.

Eutheca, a store house.

Euthymia, quietness, surety of mind, or hearts case.

Eutices, was an heretic and abbot of a monastery in Constantinople, about the
year of our lord.450 He affyrmed that Christ had but one only nature, that
is to say, divine, or of god, like as he was one person. This heresy was
condemned in the counsel of Ephesine, and Eutices sent into exyle.

Eutrapelia, gentylnes good manners.

Eutrapelus, gentle and pleasant.

Euxinus pontus, a part of the sea, which deuideth Europa from Asia.

E ANTE X.
EX, signifies of, or fro.

Ex aduersum, ^^rent. in ^el.
even against it, on the other side.

Ex aduersum ei loco, against that place.

Ex aequo and bono, according to equitye and reason.

Ex aequo and bono facere, to do justly or indifferently.

Ex animo, of good will, of a good courage.

Ex ante diem Nonarum Iuniarum, the seventh day of June.

Ex argumento, in token thereof.

Ex composito, as it was agreed.

Ex dignitate tua, and ex repub. facis. Thou do according to thine
authority, and for the weal of thy country.

Ex dignitate nostra, (...). epist.
according to our estate or dignity.

Ex dignitate tribuere, to give according to his estate.

Ex equo pugnare, to fight on horsbacke.

Ex fide, ^ad At.
fama. Summa erit haec, statues, ut ex fide fama, reque mea uidebitur This
shall be the hole effect, that thou do, as it shall seem for mine honesty,
according to the trust that I put in the, and for my profit.

Ex insidijs, by treason.

Ex more, according to the custom.

Ex superabundanti, more over.

Exacerbesco, ere, to wax sharp.

Exactio, a pyllynge of the people.

Exactor, a demaunder of money. some englysh it a Comtroller. I take it to be a
gatherer of toll or tax.

Exactus, ta, tum, passed, very diligent, exact, expelled, demanded,
perfectely done or performed.

Exacuo, cuere, to make very sharp, to steer.

Exaedifico, aui, are, to build perfectly. also to drive out of the house.

Exaequo, quare, to make egall.

Exaeuio, uire, to wax gentle or mylde.

Exaggeratio, a heapynge to gether.

Exagito, aui, are, to vex, to anger.

Exagoga, rent, revenues.

Exagogae, they which carry any thing out of the house.

Exalburno, nare, to take out the fat juice that is in some wood.

Exalto, aui, are, to mount or lift up. sometime to praise very much.

Exaluminati, oryent perles.

Examen, minis, a swarm of bees. Also the nedyll or tungue in balaunces and
beams. Some time it signifies a just examination or trial.

Exanima infantium, a company or sort of children.

Examino, aui, are, to examine.

Examo, mare, to love well.

Examurco, aui, are, to draw oil clean from the mother.

Examussim, justly, by rule.

Exanclo, aui, are, to draw out clean, to emty. sometime to suffer, to
vanquishe, to make. Non potest hic sine tua opera exanclari clauus, This nail
can not be made without thy help.

Exanguis, gue, without blood, tymerous, or fearful.

Exanimalis, without soul or life.

Ex animo est, it is as nature requires.

Ex animo facio, I do it with my good will, or as my mind gives me.

Ex animi sententia, according to mine appetite, or as I would desire it.

Ex animo illi faueo, I favor him with all my heart.

Exanimatus, ta, tum, made aferde, or troubled in mind. sometime it signifies
dead.

Exanimo, Plautus.
aui, are, to kill. some time to make aferde. Priusquam intus redij exanimatus
fui. Or ever I came in again I was made aferde. Q. Curt.
Multos exanimauit rigor insolitus niuis. The unaccustomed chyllyng of the snow
depryued many of their lives.

Exanimus, ma, mum, and Exanimis, me, dead, put in fear.

Exanio, Columel.
aui, are, to put clean away.

Exanthema, a wheale or a poushe in a man's skin.

Exardeo, si, dear, to be vehemently inflamed.

Exardesco, scere, to wax hot, or to be vehemente.

Exare^io, fieri, to be dried up.

Exareo, rere, to be dry.

Exaresco, sci, scere, to dry.

Exarmo, aui, are, to make tame, properly to break the tethe of wild beasts.
Also to unarm, or to take harnes from a man.

Exarmare actione^, to make the action faint or feeble.

Exarmare nauem, to take away the tackelynge from a ship.

Exaro, aui, are, to care well. also to write.

Exasceare, to polysshe, or make play^e, as carpenters do after that they have
hewed.

Exaspero, aui, are, to make sharp. Also to make very angry.

Ex ass, of the hole. Haeredem fecit ex ass. He made him heir of all the
hole.

Exauctorati, soldiers or servants put out of wages, or dismissed of their
service.

Exauctoratus, deposed or put out of office.

Exauctoro, aui, are, to put out of wages. sometime to disgrade a knight, or
other like.

Exaudio, iui, ire, to here beneuolentely or perfectely.

Exaugeo, gere, to increase much.

Exauspicaui ex uin culis, I have had ill luck sens I came out of prison.

Exbalisto, aui, are, to trumpe or deceive. Ego hunc communem meum, atque
nostrum omnium hostem exbalistabo lepide, I will featly deceive this mine
ennemie, and all ours in commune.

Excalceo, ceaui, are, to pull of hosen or shoes.

Excalfacio, cere, to make very hot.

Excandefacio, feci, facere, to chaufe or make angry, to make very hot.

Excandescentia, vehement anger or wrath.

Excandesco, sci, scere, to be very angry.

Excanto, aui, are, to charm. some time to shute out. Plautus.


Excarnificatus, torn or rent with tourmentes

Excarnifico, caui, care, to rent or cut in pieces.

Excedo, cessi, dear, to depart or go forth, to pass or excede.

Excessit ex ephebis, Terent. in Andria.
he passed boys age^ he waxed a man.

Excedere ex pueris, to be passed boys age.

Excedere officium, to do more than his duetye.

Excellens, excellent, surmountinge.

Excello, li, ere, to excel.

Excelsitas animi, the valyantnes or heyght of courage.

Excelsus, a, um, high or great.

Exceptio, an exception.

Excepto, aui, are, to take or draw to.

Exceptor, oris, he that writes fast that which other men do speak.

Excerebro, aui, are, to beat out the brayns of any thing.

Excerno, creui, cernere, to shyte, properlye it is to try out the ill from
the good.

Excerpo, psi, pere, to gather here and there the chief of any thing.

Excetra, a serpente, of whom the head being cut of, three came up for it. It
was also called Hydra.

Excidium, the sackynge of a town or city, or the utter destruction thereof.

Excido, cidi, cidere, to fall out of a thing, to destroy, also to cut out of
a quary of stone.

Excidit animo, it is out of my mind.

Excidere animo, to be forgotten.

Excidere formula, to lose his action.

Excidit numero ciuium, he is not of the number of citezens.

Excieo, ciui, cire, to move or shake out.

Excio, ciui, ire, to move vehemently, or to call out, to waken.

Excipio, excepi, excipere, to except, to take or receive, to try or
inserche, to separate, to take by craft, to gather, to hyde, to succeed to
resist without any busynes. Also to take unawares or suddenly.

Excipere furem, Plaut. i^ (...)
to receive a felone as an accessarye.

Excipere notis, to write in cifer, or other compendiouse form.

Excipula, a we will to take fish.

Excipuus, a, um, wherewith any thing is taken.

Exciso, aui, are, to crop, to tear, or to beat.

Excisus, a, um, gelded.

Excito, aui, are, to stere, procure, or encourage.

Exclamo, aui, are, to cry out, to call for aloude.

Excludo, to shyt out, to deliver, to hatche eggs, to make to appiere.

Excogitatio, invention.

Excogito, tare, to find or invent by thinking

Excolo, excolere, to garnyshe or deck. Also to have in reverence.

Excomposito, in order appointed.

Exconsules, and Exquestores, rehearsed in the Code of civil law do signify
(as Alciatus does affirm) they which are or have been in the dignytie of
Consul or Quaestor, but they did never minister in those offices, or took the
aduauntages thereunto belonging. Also they whose fathers were Consules or
Questores when they were borne. which assertion is contrary unto Petrus
Crinitus, who in the.xv. book De honesta disciplina, says that they were
called by those names after they had accomplyshed their ministration. which
sentence Alciatus sharpelye repr^ueth. Dispunctionum. li. 4.

Excoquo, quere, to boil a thing until it be dry.

Excorio, aui, are, to pluck of the skyn or hide of a beast.

Excors, excordis, a sole or a man harteles.

Excreo, aui, are, to spyt out.

Excrementa, things of digestion expulsed, moist or dry, Gale^ defin^
whereof there ben.ix. ordure, fleume, choler, melancholy, urine, sweat, fylthe
of the nose, spyttle, milk.

Excresco, excreui, excrescere, to grow out, or to grow much.

Excretio, is the superfluity of excrementes being in the body.

Excretum, the refuse or offall of any thing.

Excruciabilis, le, worthy to be tourmented.

Excrucio, are, to tourment.

Excubiae, arum, watch as well by day as by night.

Excubitor, he that watches.

Excubitus, watch.

Excubo, aui, are, to watch, as they which in battle, or in the guard of a
princes person do.

Excudo, excusi, excudere, to beat or stryke out, some time to find out with
study, to hatche. ^ergilius
Vt primum silicis, scintillum excudit Achates. as soon as Achates had stryken
fire of the flynte.

Exculco, care, to tread out or wrynge out.

Exculpo, psi, pere, to grave or intayle images, also to get any thing by
hearing of one.

Exculpere oculum, to thruste out ones eye.

Excurio, aui, are, to put out of company or court. (...).
Apollonium ideo, excuriauit, quia nihil habeba: Therefore did he put Apollonius
out of the court, because he had nothing

Excuro, rare, to dress a thing curiously.

Excuratus uictus, meat curiously dressed.

Excuratus homo, a galyarde fellow.

Excurro, rere, to run out of a place.

Excursio, a digression in speaking, a skyrmish in wars.

Excursor, a currour.

Excursus, sus, where one passes his bounds.

Excusabilis, le, that which may be excused.

Excusatius, more excused.

Excusatoria epistola, a letter of excuse.

Excuso, aui, are, to excuse.

Excussores equi, gambaldynge horses.

Excussorium cribrum, a rengynge syue. Also a course bulter.

Excussus, a, um, shaken.

Excutio, ssi, tere, to shake, to chose. Iuuentutem ex tota Asia excussimus. we
have chosen out all the young men that are in Asya.

Excutere aliquem, to rob one, to shake one out of his clothes.

Excutere iugum, to shake of the yoke.

Excutere lachrymas alicui, to make the tears come out of ones eyes.

Excutere uomitum, to make one to spue.

Excussi grandine, beaten with hayle stones.

Excutiunt cerebrum tua dicta, thy words do trouble my brain.

Exdecimo, aui, are, to tithe out.

Ex diametro opposita, so contrary the one to the other, that they may never
agree.

Exdisposito, by an order, of a purpose.

Exdorsuo, aui, are, to break the back bone.

Execo, aui, are, to cut without.

Execratio, cursynge.

Execro, aui, are, to abhor, to curse.

Execror, idem.

Exectus, gelded.

Exedo, di, dear, to eat as a worm or sore does, to eat up.

Exedra, a parlour, or other like place.

Exegematicus, a form of speaking, where the poet only speaks.

Exegeticon, idem quod expositiuum, uel enar ratiuum, by the which one
expounds or declares a thing.

Exemplar, a sample, whereby we attempt to make a thing like to it^s sometime
the oone is used for the other. Often times they both do signify an example,
where one thing is compared with an other.

Exemplum, an example to follow, eschew, or beware.

Exemptilis, le, that which may be taken away. or taken out.

Exemptus, exempte, or priuileged.

Exemptus est rebus humanis, he is dead.

Exeo, exiui, exire, to go out, to eschew, to braste out.

In memoriam exire, to be in remembrance.

Exit in fabulam, it is made a tale.

Exit de potestate, he is not able to govern him self: he is in ward, or
under a gardain.

Exentero, aui, are, to make a hole in a thing.

Exequiae, funeralles, the which are done in the buryall of any person.

Exequior, aris, ari, to execute the funeralles.

Exequor, eris, qui, to do or execute. sometime to declare or express.

Exequi mortem, to dye.

Exequi sermonem, to speak.

Exerceo, cui, cere, to exercise. some time to drive out of the house, to set
on warke, to use.

Exercere aetatem, to live.

Exercere Bacchanal, to be drunk.

Exercere discordias, and simultates, to have varyaunce or contention. also to
get or win.

Exercere sumptus, to get their expenses.

Excercere tellurem, to till well the ground.

Exercio, ciui, ire, to amend or repair.

Exercitatio, exerecyse, use, or custom.

Exercitatus, exercysed.

Exercitium, exercise or use.

Exercito, taui, tare, to exercise.

Exercitus, tus, an host of men of war.

Exercitus, ta, tum, exercised, used in labor, weryed, hardened.

Exero, erui, erere, to go forth, to draw out, as a man will draw out a
sword. Statius.
Fulgentemque exerit ensem, And he drew out his bright sword. also to lift
up.

Exerere uincula, to stryke of his gyues, or to take out of prison.

Exerto, aui, are, to show forth abroad.

Exertus, ta, tum, showed forth.

Exfio, I purge or cleanse.

Exfodio, dear, to dyg out.

Exgurgito, tare, to take or cast out of the channel or stream.

Exhaeredatus, disinherited.

Exhaeredo, aui, are, to disherite.

Exhaeresimus dies, the day which makes the leap year.

Exhalo, aui, are, to puff out.

Exaurio, iui, ire, to draw out clean, to make empty.

Exhaurire labores, to spend labor.

Exhebenum, a stone wherewith goldesmythes do polyshe gold.

Exherbare, to pluck up herbs or weeds.

Exherbandus est locus, Columel.
the place must be weeded.

Exherbatio, weedynge.

Exhibeo, bui, bear, to proffer, to set abroad, for all men to behold.

Exhibere negotium, to put to busynes, or trouble.

Exhibere rations, to make account.

Exhibere spectaculum, to make commune plays or triumph.

Exhillaro, rare, to comfort or rejoice.

Exhomologesis, confession.

Exhorreo, rui, rere, to fear horribly, or with trembling.

Exibilo, aui, are, to whistel or hysse a man out of the place.

Exifilare, idem.

Exigo, exegi, exigere, to expel or shut out. also to require, to inqui^^, to
do.

Exigere aetatem, Plautus.
to live.

Exigi matrimonio, to be deuorced.

Exigere nomina, Ci. in Ve.
to compel men to pay their dettes.

Exigere pecuniam, to demand money.

Exigere suppliciu^ ab aliquo, to punisshe one.

Exigere tempus, to pass forth the time.

Exigue, an aduerbe which signifies very little.

Exiguus, a, um, little.

Exilio, lij, iui, ire, to go out hastily, or to leap out.

Exilis, le, sclender, small.

Exilium, exy^e.

Exilica causa, a matter against them, which were in exyle.

Eximie, excellently.

Eximium, excellent, very great.

Eximius, a, um, excellent.

Eximo, exemi, mere, to take away, to except.

Eximere actione^, to bar one of his action.

Eximere ex aerarijs, where one has his Qui etus est in the Escheker, or other
like place, to discharge one upon his account.

Eximere ex reis, to acquit one of an offense.

Eximere noxae, Ti. Liuius
to release one of a trespass committed.

Exin, from thensforthe.

Exinde, idem quod exin, afterward, from thensforthe.

Exinantio, niui, ire, to emptye, to bring to naught.

Exinsperato, unlooked for, which no man hoped.

Existimatio, supposell. sometime reputation.

Existimo, aui, are, to trow or suppose, to decerne or judge.

Existo, extiti, existere, to be, to appear, to be set up, or advanced.

Exitiabilis, le, deadly.

Exitialis, le, deadely, or that causes death or myschiefe.

Exitium, death or myschiefe.

Ex iure manu consertum uocare, was a fourm of contention for land in this
wise: The demaundant before the judge said in this wise unto the tenaunte. Cice
(...) Murea^
The land which is in S. is mine. I say it is mine by the law, I require
the, try it there with me according to the law. The tenaunte answered: from
whense thou haste requyrred me to try with the according to the law, Ge^.
(...)
thense I do eftsoon appeal. Than went they together to the place in
demand, to the intent that they should bring with them a tyrfe of that gru^de
to the judge in the city, and in his presence demand and answer as for the
hole land which was in contention.

Exlex, he that lives without law, or out of law.

Exloquor, qui, to speak as it is, to speak al.

Exobsecro, crare, to make great desire.

Exoculatus, whose eyes be put out.

Exoculo, lare, to put out ones eyes.

Exoculasso, Plaut. i^ rude^^
sere, idem.

Exodia, were wanton toys myxte with verses in a comedy or interlude.

Exodium, a song at the end of a comedy or interlude. also the end of a
matter.

Exolesco, leui, lescere, to leave growing. sometime to grow myghtely.

Exoletus, he that is passed growing. also old or out of use. It signifies
also a man child abused against nature.

Exoluo, ui, uere, to unbind, to pay all clearly, to recompense or give in
reward, to deliver. Suspitione exoluere, to deliver from suspicion.

Exoluere religione, to discharge from vow or conscience.

Exomida, a garment with our sleues, a taberd or chymere,

Exonero, rare, to discharge or unburden.

Exopolis, he that dwells in the suburbs of a town or city.

Exopto, tare, to desire fervently, or wyshe.

Exorabilis, he that is easy to be entreated in a matter.

Exorabulum, a crafty form of desyringe or asking a thing.

Exorbeo, ^^ut. in ^idi.
bui, bear, to suck up.

Exorbito, aui, are, to go out of the tracke or carte lose, or to go out of the
right way.

Exorbo, (...) in phi.
bare, to make one that he can not se.

Exorcismus, an adiuration or coniuringe.

Exorciso, aui, are, to adjure or conjure.

Exorcista, an adiourour or coniurour.

Exordine, without ceassynge.

Exordior, iris, iri, to begin.

Exordium, a beginning.

Exorior, iris, iri, to be borne, to appear out, to rise as the sun does, to
invade.

Exorno, aui, are, to garnysshe or make fair, to apparayle rychely, to
ordeyne. sometime to make foul, or out of apparayle.

Exoro, aui, are, to induce or obtain by desire, to desire heartily.

Exorare ueniam, to ask pardon.

Exors, exortis, out of fellowship.

Exos, without bones.

Exosso, aui, are, to bone, or pluck out bones. Also to pull out the string
of a lamprey.

Exoticus, a, um, a stranger, that is come out of an other country, and
dwells here.

Expalleo, ^li. in epi ^laut. in ^a^ina.
lui, lere, to be pale.

Expallio, aui, are, to rob one of his garments.

Expalpo, aui, are, to grope out.

Expando, di, ere, to sprede out.

Expapillo, aui, are, to make naked to the pappes.

Expato, aui, are, to come abroad, or in to an open place.

Expectatio, Donatus.
desire of things certain and looked for.

Expectus, Donatus.
ta, tum, desired.

Expectati parents, Terent. in ^idelphis
were ill parents, and worthy to be hated, as who says, their death were
daily to be desired.

Expecto, aui, are, to tarry or abide, to observe or take heed. Expecto quid
uelis, I mark what thou will say: or else, I desire to know what thou
would. Also to hope. Expectate uenis: Thou come even as I would have the.

Expectoro, aui, are, to put out of the breast or stomach.

Expeculiatus, he that has nothing of his own.

Expedio, iui, ire, to deliver, to speed, to carry out.

Expedire manus, to hold up the hands.

Expedire rations, to dispatche matters.

Expedire rem, to declare the matter plainly

Expedire se cura to discharge him of care. ^^rent. in ^^orm.


Expedi, tell on quickly.

Expedibo, Pl. in epi.
for expediam.

Expedir, signifies also, It is expedient or necessary, it is come to pass.

Expeditum erat, it was expedient.

Expeditio, a setting forth toward battayl.

Expeditus, Plaut. in Trucul.
ta, tum, delivered, dispatched.

Expediti milites, soldiers in light harnes

Expello, puli, pellere, to expel or put out.

Expendo, di, ere, to ponder or way, to consider, to examine straightly, to
pay truly, to spend money.

Expendere scelus, to be punyshed justly for his offense.

Expensae, expenses, or dispenses.

Expensum, Caeli. Ci.
uel expensam, has also an other proper signification. Mentio facta est de
legione ea, quam expensam tulit C. Caesari Po^peius: Mention was made of the
legyon which Pompey reckened to be at the charge of Caesar. Sceuola.
Creditores suae expensum far debent: The creditours ought to bear the
loss, which is happened by their negligence.

Expensum far, to spend or lay out money.

Expergiscere, Expergefacere, Expergificare, to wake a man out of his sleep.

Expergiscor, eris, Expergifio, I am waked, or wake.

Expergefactus, ta, tum, wakened.

Expergitus, slepte inoughe, wakened by an other.

Expergo, experexi, expergere, to waken.

Experge te, Cicero
awake.

Expergere facias, idem.

Experrectus, idem quod expergefactus.

Experientia, experience.

Experior, iris, iri, to attempt, or assaye, or prove.

Expers, it is, without any part, lacking experience.

Expers doloris, without pain.

Expers lucis, without light.

Expers mortis, never dyenge.

Expertus, a man of experience.

Expertus, ta, tum, attempted, taught.

Expersus, sa, sum, spronge with lycoure, or weate.

Expes, without hope.

Expetendus, Plaut. in persa.
da, dum, worthy to be desired.

Expetesso, sere, to demand.

Expetisso, sere, to desire vehemently.

Expeto, iui, tij, ere, to desire much, or coueit, to happen, to will. sometime
to take, to pass over. Plaut. in Ruden.
Also to purchase. Mirum quin tuum ius meo periculo expetam. It is marvel,
but I shall purchase thy right with my great da^gier. Plaut. in Amph.
It is also to redounde or turn. Nam deum non par uidetur facere, delictum
suum, suamque culpam expetere in mortalem ut sinat: It is not sittinge for god
to do, that his offense and fault, should redounde to a mortal person.

Expetit tuam aetatem illud facere: Plaut. in penulo.
Thine age requires to do it.

Expetunt multa iniqua, many unhappy things chances.

Expiamentum, satisfaction.

Expilator, Asconius.
a robber, which leaves nothing behind him.

Expilo, aui, are, to rob, poll, or take by extortion, or deceypte, to spoil.

Expio, aui, are, to pacify god with satisfaction or prayer, when we think he
is displesed Expiare scelera.) Tua scelera dij immortales in nostros milites
expiaueru^t: Cicero in pisonem.
God has punyshed our men of arms for thyn offenses.

Expiro, aui, are, to dye.

Expiscor, aris, ari, to seek for fyshe, to fysshe out, or search privily, to
get or wyn. Tandem nescio quid ab eo expiscatur: Finally I can not tell what he
wynneth or gets by him, or what he trusts to have of him.

Explano, aui, are, to make plain.

Explanto, Columel.
tare, to pull up that which is set.

Explendesco, Sueton. in Tito.
scere, to appear clearly.

Expleo, eui, ere, to fill, fulfill. Also to saciate, to comfort.

Exple animum curis, Terent. in Hecyra.
put all care out of thy mind.

Explico, aui, are, to extend. also to unfold, to declare, to tell or show a
thing plainly.

Explicat ensem, Ouidius.
He draws out his sword.

Explicat and coenas unica mensa duas: Martialis.
He makes two suppers at oone table. Also to bring to pass.

Explica aestum meum, Cic in pis.
put me out of this fantasy or doubt.

Explicata, brought to pass.

Explodo, osi, dear, to drive out with noise or rebukes, or clappynge of hands.

Explorator, an espy, or privy serchour.

Exploratus, Cic. de senectute.
a, um, well known, or suerlye known.

Exploratum est mihi, I know surely, I am sure.

Exploratum habeo, idem.

Exploro, aui, are, to bewail with exclamation, to search out diligently, to
prove with searching, to be advised, to dry or exhauste, to espy.

Explosus, sa, sum, convicted or rejected.

Expono, sui, nere, to expowne or declare, to set or bring a thing out of
that, wherein it is, some time to cast out a thing, to the intent that it
may perysh. Also to spend, to set forth to be showed.

Exporto, tare, to bear or carry out.

Exposco, poscere, to ask or desire instantly.

Expositi, chylderne cast out to be peryshed.

Exposititij, the same.

Expositio, an exposition or declaration of any thing difficulte or hard to be
understand.

Expostulatio, a quarrel or complaynt.

Expostulator, he that complayneth of wrong done by his friend.

Expostulo, aui, are, to complain, to make a quarrel. also to will.

Expostulare iniuriam, to complain of wrong or displeasure, to him that does
wrong.

Express dicere, Plin^^^ (...) episto*
to speak properly and to the point.

Exprimo, to press or wrynge out, to express or declare plainly.

Exprobratio, a reproach.

Exprobro, aui, are, to imbrayde, to twi^e. also to lay in reproach.

Expromitto, misi, mittere, to promise or undertake for an other.

Expromissor, he that promy^^^ or is suertye for an other.

Expromo, prompsi, mere, to show forth, or open.

Exprompta memoria, a ready wit.

Expugno, aui, are, to win by assault or force.

Expulso, aui, are, to meue a thing with much thrustynge, or to put away.

Expulsor, and Expultrix, a putter away, man or woman.

Expuncti, were soldiers discharged, or put out of wages.

Expungo, punxi, pungere, to put away, or remove.

Expungor, geris, gi, to be cancelled, or put out, or rased. it is also spoken
of judges, when they be put out of commission. It is also to quite. as, Munus
munere expungitur: One good turn is quyt with an other.

Expuo, pui, puere, to spyt out.

Expuere miseriam ex animo, Tere^^ (...) (...)
to put mysery clean out from the mind, to forget mysery.

Expurgo, are, to make all clean.

Expurgare se, Plaut. i^ Mili^.
to declare him self innocente. of that which is laid unto him.

Expurgationem habere, idem.

Exputo, aui, are, to shrede or lop a tree, to cut clean away. (...)
Also to understand perfectely to coniecte.

Exputresco, Plaut. in curcul.
scere, to rot.

Exquiliae, a mountayn in Rome, where watch was kept.

Exquilinus mons, the same mountain.

Exquiro, exquisiui, exquirere, to search out.

Exquisite, and Exquisitim, exquisitly, with much study and diligence.

Exquisitus, ta, tum, exquisite, much serched for.

Exquisito opus est, it must be looked for.

Ex syngrapha agere, to do things extremely or rigorously, as it were that one
sued an another upon an obligation scalyd.

Exta, the inward, as the heart, the liver, the lu^ges or lyghtes, and the
spleen.

Extemplo, forthwith.

Extemporaneus, a, um, sudden.

Exte^poralis, and exte^poranea oration, an oration or matter spoken or written
without study.

Ex tempore, sodaynely, without study, or for the time.

Extendo, Plautus in Bacch.
di, dear, to exte^d, to continu, to prolo^ge

Extentare uires, to thrust out strength in doing a thing.

Extenuo, aui, are, to minyshe, or make little.

Exter, ra, rum, strange, commen far of.

Exterebro, aui, are, to perce through. also to inserche curyousely.

Extergeo, tersi, tergere, to wype clean.

Extergo, idem.

Exterminatus, banyshed.

Extermino, aui, are, to drive out, or pull down.

Externo, aui, are, to make mad.

Externus, na, number, which is not of that country, a stranger.

Extero, reri, terere, to beat out. also to whet or grynd.

Exterreo, ui, ere, to put in fear.

Exterus, ra, rum, that which is not of this country or place.

Extillo, aui, are, to drop out.

Extimeo, mere, to have great fear.

Extimesco, extimui, extimescere, to dread much

Extimus, a, um, the outwardmost, or last.

Extinguo, xi, gere, to put out, proprely as fire, which may be eftsoon
kyndled. sometime it signifies to slay or dystroy, sometime to make a
distinction or diversity between thyngis.

Extirpo, are, to pluck up by the roots.

Extispices, sothesayers by lookynge in the inwardes of beasts.

Extispiciu^, and extispicina, the craft of sothsaye^g.

Exto, titi, tare, to be, to remayn, to be apparent.

Extollo, extuli, extollere, to aduant or praise, also to lift up, to prolonge,
to magnify.

Extollere liberos, Plaut. in ^^lostel.
to bring up children.

Extorqueo, torsi, ere, to find out the troth by torments, to take away by
force, or pluck away.

Extorris, is he that is made to void, or is driven out of his country. also a
vagabunde.

Extortus, constrained by tourmentes.

Extra, without, except.

Extra iocum, in ernest.

Extra precium, Cicero.
above any price.

Extraho, ^ueto. in Claud.
traxi, trahere, to draw out.

Extrahere diem, to put of a matter from day to day. Caesar.


Extrahere certamen, Ti. Liuius
to defer battle.

Extrahere iudicium, ^aulus iu^^ cons. ad ^^hib.
to defer judgment.

Extraneus haeres, he that is not the very heir.

Extrarius, he that is not of the same house or kynrede.

Extra telorum iactum, out of arowe shot, out of gunshotte, signifies out of
danger, or in saulfegarde.

Extremus, a, ^, sometime it signifies the beginning, sometime the end,
sometime ^^^^arst.

Extrema linea, is spoken where a man would signify a thing to be last, and
after all other.

Extremis digitis attingere, to touch with the finger tops, is spoken, where
is signified, that a man has uneath touched or felt a thing.

Extrico, aui, are, to deliver, to shake of any thing that lets.

Extrinsecus, outward.

Ex tripode, when we speak of things, which are very true, and not to be
doubted, as it were spoken of goddis own mouth.

Extro, aui, are, to go out.

Extrorsum, from without.

Extrudo, si, dear, to thraste out.

Extruo, si, truere, to ordeyn, to buyld or set up.

Extubero, aui, are, to swell much.

Extundo, tudi, tundere, to find out with much labor.

Exturbo, aui, are, to put away, or to put out or from a thing by vyolence.

Exubero, aui, are, to abound.

Exuccum, without juice.

Exudo, aui, are, to send forth lycour.

Exuerrae, the sweepynges of a house.

Exuerto, tere, to preuente.

Exugo, exugi, gere, and exugeo, to suck out.

Exul, exulis, a banyshed man.

Exulcero, aui, are, to make a soore.

Exulcerare animum, to displease the mind greuousely.

Exuinculis causam dicere, to plede in ward.

Exulo, aui, are, to be banished, to live in exyle.

Exultabundus, reioycyng very much.

Exulto, aui, are, to rejoice excedyngly, to brag, to leap out.

Exundo, aui, are, to ouerflowe.

Exungo, xi, gere, to annoynte.

Exungulo, are, to cut of ones nails.

Exuo, ui, uere, to put of, to dyspoile, or unclothe, to depryue.

Exue mentem, put away that mind.

Exupero, aui, are, to excede.

Exurdo, aui, are, to make deaffe.

Exurgo, gere, to arise up.

Exumae, clothing also hides or skyns of beastis.

Exu^iae serpentis, an adders skyn.

Exybaphon, a salate of herbs.

E ANTE Z.
EZechiel, Epiphanius de prophet.
a prophet of the country called Sarera in Syria, of the line of bishops.
This manne had meruayllous revelations and vysyons, and by him god showed
many greatte miracles. For in the time of a great scarsitie, he by prayer
optayned of god abundance of fyshe, whereby the people were sufficiently
refresshed. Also when the people was oppressed with their enemies, he stood
against them, and made them so abashed with miracles and wonderful sightes,
that they being sore aferd, did cesse of their enterprise. More over being in
the country of Caldey, he told to the people many things that were done in
the temple of Jerusalem. He also brought the people out of Caldey unto
Jerusalem, to the reproach of the infidels. He being in Babylon judged the
tribe of Dan and Gad, for that they had wickedly done against the lord, in
persecuting them which believed in the law. And he showed unto them a terrible
token, for adders devoured their children and al their cattle. At the last he
was slain at Babylon by the duke of the people, because he reproved him of
idolatrye. And he was buried in the field called Maur, in the monument of Sem
and Arphaxad progenitors of Abraham. he prophesied of the return of the
children of Israel, and also of the coming of Christ. He lived before the
incarnation of our lord.DC.xvii. years.

F ANTE A.
FABA, a bean. Eritius Cordus, a physytyon of our time, affirms that the
pulse, which we call benes, is not Faba, where of Dioscorides, Celsus, Galenus,
and Plinius do write. For that where of they write, is round and less than our
bean, whereof.xviii. made a dram, where ours be so great, that some one bean
weyeth a dram, and is somewhat long and flat.

Faba cudetur in me, The bean shall be knocked on me, sygnifieng the peyn or
blame shall light on me.

Faba inuersa, some do suppose it to be that herb, which is callid Lunaria, or
Solanum somnificum, read in Solano.

Faba Pythagorica, sygnifyeth the counselle of Pythagoras the philosopher,
where he byddeth that we should not eat beans, saying: Faba abstineto,
which is by diverse men diuersely expound. Some declare it for a bare
precepte, saying: That forasmoche as beans do make the sight dull, and
causes ylle dreams, as Plynye says, or as Tully affirms, In diuinatione.
provoke inflation or much wind in the body, therefore Pythagoras forbear
the eating of them. But Aristoxenus affirms, that Pythagoras did not eat
more of any kind of pulse than of beans, because they easily loused the belly.
Empedocles says that Pythagoras commanded to absteyne from beans, as it were
from the act of lechery, because Cyamos signifies not only a bean, but also
the genitours. Plutarchus expoundethe this precepte of Pythagoras in this
form, as if he hadds said: Absteyn from the ministration of a commun weal,
because it is full of perils, nor may not be without either rebuke or damage.
In the old time the consent of people was declared by beans, which yet
does remain at Venyce, as well in election of officers, as in judgments and
sentences, for by white beans things are affyrmed, by black beans they are
denied or refusyd.

Fabacia, a bean ^^ke.

Fabalia, the refuse or of fall of beans.

Fabariae calendae, the calendes of June.

Fabarius, ria, rium, pertaynyng to beans.

Fabella, a short tale.

Faber, Plin. li. 32.
a fyshe of the Spanyshe sea, also called Zeus, Colu^. 3.
and is in figure round, and of a russet color. Oppi^^^ lib. 1.
It is like to be that fysshe, which is called a lympe, and of late years, was
found in the sea about Deuonshyre.

Faber, fabri, almooste every crafts man that warketh with the hand.

Faber lignarius, a carpentar.

Faber ferrarius, a smythe.

Auri faber, a goldesmyth.

Faber, bra, brum, pertaynyng to a smythe.

Faberrime, cunnyngly, very craftyly, or well.

Fabianus, the proper name of a man.

Fabitor, in the ancient time was taken for a maynteynour.

Fabius, was the surname of a noble house of the Romans, which had first
that name of sowyng or selling of beans, as Cicero of the grain called
Cicer, Piso of peasyn, Porcius of swine. Of this name were diverse valyant
capitaynes and wise counsaylours, of whom one was called Fabius Maximus, who in
his youth exercysed both eloquence and prowess, and therefore he after
became as well in arms as in counsel, a capytain most excellent, and
subdowynge many countrayes unto the Romans, he tryumphed five times. Being
made Dyctatour against Annyball, he so temperyd prudence with manhood or
prowess, that by des tractyng of battle and traynynge Anniball from place
to place, and at sundry aduauntages skyrmyfshynge with him, he minyshed his
puyssaunce, and preserved the publyke weal of his country, where Minutius the
Consule, who enuyenge him, in fighting with Anniball, was vanquyshed by the
Carthaginenses, and had been slain with all his army, had not Fabius come unto
rescuse, who delivered his adversary and all his trayn, and caused Annibal for
to retire, who said than to his host, Did I not tell you before, that this
cloud would at the last bring us a storm? calling Fabius a cloud, because
of his houeryng. This man was before the incarnation of Christ.CC. years and
somewhat more.

Fabius Quintilianus, read after in Quintilianus.

Fabre, Plautus.
workmanly, craftily. Vt apologum facit? quam fabre? See what a defense be
makes? how craftily he handles it?

Fabrefacio, fabrefeci, fabrefacere, to warke cu^nyngly, to build.

Fabrica, a warkehouse, or forge, sometime the frame or warke.

Fabrico, aui, care, and Fabricor, cari, to make, to invent.

Fabrilis, le, belongyng to handy crafts.

Fabritius, a noble Roman, who being wonderful poor, not withstandyng
refused a great sum of money, sent to him by king Pirrhus touching with his
hands all his members, and saying unto the kings messangers, As long as he
might rule all that, which he touched, he could lack nothing.

Fabula, a fable or tale. sometime an interlude.

It is also a little bean.

Fabula palliata, a comedy of Greek.

Fabula togata, a comedy of latyne.

Fabulae, spoken in an answer without any other word joined therewith,
amounts to as much, as if one would say, fables, trifles, fantasies, iapes.
sometime is added merae, as Merae fabulae, very trifles or fa^tasies, or as one
would say, that which ye say is not to be regarded.

Fabulator, a teller of fables.

Fabulinus, was supposed of the Paynims to be a god, which had the rule over
chylderne, when they began to speak.

Fabulor, aris, ari, to talk.

Fabulosus, much talked of.

Facesso, cessi, cessere, to go about to do a thing. sometime to go away.

Facesse hinc, get the hens.

Facessit tibi negotiu^, he puts the to busynes.

Facete, meryly, pleasantly.

Facetiae, merry wordis or deeds without dishonesty.

Facetus, ta, tum, merrily, plesantly.

Facies, a face sometime the proportion of all the body, a vysage, a similitude.

Facile, lightly or easily, without let or doubt.

Facilis, le, light, easy, good to be entreated.

Facilitas, easynes, gentylnes.

Facinorosus, full of myschiefe.

Facinus, an act or deed. sometime an ill deed.

Facio, feci, facere, to do, to be occupied, to make, also to sacrifice, to
profit.

Facere aucupium auribus, Plaut. in milit.
to harken as a spy.

Aequi boui facere, to take in good part, or in good worth.

Animos alicui facere, to give one courage.

Facere carnificinam, Pla. in cap
to execute the office of an hangeman, in hanging, beheaddynge, or quartryng
of men.

Facere castra, to set a camp.

Facere certiorem, Cic. Cato.
to ascertayne or aduertyse one by letter or messager.

Facere compendium, Plautus.
to make short, to abrige, to go a short way to work, to do a thing the
sooner.

Facere compotem, to give to one that thing which he desires.

Facere coniecturam, to coniect or deem, to divine or esteem.

Facere contum eliam, Plautus in Asina.
to do dyspleasure.

Facere conuiciam, to rebuke or put to rebuke.

Capitale facere, to make it felony or death.

Cautiorem facere, to make him wyser.

Concilia facere, to gather together for counsailyng one with an other.

Facere copiam, to give leave.

Facere copiam alicuius, to let him take his pleasure of one.

Facere copiam argenti, to lend money.

Gopiam cosilij sur facere, Terent. in Phor.
to here them that come for counsel, and to give it to them.

Facere consuetudinem, Cic. fami. epist. 13.
to be famylyar.

Deditionem facere, to yield up, as men vanquyshed in wars.

Facere delitias, Plaut. in penulo.
to speak for pleasure or in mockage.

Fac esse, Ci. in phi.
admyt it be so, or admyt the case.

Fac te esse qui sum, ymagyne that thou were, as I am.

Eruptionem facere, to issue out upon enmies.

Facere fidem, to make one to believe him.

Facere frugem, Plaut. in paenu.
to bring gaynes.

Facere funus, to minyster funeralles.

Gradum facere, to step forth, or step up, to win somewhat.

Gratiam facere, to thank, to release or acquit one of a thing, Plaut. in
curcul.
to give leave, to pardon.

Facere gratum, to do pleasure to one, or to win a man's favor. Terent. in
Eunucho.


Facere grauidam, to get with child.

Facere iacturam, to have a great loss.

Impetu^ facere, to run on a thing with all force.

Facere inditium, to tell or to give warnyng of a thing that he knows.

Facere ingenium suum, to do according to his wit or nature.

Facere insidias, to ly in await to do harm to one

Facere iter, to go or ride.

Iusta alicui facere, to perform all obsequies be longyng to dead men.

Lenocinium facere, to keep bawdry.

Facere lucrum, to win.

Facere ludos, Terent. in Phorm.
to mock or skorne.

Facere magni, to esteem much.

Modum facere, to keep measure.

Moram facere, to tarry.

Morem facere, to bring up a custom.

Multam facere, to forfayte a pain.

Mutuum facere, to do one for an other.

Facere mecum, to make for my purpose.

Facere naufragium, to run to wrecke.

Facere negotium, to do one dyspleasure.

Facere nequiter, to do shrewdly.

Facere nomina, to get detters, as by lendyng as they do now by exchange,
and in shyftes, properly called usury, and in bargaynes of corn, cattall, and
other like, or in lettynge of lands.

Obnoxium sibi aliquem facere, to bind one to be at his commandment.

Facere ocium, Plaut. in milite.
to give to one leisure.

Facere palam, to tell a thing abroad.

Facere periculum, to prove, to assay.

Facere pluris, to set more by.

Facere propitium, to make him thine, or his good lord or master.

Facere quaestum, to gain.

Facere reducem, Plautus in capt.
to bring one again.

Facere rem, to get profit or gayn by a thing.

Facere reum, Terent. in Adelphis Quin til.
to accuse or sue one in a crymynall cause.

Facere risum, to laugh.

Facere scelus, to do a myscheuous deed.

Facere sementem, Cice de oratore.
to sow grain.

Facere stipe^dia, to be in wagis in the wars.

Facere sumptum, to bestow cost.

Facere superbum, Pli. de uiris illustr.
to slay one.

Facere technam, to play a crafty pageane.

Facere terrorem, to put in fear.

Facere transacta omnia, to bring all things to a point.

Facere turbas, Plaut. in Bacch.
to make busynes.

Facere uadimonium, to lay in gage or surety

Facere uerba aut uerbum, to speak.

Facere uindemiam, to gather grapes to make wine. Plaut. in Epidi.


Facere uitium, to fall in decay.

Facere uoluptatem, Cic. in To
to satisfy mine, thine, or his pleasure or appetyte.

Faciam ut te plurimum amem, I wolle love the much. Fecisse hoc oportuit,
needs must ye have done it.

Facio plurimi, I make much of.

Floccifacio, I set not a straw by it.

Factio, a dyuysion of people in sundry opinions. also an act.

Factionum principes, the heads of rebellyon or sedytion.

Factitius, a, um, made or counterfayte.

Factito, aui, are, to do oftentimes.

Factor, oris, a maker, a factour.

Factum, a deed.

Factum atque transactum, done and brought to good pass.

Factura, the warke.

Facturio, iui, ij, ire, to desire to do.

Factus, tus, the deed.

Facula, a lynke, or little torche.

Facularij, torche bearers.

Facultas, tatis, power to do or speak. sometime riches, also faculty.

Facundia, eloquence, or sweet and pleasant speech

Facundus, a, um, eloquent, well spoken.

Faecatum uinu^, wine that drinks of the lies.

Faeciniae uuae, grapes, whereof comes wine, having much lies.

Faeculentum, full of lies or dregs.

Faecutinus, na, number, pertaynynyng to dragges.

Faex, faecis, lies or dregs, or grounds of any kind of lycour.

Faecem ciuitatis, men do call them which in a city do live beastly and
vyciousely.

Faginus, na, number, of a beeche.

Fagineus, idem.

Fagus, gi, a beeche tree.

Fagutal, was a chapel in Rome, wherein was a beeche, which was consecrate
unto Jupiter.

Fala, a tower made of timber.

Falcarius, he that fyghteth with a byll.

Falcarius, ia, um, pertaynyng to a byll.

Falcatus, ta, tum, hoked, also any thing whereon be hooks or other like thing.

Falce, falsely.

Falcicula, a little hook or bylle.

Falcidia lex, whereby legacies were defalcate or cut of, where the fourth part
of the goods were not assigned to the heirs.

Falcifer, he that bears a byll or hook.

Falcimonia, deceyptes.

Falcito, Plaut. in Bacch.
aui, are, to cut with a byll or hook.

Falco, aui, are, to cut of or mow.

Falco, onis, a hawke.

Falernus, a country in Ca^pania, now in the realm of Naples, wherein grew the
best wines of Italy, callid Falernum, mountflascon.

Falisci, people in Italy, also a kind of puddinges

Fallaciae, deceyptfull words, or generally deceiptes or crafty handlyng.

Fallaciter, deceytfully.

Fallax, acis, a person deceytfull.

Fallo, fefelli, fallere, to deceive, also to be hyd.

Fallonia, is a trespass whereby the tenant forsayteth to the lord, that which he
holdith of him.

Falsarius, a forger of writings.

Falsidicus, and Falsiloquus, a liar, or false reporter.

Falsifico, aui, are, to forge deeds, wrytynges, or seals.

Falsitas, tatis, falsehoode.

Falso, aui, are, to forge.

Falsus, a, um, false.

Falsum habere, to deceive.

Falurica, Vergilius
were weapons which were thrown out of toures.

Falx, falcis, a hook or bylle.

Fama, fame, or renoume, sometime opinion.

Famam disipare, to sow a brute or noise in the people.

Famelicosus, often hungry.

Famelicus, ca, cum, hungrye.

Famen, faminis, speech.

Fameo, mui, ere, to be hungry.

Fames, hunger.

Famiger, geris, a spreader of fame.

Famigerabilis, famous.

Famigerator, a teller of news or tidings, or a spreader of fame.

Famigerulus, idem.

Famigeratus, ta, tum, renoumed, famed.

Famigero, to publyshe or dyuulgate a thing.

Familia, a household, a family, or kynred. It also signifies all the servants
of the house.

Familiaria, were places of buryall for men and their servants.

Familiaris, are, pertaining to household. also familiar.

Familiaritas, custom, familiarity.

Familiariter, familiarly.

Faminor, the old writers used for Dicito, say, speak, tell on.

Famulanter, humbly, seruysably.

Famularius, a, um, seruisable.

Famulatio, householde, or meyny.

Famulatus, and famulitium, service.

Famulor, ari, to serve.

Famulus, and famula, a householde servant.

Fanaticus, mad. In the old time before that Christ expellyd the dyuell,
when that dyuels were honored in ydols, certain persons as well men as women,
were possessed with diuelles, which lad them where they lysted, against their
proper wylles, and caused them to speak wonderful things, some also
suddenly, and oftentimes did tell what should happen. wherefore they were
thought to be inspired with goddis, those persons were called Fana tici,
Sometime Fanaticus, is taken for the keeper of the temple or chapel, where the
dyuell gave answers.

Fanenses, and Fanestres, people of a town callid Fana, in a country in Italy
called Marca Anchonitana, in latin Picenum.

Fanesii, people in the north parts of the world whose cares be so great, that
with them they keuer all their bodies.

Fannia lex, was an honorable and pertuous law made by Augustus, the noble
emperor the consent of al states of the cite enforcing it all dignities
approuinge it, the people gladly receiuyng it: by the which law the
superfluous charges in feastis, whereby the city abou^ded in vices, were
prohibited, and such temperance therein provided, that in the great plays of the
Romans, and those which were called Saturnales, they should not excede a
hundred brass pens, which were.x. Roman grotes called Denarij, in our money
now curra^t, amou^tith to.v.s.vi.d.ob. half ferthynge, and the fourth part of
a farthyng. Ten other days xxx. brass pens, which is.xixd.ob.q. and a little
more. Every other day.x. brason pens, which was.vi.d.ob. and the.vii. part of
an half penye. This law was made.xxii. years after the law called Lex
orchia, whereby was determined the number of them, which should dyne or soupe
together, and that the doors should be open while they sat, that me^ might
perceive if any moo came than the law had appointed. But this law was not so
good as the other, for than moughte none come to their friends, but they which
were inuyted or boden.

Fanum, a temple, where the dyuell gave aunsweres out of an ydoll.

Far, farris, sometime signifies al manner of corn. albeit among ancient
physicians it is taken for meal, as well of wheat as of barley, properlye
where the corn is beaten in a mortar. Se Columellam li. 9.

Farcilis, le, any thing stuffed.

Farcimen, minis, a puddyng, or a sausage.

Farcio, ciui, cire, to stuff. also to frank or feed, to be fat, to cramme.

Farfara, an herb called also Tussilago, and Vngula equina, and Bechion.

Farfarus, or Farfar, a river of Syrie.

Faris, fatus sum fari, to speak.

Farraca, meats made of meal.

Farrago, ginis, a mixture of sundry kinds of grayn and corn. It is that
which in Cambridge shyre is called Bolymonge, wherein is barley, otes, and
peasyn or vetches. Som^tyme it is taken for a mixture of things good and bad
together.

Farratia, among the old Romans were the ceremonies of matrimony. Cael. li.
15.


Farreatio, a sacryfice made with cakes.

Farreum, a wheaten cake.

Farrinarium, a place where wheat or meal is kept.

Farrinus, na, number, and Farrinaceus, a, um, pertaynyng to wheat.

Fartile, stuffyng, or that wherewith any foul is franked or crammyd.

Fartim, full stuffed or crammyd.

Fartores, and Fartrices, puddyng makers.

Fartum, a puddynge.

Fariura, the craft or manner of stuffynge or crammynge.

Fas, leful before god, sta^di^g with the law of god

Fascelis, a name of Diana.

Fasces, rods bounden together, and an axe in the myddell, which were borne
before the chief officers of Rome, in declaring their authorite whereof some
had syx, and some mo.

Fascia, a swathell, or swathyng band, or other like thing. sometime any
gyrdell.

Fasciculus, a grype, or thing bounden together, it is also a nosegay, or any
thing knyt together, which may be borne in a man's hand.

Fascino, aui, are, to transform by enchantme^t, or to bewytche.

Fascinus, and Fascinum, and Fascinatio, an incha^tment to transform or
disfigure any thing. Which so enchanted, is of the common people called,
taken, or forspoken, or forloked.

Fasciola, a little band.

Fascior, fasciari, to swathe a child.

Fascis, is a burdeyne or knytche of wod, or any other thing.

Fascis sagittani^, is taken for a sheffe of arowes

Faselus, a boat.

Fasti, were books, wherein were contained certain ceremonies and causes of
sundry things among the Romans, concerning their feasts and solempnities,
which were long kept from the knowledge of the common people, until they at
the last were deuulgate by one Caius Flauius.

Fasti dies, were certain days, wherein the officer of Rome callid Praetor,
might speak only these three words, Do, dico, addico. It may be now vsyd for
holy days.

Fastidio, iui, ire, to contemn with dysdayne, to abhor, or have in
abomination.

Fastidiosus, a, um, full of dysdayne.

Fastiditus, ta, tum, hated, abhorrid, abhomined.

Fastidium, hatred, properly where one abhors the sight or presence of any
thing.

Fastigio, aui, are, to make or raise up in height.

Fastigiu^, an altitude, or the top or height of any thing. sometime it
signifies the state of a person in any dignity. sometime the end of a thing.

Fastigium imponere, is spoken when a man will signify a matter or thing to be
finyshed and brought to a point.

Fastus, tus, hautenes of mind, pride.

Fatalis, le, pertaynyng to desteny, fatal, sometime mortal.

Fateor, fassus sum, fateri, to affirm, to confess.

Fathisco, scere, to gape wide, as the earth does in a great drythe.

Fatidicus, fatidica, a reeder or teller of destenies or a sothesayer.

Fatifer, Fatifera, a brynger of does or pestilence.

Fatigo, aui, are, to make weary, to trouble much to strike, to stire or
provoke, to restrain or let

Fatiloqua, a wytche.

Fatiloquus, fatiloqua, a southsayer.

Fatisco, fatiscere, to be weary.

Fator, aris, ari, to speak much.

Fatua dea, the name of the earth, so callid because chyldern when they be
borne, do not utter any voice, until they have touched the earth.

Fatuitas, atis, folyshenes.

Fatum, the ordinance and disposition of almighty god, desteny, goddis
providence, sometime death.

Fatuus, an idiot, that lackith natural knowledge

Fatuus, Iuuenalis.
a, um, unsavory, without any manner of taste.

Fauentia, a city in Italy.

Fauentinus, a man of Fauentia.

Faueo, ui, fauere, to favor.

Fauere linguis, to keep silence.

Fauilla, a spark of fire.

Fauistae, certain cellars in the court of the Capitol at Rome, where were wont
to be laid the baners of the Romans, which were borne in wars. Also therein
was put the treasure of money, which the pristes of the temples in the Capitole
did employe about things necessary to their superstytion and ceremonies.

Fauna, the goddess called also Ops, opis.

Fauni, were named of the poets rusticall goddis and monstrous beasts like
unto men.

Faunus, an ancient king of the old Latynes, some of Picus.

Fauonius, one of the wyndes, called the southwest wind.

Fauoniana, pears which are read.

Fauorabilis, Gellius.
favored of many.

Fauste, Plautus.
prosperousely.

Faustus, a, um, prosperous.

Faustulus, a shepeherde which was the nourysher of Romulus and Remus.

Fauulus, a little honey comb.

Fauus, a honey comb.

Faux, faucis, a cheke.

Fauces, strayte passages.

Fax, facis, a torche, a candel, or other like thing, which brennyng gives
light.

Faxim, let me do.

Faxint, let them do.

Faxo, I will or shall do.

F ANTE E.
FEbricito, aui, are, to be sick in a fever.

Febricula, a little or easy fever.

Febriculosus, feuerous, or having often the fever.

Febrifuga, an herb commonly callid Feuerfew. sum think that it is one of
the kinds of the herb, which is called of old writers Parthenson.

Febrilis, le, pertaynyng to a fever.

Febrio, iui, ire, to have a fever.

Febris, a fever, which is an unnatural heat kyndled at the heart, brought
from thens by the veins and arteries, by mean of the spirit and veins into
all the body, sensibly hurtyng his natural operation. Thereof be three kinds, one
is callid Hectica, which is in the spiritis and principal humors, and also in
the firm parts of the body, Hectica.
and is either by him self proceeding of continual anger, labor, famyn,
excess of lechery, inflaming and drieng the members, or following other
syckenesses. sometime universal, specially in a body cholerike or me lancolike,
orels particular, as wha^ it happens after the wekenes of the.v. principal
members, the heart, the lunges, the liver, the stomach, or the raynes. An other
is named Ephemera, or Diaria, Ephemera
which is an inflamatio^ of the spiritis vital, natural, or animal. In the
vital spirits it hapnith by wrath inflaming, by thought or sorrow restraining,
by hot air chaufing, or by cold air stoppyng. In the natural spirits it
happens by hunger or thirst inflaming, by hot meats or hot drinks inflaming,
by repletio^ oppressing, by superfluous laske or stopping, by accustomed
exercise neglecti^g or forbering of customable baines, sweat or blood lettyng.
In the spirits animal it happens by to much being alone, or without
recreation, by much watch or lack ofslepe, by to much and often slepi^g by a
catarre or reume, by intemperate heat or coldness of the air, or by to much
labor and exercise. An other fever is callid Humoralis, and also Putrida,
which is in the humors, the matter whereof is either blud, Putrida.
coler, fleume, or melancoly. This fever happens either by ferue^tnes of the
son or air, or by lack of accustomid exercise, baines, or euacuation, by daily
surfets, inordinate walking or meuing after meals, drinking much wine after
meat, hot confectio^s or spices after meals. Of superfluite of meats and
drinks comes repletion, which stops the pores of the skyn, and the holes
of the little vains callid Capillares, because they be as small as hears. And
that stopping or opilation lets the ve^ting out of natural heat, by reason
whereof the heat of the natural humor, nature not being able to rule it,
boileth and sends up fumes, which which whirling about comes to the heart,
and inflameth it, and passing forthwith by the veins and arteries, into all
the body, makes the fever called Putrida, which according to the humor
wherein it reigns, it takes a sundry name, as ye shall read in their
several places.

Februa, sacrifices and ceremonies for purging of souls

Februarius, the month of February.

Februatus, ta, tum, that which was so purged.

Februo, aui, are, to purge souls by sacrifyce or prayer.

Februum, in the Sabines tungue is called purging or clensyng.

Februus, is also Pluto called god of Hell.

Fecialis, was a certain officer of arms, which denounced war or peace,
where as was hostilitic or cause of battle, which may be now taken for an
ambassador, sent for such a purpose, or for an heralde.

Fell, fellis, the gaul, sometime it is taken for grief of the mind.

Felicones, men which are necessary for nothing. it has an other signification,
which for the abominablenes thereof I will not write, sens it is more expedient
that it remain unknown.

Felis, a cat. sometime it signifies a weasyll.

Fello, aui, are, to suck.

Felsina, a city in Italy now called Bononia.

Feltrum, a town in Italye in the countray called Marchia Taruisina.

Femen, minis, plu. femina, the inner part of the thigh. sometime the privy
member of a woman.

Feminalia, the keuering of the thighs.

Femoralia, breeches.

Femur, oris, the thigh, some english it the ha^me

Fenestella, the proper name of a story writer, which flourished in the later
days of Tiberius Caesar.

Fenestra, a wi^dow. sometime an entry into a thing

Fenestratus, Plautus.
ta, tum, open. Nulla est fenestratior domus, No house is more open.

Fenestrenula, a little wyndowe.

Ferabites, wild.

Ferae, ferarum, feras, wild beasts.

Feralia, and feralis dies, a day dedicat to the i^ternal goddis, to pacify
the^ toward the souls depertid. They were also sacrifices done for souls.

Feralia amicula, wyndyng shetes, and such like things, wherein dead bodies
were lapped.

Feralia officia, solemnities about dead bodies

Feralis, le, deadly or mortal. lamentable.

Feralis cultus, mournyng apparayle.

Feralis dies, the day of buryenge.

Ferax, acis, fruitful, or that brings forth much fruit.

Ferbeo, bui, ere, to boil or sethe.

Ferculu^, a dysh with meat. also a pagent carried or borne to be looked on.
sometime it signifies the stage or place, wherein the pagent is set.

Fere, almost, nygh, welnygh.

Ferentarij. men armed in light harneys, redye to come quyckely to succors,
which fought with darts, swords, or slings.

Ferentinum, a city, which after Pliny stands in the first region of Italy.

Ferentum, a city in Apulia.

Feretrius, a name of Jupiter, given by Romulus.

Feretrum, a beer whereon dead bodies ar born. sometime a thing, whereon images,
relykes, or iewelles are borne.

Feretrus, a mountayn, of which the house of Pherctre was named.

Feriae, feriarum, ferias, holy days, days vacant from labor.

Feriae esuriales, fasting days.

Ferinus, na, number, wild as a beast, or pertaining to wild beasts.

Feriatus, unoccupied, or idle.

Ferio, percussi, ferire, to stryke, to stablyshe. to knock.

Ferire foedus, to make a league or truse.

Ferire iugulum, to slay, to hit the mark.

Ferior, aris, ari, to cease from labor.

Feritas, tatis, a natural wyldnes, cruelty.

Ferme, almost, weluygh.

Fermentescere, to increase or wax.

Fermento, aui, are, to meddle or myxe well together, as leven with dowe. also
to leaven.

Fero, fers, tuli, far, to bear, to suffer, to lead or bring, to say, to
name, to desire, to bring forth, to have, to bost, to take away, to receive to
obtain, Cice. ad Q fratre^.
to accustom. Balbum uero qui est istius rei, quemadmodu^ scribis adiutor, in
oculis fero, Balbus, who as thou wrytest, is the helper of all this matter, I
love heartily.

Far acceptu^, to receive, to write that which is received, to knowledge to
have received a benefyt or profit.

Far ad coelum, to extol or praise a man excedyngly* Far in astra idem.

Far ad populu^, to ask advise of the people

Aegre far, to take it greuousely.

Aequo animo far, to take patiently.

Far annos aut uetustatem, to endure long, to bear well his aege. It is
proprely spoken of wine or other like thing.

Far conditionem, to proffer, to put to the choice, to offer a condition.

Far expensum, to spend or lay out, to write expenses, to bestow.

Far fortunam, to use fortune.

Ita fama ferebat, so the brute went.

Fortiter far, to abide or sustayn constantly.

Fructu^ex aliquo far, to take profit by one.

Far gradum, to go forth.

Far grauiter, to take a thing greuousely.

Fero tibi iudicem, I am content to be judged by such one, let him be judge
between us, or judge the matter between us.

Fer manum, give me thy hand.

Fer me, supporte me, help me.

Far moleste, to take a thing displesantly.

Far obscure aliquid, to dyssemble a thing.

Odium far, to be hated.

Far osculum, to kiss.

Far palam, to speak it abroad, to publishe a thing secret. Partum far, to
be with child.

Pedem far, to go forth. poetice.

Personam aliena^ far, to play an other ma^s part.

Praemium far, to be rewarded.

Pretium far idem.

Primas far, to have the price or preemynence, Alc.
to be chief.

Priuilegium de aliquo far, Zas.
when the prince or magistrate requires the people to inacre a thing in
preiudyce of any particular person.

Far quaestionem, wha^ the magistrates desires the people to ordain judges
extraordynary in a private case.

Si ira res fert, if need be.

Repulsam far, to be refused or put back in a request.

Responsum far, to have an answer.

Far sententiam, to show his opinion.

Sese obuiam far, to go and mete with him.

Signa far, to march against enmyes with baner dysplayed.

Far sitim, to suffer thyrste.

Suffragium far, to give voice in election, or other consent.

Far suppetias, to succor.

Susque deque fero, I care not, I pass not on it.

Ventrem far, to be with child.

Ferri, to be borne or carried

Ferocio, ciui, cij, cire, to be fierce.

Ferocitas, tatis, fiersenesse.

Ferociter, fiercely.

Feronia, the goddess of woddes. also a city under the hill Soractes.

Ferox, ferocis, fierce, hardy.

Ferramentarij, they which warke in iron.

Ferramentum, an instrument or tool of iron.

Ferraria, an iron mine.

Ferrarius, a, um, pertaynyng to iron, or of iron.

Ferratus, ta, tum, having iron on it, or closed to iron.

Ferreus, a, um, of iron.

Ferro, aui, are, to set iron on.

Ferrugineus, a, um, grene color.

Ferrugo, ginis, rust of iron, a murray color, some callyth it a sad blewe.

Ferrum, iron, sometime weapon.

Ferrumen, minis, glewe, syse, sowder, or such other byndyng or cleauynge
matter.

Ferrumino, aui, are, to join or myxe together, properly metals, to soulder.

Fertilis, le, fertile or fruitful.

Fertum, a cake made of sundry grains and spices

Feruefacio, to cause to boil.

Ferueo, es, is, iui, ere, to be chauffed or het.

Feruidus, a, um, fervent diligent.

Ferula, a rod or stycke, wherewith childrens hands be stricken in schools,
callid a palmer. also a cane or reed. also a pot stycke.

Ferularius, a, um, like a cane or read.

Feruor, oris, heat.

Ferus, a, um, wild, cruel, terrible.

Fescenini, verses sunge at weddynges.

Fessus, a, um, weary.

Festina lent, speed the slowly, is spoken where a man will signify a thing to
be done, neither to hastily nor to slowely, but in a conuensent temperance. Se
my book of the Governor, in the chapter of maturitie.

Festinanter, hastily, quickly, or swyftly.

Festinatio, haste or speed.

Festinato, spedely, in haste.

Festino, aui, are, to make haste, to be troubled

Festinus, a, um, hasty, quick.

Festiuitas, tatis, myrthe.

Festiuo, aui, are, to keep holy day.

Festiuus, a, um, merry, provoking mirth, joyous. also perteynynge to holy
days.

Festra, a little wycket.

Festuca, the young tender spring of a tree or herb. also a moote.

Festus, ta, tum, feasteful or solemn.

Fesulae, an old city in Tuscane not far from Florence.

F ANTE I.
FIBER, a beast called a beuer, which is also called Castor, whose stones are
used in medicine, and are called Castoreum. It is also a kind of waspes.

Fibrae, are the extreme parts of the liver, the heart, or the lungues, or of
other things, wherein is any division, they may be called lappes, brymmes.
Also small things like hears, hanging at the roots of herbs and trees.

Fibula, a buckle of a gyrdell, or other thing like thereto, a tache, a claspe.

Fibulo, aui, are, to buckle, to join together timber, or bourdes, or other
like things.

Ficaria, a fyg tree.

Ficarius, an eater of fygges.

Ficetor, oris, he that loves or gadereth fygges.

Ficedula, a bird which fedeth on fygges and grapes.

Ficetum, a place where fyg trees do grow.

Ficolea, a staff or stake of fyg tree.

Ficosus, full of sores in the head or berde.

Fictilis, fictile, erthen, or made of earth.

Fictitius, a, um, feigned, or dissembled, or counterfayte.

Fictor, oris, a counterfaytor, a fayner.

Fictus, ta, tum, made to the simylytude of a thing.

Ficulnea, a fyg tree.

Ficulneus, a, um, and Ficulnus, a, um, of a fygge tree.

Ficus, in the masculine gender is a fyg: in the feminine gender is a fygge
tree. It is also a sore or scab, growyng in the places of a man's body, where
that hear is.

Fideicommissarius, a feoffee of trust.

Fideicommissum, a feoffement of trust.

Fideicommitto, misi, tere, to infeoffe.

Fideiussor, oris, a suerty, or borowe.

Fidelia, an erthen vessel serving to diverse purposes.

Fidelis, faithful, loyal, trusty, or sure.

Fidelitas, tatis, faythfulnes, loyalty, or suerty.

Fidena, a town in Italy.

Fidenna, confidence.

Fides, fidei, belefe, trust, promise. It is a stablenes and truth in promyses
and couenantes. It is also a faithful execution of things committed or
promised.

Fides labefactata, credence lost.

Fides publica, the credence or promise of all the people and rulars.

Fide bona, without fraud or couyne.

Fide nulla es, thou kepest no promise.

Fide sua, mea, tua, iubere, to undertake.

Fidem accipere, to be believed.

Fidem astringere, to promise faithfully.

Fidem deserere, to break promise.

Fidem fallere, idem,

Fidem habere, to believe.

Fidem labefactare, to lose credence.

Fidem liberare, to keep promise.

Fidem mutare, to be inconstant of promise.

Fides, fidis. the string of any instrument. some time a harp or lute.

Fidicen, cinis, a harp: it may be called a fiddell. It is also he that
plays on that instrumente.

Fidicina, a woman harper or luter.

Fidicula, a rebecke or gytterne.

Fidiculae, plural. a tourment made with cords or strings, wherewith men be
tourmented, to make them to confess treson or felony.

Fido, fisus sum, fidere, to trust.

Fidutia, trust, confidence: sometime hope. It is properly that trust, wherein
any thing is delivered by one man to an other, to thyntente that he shall
redelyuer it, when he is required.

Fiduciaria mancipatio, aut uenditio, a srate in lands made upon confidence of
trust: a mortgage.

Fiduciaria possessio, a possession to an other man's use, or upon condition.

Fidus, a, um, trusty.

Figlina, ae, a potters warkehouse, or potters craft.

Figlina plural. vessel of earth.

Figmentum, the warke or warkemanshyppe. some time a lie, or a thing feigned.

Figo, Columel.
xi, figere, to thrust in. sometime it signifies to drive or fasten in the
earth. Ver. Geor lib. 4.
Palum humi fixit, he drove the stake in to the ground Also to plant or set.
Iuuenal.
Ipse feraces Figat humo plantas. He woll set in the ground the fruit full
plants. sometime to stryke.

Figere ceruos, to hunt dear with bows.

Figere legem, to set an act of parlyamente or ordinance on a wall or post,
to the intent that all men may read it.

Figulus, a potter.

Figura, a figure.

Figuro, aui, are, to make or form.

Filiaster, a son in law by an other wife, or an other husband.

Filictum, a ferny ground.

Filicula, fern growing on trees, ralled in a greek name Polypodion.

Filistim, a country that is now called Ascalo^.

Filius, a son.

Filia, a daughter.

Filij, some time does conteyne both sons and daughters.

Filins terrae, a new begun gentle man, or a gentle man of the first head.

Filix, licis, fern.

Filo, aui, are, to spyn or make threde.

Filum, a threde. sometime the proportion of a thing.

Fimbria, the sayrtes or hem of a garment.

Fimetum, a dunge hill.

Fimum, a box, out of the which men do cast dyse.

Fimus, dunge of cattle.

Finalis, le, fynall or last.

Findo, fidi, findere, to cut, to cleave.

Fingo, xi, gere, to make, to form, to feign, to counterfayt.

Finge animo, suppose or put the case.

Fingere mores alicui, to fascion oone in manners.

Vultum fingere, to make countenance not to be merry or sorowefull, where in
deed he is merry or sorowefull.

Finio, iui, ire, to fynyshe or end.

Finis, the end, the conclusion. also entente or purpose, whereunto any other
thing has relation, or is made or done for.

Fines plural the borders or marches of a cuntraye, bounds.

Finitimus, ma, mum, nyghe ioynynge.

Finitio, a definition.

Finitor, oris, a setter of bounds.

Fio, fieri, to be, to be esteemed. Nulla adeo ex re istuc fit, nisi ex nimio
otio. This comes of nothing but of to much ydelnes. Ex ea re quid fiat,
uide. Take heed what follows thereof. Fit obuiam casu ei multitudini. C. Curio.
By chance C. Curio met with that rout. Illud fit saepe, that oftentimes
happens.

Firmamentum, a suerty or stabylitie. also that which is called the ground of a
cause or matter Also the fyrmament or heaven visible.

Firm, assuredly, steadfastly, constantely, fast.

Firmitas, and Firmitudo, stablenes, constance, surenes.

Firmiter, idem quod firm.

Firmo, aui, are, to assure, to make stable or sure, to affirm.

Aluum firmare, to bind the bealy, or make one costyfe.

Firmare corpora cibo, to strength their bodies with meat.

Dotem firmare, to be at a point what he will give in marriage with his daughter.

Firmare fidem, to perform or make assurance of promise. Also to accord to a
thing.

Firmatae cibo uires, he is made strong with good meats.

Firmus, stable, constant, well fortified, assured.

Fiscalis, le, perteyning to the kings treasure.

Fiscella, chese fate. Also it is a thing made with withes and halters,
wherewith cattle was so moselled, that they might not byte any young syrynges
or buddes of trees.

Fiscellus, a little hill in Italy, not far from Tiber.

Fisci, Fiscinae fiscellae, great sachels, wherein were put great sums of
money.

Fiscina, a great basket.

Fiscum, the kings Escheker.

Fiscus, revenues of the kings crown. It signifies sometime a panyar of
wykars. some time a bag, wherinto money is put.

Fissibilis, le, that may be cut or slyt.

Fissilis, le, idem.

Fisura, a cut or clefte.

Fistuca, an instrument, wherewith pyles of wood be driven into the ground, and
stones in pauynge, called a rammer.

Fistucatio, pylynge or pauynge.

Fistula, a pype, as well to convey water, as an instrument of music. also the
wesel or throat boll. Also a tappe or faucet. also a disease or sore, which
comes of a putrified humor, and continually runs.

Fistulosus, full of holes like a sponge.

Fistulosa terra, earth barrayne of nature, which serves neither to tyllage
nor pasture.

Fit, in happens.

Fitiges, be beasts of Aethiope, of a brown color, having two pappes in the
breast as ma^hath: nor they be so wild, but they may be tamed: nor so tame,
but they woll hurt those that grieve them.

Fixus, a, um, fyrme, fast.

F ANTE L.
FLABELLVM, an instrument, wherewith in the heat of summer wind is fanned, and
blown into men's vysages, to cool them.

Flabrum, a blowynge or puff of wind.

Flacceo, and Flaccesco, ere, to wydder, or wax feeble, or to have no force.

Flaccidus, a, um, wythered, feeble, weak, hanging downewarde, lollyng, or
flagging.

Flaccum, bruised.

Flaces, the ortes of olyues.

Flagella, the small branches or twigs of trees or vynes. Sometime scourges
or flayles, wherewith corn is threshed.

Flagello, aui, are, to scurge, to thresh, to blame or rebuke.

Flagitiosus, an ungracious person, full of myschiefe.

Flagitium, an ill or myscheuous deed, worthy rebuke and punishment.

Flagitium ruum est, it is by thine vngracyousnes, (...)
or through thy defaulte. Nam id no bis tam flagitium est, quam illa non
facere uobis quae modo dixti, For that is in us as great a fault, as it is in
you that you have not done it.

Flagitio ardere, to be convict of a great offense.

Flagito, aui, are, to ask importunately and with clamor.

Flagratores, they which for money do suffer them selves to be beaten.

Flagrio, onis, a slave.

Flagro, aui, are, to burn with a flame of fire. sometime to love or desire
inordinatly.

Flagrare infamia, to be very ill reported of.

Flagrare inopia, to be in great necessity or poverty.

Flagrare inuidia, to be excedyngly hated.

Flamatica, a tree burned with lyghtenyuge.

Flamea, clothe or sylke of yelowe color.

Flamen, the great priest among the Gentiles.

Flamen, hoc, the blaste in an instrument.

Flameum, a veyle or typpet of yelowe, which womenne did wear, when they were
new married.

Flaminea, a country in Italy, called also Aemilia, and commonly Romandiola,
in the which are the cities of Bononia, Fauentia, Imola, Rauenna, and Ariminum.

Flaminea uia, an high way from the city of Rome unto the city of Ariminum.

Flaminia, the house of the archeprieste.

Flaminica, the wife of the great priest called Flamen, which moughte not be
deuorsed from her husband for any cause. (...) Fest
Also a wedding gown, which was of yelowe color.

Flaminium, was an attire that wedded women did wear on their heads.

Flamma, a flame. sometime peril.

Flamefcere, to be inflamed.

Flammeus, a, um, burning or flamynge.

Flammigena, comen of fire.

Flammiuomus, sendynge out flames.

Flandria, a country called Flaunders.

Flaueo, and Flauesco, aui, are, to be like gold, or of yelowe color.

Flauus, a, um, yelow, or of the color of gold.

Flebilis, le, lamentable.

Flecto, and Flexo, xi, tere, to bow, to bend, to lead.

Flegma, fleume.

Flegmen, Festus.
is where with much going the blood issues out of the tooes.

Fleo, eui, ere, to weep.

Fletus, weeping.

Flexanima oration, an oration or speech, whereby a man's mind is styred to
pity, reioysynge, or other like affection.

Flexilis, le, any thing that may be easily bowed or bente.

Flexipes, pedis, he that has crooked feet.

Flexura, the bowynge.

Fligo, xi, ctum, to tourmente or vex.

Flo, aui, are, to blow. also to make coin of metal.

Flocci, flocks of the sheryng of wolen clothes.

Floccifacio, and Floccipendo, I set naught by.

Flocculi, fine flocks.

Floces, lies or drastes of wine.

Floralis, florales ludi, plays made in the honor of Flora an harlot, which
gave a great treasure unto the people of Rome.

Floreo, rui, rure, and Florido, aui, are, to floryshe or to have flowers. Also
to excel. sometime to prosper.

Floresco, sci, scere, to burgen, or to bring forth flowers.

Floreus, a, um, made of flowers.

Floridus, da, dum, garnyshed with flowers. sometime fresh or lusty.

Floriger, eris, bearing flowers.

Florulentus, ta, tum, full of flowers.

Flos, floris, a flower.

Fluctio, onis, the re^me or pose.

Fluctiuagus, wandrynge in ryuers or waters.

Fluctuatim, troublensly, doubfully.

Fluctuatio animi, when a man doubts what is best to do.

Fluctuatio stomachi, when the meat swymmeth in the stomach.

Fluctuo, aui, are, to wave up and down as the water does: by translation it
signifies to think now one thing now an other.

Fluctuosus, a, um, troublous, unquiet, stormy.

Fluctus, a floudde, a wave of water styred by tempest.

Fluentia, the ancient name of the city called Florence in Italy.

Fluentum, a river or stream.

Fluescere, to be resolved or relented.

Fluidus, da, dum, flowyng, telente^, resolved.

Fluito, aui, are, to flow continually. sometime. to flyt or swymme.

Flumen, inis, a great river. some time the course of the water.

Flumineus, a, um, of the river.

Fluminosus, a, um, full of ryuers.

Fluo, xi, ere, to run as water does, to proceed or come of a thing, or to
grow.

Fluor, Fluxus, and Fluctio, a flyx.

Flustrum, the full tide in the sea, or other water, which ebbeth and flows.

Fluta, a fyshe, like to an eele, called a lamprey.

Fluuialis, le, of the river.

Fluuiatilis, le, that which is in the river.

Fluuius, a flood or river.

Fluxura, lechery.

Fluxus, a, um, unstable, or that which dureth but a while, large, or wide,
relented, lecherous and wanton.

F ANTE O.
FOCALE, a kerchefe, which men and women did wear about their cheeks.

Focaneus, a branch of a vine, which grows out of a twyst or forked bough.

Focaria, a fire pan.

Focatius, bread baken on the hot roles.

Focillo, aui, are, to nouryshe or comfort.

Focula, nourishinge meats.

Foculo, aui, are, to nouryshe or sustain.

Foculus, a little pan, wherein fire is borne.

Focus, a pan or herthe, wherein fire is. sometime it signifies fire. sometime
private houses or tenementes.

Fodico, aui, are, to perse or prycke, or bore.

Fodina, a place where a thing is dygged.

Fodio, fodi, fodere, to delue.

Foecunditas, plenty.

Foecundo, aui, are, to make fruytefull, or plentuouse.

Foecundus, a, um, plentuous, or frutfull.

Foede, villaynously, shamfully.

Foederatus, a confederate.

Foedero, aui, are, to confederate.

Foedifragus, a breaker of leage or truse, or intercourse.

Foedo, aui, are, to polute or defyle, to destroy, to rent or tear, to consume.

Foedus, da, dum, foul, defourmed, cursed, or cruel.

Foedus, deris, a treaty of peace, or league between pryn^^s, ^n enter^^^se, a
trisse after battle: sometime it signifies a law made in the time of wars.

Foelicitas, tatis, felicity, prosperity, abundance of all things.

Foelicito, aui, are, to make prospe^ous.

Foelix, licis, having abundance of al things prosperouse, commodiouse, or
profitable.

Foemina, a woman. Also in beasts the female.

Foenarius, a, um, perteyninge to hay.

Falces foenariae, hokes or sythes for to cut hay^.

Foenebris, bre, pertayninge to usury, or unreasonable gain.

Foeneratitius, a, um, the same.

Foenerator, oris, an usurer, or lender for unreasonable gain.

Foenero, aui, are, and Foeneror, rari, cum datiuo, to lend for vsurye.
Foeneror cum ablatiuo, to borowe, or make a shyfte, or to lay to mortegage.

Foeniculum, fenell.

Foenile, an hey house.

Foenisecium, hey harueste.

Foenisex, secis, a mower of hey.

Foenograecum, fenegreke.

Foenum, hey.

Foenusculum, a bottell of hey.

Foenus, noris, usury, also unreasonable or unlawful gain, coming of that
thing, which is lent. It is sometime fruit, which the earth brings forth
without any labor.

Foeteo, tere, to stynke.

Foetidus, a, um, stynkynge.

Foetifico, aui, are, to bring forth, most commonly as a beast or bird
does.

Foeto, Varro.
taui, tare, the same.

Foetor, oris, stynche or ill savor.

Foetuosus, a, um, full of bredynge.

Foetura, the time from the conception unto the birth. Also the increase of
cattle. sometime it signifies the increase or coming forth of other
things.

Foetus, tus, all thing that is brought forth by generation. Sometime the
fruit of tres.

Foetus, ta, tum, full, or great with young, as a woman with child, or a
beast.

Foliatius, a, um, full of leaves.

Foliatus, ta, tum, leaued, or having leaves.

Folium, a leaf.

Follico, caui, care, to snuff or fetch back wind with the nosethrylles.

Folliculus, the husk wherein the ears of weate or other corn is enclosed,
when it is green, called the hose. Also a sack wherein corn is put.

Follis, a below, wherewith fire is blown. Also a ball blown full of wind.
Semblablye a bed stuffed only with wind. It is also a bag, wherein money is.

Fomentum, a nouryshement of naturral heat. It is also any thing laid to the
body in the form of a plaster, to mittigate the pain or grief of any
disease, called fomentation.

Fomes, fomitis, any matter, wherewith fire is kendeled and kept burning.
Sometime it signifies that, which feruentely styrreth us to do any thing.

Fons, fontis, a fountain or well.

Fontanus, a, um, of a fountain.

Aqua fontana, well water.

Fonticulus, a little well or spring.

Forago, a skayn of yerne.

Foramen, minis, a hole.

For As, without.

Foratia, a markette womanne, which sells eggs, chykens, and other like
things at the market.

Foratus, tus, a hole.

Forbea, a kind of hot meat.

Forcipes, a pair of tongues, or other like instrumente.

Forcus, a proper name of a man.

Forda, a mylche cow that brings forth calves.

Fore, to be hereafter.

Forem, res, ret, I should or had be, thou shuldeste or had be, he should or
had been.

Forensia, habites or robes, worn only in plates of judgment.

Forensis, se, perteyninge to places of judgment or courts wherein laws be
exercised. Also a iurrour.

Fores, doors.

Forfices, sheres.

Forficuli, little sheres.

Fori, the hatches of a ship, or place where me^ being in the ship do walk up
and down. Also stages or galeries, from whense the noble men of Rome beheld
the plays called Circenses.

Foria, dunge that is liquide or thyn.

Forica, commune draughtes or Iakes.

Foriculae, little doors.

Forinsecus, without.

Forio, iui, ire, to discharge the bealy of ordure

Foriolus, he that has a laske.

Forma, form or shape sometime beaulty, fascion, manner.

Forma stata, a mean beaulty or stature.

Formiae, a town in Campania.

Formica, an emote, or ant, or pismere.

Formicatio, that which is communely called a ryngeworme.

Formidabilis, le, that which is to be drad.

Formido, dinis, dread or fear.

Formido, aui, are, to have great fear.

Formidolose, fearfully.

Formidolosus, he that fears other: also he that is feared of other.

Formo, aui, are, to form, to make in fascion.

Formosus, a, um, fair.

Formucales, a pair of tongues.

Formula, an instrument or deed in writing, a style in writing, and a form
in pleading.

Formula iniuriarum, an action of trespass.

Formula excidere, to be barred of his actio^.

Formulam intendere, to bring an action.

Formularius, a practiser of the law.

Fornacaria, dais when the women did naught else but bake bread.

Fornax, a chymney or oven.

Fornax calcaria, a lyme kill.

Fornax lateraria, a brycke kill.

Fornicarij, they which have stalles or bouthes under the vaultes or arches of
churches or palayces, where they sell their wares to the^ that pass by, as
they do in westminster hall.

Fornicarius, a, um, perteyninge to lechery.

Fornicator, a lechour.

Fornico, aui, are, to make an arche or a vault.

Fornicor, ari, to commyt fornication.

Fornix, nicis, an arche or a vault.

Foro, aui, are, to perce or bore a hole.

Forpices, cysfars to clyp hear.

Fors fortune. sometime it is used for forsitan, peradventure.

Fors fortuna, Terent. in Hecyra,
good fortune or chance.

Fors fuat, god send the good fortune, god speed the well.

Forsitan, and Forsan, peradventure.

Fortasse, Fortassis, idem.

Forte, perchance, peradventure.

Forte fortuna, by good adventure.

Fortesco, Neuius.
scere, to wax or be strong.

Forticulus, a little strong.

Fortifico, aui, are, to fortify or make strong.

Fortis, strong, puissant, valiant of courage. Also fair, sometime rich.

Fortiter, strongly, valiantly, constantly.

Fortitudo, dinis, strength, valiant courage.

Fortuito, by chance, at adventure.

Fortuitus, ta, tum, that happens by chance.

Fortuna, fortune.

Fortunae, goods, good fortune, advancement.

Fortunatae insulae, the fortunate yles, which are in the great occean sea,
and of Pliny are named to be six: of Solinus but three: of Ptholome two,
which he calletth also the yles of gods. so called for the holsomnes of the
air and wyndes blowynge there, also the plenty of good fruits and fertilite
of the ground. It is now thought of some men to be those yles, which are
now called Canaria, distant from Spain toward the weste one thousand and
two hundred miles after the count of Petrus Martyr. Of these yles are founden
to be seven in number. First about the year of our lord. 1405. a frenchmen
called Betanhor, at the commandment of Katharine thanne being queen of
Castyle, found two of them, and one called the Launcelote, and the other Forte
Ventura. Sone after oone Fernandus Peraria and his wife found other two, and
called the one Ferream, and the other Gomeram. After that the great Canaria was
^^^nde by Petrus de Vera, and Michael de Moxica. Last of al by the
commandment of Farnando and Elyzabeth late king and queen of Spain,
Teneriphe and Palma, were found by Alphonsus Lugo. So that now all the.vii.
yles be under the dominion of the king of Spain. Not withstanding some do
suppose, that these be not the yles, which were called Fortunatae, but rather
those which are more in the south, and be called now of the Portugalles
Insulae capitis uiridis.

Fertunatim, fortunately.

Fortunatus, ta, tum, fortunate.

Fortuno, aui, are, to make prosperous, to augment with good fortune.

Forula, a wykat.

Foruli, huches, wherein books were kept: now be they taken for keuerynges of
books.

Forum, a market, where things be sold. Also a place where judgments are
practiced, and matters in law pleaded. Forum agere, to sit in judgment, to
here and determyne causes.

Forum, when it is taken for a markette, has commonly an other word joined
therewith, as, Forum boarium, the market where cattle is sold.

Forum holitorium, the market where herbs be sold.

Forum piscarium, the fyshe market.

Forum Cornelij, a town in Italye called Imola.

Forum Iulij, a region or countreye of Italy, which sometime was called
Iapidia, now it is called Frioll.

Forum Claudij, Tarentasia in Italy.

Fossa, a dyche, or dike, or a mote.

Fossilis, le, that which is dygged, or may be dygged.

Fossio, a dyggynge.

Fossitius, a, um, that is dug.

Fossor, oris, a dygger or dycher.

Fossula, a little dyche.

Fossum Sempronij, a town in Italy called Fossemborne. Also Fauentia.

Fossura, a digginge.

Fotus, ta, tum, dygged.

Fouea, a den.

Foueo, ui, uere, to nouryshe, to sustain, to maynteyne, to wea^e or wash a
thing, to ordeyne or set, Cice. ad Q fratre^.
to defend.

Fouere aliquem, to keep one his friend.

Fouere in pectore, to think privily.

F ANTE R.
FRaceo, cui, cere, to putrify for age.

Fracesco, sci, scere, idem.

Fraces, lies of oil.

Fracidus, da, dum, more than ripe, rotten as fruit is.

Fractus, ta, tum, broken.

Fractus animo, discouraged.

Fractae res, things spent or lost.

Fractibello, weary of wars.

Fraeno, are, to bridle, to restrain, to stop.

Voluptates fraenare, to master the wanton appetites.

Fraenum, a bridle.

Fraenos adlubere, to restrain.

Fraenos inijcere alicui, to let one of his pleasure, to brydell him that would
not be ruled.

Fraenum mordere, to take the bytte in the tethe, signifies to set naught by.

Fraetus, ta, tum, trustinge, aided.

Fraeti uirtute and uiribus, aided with strength and puissance.

Fraga, straweberies, the herb is called Fragraria.

Frageo, gere, and Fragesco, sci, scere, to brast.

Fragilis, le, frail, broukle, sone broken.

Fragilitas, frayltie, brouklenes, inconstancy.

Fragiliter, weakly, inconstantly.

Fragitides, the two great veins, which do appire on either side of the neck.

Fragmen, and Fragmentum, a piece or gobet of a thing broken.

Fragor, oris, the noise, which is made at the falling of any great thing,
rushynge.

Fragosus, a, um, uneasy to clyme.

Fragrans, it is, having great or sote savor.

Fragrantia, ae, a great savor.

Framea, a spear or iavelin.

Frango, fregi, frangere, to break.

Frangere animum, to discourage.

Audatiam hostis frangere, to abate his ennemies courage.

Frangere authoritatem ueteris disciplinae, to break or distroye the old rule
or laudable custom.

Fidem frangere, to break promise or appointment.

Frangere hominem, to cause one to relente from his purpose, to make him to
agree to his request.

Opes inimicorum frangere, to impouerishe his enemies.

Sententia^ alicuius frangere, to confute ones opinion, and make it of no value.

Frangi dolor, to be in extreme sorrow, or almost dead for sorrow or grefe.

Frangi metu, to be almost dead for fear.

Frangi pudore, to be excedyngely ashamed, to be out of countenance.

Franosus, a deceyuour.

Frater, tris, a brother.

Frater patruelis, a brothers son.

Fraterculus, a little or young brother.

Fraterne, brotherly.

Fraternus, na, um, of a brother.

Fratilli, the fringe of tapesry, that hangs next the ground.

Fratrare, properly is said of chylderns breasts, when they do grow to wax
imboced.

Fratres Aruales, read before in Aruales.

Fratria, a brothers wife.

Fratricida, he that has slain is brother.

Fratrueles, brothers chylderne, cousyn germaynes.

Fraudator, a deceyuer.

Fraudo, aui, are, to begyle, to disappoynt.

Fraudare alique^ suo testimonio, where one holds his peace, when his friend
is spoken of, and will not say well of him.

Fraudare genium, not to satisfy the necessite of nature, or carnal appetite.

Fraudare se uictu suo, to fare hardly for nygardeshyp.

Fraudare stipendium, to reteyne or keep away wages from men.

Fraudulenter, deceitfully.

Fraudulentus, full of deceit.

Fraudulosus, a begyler.

Fraus, fraudis, deceyt. Also peril, dangier.

Fraxineus, a, um, of ash, or ashen.

Fraxinus, an ash.

Fraxo, aui, are, to go in watch.

Fregella, a little town in Italy.

Fremitus, a rorynge, properly of waters. sometime a murmuring, rumble, or
noise of people assembled together.

Fremo, mi, mere, to rore or make a noise like great waters, or like a lion.

Frendeo, dui, dear, to grynde the teethe together for anger or peyn. Also to
grunt or groan for pain.

Frequens, entis, accustomed, much haunted. Also assemble together, abundant.
Omnibus relictis mihi frequentem operam dedistis, leuynge all other men, ye
have often times helped me.

Frequens auditorium, a great audience.

Frequens adest, he comes often.

Frequens est cum eo, he is often times with him.

Frequentes fuimus ad ducentos, we were a great number about two hundred.

Frequens senatus, all the senators assembled to gether. Venio in senatum
frequens, I come ordinarily unto the Senate.

Frequentatio, an hauntynge, an assembly.

Frequentia, great haunt, and company of folk.

Frequentissimae aedes, ^ house much haunted with people.

Frequento, taui, tare, to haunt, to go together.

Fresta faba, a bean bruised or broken.

Fretum, a narrow sea between two lands, as fretum herculeum, which is in the
sea between Spain and the country of Moors, called the straictes of Marrok.

Fretus, Cice. fam. epist. 12.
of fruor, trustyng. De qua tamen magnam spem habemus, freri clementia collegae
tui: whereof not withstanding we have good hope, trustinge on the mercy of
your companion.

Friabilis, sone broken in small pieces.

Fribolus, almost worth an halfepeny.

Frico, caui, cui, care, to rub.

Frictilla, a frytue, made with flower and bater.

Frictus, Fricatio, and Frictio, rubbing.

Frictus, and Frixus, a, um, fried.

Frigefacio, feci, facere, to cool.

Frigefio, frigefieri, to be cold.

Frigeo, gui, and frixi, gere, to be cold or flow.

Frigero, aui, are, to cool.

Frigesco, scere, to wax cold.

Frigidarius, a cold bathe.

Frigide, coldely, unaptly, unpleasantly.

Frigiditas, coldness.

Frigidulus, a, um, somewhat cold.

Frigidus, da, dum, cold, dangerous, or noyfull.

Frigilla, a dyrde, which syngeth in the cold wether, a ruddocke, or rod in
redbrest.

Frigo, xi, and frigui, gere, to frye.

Frigorificus, ca, cum, made cold.

Frigus, oris, cold. sometime fear.

Frigutio, tiui, tire, to quake for cold.

Frio, aui, are, to break small, specially betwyxte the fyngers.

Frisii, people by Holande, whereof the country is called Fryselande.

Frit, the grain in the top of the ear, which is less than a corn.

Fritilla, a froyse or pancake.

Fritillus, a box, out of the which dyfe were cast on the tables.

Friuiculum, discention between men and their wyfes, which comes not to
separation.

Friuolo, vtensiles of lyttel value.

Friuolarius, he that sells stuff of little valu.

Friuolus, a, um, vain, light, of none estimation or value.

Frixorium, a fryinge pan.

Frondarius, ia, ium, of leaves.

Frondatio, a slyppynge of leaves. Also brousynge.

Frondator, oris, a brouser, a wood lopp^r.

Frondeo, and Frondesco, scere, to bear or have leaves.

Frondeus, ea, eum, that is of leaves.

Frondo, daui, are, to bring forth leaves,

Frondifer, bearing leaves.

Frons, it is, the forehead, the frunt, shamefastenes, also countenance. also it
signifies the foreparte of an hooste.

Frons causae, the beginning of the matter.

Prima front, at the first, at the entry, at the prime face.

Porrecta front, with a merry countenance.

Frontem explicare, to look mirily.

Frontem exporgere, idem,

Frontem contrahere, to look sowerly.

Frontem ferire, is spoken where a man signifies, that one disdayneth
extremely an other Pernijt illi frons, he has lost his countenance.

Frons, frondis, the leaf of a tree with the bra^nches.

Frontale, the hedstall of an horse.

Fronto, tonis, he that has a broad forehead.

Frontosus, having a great forehead, or not abashed.

Fructifer, bearing fruit.

Fructificus, and Fructuosus, fruitful.

Fructuarius, he that takes the fruit or profit of a thing, called of our
lawyars Pernour of profyttes.

Fructuarius, a, um, that which bears fruit, or does perteyne of fruit.

Fructus, tus, and ti, fruit. Also all profit or revenues that comes of the
ground.

Frugalitas, tatis, moderation in lyuinge, specially in apparayle and dyete,
sober rule. also sufficiency.

Frugaliter, temperately, soberly, profytably, without reproach, excess, or
riot.

Frugalior, frugalissimus, more temperate, most temperate.

Fruges, aut Frux, frugis, increase of all those things, which the earth
brings forth, most properly of grain or corn. Sometime it signifies rent
or revenues.

Frugi, moderate, profitable, necessary.

Frugi aedificium, a house not sumptuous.

Frugi homo, a good man, a thrifty man, an honest-man, temperate in expenses.

Frugi seruus, a trusty servant, which looks well to his masters profit.

Fruiscor, sci, to use at liberty.

Frumen, the vppermoste part of the throat, the gargyll.

Frumentaceus, of corn.

Frumentarius, ia, ium, perteyninge to corn.

Frumentatio, taking of corn.

Frumentator, toris, a taker or pourueyour of corn.

Frumentor, aris, to gather or puruey corn.

Frumentum, all corn, that has berdes or eyies, it is most used for weate or
rye.

Fruniscor, Cato used for fruor.

Frunitus, wise in using of a thing.

Fruor, fretus sum, frui, to use with dilectation and profit.

Frui ingenio suo, to do as he will.

Frustatim, in pieces or gobettes.

Frustillatim, piece meal.

Frustra, in vain.

Frustraes, thou art deceived or abused, frustra esse, to come to none effect.

Frustra habere, aliquem, to abuse or deceive one.

Ne frustra sis, that thou be not disappointed

Frustra legati dissessere, the ambassadors departed without having their
purpose.

Frustratio, abusing or deceyuynge of one.

Frustro, aui, are, and Frustror, aris, ari, to deceive. also to do a thing in
vain, or vaynly to employ.

Frustrari expectationem alicuius; to disapoynte one of that which he looked
for.

Frustrari expensas, to lose his costs and charges. Columel.


Imprudenter facta opera frustantur expensas, warkes made unadvisedly makes
one to lose all that he has bestowed.

Frustrari laborem, to lose his pain.

Satis adhuc tua frustrata est fides, hitherto the trust that I have had in
the, has me^ely well abused me.

Frustulum and Frustillum, a little gobet.

Frustum, a piece or gobet.

Frusus, a kind of brembles, whose pryckes be not hooked.

Frutex, that which has a great stalk, and yet it is no tree, as fenell,
caules, certain malowes, and other like herbs. sometime it is taken for the
stem or stalk.

Frutetosus, a, um, having abundaunce of such great herbs.

Frutetum, seu Fruticetum, a place where grows herbs with great stemmes or
stalks.

Fruticescere, to be a stalk.

Frutico, aui, are, and Fruticor, aris, ari, to spring in stalk.

F ANTE V.
FVAT, for fit.

Fucatus, ta, tum, colored or painted, as some women be.

Fucilis, le, false, colored.

Fucinus, a lake in Italy.

Fuco, caui, care, to lay on a color.

Fucus, a dorre or be without stynge, which enters into hyues, and eats
up honey. Also payntynge, where one color is laid on an other. It is also
used for disceypte or falsehoode.

Fuga, flight.

Fugax, gacis, he that flies lightly. also it signifies swyfte.

Fugio, gi, gere, to flee, to run away, to escape to forget. also to eschew.

Fugit aciem tenuitas, it is so small that one can not see it.

Fugit te ratio, thou understand not the matter. De Caesare fugerat me ad te
scribere, Of Caesar I had forgoten to write unto the.

Nisi si quae me forte fugiunt, Except I have forgotten somewhat.

Fugiens laboris, abhorrynge labor or peyn.

Fugiens uinu^, wine that has lost his verdur

Fugientes literae, blind letters.

Fugitiuarius, a, um, startynge away, flyttynge, that gladly and quyckly
runs away.

Fugitiuus, a, um, fugitive, not abydyng.

Fugitiuae aquae, waters, which be taken out of a commune river by stelthe.

Fugitiuus seruus, he that rounneth from his master, willing never to
return, or goes to a place, from whens he supposes that his master can
never recover him.

Eugito, aui, are, to use to run away.

Fugo, aui, are, to drive away.

Fulcimentum, a botreulx, or that wherewith a thing is sustained.

Fulcio, si, cire, to support, to fortify.

Fulcra, bedsteedes.

Fulgeo, si, gere, and Fulgo, gi, ere, to shine.

Fulgetrum, a leame of lyghtnynge.

Fulgidus, da, dum, bright.

Fulgor, brightness.

Fulgur, uris, uel oris, lyghtnynge.

Fulguratio, the lightening when it is in the clouds.

Fulgurator, the sender of lyghtnynge.

Fulgurio, riui, rire, to cast lyghtnynge.

Fulguritas, lyghtnes or bryghtnes.

Fulguritassunt, stryken with lyghtnynge.

Fulguritum, stricken or blasted with lyghtning.

Fulguro, aui, are, to send forth lyghtnyng^.

Fulica, a sea bird, more than a culuer, and black.

Fuligo, ginis, the soote of a chymney.

Fullo, onis, a fuller of clothe.

Fullonica, fullars craft.

Fulmen, minis, lyghtnynge.

Fulmino, aui, are, to lyghten.

Fultura, a shoore.

Fuluus, a, um, a color myxt of grene and read, a dark yelowe.

Fumaria herba, an herb called fumitorye.

Fumarium, a smokye place, where wine was laid, to the intent that it moughte
the sooner wax old* also the shank or tonel of a chimney.

Fumisico, aui, are, to make smoke, to incense.

Fumigo, aui, are, to parfume.

Fumo, aui, are, to smoke.

Fumus, smoke.

Fumos uendere, is the practyse of them, which being nigh about a prince, or
in his favor do bear men in hand, that they speak for them to the prince,
where they speak never a word: and cause men to live thereby in fools
paradyse.

Funale, a torche.

Funales equi, horses which coupled with an halter, did go before the chariot.

Funambulus, he that walks on a rope.

Functio, the exercise of a weightye matter or office.

Funda, a slynge. also a casting net, a sachell or purse like a net* also a
cercle of gold, or other metal, wherein stones be set.

Fundamen, and Fundamentum, a foundation.

Fundibularij, slyngers of stones.

Funditores, the same.

Fundito, aui, are, to power out often.

Funditus, from the foundation, utterly.

Funditus me perdidisti, thou haste utterly undone me.

Funditus perij, I am utterly undone.

Fundo, aui, are, to found, to make stable.

Fundo, fudi, fundere, to yette or cast metal, to pour out, to shede, to
throw down, to scatter, to discomfite, to give abundantlye, to speak much, to
lay down.

Fundere exercitum, and Fu^dere copias, to discomfite or defete an host, to
slay all the army.

Fundere lachrimas, to weep excedyngly.

Fundere uerba, to speak more than needs.

Fundere uersus, to make verses suddenly.

Fundere urinam, to pysse much.

Fundum, the bottom of a thing.

Fundus, that which is used to be called land or soil. sometime it is taken
for a foundation. also for the chief author of a thing.

Funebris bre, funeral.

Funepeus, a goer on a cord.

Funerale, pertaynyng to funeralles.

Funereus, rea, reum, pertainyng to the dead body

Funero, aui, are, to bury.

Funesto, aui, are, to violate a place with a dead body.

Funestus, ta, tum, violated with dead bodies. also mortal, bluddy. also
pertaynyng to dead bodies or death.

Funetum, bowed or houped, as some vines be.

Fungor, fu^ctus sum, fungi, to exercise an office.

Fungi officio suo, to do his devour.

Fungi fato, to be dead.

Fungi uita, to live.

Fungi uice alicuius, to be in an another man's steed.

Functus uita, he that has fynyshed his life.

Funginus, a, um, of a mousherom.

Fungosus, like a mousherom.

Fungus, a tadde stools, a musherom.

Funiculus, a small rope.

Funis, a rope.

Funus, funeris, funeral exequies, or solemnite of burieng. sometime it
signifies the dead corpse.

Funus facere, to cause one to dye.

Fuo, fui, futum, to be.

Fur, furis, a thief.

Furax, acis, theuyshe, a great pycker.

Furca, furcula, an hey forke.

Furcifer, ciferis, a servant, which for some light offense, was compellid to
bear a forke on his neck, having both his hands bounden fast thereto, and so
to goo through the town, confessing his defaut, and exhortyng other that they
should not in like case offend, which was a great reproach.

Furcilis, a dunge forke.

Furcilla, an hey forke. also a galowes.

Furfur, uris, branne.

Furfureus, and Furfuraceus, a, um, of branne.

Furiae, the furies of hell, which were three, Alecto, Tisiphone, Megera.

Furiatus, a, um, furyous.

Furibundus, a, um, wood, or very mad.

Furio, aui, are, to make mad or wood.

Furiosus, a, um, mad, or wood, frantike.

Furnaceus, a, um, baken in an oven.

Furnaria, bakers craft. also a woman baker. also a bakehouse.

Furnus, an o^en.

Furo, furi, furere, to be wood for anger.

Furor, oris, madness. also fury, which is vehement concitation or styrynge of
the mind.

Furor, aris, ari, to steal.

Furtificus, a pycker or privy stealer.

Furtim, by stelthe, priuyly.

Furtiuus, a, um, that which is done by stelthe or very priuyly.

Furtiuae literae, and Furtiua scripta, letters which no man can read but
only he, unto whom they be sent, as letters in cyfer.

Furtum, theft. It is defined to be a deceytfulle handlynge or vsyng of any
thing, or the possession thereof, to have thereby gain or advantage, which is
by the law of nature prohibyted to be suffered. It is sometime any act that is
done pryuily, to the intent it should be secret.

Furti teneri, aut obstringi, to be answerable to felonye.

Furunculus, a lyttel thief. also a beast called a stote, that kylleth
rabettes. It is also a soore callid a felon. also a soore callid a cattes hear,
which breketh out in the fingers with great wheales and much pain.

Furuus, ua, uum, dark.

Furuae hostiae, sacrifyce done to Pluto and Proserpine.

Fuscina, a spear with many teethe, wherewith fyshers do take troutes or yeles,
by throwing of it, a troute spear, an yele spear.

Fuscinula, a flesshehoke.

Fuscus, ca, cum, brown of color, not fully black.

Fusile, that which may be molten.

Fuse, in length, long.

Fusim, abroad, as it were molten.

Fusores, melters.

Fusorius, a, um, pertaynyng to meltynge, as, Ars fusoria, the craft of
meltynge. Vas fusorium, a meltynge pot.

Fustigo, are, to beat with a staff.

Fustis, a staff.

Fustuarius, a minister, which serves to beat men with staves.

Fusus, si or Fusum, a spyndell.

Fusus, a, um, molten.

Fusus humi, stretched on the ground.

Fusi fugatique, slain and put to flight.

Futilis, le, that which will be sone poured out.

Futilis, he that speaks all that he knows shortly or unadvisedly.

Futio, it is, tere, to pour out or run out.

Futis, a vessel, wherewith water was poured into a lauer, to bring water
into a parler, or soupynge chaumber.

Futuo, tui, tuere, to do the act of generation.

G ANTE A.
GABA, A TOVNE in Galilee.

Gabalu^, a town in France nigh to Narbona, where there was made very good
cheese.

Gabalus, a galowe tree, or gybet, whereon men be hanged.

Gabaon, a city in the holy land nygh to Rama where Salomo^ doing sacrifice,
spoke with god.

Gabaonitae, men of that town.

Gabata, a potage dyshe.

Gabba, a city in Siria.

Gabij, orum, a city in Italye, which the Romans dystroyed.

Gabinus, a garment with two lappes, whereof the one cast backward, did girde
him that did wear it, which garment the consule ware, when he denounced
wars.

Gabriel, signifies the puissa^ce or might of god

Gades, two isles by the further partis of Spain beyond Granade.

Gaditanum fretum, is the entree out of the occean sea, into the sea called
Mediterraneam, having Spain on the north side, and the Moors on the southe.

Gaeon, a great river which runs through Ethiope and Egypt, and is now
callid Nilus.

Gaetuli, people in Affrike.

Gaetulia, a country in Affrike.

Gagates, a stone called Ieate.

Galactophagus, a eater of milk.

Galactopota, a drynker of milk.

Galanga, a spyce called galyngale.

Galatae, uel Gallograeci, people of Galatia.

Galataea, a nymph or maiden of the sea, and was daughter of Nereus and Doris.

Gallatia, uel Gallograetia, a country in the less Asia, ioynyng to Phrygiam,
and Lydiam.

Galbanus, a gum of a certain tree, which is much vsyd in playsters.

Galbinus, a, um, delycate, wanton.

Galbuli, things which do hang on cypres trees, like small hears.

Galea, a helmet or salette.

Galeatus, he that has an helmet of salet.

Galenus, a noble physician, borne in Pargamo a town in Asia, son of Nicon a
great geometrician. This man in the art of phisike excellyd all other before
his time and sens, in so much as in his ministration, counsel, or doctrine, he
never had reproach, as he him self writes. also he living (as some do
write.Cx. years, after that he passed the aege of.xviii. years, until the time
of his death, he was never vexed with any syckenes, except the grudge of a
fever of one day, as he says in his warke De sanitate tuenda, and that happened
only by to much labor. He ^louryshed in the time of the emperors Marcus
Commodus, and Pertinax, and dyed only for feebleness of age, after the
incarnation of Christ about.C^x. years.

Galericulum, an under bonet, or rydyng cappe

Galerita, a lark.

Galerus, and Galerum, a hat. also a pirwike.

Galetia, a cuntray in Spain, having on the east part the river callid Seyn, in
latin Sequana, on the south the royalme of Portugal, on the west and north the
occean sea.

Galgulus, a byrd, whom if one do behold that has the yelowe iaundyse,
forthwith the man becomes hole, and the bird has the syknes.

Galilea, is a country, which marches on Siria Arabia, and Egypt.

Galiopsis, an herb called Archangell, as some do suppose.

Galla, a fruit called gaulles.

Gallaria, a lampurne.

Gallia, a noble region set between Spayn and Germanye, and on the east
bordereth on the mountay^es called Alps. That which joined to Germanye was
called Belgica, and was contained between the river callid Scaldes, and the
river of Sequana, or Seyne. That part which marched to the mountains, was
called Celtica or Lugdunensis, and was contained between the ryuers of Seyne
and Geronde. That which bordered on Spain called Aquitania, was bounded with
the mountains called Pyrenaei. Caesar boundeth the part called Celtica, with
the ryuers called Rhone and Gerounde, and Aquitaniam, with the hills called
Pyrenaei, and the river of Gerounde. Agrippa described Galliam between the
river called Rhenus or Rhene, the mountains Pyrenaei, the occean sea, and the
mou^tayns callid Gebenne and Iura. Moreover that which is now callid
Lu^bardy, was called Gallia Cisalpina.

Gallicanus, a, um, of France.

Gallicia, a royalme in Spain, called Galyce.

Gallicinium, the time in the night when the cock croweth.

Gallicus, a, um, french.

Gallina, a hen.

Gallinaceus, a house cock.

Gallinaceus pullus, a chycke.

Gallinarium, a place where pultry is kept.

Gallinarius, and gallinaria, he or she that keeps pultrye.

Gallium, an herb like unto clote, but it has no burres nor pryckes, and
grows on stone walls.

Gallo, are, to be mad.

Gallograetia, a countreye in Asia, called alsoo Galatia.

Gallus, a cock, a frencheman, a priest of Cybeles, callid the mother of the
goddis. also a river in Phrigia, the water whereof, if it be drunk, it makes
one mad.

Gallus, a, um, of France.

Gamale, a town in Judea.

Gammarus, a fyshe called a lopstar, or creuyse of the sea.

Ganea, and Ganeum, a brothelhouse, a house of bawdrye and ryotte. Also Ganea
is taken for gluttonye.

Ganeo, onis, a ruffyan, a haunter of bawdye howses, a ryotter. also a rauener
of delycate meats.

Gangaridae, people between Assyria and India

Ganges, is a great river that dyuideth Inde, and is that which in holy
scripture is called Phison, one of the four ryuers, which do come out of
Paradyse. Josephus does interpret it inundation li. 1. cap. 2. The breadth
thereof as Solinus writes, is in the naroweste place eyghte miles, the brodest
twenty miles. Arrianus lib. 8. writes, that where hit is narroweste, hit is in
breadthe a hunderde furlonge, which is eyghte miles, in many places it
spreads so wide, that where the ground is most plain, nor any high place
appears, no man may dyscerne any thing on the other side. In the shalowest
place it is an hundred foot deep. There runs into it.xvii. great ryuers,
every of them able to bear a ship. In this river of Ganges is an isle, and
therein is a great city callid Palybotra, the countraye is named Prasia, the
king whereof, as Pliny writes li. 6. ca. 19. has always in wages, six hundred
thousand foot men.xxx. thousand horsemen, and ix.M. Olyphantes.

Gangeticus, ca, cum, of that river.

Gangetica tellus, Indee.

Gangilium, a sycknes in the head of a beast, wherewith the head becomes full
of water.

Gangraena, a soore called a canker.

Gannio, nire, to bark or houle like a dog.

Gannitus, tus, barkynge or houlynge.

Ganymedes, a Troyan child, which was fained to be rauysshed of Iupyter, and
made his butlar.

Ganzae, geese.

Garamantes, people in Affrike, in the myddell of Lybia which are black
Moors.

Garganus, a hylle in Apulia.

Gargara, a mountayn, and also a city in Asia.

Gargarizatio, a washing of the mouth and throat to expel fleume out of the
head.

Gargarizo, to gargelle or wasshe the mouth and throat.

Gargarum, oone of the tops of the mountayn called Ida.

Garrio, ire, to babble.

Garrulus, a babbler.

Garum, sauce made with fyshe salted.

Garumna, a river in France called Gerond.

Garyophyllata, some think it to be the herb, which is called herb Benet.
some suppose it to be that, which Plinye names Geum, the rote of this herb
gathered in March, smells like cloves, and Pliny writes, that Geu^ has
black rotes, which do smell very swetely.

Garyophylli, the spyce called cloves.

Garyophyllus, Ruellius callith it Garryophil lea, a gylofer, next to the rose
the fairest and so test flour. it is also the tree that bears cloves

Gastrimergia, gluttony.

Gaudeo, gauisus sum, gaudere, to rejoice, to be glad. Gaudere in sinu, to
rejoice by him self.

Gaudium, joy, mirth, an affection of the mind, conceived of an opynion of a
thing good or pleasant.

Gaulus, a little round bote, or a payle to receive milk.

Gausape, a mantell to cast on a bed. also a carpet to lay on a table, some
call it a dagswayne. Some do expound it a velvet cloak.

Gausapina, idem.

Gaza, the tresure of a king. also a cite i^ Palestina.

Gazella, a beast in the parts of India, of who^ comes musk. Antonius Musa
writes, that there be of them in Africa, in figure like to a roo. Serapio
says, that they have horns, also long tethe and white, about.ix. inches of
length, standing out of their mouths like a bore. This be naturally has a
superfluous blood congelid on his bealy, and growith like an impostume, and
when it is ripe, the beast goes to a tree or a stone, and rubbith thereon his
bealy, until the humor breakith out like unto corrupt matter, which at the
first sti^keth, but when it has been hanged a while in the air, (...) waxes
ripe, and than has it an odoriferous savor, and is callid musk. Gazella, is
not a cyuet as some do suppose, for the cyuet is like a great cat, and the ^oote
humor, which comes from him is like sweat, which is founden between her
flanks. Wherefore unto it is given a new name, and is called Cibeta.

Gazophilacium, a place where tresure is kept.

G ANTE E.
GEbenna, a city in Sauoy callid Geneuera, where among the women specially,
raineth a disease callid Bronchocoele, which is a bolnyng or swellynge under
their chynnes. Also Solinus names the part of Alps ioynyng to Sauoy,
Gebennam.

Gebuseus, the son of Canaan, of whom the old inhabytauntes of Jerusalem
were called Gebusei.

Gedeon, the name of a judge in Israel.

Gedrosia, a country in Asia.

Geenna, is taken in holy scripture for hell.

Gela, a river in Sicile.

Gelabilis, le, that may be frosen.

Gelasco, scere, to be frosen.

Gelasini, the foreteethe, which be showed in lawghynge.

Gelasinus, he that laugheth to make other men laugh.

Gelicidium, a frost.

Gelidus, a, um, cold as yse.

Gelo, aui, are, to freese.

Geloi, fields in Sicile.

Geloni, a people now called Tartarians.

Gelothophyllis, lidos, an herb, which (as P^^nius writes) being drunken in
wine with myrre, makes laughyng without cessyng, except the kernelles of
pyneappuls myxte with pepper and honye, in the wine of dates, be drunken after
it. This herb is found about the river called Borysthenes, in the furthest
part of Russia, and alsoo in the countreye called Bactrae.

Gelu, yse. sometime cold.

Gemellariae, an instrument by the which oil runs out of the press.

Gemellus, little or small twynnes.

Gemibundus, full of waylynge.

Gemino, aui, are, to double.

Geminus, a, um, the number of two. Also Geminus is a twyn, where many
chylderne are borne at one burdeyne, although they be three or mo. also it is
the name of a man, which in Hebrew and english is Thomas.

Gemma, the young budde of a vine. also a precyouse stone.

Gemmascere, to begin to budde.

Gemmatus, a, um, budded.

Gemmo, aui, are, to bud or spryng, as a young graffe or vine does.

Gemmosus, a, um, that which is all of precious stones.

Gemo, mui, ere, to groan, or to wa^l, or to make a lamentable noise.

Gemi^ cymba, Vergilius
the boat cracketh, being ouercharged.

Gemoniae scalae, a place from whe^s the bodies of persons condemned were
thrown down at Rome.

Gemonidae, women great with child.

Gemursa, a corn, or like grief, under the little toe.

Gena, the eye lydde. it is sometime taken for the cheeks.

Genauius, a, um, gluttonous.

Genealogia, a pedegrewe.

Gener, he that maryeth my daughter.

Generalis, le, general.

Generatim, generally.

Genero, aui, are, to engender.

Generositas, an aptnes to engender, to bring forth. Col^^el.
sometime it signifies nobility.

Generosus, a, um, of a gentle or noble kind.

Generosus princeps, a puyssant and couragyous prince.

Generosus equus, an horse of a good raze.

Arbores generosae, trees which bear plenty of good fruit.

Genesis, generation.

Genethliacus, an astronomer, or other like, which by the sterres set at a
man's nativity, tells his fortune.

Genezareth, a great meare or ponde in the la^d of promyssion, and it is also
called Mare Tiberiadis.

Genialis homo, a man in his house very lyberall and fresshe.

Geniae, old veckes full of unhappiness.

Geniculatim, ioynted as a wheat straw is.

Geniculum, the ioynte of a straw, or stalk of an herb.

Genij, men which do give all their study to eating and drinking.

Genista, broume.

Genimen, generation.

Genitalia, the members of generation.

Genitalis, le, pertaynyng to the birth of a man.

Genitale solum, the natural country or place where a man is borne.

Genitale semen, the sede of generation.

Genitalis dies, the day of nativity.

Genitiua, sometime generation. sometime the seed of generation.

Genitiuus, a, um, that has power to engender, or that which proceeds with
generation.

Genitiuae notae, marks wherewith a man is borne.

Genitor, a father.

Genitrix, a mother.

Genitus, ta, tum, begotten, engendered.

Genius, an angel. Among the Paynyms some supposed it to be the spirit of
man, some did put two governors of the soul, a good and an euylle: Bonus
genius, and malus genius, which never departed from us. sometime it is taken
for nature it self, or dylcetation moved by nature.

Genio dare operam, to live voluptuousely.

Genium defraudare, to absteyn from al things pleasant.

Ge^^ocha, a beast less than a fox, in color a dark yelowe, full of black
spots, I suppose it to be a black Ienet, the furre whereof is in England
esteemed above all other furs.

Gens, gentis, a people, sometime a kynrede.

Genselia, which is compact of many families or kynredes.

Gentiana, an herb called Gentian.

Gentilis, a kynsman of the same name and stock. sometime it signifies a
Gentile or Paynym. sometime (...) country man.

Gentilis, le, proper or familiar to that people, or kynrede.

Gentilitas, tatis, gentilitie, the multitude of the people or family.

Gentilitius, a, um, of the people or nation.

Gentilitium nomen, the surname or aunciente name of a man's auncetours.

Gentilitia sacra, ceremonies of that country or people.

Genus, ^idis, and king of Illiria, called now Slauony, which was the first
fynder of the herb called Gentian.

Genu, a knee.

Genua, a great city called Geane.

Genuini, the innermoste cheke teethe.

Genuinus sermo, the natural speech or mother tungue.

Genus, generis, is the beginning of every thing either of the person that
engendered it, or of the place where it was engendered. Orestes a Tantalo ducit
genus, Orestes has his beginning of Tantalus, or is of the blood of
Tantalus. Plato genere Atheniensis (...) Plato is of his bludde or auncetry an
Atheniens. Also it sygnyfieth kind. Genus uitae, a kind of life. Genus
mortis, a kind of death. Genus animalium, a kind of beastis. Also it
signifies that, which conteyneth many sundry kinds, as Animal, comprehends
a man, a byrd, a fyshe, and every of them is genus to that, which in them is
comprehended. As a brute beast is genus to a horse, a lion, a bulle, a dog.
etc. A bird is genus to an egle, a crow, a lark, a sparowe. etc. A fysshe is
genus to a whale, a porpese, a haddocke, a playce. etc.

Geodesia, is a science of things concerning sensible greatness and figure.

Geographia, the description of the earth.

Geomancia, superstitious warkyng in sorcery, by cercles and pryckes in the
earth.

Geometer, a geometrician.

Geometria, geometry, measuryng and proportionyng of fygures in the earth.

Georgica, pertaining to husbandry.

Geranium, an herb called herb Rob^rtr.

Gergonia, a town in Guyen, standing on an high hylle.

Germania, the countray called of some Duchlande, of some Almayn, is described
by Ptholome the.xi. chapter, to be bou^ded on the west with the river of
Rhene, on the north with the sea callid Germanicus oceanus, the south west
part with the river called Donow, the east side is bounded with the bendyng of
Do now unto the hills of Sarmatia. The name of Germania extends now further,
for there in is contained many great countrayes and cities, which sometime were
part of Gallia Belgica, that is to say from the river of Rhene westwarde unto
our sea called Mare Britannicum.

Germani, people of Germany, or Germayns.

Germane, brotherly.

Germanus, substant. brother of one father and one mother.

Germanus, na, number, come of the same stock.

Germanum nomen, the proper name.

Mea germana patria, my very or naturalle countray.

Germen, minis, a branche of a tree or herb.

Germino, a^i, are, to branche out.

Gero, gessi, gerere, to beat. sometime it signifies to have.

Gerere aniciria^, Cice. fam. epist. 3.
to practice freendshyp. Quorum sunt de gerenda amicitia prae clarissime
scripti libri, Whose books we have how to practyse fre^dshyp, Plinius in pane.
very well written.

Gerere b^llum, to make war.

Gerere honores, to be in honor or authority.

Gerere magistratum, to exercise an office.

Gerere morem, Terent. in Adelphis.
to obey.

Gerere negotium, to do his busynes.

Paterna^ specie^ gerere, to be like his father.

Gerere praeturam, to be in the office of a judge

Gerere pudorem, Cicero de amicitia.
to be shamefast.

Gerere rempub. to minister the publik weal.

Simultatem cum aliquo gerere, Plaut. in Amph.
to be at variance with one.

Gerontocomion, an hospital, wherein old men are kept, an almeshouse.

Gerrae siculae, tryfles.

Gerres, fyshe of the kind of herrynges, it may be called pylchardes.

Gerrones, talkers of tryfelynge things, or light matters.

Gerula, a maid that keeps a child.

Gerulus, a porter, or a man hired to carye bourdeyns.

Gerusia, a place where the Senate did assemble, a parlyament house.

Geryones, nis, a king of Spayn, whom Hercules did slay, and took from him
certain bulls and kyen of notable greatness.

Gesa, a haulberde.

Gessoriacum, as some men do suppose, was the town, which is now named
Calays.

Gesta, things which have been done, acts.

Gestamen, minis, what so ever is borne, a burdeyne or carriage.

Gestatio, the exercise, where a man is borne or carried on any thing.

Gestatorium, that wherein any thing is carried or borne, a flagon, a horse
lytter.

Gesticularius, a, u^, pertaynyng to signs or tokens of myrthe, with me^yng
the body or hands.

Gesticulator, he that plays with puppettes.

Gesticulor, aris, to make such signs or tokens of mirth, as in daunsynge.

Gestio, iui, ire, to show the affections of the mind by me^ing of the body,
or any part there of* sometime it sygnifieth to delight.

Gestito, aui, are, to bear or wear oftentimes.

Gesto, aui, are, to bear long.

Gestat uentrem, she is with child.

Gestuosus, full of tokens of myrthe.

Gestus, ^us, gesture, or countenance with mouyng of the body.

Gestus, ta, tum, borne, or done.

Getae, people, which some suppose to be those, which are in Norway and
Gothia. some say that they be more in the northeast in Scithia pertaining to
Europa. Some think that it is the people of the countrays Valachia and
Transyluania.

Ge^uli, a people in Affrike.

G ANTE I.
GIarus, a lyttel i will in the sea callid Ioniu^, whereunto men condemned were
exiled. Gibber, and gibbosus, and gibberosus, he which has a crooked back, or a
great bunche on any part of the body.

Gibbus, and gibba, a great bunche.

Gigantomachia, a bettayle, which gyantes prepared against the goddis, as
poets feigned.

Gigas, gantis, a giant, a man or woman far excedyng the common stature of
men, of whom as well holy scripture, as other credible writers do make mention.
Plutarchus a noble philosopher and hystorien writes, that Sertorius a capitayn
of Romans being in Mauritania, brake down the sepulcher of Antheus, and therein
was found the body of a man of such monstrous greatness, that the same
capytayne me^ed with a reverend fear, caused the monument to be reedifyed
Plyny writes, that in the isle called Creta, now Candy, an hylle fell down, and
there was found the body of a man, which was in length.xivi. cubytes, which
are.lxix. fete, which was supposed of some to be the body of Orion, of some the
body of E^ion. Antonius Sabellicus affirms, that it was reported to him of a
credyble person, that in the southe part of Candye, there was founden by men,
which dig^ed up a great tree for the making of a ship, the head of a man as
great as a wine vesselle called Dolium, how great that vessel is at Venice,
where Antonius wrate, I can not tell: with us it is taken to be the
greattest vesselle, which was sometime a ^utine, and if it were so great, it
were wonderful monstruouse, and also incredyble, but that he says one of the
teethe of that head remains at Venyce, of a wonderful greatness, by the
which they that do see it, may make some guess to the greatness of the
head. Solinus reme^breth, that in the wars, which the Romans had in
Candye, that in a greatte rage of water, the ground being broken up, there
was found the body of a man, being in length.xxxiii. cubytes, which is
x^vi. foot and a half, the which being seen of Flaccus and Metellus, than
capytaynes of the host of the Romans, they in beholdynge it, wondered at
that, which they before would not believe, when they only herd it reported.
About thirty years passed, and somewhat more, I my self being with my father
sir Richard Elyote, at a monasterye of regular chanons, called Iuy church,
two miles from the city of Sarisburye, beheld the bones of a dead man found
deep in the ground, where they dygged stone, which being joined together, was
in length.xiiii. foot and ten inches, there being met. Whereof one of
the teethe my father had, which was of the quantytie of a greatre walnutte.
This have I written, because sum men will believe nothing that is out of
the compass of their own knowledge and yet some of them presume to have
knowledge above any other, contempnynge all men but them selfs, or such as
they favor.

Gigeria, a meat made of garbage of pullayne and other things.

Gigno, genui, gignere, to engender or get. sometime to make.

Giluus, ua, uum, yelowe color.

Gingiuae, the jaws, wherein the teeth be set.

Gingiuerim, sieve gingiberim, gynger.

Gingrio, griui, grire, to chur or make a chirme as birds do.

Gion, a great river in Egypt, otherwise called Nylus.

Girgilhis, a reele, whereon threde is wounden.

Giruli, fyshes, which I suppose to be menowes.

Gith, an herb, which is now called Nigella Romana, the seed thereof is
black like to onyon sede, and is very soote, and the savor thereof exhausteth
reumes of the head.

Githago, corkle growing among corn, which is type.

G ANTE L.
GLabella, the spare between the brows.

Glaber, bra, brum, smoth without hear.

Glabre^co, scere, to be without hear or smothe.

Glabreta, a plate having nothing growing in it.

Glabriones, they which lack hear.

Glacialrs, le, where yse is.

Glacies, yse.

Glacior, aris, ari, to be frosen.

Glacitare, to make a noise like a gander.

Gladiatores, were men, which faughte unarmed with swords.

Gladiatorius, a, um, pertaynyng to that manner of fighting.

Gladiatura, the act or feate to fight with a sword.

Gladiolus, a lyttel sword or wodknife. also the name of an herb like to
sedge, having a yelow flower like in form to a flower delyce.

Gladius, a sword. also a kind of fysshe, which has a bone in his forehead
like to a sword.

Glanda^io, feedyng of swyne with maste, called paunage.

Glandium, Glandionica, the part of a boore next the neck, the shield or
gammonde.

Glandifer, ra, rum, that which bears mast.

Glandulosus, he that has many kernelles.

Glans, glandis, mast growing on oaks, beeche, chestens, and other like, It is
also a pellet of lead. also a kernel growing between the skyn and the flesh.
it is moreover the forepart or nut of a man's yard. it is also a supposytorie.

Glans Iouis, a chesten.

Glaphirus, a, um, iocunde, pleasant, iugra^ed, polyte, holowe, famous, subtle.

Glarea, properly gravel.

Glareosus, a, um, grauelly.

Glastum, an herb called also Isa^is, in englysh Woad, wherewith as well
woulle, as woollen clothes are dyed blue, the leaves thereof are like to great
sorrel, but that they be greatter and thycker. As Caesar writes in his time it
was so commonly known in England, than being called Brytayne, that the people
with the juice thereof colored their bodies and visages to seem terrible to
their ennemies, the women also, that goinge naked in certain ceremonies they
might be like to people of Ethiope. Of this herb, woad is made in this wise:
They grynde it with whecles of wood runnyng in a compassed trough until the
juice be out of the herb, and than they make the herb into balls, and lay
them on a bourded floor a certain space until they be pu^ryfied and dried
into poulder. But the making hereof has remained unknown in England a
thousand years and mo, until now late an honest merchant of London, zealous of
the common weal of his country, has eftsoons nouryshed that herb in his
gardeyn at London, and by the example which he found in the other countrayes
beyond the sea, he making howses and mylles to his importable charges, has
now experienced to make the same woad, to the inestimable commodity of this
royalme, if it be worthyly imbracid. The merchant at this time lives, and is
named

Goodman, a name right agreeable unto his qualities. Who deserves to be
encouraged of all good englyshemen, which are not touched with dysdayne or
envy, that by his thank and reward, other may the rather endeour them selfs,
either to invent by their wits, or to attempt by the example of other
countrays, to augment the weal and honor of this royalme of England.

Glaucinum, oil which does come from the olyues before they be pressyd.

Glauciolus, a horse with a wall eye.

Glaucium, is a juice of an herb, which the potycaries do commonly call
Memitha, which is used in medicine for diseases in the eyes.

Glaucoma, matis, and Glaucomatu^, ti, and Glaucoma, mae, an humor in the
eyes, like crystal, which lets the sight.

Glaucopis, pidis, a man or woman, with gray eyes.

Glaucus, ca, cum, gray color.

Glaucus, a god of the sea. also many men were called by that name. also the
name of a fyshe.

Gleba, a turfe or piece of earth.

Glessaria, an isle in the north sea called Mare Germanicum.

Glessum, crystal or beryll.

Glis, iris, a field mouse, which slepeth all the winter.

Glis, glissis, potters claye.

Glis, glitis, a thystell.

Glisco, sci, scere, to grow, to wax fat, to coueyte or desire fervently.

Globo, aui, are, to gather round.

Globuli, little round cakes or pellettes.

Globosus, a, um, round as a ^oule.

Globus, and Globum, a boule, or other thing very round. Also a multitude of
men or beasts gathered round together.

Glocido, aui, are, to cackle as a hen does.

Glocio, cire, idem.

Glomero, aui, are, to wind in round. also to gather together in an heap.
also in an horse it is to go pleasantly.

Glomus, mi, and Glomus, meris, a botome of threde.

Gloria, the consent of good men in the praise of a man or woman, called
renoume, glory.

Glorior, ari, to auaunt, to the intent to have praises, to extol with
bostynge.

Gloriosus, a, um, renoumed, some time in the ill part, vaynegloriousely, or
bostynge him self.

Glos, glotis, the systars husebande, or brothers wife.

Glossa, a gloss or exposition of dark speech.

Glossema, words not much used.

Glossematicus, he that makes a comment on a book.

Glubo, by, bear, to pull of the bark or rynde of a tree.

Glucidatum, sweet and delectable.

Gluma, the husk of wheat.

Gluo, glui, ere, to streyne or wrynge hard.

Gluten, and Glutinum, glewe.

Glutinamentum, all glewyshe matter.

Glutino, aui, are, to glewe or join.

Glutio, tiui, tire, to swalowe.

Gluto, tonis, a glutton.

Glyciamerides, a kind of meat.

Glycyrrhiza, lycorise.

G ANTE N.
GNAFALIVM, an herb, which is also called Chamezelon, whose leaves are so
white and soft, that it seems to be flox.

Gnafalon, a certain flox.

Gnafos, a tesyll, which tonkars do use.

Gnarauit, Liuius.
and gnarauisse, for Narrauit and narrauisse.

Gnare, skylfully.

Gnari^as, tatis, skylfulnes.

Gnariter, for Gnare; wyteyly.

Gnarus, a, um, skylfull.

Gnauiter, diligently, lustely, valiantly.

Gnauus, quick, active, apt to every thing.

Gnitur, uel Gnixus, old writars used for Gignitur, and Nixus.

Gnomones, the teethe, whereby the age of an horse is known. They be some time
taken for that, which shows the hours in a clock or dial. also rules to
know any thing by.

Gnoro, for Noro.

Gnosco, for Nosco.

Gnosos, a city in C^eta or Candy.

Gnosius, a, um, of that city.

Gnostici, were detestable heretics, when on good friday about the son set,
assembled men and young womenne together, not sparynge daughters nor susters.
After.ix. months passed they met again in the same place. and then they
plucked the chyldern newely borne from their mothers, and cuttynge them in
pieces, and receyuynge their blood in pottes and cups, they burned the body
in to ashes which they did myxte with the blood, and preserved it, to put in
to their meats and drynkes. They also affirmed that neither the law of
nature, nor laws of men were good and that which were called virtues were
nothing.

G ANTE O.
GOaetia, a spyce of which craft.

Gobio, idem quod Gobius, a gogeon.

Golias, was a puissant man of the Philistians, whom king Dauyd being yet a
child slew, when the Jews were aferd to fight with him man for man: his
stat^^te was, as the Bible reherseth.vi. cubytes and a span, which was ten
fete, lacking three inches, acco^pting it with the fete of me^ living at that
time, which undoubtedly were more than they be now. his habergeon weyed.v.M.
Siclos, which is.ii.M. and D. ounces. and the iron of his spear weyed. DC.
stilos, which is.CCC. ounces, where by his greatness and strength may be
coniec^ed to excede any man living in this time.

Gomor, is a mesure of the Hebrews, and is the tenthe part of Ephi, wherefore
it contains of our standard measure nine pintes, an half pynte, a quarter,
and about half an ounce. It is sometime taken for as much corn as one may
receive between his arms.

Gomorrha, and Gomorrlium, a city in Judea which was consumed for horrible
sin against nature.

Gongylium, of Hippocrates and Galen is used for a pyll in medicyne, and for
the similitude thereof is signifies the rape root which is round. It is
also called of some Gongyles, or Gongylis, lidis.

Gonorrliea, a disease, whereby a man's sede goes from him vnwy^ttyngly.

Gordium, was the principal city of Phrigia.

Gordius, was a poor husbandeman of Phrigia, having but two yokes of oxe^, who
in the time of a sedition in the country, was by answer made of an ydoll,
chosen king there, when he came with his wayn where the counsel was kepts,
and being made king, and causynge the sedytion to cease, he made his yokes
to be hanged up in the temple of Jupiter, the eord^s thereof being made in such
knottes, thbee it seemed not possible that they might be undone. Read more
hereof in Nodus Gor^^ni:

Gorgias, a famous rhetortrian in the time of Socrates, who invented the craft
to dyspute (...) suddenly to every question, or matter that was purposed, in a
continual oration, and by teaching rhetorike, ^^cam so rich, that he was the
first that did set an image of gold in the temple of Apollo at Delphos, he
being of the age of a hundred and eyghte years, surmounted almooste all men of
his time in bodily strength, perfectnes of fences, quycknes of wit, and (...)
of memory.

Gorgones, monstrous women, which were vanquyshed by Perseus.

Gorgonius, a, um, pertaynyng to Gorgones.

Gor^ys, a city of Candy.

Gossampinus, after which bears cotton.

Gossipium, cotton.

Gothia, an isle by Denmark called Gutlande, not far from Norway.

Gothi, people of whom the first camme out of Gutlande; unto whom resorted a
great multitude of other people over of the north parts of the world, as well
out of the countrays now called Prutia, Liuonia, Russia, Tartaria, as diverse
other partis callid sometime Scithia and making sundry kings did depopulate and
bring in subjection the more part of Europa, and finally distroyed Rome, and
inhabyted the part of Italye now called Lumbardy, and likewise subdewed the
royalmes of Castile and Aragon.

G ANTE R.
GRABATVS, a couche.

Gracchus, the name of a noble family or house in Rome.

Gracile, sclenderly.

Gracilesco, scere, to wax or become lean.

Gracilis, le, Gracilentus, ta, tum, leave or sclender? sometime soft.

Gracilitas, tatis, leannes, sele^dernes, or softnes.

Gracus, and Graculus, a bird called a Iay.

Graculo cum fidibus nihil, the Iaye has naught to do with the harp, spoken
of them which lacking eloquence or good letters, do scorn them that have
learning.

Gradatim, in order, or by course, little and little.

Gradatio, a form of speaking, when of the first sentence spryngeth the
second, of the second the third, and so forth.

Gradarij equi, amblynge horses.

Gradator, a great goer,

Gradior, to go by steps, or step.

Gradiuus, one of the names of Mars.

Gradus, a greese or step, a degree in consanguinitie. also honor.

De gradudeijci, to be cast down from his place: whereby is signified to be
abashed or moved from constancy of mind.

Deturbari gradu, has the same signification.

Gradu dimoueri, Cic. ^us. 2. and offic. 1.
to be put out of estimation or authority.

Gradu mouere, Liuius.
to cause one to step back.

Graecanicus, ca, cum, come out of Greece.

Graeca salix, red wyllowe.

Graecia, the fountain of prowes and doctrine, and norise of eloquence, was a
great and famous country, containing these noble regions: Epirus, Acarnania,
Aetolia, Phocis, Locris, Achaia, Messemia, Laconia, Argos, Megaris, Atrica,
Boeotia, Doris Phthiotis, Thessalia, Magnesia, Macedonia, and Thracia. All the
which of late years were under the sweet yoke of Christ's relygyon, And now
alas to the great discomforte of al perfect christen men, are under the most
cruel subjection and servitude of the great tyrante the Turk, and become
barbarous, living in the beastely superstition of the false prophet Mahomete.

Graecisco, are, to follow the Greeks.

Graecor, aris, ari, to riot in bankettynge and rybendry.

Graecostasis, a place where ambassadors stood, until they were sent for in
to the Senate.

Graecus, a m^n borne in Greece, a Greek.

Graecus, a, um, of Greece.

Graiugenae, Greeks.

Graiae, crouches, styltes, or skathes.

Grallatores, they which do go on styltes or skaches.

Gramen, grass* sometime al herbs together, the swarthe.

Graminosus, a, um, grown with grass or herbs.

Gramma, idem quod scriptulum, uel scrupulum, a scruple, the.xxiiii. part of
an ounce.

Grammataeus, a chancellor.

Grammatica, grammar.

Grammaticus, he that teaches grammar, or expounds aucthors, a profounde
grammarian.

Grammaticus, ca, cum, perteynynge to grammar.

Grammatice loqui, to speak congruely.

Grammatista, a smatterer in grammar, a mean grammaria^.

Grammatocyphon, he that writes on his knee.

Grammatophylatium, the place where the records, or commune writings be kept.

Gramme, a length without bredthe.

Grammia, the fleume in the eyes.

Granatae, a reyalme and city in Spain, ioynynge to the sea called Mare
mediterraneum, which was under the subjection of the Moors about.DCCC. years:
at the last, by the great wisdom, polycie, and prowes of king Ferdinando
and his queen Elyzabeth, of famous memory late king and queen of Spain,
was eftsoon restored unto Christendom, and the Mores expelled.

Granarium, a grayenarde, wherein corn is kept.

Grandebalae, haeres in the arm holes.

Grandaeuus, very old.

Grandaeuitas, great age.

Grandesco, scere, to wax great.

Grandiloquentia, a stately eloquence.

Grandiloquus, eloquente, he that speaks as it were with a great magnificence
in worde^

Grandinatus, ta, tum, hurt or wounded with hayle.

Grandinosus, a, um, full of hayle.

Grandio, iui, ire, to make great.

Grandis, de, ancient, or great.

Granditas, tatis, the abundaunce of years, auncienty.

Grandiusculus, la, lum, some what or a little greater, or of good age, well
stryken in years.

Granum, grain or corn. Also the five hundred and.xxvi. part of an ounce.

Graphiarium, a case, wherein pensilles were kept, it may be called a pennar.

Graphice, properly, well, and kunningly.

Graphicus, a, um, kunnyngely or perfectelye wroughte.

Graphicus homo, a proper man.

Graphis, phidis, the art of portrayture.

Graphium, a pensyll, wherewith men do write in tables.

Grassator, he that by high ways, lies in a wait to rob or sle^ men, an
extortioner.

Grassor, aris, ari, to rob or slay men passing by the high ways. Also to go
or come on one with a violente rage. Therefore in a sudden and violent
pestilence, it is said: Morbus grassatus, the sickness kylleth men suddenly.

Grate, kyndely.

Grates, thanks.

Gratia, grace: sometime it signifies thank, sometime a benefit, sometime
reward, also peace or love, sometime cause or respect, also praise,
authority, favor.

Mala gratia, signifies displeasure.

Mea, tua, uel eius gratia, for my sake, thyr sake, or his sake.

Gratiam haber, to thank.

Gratiam inire, to get thank.

Gratiam refer, uel reddere, to requite one good turn for an other.

Gratificor, ari, to gratify, or do a thing thankful, or to confer a
benefyt, or do a good turn.

Gratiosus, very thankful. also in favor with the people, or well esteemed.

Gratis, an aduerbe, betokenynge without reward: Some time without deserte,
for nothing.

Habitare gratis in alieno, to dwell on an other man's ground without paying
rent. Seruire gratis, to serve without wages.

Gratitudo, dinis, kyndnesse.

Grator, ari, to give thanks to god with offerynges: also to rejoice of good
fortune.

Gratuito, an aduerbe, signifyenge of good will, without benefyte.

Gratuitus, ta, tum, without reward or vnhyred.

Gratulatio, sometime it signifies a rejoicing of some good fortune happened
to him self, or to an other man: sometime a giuinge of thanks.

Gratulabundus, he that does rejoice, ut supra.

Gratulor, ari, with a dative case, to be joyous for him self or an other for
any good thing that has happened.

Tibi de hac tua felicitate gratulor, (...).
I am joyous with the, or as glad as thou art, of this prosperity that thou
art in. Sometime it signifies to give thanks unto god: but with an accusative
case it signifies to take thankfully any act.

Gratus, he that remembers a good turn. also agreeable, pleasant, or
dilectable.

Gratus, ta, tum, thankful, pleasant, acceptable.

Grauastellus, (...).
an ancient father.

Grauate, and Grauatim, grievously, or dyspleasantly, or peynefully.

Grauatus, grieved.

Grauedinosus, he that has a heavy head.

Grauedinosus, a, um, heavy or unlusty, disposed to do nothing.

Grauedo, dinis, heaviness, grief, disease. sometime the mur or reume of the
head.

Graueolentia, stenche or stynke.

Grauesco, scere, to be laded.

Grauicors, cordis, he that has a great heart.

Grauida mulier, a woman great with child.

Grauido, are, to get a woman with child.

Grauiloquus, he that speaks gravely and seriously.

Grauionarium, a city in Almayne called Banbergh.

Grau^s, grave, heavy, grievous. sometime substantialle, grave, or having
granitie, contrary to lyghtnesse or wantonness. also great or puissaunte:
Sometime old or aged, sometime sure or constante, some time plentuous or full.

Terra granis, land laded with (...).

Grauis nuntius, Vergilius.
heavy tidinges.

Grave pretium, an high price.

Grauiter, and Grave, grievously, heuyly, substa^tially, much, wisely, sadly.

Grauo, aui, are, to grieve, to burden, to lade.

Grauor, ari, to be grieved, or to take gryeuousely.

Gregalis, le, cattle, which is in the flock.

Gregarius canis, a cur dog.

Gregarius miles, a soldier taken at adventure, not chosen.

Gregarius pastor, the chief shepeherde, which has the charge of the hole
flock.

Gregatim, in sundry flocks.

Gremiale, an apron.

Gremium, is the space between the.ii. thighs specially of a woman.

Gressibile, apt to go.

Gressutus, ta, tum, idem.

Gressus, a step or going.

Grex, gregis, a flock, as well of men, as of cattle.

Grossapina, cotton.

Grossi, grene fygges.

Grossipion, seu Grossapinus, a tree whereof comes cotton.

Grossuli, young fygges.

Grossus, a, um, great.

Gruina, herb Roberte.

Grumia, a mydde place, from whense goes four ways.

Grumma, a thing wherewith ground is measured.

Grumus, a barowe or hyllocke.

Grunnio, ire, to grunte like aswyne.

Grundio, idem.

Gruo, gruere, to cry like a crane.

Grus, gruis, a crane.

Gryllus, a beast more than a grashop, which destroys corn.

Gryphus, a grype or gryffon: Also a captious, an insoluble or diffuse
argument, a ryddle.

Grypus, a nose risynge in the myddle.

G ANTE V.
GVAIACVM, a tree growing in the yles new founden, the one called Corterati,
the other Hispaniola, which be not far from the equinoctial line and
which tree is in the top full of branches, the leaves very small and
meruaylous green, it bears fruit in the quantity of a fylberde nut,
having within it a kernel, and without a thyn shale. There is of this tree
three kinds: The wood of the one is hard and heuye, within black, without
pale colored having lines somewhat russet. The other is somewhat whyter
without, but black within, not in so great a tompace The third is white
within and without, having very small lines. This wood boiled in water has been
found an excellent remedy against the french porkes, and also the gout.

Gubernacula nauis, the instruments, whereby the ship is ruled.

Gubernator, a master of a ship: also a governor of a country.

Guberno, nare, to govern.

Guesseli, beasts like to myse, which have their dunge as sweet as musk.

Gula, the throat: sometime gluttony.

Gulosus, a glutton.

Guliocae, the grene shale of the walnut.

Gummatus, ta, tum, dressed with gum, or rased.

Gummatae arbores, trees that brings forth gum.

Gummi, gum, which droppeth from trees.

Gumminum, oil made of gum.

Gurges, gitis, a swallowe or deep pyt in a water, or a gulf.

Gargito, aui, are, to swalowe or devour.

Gurgulio, lionis, the gullye or gargyll of the throat, or throat bol. It is
also a worm that bredeth in barnes, and eats up corn.

Gurgustium, a dark and vile habitation, a cabban or cotage.

Gustatus, tus, taste.

Gusto, aui, are, to taste.

Gustus, tus, taste.

Gutta, a drop.

Guttatim, by drops.

Guttur, gutturis, the throat.

Gutturosus, he that has a swollen throat.

Gutturnium, a lauer or yewer.

Guttus, a cruet, or other like thing, out of the which lycour is ponred
droppynge.

G ANTE Y.
GYGAEVS, a lake of Lydie.

Gygemorus, a little hill, not far from Thessaly.

Gyges, the son of Dascylus, and one of the servants of Candaules king of
Lydia (as Herodotus writes) or his companyon, as Trogus reherseth, was also
king of Lydia by this means: Candaules the king had a wife, whom for the
inordinate love that he bare toward her, he supposed to be the fairest woman
living. On a time he praised his wives beaulty unto Gyges, addyng there unto,
to the intent that he moughte the better believe him, he would cause hum to se
her naked: but Gyges refused to do it, dissuadynge as much as he could
Candaules from that folly, with right wise exhortations. But Candaules
obstinately persisting in his folyshe fantasy, did set Gyges in a secret
place, where he beheld his wife naked going to bed, and as Gyges departed,
the lady beheld him. And finally the matter dysclosed by her husband unto
her, she keeping silence, determined in her heart to be revenged on Candaules
her husband. For in that country it was an intolerable reproach to a man or
woman to be seen naked. wherefore sone after calling unto her such of her
servants as she specially trusted, she sent for Gyges. who being come unto
her, she purposed unto him this election, either he him self to be slain, or
else to promise her to slay Candaules, and take her to his wife, and the royalme
with her, which he abborryng, and a good while resistinge, with sundry
persuasions, at the last finding no remedy, he chase rather than him self to
dye, to sle Candaules, as he did lyinge in his bed by the means of the
queen, whom he took to his wife and was king of Lydia. Plato. li. 2. de
Iusto, in the person of Glaucus tells un to Socrates, that Gyges had a ring,
which was of a meruaylouse nature, for when he turned the brother part of the
ring toward the palm of his hand, he was seen of no man, but he might see
all things: And when he turned the ring on the contrary part, he was him
self seen openly, by the means whereof he slew Candaules, and committed
adultery with his wife. There was also an other called Gyges, a great giant,
and brother of Briareus.

Gymnasiarches, the chief master of the schole, or place of exercise.

Gymnasium, a place where is commune exercise of the body. Sometime a
scholehouse.

Gymnastes, he that teaches children, to exercise them in wrastlynge, or other
like.

Gymnastium, the art of exercise.

Gymnici ludi, plays exercised naked.

Gymnosophistae, philosophers of Inde, which went always naked.

Gymnus, a beast which comes of an horse an ass mare.

Gyneconitis, that part of the house, which serves only to women.

Gynephilus, a great lover of women.

Gynoecium, a nurcery.

Gypso, aui, are, to plaster.

Gypsus, plaster.

Gyro, aui, are, to compass or go in circute.

Gyrus, a circute or compass.

Gyttheum, a town, which Hercules and Apollo, laynge there aside their strife
and debate, builded together, and the inhabitants of the same town are called
Gyttheres.

H ANTE A.
HABENA, THE rain of a bridle. sometime it signifies power or rule.

Habenas adducere, to hold straight the bridle Habenas remittere, to slake the
brydell.

Hebeo, bui, bear, to have, to hold, to possede or occupy, to esteem or
suppose, to call, to dwell.

Habeo audire, I can here.

Habeo polliceri, I can promise.

Haberi aliquo numero, to be in some estimation.

Clodij animum perspectum habeo, I know what Clodius intends.

Habere been seu male, to do or prosper well or ill. Been habet, it is well.

Male me habet, it greueth me.

Habere concionem, to preche, to declare a thing to the people.

Habet eum arcte, he keeps him short, or from lyberty.

Fortunas suas uenales habuit, he has sold all his goods.

Frustra habere, to be deceived.

Habet frustra, he is disappoynted.

Habere gratiam, to thank.

In custodijs haberi, to be kept in prison.

Habere obuiam, to encounter or meet with one.

Pensi habere, to take heed. Prorsus neque facere, neque dicere, quicquam pensi
habebat:

He cared not what he did, nor what he spoke

Principatum habere, to be more excellent.

Habere quaestui rempublica^, to minister the weal publyke for his own profyt.

Habere rationem, to have regard or consideration.

Habere rationem cum terra, to labor the earth.

Res ita se habet, the thing is at this point.

Habere rem, to meddle with a woman,

Habere rem cum aduersario, to contend.

Se munditer habere, to be clenly.

Sermonem habere, to commune or deuyse.

Habeo tibi fidem, I put my trust in the.

Habilis, le, hable.

Habitaculum, and Habitatio, a dwelling place or habitation.

Habitior, oris, more corporate.

Habito, aui, are, to dwell.

Habitudo, dinis, idem quod habitus.

Habitus, tus, the form or state of the body, some time of other things.
also apparayle. Also it signifies a quality or property, which a man has
conceived by education, long exercise or custom.

Habitus, ta, tum, had.

Habraham, is interpreted Father of many diverse people.

Hac, hither. sometime by this place. Ita nunc hac, an illac eam, sum inscerta
consilij: Now whether I may go hither or thither I can not tell.

Hac non successit, alia aggrediamur uia, this way it comes not to pass, let
us now assay an other fascion.

Hactenus, hitherto, so much.

Hadria, was a city of Italy on the sea side, by the which the sea between
Italye and Slauony was called Mare Hadriaticum.

Hadrianopolis, a city in Thracia.

Hadrianus, a noble emperor, which in all sciences was excellentely learned: He
was after Christis incarnation.Cxix. years, and raygned.xxi. years.

Hadrobalum, a kind of sweet smelling gum that grows in Media.

Haebudes, are yles beyond Scotland.ii. dais saylynge, whereof be five.

Haec illa est misericordia: Loo the pity that this man has. Vna haec spes
est, This is all the comfort that I have.

Haedera, yuy tree.

Haederatius, a, um, of yuy.

Haedile, a stable wherein kyddes be kept.

Haedina, caro, kyddes flesh.

Haedus, a kyd.

Haedui, people in France, which be now called Burgonions, and Burbonoises.

Haematices, the sanguinary or blood stone.

Haemonia, the country called Thessaly,

Haemorrhois, Haemorrhoidis, a disease in the fundemente like teates or wartes,
out of the which issues blood, called emorroides or pyles. Also a serpente,
of whom if a man be stricken, he bledeth to death.

Haerba, an herb.

Haerbaceus, a, um, that is of herbs.

Haerbarius, he that knows herbs and their virtues.

Herbarius, a, um, of herbs.

Haerbesco, scere, to be an herb.

Haerbidus, and Haerbosus, a, um, having many herbs.

Haerediolum, a little inheritance.

Haeredipeta, crauers of goods, flattering men to be their heirs.

Haereditarius, a, um, perteyning to inheritance.

Bona haereditaria, goods which do come by inheritance.

Haereditas, tatis, inheritance or succession.

Haereditas caduca, land fallen by exchete to the lord, of whom it is holden.

Haeredium, land, wherein a man has a state of inheritance.

Haereo, haesi, haerere, to cleave or stycke to a thing. sometime to doubt.

Haeret in te omnis culpa, In the is put all the blame.

Haeres, haeredis, an heir, or he, which succedeth an other in his lands or
goods.

Haeredem scribere, to make one heir by testamente.

Haeredes secundi, heirs in remaynder.

Haeresco, scere, to stick fast, or be thruste in.

Haeresiarches, an arche heretic.

Haeresis, sios, a sect, an heresye, an obstynate opinion.

Haereticus, an heretic.

Haesito, aui, are, idem quod Haereo.

Hagiographa, holy scripture.

Hagiographus, a writer of holy scripture.

Hagnus, a lamb.

Hagnellus, a little lamb.

Hagninus, a, um, of a lamb.

Halcyone, was daughter of Neptunus, and wife of Caeyces, whom she beholdynge
to be drowned, she for sorrow drowned her self. wherefore the poets do write,
that they were both transformed in to birds, and called

Halcyones, read before in Alcyones.

Halec, lecis, a fyshe called herrynge. Also a sauce made of fyshe.

Halesina regio, a countray wherein is a well, the water whereof being always
quiet and plain, if one standing by it do play on a shalme, or other like
pype, the water in the well will rise, as it daunced, in so much as at the
last it will mount and run over the brynmme of the well: and the pype
ceasynge, the water will forthewith fall and become quiet.

Halesius, a river not far from Aetna.

Halialmon, a river of Macidon.

Halicacabus, an herb called of the apothecaries Alkekengi.

Halietus, an egle, that haunteth about the sea.

Halieutica, books contayninge the propertyes of fyshes.

Halimon, a thorn like to a white thorn, growing by the sea side, and has
leaves like to an olyue tree, but they be brother.

Halito, aui, are, to vapor out.

Halitus, brethe or vapor.

Halizones, people of Paphlagonie, so called because they are ^nuyrroned about
with the sea.

Hallucinor, ari, to be in a dream, to be deceived, to err, or to take a
matter wrong, to take one thing for an other.

Hallux, the great toe, which lies over the next toe.

Halmades, be olyue beryes condite in bryne, as Ruellius affyrmeth, who says,
that Colymbiades be they which do swym in their own oil. al be it (as he
says) men do confound the one name with the other.

Halmyris, a kind of colewortes crispe and delycate to eat.

Halo, aui, are, to send forth savor.

Halo, lonis, a myste, which sometime happens to be about the moon.

Halophanta, a great liar.

Halosis, captivity.

Halteres, ris, a plummet or weyghte of lead, which daunsers on cords do
hold in their hand.

Halycarnasus, a city in the less Asia, in the country called Caria, on the
sea side.

Halyetus, a faulcone.

Hamadriades, nymphs or fayries of the woods.

Hamatilis, le, perteynynge to a hoke.

Piscatus hamatilis, fyshynge with a hook, or anglynge.

Hamatus, ta, tum, to be furnyshed with hokes

Hamiota, uel Hamota, an angler or fysher, with an angel or hoke.

Hammon, onis, Jupiter in the Egyptian tunge.

Hamo, aui, are, to crook.

Hamonus, a, um, a color somewhat red.

Hamus, a hoke, sometime a chain.

Hannibal, was son of Hamylcar, the most noble and valyant captain of the
Carthagynensis, whoo making war with the Romans.xvi. years, contended with
them in prowes and polycie, winning from them their dominions in Spain and
Italy. Finally being vainquished by Scipio, he fled to Antiochus king of
Asia, afterward to Prusias king of Bithynia, of whom under the color of
amytie he was betrayed, and should have been delivered to Flaminius that time
ambassador to Prusias. But Hannibal perceiving it, chesynge rather to dye
than to come into the hands of the Romans, took poison, which he kept for
that purpose, saying: Let us deliver the Romans from the care and fear,
which they have of us, with a few mo words of indignation, and so dyed before
that he might be delivered some do write this name without h.

Hanum, or Hanus barbatus, a vesselle with a great bealy, wherein wine or water
was wo^t to be brought to the table.

Haphe, a color on the body, like to them that be leperous.

Hara, a swynes stye or cote.

Harena, uide ante in arena.

Hariolus, a southsayer.

Harmonia, harmony or melody.

Harmonides, a Trojan carpentar, which made the ships that brought Paris in
to Greece.

Harpa, and Harpax, acis, a grapelynge iron, for to close ships together.
Also a poll with a hook on the end, that shypmen use.

Harpago, ginis, a grapull of a ship. also a coupers instrumente, wherewith he
dryueth on houpes, an addyse.

Harpago, aui, are, to take by violence.

Hapalice, a woman's name, the daughter of Harpalus king of Thrace.

Harpasa, a town of Asia.

Harp, a sword like to a sithe.

Harpocrates, the god of silence.

Harpocratem reddere, to put one to silence.

Harpyiae, monstrous birds, having maidens vysages, and talons of a
meruaylous rapacitie. wherefore men that be ravenous, and great gatherers of
goods, be named sometime Harpyiae.

Haruspex, spicis, a diuinatour, or tellar of things to come by the lokynge in
the bowels of beasts. Also he, which observes times in doing of things.

Haruspicina, the art of him, which is a diuinatour.

Haruspicium, the diuynation or telling of things to come, by the lokynge in
beasts bowelles.

Haspis, pidis, the bowynge made like a cerkle in roufes of houses, or of a
wheel.

Hasta, a spear.

Hastam abijcere, signifies to leave suite, to despair of the matter in
variaunce.

Hastae purae, were without iron, and in the old time were given for a price to
them that vainquished first in battle.

Hastarium, selling under the standerd.

Hastati, spear men

Hasticus Iudus, runnynge at the tylte with spears.

Hastile, a spear staff.

Haud, in no wise.

Haud inuito, wyllyngely.

Haud nihil, some thing.

Haurio, hausi, rij, ire, to draw or take out, to here, to se, to take a thing
gredely, to wou^d, to fatigate or make weary, to make empty, to consume.

Hausit coelum, he saw heaven.

Hausit corda pauor, fear made their courages faynte.

Haurire dolorem, to endure heaviness or sorrow.

Haurire supplicia, to suffer punisshemente or peynes.

Hauritorium, any thing whereby water is drawn out of a well.

Haustrum, a bucket to draw water.

Haustus, tus, a draught in drinkinge.

Haustum facere, to drink.

H ANTE E.
HEANA, a foundation.

Heautontimorumenon, the name of one of the commedies of Terence, which is as
much to say, as tourmentynge him self.

Hebdomas madis, and Hebdomada, ae, a weke Also the number of seven in days,
years, or other time.

Hebe, hebes, the daughter of Jupiter and Juno, who was buttelar of Jupiter
before the raueshynge of Ganymedes, and she was called of the Paynimes, the
goddess of youth.

Hebenus, a tree, whereof the wood is black like ieate, and it bears neither
leaves nor fruit. look in Ebenus.

Hebeo, and Hebesco, scere, to be dull.

Hebes, hebetis, dull.

Hebetesco, seu Hebetasco, scere, belongs properly to the eyes, to be dull in
sight.

Hebero, aui, are, to be duske, or made dark.

Hebetudo, dinis, dulnes or duskyshenes.

Hebiones, of men in old time, were called poor folks.

Hebraei, Jews, which came of Abraham,

Hebraicus, Hebrician, or of Hebrew.

Hebron, a village by Jerusalem.

Hebrus, a river in Thracia.

Hecameda, the daughter of Arsinoi, which was given to Nestor for a gift.

Hecate, a name of the moon. It was also Proserpina.

Hecatombe, a sacrifice, wherein were killed an hundred beasts.

Hecatompolis, a country having an hundred cities therein.

Hecatompus, he that has an hundred feet.

Hecatontarchus, the capytayne of an hundred men.

Hecta, the pexynge of a man. also a little puff, which ryseth in bread when
it is bake. Sometime it signifies a tryfle.

Hectica febris, the fever that consumes.

Hector, the son of Priamus, the most noble and valiant of all the Troianes.

Hecuba, was the wife of Priamus king of Troy, and daughter of Cysseus king
of Thracia, a woman of noble courage and most unhappy fortune: for having al
her sons slain, and also her husband, her fair daughter Polyxea killed on
the grave of Achylles, her other daughter Cassandra taken prisoner, and
beholdynge the noble city of Troy burned, her self a captyue, her yongeste
son Polydotus killed, she finally waxed mad, and did byte and stryke all men,
whom she met, wherefore she was called dog, and at the last was her self
killed with stones by the Greeks.

Hecyra, a mother in law.

Hedonius, expenses in voluptuous things.

Hedui, people in France, now called Burgonious. look Haedui.

Hegesias, was a philosopher of the sect called Cirenaica. who so much
commended death, that many which herd him, killed them selves.

Heiulo, aui, are, to wayle, cryenge out.

Helciarij, shypmen which draw things of great weyghte in to the ship, with
roopes, or do draw the ship to the shore or from the shore.

Helcium, the harueys of carthorses, whereby they draw.

Helena, was daughter of Jupiter and Leda the wife of Tyndarus king of
Lacedemonia: She for her wonderful beaultie was twyse rauyshed. First at the
age of.ix. years by Theseus, afterward by Paris the Trojan, she than being
wife unto Menelaus: The which was the only occasion of the ten years siege of
Troy, and finally the destruction of the most famous City, with the death
and loss of most noble princes, and of people innumerable. Look more in Troia.

Helenium, an herb commonly called Enulacampana, in english Helycampane.

Heliades, the daughters of the Sun and Neaera, that is to say, Phae^tusa,
Lampetia, and Lampetusa, which lamented so much the death of Phaeton their
brother, that therewith they dyed, and were transformed (as the poets do fayn)
in to trees, out of the which cunneth the gum called Electrum, in english
amber, whereof beads be made.

Helias, the prophet of Thesbis, of the country of Arabia, a leuite of the
tribe of Aaron, he dwelt in Galaad, for Thesbis was an habitation dedicate to
priests. In the time of his birth his father Sobac did see in a vysion, that
men being apparayled in white did call the child, and threw him into the
fire, and gave to him a flame of fire to eat, the father rysynge up went to
Jerusalem, and showed his visyon unto the pristes: and he that gave answers,
said unto him: beware that thou do not disclo^e it. The habitation of this
child shall be light, and his word a demonstration, and shall judge Israel in
the sword and fire. This is that Helias that brought fire thryse out of
heaven, and bare rain in his tungue, and was taken up in to heaven in a fyry
storm. That which is written more of Helias in the Bible, it may be there
rad, sens the Bible is now commonly rad in english.

Helicon, a mountain in Aonia, dedicate to the musis.

Heliocaminus, is a soller set in a sunnye placeo where the heat of the sun
may be received, which was used in the old time.

Heliochrisos, an herb having a yelow flower, a marygolde.

Heliogabalus, was supposed to be the bastard son of Antonius Caracalla,
Emperor of Rome, and (as Lampridius writes in his life) of Semiamitra, or (as
Egnatius writes) of Scenides his cosen, he was made emperor after the death
of Macrinus and Diadumenus, being but a boy of.xvi. years old. He so much
exceded in detestable lechery and promotynge of vile persons and rybauldes,
that finally he was hated of al me^, and at the last slain and drawn
through the city of Rome, and thrown in to the river of Tiber. Albeit he was
warned before of astronomers, that he should dye a vyolente death, and
therefore he had provided ropes of sylke, if need were, to hang him self: also
swords of gold to kill him self: alsoo strong poison in iacinctes and
emerauldes to poison him self, if he were inforsed: more over he made a very
high toure, having the floor of bourdes keuered with plates of gold,
bordered with precious stones, from the which toure he would throw him self
down when he were pursued. But all this nothing auayled, for he was slain by
knaves, and thrown into Tiber, as is before written. More of him may you
reed in the life of Alexander Seuerus, which I did translate into englysh,
and callid it the image of governance.

Heliopolis, a city in Grecia called also Corinthus. An other in Egypt.

Helioscopium, a little tree like to a fygge tree and has leaves like a
plane, but greatter and blacker.

Helioselinum, an herb like to smallage, which grows in watery grounds, and
has but one leaf.

Heliotropium, a flower, which in the son risynge does open, and at the
son set closes. other do think it to be cihory. some supposes it to be
marygoldes or ruddes.

Helissaeus, was the prophet of Abelmuth, of the land of Rubim. when he was
borne in Galgalis, the cow of gold in Selom cried so loud, that she was
herd at Jerusalem. And the priest said, that it signified, that a prophet
was borne that day, which should dissolve keruen images, and break in pieces
images, which were cast of mettalle. Many meruayles almighty god showed by
him, which ye may read in the bible now being in english.

Helix, icis, of some men is taken for a kind of wyllowe tree, of some men for
yuy.

Helias, ladis, the countray of Greece.

Helleborus, an herb, the root whereof pourgeth melancoly. look in Elleborus.

Helleborum edere, is a proverb spoken to men, which are very melancholy, or
be wild brayned.

Hellenes, the son of Deucalion, of whom the Greeks were named Hellenes.

Hellespontus, is the first part of the sea, which divides Europa^ from Asia,
and is in breadth but.vii. surlonges, which lacks one furlonge of a mile.

Heloi, in hebrew signifies god almighty.

Helorus, a river in Sicile.

Heluatia, a garment, which was vsyd in Lidia, and was of the color of a cowes
hyde.

Heluati, ravenous eaters.

Heluella, small wortes or herbs.

Heluerij, people called Suicers, or Suiches, by desire of wars, ennemies to
all mankind, subjects neither to god nor to prince, as ready for money to serve
as well Turks, as christen pryncis.

Heluo, onis, he which in eating and drynking spends al his substance, a
reueller. sometime a glutton only.

Heluo libroru^, an insaciable reder of books.

Heluor, aris, aris, to eat rauenousely.

Heluolum, a color between read and white like the color of clothe called
french tawny.

Heluolum unum, claret wine.

Helxine, an herb called pelytory of the wall.

Hem, an interiection of blamyng, disdaynyng, meruaylynge or showing.

Hemeridion, which dureth but one day.

Hemerobius, one days sustynance. also a worm which lives but one day.

Hemerodromus, a currour, which rounneth many miles in one day.

Hemicadia, vessels called a tierce, half a hoggeshead.

Hemichorium, half a dance.

Hemicranea, a pain in half the head, called the mygrym.

Hemicyclum, a compass chair.

Hemyclus, an half cercle.

Hemina, a measure which is half Sextarius, ten ounces of measure, which
lacks two ounces of our half pynte, and conteyneth in weight of oil.ix.
ounces, of wine.x. ounces, of honey.xv. ounces.

Hemiola, gain of all, and half as much, as if of.iiii. s. be gotten.vi.s.

Hemiolus, a proportion in arithmetike, containinge the hole number, and half
that number, as one to three.xv. to.x.

Hemionum, an herb good against all yexis.

Hemionitis, tidos, is the herb, which is communely called hartis tungue, as
Leonicenus supposes.

Hemis, half.

Hemispherium, half the compass of the visible heaven or firmament.

Hemistichium, half a verse.

Hemitogium, half a gown.

Hemitritaeus, an half tertian fever, whose course is every.xxxvi. hours, or
which has the course of a tercian.

Hemodes, certain isles in the douche sea.

Hemus, a great mountain in Thracia, nyghe to the sea called Propontis, which
is syx miles in height.

Hendecasyllabus, a verse of.xi. syllables.

Henula, a littell chapel.

Heo, an interiection, how, in calling one.

Hepatica, an herb callid Lyuerwort. read after in Lichen.

Hepiolus, a fly like a butterfly, which flies at night into the leame of a
candell.

Hepsema, must boiled to the third part.

Heptaphillon, an herb called tormentill.

Heptapleuron, an herb called Plantayn.

Heptapolis, was sometime the name of Egypt, by reason of seven cities, which
first were in it.

Hepthemimeris, where a syllable naturallye short is made long in a verse,
which does hap in the beginning of the first foot.

Hera, the name of Juno. It is also the maistres of a bondsman or bondewoman. it
is alsoo an herb called Clary.

Heraclea, a town in the confines of Europa.

Heraclee, a town very nere to Naples.

Heracleon, an herb like to Organum, it grows in watery places, and has a
flower like a lylly: and when the flower is fallen, it has a head like a popy:
It is also an other herb growing in plashes, having a little stalk, which
excedeth not four fyngers high, having a red flower, and leaves like
Coriander: this herb heals all wounds, if it be laid unto them. It is
called Heraclion syderion.

Heracleotica nux, a wall nutte.

Heraclia, a kind of the water lyly called Nemiphar, having a white flower.

Heraclides, the name of a philosopher.

Heraclitus, a philosopher, which always wept when he beheld the people,
considering how busye they were to gather treasure, and how neglygente in
the well bringing up of their chyldern, his warkes of a purpose were obscur^
and hard to be understand.

Heraclius, the name of an emperor. It is also a touch stone.

Herba, an herb. Also generally all thing that grows on the earth, not
being wood sometime a wede.

Herbam dare aut porrigere, where a man yeldeth him, or confesses him self
to be vanquyshed.

Herba paralysis, the small daysye.

Herbaceus, a, um, of herbs or grass.

Herbare, to bring forth herbs.

Herbarius, and herbaria, he or she that does gather herbs for physicians.
Also he which knows the properties of herbs, and makes medicines of them.

Herbarius, a, um, pertaynyng to herbs.

Herbesco, scere, to make herbs or wedes.

Herbidus, a, um, idem quod herbaceus.

Herbilis anser, a grased goose.

Herbosus, a, um, full of herbs or grass.

Herbula, a little herb.

Herceus, one of the surnames of Jupiter.

Hercinia, a great wodde in Germanye, which is in breadth.ix. days journey,
and in length xl. days journey, as Caesar writes. Pomponius Mela affyrmeth it
to be.lx. days journey in length.

Hercisceor, ceris, sci, or Ercisceor, sci, to make partition between
coheyres, and to assygne to each of them their portion. Thereof comes Familiae
herciscundae, a title in the digestes of the law civil.

Hercle, a word used to ornate a sentence in manner of an oath, as God help
me, truly, in faith.

Herculanus, a, um, of Hercules.

Herculanus morbus, the falling syckenes.

Herculanus nodus, was a certain knot hard to be undone, by the which a
subtylle questyon or syllogysme may be sygnyfied. Festus Pompeius wrytethe,
that in the old time the custom was, that the new married bryde, when she
went to bed, should be gyrte with a woullen gyrdelle knyt with Hercules
knotte, which the housbande for good luck should undo in the bed, that he
might be fortunate in getting of children. for Hercules is reported to
have.lxxii. sons and one daughter, as Aristotle writes De natura animalium
li. 7. cap. 6.

Herculeana pars, It was the custom of men in old time to auowe the tenth
part of their goods unto Hercules, and that tenthe part was called Herculeana
pars.

Hercules quaestus, sygnifieth the same.

Herculea, an herb commonly called Millium solis, of Dio corides Lithospermon.

Herculeius, a Roman, which favored the part of Marius.

Hercules, seems to be a generalle name given to men excellyng in strenthe all
other men of their time. for Cicero De natura deorum, writes, that among
ancient writers were found.vi. Hercules. Varro affyrmeth, that there
were.xliiii. Hercules. Fynallye there is no notable mencyon made but of two,
the one called Hercules Aegyp^tius, or Libicus, which is supposed to be
Osyris, of whom is written hereafter. The other, which was long after him, who
was son of Iupyter and Alemena, and was called Alcides by his proper name,
and for his incomparable strength and labors, which he took for the
commune profytte of mankind, he was named alsoo Hercules. All be yt Berosus
the Caldey affyrmeth Hercules to be the son of Osyris, and king of Aegypte,
and was called Hercules Libyus, because that he conqueryd Libyam. And sayncte
Hierome on the tenthe chapyter of Genesis writes, that this Hercules was he
that performed the twelve notable labors, which poets do write of, and not
Alcides son of Alemena. The first of the twelve labors (was as Diodorus
Siculus writes) the sleing of a lion in the wod callid Nemea, which far
exceded al other lions in greatness, which might not be slain neither with
metal, nor with stone. Wherefore he was constrained to slay him with his
hands. The second labor was in the kyllyng of Hydra the monster in the
fennes of Lerna, which had a hundeede necks with serpentyne heads, and
when one head was stryken of, there did rise eftsoons two other heads. The
third labor was the taking of the great wyld bore of Erimanthus, which
wasted the countreye of Arcadia, and all people drad him, but finally Hercules
took him alive, and bearing him on his shulders, brought him to king
Euristheus. The fourth labor was the battle, which he had alone with a
great number of men called Centauri, which were of greatte strength, and as
swyfte as horses: all them he slew when they assaulted him. The fyfthe labor
was the taking of a great heart in runnynge, which for his swyftenesse had
his horns guylte. The syxthe labor was the destruction of the birds called
Stymphalides, which consumyd the fruytes and grayn of the countrayes
adioynynge. The seventh was the making clean of the halle of Augeus, being
fulle of dunge, which Hercules performed by wisdom, bringing the river
called Pignio through out the halle, which by the swift course of his stream
in one day carried away all the dunge, without any reproach unto Hercules. The
eyghte was the bringing of a bull from the isle of Creta into Greece, drawing
him alonge the sea. The nynthe was the taking of Diomedes king of Thracia, and
casting him to his horses, whom he fed with man's flesh, and was him
self of them devoured, and after Hercules breaking those wild horses, and
making them gentylle, brought them to Euristheus. The tenthe labor was his
voyage into Spain, the sleynge there of Gerion and his sons, and taking the
greatte kyne, which he gave to a king in that countray, who contynually
afterward of the bulls coming of that kind, yearly offered one in
sacrifyce to the honor of Hercules. The leuenth was, his going into hell,
and fetching thense Theseus and Perithous and bringing with him in a cheyne
Cerberus the dog of hell, having three heads. The twelfthe and last
labor was, the taking of the golden appuls out of the gardens called
Hesperides, and sleynge of the terryble dragon, which contynually watchynge,
kept those appulles, which were called goulden, for the beaultie of them.
Sum do say, that they were sheep, whose fleeses were of the color of
gold, and the dragon sygnyfyed the dylygence and strength of the shepcherdes,
which kept them. These were the twelve labors of Hercules, whereof grew
this proverb:

Herculei labores, where the labors do seem impossible to be achieued.

Herculis cothurnos, was used for a proverb, where in a thing of little
importance was set forth any great cloquence or other thing solemn more
apt for a greatter matter, as one should put Hercules hosen on a chyldes
legs. Like unto that accorded the saying of the wise king Igesllaus, when
one commended to him a rhetorician, which by his craftye eloquence made tryfles
and small things to seem greatte. The king answered: That sowter deserves
no praise, which puts a great show on a very little foot, meaning thereby,
that the words should as well accord with the matter, as the garment with the
person. This is so commune a vice now a days among students of eloquence,
that in writynge and speaking, they seem to prepare the hose, or they know
the measure of the leg, whereon they will put it.

Hercules Gallus, as Lucianus writes, was in the old time in France an image
made like an old manne with a balde head, and vnkempte, his hear very white,
the skin of his face ryuellyd, and as it were bourned with the sun,
wearynge on him a lions skin, and bearing in his right hand a great
clubbe, in his left hand a bow, a quiver at his back, drawing after him a
multitude of people tied by their ears with a little chain wrought with ambre
and goulde, but they were so easyly tied, that laughing and with good chere,
they wyllyngely solowed, and as it seemyd, they would not be loused, and the
other end of the chayn was tied at Hercules tungue, who looked toward them
with a lawghynge countenance.

This image sygnyfyed eloquence, which for the puyssaunce thereof, resemblyd
rather Hercules thanne Mercurye. And his age betokenyd that eloquence is for
the more part substancyall and vehement. That Hercules or rather eloquence
draws men by the ears tied to his tungue, sygnyfyeth the affynitie between
the tungue and the ear, and their glad and voluntary following, sygnyfieth
with what dilectation eloquence draws men to her perswasyons and
exhortations.

Herculeus, a, um, puyssant or mighty.

Here, for heri, yesterday.

Herebus, the depest place in hell.

Heri, yesterday.

Hericius, an yrchyn or hedgehogge.

Herilis, le, pertaining to the lord or master.

Herillus, a philosopher of Calcidony.

Herinatius, an hedgehogge.

Herma, an image of Mercurius. It is also an image, the head whereof may be
changed.

Hermae, be alsoo images set or laid on sepulchers.

Hermaphroditus, the son of Mercury and Venus. Also he that is both man and
woman.

Hermathena, was two images together of Mercury and Minerua.

Hermerotes, small images, properly of little children with whynges.

Hermes, is, and Hermetis, Mercury.

Hermesia, a confection made by the Persians with honye, myrre, saffron, and
the wine or juice of dates, with the kernels of pyne appuls, which being taken
of a man with mylk and also of women after that they be conceived, shall bring
forth children in personage and wit very excellent. Democritus writes of a
like medycine, by the which chylderne fair, good, and fortunate shall be
begotten.

Hermione, was daughter of Menclaus and Helene, who being a child, was by
Tyndarus the father of Menelaus in his absence affianced to Orestes the son of
Agamemnon: but afterward she was married by her father to Pyrrhus son of
Achilles, whom Orestes did afterward slay, and wedded Hermione and had by her
three sons Thessamenes, Corynthus, and Orestes the younger. There was an other
Hermione daughter of Mars and Venus, and wife of Cadmus, whom the poets feigned
to be with her husband, turned into a serpent.

Hermodactylus, is supposed to be that which of Aetius and Paulus is callid
Ephemeron. Actuarius makes mention of two kinds called Hermodactyli, which
are as much to say, as Mercurij digiti, in english Mercurius fingers, for
the similitude that they have with fyngers. whereof the one is white, the other
is read, which Ruellius supposes to be that which the Arabians do call Been
rubeum, and Been album.

Hermodocus, a philosopher of Ephesie.

Hermogenes, a proper name of a famous rhetorycian.

Hermoglyphus, a grauer of images.

Hermon, a little hill that stands on Jordan

Hermopolis, the name of a city that Hercules builded.

Hermupoa, an herb called Mercury.

Hermus, a river which in the mids parts the fields of Smirnee, and
fallith from the hyl Dorylao, and divides Phrigia from Caria, wherein Virgil
supposed to be golden sand.

Hernia, the disease, whereof men be called brosten, for that their bowels or
other matter, is fallen into their coddes.

Hernici, people in Campania.

Herniosus, he that is brosten.

Herodes, the son of Antipater, which in the v. year of Augustus, was of the
Romans declared king of Jews, and he reigned.37. years. of that name were
diverse other kings, of whom Josephus writes abundantly.

Herodianus, a noble hystorian, which in greek wrate most eloquentely and
truly the lives of the emperors from Marcus Philosophus to Gordianus the
younger, which book is most eloquently translated into latin by Angelus
Politianus.

Herodius, a bird named a faulkon.

Herodotus, was a noble hystorian, borne in the city of Halycarnassus in Asia,
he wrate most eloquently a general hystory of the acts done in Europa and Asia
by the space of.CC. and xl. years, until the war among the Greeks called
Peloponesiacum, which Thuridides with an equaile style wrate and performed.
He floryshed before the incarnation of Christ 200. years.

Heroicus, a, um, noble or pertaynyge to nobleness.

Heroida, a noble woman.

Heroes, herois, an half god, or he which for the love of virtue susteyneth
greatte labors and peril.

Herostratus, a poor folyshe man, who to have a perpetual fame, burned the
most famous temple of Diana at Ephesum, and after detected him self, and was
put unto death.

Herpeta, a tetter.

Hersilia, the wife of Romulus king of Romans

Herus, a lord or master.

Hesione, was daughter of Laomedon king of Troy, and sister to Priamus, whom
Hercules at the first destruction of Troy gave in marriage to Thelamon a noble
prince of the Greeks.

Hesiodus, an ancient poet of the greeks, which first wrate of husbandry,
whom Vergile followed in his Georgikes.

Hesperia, Italy.

Hesperia ultima, Spain.

Hesperides, the three daughters of Atlas, which kept the gardens, wherein grew
the golden appuls, that were taken away by Hercules.

Hesperidum horti, the gardeyns wherein were the golden appuls, now called
orenges.

Hesperus, the west sterre.

Hesternus, na, number, of yesterdayes.

Hestiaea, is a part of Thessalye says Strabo, and Ptolom. and in Homerus it
is a town in Euboea, Stephanus says it is a city in Acarnania.

Heterogenus, a, um, of an another kind.

Hetruria, the countreye of Thuscane, wherein the city of Florence is.

Hetruscus, a, um, of the countraye called Hetruria.

Hetrusca disciplina, was a certain doctrine taught in Thuscane, concerning
the interpretation of lyghtenynges, tokens in the firmament, and things that
were monstrous, which was of such estimation among the ancient Romans,
that it was decreed by an ordinance of the senate, that into six parts of
that country should be sent six sons of noble men, to learn that art.

Heu, alas.

Heus, how.

Hexaclinum, a parlar, wherein syx persons may soupe.

Hexagonum, six cornerde.

Hexameron, of six days.

Hexametrum, a verse of six feet.

Hexapeda, a measure called a fathom.

Hexaphorus, a lytter or chair to be borne by six men.

Hexaplum, uel hexapla, an example.

Hexasticum, six verses together.

H ANTE I.
HIARBAS, the son of Jupiter, which was king of the Getulians, and made war
against Dido queen of Carthage.

Hiasco, scere, to gape, open by him self, or sprede as flowers done.

Hiato, aui, are, to gape often.

Hiatus, tus, a gapynge.

Hibernia, the isle called Irelande.

Hibiscus, an herb, which Galenus does call wild malowe. it is also called
Althea, Ruelli^e says, that it is the same, which the pothecaries do call
Bismalua, or Maluauiscus, which is the double malowe.

Hibris hibridis, a wild hog, engendered between a wild bore, and a tame
sow.

Hic, this man. also here or in this place. sometime it is taken for Tum. Hic
illi flentes rogare atque orare coeperunt, Than began they to desire and pray.

Tu si hic sis, aliter sentias, If thou were I, or es I am, thou would think
otherwise.

Hic amor, hoc studium, that is your desyrs, there aboutes ye go.

Hic quis est, Who is this?

Hic somnus est mihi, this is my manner of sleapynge.

Hicce, haecce, hocce, for hic, haec, hoc.

Hiccine, haeccine, hoccine, for hic ne? haec ne? hoc ne? Hiccine est Simo, Is
not this Simon sometime it is taken doutfully. Haud nihil ambigam, hiccine
fuerit Ascanius, an mayor quam hoc: I doubt somewhat, whyther this were
Ascanius, or an other elder tha^ he.

Hiera, an isle between Sicile and Liparis. also the name of a way, of a woman
the wife of Thelaphus king of Misie.

Hieracium, an herb, which some do suppose to be sowthistell.

Hieranthemis, the flower of the herb camamel.

Hierapicra, a medicine to purge fleume and choler, and sometime it is called
only Hiera, it is of sundry spyces confectioned in a poulder.

Hierapolis, a city in Asia.

Hierarchia, the holy governance or pryncipalytie.

Hieratica, fine paper.

Hieremias, the prophet, was borne (as Epiphanius writes) at Anathothis, and
was slain by his people at Taphnas, in Egypt. But afterward the Egyptians
had him in great honor, and buried him in the place, where stood Pharaos
palayce, for he drove thens serpents and crocodiles. This is the prophet,
which before the alteration of the temple, took the arc or holy coffer, and
that which was in it, and caused a stone to swalowe it up, saying to the
priestis and ancient men that were present: Our Lord is departed from Sina
to heaven, and shall return with an holy puissance, and this shall be the
sign of his coming, when al people shall honor a tree. he said moreover
unto them: Never man shall open this arc, neither priest nor prophet,
except Moses the elect of god, the tables with in it, no man shall unfold,
except Aaron. And at the resurrection, first this ark shall rise, and shall
come out of the stone, and shall be set in mount Sina. And all saynctes shall
resort thereunto, there to receive the Lord, and shall flee from the ennemy,
which would have destroyed them. And he sealed the stone, writing therein
the name of our lord. And the sign was like as it were graven in iron, and a
cloud than keuered the stoone, but no manne knowethe that place.

Hieri, people beyond Sauromatas.

Hiero, ronis, a king of Sicile, which was like a private person, very rude
and homely, and of his nature fierce and intractable. but after he became
sick, and ceased from business, the fever now and than taking him, he
became a man of good manners and honorable. And in the mean time, that he was
not vexed with the fever, he fell to learning. Wherefore being recovered, he
used the company of Simonides, Pindarus, and Baccilides, most excellent poets
at that time living who in their writings brought his name in an honorable
remembrance.

Hierobotane, an herb called Veruen.

Hieroceps, an isle in Cyprus nere to Paphus.

Hierocomion, a laserhouse.

Hieroduli, ministers in temples and churches.

Hierogliphica, mystical letters or ciphers among the Egyptians, which were
images sygnifyenge hole sentences.

Hieron, uel Hiereon, a chapel.

Hieronymus, the most noble and famous interpreter of holy scripture, he was
after the incarnacion of Christ about.CCClxxxvii. years, as he him self
writes. he was borne in a town called Strido, which was in the co^fynes of
Hu^gary and Dalmatia, his fathers name was Eusebius.

Hierophanta. the declarer of mysteries or holy scripture.

Hierosolyma, or Jerusalem, after the Hebrew the chief city of Judea (as
Eusebius writes) was in compass about.vi. miles and a half, and as the same
author says li. 9. Praeparationis euangelicae, ca. ult. was callid Hieron
Salomonis, that is to say Salomons house: And after by corruption of speech
was called Jerusalem and Hierosolyma. But Lyranus on the.xxviii. chapter of
Genesis writes, that it was first buylt by Melchisedek, and by him called
Salem, that is to say peasyble. forasmoche as he was king of peace and justice.
also that it was callid Solyma, Luza, also Bethel, Hierus, Hierosolyma, and
Aelia. Albeit Josephus de bello Iudaico, li. 7. ca. 26. affirms, that the
first buylder thereof was Chanam, which made there a temple, and called it
Hierosolyma, where before it was called Solyma. Saint Hierom De locis actorum
apostolorum, says, that the city was called Aelia, of Aelius Hadrianus the
emperor, which eftsoon repaired it, after that it was distroyed by Titus,
and made it larger. It was five times wasted, and last was distroyed by Titus,
after the incarnation of Christ.lxxiii. years.

Hierotheus, the proper name of a man.

Hila, a small gutte or ar^ gutte.

Hilare, meryly, ioyousely.

Hilaresco, scere, to be merry.

Hilaria plurali, the.viii. calendes of Apryll, wha^ the day and night have
equal hours, and the day begins to increase.

Hilaris, re, and hilarus, merry or joyous.

Hilaritas, tatis, myrthe.

Hilarious, the proper name of a man.

Hilaro, aui, are, to make one merry or ioyouse.

Hilarodus, a synger of a wanton and delycat song

Hillus, the son of Hercules by Deianyra.

Hilum, the little black, which is in the end of a bean. It is sometime
taken for nothing or naught.

Hima, a mule which is begotten between an horse and ass. Himulus, and
himula, little beasts of the same kind.

Himera, a river in Sicile, divided into two parts, the one fresh water, the
other salt.

Hin, is a measure of the Hebrews, which after the account of Senalis, is of
our measure one galon and a pynte, and receives in poyse of wine.xvi.li. and.
di^. and two ounces: of oil xv.li. of honey.xxv.li.

Hinc, an aduerbe signifieng from thense. some time, for that cause. Hinc ille
lachrimae, For that cause were the tears, or that was the matter wherefore he
wept.

Hinc loci mei, from my countray or town that I came fro.

Hinc scibo iam ubi siet, I will wete of him now where he is.

Hinc, illinc, here and there.

Hinc and illinc, on every side. Hinc inde, idem.

Hinc illinc uenit, he comes I know not from whense.

Hinnio, iui, ire, to neye like a horse.

Hinnulus, a fawn or hynde calfe.

Hinnulus leonem, there is to be understand coepit, uicit, or prouocat, the
kydde or fawn took, vanquyshed, or provoked the lion to battle. A proverb
applied to a person feeble or ignorant, which by any mean has vanquished him,
which is more puissant than he, or provoke him to battle, or contendeth
with him, which is wyser or better learned than he him self.

Hinnus, hinna, and hinnulus, hinnula, a mule engendered between an ass and a
mare.

Hio, aui, are, to gape, also to wonder or meruail

Hiant flores, the flowers do spread.

Hiosciamus, an herb called henbane.

Hippacen, chese made of mares milk.

Hippaco, aui, are, to fetch breath quyckly.

Hippagium, caryage on horsbacke.

Hippago, ginis, a ferybote.

Hippagogius, an instrumente wherewith stones are polyshed.

Hipparchus, capitayn of the horsemen.

Hippeas, a kind of crabfyshe.

Hippei, cometes or blasyng sterres, having manes like horses.

Hippiades, images of women on horseback, as the women of Amazon were always
painted.

Hippiae, ben a kind of creuyses in the country called Phoenicia, which be so
swyfte, that it is impossible to over take them.

Hippias, a rhetorician (as Apuleius says Floridor. 2. excelled al men in the
multitude of crafts, and was equal to any man in eloquence, but of what
country or kynred he was, it is uncertain, he came on a time to Pisa, to the
great tryumphe called Olympicum, and all things that he did wear upon him,
was of his own making: his shoes and patens, his cote wrought of the fynest
threde, with three threde stytches, a bawdrike of baudkyn with chaungeable
colors and sundry pictures, a mantelle of white over all, and a ring on his
finger with a stone, wherein was a sygnet most perfectly wrought. And all this
did he work with his own hands. Also he carried with him a little oil
bottell, with a narow mouth, the resydue round and flat, with a little
instrument to stryke sweat from his body hangyng thereat. He played
excellentely on every instrument, he sange his own verses in all kinds,
which no man could amend. In all parts of rhetorike, logyk, and philosophy,
he vanquyshed many and of none was vanquyshed. He ran, wrastelyd, and did other
fears of actiuitie, that all men beholding him, were therewith abashed. Finally
in nothing he semyd to be ignorant, weak, or unable. Not withstandyng Plato
in two dialogues brings in Socrates disputi^g with him: In the one inserching
what beaultie is, in the other what a lie is. he concludes and proves Hippias
to be an arrogant and ignorant folle, forasmoche as praysynge beaultie, he wist
not what beaultie was, and bostyng that he before any other man could discern
a liar from a true man, he could not make of them a true diffinition. By this
it appears how much the commune judgment of men varieth, and is inferior to
the judgment of a perfect wise man, as Socrates was.

Hippiatrus, an horse leache.

Hippius Tyrius, was he that first made ships, which serve only for
burdeyn, called in latin Naues onerariae.

Hippo masc. gener. the name of two cities.

Hippobotos, a feedor of horses.

Hippocampus, and hippocampae, fysshes like horses on the forepartes.

Hippocentauri, were a people in Thessalia by the mount of Pelius, which were
also callid Centauri, the which were the first that were seen in Greece rydyng
on horses, whereof came the fable that Centauri, were half men, half horses.

Hippocomus, an horsecorser.

Hippocrates, the name of a physician most excellent.

Hippocrene, a fountain in Boeotia, dedicate to Apollo and the.ix. muses.

Hippodamia, daughter of Oenomaus, king of Arcadia, unto whom it was told by a
sothesayer, that when his daughter did marye, he should dye. Therefore when his
daughter came to the years of marriage, he ordained a price of runnynge with
charyottes, and caused to be proclaimed, that who so ever did vaynquyshe him
therein, should have his daughter to wife, and he that was vaynquysshed by him,
should dye. Many of the wowers were slain. At the last Pelops the son of
Ta^talus, desyryng to haue^ the said maiden, promised pryuylye to Myrtilus
which drau^ the kings charyotte, that if he did win the price. Myrtilus
should lie with Hippodamia the first night. upon the which covenant
Myrtilus made the extree of wax, by occasion whereof, the chariot fell down
and was broken, and Pelops had the price, Wherefore Oenomaus slew him self,
and Pelops enjoyed the lady and the royalme. Moreover when Myrtilus asked that,
which was promised him, Pelops threw him into the sea next adioynyng, which
thereof was ever after called Mare Myrtoum. There was an other lady called also
Hippodamia, which was wife of Perithous, for whom the battle was between
the people called Centauri, and them which were named Lapythae.

Hippodamus, a breaker of horses.

Hippodromus, a broad way, wherein many horses many run together.

Hippolapathum, an herb called patience.

Hippolytus, the son of Thescus, who at the complaynte of Phedra his
stepmother, was pursewed by his father, and he in a charyote fleyng was
overthrown among the sharp stones, and rent all to pieces. Afterward
Aesculapius reuyued him, and restoryd him to health. Wherefore he would be
called Virbius, that is to say, twyse a man, forasmoche as he had twyse lived.

Hippomachia, tourneyenge on horseback and iustynge.

Hippomanes, an herb, whereof if horses done eat, they forthwith run mad. It
is also a venomous humor, runnyng out of the shap of a mare, which if a man
hap to receive inward, he shall be mad, Plinius says, that it is a little
flesh in the forehead of a colte, when he is new fooled, black, and as much
as a date, which the mare plucketh away with her teethe, as soon as she has
fooled: and if any man do take it away before her, she never after will love
her fool.

Hippomaratrum, wild fenell.

Hipponax, was a Greek poet, borne in Ephesus, who was defourmed in vysage,
but in style sharp and vehement, in so much as wha^ a kunnynge payntour named
Bubalus, had painted his ylle favored face, to make men laughe at it: Hipponax
made against him such vengeable verses, that for anger and shame, he caused
him to hang him self in his house.

Hipponomus, a heard or keeper of horses.

Hippopera, a male or bougette.

Hippophaes, the herb called tasyll. It is also called Labrum Veneris, and
Virga pastoris.

Hippopodes, people i^ the Scithik occea^, which have fete like horses.

Hippopotamus, a beast living in the river of Nyle, having fete like an ox,
his back and mane like an horse, and neygheth like an horse, a wyndyng tail,
and tusked like a boore.

Hipposelinon, some suppose it to be the herb callache or smallache, or
march. Read after in Olus atrum.

Hippotela, a fool of an ass.

Hippotoxota, an archer on horseback.

Hippuris, an herb called in latin Equisetum, or Cauda equina, in englysh
horsetayle, but it is commonly called cattes tail.

Her, hiris, the palm of the hand.

Hira, the gutte which is called Ieiunum.

Hircinus, a, um, gotyshe.

Hircipilus, a man that is heary.

Hircosus, a, um, that stynketh like a got.

Hircquus, the corner of the eye. also he that is gogle eyed.

Hirculus, a kind of Spikenarde.

Hircus, a got bucke. It is alsoo the rank savor, which yssueth out of the
arm holes.

Hirquitalus, a child, which passes the age of xiiii. years, and begins
to be styrred with lechery.

Hirquitallire, to enter into that age, or aptnes to lechery.

Hirrio, iui, ire, to narre like a mad dog.

Hirsutus, ta, tum, rough.

Hirtae, hedges made of thorn.

Hirtus, ta, tum, idem quod hirsutus.

Hirudo, inis, a horseleache or blud sucker.

Hirundo, inis, a swalowe.

Hisciacus, he that gapeth much.

Hisco, sci, scere, to gape as one does for sluggishenes, after sleep, or for
lack of sleep. Also it is to proffer to speak, or open the mouth to speak.

Hismaelita, a sarasyn.

Hispalis, uel Hispalum, a city in Spayn now called Sibilia, or Siuii.

Hispania, a country in the west part of Europa called Spain, and was
sometime called Iberia, and Hesperia, and is enuyronned on the south part with
the sea called Mare mediterraneum, which divides Europa from Africa: on the
north part with the sea called Mare Cantabricu^, on the west with the great
occean sea: on the east with the mou^tayns called Pyrenaei, and the part of
the royalme of France, called Aquitania and Narbonensis, And this country is
divided by Ptholome into three regio^s: Bethica^, wherein is Granado, Siuyl,
Corduba. etc. Lusytaniam, wherein is Portugal, Galicia etc. Tarraconensem,
wherein is Castil, Lio^s, and Arragon. At this time it co^teineth five royalmes:
Granado on the southe part toward Affrik, Portugal on the weste, Galitia and
Biskay on the north, Arragon on the east part, Castylle, and Lyone in the
myddell. Much of the weste part, by reason of rocks, forrestes, and lack of
water is not fertile nor well inhabyted. The north part by reason of much
cold is not plentuouse: the southe part is wonderful fruitful. It is in
length, as Strabo writes.vi. thou sand furlonges, which is.DCCC. and fyfty
miles, in breadth five thousand furlong, which is.DCxxv. miles. Plinius next
unto Italy extolleth it in fertility above al other cuntrayes. Solinus
compares it with the best countrays in plenty of grain, wynes, oil, silver,
gold, and iron. Statius and Claudius famous poets, do no less commend it.

Hispidus, a, um, bristeled or rough heared.

Historia, a story.

Historicus, a writer of hystories.

Histrio, onis, a player in enterludes and stage players.

Histrionicus, ca, cum, pertaynyng to players.

Histrix, icis, a beast having sharp pricks on his back, called a porkepyne.

Hiulco, aui, are, to make to gape or chynke.

Hiulcus, ca, cum, gapynge, or chynked, as the ground is in a great drithe.

H ANTE O.
HOC, this or that.

Hodie, to day.

Hodiernus, na, number, of this day.

Hododocus, a robber by the high way.

Hodoeporicum, a book to carry in journey, which may be called a iournall.

Hodoeporus, a trauayler by the way.

Holocaustum, properly the beast, which having his bowelles taken out, is laid
hole on the altar and burned.

Holographum, a testament al written with the hand of the testatour.

Holor, oris, a swanne.

Holoserica uestis, a garment all of sylke.

Holus, alias Homolus, a hill of Thessaly.

Homeromastix, ticis, the reprocher of Homer, generally Homeromastices, be
taken for all reprochers and false correcters of lernyd men.

Homerus, the chief of all poets, and was named Melesigenes, but because he
was blynds, he was callid Homerus, which in the tungue called Ionica,
signifies blind. Cicer. Tusc. 5. says in commendation of Homer: It is written
(says he) that Homere was blind, yet see we his picture and not his poem. for
what country, what marches, what host, what navy, what motions of minds, as
well of men, as of bestis are expressed in such wise, that he makes us to se,
that he saw not. Plutarchus in the book which he wrate of him, says, that in
his two warkes he comprehended both the parts of a man, for in Iliade he
descrybed strength and valyauntnes of the body: In Odyssea he does set
forth a perfect pattern of the mind. Notwithstanding for his vndescrete
fablynge of gods and goddesses, Plato excluded him out of his weal publyke,
which he devised.

Homicida, a murderer, a man kyller.

Homicidium, murder, or manslaughter.

Homilia, a sermon.

Homo, a living creature, having capacity of reason, subject to death, a
man, woman. or child.

Homo bulla, a man is but a bubbel. A proverb signifieng the shortness and
uncertainty of man's life, resembling it to a bubbell of water, which
shortly ryseth, and as shortly vanishes and comes to nothing.

Homo homini deus, man is man is god, applied to him which with any syngular
benefit helps a man above his expectation.

Homo trium literarum, signified sometime in mokage, a man of a noble lynage,
because noble men wrate their forenames, their names, and surnames with three
letters, as P. Cor. Scipio. C. I. Caesar. It is sometime taken for a thief,
because in Fur, are but three letters.

Homocapnus, a man which sytteth always in the smoke, or by the fire.

Homoeosis, a similitude.

Homogalactus, a foster brother.

Homogenes, of one kind.

Homoglossus, of the same tungue or language

Homoleum, a cap of the old fascion.

Homologia, a confession, consent, or covenant

Homomeria, lykenes in parts or members.

Homonaea, the proper name of a woman, whereby is signified concord.

Homonymon, where many things have one name, but diverse in effect, as a man,
which is a live, or painted, divided by this addition, a very man, a painted
man.

Homosipyi, they which sleep together under one roufe.

Homousios, of like substance.

Homulus, and Homuncio, a little man, or of ^^all reputation. (...) ^^estas,
tatis honesty. (...), aui, are, to reward with honor. (...) us, ta, tum,
honest.

Honor, oris, Honos, noris, honor, dignity. sometime beaulty. also reverence,
honesty.

Honorem praefari, is where one shall speak of any thing that is not honest,
than to say: Saving your reverence.

Honoraria, plays made at Rome, to the honor of Bacchus.

Honorarium, a present given to ambassadors, greatte officers, and Justices
at their first coming, or executyng of their authorities.

Honorarius, a, um, perteynynge to honor.

Honorifice^s, honorificentior, honorificentissimus, a, um, using or doing
things honorably.

Honorificentissime, in a very honorable form or manner, very honorably.

Honorifico, aui, are, to do honor, or to honor.

Honorificus, ca, cum, that brings honor.

Honoro, aui, are, to honor.

Honorus, a, um, that is with honor.

Hopistographi, rolls written on both sides.

Hora, an hour. also time of an hour, a day, or a year.

Horaeum, somer honey. It is also a sauce made of fyshe.

Horarium, the space of an hour.

Horatius Flaccus, a famous poet borne at Venusium a town in Apulia, a man
excellent in sharpnes of wit and quickenes of sentence. He was addict to
Epicures sect, and somewhat wanton in manners though he do liberallye note vices
of other men in his verses, called Satyri, in balades to sing to the harp,
which were in.xviii. sondrye kinds of verses. he passed all other that wrate
in latyne: he was in good favor with the emperor Augustus, by the means of
Mecoenas the emperors minion, whoo took in him for his mirth and wit much
dilectation, to whom and to Augustus he wrate diverse epistelles in verse,
comprehendynge great wysedomes in compendious sentences, and dyed when he
was.lvii. years old as Eusebius writes* he was after the incarnation of Christ
about x. years.

Horda, a cow great with calfe.

Hordeaceus, a, um, of barley.

Hordearij, they which do live with eating barley.

Hordearius, a, um, perteyninge to barley.

Hordeum, barley.

Horestes, the son of king Agamemnon, which slew his mother, because she
conspyred with Aegisthus her aduouterer to slay his father.

Horia, a fyshers bote.

Horiola, a little fyshers bote.

Horizon, it is, a cercle diuidyng the half sphere or over part of the
firmamente, from the other half, where, to our sight, it seems that the
heaven touches the earth.

Hormesion, a precious stone of the color of fire.

Horminode, a grene stone, compassed with a cercle of the color of gold.

Horno, an aduerbe signifieng this year.

Hornotinus, a, um, of one years growing.

Hornus, na, um, of this years.

Hagnus hornus, this years lamb.

Hornae fruges, this years grain.

Horologium, a dyall or a clock.

Horomasdes, among the Caldees was named the good god.

Horoscopo, are, to mark the hour.

Horoscopos, the diligent markyng of the time of the birth of a child.

Horoscopus, that part of the firmament, which every hour rises from the
east, astronomers do call it the ascendent.

Horoscopus, pa, um, eyery thing, wherein hours be marked.

Horrearius, the keeper of the barn.

Horreo, rui, ere, when a man thinks that his hear does rise also to
quake for cold or fear. sometime to fear much.

Horrent agri, the fields are unpleasant and unfruitful.

Horresco, scere, when a man feels within him great cold or trembling to
begin, as in a fever, or in a great fear. some time to quake.

Horreum, a barn, wherein corn is laid. some time a storehouse, wherein any
other thing is kept.

Horribilis le, horrible or terrible.

Horrificus, idem.

Horride, without any good fascion or pleasure.

Horridulus, tymorus.

Horridus, da, dum, hydeous, or he that quaketh for cold or fear.

Horrifico, aui, are, to make aferde.

Horripilo, aui, are, to be roughe.

Horrisonus, na, number, having a terrible sown or voice.

Horror, oris, a sheuerynge or quakynge for cold or fear.

Horsum, hither, or hytherwarde, an aduerbe.

Hortatus, tus, exhortation.

Hortensia, the daughter of Hortensius, a woman most eloquent.

Hortensius, an excellent orator of Rome, of a wonderful memory.

Hortensis, se, perteyninge to a gardeyne, or of a gardeyne.

Hortor, aris, ari, to exhort.

Hortus, a knot gardeyne, or a gardeyne for pleasure, or an orcharde.

Horti pensiles, gardeyn made on the tops of houses.

Horula, a little hour,

Horus, was an Egyptian, which wrate and declared the secret manner of
writing, which the Egyptians used, called Hieroglyphica.

Hostomaticus, syckely.

Hospes, hospitis, a Gest, which lodges in an other man's house. also a
stranger, or a man, inhabitynge out of the country.

Hospita terra, a country, whereby a man may peasibly pass.

Hospitalia, lodgings in an house, which serve only for strangers.

Hospitalis, le, using a gentle entertaynment or gladly receyuynge a
stranger.

Hospitalis Jupiter, was so called, because strangers or Gestes when they
were ill entreated in their lodginges, they called him to witness, desyringe him
to revenge him.

Hospitium, a housea lway ready to receive friends. sometime a lodging. also an
hospital. sometime frendshyp showed in hospitality.

Hospitor, aris, ari, to receive friendly in to his house.

Hossimi, they that be borne without nosethrisls

Hostia, an host or sacrifice offered to attain victory of ennemies.

Hosticus, ca, cum, hostile or ennemy.

Hostilis, le, perteyninge to an ennemy.

Hostimentum, recompense, one for an other.

Hostio, iui, ire, to recompense, to assuage, or abate, to offend.

Hostis, an ennemie.

Hostium, a measure of a hundred and forty bushels. Also a door.

Hostorium, the staff, wherewith all measures be made even, a stryke.

H ANTE V.
HVber, eris, a pap or vdder.

Huber, ra, rurr, fruitful or plentuous.

Hubero, aui, are, to make plentuous or fruitful.

Huberrime, very plentuously.

Hubertas, tatis, plenty.

Hubertim, plentuously.

Hucertus, ta, tum, abundant or plentuous.

Huc, hither.

Hui, an interiection of wonderyng. Hui meam sororem, ho my sustar. Hui tam
cito, ho, ho, so shortly or sone.

Huic, to that place: also to him or her.

Huiusmodi, and Huiuscemodi, such.

Hulula, a shriche owl.

Hululo, aui, are, to houle.

Humanitas, humanity, or nature of m^ doctrine perteyninge to man.

Humaniter, gentylly.

Humanitus, of men.

Humanus, na, um, gentle, tractable, courteys merciful, and friendly.

Humecto, aui, are, to make moist.

Humeo, mui, ere, to be moist or wet.

Humesco, scere, idem.

Humerus, the shulder.

Humidus, moist.

Humigatus, wet.

Humilio, aui, are, to make low, poor, or abiecte.

Humilis, le, base, low. also simple or poor, abiecte, vile.

Humilitas, tatis, baseness or lowenes, humylitie, which as Speusippus
defyneth, is a gentylnes of the mind, lacking wrath or anger.

Humi, a low, or on the gronnde.

Humo, aui, are, to bury or hyde.

Humor, oris, humor or moisture.

Humus, earth being moist.

Hungaria, read after in Pannonia.

Hunni, people which came out of Scithia, and inhabited Hungary.

H ANTE Y.
HYacinthina, were solemn ceremonies done in the night.

Hyaccynthinus, na, um, violet color.

Hyacinthus, called also Vaccinium, has leaves like porret, an hand bread in
heyghte, less than a man's little finger, green of color the top lyinge
down full of purple flowers, and the rote round, the flower springs out in
spryng time, with the violet, and before the rose. Of this flower were feigned
two sundry fables, One, that it was a boy, whom Apollo loved, whom by
misfortune he slew, wherefore he turned him in to this flower. An other fable
is, that it sprange of the blood of Ajax the valiante Greek, and that
certain veins of the flower seem to express the figure of those two letters.
AI. It is also a precious stone of the color of gold called a Iacincte,
which has a soueraygne virtue against the commune plage specially if it be so
worn, that it do touch the vein coming from the heart.

Hyades, are.vii. sterres, whose names ar Ambrosia, Eudora, Pasithoe, Coronis,
Plexaura, Pytho, and Tithe, they be troublous, and rayseth storms and wyndes,
and they goo down the.xiiii. calendes of May. Poets name them the daughters
of Atlas and Aethra. wherefore they ben also called Atlandides. But because that
in lamenting their brother Hyas, which was slain by a lyones, they worned away
and dyed, and therefore by Jupiter were translated unto the firmament they were
afterward called Hyades, by the name of their brother. Some say that they
were the nouryces of Bacchus, and were called Dodonides Nymphae, of a town and
forest called Dodona. The Romans called them Succulae, and also Paralicium.

Hyalargus, a glasyer.

Hyalinus, glasy.

Hyalus, glass.

Hyberia, a region in Asia, ioynynge to Armenie, enuyrronned with the mountain
called Caucasus. It is also the old name of Spain

Hyberna, places where men of war do rest them in winter.

Hybernacula, places prepared to winter in, specially in the besiegynge of
towns or fortresses.

Hybernia, Yrelande.

Hyberno, aui, are, to make abode in winter.

Hybernus, na, um, perteyninge to winter.

Hyberus, a great river in Spain, nyghe to Tarrhacon.

Hyble, uel Hybles, a City in Sicile, and a mountain nyghe to it, whereon
grows plenty of time, and therefore the honey which is there, is of all other
most pleasant.

Hybrida, is a dog, engendered betwyxt a hound and a mastyue, called a limmar,
or mongrel.

Hybrides, half wild.

Hybris, idis, a kind of hawks, which seldom is seen in the day, but
seeks his pray in the night.

Hydaspes, a great river in Indie.

Hyderon, a disease, when the skyn is filled with water.

Hydra, a water serpente. It was also a monster, with whom Hercules faughte,
and as soon as he had stryken of one head of the mo^ster, immediately sprange
up an other.

3 Hydram secare, to meddle with an endless matter, or where after one mischief
happens an other.

Hydragogus, he that brings water to a place by furrows or trenches.

Hydrargyrum, a certain thing, wherewith silver is gylte in the stead of
quick silver.

Hydraulis, an organ player.

Hydraulos, an instrument to pushe out the water by violence.

Hydria, a water pot.

Hydrolapathon, water dockes.

Hydromantia, divination in calling of spirits to appear in water.

Hydromel, water and honey sodden to gether.

Hydropiper, seems to be the herb which the pothecaryes do commonly call
Eupatory.

Hydropota, he that drynketh always water.

Hycca, a great fyshe, which Hermolaus Barbarus takes for a sturgeon.

Hydrops, dropis, the dropesy. It is a sickness (as Trallianus writes) which
comes of the liver made so cold, that it may not suffitiently boil the
meat that is received, and convert it in to the substance of pure blood, but
turns it into a warry substance, or into wind, or else into fleume. By
occasion whereof (as Galenus and Paulus do say) the liver being feeble, the
cold matter, which abounds, is sent into other members, whereof comes
ill habyte or figure of the body. It proceeds of three causes: of a primative
cause, as by much cold drink forthwith after labor, or bayninge, goinge
long in the sun, or drinking much fasting. Of a procedynge cause, as of an
ill complexion, hot or cold, or oppilation, whereby good humors are let to be
iugendered, and ill humors to be expulsed. Of a ioynte cause, as of water or
wind possedynge either all the members, or only them which serve for
nouryshement of the body. Of this sickness be three kinds: Tympanites, Astites,
Hyposarcha, read more of them in their places.

Hydruntes, a city in Calabria.

Hydrus, a water serpente.

Hyemo, aui, are, to rest in the winter time.

Hyems, winter.

Hyena, a beast like a wulfe, which has a mane over all his back and neck,
but the hears be longer and harder.

Hymber, a shoure of rain or hayle.

Hymen, a skin in the secret place of a maiden, which when she is defloured,
is broken.

Hymenaeus, was called the god of marriage.

Hymera, the name of a river.

Hymettus, a hill by Athenes, where was honey of all other most precious.

Hymnus, a praise in a song.

Hyoscyamos, an herb called henbane.

Hypaepa, a city, where were meruaylous fair women.

Hypaethra, an aley in a gardeyne, or galerye without any covering.

Hypagogeus, an instrument, wherewith stones are polyshed.

Hypanis, a river in Scithia.

Hypasis, or as some do write Hypanis, Arrianus calls it Hyphasis, a great
river, which runs out of the mountains of Scithia into Inde, and comes
into the famous river of Ganges, and is in bread.vii. furlonge, as Diodorus
writes. lib. 17. The stream thereof is so swyfte, that no man may pass over
it, by the space of five days saylynge, the water is fresh: after that it
comes within four days saylynge of the sea it is wonderful bitter, by
reason of a bitter fountain, which runs in to it. At this river the great
Alexander fynished his journey, and went no further into Inde, but there did
set up.xii. great aulters of stone, every of them fyfty cubits in greatness.

Hypata, a city of Thessaly.

Hypenium ouum, an egg which has neither white nor yelke.

Hyperaspistes, a protector, a great shield.

Hyperbaton, a long dependynge, or superfluous sentence.

Hyperbole, excess in aduaunsynge, or depressynge: as higher than heaven,
whiter than snow, swifter than lyghtenyng, slower than a snayle, worse than
the dyuell.

Hyperbolicus, ca, cum, exceeding credence.

Hyperborei, people dwelling in the furthermoste part of the north, and as
some have supposed, under the north pole called Polus Arcticus. Pomponius Mela
writes, that the country is but little, having the sun over them, and
being fertile of it self, the people very just, and living longer and more
pleasantly than other men, always with out business or labor, knowing neither
war nor debate: Like to this does Pliny write. li. 4. cap. 12. Solinus
says, that some men do appoynte them rather to Asia, than to Europa. Other
do set them mean between the sun going down with the Antipodes (which are
people having their feet against ours) and the sun rysynge with us.
Finally he says, that they be in Europa, where they have.vi. months
continually day, and.vi. other months continually night, the wyndes there
be always wholesome, and they know neither sickness nor unquietness. Wherefore
Strabo writes li. 15. that some men affirmed, that they did live a thousand
years. Festus Pompeius wrate, that they exceded the life of man, living above
a hundred years, and therefore were they called Hyperborei, as it were exceeding
the commune term of man's life. and when they be weary and tedious of their
life, as Mela and Solinus do write, making good chere with their neighbors,
and having garlandes on their heads, they throw them selfs from a certain
rock into the deep sea, estemyng that to be the best death and form of
burienge.

Hypercatalecticum metru^, where abounds one syllable or two.

Hypericon, an herb called sayncte Iohn^s wurte.

Hyperion, of the poets called the sun of Titan and Terra, father of the
sun, the moon and the morrow, and sometime he is put for the sun.

Hyperthyron, is a transumpte or haunce.

Hyperthyrum, that which is next over the browe of a man.

Hyphen, where diverse words be pronounced under one accente, as Quandoquidem,
utcunque. etc.

Hypnales, adders, which stynginge a man, he dies sleapynge.

Hypocaustum, a hot house or stewe.

Hypochyma, a graye humor keuerynge the eye, called also Glaucoma.

Hypocondrium, the inward part of the body above the nauel, and under the
stomach.

Hypocrisis, false dyssimulation, feigned holiness.

Hypocrita, an hypocrite.

Hypodidascalus, an usher or substitute in teaching.

Hypogeum, a place under ground.

Hypoglossida, little round things made by phisyke to lie under ones tungue,
which is dyseased with reumes or grief in the throat.

Hypomnema, matis, an exposition or comment.

Hypopodion, a foot stool.

Hypopyus, where matter runs out of the eyes.

Hyposarcha, is one of the kinds of dropesy, whereby all the body bolneth or
swells. It comes by the increasynge of blood, cold, thyn and watrye,
infused in to all the members, in the defaulte of the third digestion, caused
by the weakness of the stomach and liver, the ways whereof being stopped, the
power whereby superfluities are separat and expulsed, is made feeble, whereby the
body does gather vicious juice and wyndes.

Hyposphagma, where the skin of the eye by some stroke is so hurt, that the
blood suddenly spredeth over the eye.

Hypostasis, substance. It is also that, which does rise in urine, where
there is good dygestion, if the residence be white, light, and rysynge in
fascion like a pear, the small end upward.

Hypotheca, a pledge. also a doctrine.

Hypothesis, an argument, matter, or cause, whereupon one should argue, dispute,
or speak.

Hypothicos, a lynnen rochet.

Hypothyra, seu Hypothyrides, the door, or rather the place open, where the
door is.

Hypothyron, a groundsyll, or threshold.

Hypozigia, all drawing cattle.

Hypsicratea, the wife of king Mythridates, which followed him in all his
wars, being armed like a knight.

Hypsiphyle, was daughter of Thoas king of Lemnos, when the women there by a
commune consent, had slain all the men of that country in one night, she
saved her father, and did let him depart. After when Jason going toward the
conquest of the goulden flyse, came unto Lemnos, she being in love with him,
conceived by him two children twynnes, and when they were borne, the women of
that country would have put her to death for the saving of her father, but she
in fleinge was taken by pirates, and given to Lycurgus king of Nemea, whose
son she nourished. But when the Argiues went to destroy Thebes, Hypsiphyle
while she went to show to the Argiues a fountain, left the child lyinge on
the grass, who was slain by a serpent. wherefore when the father of the child
would have put her to death, the kings of the Argiues defended and saved her.
Some other do write, that Hypsiphyle, when she perceived that Jason did not
return to her again according to his promise, she threw her self into the
sea, and was drowned.

Hyrcania, a country in Asia.

Hysginum, a color like scarlet.

Hysopus, and hysopum, an herb called hisope.

Hysteralgia, pain of the bealy.

Hysterologia, and Hysteron proteron, a manner of speaking, where the last is
set before the first, and as it is said: the carte before the horses.

I ANTE A.
I IS THE Imperative mood of Eo, and does signify Go thou. It is also a form
of speaking, when we do correct, exhort, or mock any man.

I nunc, and rebus nimium confide secundis, Go to, and put all thy trust in
prosperity.

I nunc, and dormientem excita, go thy way and awake him.

Ia, was the younger son of Atlas, and souneth as much as a voice.

Iacchus, one of the names of Bacchus, called god of wynes.

Iacea nigra, is as Brunfelsius supposes, the herb, which is called Morsus
diaboli.

Iaceo, cui, cere, to lie, to extend out or be of length sometime to be. In
medio campus iacet, In the myddle is a fylde. Also to be dead. Ille iacet, he
is dead. Sometime to be contemned or naught set by. Maximas uero uirtutes
iacere necesse est, uoluptate dominante, Carnal dilectation rulynge, needs
must excellent virtues be nothing set by.

Iacent, they are without virtue, courage or estimation.

Iacent uirtutes, virtue is naught set by.

Iacent pretia, they are of a low price.

Iacet grauiter, he lies sick.

Iacet oration, the oration is without any grace or spirit.

Iacens animus, a desperate mind, or out of courage.

Iacente te, thou being sick.

Iacio, ieci, iacere, to throw, cast, or shoot, sometime to set or lay.

Iacere fundamentum, to set or lay a foundation.

Jacob, a patriarch, son of Isaac.

Iacobus, a proper name, in english James.

Iactanter, bostyngely.

Iactantia, boste.

Iactatio, idem.

Iacito, taui, tare, to boste often.

Iacto, aui, are, to throw, to reuolue, or toss in the mind, to vex, to
throw down and heat, to auaunt or glory, to speak vaynly, to set forth, to
toss, to cast out.

Iactuose, braggingly.

Iaculatio, Iaculamen, and Iaculamentum, a shot, or cast with a darte, or
iauelyn.

Iaculo, aui, are, to shoore or cast far.

Iaculor, aris, idem.

Iaculum, any thing that may be shot or cast far, most commonly a darte or
light iauelyn.

Iaculus, a serpente, that lies under trees, and suddenly with a meruaylous
vyolence perseth any beast, which happens to pass by him.

Iam, now, also incontinent, or forthwith.

Iam ne imus? shall we not go now?

Iambus, a foot in meter, which has the first syllable short, the other
long.

Iam diu, long agone.

Iam dudum, now late, but a while sense.

Iamiam, even now.

Iam inde, incontinent after.

Iam olim, now late.

Iam pridem, a little while paste, but late. sometime forthwith.

Iam tum, for that time.

Ianiculum, a part of Rome and a mountain in it. Also a gate of the same name.

Ianira, the daughter of Ocean and Tethis.

Ianitor, toris, a porter.

Ianthina, violet color or purple.

Ianua, a door or yate.

Ianuarius, the month of Ianiuer.

Ianus, some suppose to be Saturn, some to be Iaphet one of the sons of Noe.
Cicero calls him the superioure world, or heaven. He was made having two
visages, either because the heaven tournynge, the year retourneth, where it
began: or else because it knows what is passed, and foreseeth what shall
happen. This god, or rather ydoll, had a temple in Rome, which in the time of
wars was always open, and in the time of peace was shut. And therefore when in
stories mention is made, that the temple of Ianus was a shut, than is it to be
understand, that the Romans had peace universally.

Ianum claudere, in old time sygnifyed to make universal peace, for in the
temple of Ianus at Rome were two doors, which were opened when the Romans
made war, and when war was finished and all things in quiet, than were they
shut.

Iapetus, the father of Prometheus.

Iapigia, a country in the realm of Naples, called Calabria.

Iapix, gis, a wind, which comes out of the parts of Apulia, and is a
western wind. also one of the sons of Dedalus, and was king of Calabria,
which of him was called Iapigia.

Iasminum, a tree and little flower called Iasemin.

Jason, onis, he which first conquered the fleese of gold.

Iaspis, pidis, a stone called Jasper.

Iatraleptes, a physician or surgion, which cures with oyntmentes.

Iatraleptice, curing by oyntmentes.

Iatronice, a book of phisike.

Iatros, a physician.

I ANTE B.
IBERIA, the ancient name of Spain. Also an other country nyghe to Armeny.
it is of some written with h.

Iberi, and Ibres, Spaniardes, or men of the other Iberia.

Iberis, or Hiberis, an herb like to kresses, but much greatter, the stalk
is a little cubyte in heyght, in somer it bears a white flower, and has a
little sede, which grows about all the stalk. Hermolaus does interpret it
wyld kresses. Manardus writes, that some men calls it Lepidium. Aetius
calls it Cardamine, which in latin is Nasturtium in english kresses.

Iberus, a river in Spain.

Ibi, there.

Ibidem, there, or in the same place.

Ibis, a foul or bird of Egypt which is high, and has stiff legs, and a
long byl. They profyt much to the country in kyllyng and eating serpents,
which out of Libya be carried into Egypt with a southern wynd. also it is taken
for an enuyous person.

I ANTE C.
ICaria, an isle in the sea Icario, which is also called Icaros.

Icarus, the father of the chaste Penelope. There was an other Icarus, which
was the son of Dedalus, who having wi^ges with his father flew out of the isle
of Crete: but when he flewe higher than his father commanded him, the wax,
wherewith the feathers of his wings were glewed, being molten with the heat of
the sun, and the feathers falling of, Icarus was constrained to fall into the
sea, which was afterward called Mare Icarium. Also Icarus is a mountain in
the region of Athenes.

Ichneumon, a beast in Egypt, of the greatenes of a cat, and is fascioned
like a mouse, who crepeth in to the body of a Cocodryll, when he gapeth, and
eating his bowelles, sleeth him. It is also a kind of waspes.

Ichnographia, is a plat concerning buyldyng wherein is only contained the
place, whereon the building shall stand, having lightely described with rule
and compace the form and fascion of every court quadra^t, and flore therein
comprehended. Also an instrument like a compace, wherewith are made the
descriptions of the sun.

Ichnusa, the isle now called Sardinia.

Ico, ici, icere, ictum; to strike.

Icona, uel Icon, an image.

Iconicus, ca, cum, so painted or fourmed, that in every member the very
similitude is expressed.

Iconismus, a description.

Iconium, a town in the country of Capadocia, an other in Asia the less. It
is also a man's own image like him self.

Ictericus, he that is diseased with the iaundise.

Icteros, a sycknes called the iaundise.

Icthybolus, a fysher.

Icthyocolla, a fyshe of whose skin water glewe is made, and the same glue is
also called Iectyocolla.

Icthyophagi, people by southe Indie, which do eat only fyshe, not only the
people but also their cattle is fed therewith, and do wear garments of the
skynnes of fyshes. Also (as Strabo writes) they houses be made with whales
bones and oyster shelles, for the rybbes of the fyshes do make the beams and
rafters, of the iowes ar made doors of the back bones are made morters, in the
which the fysshe is pounded, and dried at the sun, and thereof do they make
their bread myngled with a lyttel wheat. Arrianus. li. 8. writes, that the
rybbes of whales were seen there by the capitaynes of king Alexander, which
were above.xxxvii. foot, and a half long, wherewith their houses were builded

Ictyopola, a fyshemonger, or seller of fyshe.

Icthyopolion, a fyshe market.

Icthyotrophia, a ponde or stewe, wherein fyshes be fed.

Ictis, idis, a white wesyl, which destroys be stalles and eats the honey.

I ANTE D.
ID, that. Id, quod res est, which is troth

Id aetatis, of that age.

Id eurat scilicet, he cares much therefore. which is spoken as who says, he
cares nothing for it.

Id locorum, for Id.

Id temporis, at that time, or such a time.

Id temporis est, the time is such.

Ida, a mountain, which lies nyghe Troy.

Idaei dactili, people called also Coribantes.

Idaeus, a, um, of the mountain of Ida.

Idalium, a city in the isle of Cypres.

Idalius, a mountain and a wood in Cypres.

Idaspes, a river runnyng by Parthia and Inde, and at the last falls into
the great river called Indus: in this river is found much gold and precious
stones.

Idcirco, therefore.

Idea, a figure conceived in imagination, as it were a substance perpetual,
and like as of one seal proceeds many pryntes: so of one Idea of a man
proceeds many thousands of men, and semblably of other Ideas proceeds
things innumerable. So that Ideae, be as it were external examples, whereby
all other things be created, and this is Idea, whereof Plato speaks.

Idem, the same thing, or the same man. also like or semblable.

Identidem, eftsoon, in the same wise.

Ideo, for that cause.

Idicus, ca, cum, of the mountain of Ida.

Idiographae literae, a private letter.

Idiographum, a private writing.

Idioma, matis, a proper form of speech.

Idopathia, the proper passion of a disease.

Idiota, Idiotes, a man or woman unlearned.

Idipsum, the same thing, or one thing.

Idolium, a little ydoll.

Idololatra, a worshypper of ydoles.

Idololatria, ydolatry.

Idolothysa, offerynges to Idolles.

Idolothytum, that which is offered to ydols.

Idolum, an ydoll.

Idomeneus, a king of Crete or Candy, which came with the greeks to Troy.
In his return being troubled with tempeste, he vowed, that if he returned
saulfe in to his royalme, he would offer what so ever he met with all first.
wherefore when he would have offered his son, who first met with him at his
landynge, the people did arise against him, and drove him out of the country.
And than sailed he into Apulia, and builded there a city, which he called
Petilsa on the mountain called Salentinum in Calabre.

Idoneus, a, um, apt.

Idula, a sheep that was offered every Idus to Jupiter.

Idumaea, a region in Syria, ioyninge to Egypt, and bordereth upon Palestina.

Idume a city in the country called Idumaea, about the which are abundance
of palm or date trees.

Idus, Ides of months, which do divide Nonas from Calendes.

I ANTE E.
IEcinorosi, men sick in the liver.

Iecoraria, an herb called lyuerwurt.

Iecur, coris, and Iecinoris, the liver of a man or other thing living.

Iecusculum, a little liver.

Ieiunium, fasting.

Ieiuno, aui, are, to fast or absteyne.

Ieiunum, the gut, which goes down to the foundement.

Ieiunus, he that is fasting.

Ientaculum, a breakefaste.

Iento, aui, are, to eat meat ^fore dinner.

Iessen, a fowne, where Joseph met his father Jacob, and brought him into
Egypt.

JESUS, the son of god, and of the most pure virgin Mary. Although after
the common translations of the bible into latin, it seems, that there were
diverse other Jews so named: yet in the Hebrewe tungue, as Reucline writes in
his book De uerbo mirifico, There was some diversity in the letters of the
name of our savior, from them, which were in the other called Jesus. For in
his glorious and wonderful name were the vowelles called Tetragrammaton, with
one consonant called Schin, which is one S. of the Hebrews, wherein was a
mystical or hyd sygnification of his divinity, although the hole name be
interpreted Savior. who being equal in divinity with god the father begotten
of him before that the world was created and without time, wyllyngly for the
redemption of man descended in to the body of the blessed virgin Mary, and was
conceived in her by the holy ghost the third person in godheade, and of her
was borne the. 3962. year after the creation of the world. And being god and
man lived here. 32. years, in form of poverty, and than being betrayed by
his own disciple, was by the Jews his own people most cruelly nailed on the
Cross, the year after the creation of the world. 3994.

I ANTE G.
IGITVR, therefore, from hense forth, afterward.

Ignarium, any thing, out of the which fire may be beaten.

Ignarius lapis, a fire stone, or flynt, out of the which fire is beaten.

Ignarus, ignorant, without knowledge.

Ignatius, was an holy bishop of Antioche, the third after saint Peter, and
was dysciple of saynct Ihon^ the euangeliste. In the time of Traia^^ he was
condemned to be deuo^red of beasts, and as he was led toward Rome with ten
men of war, whom for their cruelty he called ten leopardes, he by the way
confyrmed all christen men in the faith, as well by prayers as by letters, saying
in this wise: So that I may find Christ and embrace him, I would there
should come unto me, fire, gybbettes, beasts, crashyng of bones, rentinge of
all the body, and all the ^urmentes of the dyuell. And when he herd the
corynge of lions, which should devour him, he ioyously said: I am the wheat of
Christ let me be ground with beasts tethe, that I may be found to be pure or
fine manchet. He was martyred after the incarnation of Christ about.lxxx.
years.

Ignauia, cowardnes. also lack of courage.

Ignauit, he made him a fool.

Ignauiter, with a false heart, or cowardly.

Ignauus, a, um, cowarde.

Ignesco, scere, to be set on fire, or to made fire.

Ignia, certain fautes, which erthen pottes have in the inealynge.

Ignicula, are certain prouocations, naturally given to embrace virtue.

Igniculus, a spark of fire.

Ignifacio, feci, facere, to set on fire.

Ignio, iui, ire, to inflame.

Ignipotens, one of the surnames of Vulcanus.

Ignis, the fire. Some time it is taken for an harlot.

Ignis sacer, a sore, wherein is an exceeding inflammation and burning.

Ignitabulum, a fire pan.

Igniuomus, he that spytteth fire: the sun is some time so called.

Ignobilis, Ie, unnoble, unknown. folyshe, of none estymation.

Ignominia, reproach, infamy.

Ignominis, without renoume.

Ignorabilis, le, unknown.

Ignoranria, ignorance, lack of knowledge, and is referred to the wit of the
person.

Ignoratio, lack to be known, and pertayneth to the thing or act.

Ignoro, aui, are, to know not.

Ignosco, noui, noscere, to learn and know perfectlye. also to forgive, to
have excused, not to know, or be ignorant.

Ignotus, unknown. also ignorant.

I ANTE L.
ILA, the lest portion of a thing that may be imagined also the stuffynge of a
pudding, or other like thing.

Ila, or Ilua, an ylande in the Tuscane sea.

I Will, is that which is set in the highest part of a man.

Ileos, the colyke.

Ileosus, the colyke, and he that has the colike.

Ilex, licis, a tree called holy or holme, whereof one kind bears grain,
which the Arabians do call kermes.

Ilia, great guts.

Iliacus dolor, the frettyng of the guts.

Ilias, adis, the warke of Homerus, of the siege of Troy.

Iliberis, a city in the province of Narbone.

Iliceus, a, um, of holy or holme.

Iligneus, a, um, idem.

Ilione, the proper name of a daughter of Priamus

Ilioneus, the proper name of a Troiane.

Ilissus, the name of a river in the prouynce of Athenes.

Ilithya, a name of Diana.

Ilium, the palayce of Priamus.

Illabor, beris, labi, to throw him self into a thing Mediaeque minans
illabitur urbi, and thretninge them, he threw him self into the city.

Illaboratus, ta, tum, that which is made or done without labor.

Illac, on that side.

Illaetabilis, le, without mirth, or lackyng mirth or pleasure.

Illatebro, aui, are, to hyde in corners.

Illaudatus, not worthy to be named.

Ille, he.

Illecebrae, things dilectable, which draws and allureth the mind to
embrace them, flykerynge intycementes.

Illecebrosus, a, um, that which pleasantly allureth one to favor it.

Illecto, aui, are, to draw pleasantly.

Illectus, ta, tum, pleasantly styred or provoked.

Illepidus, without dilectation or grace.

Illex, illegis, lawless, also wanton.

Illex oculus, a wanton eye.

Illibatus, ta, tum, untouched, untasted.

Illiberalis, vngentyl, without kindness, or cur^^sy. Illiberale facinus, an
vncurteys pagen^^.

Illiberaliter, vngentylly, excedingly ill, myscheuousely.

Illiceo, illicui, cere, to provoke or styre plesantly

Illicet, now go to, incontinent.

Illicium, a provocation.

Illico, anon, in the same place.

Illido, lisi, dear, to drive or beat to a thing.

Illinc, from that place.

Illineo, iui, ire, to annoynte on.

Illino, ini, ire, to anoint hard, to spot or soylle.

Illisus, a, um, driven or beaten to.

Illiteratus, unlearned.

Illiusmodi, of that sort.

Illix, licis, a provocation or styrynge.

Illo, to the place.

Illotis manibus rem aggredi, to go about a great thing without reverence, or
dishonestly to handle a thing of great estimation.

Illotis pedibus fere ide^. also without shame.

Illuc, in that place or there.

Illuceo, xi, cere, and illucesco, scere, to be light or clear.

Illudo, si, ere, to mock, to hurt in iaping, or playeng.

Illuminus, a, um, without light.

Illunis, dark, when the moon does not shine.

Illustris, famous, clear, noble inrenoume.

Illustro, aui, are, to make light or clear, to make famous or well known, to
set forth that which is hid.

Illutibilis, that which can not be washed away

Illuuies, uncleanness, fylthynesse in manne or garment.

Illyria, Illyris, or Illyrium, a great countray between Italy, Germany,
Thraciam, and Mace doniam or Epirum, and has on the one side the sea called
Hadriaticum, on the other side the great river of Danubius. That country is
now called Slauony.

Illyricus, ca, cum, of Illyria.

Ilus, the king of Trojans son, that builded Iliu^.

I ANTE M.
IMaginarij, baner b^arers, wherein be images painted.

Imaginarius, a, um, done for a form or fascion, and not in effect.

Imaginatus, ta, tum, fygured or fourmed into an image.

Imagino, naui, nare, to make images, or to counterfayte.

Imaginor, aris, ari, to ymagyne.

Imaginosus, a, um, full of images.

Imago, imaginis, an image, a symylitude, a shethe or case.

Imaguncula, a little image.

Imaus, a mountain in Judea

Imbecillis, le, and imbecillus, a, um, feeble.

Imbecillitas, tatis, feebleness.

Imbellia, cowardyse.

Imbellis, le, unapt to wars, coward or weak.

Imber, a shower.

Imberbis, be, beardlesse.

Imb^bo, bibi, bear, to drink in.

Imbrex, bricis, a spowte or gutter, out of the which rain is conveyed from
the house. It is sometime taken for tyle or slate, that lies on the house.

Imbriciu^, the covering or ^ueising of the house.

Imbrico, to cover with tile, or other like thing.

Imbricosus, a, um, full of gutters.

Imbrifer, bryngyng shoures.

Imbrus, an ylande of Thrace, and a town in the same is so called.

Imbubino, aui, are, to defyle with menstruous flyxe.

Imbulbito, taui, tare, to defile with chyldrens dyrte.

Imbuo, bui, buere, to dye cloth or sylke, to teache as one teaches his
apprentyce.

Imitor, aris, ari, to follow the exa^mple of an other.

Immanis, ne, cruel, great, horrible.

Immanitas, tatis, cruelty, greatness.

Immemor, forgetful, he that does not remember.

Immemorabilis, le, unworthy remembrance.

Immensus, a, um, of such greatness, that it can not be measured.

Immerens, he that has not deserved.

Immergo, mersi, gere, to drown or to plunge a thing in the water.

Immergere se in consuetudinem, to enter in to deep familiarity or
acquayntance.

Immersit se in ganeum, he is gotten into a tavern or he has thruste him
self into a tavern or alehouse.

Immerito an aduerbe, without deseruynge.

Immerito meo, without my deserte.

Immigro, to go dwell in a place.

Immigraui in ingeniu^ meu^, I came to mine own rule, or to be ruled by mine
own wit.

Imminens, that which is at hand.

Imminens ingenium, a runnyng wit.

Imminens Dario, wylling to assail Darius

Immineo, nui, nere, to hang or houer over a thing as it would fall, to take heed or espy. also to be nigh. Mors propter incertos casus quo tidie imminet,
Death by uncertain chances; is every day nigh.

Bellum imminet ab. Tarquinis, it is at the point to have war with Tarquines.

Imminet exitio alterius, he is ready to slay one

Imminent in fortunas nostras, they be at hand and ready to rob us of our
goods.

Imminuo, nuere, to cut of.

Imminuere caput alteri, to break ones heed.

Imminuere ius, to defalcate or minish the authority or state of a person.

Imminuere maiestatem, to ^o^myt treason.

Imminuere pudicitam uirginis, to defloure a maiden.

Immisceo, scui, scere, to myngle together.

Immisericorditer, without pity.

Immissum, laid in to abide, as a beam of a house, or other like thing.

Immitis, te cruel, without pity.

Immitia poma, appuls which at not yet ripe.

Immitto, misi, mittere, to send in. sometime it signifies to let grow in
length. Neque barbam immiseris is^am, Neither let this berde grow in length.
Respicimus dira illuuies, immistaque barba, We beheld, O what an horrible
filthynes and a beard grown in length. also to bring or send on the contrary
part. Hoc futurum esse dixerunt, ut post breue tempus immitteret deus regem,
qui expugnaret Iudaeos, It should come to pass (said they) that god should send
to the contrary part a king, which should vanquishe the Jews. Alij Tarquinium
a Cicerone immissum a^ebant, ne Crassus suscepto maloru^ patrocynio re^pub.
turbaret, Some said, that Tarquine was brought in craftily by Cicero, lest
that Crassus, in taking on him the defense of misdoers, should thereby bring
sedition into the weal publik. Immittere rude^tes, to let go the ropes or
cables. In medios hosts se immisit, he thrast him self into the myddle of his
ennemies.

Immo, but rather, yea rather, yes, yea but.

Immobilis, le, vnmoucable.

Immodeste, out of measure, also to much.

Immodestus, ta, tum, without temperance.

Immodice, to much.

Immodici, many.

Immodicus, ca, cum, great or much.

Immola, a city in Italy, which was sometime called Forum Cornelij.

Immolo, aui, are, to offer in sacrifice.

Immorior, immori, to dye on a thing.

Immoro, rari, to abide or continue in a thing.

Immortalis, le, vnmortall, that, lives ever.

Immortalitas, a perpetuali life.

Immunis, exempt, without office or charge.

Immunitas, tatis, fraunches or liberty.

Immunitus, ta, tum, not defended.

Immurgio, gij, gire, to murmr within one^

Immustulus, a little byrd, I suppose it be a when

Immurabilis, le, unchangeable.

Immuto, tare, to change one thing for an other

Impago, ginis, a tenon which is put into the mortays. also a pyn which is
driven into timber, to make it join and abide.

Impancro, crare, to invade or go into a place.

Impar, not equal, not sufficient.

Imparatus, unready, unpurveyed.

Imparens, disobedient.

Imparibilis, le, that which can not suffer or sustain.

Impauidus, he that fears not.

Impeccabilis, he that never offends.

Impedimentum, let, impediment in wars.

Impedimenta, is the carriage and traffike, that gothe with the host.

Impedio, diui, dire, to let, to stay, or supporte, to defyle.

Impeditus, is properly he, that has his feet so bound, that he can not goo.

Impedo, aui, are, to underset.

Impello, puli, pellere, to persuade instantly, to enforce, to pluck down, or
infeble.

Impendeo, di, dear, to hang over.

Impendent mala, myschiefe is nygh.

Impendio, very much or more.

Impendium, expense or cost.

Impendo, di, dear, to spend or lay out money, to bestow, to employ.

Impensa, benefyttes.

Impensa, sae, expenses.

Impense, proualde. Est impense improbus, he is a very ill man.

Impensibilis, without consyderation.

Impensius, exceeding, more grievous, or dyspleasant.

Imperator, the chief capitayn in wars, Now the emperor.

Imperatum, commanded.

Imperiose, stately, rygorousely.

Imperiosus, a maisterly man, rigorous, or cruel in governance.

Imperitabundus, full of rule, or rulyng much.

Imperitia, lack of knowledge.

Imperito, aui, are, to rule or govern.

Imperitus, not expert, easy to be deccyued.

Imperium, a solemn commandment, a preeminence in governance, authority
royal.

Imperium exequi, to do that is commanded.

Impero, aui, are, to command.

Imperare cupiditatibus, to rule desires or appetytes.

Impertio, tiui, tire, and impertior, tiris, perti, to participate with one, to
give part of that which he has.

Impertire salute, to salute.

Impertitur, part is given.

Impesco, scere, to put a beast into a good pasture to feed.

Impetigo, ginis, a ring worm.

Impeto, tiui, tere, to invade.

Impetrabilis, le, that may be gotten by desire.

Impetrasso, trassi, sere, to get by desire or insta^ce

Impetritus, infixed, mortaysed, as it were in a stoone.

Imperro, aui, are, to optayn by desire or request

Impetuosus, violent or hasty in wrath.

Impetus, tus, and impes, petis, violence.

Impetus animi, vehemence of the heart.

Impetum dareuel facere, to rounne with a great raundon on any thing.

Primo impetu, at the first assaut, at the first brunt.

Impiatus, not purged of syn.

Impie, wyckedly, cruelly, mischeuousely.

Impietas, tatis, hatrede of god, cruelty, wyckednes, impiety.

Impiger, diligent, not slow, valyant.

Impigre, diligently, without slouthe.

Impingo, pegi, pingere, to hit one in throwing some thing at him. Dicam tibi,
impinga^ gra^dem. I will lay a weighty mattier unto the. Caput parieti
impingere, to knock ones head against the wall.

Impingere compedes, to put on gyues.

Impingere culpam in aliquem, to lay the blame on one.

Impingere nauem, to run the ship on a rock, or to drive him on land, as is
the commune saying.

Impinguo, aui, are, to make fat.

Impio, are, to defile, to distayne him self with a dishonest or foul deed,
specially against god or his parents.

Impius, cruel, hatyng god and good men, he that cares not for god, an
ungracious man, a myscheuouse man.

Implano, aui, are, to deceive.

Impleo, eui, ere, to fill, to accomplish, to put in execution.

Implere uncem alterius, to take in hand an other man's charge, to exercise an
other man's office.

Implet ulnas hominum quatuor, it ronteyneth fully two fathomes.

Implexus, wound in.

Implicitus, ta, tum, wrapped or tied fast togider

Implicitus morbo, attached or detayned with syckenesse.

Implico, caui, care, to wrap in, to tie fast, to detayne. Implicat ad speculum
caput, she bound up her head at a glass.

Imploro, aui, are, to desire lamentably.

Impluo, ere, to rain in.

Implutus, wette in the rain.

Impluuia, a cloak to wear in the rain.

Impluuiatus, ta, tum, colored as it were wette in the rayn.

Impluuium, a place in the house, whereby they used to receive rain water.

Impolitia, negligence about the weal public.

Impono, sui, nere, to put one thing on an other also to give, to inioyne, to
lay to ones charge.

Imponere alicui, to abuse or deceive one.

Calculum imponere, to cast account.

Imponere claues alias portis, to change the kayes of the gates.

Clausulam disputationi imponere, to conclude or make an enoe of the
disputation.

Imposuit exercitum Brundusii, he laid his host in garryson at Brundusium.

Iniuria^ alicui imponere, to do wrong to one.

In stipendium argentu^ imponere, to assesse what men, or townships shall pay to
the souldyours wages.

Laborem imponere, to apoynt him business.

Imponere sibi laborem, to charge him self with great pain and travail.

Imponere legem, to set a law on a thing.

Imponere legem alicui, to appoint a man what he shall do.

Imponere summam manum, to achieue the thing that a man gothe about.

Modum imponere prosperae pugnae, to hold a mean, or to use temperaunce, where
the battle is prosperouse.

Imponere mulcta^, to set a peyn, as iuges do.

Necessitatem imponere, to constrayne.

Onus imponere, to give in charge.

Imponere praesidium ciuitati, to set a garrison in a city.

Imponere praetium, to set a price.

Silentium imponere, to command silence.

Imporco, aui, are, to make a balke in caryng of land.

Importunitas, tatis, which has no commodity of time nor of place.

Importunus, na, nu^, out of season, importunate.

Importuosus, a, um, without port or haven.

Impos, impo^is, unable, without power.

Impostor, oris, he that deceyueth with promises, or sells false ware for
good.

Imposturam facere, to deceive in manner aforesaid.

Impotens, tentis, he that can not resyste his appetite or affections, sometime
it is usurped for puyssaunt.

Impotentia, debilitie. sometime immoderate power, also inability to resyst.

Impraesentia, and impraesentiarum, at this time or for this present time.

Imprecor, aris, ari, to desire, to wyshe.

Impressio, onis, a violent assault.

Imprimo, pressi, primere, to prynt, to seal.

Improbe, ill, naughtily, vnhappyly.

Improbitas, tatis, dishonestye, vnthryftynesse, wantonness, obstynacye,
malapertnes, rauenye, wylynesse.

Improbus, an ill man, dishonest, obstinate, wanton, malapert, wyly, insatiable.

Improbus aliae rei, good for none other thing.

Improba facies, an ill favored face.

Facinus improbum, a shrewde turn.

Labor improbus, great travail.

Improba merx, unlawful marchandyse, or of small profit.

Improbum os, a lewd or myscheuous tunge.

Improbi posts, rotten posts, or being in any wise insufficient.

Improbum testamentum, a testament insufficient, lacking the circumstance or
form.

Improlis, uel improlus, he which is not yet a citise^.

Improperiu^, imbraiding of a defaut.

Impropero, aui, are, to imbrayde a man with some defaute.

Improuidus, he that provides not for the time coming.

Improuidus, da, dum, that which comes suddenly, and unlooked for.

Improuise, and improuiso, vnthoughte on, or unlooked for.

Improuisus, a, um, idem quod improuidus.

Imprudens, dentis, unware, also not circu^spect

Imprudens harum rerum, not knowing of those matters.

Imprudenter, unwisely, unadvisedly.

Imprudentia, lack of foresyghte, that it was not thought on.

Impubes and impuber, a man child before the age of.xiiii. years, a maiden
before.xii.

Impudens, shameless.

Impudenter, shamefully, dishonestly, unadvisedly, wantonly.

Impudicitia, uncleanness of living.

Impudicus, unchaste, unclean in living.

Impulso, aui, are, to persuade often.

Impulsus, persuaded, provoked, enforced.

Impune, without damage, without punysshement or grief, in vain.

Impunitas, tatis, lack of punishment, liberty without punishment, pardon of
punishment.

Impurus, ra, rum, dishonest, vile, reprochable, sluttyshe.

Imputatus, ta, tum, vncutte, or never cut.

Imputo, aui, are, to repute or ascribe, to lay the blame or defaut. also to
reken one thing with an other, or to acoo^pt one sum with a another.

Imus, ma, mum, the lowest, or most low.

Imus pes, the sole of the foot.

Imus sonus, the base in song.

Imo a pectore, from the bottom of the heart.

I ANTE N.
IN, sygnifyeth in.

In aduersum, on the contrary part.

In annum, for a year.

In bonis, among good men.

In coenam, for supper.

In conspectum aspice, to look before the.

In diem addicere, to sell upon condition that a thing be done by a day.

In diem uiuere, to live without carynge for to morrow.

In dies singulos, day by day.

In horam, for one hour.

In horas, from hour to hour.

In lucem, until day.

In magno munere, for a great reward.

In manu uel manibus est, it is in his power, at hand, or casy, or in hand.

In manum dari, to be given apart, or severally.

In meam partem, on or for my part.

In medium afferre, to bring forth to a common use or commodity.

In mentem uenire, to come to mind or remembrance, to be considered.

In nauem ingreditur, he went into the ship.

In noctem, unto night.

In numerato habere, ready, or at hand.

In numerum, in order.

In ordinem ducere uel cogere, to bring down from authority, to minishe
estimation or power.

In ore est omni populo, all the people speaks of it. In partem, for thy
part. Age sis, tu in partem nuncia^ hu^c delude, atpro amplexare hanc, Go to
now for thy part, deceive him hardyly, and take her unto the.

In partem dimidiam decoquere, to boil it to the half deal.

In paucos dies, for a little while.

In pedem, for every foot. Is se ternis nummis in pedem tecum transegisse
dicebat, He said, that he bargeyned with the for three pe^ce a foot, or for
every foot.iii. pence.

In perendinum, after to morrow, or.ii. dais he^s.

In portu sum, I am saufe.

In posterum, finally, in conclusyon, from hens forth, hereafter.

In potestatem esse, under the rule, or at the pleasure of one.

In praesentia, at this time, In praesens, idem.

In primis, chiefly, specially, above al other things. In priuato and publico,
at home and abroad

In procliui est, it is easy to do, or to bring to pas.

In promptu est, it is easy to know, it is apara^t.

In propatulo, before all men.

Iam in propinquo certamen erat, now was the battle at hand, or the day of
the battle was come.

In proximo, at hand.

In publicum redigere, to confiscate, to take for a forfayte.

In re ipsa, to experience.

In re tua, for thy profit.

Inre praesenti, in a plain and evident matter.

In rem nostram, it is for our profit.

In rem praesentem excurrere, to come on the land which is in demand.

In rem praesente^ producere, to bring the matter to light, to express the
thing perfectly.

In rem praesentem uenire, where the lands in debate, do come in view, by
the assignement of judges, unto them which be called viewers, which shall se
the bounds and quantity of the land in variance.

In serum, until night.

In speciem, by dissimulatio^. Ducentes paucos in speciem captiuos, faynyng
that they carried a few prisoners with them. Praeclara classis in speciem, it
seemed a fair and great navy.

In spem uenire, to begin to hope.

In tempore, in season, oportunately.

In tutum eduxit legiones, he brought his army out of danger into a sure place.

In uiros diuidere, to gyne to every man.

In uniuersum, generally.

In utranpro partem, of the one side and other.

Inaccessa, an ylande of Egypt, to the which is no coming.

Inachus, the first king of Argi^es.

Inanescere, to be vayn, and of none estimation.

Inaniloquus, abablar.

Inanimus, m^, mum, without soul.

Inanio, iui, ire, to make empty.

Inanis, ne, empty, vacant, ydelle, light in estymation.

Inanis accedit, he comes without bryngyng any thing with him.

Inanitas, and inanitio, emptynes, voydnes.

Inaresco, scere, to dry up.

Inarime, an isle in the Thuscane sea. Alsoo a mountain.

Inaudio, iui, dire, to here.

Inauditus, ta, tum, never hard of, strange to hear.

Inauris, a ring, or other like thing hanging at the ear.

Inauro, aui, are, to make rich.

Inauspicato, vnluckely.

Incaeduus, a, um, unused to be cut.

Incaero, aui, are, to cover with wax.

Incalesco, lui, scere, to be or wax very hot.

Incallidus, simple, without craft or subtlety.

Incandesco, dui, descere, to be very hot angry.

Incantatio, and incantamentum, a charm.

Incanto, taui, tare, to charm.

Incapistro, straui, strare, to halter, or to bind with an halter.

Incassum, in vain.

Incautus, unware.

Incedo, cessi, cedere, to go or walk, to go stately, to enter.

Ince^do, di, dear, to inflame, to set fire on a thing.

Incentio, onis, the sowning of instruments.

Incepto, aui, are, to begin often.

Incerniculum, a rangynge syue, wherein corn is cleansed or it be ground. also
a sarce.

Incerno, ni, nere, to syfte in.

Incerto, taui, tare, to make doutful or uncertain

Incertus, ta, tum, uncertain or doubtful.

Incesso, ssi, ssere, to make angry, to do displeasure to one, to accuse.

Incessere hosts iaculis, to cast darts or iauelyns on the ennemies.

Incessit ambos inopia, both of them are vexed with poverty.

Cupido eum in cessit, there took him a desire, there came a fantasy unto him.

Is incessit mos, they had taken such a custom.

Incesto, aui, are, to ppllute.

Incestuosus, he that does often pollute.

Incestus, ta, tum, polluted.

Incestus, tus, is lechery committed with one, which is nygh of kynne or
aliaunce to him that commytteth it. also it sygnifieth all manner of pollution.

Inchoo, aui, are, to begin. also to perform.

Incido, cidi, ere, to cut, to grave.

Incisa, lost. Spe incisa prius quam praedicta dies adesset, Hope being lost,
er ever the said day was commen.

Incido, di, ere, to happen, to fall sodaynely, to come by chance.

Inciens, a woman nigh her time, to trauaylle of child.

Incile, a gappe or trenche.

Inciles, trenches, to convey water from a river, into a medowe or other low
ground.

Incilo, aui, are, to blame or reprove.

Incino, ni, nere, to sing, proprely to fayn a small breast.

Incipio, coepi, cipere, to begin.

Incisim, piece meal, gobet meal.

Incisio, onis, incisyon or cuttynge.

Incisura, a cut or garse. also incisurae, be the lines in the palm of the
hand.

Incitabulum, Incitamen, and Incitamentum, a provocation.

Incitas, poverty, necessity.

Incitega, a thing whereon great vessels. of wine are couched.

Incito, taui, tare, to provoke.

Inclamo, aui, are, to call for one, to cry out on one, rebukefully to call in.

Inclareo, uel inclaresco, ere, to be known of all men.

Inclementer, without mercy, cruelly, sharply.

Inclementia, cruelty, lack of mercy.

Inclino, aui, are, to inclyne or bow down.

Inclinare acies, when the host does recule.

In uitium inclinare, to begin to be naught.

Inclinari opes ad Sabinos, rege inde sumpto uidebantur. The chief substance
and power turned to the Sabins, after that a king was made of their people.

Cum omnem culpam in collega^ inclinaret, When he had laid the blame to his
fellow.

Inclinata respublica, the weal publik decaid.

Includo, si, ere, to include or shut in.

Inclytus, ta, tum, glorious, famous, of greatte renoume.

Incoctile, a pot wherein meat is sodden, also a brason or copper vessel,
tyuned within.

Incoctus, ta, tum, vnboyled or raw.

Incoctae mulieres, women which do trymme their hears to much.

Incoenatus, not having souped.

It incoenatus cubitu^, he goth to bed supperles.

Incoenis, without supper.

Incogitabilis, forgetful, not considering what he does.

Incogitans, unadvised.

Incognitus, ta, tum, unknown.

Incola, he that dwells in an another country, than where he was borne.

Incolatus, dwelling in a strange country.

Incolo, ui, ere, to dwell in a place.

Incolumis, holem, without sycknes, lacking no reparation or amendment.

Incolumitas, tatis, helthynesse.

Incomitatus, being without company, alone.

Incommode, vncommodiousely, ill fauouredly

Incommodo, aui, are, to hurt.

Incommodus, da, dum, incommodious, dangerous, damageous.

In commune, equally.

Incompactum, vnioyned, or ill joined.

Incomprehensus, not comprehended.

Inconcinnus, a, um, unmeet, ill proportioned.

Inconcussus, stable, that can not be shaken.

Inco^dite, aduer. without facio^, or without order

Inconditus, ra, tum, out of order or facion, ru^e, also weryshe.

Inconditus, ta, tum, unmade, vnbuylded.

Incongelabilis, le, that can not be frosen.

In consiliari, to be called before the counsel.

In consilio adesse, to be of counsayl in a mattee of law. Me quoque Petilius,
ut sibi consilio ad essem rogauit: Petilius also desired me, that I would be of
his counsel.

Inconsulte, without counsel or unadvisedly

Inconsultus, lacking advise or consyderation, he that will not ask counsel.

Inconsultu meo, without my counsel.

Inconsutilis, without any seame.

Inconsutus, ta, tum, unsown.

Inconsyderate, unadvisedly.

Inconsyderatus, he that nothing considers.

Incontinens, he that is not chaste, or keeps him not to one woman.

Incoquo, xi, quere, to seethe or boil in a thing.

Incordio, aui, are, to put into a man's heart, to persuade him.

Incoxo, aui, are, to fytte as women or taylours done without a stool.

Increatus, never created.

Increbresco, sci, scere, to wax, to be spradde or much known.

Incredibilis, le, incredyble, not to be believed, meruaylouse.

Incrementum, increase.

Increpito, aui, are, to blame or rebuke often.

Increpo, pui, pere, to sound or make noise, also to rebuke, to provoke.

Incresto, eui, scere, to grow much or more.

Incubatio, and Incubitus, lyenge in, sitting to hatche eggs.

Incubo, bonis, they that set all their study on treasure.

Incubo, aui, are, to ly in or upon, to cleave to, to sytte over a thing, to
sit on eggs, as a hen does, to occupy, to possede, to embrace, to noryshe,
to dwell in, to care.

Incubus, a spirit, which assuming the form of a man, medleth with women,
also that which is callid the mare, wherewith men be oppressed in their sleep.

Incudo, donis, he that works on an anuyll.

Inculco, aui, are, to porre in.

Incultus, a place unhusbanded or untilled.

Incumbo, bear, to endeavor, to take in hand, to hap, to lean upon, or fall
on a thing. also to be inclyned to some thing.

Incumbo ad studia, I give my mind to a thing, I apply me.

Ad salutem, reipublicae incumbere, to travel about the commune weal.

In causam incu^bere, to maintain that part.

Incumbere gladium, to thruste him self on a sword.

Incumbunt tecta centenis columnis, the rofe is borne up with an hundred
pyllours.

Qui in teipsum incubuerunt, which are fallen or thrown on thy neck.

Incunabula, all that longs to the swathelinge of a child, things pertaynyng
to infancy.

Incunabulum, a cradell.

Incuria, negligence, ill husbandry.

Incurro, rere, to run against one, to run in.

Incursus, and Incursio, invasion of ennemies.

Incuruesco, scere, to bow down, or be crooked.

Incuruo, aui, are, to make crooked.

Incuruus, a, um, crooked.

Incus, udis, an anuyll.

Incuso, aui, are, to accuse.

Incutio, cussi, cutere, to throw in.

Indago, aui, are, to seek or search, to vente, to seek as a hounde does.

Indago, ginis, search.

Inde, from thens, there, from thensforth, after ward, of him or her. Vxorem
duxit, nati filij duo, inde ego hu^c maiorem adoptaui mihi: He took a wife, and
had by her two sons, from him I took this, which is the elder, and made him
mine heir.

Inde ab initio, from the first beginning.

Inde est, thereof it comes.

Indecens, unsitting, inconvenient.

Indecor, coris, not regarded.

Indecore, an aduerbe, sygnifieng unhonestly, vnconueniently.

Indecoris, re, idem quod indecor.

Indecorum, dishonest.

Indefensus, without defense.

Indefinitus, ^a, tu^, not determined or discussed.

Indemnatus, he that is condemned without making answer, or not being herd.

Indemnis, without hurt or harm, defended.

Indemnitas, eschewyng of damage. Existimans indemnitati suae consuli posse,
Thinking that he might eschew damage or danger.

Indeprecabilis, he that wol not be entreated, or will not forgive.

Poena indeprecabilis, punisshement without remyssyon.

Index, indicis, he that accuses or appecheth an other man. also he that for
to escape punyshement, or for some reward, discloseth the conspiracy, whereunto
he was made privy it is also the forefynger, and a touch stoone to try gold,
also the table of a book, whereby certain chapiters or notes be founden.

India, a great countray and rich, called in english Indee, lieng on the
south east partis of the world, which as Ptholomeue writes, is in two parts.
The one is callid Indes, with in the river of Ganges, which on the west is
bou^ded with Aracosia and Gedrosia, on the east with the great river callid
Ganges, on the north with the hill called Imaus, on the south and weste with
part of the Indian sea. The other part of Indee, without Ganges, is bou^ded on
the west with the said river of Ganges, on the north with part of Scithia and
Serica, on the east with the regio^ callid Sinaru^, on the south with the
Indian sea. Nearchus, which was one of great Alexanders admyralles, affirmed
(as Arrianus writes) that it was four months journey by the playnes of
Indee. Megasthenes said, that the breadth of Indee, which was from the weste to
the east, contains.xvi. thousand furlong, which is two thousand and a.C.
miles. The length, which was from the north to the south xxii. thousand
furlonge, which is two thousand DCCCI. miles. Ctesias affirms i^ to be as
much as the resydue of Asia. But Onesicritus, which wrate the acts of
Alexa^dar, demeth it to be the third part of Asia. There is always two
summers, and fruits and grayn is there twyse gathered, the wyndes to always
temperate, and not troublons, the beasts and fowls much greater than in other
cou^trays, and of more diverse kinds. The names of the countries and cities
there, be now otherwise, than they were in the time of the ancient writers.
They which be now known, shall be declared in their places, with also the
mountains and ryuers, which are great above all other.

Indicatio, estymation, or valuation.

Indicatura, idem. Indicatus idem.

Indicium, is where one, which was particypatour in an offense does dyscouer
the acts and deuyses of his companyons.

Indicio esse, to betoken or declare.

Indico, caui, are, to disclose, to manifest, and make openly known, to
demonstrate, to accuse, to set or tell the price, to deliver in possession that
which is bought.

Indico, dixi, dicere, to denounce or declare solemnly, and for a great cause,
as battle, fastings, fun^ralles, counsayles, tryumphes, and other great
things. also to set a tribute or tax, and to appoynte or commmaunde.

Indicere consilium, to call or command a counsel.

Indicere iustitium, to co^mande a vacation, or as we do say, to keep no term.

Indicere pecuniam populo, to set a tax or subsidy on the people.

Indictio, the space of.xv. years. also a tax granted by the people.

Indictiuus, ua, uum, that which is declared or appointed.

Indictus, ta, tu^, declared or denounced solemnly.

Indicta causa, the cause or matter not known, declared, or defended.

Indidem, from thens, forthwith the same.

Indies, daily, from day to day. Crescente indies multitudine, the multitude
or member daily increasynge.

Indigena, of the same country or town borne and bredde.

Indigentia, need or necessity.

Indigeo, gui, gere, to lack.

Indigeste, inordynately.

Indigestio, ill digestyon.

Indigetes, goddis made of mortal men, sum take them for private goddis,
pertaining to particular places.

Indigitamenta, books containing the names of goddis, and the mistical
signification of them.

Indigito, taui, tare, to name or call by name.

Indignor, aris, ari, to disdain.

Indignus, unworthy, miserable.

Indigus, nedy or lacking.

Indipisco, sci, scere, and Indipiscor, sceris, sci, to obtain; to usurp.

Indiscriminatim, indifferently, without diversity

Indisertus, without eloquence.

Indiuidiu^, that may not be divided or separate.

Indo, indidi, indere, to set or name also to print.

Indocilis, a dullarde, that can not be taught.

Indoctus, unlearned.

Indolentia, lack of pain.

Indoloria, idem.

Indoles, towardnes and disposition to virtue in children: in men, token of
virtue. also very nobility or honor, aptnes to good or evil.

Specimen indolis dare, when in youth one shows a likelyhode of towardnes to
virtue.

Laetae indolis adolescens, of a pleasant or merry nature.

Tania indoles in Lauinia erat, so good or virtuous a nature there was in
Lauinia.

Equorum indoles, the raze of horses.

Fructuum indoles, the terrage, verdure, or sent of fruytes.

Frugum indoles, the good growthe and fulness of grain.

Indomabilis, ^e, that may not be made tame.

Indomitus, wild, unbroken.

Indubitatus, ta, tum, undoubted.

Induciae, tru^e, or peace for a certain time.

Induco, xi, cere, to induce, to bring in, to persuade, to illure, to incline,
to deceive, to cancel to defete, to put on, properly hosen or shoen, to infixe
or stablish* Ita induxi in animu^, I have infixed or stablyshed in my mind.

Inductio, a form of argument, proceeding from the particulars unto the
vniuersalles. also an argument, which by getting the assent in things not
doubtful, proves the thing which is intended.

Indulco, aui, are, and indulcoro, aui, are, to make sweet.

Indulgenter, favorably, without rygour.

Indulgentia, and Indulgitas, gentylnes in sufferaunce, also mercy.

Indulgeo, dulsi, gere, to grant lightly, to consent to a request. Also to
give respite, to be ge^tyll and merciful, to pardon.

Indulge ualetudini ruae, take heed to thy health

Nimium illi indulges, thou carest to much for him, thou folowest him to much,
thou makyst to much of him.

Indumentum, a garment.

Induo, dui, ere, to put on a garment or other like thing, to transform or
translate, to cast in, to annoynte.

Induere personam alterius, to speak in the name or stead of an other man.

Induere personam iudicis, to represent or do the office of a judge.

Induere posts pice, to lay on pitche on the posts. Induere sibi ingeniu^
nouu^, to change his nature.

Speciem latronis induere, to use the fascion of a thief.

Vaetustatem induere, to become old.

Indui fructu, to be chargid or laded with fruit

Indui sua confessione, to be taken by his own confession.

Induit se in florem, it blossometh.

Induperator, oris, an emperor.

Indus, a noble river, which comes from the great mountain of Taurus, and
incloseth Inde on the west, and runs into the Indian sea. Into this river
runs.xv. great famous ryuers, the least of them more than the great river
of Donow, where he is brodest. Strabo says that they which do write most
inoderately of Indus, done affirm that he is in bread fifty furlung, which is
twelve miles and a half. The water thereof causes great settilitie when it
ouerfloweth, and thereof many sundry pleasant and wholesome fruits do spring
without labor.

Indusiarius, a maker of peticotes.

Indusiatus, clad in a peticote.

Indusium, a peticote.

Industria, a virtue comprehendynge both study and diligence, industry.

Industry, wyttyly.

Industrius, he that is wytty and active.

Induuiae, apparayle,

Inebrior, aris, ari, to make drunk, or be drunken.

Inedia, hungar.

Ineffigiatus, ta, tum, vnfascioned, without good proportion.

Ineo, iui, ire, to begin, to go in, to deserve, to get, to win, to obtain,
to treat. Inire is sometime where the male leapeth the female, as the horse
keuereth the mare. Also to consider or understand.

Inire cursum, to begin his course.

Falsam gratiam inire, to get faint or unsure friends.

Inire foedus, to make a leage or treatye of peace.

Inire fugam, to flee as men do in battle.

Gratiam inire, to get thank or friends with some pleasure done unto them.

Inire magistratum, to enter in an office.

Inire pacem, to make peace.

Inire bellum, to make war.

Inire uiam, to find the way.

Rationem inire, to seek mean, or to consider how a thing may be done.

Inire societatem, to fall in feloweshyp with one.

Inire suffragia, to assemble people for an election, or to consent to any
matter.

Inita, subductaque ratione, al thing rekened or well accounted.

Ineunte aetate, in youth.

Ineunte uere, at the beginning of the spring of the year.

Ineptio, iui, ire, to trifle, to do a thing unmeet for the purpose.

Ineptus, ta, tum, unapt.

Ineptus, a triflar, using nothing in order, unapt to the purpose.

Inermis, unarmed, a man yolden.

Iners, inertis, without any science, or craft, an ydell person. also
unprofitable.

Inertia, lack of craft, ydelnes.

Inerticula, a vine, whereof the wine is so good, that none yuell proceeds
thereof.

Inesco, sci, scere, to cram or fode. also to deceive

Ineuitabilis, le, that can not be eschewed.

Inexercitus, ta, tum, not exercised, unoccupied.

Inexhaustus, a, um, never reasynge.

Inexplorato, without search.

Inexputabilis, le, that may not be numbered.

Inextricabilis, le, that can not be shaken of, or dissolved.

Infabre, vncunningely, vncraftylye, ill favored.

Infamia, infamy.

Infamis, me, infamed.

Infamis digitus, the myddle finger.

Infamo, aui, are, to infame or ill report.

Infandum, that may not be spoken.

Infans, a child that can not yet speak. It is also every thing that is very
young. Also it signifies not eloquent. some time an ideote that can not speak.

Infantia, chyldehod^ also folyshenes.

Infantilis, le, pertayninge to chyldhode.

Infarcio, cij, and ciui, cire, to infarse or stuff, or fill.

Infatuo, aui, are, to make folyshe.

Infector, toris, a dyar of colors.

Infectus, tus, dyenge or stayni^ge.

Infectus, ta, tum, infected, dyed, stained, poisoned. also undone or not done,
not made.

Infecta pace, without any peace made.

Infectum reddere, to undo that which is done.

Infensus, displeased, moved with anger or hate toward an other. also he that
bearith malice.

Inferiae, sacrifice done to infernal gods.

Infernalis, le, infernal.

Infernas, atis, the low.

Inferne, allow, or benethe.

Infernus, hell.

Infernus, na, number, low.

Infero, intuli, infer, to bring in, to throw in, to add to, to cast in,
to conclude.

Infer arma, to make war.

Infer crimen alicui, to lay to ones charge.

Infer sermonem, to talk.

Stuprum infer, to commyt adultery or fornication with a kynswoman.

Inferus, ra, rum, where nothing is lower.

Infestiuus, ua, um, unmeet for disporte.

Infesto, aui, are, to do displeasure with sundry incursions or rodes.

Infestus, a mortal enemy.

Infestus, ta, tum, that stands against a man to the intent to indamage him.

Infesta signa, standerdes or bauers displayed in battle on both parts.

Infestum mare, the sea occupied with pirates and robbers.

Infestus ager, a dangerous countreye to pass through.

Infestus animus, a malicious mind.

Infibulo, aui, are, to claspe to gether.

Inficias ire, to doubt or deny.

Inficiator, oris, he that denies.

Infici, feci, ficere, to dye clothe, to slain or infecte.

Inficior, aris, ari, to deny or disaffyrme.

Infidus, da, dum, unfaithful.

Infimates, the base people.

Infimo, aui, are, to bring low.

Infimus, a, um, the lowest or most base.

Infirmitas, tatis, vnstablenesses, weakness, sickness.

Infirmo, aui, are, to make weak.

Infirmus, ma, um, unstable, sick, feeble.

Infit, he said, he began.

Inflammo, aui, are, to inflame or set on fire.

Inflecto, ctere, to bow or plye.

Infligo, xi, gere, poenam aut opprobrium, to punyshe or rebuke.

Influo, xi, ere, to run in to a thing, as water or other licour does.

Informo, aui, are, to shape or form, to enfourme or teach good manners.

Inforo, aui, are, to declare at the bar in a place of judgment, to plead.
Also to perf^cate or make a hole.

Infortunium, ill chance.

Infra, within, benethe: in number it signifies less or fewer.

Infractio, slouthfulnes.

Infractus, ta, tum, unbroken, sure. Infractus animi, styf of courage. sometime
it signifies discouraged.

Infrendes, children lacking teeth.

Infrendo, di, dear, to crashe the teth for anger

Infringo, fregi, gere, to break to pieces.

Infrunitus, a fool, that knows not how to use a thing.

Infuco, care, to color a thing, intending deceypte.

Infulae, be the labelles, which do hang on every side of a mytar. It was in
the old time the attire that priests did wear on their heads. They were
also tapets of linen, wherewith temples were hanged.

Infumibulum, the shanke or tonnel of a chymneye.

Infumo, aui, are, to dry in the smoke.

Infund^bulum, a tounnell, wherinto lic^ure is poured, when vessels are
filled.

Infundo, fudi, fundere, to pour in.

Infurnibulum, a piele, wherewith bread is put into the oven.

Infuscare ui^^m merum, to alay wine with water.

Ingemo, gemui, ere, to lamente or bewail much.

Ingeniculor, aris, ari, to bow the knee, or make courtesy.

Ingeniculus, a figure among the sterres, called now Hercules.

Ingeniosus, wytty.

Ingenium, the proper name of a thing. alsoo wit.

Ingens, it is, wonderful great.

Ingens animus, a great courage.

Ingenuatus, come of an honest stock or kynrede.

Ingenue, freely, frankly.

Ingenuitas, tatis, fredome.

Ingenuus, a free man borne, or a gentylman.

Ingenuus, a, um, natural.

Ingenua facta, noble acts.

Ingero, gessi, gerere, to bring in, to myxte.

Ingerere cibum, to give to one meat.

Ingerere dicta in alique^, to chyde with one to say ill of one.

Ingerere malum, to do displeasure.

Omnia mala ingerebat, he did the warst that he could.

Osculum ingerere, to kiss one passing by.

Ingerere pugno, to stryke with the fyste.

Se ingerere, to advance him self in company, or to be malapert.

Ingitas, tatis, poverty.

Inglorius, a, um, of no renoume or fame.

Ingluuies, gluttony. also the craye or gorge in birds.

Ingrandesco, sci, scere, to ware great.

Ingratijs, maulgre one.

Ingratis, against my will, or our will.

Ingratus, ta, tum unthankful, displeasante, constrained, or against a
man's will. also unkind, and not remembrynge frendeshyp, or benevolence.

Ingrauesco, sci, scere, to ouercharge.

Ingredior, eris, gredi, to enter.

Ingruo, ui, ere, to invade, to be imminent, properly spoken of battle or
tempest.

Inguina, the privy members of men and womenne.

Inguinaria, an herb which cures the diseases in privy members.

Inguinium, a city in Liguria, aunciente and rich.

Ingurgito, aui, are, to devour gluttonousely.

Inhabilis, le, unapt.

Inhabito, tare, to dwell in a place.

Inhereo, to cleave or stycke to.

Inheresco, sci, scere, to stick fast.

Inhalo, aui, are, to draw in brethe.

Inhibeo, bui, bear, to forbid.

Inhibere imperium, to have charge or rule.

Inhibere nauem, to cast ancre, or to s^aye a ship, which is under sail,
that she sail not a full course.

Inhibere supplicia alicui, to execute tourmentes on one, or to put one to
death.

Inhio, aui, are, to gape. also to covet much.

Inhoneste, dishonestly.

Inhonestus, ta, tum, dishonest.

Inhonor, without honor.

Inhonoratus, ta, tum, lacking honor.

Inhorreo, rui, rere, Inhorresco, scere, to abhor, to quake for fear.

Inhospes, he that will lodge no man.

Inhospita tecta, houses where no man may lodge.

Inhospitalis, le, unapt for lodging.

Inhumanus, cruel, vncourteys.

Inhumo, are, to put into the ground.

Inibi, even there, anon, among them.

Inijcio, ieci, ijcere, to cast or throw in, to cast at some thing, to throw
with violence, to put on.

Inijcere manum, to scase or take possession of a thing.

Inijcere manus in aliquem, to apprehend or attache one.

Inijcere scrupulum alicui, to put one in a fantasy.

Inijcere studium alicui, to cause one to study.

Manus iniectio, a seaser of land.

Inimicitia, hostility, contrary to amity.

Inimico, caui, care, to make ennemies.

Inimicor, caris, cari, to practice hostility.

Inimicus, an ennemy.

Ininde, from thens.

Inique, mischeuously, or unjustly.

Iniquitas, tatis, parcialitie, contrary to justice.

Iniquus, a, um, not even or plain. also not indifferente or just. sometime
great, straighte, or narrow.

Iniquo animo far, to be myscontented or sorowefull.

Initiatus, instructed or entered in rules concerning religion.

Initio, aui, are, to instruct in things concerning religion. also to begin
to do a thing.

Initior, aris, ari, to begin. also to be weaned as children be.

Initium, a beginning, a sacrifice to Ceres.

Inito, aui, are, to walk in.

Initor, toris, a stalyon.

Initus, the leaping or keuerynge of a mare by a horse.

Iniuges, cattle never yoked or broken, which were sometime sacrifised.

Iniungo, xi, gere, to inioyne, to appoynte, to lay on, as a man will ad to a
great burdeyne.

Iniuria, wrong, injury, reproach, damage. taken like an aduerbe, it
signifies without cause, without deserte.

Iniuria tua, through thy default.

Iniuriosus, a wrong doet.

Iniurius, a, um, wrongful, he that does any thing against the law.

Iniussu imperatoris, without the emperors commandment.

Iniustus, ta, tum, unjust, also exceeding just measure.

Unjust, unjustly.

Innascor, sci, to be engendered in one.

Innatus, ta, tum, ingendered.

Innato, aui, are, to swym in a place.

Innitor, teris, inniti, to assaye, to endeavor.

Innocens, vnharmfull, innocent.

Innocentia, integrity, true intent.

Innocuus, a, um, vnharmfull, he that does none harm.

Innotesco, sci, scere, to be known.

Innoxius, a, um, wherein is no damage, that which can do none harm.

Innumerato, in a redynes,

Innuo, nui, ere, to grant or assent with nod^dynge of the head,

Ino, was daughter of Cadmus, wife of Athansas king of Thebes, which her
husband being mad, and Learchus her son slain, she threw her self into
the sea.

Inocco, aui, are, to harowe in.

Inoculatio, graffynge between the rynde and the wood.

Inoculo, aui, are, to graffe between the rynde and the wood.

Inodorus, without savor.

Inoffensus, unhurt.

Inofficiosum testamentum, where the father by testament gives away from his
son his lands or goods without cause.

Inolesco, sci, scere, to wax great.

Inopia, poverty, lack of things necessary.

Inopinatus, unthought on, or unlooked for.

Inopiosus, a, um, needy.

Inops, pis, pore, lackyng help. also unburied

Inops ab amicis, dispuruayed of friends.

Inops amicorum, idem.

Inora, beasts without mouths.

In posterum, at the last, in conclusion.

Inprimis, specially, pryncipally, chiefly.

In promptu, ready, or in a redines.

In promptu esse, to be plain or without any difficulty.

In promptu ponere, to set forth in sight.

In quam, I said.

In quantum, in as much, or for as much.

Inquies, quietis, and Inquietus, ta, tum, unrestful, unquiet.

Inquieto, aui, are, to unquiet or trouble.

Inquilino, naui, nare, to dwell in a strange place.

Inquilinus, he that dwells in a place, where neither he nor his auncetours
were borne.

Inquino, aui, are, to defyle or polute.

Inquio, I say.

Inquiro, siui, quirere, to inquire.

Inquisitius, more intentifely, more inwardely.

Insania, madness, peuyshenes, dotage, frowardenes.

Insanio, iui, ire, to be mad or peuyshe, to dote, to do unadvisedly.

Insanitas, madness.

Insanus, mad, peuyshe, dotynge, regardyng no counsel, froward, intractable.

Insatiabilis, le, insatiable.

Inscendo, dear, to go up, or to clyme.

Insciens, vnwyttynge: also not thinking on that he does.

Insciencer, ignorantly.

Inscientia, ignorance.

Inscitia, idem.

Inscius, a, um, ignorant.

Inscribo, scripsi, scribere, to write in or upon, to name or entitle.

Inscriptus, a, um, unwritten, written upon, named or entitled.

Insecta, be all flies and worms, that be divided in their bodies the head
and breast from the bealy and tail: as bees, waspes, emoces or pismeres, and
such like.

Insequor, eris, sequi, to follow or pursue.

Infero, serui, rere, insertum, to set in, to join. when it has inseui,
ins^tum, it sygnyfieth to graffe.

Inserto, aui, are, to set to.

Insertorium, the bond or thonge, wherewith a tergate or buckeler is hanged on
a man's arm.

Inseruio, uiui, ire, to seru^.

Insideo, es, sedi, fidere, to sit on, to sit in, or be in, to besiege, to
abide in a place.

Insidiae, wyles to intray a man, er he be ware.

Insidior, aris, ari, to practice wiles, to entrap or betray a man.

Insidiose, wylily, craftily.

Insidiosus, a, um, full of wyles.

Insido, is, sidi, re, to enter to the intent to abide.

Insigne, a notable sign or token.

Insignia, signs or tokens of honor, whereby every astate or great authority
is known. a robes, maces, swords borne vpeyghte, cappes of mayntenance, and
other like things. Also some time tokens of doctrine and virtue: as staves
typped with silver, which bedells bear before doctors, hoodes furred,
crowns of laurel. it may be also taken for the arms or bages of gentylmen.

Insignio, iui, ire, to note with some sign. also to doube knights.

Insignis, ne, notable, excellent, marked with some special token to be
known.

Insignite, and insigniter, notably.

Insilio, liui, ire, to leap in or up.

Insimul, together.

Insimulatio, an accusation or appeal.

Insimulo, aui, are, to accuse or appeal. also to feign or dissemble.

Insinuatio, a colorable and crafty beginning of an oration, dissembling
sum thing, where the matter may not be fauourablye herd.

Insinuatus, a, um, wound to gether.

Insinuo, aui, are, to bring in to, to conioyne, to put in a man's mind
couertelye and craftily.

Aliquem alteri insinuare, to bring one in favor with an other.

In causam insinuare se, to consider the gru^de of a matter.

Insinuare se, by little and little to crepe into favor or credence.

Insinuare se in consuetudinem, to enter in aquayntaunce, or become familiar
with one.

Insinuare se in sermonem aliquorum, to cterlase communication with them, which
be already talking of a matter.

Insipidus, a, um, vusauery.

Insipiens, entis, without discretion.

Insisto, institi, insistere, to set fast and fyrmely, to endeavor, to provoke
or solicit. sometime to assyste. Insistebat in manu Cereris dextera
simulachrum pulcherrime factum victoriae. There was in the right hand of
Ceres an image of vyctory most pleasauntly wroughte.

Aliquod negotium insistere, to go about some affayre or business.

Hastae insistere, to lean on a spear.

Mente and animo insutere in rem aliquam, to employe al wit and mind on some
thing.

Omnes itinera insistant sua, let every man go his own way.

Quam insistam uiam? what way shall I keep?

Vestigijs alienis insistere, to follow other men's doings.

Insistere uestigijs laudum suarum, to continue in his well doing.

Vrijs insistere aut ingredi, to carry by the way or to go forth.

Insitio, onis, graffynge.

Insitium, the stock.

Insitium, the graffe. Also a iegot or other like meat stuffed with flesh and
eggs chopped or mynced.

Insitiuus, ua, uum, infarsed or stuffed.

Insolabiliter, without comfort, desperatelye.

Insolatio, a sunnynge.

Insolatus, a, um, sunned.

Insolens, not wont or accustomed, haut, arrogant, presumptuous.

Insolenter, arrogantly.

Insolentia, seld omnes of use in any thing, vnhauntynge of a place. Also
presumption, wanton pride.

Insolitus, not wont.

Insolo, aui, are, to dry in the sun, to bleach

Insomnes noctes, nyghtes without sleep.

Insomnia, ae, lack of power to sleep.

Insomniosus, sleapy, or he that sleapeth much.

Insomnium, a vain dream.

Insons, so ntis, innocent or not gylty.

Insonus, a, um, without noise.

Inspectius, more auysedly.

Inspecto, taui tare, to behold attentiuelye, to wait on.

Inspectio, a beholdynge, an ouersyghte, a controllement.

Inspector, an ouerseer, a controller.

Inspicio, spexi, cere, to behold, to ouersee, to control, to consider a
thing thoroughly.

Inspico, aui, are, to make a thing small, like to a wheat reed.

Inspiro, aui, are, to inspire, to blow in.

Instans, it is, an instant, the least part of time.

Instanter, instantly.

Instantia, things that be present.

Instantia, dilygence.

Instar, as it were, or like.

Instat, it is nigh, it is come, it is at hand. Caesar ubi se diutius duci
intellexit, and diem instare, qua die frumentum militibus metiri oportebat,
When Caesar perceived, that he was delayed, and the day was nyghe come, when
he must needs deliver corn to his men of war.

Instatio, the instant time.

Instauratio, reedifieng, repairing, renewynge.

Instauro, aui, are, to new make, or begin again any thing sometime to renew
or reform, to reedyfye.

Instaurare bellum, to make war eftsoon.

Insterno, straui, sternere, to cover, to spread.

Instigo, aui, are, to stir or prycke forward.

Instigo, inxi, gere, to meue inwardly.

Instinctus, inwardly moved.

Instita, a purfle.

Instito, aui, are, to repugne or withstand.

Institor, oris, a chapman, a mercer, also he that sells apparayle and fine
stuff, going about therewith, also a marchantes factour.

Institorius, a, um, pertaynyng to chapman.

Actio institoria, an action against the master for the act of the factour.

Instituo, tui, tuere, to institute, to begin, to instruct, or teache, to
ordeyn. Aueo scire quaru^ reru^ ratione^ instituat, I would fain know where
about he gothe, or what he intends to do.

Senex institui lyra non erubescebat, being old, he was not ashamed to be
taught to play on the harp.

Accusationem instituere, to commence an action, or make a complaynt by byll.

Astutiam instituere, to invent a crafty mean.

Certamen sibi instituere cum aliquo, to be at varyance with one.

Collegium instituere, to found a college.

Consuetudinem instituere, to enter into famyliaritie.

Delectum militum instituere, to raise men to the wars.

Quaestum sibi instituere, to begin a way to have gain or profit by it.

Vitam sapienter instituere, to prepare him self to live wisely.

Instituta, ancient manners and customs, also ordynances.

Pro meo instituto, for my purpose.

Institutiones, instructions in doctrine.

Insto, as, institi, stare, to require instantely, to solicit, to styck to, to
resist, to persyst, to prese on, to come on, or immediately follow. also to be
nygh. Vestigijs alicuius instare, to follow one foot by foot.

Instat, it is now. Periculum instat, danger is at hand.

Instant a me tibi dona, I am at the point to do the good.

Instratum, a counterpoynte. Also it sygnifieth all tapisey, which serves to
cover any thing. also the trappier or apparayle of an horse, an horseclothe.

Instrumentum, an instrument or tool. also ordinance of war, vessel, and
all necessaries of householde and husbandry. sometime it sygnifieth a deed or
charter concerning land, dettes, or couenauntes.

Instructus, ta, tum, instruct, taught, furnished, garnysshed.

Instructiores peditum copiae, the foot men were in better order and better
appointed.

Vir instructissimus, a man furnished with all things necessary or convenient.

Instruo, struxi, struere, to set in order or array, to instruct, to fournishe,
to prepare.

Domum instruere, to garnyshe a house with all things necessary.

Epulas instruere, to provide for a feast or banquet. Insidias instruere, to
prepare thingis to intrappe or deceive one.

Instruendae fraudi aliquanto intentior, somewhat busy in deuysyng how to
deceive.

Insubres, Lumbardes, properly men of the duchy of Melayn.

Insucco, aui, are, to soke in lycour.

Insuesco, sueui, scere, to be wont.

Insuetus, ta, tum, not used.

Insula, an isle inuyronned with water. it is also a house in a town, having
none other house joined to it, but streets on every side of it.

Insularis, re, belongyng to an isle.

Insularius, a, um, most vile, proprely men bauyshed into yles to dygge metal.

Insulatus, ta, tum, made an isle.

Insulto, taui, tare, to leap up, to scorn or speak in the reproach of a man.

Insultura, a leapyng up or into a thing.

Insum, inesse, to be in some thing.

In summa, universally, always, finally.

Insummo, are, to fynyshe.

Insumo, psi, ere, to spend or lay out money.

Insuper, furthermore, moreover.

Insusurro, aui, are, to whisper in ones care.

Integer, gra, grum, if it be spoken of age, it signifies young and lusty, if
it be spoken of a man, it signifies honest in all points and qualities: in a
thing it signifies entier or hole. also safe

Integer aeui, lusty of age.

Integrasco, sci, scere, to be renewed.

Integritas, honesty without corruption, innocence. Corporis integritas, good
disposition of the body.

Integro, aui, are, to begin again, to renew.

Integre, truly and diligently.

Integrum esse, to be at a man's liberte, or in his power. Non est integrum Gn.
Pompeio co^silio iam uti tuo. It is not now in Pompeys power to do after your
counsel. Ego, si mihi esset integrum, susciperem hoc crimen. If I were at my
liberty, I would take that blame upon me. Constituent quid agant quibus
integrum, est, They which yet have done nothing, let them take heed what they
do.

Si mihi esset integru^, if it were in my power, or if it were to do that I
have done.

In integrum restituere, to bring it to the first estate, to restore it to the
point that it was at In integro esse, is spoken where in any matter or affair,
there is nothing done, but that every man may do as it lyketh him. Sed quonia^
hec ia^ neque in integro esse possunt, but forasmoche as there is no remedy,
or that these things may not be helped, or may not be in as good point as they
were.

Intellectualis, of understanding.

Intellectus, understanding.

Intelligentia, the perceyuyng of the mind.

Intelligibile, that may be understand.

Intelligo, lexi, ligere, to understand.

Intemerata, perfect sacrifyces, all things obseruyd.

Intemeratus, ta, tum, undefiled, uncorrupted.

Intemperans, he that does every thing without order or measure.

Intemperiae, goddesses having power to do harm

Intemperies, and intemperantia, vnteperatnes.

Intempesta nox, mydnyghte, when all thing is in silence.

Intempestas, tatis, the caulme of the water, when there is no tempest.

Inte^pestiue, untimely, out of due time or order.

Intempestiuus, a, u^, thing out of time or season.

Intendo, di, dear, to bend or stretche also to look diligently on a thing,
to knyt or tie, to enforce with might.

Intendere animum, to set or fyxe the mind.

Intendere formulam, to bring an action against one.

In tenebris saltare, signifies to do a thing unadvisedly, and without any
judgment.

Intentatus, not assayed.

Intentio, signifies not intent or purpose, but forth act that is appointed
or executed.

Intento, aui, are, to menace.

Intentus, ta, tum, set or fyxed.

Inter, between, among.

Inter coenam, for in coena.

Inter nos amamus, we love together one an other. Inter opus, whiles he was
busy.

Inter paucos dies, in a short time.

Inter poenam, being to tourment.

Inter sacrum and saxum, in the point to perish and be utterly lost.

Inter uias, on the way rydyng or going.

Interamna, a city in Italy.

Interana, the inwardes of a man or beast,

Interaneus, a, um, that which is within.

Interaresco, sci, scere, to be dried up.

Interbibo, by, bear, to drink all out.

Intercalaris, re, and intercalarius, a, um, put or set between.

Intercalaris dies, the day of the leap year.

Intercalaris mensis, the month in the which certain days were set, that
lacked to make the year complete, which month is Februarye Read abundantly
hereof in Solino and Macrobio, which would be tedious to write in english,
specially in this Dictionary.

Intercalaris uersus, a syngular verse often repeted among other verses. Some
do call it, in english balades and songs, the foot or refrete of a ditie.

Intercalo, aui, are, to set or put between.

Intercapedo, dinis, a space or pause.

Intercedo, cessi, cedere, to make intercession, also to go between, or be
between. Quadringe^toru^ remigu^ obsequio co^tra se intercedit. He let
that.iiii. hundred watermen that rowed did not obey him. Vaeteres mihi
necessitudines cu^ his omnibus intercedunt, There is great amity of a long
time between us. Tribuni inter cesserunt, The Tribunes did let or prohibyte.

Intercedit mihi tecum amicitia, There is amity between the and me.

Pro alio intercedere, to answer for an other man. Intercessere pauci dies, in
a few days after, a little while after.

Quae ratio tibi cum illo intercesserat? What acquaynta^ce had thou with
him? or what had thou to do with him?

Intercessio Tribunorum, a let or prohibitio^ of the Tribunes against the
authority of other officers.

Intercessor, he that lettith a matter, that it may not go forward.

Intercido, cidi, ere, to cut su^der in the mids.

Intecido, cidi, ere, to decay or perish between this and that.

Intercino, nere, to sing between or in the middell of a thing, as in comedies
or enterludes, whiles new personages be in preparyng.

Intercipio, caepi, ere, to prevent or apprehende one unware, to take in the
mids, or in the mean while, sometime to take all.

Intercipere iter, to keep or enclose a way, that men may not pass.

Intercipere literas, to take letters on the way from him that carries them.

Intercipere sermonem, to dysapoynt one of his purpose.

Intercisa and porrecta, cut of and made longer.

Intercisi dies, were days divided, part holyday part warkeday.

Intercludo, si, ere, to shut in, to stop, to let.

Intercludere corporibus suis aduentum inimicorum, To be them selves in the
war, to let their enemies to enter.

Dolorem intercludi, to be enuyronned with heaviness.

Fugam intercludere, to keep the passages that they escape not.

Libertatem intercludere, to let them of their liberty.

Spem co^meatus intercludere, to put them from hope to have vitayles.

Intercolumnium, the space between pyllars.

Intercus, cutis, a disease between the skyn and the flesh: When it is an
adjective it sygnifieth inward. Intercutibus uitijs madentes, ouerwet with
inward vices.

Intercutaneus, a, um, that is within the skin.

Interdico, xi, cere, to prohibit greuousely. also to resyst or let.

Interdico alicui aqua and igni, was a condemnation in Rome, whereby one was
deprived from the usage of water and fire, whereby he was constreyned to depart
out of the limits of the empire of Rome.

Interdicere de ui hominibus armatis, to ordain that he by whose means one
supposes that he is put out of possession with force, shall set him eftsoon
in possession.

Vestigijs interdicere, to forbid one that he go not a certain way.

Nihil interdico, I will not let the, I care not for it.

Interdictum, a prohibytion, a menace, sometime a determination of the
possession of a thing in debate.

Interdiu, in the day time.

Interdum, sometime.

Interea, in the mean while* also nevertheless.

Interealoci, in the mean space.

Intereo, rij, ire, to dye utterly.

Interequito aui, are, to ride between.

Interesse, to be present. Publicis consilijs interfuimus, we were present at
the comnune cou^sayl. also to be between. Id morari uictoriam rati, quod
interesset amnis, supposing that the cause why that they had not ^orthewith
the vyctory, was forasmoch as the river was between them. Magni sua putabant
interesse, They thought that it made much for the purpose, or for their
profit. Triginta ferme interfuere anni, There were almost thyrty years between
them.

Interest mea, tua, sua, nostra, uestra, it behouith me, the, him. us, you, or
it pertayneth to me, the, him, etc. Also it makes matter, or is a diversity.
Si nihil interest regis, peto ut dum dico, uinculis liberer, If it be no
mattier to the king, I pray you, whiles I do speak, let me be without gyues.
Sometime it signifies to be in the mids. Nihil interest tui, It is no matter
to the. Nihil interest eius, it makes no matter to him. Interest eius, It is
his part, or it is for his profit. Quid ergo inter est, proferantur, nec ne?
What makes it matter, where they be brought forth or no? Nec interest
discentium, quibus quidque no minibus appelletur, It makes no matter to them
that do learn, by what names any thing is called. Permagni interest, It makes
much of the matter. Inter hominem and beluam hoc maxim interest, This is the
most diuersytie between a man and a beast.

Interficio, feci, to slay.

Interfluo, xi, ere, to flow between.

Interfoemineum, a woman's privy token, whereby she is known from a man.

Interfundo, fudi, fundere, to pour between.

Intergerimus, a wall added to an old foundation or wall to sustain it.

Interhaec, in this mean time.

Interi, they that be within.

Interiaceo, cui, cere, to put between, to cast between.

Interibi, in the myddle of that place.

Interiectus, ta, tum, put or cast between.

Interiectae collibus ualles, valeys lyenge between the hills.

Interiecti inter philosophos, and eos qui rem pub. administrent, Which be
neither philosophers nor yet mynysters of a common weal, but participatours of
the one and the other.

Interiectum tempus, the mean time.

Interncio, ieci, ijcere, to lay or put between.

Interim, in the mean space or time, in the mean season. also sometime,
sodeinly, other while.

Interimo, emi, imere, to kylle.

Interior, and interius, the inner.

Interitus, death.

Interiungo, ere, to tarry.

Interius, more inward.

Interlino, nere, to enterlyne.

Interloquor, eris, qui, to speak in a man's tale.

Interluceo, cere, to shine between, or in the mids.

Interluco, care, to make a glade in themyddell of a wood.

Interlunium, the spare of time, in the which neither the old moon does
appear, nor the new moon is seen.

Interluo, ere, to flow between, to wasshe between meals, or other acts.

Intermedius, a, um, in the myddell.

Intermestris luna, the new moon at the very change.

Intermestrum, the time when the moon is at the point to change

Intermico, to shine in the mids.

Interminor, aris, ari, to thretten soore.

Intermitto, tere, to leave or put of for a time.

Consuetudinem intermittere, to forbear family ariti^ or resort.

Intermorior, to dye utterly.

Intermortuus, a, um, dead for a season.

Internecio, an universal slaughter.

Internitio, idem.

Interneco, are, to slay all at ones.

Internectiuum bellum, war to the utter dystruction and death.

Internicinum bellum, war to the vttrance.

Internodium, a joint in a man's finger. also a joint in a straw or reed.

Internosco, scere, to know a thing among other things.

Internuncius, a messanger or mean between two persons being at varyance.

Internus, na, number, that which is within, or inward.

Inter opus, even in the doing.

Interordinium, a space between that which is in order.

Interordo, dinis, idem.

Interpellatio, a let in a man's busynes.

Interpellator, a distourber or letter or other, that they may not do their
busynes.

Interpello, are, to interrupt or let one that speaks or does any thing. also
to require, to ask or demand.

Interpellare debitorem, to call on a dettour.

Interpensiua, certain pieces of timber, which are set from the corners of
the wall, to the ends of the rafters, to convey rain water into the spoutes.

Interpensiui parietes, walls which rise upon an other wall, and have no
foundation in the ground.

Interpola, new inventions or devises.

Interpolator, oris, and Interpolatrix, tricis, he or she that refreshes old
things, and do make them seem new.

Interpolis, le, Interpolus, la, lum, renewed, refresshed.

Interpolio, are, to put or set between, to rem^e, or refreshe any thing.

Interpono, sui, nere, to put between, to resyste.

Interponere fidem publicam, to promise upon the credence and consent of all the people.

Interpremo, to stop or close in.

Interpres, pretis, an interpreter or tra^slater, also a stikler between two,
which are at varia^ce.

Interpretamentum, and interpretatio, an interpretation or translation.

Interpretor, aris, ari, to interpret, expoune, or translate, also to judge or
esteem.

Virtutem ex consuetudine uitae interpretemur, Let us judge the virtue of the
person by his custom of living.

In bonam partem interpretari, to take it in good part.

Perverse interpretari, to mean shrewdly.

Interputo, are, to cut between.

Interrafile, that which is plain betwyxt two parts, graven or imbosed.

Interrex, regis, he that rules in the mean time between the ceassyng of the
authority of one principal governor, by death, or otherwise, until an other
be elected into the same office.

Interregnum, the said mean time of governance or rule.

Interrogo, are, to demand a question.

Interrogati legibus, to be tried by examination, that they had offended
against the laws.

Interrumpo, rupi, pere, to break in the mids

Interscalmia, the spaces between the oores in a boot or galey.

Interscapilium, the space between the shulders under the neck.

Interscindo, di, dear, to cut in the mids.

Intersepio, sepsi, pire, to divide in the myddell with some enclosure.

Interseptae, the gristell, which makes partition between the nosethrylles.

Intersero, seui, serere, to sow or set between or in the mids.

Intersono, are, to make noise in the mids, or between.

Interspiro, are, to spryng up in the mids.

Interstertio, to straw between, or throw things between.

Interstitium, a distance or spare between.

Intersum, interesse, to be present, also to differ, to be diverse. Stulto
intelligens quid interest? What diversity is there between a fool and a wise
man?

Intertextus, a, um, wouen or wrought between or tinselde, as cloth of tynsell
or baudkyn.

Intertrigo, ginis, gallyng, which happens by the occasyon of sweat between
the legs, the toes, or fyngers.

Intertrimentum, the waste or loss of a thing by wearyng or occupienge.

Interturbo, are, to trouble excedyngly.

Interuaco, are, to be vacant or void between.

Interuallum, a space between.

Interuello, ere, to pluck up here and there.

Interuenio, ire, to come in the mean while, to be present among other.

Interuenium, the space between the veins.

Interuerto, ere, to take away craftily or falsely.

Interuiso, ere, to visit among, or now and than

Interula, a shyrte or smock.

Intestabilis, he which by the law can make no testament, sometime it
signifies detestable.

Intestatus, he that dies without making any testament, intestate. also he
that dies making none heir by testament. also a man out of credence, whom no
man will take for a wytnes.

Intestina, the bowels, or inward part of man, or other thing lyuinge.

Intestinum bellum, where people do war within their own realm.

Intestium odium, hate with heart and mind mortal hatrede.

Intestinum opus, the inward building of timber and parget.

Intimus, most inward, most secret. also he whom a man most specially
favors.

Intingo, xi, gere, to deep, as one does his fyngar into licour.

Intorqueo, si, quere, to thruste in by throwing of a darte, or other like
thing. also to turn or wind in.

Intra, within.

Intra fama^, less tha^ the opinion the me^ have.

Intra modu^, less tha^ a mean, short of a mean

Intrarius idem quod intimus.

Intrarius amicus, a special friend.

Intrico, care, to wrappe.

Intrinsecus, within.

Intritus, broyed in a mortar.

Intro into a place.

Intro, are, to enter (...) in.

Introcludo, si, dear, to shut in.

Introduco, xi, cere, to bring or lead in.

Introeo, iui, ire, to go in.

Introgredior, eris, gredi, to come in.

Intromitto, misi, mittere, to let in.

Introrsus, into, within.

Introrumpo, rupi, rumpere, to break in.

Introspicio, spexi, spicere, to look in.

Introuoco, are, to call in.

Intueor, eris, eri, to behold, to take heed.

Intus, in a place.

Intusium, a shyrt or smock.

Intutus, ta, tum, unsure.

Intybum, seems to be the general name of all kinds of endive and cykory. yet
Dioscorides divides it into.ii. kinds, the one wyld, the other which is
sowe^, and of that also he makith two sorts, the one with a broad leaf, which
I take to be endive, the other with a narow leaf which I take for the common
cykory, that which is wild, is called Erraticum.

Inuado, si, re, to invade, to enter, to apprehend.

Inualesco, lui, scere, to wax strong, to be confirmed or stablyshed.

Inualetudo, dinis, feebleness.

Inualidus, da, dum, feeble, weak.

Inuectiuae orationes, orations made against one, in reprouyng his manners and
living.

Inueho, uexi, uehere, to carry in a thing, to carry a thing into a place.

Inuehor, eris, uehi, to rebuke one vehemently, and with violent and foore
words.

Inuenio, ire, to find a thing which a man seeks for.

In uerba iurare, to be sworn as princis counsaylours and seruantis be sworn
unto them. also to do fealty.

In uersum, in number and order.

Inuerto, tere, to turn in, to turn up so down, to turn in and out after
the vulgar speech, properly to turn every thing contrary to the right form
and fascion.

Inuestes, yo^g children about without hear on their bodies

Inuestigabilis, le, that may not be found with seki^g.

Inuestigo, are, to seek out, to find in seeking, to inquire.

Inuestio, iui, ire, to adorn or garnyshe a thing.

Inueterati, old shrewes or unthrifts, men in lykyng unthriftily waxed old.

Inueteresco, raui, scere, to wear out for age, to be out of use, to be aged or
old. also worn out, almost consumyd.

Inuicem, together, one the other. Inuice^ diligu^t, they do love one an other.
also it signifies for thy yt. Habes res urbanas, inuice^ rusticas scribe, Now
thou know thaffaires of the cite, for thy part write what is done in the
country.

Inuidentia, envy, grief to behold or here that an othre in an prospers.

Inuideo, uidi, ere, to have envy at an others prosperity. also to se inwardly
or through a thing.

Inuideo tibi doctrinam, I have envy at thy learning.

Inuidia, envy, hatred, ill will.

Inuidia facti sui, the displeasure of his act, or attemptate, or the deed
whereof he was envied and hated.

Inuidiam concitare alicui, to bring oone in hatred or ill opinyon.

Facere inuidiam, idem.

Inuidiosa res, a thing which bredeth envy or hatred.

Inuidiose, enuyousely.

Inuidiosus, an enuyouse person. sometime he which is enuyed.

Inuidus, he that has envy.

Inuigilo, are, to have watch of a thing, or to lay watch, to care.

Inuinius, he that never drynketh wine.

Inuisus, a, um, never seen. also hated or odious.

Inuitatus, boden, as to a feast or banquet.

Inuito, tare, to bydde. alsoo to delyre, to fylle the bealye.

Inuitus, ta, tum, unwilling, or against a man's will.

In uniuersum, universally.

Inuius, a, um, lackyng a way, or where nothing can pass.

Inumbro, are, to make shadow, sometime it signifies to defend.

Inunco, care, to catch, as it were with an hoke

Inundatio, a floudde.

Inundo, to ouerflowe or surrounde.

In unguem, to the point, perfectly.

Inuoco, are, to call in, to call for help. alsoo not to call.

Inuolo, are, to steal, to lay violente hands on one, to flee out.

Inuolucris, a bird not ready to flee.

Inuolucrum, and inuolucre, every thing which serves to keuer or wrappe in
it an other thing.

Inuolucris simulationum tegi, to be hyd under crafty couerynges of
dissimulation.

Inuoluo, uere, to wrappe.

Inuoluolus, and Inuoluola, a worm like a canker, which is on vynes, and
when he is taken of, he wrappeth him self round together.

Inuolutus, ta, tum, wrapped.

Inuro, inussi, inurere, to mark a thing with an hot iron.

Inurere alicui notam censoriam, to bring to one a notable reproach.

Inurere infamiam alicui, to bring up a sclaunder of done, which will
never be laid.

Leges inurere, to ma^e laws, to the perpetual dishonor of a w^^^e publyke.

Inutrium, a town in Almayn callid Insprngh.

Inuus, is the rustical god of the Paynyms called also Pan.

I ANTE O.
IO, an interiection, sygnifyenge sommetyme grief, as in Tibullo, Vror io, O I
burn. sometime excessive gladness, as in Ouidio Dicite io Paean.

Ioannes, a proper name of Hebrew, and sygnifieth the grace of god. Ioannes
Baptista, son of Zacharias, and Elysabeth of the tribe of Leui, was
sanctified before that he was borne, and declared by an angel that his name
should be John^. And because his father did not forthwith believe it, he was
specheles until the eight day after the birth of the child, and that he
had written in tables, his name is John^, than was his mouth opened, and he
spoke gloryfyenge god, and made than the psalm: Benedictus dominus deus
Israel, quia uisitauit and fecit redemptionem plaebis suae. This man was of
such perfection and holiness, that our savior Christ testified of him,
that he went in the spirit and truth of Helias the prophet, but yet was he
more thanne a prophet, and was the messanger which god promised by the
prophet Malachias, that he would send, which should prepare the way before
him. Semblably John^ testified of Christ, that he was the true light that
lyghted every man that comes into the world, and that he was in the world,
and the world was made by him, and that he bare record, that he was the son
of god. John^ lived in wilderness, his garment was of camelles hears, and his
gyrdell of askynne about his loins, and his meat was Locustae and honye of
the woddes. He baptized only in water teaching repentance and the approchyng
of the kingdom of heaven. But because he said to Herod, that it was not
lefulle for him to have his brothers wife, he was by him put in prysone, and
fynallye at the petytion of the daughter of Herodiades, who daunsyd before him
(by the perswasyon of Herodiades, who was the wife of his brother) the head of
John^ was stryken of, and in a dysshe was brought by the maiden unto her mother
in open bankette. Josephus antiquitatum li. 18. calls him a very good man,
who commanded the Jews to labor to get virtue, to observe justice among
them selves, to keep true relygion toward god, and by baptysme to join
together in oone. Alsoo he says, that many men thought, that in the battle
between Herod and Aretha, by the just vengeance of god for puttyng John^
Baptyst to death, the host of Herod was utterly distroyed. He was born
before Christ carnally months and was put to death before Christ suffered his
passion, one year.

Ioannes, apostle and Euangeliste, the son of Zebedaeus, and brother of James
the apostle called the more, was of Christ most tenderly beloved, and in the
time of the emperor Domitian, was exiled into the i will callid Pathmos, where
he wrate the book of reuelatio^s called Apocalypsis. After the death of
Domi^^an in the time of Pertinax he returned to Ephesum, and there remaining
unto the time of Traiane, he raised many churches, and did set them in
order, and being of great age, dyed.lxviii. years after the passion of
Christ, as Sophronius writes, and was buried at Ephesum. Polycrates an
ancient and holy bishop in Asia, in his epistoll to Victor bishop of Rome,
writes in this wise: Also John^, which laid his head upon our lords breast,
who was the chief priest, and ware the pontificalle plate or table, martyr
and doctor of the church, slept at Ephesum. He wrate his gospel last of all
the Evangelists in the last end of his life, wherein he declares the
divinity of our savior, more tha^ any of the other, which by the holy
ghost was reserved unto him.

Iocasta, was daughter of Creon, and first wife of Laius king of Thebes, after
whose death she being ignorant, married Oedipus her natural son. After that
her sons Polynices and Etheocles, which she had by Oedipus had one slain
the other in battle, she alsoo killed her self.

Iochabella, the name of Moses mother.

Iocor, aris, ari, to speak meryly or in disport.

Iocosus, a, um, and iocularis, re, merry sportfull, prouokyng mirth.

Ioculus, a little sport or myrthe.

Iocus, plurali ioca, a merry word, disporte.

Iohel, a prophet born in Bethon in the land of Rubim, he prophesied much of
Jerusalem, and fynall conclusion of Gentiles.

Io^laus, the son of Iphiclus, of whom the people of Sardinia, were named
Iolenses.

Io^le, the daughter of Euritus king of Aetolia, whom Hercules loved so
much, that he served her in a woman's apparayle, and span on a distaffe.

Ion, a stone of a violet color.

Jonas, a prophet of the country of Cariathamaum, not far from Azotus a
city of the Greeks nygh to the sea in Siria, was in the time of Helias, and
was the son of the pore wydowe, and him did Helias restore unto life for the
hospitalytie of his mother. And when he came to full age, he was by almyghtye
god sent to the great city of Niniue in Assyria, and as he would have fled
from our lord, and have turned his journey unto Tharsos, he was devoured of
a whale, and being at the last cast up unto the land out of the whales
mouth, when he had been three days in the whales bealye, he went forth and
preached in Niniue in such wise, that the people by penance restrained the
sword of god, which was ready to stryke them. Afterward Jonas vexed with
heaviness of mind returned to his country, nor there long abiding, he taking
with him his mother, went to the land of Sur, and as he haunted the land of
Saar he there dyed, and was buried in the grave of Cinezeus the judge, He
prophesied that when men should se in Jerusalem much people come from the west
parts of the world, than should the city be distroyed unto the hard earth.
Jonas in hebru signifies a culuer, or a distroyer of people.

Ionia, a region of Greece in Asia, wherein were the cities of Ephesus, Miletus,
Priena, and other, and the people thereof be called Jones, and the tungue
Ionica, and the sea ioynynge to it Mare Ionicum.

Ionicus, ca, cum, and Ionius, a, um, of Ionia.

Ioppe, a city of the country of Palestina, not far from Jerusalem,
standing by the sea, some men do suppose to be the haven called which Port
Iaffe.

Iordanis, a fair river in Iudaea, which divides Galile from the resydue of
Iudaea, and fallith into the dead sea.

Ios, an isle where Homerus was buried.

Joseph, the son of Jacob the patriark, was through envy sold by his
brethren unto a merchant, who brought him into Egypt, and gave him to
Putiphar great master of household with king Pharao, whose wife bournynge in
concupiscence, because that Joseph woide not commit adultery with her, she
caused him to be cast into prison. where he declari^nge to the kings cupbearer
the signification of his dream, afterward he was by the same cupbearer
remembered unto king Pharao, wha^ he had dreamid a dream, which he would have
expouned. And he expounding the kings dream, which signified.vii. plentuous
years, and.vii. scarce years of corn, was made by the king high steward of
his royalme. So that by his most excellent wysedom such abundance of grain was
brought into the kings barnes, and there kept during the vii. plentuous years,
that the.vii. scars years next ensuynge it suffysed not only to relieve all
the people of Egypt, but also refresshed other countrayes, and made the king
excedi^gly rich. Moreover the brethern of Joseph being sent by Jacob these
father to bie corn in Egypt, not knowing their brother Joseph were by him
sundry times apprehended, and compellid to fetch their yo^ger brother
Ben-Iamyn, and at the last Joseph discovering him self unto them, caused them
to fetch his and their father into Egypt with all his family, where they were
honorably entertained of king Pharao and Joseph. And Joseph had there two
sons, Effraim and Manasses, and lived a hundred and ten years. Joseph
signifies increase, or a great officer, he dyed before the incarnation of
Christ about.MDClii. years.

Josephus, the son of Mattathias, a priest of Jerusalem, which wrate in
greek the battle of the Jews and destruction of the city by Vespasian and
Titus, whereat he him self was present. He wrate also of the antiquity of the
Jews, in.ii. sundry arguments. He was among the Romans had in such
reverence and honor, that his image was set up in the cite. He had the spirit
of prophecye, and being prisoner told unto Vespasian that he should be emperor
of Rome. Also in his book of antiquities he writes in this wise: At this time
was Jesus a wise man, if it be leful to call him a man, he was a doer of
wonderful works, and a teacher of those men, which wyllingly do here things
that be true, he joined unto him many Jews and also Gentiles, this man was
Christ. When Pylate by the envy of the chief men of our nation had judged him
to be put on the cross, he forsook not them, whom from the beginning he
loved, but appeared to them the third day, eftsoon alive, according as the
prophets by divine inspiration spoke before of him, and that innumerable
miracles should be done by him. Hitherto wrate Josephus. whereby appears his
excellent wisdom, and special grace, which he had received, and it
repugneth not much, that in his heart he embraced the faith of Christ.He was
after the incarnation of Christ.lxxvi. years.

Iotapata, a city in Syria.

Iouiniani, were me^ of arms, so callid of Maximian the emperor, which did
valyantly in the country of Illyria.

Iouis, the genitive case of Jupiter.

I ANTE P.
IPHIANASSA, the wife of Melampos, whom for her beaultie Juno turned into fury
or madness.

Iphiclus, son of Alemena, borne with Hercules at one birth, but Hercules
was gotten by Jupiter, but Iphiclus was gotten by Amphitrio. And when two
serpents came to the cradelle of Iphiclus, and slew him, after when they came
to Hercules, he took in every of his hands one and slew them. There was an
other Iphiclus, which was the son of Philacus and Clymene, who Hesiodus says,
was so light and swyft, that he ran upon the ears of wheat as they grew,
and did not hurt them, also that he ran on the water as well as on the land.
Read Coelium lectionum antiq. li. 2. ca 5.

Iphigenia, the daughter of king Agamemnon, with whom he offered in sacrifyce
going to Trope.

Iphitus, the son of Praxonidis, which first ordained the solemn plays
callid Olympiada

Ips, ipos, a lyttelle wourme bredyng in horns and vines.

Ipse, ipsa, ipsum, he, she, that same, by demonstratyng or showing the person
or thing spoken of.

Ipsemet, he him self.

Ipsippe, to him and to none other.

Ipsulces, plates embosed like to fygures or images of men or women.

I ANTE R.
IR, the holownes of the hand. sometime it sygnifieth the hole hand.

Ira, wrath, an appetite to punyshe him, of whom we be offended.

Iracundia, anger, displeasure against one, a desire to be revenged.

Iracundus, shortly or sone angry, hasty.

Irascor, eris, irasci, to be angry.

Irate, angerly.

Iratus, angry.

Irceus, a kind of puddynges.

Ircipes, an harowe.

Ire inficias, to deny, to say the contrary.

Ire alicui obuiam, to go to mete with one.

Ire in ius, to goo to the law, or to here the judgment in his matter.

Ire in nernum aliena causa, to goo to prison for an other man's sake.

Ire in subsidium, to go to succor one.

Ire pedibus, to go on foot.

Ire pedibus in sententiam, to consent to the sentence or raison of an another,
which has spoken, or to be of the same opinion.

I prae, go before.

I sane, si quid festinas magis, goo before if thou be in haste.

Irenarches, and Irenarcha, he which is in authority to see peace kept in a
countreye or city, which among us may be called a justice of peace.

Iris, iris, uel iridis, the rain bow. it is also a flower deluce, the root
whereof is very soote, and is commonly called Yreos.

Irinium, oil of Ireos.

Ironia, is a figure in speaking, when a man speaks otherwise than he
thinks, as in scoffyng or bourdyng, calling that fair which is soul in
deed: that good which is ill: that eloquent which is barbarous. semblably
reasonyng contrary to that I think, to the intent to mock him, with whom I
do dispute or reason.

Ironice, mockyshly, scoffyngly.

Ironicus, he that uses that fashion in spekyng.

Irpices, rakes with iron tethe, wherewith they drew up weeds.

Irrasus, vnshauen.

Irraucio, raucui, cere, to be hoorse.

Irremunerabile, that may not be rewarded or recompensyd.

Irreparabile, that may not be repaired or restored to the first astate.

Irrepo, psi, pere, to crepe in.

Irreprehensus, a, um, that can not be reproved.

Irretio, iui, ire, to take or hold in, as it were in a net.

Irretitus, taken, lapte in with craft, or fair promyses.

Irrigo, to water ground, to bring water into the fields out of a river.

Irriguus, a, um, the ground or field that may be easily watered. sometime the
water, which may be easily diriued into the fields.

Irripio, pere, to pluck in.

Irrito, are, to make void and of none effect.

Irrito, having the last syllable saving one long, to provoke, to kendle wrath,
to styre up.

Irrettus, ta, tum, void of none effect or force.

Irrogare mulctam, to set a pain.

Irructo, are, to blow in by belkynge.

Irrugio, gere, to bray out.

Irrumo, are, to suck in.

Irrumpo, rupi, rumpere, to break in, or enter with force. sometime to break
a sunder.

Irruo, to rounne hastily or furiousely into battle, or upon any thing.
sometime to fall in or cast in.

Irus, a beggar of whom Homere makes mention, who was great and feeble, and
being in Ithaca the country of Ulysses, he being absent, consumed his
vittayles with the woars of Penelope. Wherefore Ulysses at his return home
slew him with his fyst.

I ANTE S.
IS, a pronowne, which sygnifieth he.

Isaeus, a famous rhetorician, which invented to make every matter compendious.

Isagoge, an introduction

Isagogico^, a way to introduce, or begin to tech

Isapis, a river nigh to Caecenna.

Isara, a river coming out of the river of Rone where the hill called Cemenus
is joined to the Rone, and so runs by Druentia into the goulfe of Venyce.

Isatia, an i will against Velia, callid also Oenotris

Isatis, woad, read before in Glastum.

Isauria, a region of Asia, joining to Cilicia, some do take it to be part of
Cilicia.

Isaurum, a city in the country of Pamphilia.

Isca, a city in Deuonshyre, callid Exceter.

Ischalis, a town in Som^s. shire callid Ilchester

Ischia, the huckle bone. it is sometime taken for the ache in the said bone,
which vulgar physicians do call Sciatica.

Ischiadicus, uel Ischiacus, he that has the ache in the hyppe commonly called
Sciatica.

Ischiros, idem quod fortis, strong.

Isiaci, the priests of the goddess Isis.

Isis, called also Io^, one of the harlottes of Jupiter, whom he turnyd into a
cow for fear of Juno his wife.

Isitium, a certain pudding, some call it an ysyng.

Ismae^l, was the son of Abraham by Agar his wives maiden, of whom the sarazins
be called Ismaelitae as they be also called Agareni.

Ismarus, a mountain in Thracia.

Ismenias, the name of an excellent mynstrelle, which played on the shaulmes.

Ismenides, the women of Thebes.

Ismenus, a river in the country of Boeotia.

Isocolon, where two sentences ar in like length.

Isocrates, the name of a famous orator, of wonderful eloquence, out of whose
school proceeded the most excellent orators of Greece.

Isodomon, a form of buylding, where every thing is equally straight.

Isonomia, equality of laws, as where they be indifferent to all manner of
persons.

Isopleurus, three edged.

Ispalis, a city in Spain called now Syuile.

Israel, sygnyfyeth a man seeing god. It was also the name of Jacob the
patryarke. And the people of the Jews were also called by that name, how be
it sommetyme it was attrybuted only to ten trybes, the trybes of Judah and
Beniamyn being severed from them.

Issa, an isle in the Venycian sea, ioynynge to Slauony.

Issus, a rytie in Sicile, and a river of Siria.

Ister, a great river called also Danubius, in duche Donawe, it comes out of
an hill in Germany, called of Pliny Arnoba, of Ptholome^ Abnoba, of Tacitus
Arbona. It receives into it three score ryuers, whereof the more part be
nauygable, and rounneth by Swaue, Bauyer, Owstryke, Hungarye, Valachia, and so
through Europa, and falls in to the sea callid Pontus. in seven sundry dry
places as Solinus and Mela do write. But Plinius and Tacitus affirm but six.
Herodotus, Arrianus, and other but five. while it is in Germany it is called
Danubius, and when it comes into a part of Thracia called Istria, where it is
brodest, it is tha^ callid Ister.

Isthmus, a narrow part of the country, where ii. seas are but a small distance
a sunder, inclosyng the land on both sides. In such a place is set the city
of Corinthus in Greece. There be diverse such places in Grecia, and of them were
certain plays called Isthmia.

Istic, there, where thou art.

Istria, a part of Italy, marching on Illiria, called now Slauony.

I ANTE T.
ITA, an aduerbe of answeryng or affirming and sometime signifies yea. sometime
so.

Ita est, even so it is.

Ita loquor, yea so I say.

Ita aiunt, so men say.

Ita me deus amet, so god love or help me.

Ita ne? but is it so? or is it as thou say? also it signifies a note of
disdain. Ita ne co^temnor abs te? Set thou so little by me?

Ita ne beatus quidem est? is he therefore than happy?

Ita negotium est, so the case requires.

Ita opus est facto, so must it be done.

Ita sane, yea truly.

Ita ut erat, as it was in deed.

Ita ut fit, as it hapeneth. Dum rus eo, coepi egomet mecum inter uias, ita ut
fit, ubi quid in animo est molestiae, aliam rem ex alia cogitare, When I went
down into the country, by the way riding, as it happens oftentimes, when any
displeasure comes to my mind, I bethought me of one thing and other.

Itaque wherefore than, and therefore.

Itaque, and so.

Italia, a noble country called Italy, which is enuyronned on the west with
the mountayns called Alps, on the north with the sea callid Mare Adriaticum,
on the ^ast and the south with the sea called Mediterraneum, and Fretu^
Siculum. It also conteyneth these regyons: Liguriam, Ethruriam, Vmb^^^m,
Flaminea^, ^atium, Aprutium, Campaniam, Apuliam, Venetiam, Picenum, Galliam
Gisalpina^, called Lumbardy. The length thereof after Pliny is a thousand
and.xx. miles, the breadthe in some place between the two seas.CCCCx. miles, in
some place it passes not.Cxxxvi. miles. it was sometime named Magna Graetia,
because it was inhabyted with Greeks, as Myrsilius does write. Solinus does
resemble the figure thereof to a^ok^^ leaf, extendynge more in length than in
breadthe, toward the end being divided, as it were into two horns, whereof
the one lies toward the sea called Ionium, the other looks to the narowe sea
of Sicile called Fretum Siculum, in the narowest place it passes not in breadth
twenty miles.

Italica, a city in Italia, which by an other name is called Confinium. There
is an another in Spain, where Silius Italicus was borne.

Italicensis, a citisen of Italica.

Italicus, ca, cum, of Italy.

Italus, an Italyan.

Item, in like manner, so, also, even as, afterward

Iter, eris, Itiner, neris, a journey, also a way. Iter habeo ad Caesarem, I
take my iourneye to the Emperor.

Iter conficere, to perform a journey, to go or ride a journey.

Iter facere, to go a journey.

Itero, are, to do a thing eftesoones, to goo back again.

Iterum, eftsoon or again.

Ithaca, an isle lyenge before Athasis, and was the countraye of Ulysses, who
therefore was called Ithacus.

Ithome, a town in Peloponeso, an another in Thessaly.

Ithonia, a country in Greece.

Ithyphallus, the name of Priapus the most dishonest and abhomynable ydoll.
Also Ithyphalli were dishonest persons, which in honourynge their ydoll
Bacchus, daunsed having between their legs cou^terfayt members of horrible
greatness.

Ithyra, a town on the mountain of Taurus.

Itidem, semblably, also.

Itinerarium, a commentary or book of remembrance, contaynyng things
committed in iourneyes. Also it is a calendar of miles in the distaunce of
places, with the time of abode in every place, like to gestes of princis.

Itineror, aris, ari, to go in journey.

Ito, taui, tare, to goo much.

Ituria, a region in Arabia or Siria, of which the people are called Ituraei.

Itus, and Itio, a going. Quid noster itus and reditus, What our going and
coming.

Itys, the son of Tercus* and Prognes, who as poets do feign, was turned
into a fesaunte.

I ANTE V.
IVBA, the name of a beast. also the name of a king of Mauritania.

Iubar, a sterre, which is also called Hesperus and Lucyfer. It is sometime
taken for brightness.

Iubeo, iussi, iubere, to co^ma^d, to desire, to wish, to exhort, to decree.

Iubeo te saluere, god save you. Dionysium iube saluere, commend me to Denyse.

Iubero habere animu^ bonum, bid him have a good heart, or bid him be of good
chere.

Iubilo, are, to declare in the voice, the joy and gladness of the heart,
which may not be expressed with words.

Iubilium, ioy^nd gladness in voice, not expressyd in words, or with a shoute.

Iucunde, merrily, gladly, pleasantly, dilectably, swetely.

Iucunditas, dilectation, pleasure, reioysynge.

Iucundor, aris, ari, to be joyous and merry.

Iucundus, a, um, he or that which is the cause that an other reioiseth,
dilectable, pleasant to see or here. also loving.

Iudaea, acountrey in Asia, which has on the weste the sea called Mare
Cyprium, on the north Phoeniciam and Siriam, on the east Arabia^, on the south
the land of Egypt. It received the name of Judas the son of Jacob the
patriarch, where before it was callid Chananaea, of Chananaeus, the fourth son
of Cham.

Iudaei, not only the people of Judea, but also they be so called which do
observe their superstition. They were expellid out of this realm of England
in the time of king Richard the first, for their cruelty in sleyng of
christen children, like as they have been out of France and Spain, and now of
late out of Portugal. Which now be suffered eftsoon to repair hither, and here
to inhabit under a counterfaite color of faith, whereby no little corruption
is happened in our religyon, by their secret workynge, many of them being
physicians of the body, but privy murderers of christen men's sowles, as it will
ones more plainly appear, to our no little peril, shame, and dishonor,
except god will shortly put into the hearts of governors, to remember what
mortal and natural hatred the kyllers of our savior and his obstinate
ennemies and blasphemours has born always toward us, praying in their sinagoges
for our distructio^, and after credence ones gotten, under the cloak of
phisyke, wylfully and ioyousely kylleth us.

Iudaicus lapis, called also Tecolithos, a stone found in Judea, which is of
the quantity and figure of an akecorne, or of an olyue (as Solinus writes)
white and fair with an order of lines so correspondent, that they seem to be
wrought with the hand and turn. Albertus mineraliu^ li. i. calls it
Cegolites.

Iudex, iudicis, a judge.

Iudex ordinarius, he that has authority of his proper jurisdiction, to sit
in judgment with out commission, as the chief justice of England, the maire of
a city incorporat, and a coroner.

Iudex delegatus, he that sits by co^missio^, as all other judges and
justices.

Iudicatio, the question come in judgment.

Iudicato, an aduerbe, which signifies with a judgment or consyderation.

Iudicatum, the thing judged or determined.

Iudicatu^ facere, to obey the se^te^ce or judgment.

Iudicatus, tus, tui, judgment.

Iudicialis, le, of a judge.

Iudiciarius, a, um, pertaining to a judge, or that which is to be judged.

Iudiciaria controuersia, where the judges do not agree in one opinion.

Iudico, are, to judge or deem, to suppose, to give sentence, to condemn.

Iuditium, judgment.

Iuditia legittima, judgments given according to the determined law written,
or by ancient custom approved.

Iuditia publica, iugementes given by them, which be callid iuges, and have
places certain, and do not renew their co^missio^, as the iuges of the kings
benche and commune place.

Iuditiu^ capitis, judgment in causes criminal.

Iuditium dare, to grant a commission, to here and determyne a matter.

Iuditium rescindere, to reuerse a judgment.

Iuditium habere, to give judgment.

Iuditio perfundere, to bring one to the point to be condemned.

Iuga, the benches in a ship or bote.

Iugale uinculum, the bond of matrimony.

Iugalis, he that is yoked.

Iugantinus deus, was among Paynims the god, whom they supposed to have
authority over the rydges of hills.

Iugarius, he that dryueth a plough with oxen, or a wayn. Also a street in
Rome, where was an altar of Juno, at the which if any were wedded, they
supposed that matrimony to be most surely joined.

Iugatorius, a draught ox.

Iugeratim, by sundry furlonges.

Iugere, to cry like a kyte.

Iugerum, and Iugus, geris, as much ground as one yoke of oxen will ear in a
day. some suppose it to contein in length. 240. fete, in breadth half so much.
some say that it is more.

Leonardus Portius says, by the authority of Columella, that Iugeru^
conteyneth.xxviii. M. and.viii.C. feet.

Iuges, oxen like in greatness, called, yokes or payres.

Iugis, continuyng in one thing.

Iugiter, contynually.

Iuglans, andis, a wall nutte.

Iugo, are, to yoke or couple together.

Iugosus, rydged.

Iugula, a celestyall sign, contaynynge three sterres, called also Orion.

Iugulo, are, to slay, not only with wepon, but also with syckenes. Quartana
neminem iugulat, The fever quartayn sleeth no man.

Iugulare mortuos, to kylle dead men. A proverb applied to them, which do
speak or write to the rebuke of them that are dead, or as Erasmus does think
it more apt, it may be said by them that impougne a book, which is of all men
condemned, or resoneth against a sentence of all men rejected, or dysprayseth a
thing, which is of all men abhorryd.

Iugulus, the forepart of the neck which is divided into two great synewes,
Dexter and sinister.

Iugulum ferire, to slay properly in the neck.

Iugulum petere, when an orator or man of law towcheth vehementely the point
of the matter, and with manifest and soore arguments and reasons, seems to
assaut and oppress the contrary part, as it were with sharp weapons.

Iugum, a yoke* also the ridge of an hyl or bank. also the beam whereon
weauers do turn their web, also a thing like to a galowes, under the
which in sign of reproach, they that were vanquysshed were constrained to
creep, which was made with two spears standing, and one spear overthwart.
also a frame whereon vi^es are joined. also a beam whereon balances do hang.
also the side beams in a ship, in the which the transomes ar fastened. It is
also a roll of timber, whereon the imbrouderer or worker of carpettes do roll
up the thing that they work on.

Iuli, are the mosynes or soft hears, which do grow on the beardes and
vysages of young men, before that they be shaven, and sometime it signifies the
same young men.

Iulia, a kynred, which proceeded from Ascanius, son of Aeneas callid Iulus.
Also a town in Cales in the countray of Spain.

Iuliobona, Hounflete in France.

Iuliobriga, a town in Spayn callid Logroino.

Iulio magus, Angiers in France.

Iulis, a city in the isle of Caea, the countreye of Simonides the poet.

Julius, the month of Iulye, which took his name of Julius Caesar.

Iulum, as Ruellius writes, is that which cleaves fast to a hasyll nutte or
fylberte clusterwyse in a compact hardness, and as it were a very long synew
hangs by one stalk.

Iulus, otherwise named Ascanius, the son of Aeneas. Iulus, is also a little
wourme with many feet, bredyng in vynes and oaks, which is also called
Conuoluolus, Inuoluolus, and Voluola. It is also the mosynes of the outward
part of fruits, also the young fruit immediately after that the flowers be
fallen. Iulus is also a fyshe, which is guide unto whales, which also is called
Hege^er. It is more over a song dedicate to Diana.

Iumentum, every beast that draws or bears burdeynes, also a little carre.

Iunctim, jointly.

Iunculi, meats called iunkettes. also a fresshe chese made on rushes called a
jack man.

Iuncus, a bulle russhe.

Iuncus odoratus, is of two sortis, one is of Pliny called Triangularis, of
Dioscorides Angulosus, of Theophrastus, Cyperus. The stalk is lyttel and
read, and if it be bruised, it smells like to a rose, the best grows in
Arabia and Nabathea, the warst growith in Africa. An other sort is round, and
has flowers, which be medicinable, and it is of the apothecaries called
Squinantum. Read in Schoeno.

Iungami, people in the country of Liguria.

Iungo, xi, gere, to join.

Iungere uulpes, to yoke or couple wolfes. Aprouerbe signifyeng to do a thing
which is impertinent, or without any reason.

Iuniculi, the long twigs of the vine which do shote out of length, and
would be laid on a frame.

Iuniperus, a sweet bushe, called Iunyper.

Iunis, ne, young, whereof comes Junior, yo^ger.

Iunix, icis, a young cow or heffar.

Iunius, a propre name of the Romans, as Iunius Brutus, Iunius Columella. it is
also a month called June: for when Romulus had first divided the people
into old men and young men, callid in latin Maiores and Minores, he honored
them with two months. calling the one Maius, or May, the other Iunius, of
young men callid in latin Iuuenes.

Juno, was daughter of Saturn and Opis, sister and wife of Jupiter called also
Hera.

Juno moneta. Sone after that kings were expellyd out of Rome, there was a
great erthquake, at which time there was herd in the Capitol out of the
chapelle of Juno, a voice warnyng them that they should make a full pacification
of her wrath, and so doing the earth quake ceased. Of that warnyng, which in
latyne is Monitio, she was called Juno moneta. And to the honor of her was made
one chapel in the capitol by Camillus, an other on the hill called Auentinus,
wherein was set her ydoll brought from the city called Veiae destroyed by the
Romans, both these chapelles were called Aedes Iunonis Monetae.

Iunonia, one of the yles that are called Insulae fortunatae.

Jupiter, Iouis, the son of Saturnus and Opis king of Creta, who drove his
father out of his royalme, and was a man valiant and wise, but excedingly given
to lechery, in deflouring as well maidens as wyfes. Not withstanding for his
prowess and wit, after his death he was of all the Greeks honored for a
God, and called father and king of goddis. His name was in such estimation
among the Gentiles or Paynyms, that they gave to him souerayntie in all things.
In so much as they also named him god of hospitality. And therefore wha^ any
thing was violate either by the good man of the house or by his guest, they
callid on Jupiter Xenius: when trust in fre^dshyp was broken, they callid to
vengeance to Jupiter Philius, when companions betrayed one another Jupiter
Heterius, when kynsme^, Jupiter Homoginus, when they which were in league
together de^eyued each other, than cried they Jupiter Enhorcius.

Iura, a mountayn of France which divides high Burgoyn from Swizerlande.

Iuramentum, an oath.

Iuratus, sworn.

Iurgiosus, a, um, braulynge, full of contention.

Iurgium, a braulyng or a small contention.

Iurgo, are, to brawle or chyde.

Iuridicus, ca, cum, according to the law, or belongyng to the law.

Iurisdictio, jurisdiction, power, or authority to minister and execute laws,
as diverse citis and countrayes have by the grauntes of emperors and kings.

Iuro, rare, to swear.

Iurare in lege alterius, to swear to keep the laws or ordinances of an other.

Iurare in uerba alterius, to do fecaltie, or to be sworn a subicete.

Iurulentus, ta, tum, full of juice or lycour.

Ius, iuris, law authority, liberte, power, right, sometime the place where
the law is mynistred. also lycour or juice.

Ius annulorum donare, was among the old Romans the same almost, that is
now to make a knight.

Ius municipale, a private law or custom, which a city or town has within
it self, for the good order of their commune weal.

Ius moribus constitutum, right made of custom. Ius dicere, to give judgment.

Ius dicis, thou speak reason.

Ius bonum dicis, your request is reasonable.

Iure, with good cause.

Iure uel iniuria, by right or wrong.

De iure meo, tuo, suo decedere, to omyt some part of the rigor or extremity
of the law.

Pro suo iure agere, and summo iure agere, to take the extremity of the law.

Summum ius, the rygour of the law.

Iuscum, and Iusculum, brothe, wherein meat has been sodden.

Iuisiurandum, a solemn oath or promise made to God.

Iussa, commandments.

Iussus, a, um, commanded.

Iusta, sacrifyces done for dead men: now it may be used for funeral
exequies.

Iusta soluere, is proprely in funeral obsequies, to do and perform all
things thereunto necessary.

Iustinianus, an emperor comen of a poor kynred, his mothers brother Justinius
emperor before him being but a swnie herd, succeeded his uncle at the age
of.xliiii. years in* the empire, and gouernid it nobly by the space of.xl.
years, augmentynge it honorably. And caused the laws civil, dispersed in
infinite volumes, to be reduced into fyftye books called the Digestes, and
caused to be made.iiii. books of institutes, and likewise the Code, contaynyng
the decrees of emperors, although he him self knew no letters. An
excellent prince, if he had not ben corrupted with auaryce, and the heresy of
Eutichianus. he was after the incarnation of Christ.517. years.

Iustitia, Justice, is a per^eet virtue (as Aristotle says) referred to a
second person, and therefore chief of all virtues, more wonderfulle than the
bright sterres Hesperus and Lucyfer, comprehending in it all the parts of
virtue, this is callid justice universal. But there is a more particular
justice, which in the law civil is defined to be a constaunt and perpetual
will, gyuyng unto every body that which belongs unto him, which is callid
his right. More abundantly hereof shall ye find in my warke called the
Governor.

Iustitium, a ceassyng for a time from ministration of laws in places
iuditiall.

Iustus, a just or rightuous man, an upright and true meaning man It is taken
often times in holy scripture for a virtuous man or good man.

Iustus, ta, tu^, equal, mean between two extremities. sometime it signifies
greatness. Iusta pars, the great part. sometime it signifies among lawyers,
true or very. Iustus filius, his very son Iusta magnitudo, neither more nor
less, the just quantity.

Iusta seruitus, service without rigor.

Iustas inimicitias, great hostility.

Iusti honores, honors due.

Iusto labor, with great labor.

Iuturna, the sister of Turnus.

Iuuamen, Iuuatio, and Iuuamentum, help.

Iuuenalia, plays vowed for the health of young men.

Iuuenalis, le, pertaynyng to youth.

Iuuenalis dies, a day celebrate to youth.

Iuuenalis, is also the name of a poet, which wrate Satyrs.

Iuuencus, and iuuenca, young, not only men, but also beasts.

Iuuenculus, idem.

Iuuenesco, scere, to wax or be young.

Iuuenilis, le, young.

Iuueniliter, yongly.

Iuuenis, a young man.

Iuuentus, tutis, youth. sometime a multitude of young men.

Iuuerna, the old name of Irelande, called of some Iuernia, and Hibernia.

Iuuo, uas, iuui, are, to help, to delight.

Iuuat mihi, It does me good, it is a pleasure to me.

Iuxta, nygh, jointly, or together, even like, according. Nunc uero quo in
loco res nostrae sint, iuxta mecum omnes intelligitis, Now how the matter
stands, ye al know as well as I: orels in what case our business is, ye
understand all as much as I do.

Iuxtim, nygh to.

I ANTE X.
IXION, was king of Thessalia, who falsely brake the promise that he made to his
wives father, and threw him into a pyt of fire. He also callid by Jupiter unto
a feast, styred Juno to commyt auoutry, which Iupyter perceiving, he made a
cloud like unto Juno, and delivered her to him, on whom he gatte the people
called Centauri, but when he aduaunted that he had companyed with Juno, he
was driven down in to hell, and there was bound to a wheel, always tournynge
and fulle of serpents, as poets feigned.

Ixon, a greatte white bird of the kind of ravens.

L ANTE A.
LABASCO, labascere. and Labascor, sceris, to fail or decay.

Labda cus, a king of Thebes, father of Laius, who was father of Oedipus, or
Edippus.

Labecula, a little spotte or blemysshe.

Labefacio, facere, to break or distroy.

Labefacto, tare, to make feeble, to appayre, to subuerte, to corrupt.

Labellum, a lyppe.

Labeo, onis, a man or woman having great lyppes. Also a nettle called blind
nettle.

Labes, a spotte, which suddenly happens to things that are smothe.

Labia, and Labra, lyppes.

Labicanum, a town in Italy.

Labici, the inhabitants of that town.

Labicus, was the name of the son of Minos, who was named also Glaucus.

Labilis, le, vustable, which will sone fall, slypper.

Labina, slyppernes.

Labio, is a fyshe, which I suppose to be in english called Codde, with the
great lyppes, it was also the surname of a Romayne.

Labo, are, to fall down suddenly.

Labor, eris, lapsus sum labi, to slide, to dye, to fail, to fall down by
little and little.

Labor, labor, travail.

Laboriae, the name of a country in Italy, vulgarly callid Terra laboris, the
land of labor*

Laborinus, a field in Ca^pania, where the stubble of corn is so great, that
the people do burn it instead of wodde.

Laboriosus homo, a peynefull man.

Laboro, are, to labor, to be in heaviness or grefe.

Animo laborare, to be careful.

Ex renibus laborare, to have peyn in the raines. Fame laborare, to dye for
hunger.

Foenore laborare, to be in debt by reasone of vsurye.

Laborare frigore, to be almost dead for cold.

Ingenio laborare, to be troubled in wit.

Laborare iniuria, to suffer wrong.

Laborare morbo, to be sick.

Nihil laboro, I care not, I pass not on it.

Non laboro, idem.

Odio apud hosts laborare, and contempt^ inter socios, to be hated of his
enemies, and not regarded of his friends.

Laborare podagra, to have the gout.

Vi^s laborare, to be vicious.

Laboratur uehementer, they studied diligently to bring a matter to pass.

Labrum, a lyppe. also the brymme or brynk of a river or fountain. also a vat
or like vesselle necessary to be bayned in. Sometime a vat for wine after that
it is pressyd. It may be vsyd for a keele vate, whereinto ale or biere is
put.

Labrum Veneris, is taken for tasyll, although Dioscorides does not remember,
that it serves to the use of toukars, but assigns that rather to other two
herbs, the oone called Hippophaes, or Hyppophyes, and the other Hippophaestos.

Labr^sca, wild vine.

Laburnum, a tree growyng on the mountayns called Alps, the wood thereof is
white and hard, and has a flower a cubyte in length, which no be will
touch, he grows not but in dry places, and hates water.

Labyrinthus, a place containing many romes in such wise prepared, that who
so ever was brought into it, moughte not issue out of it, without a guide very
perfect in it, or without a threde leading him, whereof the botome or klewe
should be left at the enter. Of this name were three principal places, oone in
Egypt, by the pattern whereof the other were made. And that is described by
Herodotus (who writes that he saw it) saying that it was above the gr^^te
poole called Myrios, toward the city of Crocodiles. Strabo in his.xvii. book
callyth the said poole or meare Muris. Herodotus in Euterpe says, that first
there were.xii. halles keueryd.vi. toward the north, and.vi. toward the south,
all inclosyd with one wall. within the wall were houses in two diverse sorts,
one sort under ground, an other above ground over them, every sort being in
number three thousand and five hundred. The ouermost, which (as he says) he
beheld, the nethermost he might not be suffered to se, but as he herd by
report of them which saw it, he wrate: The ouermost which he did behold,
exceded al works of men's hands, for he went from a hall into parlers, from
parlers into chambers, from chambers into other solars, and from parlours into
other halles. The beam which bare the flowers was of stone, wrought with
ymagery, every hal inuyroned with pyllers of white stone. In the end of that
Labyrinthus, stands a stone large benethe, and small on the top called
Pyramid, which is of length.xl. paces, in the which ar wrought great images,
and thereat is the encry under ground to the other Labyrinthus. An other
Labyrinthus was in Creta, made by Dedalus by the commandment of Minos for a
prison, but it was much less than the other. But by diverse doors, entrynges,
and issuinges out, it deceived them, which came into it. The third was in
Italy by a town callid Clusiu^, which was made by king Porsena, and as
Plinius and Varro do write, was of square stone, the sides.xxx. foot broad, in
height fyftye feet. Into the which who so ever went without a clew or bottom
of threde, could never return. On this place stood.v. Pyramides or steples
one at every corner, and one in the myddell, eueriche of them.CI. foot high, on
the tops of them great bolles of brass, and thervppon horses with wings,
from the which did hang chains, having belles at them, which being meued
with wind, rendered a sharp sownd. also upon the four bolles of brass stood
four other Pyramides or sharp pyllers of a hundred foot high, and on that
which was on the myddle stood oone sharp pyllour, whose heyght Varro durst
not rehearse, because it seemed a thing incredible. Al these things were made by
great kings, which having abundance of treasure, and lackyng learning, did set
their delight in such vain ostentation.

Lac, lactis, milk.

Lac gallinaceus, The milk of an hen. A proverb applied to them, which
lack nothing, or to things which for the scarsitie of them be very precious.

Lacaena, a kind of apparaylle. also a woman of Lacedemonia.

Laccia, a fyshe called a cheuyn.

Lacedaemon, a noble city in Greece, called also Sparta, in the region of
Achaia, the country is called Laconia.

Lacer, and Lacerus, a, um, torn or rent.

Lacerna, a short cloak, which men of war be wont to wear.

Lacernatus, cloked, or clad in a cloak.

Lacero, are, to rent in pieces, or to give many wounds.

Lacerare diem, to lose the day, to spend the time about naught.

Lacertosus, having great brawnes and synues.

Lacertus, and Lacerta, a lyzerde, an euet. also the part of a man's arm, from
the elbowe to the wrest of the hand, properly the brawne and synewes of the
arm.

Lacesso, siui, and cessi, ssere, to rent or go about to rent the good renome
of a man also to provoke a man to wrath or dysplesure with words, writing or
act: to rayl on a man, to pryck a man with some ill language or act.

Lachana, all kind of herbs, which serve for the port called wortes.

Lachanopoles, a sellar of herbs.

Lachanopolium, the herb market.

Lachesis, one of the three ladies called Parcae, which poets did fayn, to
have the rule and continuance of man's life.

Lachrima, a tear in weeping.

Lachrimo, are, to weep.

Lachrimula, a little tear.

Lacides, garments that be rent.

Lacinia, is a red musheron, which spryngeth at the root of a chesten tree.

Laciniae, gardynges of a garmente, properlye where the skyrtes be cut in
sundry fascion.

In lacinias, in pieces, in iagges.

Laciniosus, a, um, cut in sundry fashions, windyng and turnyng diverse ways,
^agged.

Lacinium, an elbowe of land, lyenge between the sea, called Hadriaticum, and
the sea called Ionium.

Lacio, lacui, and lexi, lacere, to bring into a snare or to wind one in, to
deceive him.

Lacon, onis, a man of Lacedemonia.

Laconia, the countreye where Lacedemonia stands.

Laconicus, ca, cum, of the country of Laconia

Laconicum, a hot house or dry bayne.

Laconismus, a short form of speaking, contaynyng much sentence in a few
words.

Lactarius, a, um, meat made of milk, all herbs which have juice like milk.

Lactarius, rij, he that makes sundry meats of milk. also they which do
sell milk.

Lacteo, ere, to suck milk.

Lactes, places within the rybbes of a man, benethe the nauel, so tender, that
it may not suffer any wound or stroke. as Probus says. some say that they be
caules, wherein the small bowelles do lie.

Lactesco, scere, to be turned into milk, or to be filled with milk.

Lacteus, a, um, of milk or like mylk also that which is nouryshed like milk.

Lacticinia, white meats made of milk.

Lactidiaci, stryken about the navel.

Lacto, are, to feed with milk. also to deceive with fair words.

Lactuca, an herb called letuse.

Lacuna, a dyche, wherein water stands. also a trenche, whereby fields are
drayned. Some english it, a synke.

Lacunar, a beam. also such a thing as does yet hang in marchantes houses,
overthwart their halles, whereon be set a great number of candelles.

Lacus, cus, a deep place always full of water, which is diriued into brokes
and ryuers. also the vessel which receives wine, when the grapes ar pressed.
also the principal beam that goth overthwart the house.

Lacus Lemanus, Losane in Peemountayne.

Lacut^rres, great cabages.

Ladaes, was a man, who ran so swiftly, that on the sand he left no print of
his foot.

Ladanum, a gum which runs from an herb called Lada or Ledum, which is
commonly called Labdanum, and is most used in pomaunders.

Ladon, a river in Arcadia.

Laeander, a young man, which for the fervent love that he bare to a fair
maiden callid Eros, used to swym from Abidus, to Sestos, over the sea called
Hellespontus, at the last was drowned, which Eros beholding to be dead,
threw her self also into the sea from a high tower, of whom Musaeus, and
Ouidius, in his epistoles do write.

Laedo, laesi, dear, to hurt or do displeasure.

Laedere maiestatem, to derogate any thing of the kings authority or
prerogative.

Laesae religionis culpa, heresy or lollardy, contempt of religion or
ceremonies.

Laemargia, gluttony.

Laemargus, a glutton.

Laemuschaton, the reward given to him that vanquisshed at playinge or
fighting with weapons.

Laena, a garment lyned, which the diuinours called Augures, did wear.

Laerte, a city in Cilicia.

Laertes, the father of Ulysses.

Laertius, the name of oone, which wrate the lives of philosophers.

Laestrigones, were people in the confynes of Campania, which eat man's flesh.

Laetabilis, glad, or reioysefull.

Laetamen, compass or mucke laid in the fields, to make corn and grass to
grow plentuousely.

Laete, ioyousely, gladly.

Laetisico, care, to make glad.

Laetifco, scere, to be glad.

Laetitia, gladness, reioysyng of the mind, which does appear also outwardly.

Laetitudo, dinis, idem.

Laetor, aris, ari, to be glad, or to rejoice with outward signs.

Laeto, are, to make glad.

Laetus, a, um, joyous and glad.

Laetus homo, a glad man.

Laeta ouis, a good sheep. Laeta seges, and laetum legumen, plentyfull corn
and grayn. all other things not having life, being called Laeta, do signify
dilectable to behold, or that do please the eye of the beholder.

Laeuigo, are, to plane or make plain, or to polysshe.

Laeuis, leave, smothe or plain.

Laeuitas, tatis, playnnesse or smothenesse.

Laeuo, are, to make smothe.

Laeuor, oris, smothenesse.

Lagana, be thyn cakes made with flower and water, whereto was put fat broth,
pepper, saffron, and cynamome, frytuse.

Lagari uersus, verses, which do halte in the mids of the foot.

Lagaron, is the part of the body from the stomach to the nauel, called also
Hypocondriu^.

Lagena, a pytcher pot.

Lageos, a kind of grapes.

Lagia, one of the names of the isle of Delos.

Lagois, a kind of fyshe, which may be called the hare fyshe.

Lagonon, the frettyng of the guts.

Lagophthalmos, he that has eyes like a hare, or in whom the ouerlyddes of the
eyes do not meue downewarde.

Lagopus, an herb of the kind of trefoyles callid trinity grass. some call
it hare cummyn. some suppose it to be Dentdelyon, other Garyophyllacium, among
the Germans it is called Harefoote.

Lagorrophia, a warren or park of hares.

Laguncula, a little pytcher.

Lagygies, people in Sarmatia.

Laicus, a lay man.

Lais, was a common harlot in Greece, who was of such excellent beaultie, and
therewith so pleasant, that unto her out of all Greece there came to Corinthus
where she dwelled, men noble and rich in great numbers, to company with her.
On a time came to her Demosthenes the greattest orator of Greece, and desired
to lie with her, of whom she asked for one night a thousand Dragmas, which
amounted to the rate of our money at this present time to xxiii.li.xix.s.x.d.
The which Demosthenes heryng, he departed, saying in this wise: I will not
repent me at that price. Some write that she demanded.x. thousand Dragmas,
which was a talent.

Laius, was king of Thebes, and father of Oedipus, whom Oedipus unawares slew
in battle, and wedded his wife which was also Oedipus mother called Iocasta.
Read after in Oedipus.

Laletania, a countray in Spain.

Lalisiones, ^oltes of wild asses.

Lallare, to speak like a babye: in the which word the greek does approach
nerer to the english than to the latin, as Babazin, which made a latin word,
is Babare. It may be transferred to the noryce, that babeleth with her child
when she gives to it the dugge.

Lamae, the raggydnes of rocks*

Lambo, bear, to lycke with the tungue. also to touch, to flow or run
softely.

Lambrus, a river in Italy, which meteth with the river of Po, called Padus.

Lambrani, people dwellinge about the said river of Lambrus.

Lamentabilis, le, lamentable.

Lamentarius, a, um, that causes lamentation.

Lamentatio, onis, lamentyng or waylyng.

Lamentor, aris, ari, to lament or bewail.

Lamia, is a beast, which has a woman's face, and the feet of a horse. It was
also the surname of a noble Romayne, and also of a famous harlot. it is also a
blind nettle.

Lamiae, be women, which beholding children, or gyuyng to them gifts, do alter
the ^ourm of them, which children be afterward callid elfes, or taken with the
fayry. And some such women will suck the blood from children. They be also
those, which be callid ladies of the fayry, which do allure young men to
company carnally with them, and after that they be consumyd in the act of
lecherye, they coueyt to devour them.

Lamina, a plate of metal.

Lamirus, one of the sons of Hercules.

Lampas, a leame of fire, or bryghtenes of the son, most used for a lamp.

Lamperia, the daughter of the son by Neaera which with her sister Phaetusa,
kept sheep in Sycile.

Lampetra, a fyshe called a lamprey.

Lampsacus, a town on the sea side callid Hellespontus in the side of Asia,
where Priapus was honored.

Lampsacenus, a, um, of Lampsacus.

Lampyris, a gloo worm, or a wourme called a gloo berde.

Lana, woulle.

Lanaria, an herb which fullers do use, when they scour clothes. Some do
say it is that which apothecaries do call Condisi.

Lanaris, re, that bears or has wolle.

Lanare paecus, beasts having woulle.

Lanarius, a woulle man, or he that occupies or sells woulle.

Lanatus, a, um, clad or wrapped in wolle.

Lanatus lupus, fyshe so called for his whytenes and softenes.

Lancearius, he that bears a iauelyn.

Lanceatus, armyd with a iauelyn. also woundyd with a iauelyn.

Lancia, a spanyshe iauelyn with a broad head.

Lancino, are, to strike, to rent with the tethe.

Lanerum, a garment made of vndyed woull.

Laneus, a, um, woullen.

Laneus, a fyshe.

Langa, a beast which is found about the river of Po.

Langia, a fountain in Nemea a countreye of Arcadia, where the host of Argiues
was refreshed, when they went against Thebes.

Langueo, and languesco, ere, to languyshe, to be sick, to be faint, to be
aferde, to be ydell.

Languidus, da, dum, faint, sick, aferde, idle.

Languor, oris, languour, faylyng of strength and natural moisture.

Langurium, languettes of aumber, like to long beadstones.

Laruena, the flesh shambles, or shop where flesh is sold, sometime it
signifies dismembryng.

Lanifex, idem qui lanificus.

Lanificium, cardyng and spynnyng of woull.

Lanificus, he that does work woll, to make it mete for the clothyer. it may
be called also a wolle wynder.

Lanio, are, to cut like a boucher.

Lanionius, a, um, pertainyng to bouchers craft

Lanista, he that had the rule over sword players, and caused them to be
taught, and after sold them. also that ordained birds to fight

Lanitium, clothing, or the craft of making woullen clothe.

Lanitius, a, um, woullen, or of woulle.

Lanium carnarium, a slaughter house.

Lanius, and Lanio, onis, a boucher.

Lano, are, to put in woll, or to dress with wull.

Lanugo, the soft hears or mosynes in the visages of children and women. also
on fruytes called peaches, and some herbs as long wort, clary, and such other.
Also the down feathers in birds. it is alsoo the saw duste or other poulder
which comes of wodde when it is percyd.

Lanx, cis, a dyshe, which of sum is called a potenger. also a balance.

Laodicea, a city in Asia.

Laodomia, the wife of Prothesileus.

Laomedon, ontis, the father of Priamus.

Lapathum, uel Lapathus, callid also Rumex, is the general name of all
sorrel, as Oxylapathum, or Lapathum acutum, sorrel as well wild as of the
gardeyn. Hippolapathon, a great sorrel like a docke, but having the taste of
sorrel, and is called patience.

Lapicida, a mason.

Lapidarius, a, um, pertaynyng to stones.

Lapidesco, scere, to be made or turned into a stoone.

Lapidicina, a quarye of stones.

Lapido, are, to stryke with stones. also to strike sometime without stones.

Lapillus, a little stone, also a precious stone.

Lapio, iui, ire, to make hard as a stone.

Lapis, idis, a stone, but less than that, which is called Saxum. Sometime it
is taken for a mile. Ad tertium aut quartum lapidem, at the third or the
fourth mile.

De lapide empti, were slaves or bo^dme^ sold.

Lapithe, people of Thessaly, of whom Perithous was king.

Lappa, the general name of al burres growing on herbs, which will stycke to
any thing.

Lapsana, after Dioscorides is a kind of wild nauewes having but three leaves.
Plinius and Theophrastus do write, that they were called of the Arcadians wyld
colewortes, and of the phisitio^s, as Theophrastus says, Cera. With the roots
hereof boiled in milk, all the host of Julius Caesar lived at Dyrrachiu^ a
long time. whereof came the proverb,

Lapsana uiuere, where men do live nygardly and wretchydly.

Lapsio, a fall.

Lapso, are, to fall often.

Lapsus, us, a fall. also a small offense done by negligence, an ouersyght.

Lapythos, a city in the isle of Cypres.

Laqueare, Laquear, and Laquearium, the roufe of a chaumber, which is imbowid
or fretted. also a plain beam in a roufe.

Laqueatus, a, um, haltered snarled, tied, or bound fast. sometime it
signifies holowe or bowynge.

Laqueus, an halter.

Lara, uel Larunda, was a maiden which showed to Juno the wanton pastymes of
Iupyter with women. For the which Iupyter did cut of her tungue, and
commanded Mercurius to bring her to hell. Who begat on her two sons, which
were called Lares.

Laranda, a city Lycaonia.

Lararium, a private chapel or closet in a man's house.

Larcus, a pan wherein coals be carried.

Larentia, a famous harlot, which because she made the people of Rome her
heir, they named her a goddess, and called her Flora.

Lares, goddis, which the paynymes did suppose every person had belonging
unto him: they were also called Penates, both the which words be also taken
for pryuate dwellynges or houses. Mei lares, mei penates. My house or dwelling
place.

Large, abundantly.

Largior, iris, iri, to give liberally. also to grant.

Largitas, tatis, largenes, or lyberalitie.

Largitio, lyberall expenses, to win a man's purpose.

Largus, a, um, large or free of expenses.

Laridum, uel Lardum, larde, or the fat of an hog. sometime swynes flesh
salted.

Larine, a fountain in Attica.

Larissa, the name of one city in Thessalia, an other in Asia, the third in
Italy.

Larius, a brook by the city of Comum.

Larix, laricis, a great tree, which has leaves like a pyneappull, the wodde
long and apt for buyldyng of inward warkes, it has in it a thyn rosen of
the color of honey of Athenes. it perysheth not neither by rottyng, nor by
eating of worms, nor will bourne in a flame, nor be brought unto coals, but
by a long space of time be consumyd. also it will not swym on the water as
other trees do. And therefore be they either carried in ships, or else laid on
fyrre trees pynned together. The gum which comes from this tree, is called
Laricearhesina, which is used in the stead of Terebinthine, ne that is
discommended of Aetius.

Larodij, people in Scithia.

Larua, a spirit, which appears in the night time. some do call it a hegge,
some a goblyn. also a masker, or he that wears a vysour it is sometime taken
for the same vysour.

Laruale, an image defourmed, pale, lean, and horrible to behold.

Laruatus, he that is feared with a spirit, and is become mad. it sommetyme
sygnifyeth a masker.

Larus, called in greek Cepphus, a lyttel bird having many feathers, which at
the time that she brings forth young, she cries out. She lives by eating
the some of salt water: of her came the proverb: Larus parturit, Larus does
lay: applied to them, which promise much, and great things, and finally do
give or bring forth nothing, in regard unto that which they promised.

Lasanum, a chaumber pot or vrinall.

Lasciuia, wantonness.

Lasciuio, ire, to be wanton.

Lasciuus, a, um, wanton.

Laser, or Laseris, is a gum or juice rnnyng out of a tree, which is taken
of the best writers to be that which is callid of the apothecaries Asa foetida.
Read more in Sylphium.

Laserpitium, is of Antonius Musa supposed to be the sweet rosen called
Belsewine or B^ugewin. some suppose it to be the tree, of the which comes
that rosen or gum.

Lasibus, old writers used for Laribus.

Lasseo, and lassesco, lassus, ^um, scere, to be weary.

Lassi^, an isle in the sea calllyd Egeum, it was also called Andros.

Lassitudo, weariness.

Lasso, are, to be weary.

Lassus, a, um, weary.

La^^aurus, a great leechour.

Latace, an herb which the kings of Persia were wont to give to
ambassadors, wherein they had this superstitious believe, that bering about
them that herb, where so ever they were, they should have plenty of all
things, and should not perish for hunger or thirst The figure of this herb I
could never find in any author.

Late, abroad in many places.

Latebra, and (...), arum, a privy place where men do hyde them. sometime it
signifies an excuse.

Latebro, are, to hyde.

Latebrosus Iocus, where as be many privy places.

Lateo, tui, tere, to be hid.

Later, a tyle.

Laterem lauas, thou washist a slate or a tile A proverb signifieng thou
labourest in vayn*

Laterem elixas, A proverb having the same signification.

Laterani, yomen of the guard.

Lateranus, the name of a consule of Rome, of whose house was made a church in
the city of Rome of saint John^, which is now called Lateranensis.

Laterculus, a little tyle.

Lateritius, a, um, made of tyles.

Laterna, a lantern.

Latex, ticis, all manner of lycour: but it is most commonly taken for water.

Latheris, an herb called spurge.

Latialis, le, and Latiaris, re, of latin, of that part of Italy, which was
called Latium.

Latibulo, are, to be hid.

Latibulum, a den or bury, where beasts do hyde them. sometime it is used
for a secret place or cave, wherein men be hyd.

Laticlauium, the garment of a senator. sometime it sygnifieth the dignity of
a senator.

Latico, care, to lurk.

Latifolium, that which has broad leaves.

Latifundium, a great or large field, great and large possessions.

Latinae, narum, sacrifices to Jupiter, named of the latins; who first did
ordain them.

Latin, in the form of latyne.

Latinitas, atis, latyne speech.

Latinus, na, um, latyne, or of the people called latynes.

Latinus, the proper name of the father in law to Aeneas.

Latitudo, dinis, breadthe.

Latium, a part of Italy between the river of Tibris and Liris, wherein
stands the city of Rome.

Latius, a, um, of that country.

Latinius, a mountain in Ionia, where poete^ say the moon kyssed Endymion.

Lato, latescare, to be ^rode.

Latomia, at dungeon in the prison at Rome.

Latomiae, was a straight prison in the city of Siracusis in Sicilia: an other
in Spartha. It is also a quarry, out of the which stones are dygged.

Latomus, a mason.

Latona, was mother of Apollo and Diana.

Latonia, called also Diana, and is alsoo taken for the moon.

Latres, a servant.

Latria, the honor and service, wherewith god only is worshypped.

Latrina, a siege or sakes.

Latro, are, to bark as a dog does.

Latrocinium, theft, robbery.

Latrocinor, nari, to rob. also to serve in wars

Latrones, robbers by the high way. also souldyours retained. Among the
Romans it were those, which were always about the kings or emperors person,
as the guard is about the king. also Latrones seu latrunculi, be chessemen,
with the which men do play at the chesse.

Latrunculator, a justice of gayle delyuerye, or any Justice, which does give
sentence on thieves.

Latuniae, quarries where stones are dygged.

Latus, ta, tum, broad.

Lata culpa, a gross negligence, when a man perceyueth not that thing that
every man understands.

Latus, lateris, a side.

Latus clauus, a senators robe or garment. It is put sometime for the dignity
of a senator. semblably Laticlauium.

Lauacrum, a bathe or bayne.

Lauatrina, a synk, wherinto soul water is cast or swept, whereby pauementes ar
made clean.

Lauce, an isle in the sea called Pontus.

Laudabilis, le, laudable, commendable.

Laudatio, a praise or commendation.

Laudo, are, to praise.

Laudo ^es^em, I take to witness.

Lauer, an herb growyng in the water, like to Alysaunder, but having less
leaves. some do call it bylders.

Lauerna, a goddess, under whose protection thieves were in Rome.

Lauinia, was daughter of king Latinus* for whom Aeneas and Turnus faught
together.

Lauinium, a city in Italy called also Lauretu^.

Lauo, uaui, are, and lauo, ui, ere, to wash.

Laurea, a leaf of laurel or bay tree. sometime a garlande made of laurel.

Laurens, it is, a man of the town callid Laurentu^.

Laurentum, a city in Italy callid also Lauiniu^.

Laureo, are, to put on a garlande of laurel.

Laureola, a crown or garlande that vyctours ware in their triumph.

Lauretum, a place wherein do grow laurelles or bay trees.

Laureus, a, um, of laurel.

Laurifer, and lauriger, is he that wears a garlande of laurel.

Laurinum, oil of laurel or ^ayes.

Laurion, a place in Attica, where silver was dygged.

Laurus, a laurel or bay tree.

Laus, laudis, praise.

Lautia, were presents, which the Romans did send to ambassadors of other
realms.

Lautitia, magnyficence and netenes in diverse and bankettes.

Lautrices, the wives of two brethren.

Lautulae, weat baynes.

Lautus, and lotus, ta, tum, washed, also nete or clean, or elegant, rich.

Laxitas, tatis, and laxamentum, release, pardon, lousenes, liberty.

Laxo, are, to louse or set at liberty, to release.

Laxare manipulos, was in battaylle, when the sundry bendes or cumpanies of
footmen were set in array, one man a convenient distance from an other, that
they mough^ fight the more at their liberty.

Laxum, an aduerbe, signifies wide.

Laxus, a, um, louse, large, wide, soft, weak.

L ANTE E.
LAEA, laeae, a lioness.

Leae, an ylande by Cyrenaica, a regyon of Affryke.

Leaena, a lioness it was also the name of a common woman at Athenes, who
after that Harmodius and Aristogiton had slain Hypparchum the tyrant, she
being turmented in sundry fascio^s, to the intent that she should dyscouer the
confederates of that murder, she spoke not one word, but bytynge in sunder her
tungue, she spyt it in the face of Hyppias the tyrant, who caused her to be
tourmented.

Leander, the name of a man.

Learchus, son of Athamas and Ino, whom the father being mad slew in the
stead of an heart.

Lebadia, a city in Boeotia.

Lebes, lebetis, a caudron to boil in.

Lechia, a fysshe, which some have taken to be Tuny, for the similitude of
them.

Leconomantia, was a kind of divination by water in a basyn, which the
rusticall people in the old time used among the Assyrians. They filled a
basyn sulle of water, into the which after certain words spoken, spirits
entered into the water, whereby was herd a little sown or whysperyng, by the
which the inchantours perceived things to come, and made answers according.
Ioannes Zeses in his comment on the Iliados of Homere makes mention of two
kinds of Leca^omantia, one old was, which Ulysses vsyd, an other new
found, which is by water in a deep basyn, into the which was put gold, silver,
ambre, copper, and stones, whereat might be no women, or they which had
oftended with women. But this vain science is forboden among christen men,
like as Necromancy and Geomancy is.

Lectica, a thing like to a bed, wherein rich men and noble men were borne by
syx servants, it may be taken for a lyghter.

Lecticarij, they which bare Lecticam.

Lectio, onis, reading.

Lectipes, an herb.

Lectisterniator, oris, a chamberlayn, or he that makes the beds.

Lectisterniu^, a solemnity among the paynims when in the honor of their
goddis Jupiter, Juno, and Minerua, beds were spradde in the temples, in the
which first the ydolles were laid, in the residue as many as might lie and
eat.

Lectito, are, to read often.

Lecton, one of the tops of the mountayn called Ida.

Lectrum, a part of Asia, lyenge into the sea.

Lecturio, ire, to desire to read.

Lectus, a bed.

Lectulus, a little bed.

Lecythus, a pot of earth, which served only for oil.

Leda, was wife of Tindarus king of Laconia, with whom (as poets do fable)
Jupiter in the form of a swanne did company, and she brought forth two
eggs, of the one came Pollux and Helena, which was rauyshed by Paris: of the
other came Castor and Clytemnestra. Pollux and Castor be called Ledaei.

Lagatarius, ia, to who^ any thing is bequethed.

Legatio, an ambassade, or office of an a^bassador

Legatitius, pertaynyng to legacies.

Legator, oris, he that bequetheth any thing, the testatour.

Legatum, a legacy or bequeste.

Legatus, an ambassador, that has commission to treat of matters. He that is
sent only to salute or congratulate, is called Orator. it is also a
lieutenaunt or generalle capytayne of an army.

Legerda, a city in great Armeny.

Legio, onis, a company of men of war, contaynyng commonly syx thousand
foot men, seven hundred thyrty and two horsemen* it is also a town in Cornwall
now called Leskarde.

Legionarius, a, um, pertaynyng to a legion.

Legirupa, a breaker of laws.

Legirupio, idem.

Legislator, a maker or gyuer of laws.

Legifer, idem.

Legi^imus, a, um, according to the law.

Legitimi dies, days in bank before ordinarye judges, when the party should
appear or plead, or else it may be days of return in the kings benche or
chauncery.

Legitima iuditia, judgments confirmed by laws written, or ancient custom.

Legiuncula, a small legion.

Lego, are, to send as an ambassador, or as a legate, or deputy, to commytte
or appoynte, to bequeath.

Lego, gi, gere, to gather, to reed, to pass by, to chouse, to stryke.

Legula, a fyllette.

Leguleius, a lawyer.

Legulus, a gatherer of small things.

Legumen, minis, all manner of pulse, as beans, peason, vetches, tares. etc.

Legumentum, and Legarium, the same.

Leleges, seu Lelegae, people, which were always wandrynge.

Lema, a tear.

Lemanus, a river which runs into the river of Rone, called in french
Lausane.

Lembus, a swyfte lyttel ship, which may be called a bark.

Lemnia terra, that which is now called Terra sigillata.

Lemnisci, labelles hanging down from garlandes. also iesses belongyng to an
hawk

Lemnos, one of the yles called Cyclades, in this isle Vulcane was nourysshed.
The womenne thereof being in a furye, that their husbands were long absente
in wars. When they came home, the women conspyrynge together, slew them all
in one night, saving that Hypsiphile the kings daughter saved her father, and
conveyed him. Read in Hypsiphile.

Lemosi, they that weep lightly.

Lemouices, Lymosyn in France.

Lemures, spirits which do walk by night, with horrible fygures.

Lenaeus, one of the names of Bacchus.

Lenas, a bawd.

Lendigino^^s, a, um, full of nyttes.

Lenio, iui, ire, to pacyfye, to appease, to treat gentyllye, to make plain,
or smothe, to comfort.

Lenis, ne, that which has no roughnes, meke tractable, soft of conditions.

Lenitas, and Lenitudo, mekenes, gentylnes, easynesse to please, softnes,
smothenesse.

Leniter, softely, swetely, moderately.

Leno, a baude, a merchant of hoores.

Lenobates, a treader of grapes.

Lenocinium, the practyse of baudry. sometime immoderate and exquisite
klenlynesse or elegancy, to styre a man to vice, a vicious pleasantness.

Lenocinor, ari, to practice baudry. also to speak fair, or allure oone with
words, and other pleasant things.

Lenonius, a, um, pertaynyng to bawdes.

Lens, lendis, a nytte.

Lens, lentis, a kind of pulse called lyntelles.

Lens palustris, duckes meat, which in standing waters lies houerynge.

Lent, easyly, softely.

Lentesco, scere, to be smothe or tender.

Lenticula, a pulse called chyttes.

Lenticula, a manner of vessel, out of the which kings and princis were
anointed, a chrysmatory, a round read thing like a lyntell in men's vysages.

Lenticularis, re, like a chyt or fatche.

Lentiginosus, he that has in his face or body many little red marks, like
lyntelles.

Lentigo, ginis, a thing like a little warte in the face read or black.

Lentiscus, a little tree, out of the which comes a sweet gum called
Mastix.

Lento, tare, to do a thing softly or easily, slowly

Lentus, ta, tum, soft, gentle, easy, slow, remiss, ydell, cleauyng, or
clammy.

Lenulus, a little or young bawd.

Lenunculus, idem. also a little fyshers bote. also the whelpe of a lion.

Leo, onis, a lion. also a shel fysh callid a lopster

Leonem ex unguibus aestimare, to esteem the lion by his talons. A proverb
signifieng to perceive by a little what the hole matter means, or by a piece
of a thing what the holle is.

Leone^ radere, spoken where one atte^pteth a thing dangerous and almost
impossible.

Leo risit, a proverb touching them, which be sour of countenance, fierce,
and vncurteys.

Leocrates, the name of an excellent grauer.

Leodamas, the proper name of a philosopher.

Leon, a philosopher.

Leonides, was king of the Lacedemonia^s, which did feats of war against
Xerxes king of Persia incredible, and finally was slain in defendyng Greece,
with four thousand and eight hundred Greeks only, against.xvii. hundred
thousand of the hooste of Xerxes.

There was also an another Leonides, which was tutour to king Alexander, when
he was a child.

Leonina, an herb, which grows on hills, whose flowers ar like to a lions
mouth when he gapeth.

Leontopetalon, an herb, having leaves like to colewortes, the stalk half a
foot high, the seed in husks as great as small peason, the root like a rape
root, great and black, which helps against the styngyng and bitynge of all
manner of serpents.

Leontophon, a little worm, which if the lion do byte, the lion dies
incontinent.

Leontophona, a little beast, whose head is turned into ashes, wherewith men do
myxt flesh, and cast it in the ways whereby lions do pass, whereof if they do
eat, they dye incontinent.

Leontopodion, an herb called Pee de lion, which has flowers like roses
vnsprad.

Leontopodium, an herb, which some do say is like to that which is called
marygouldes, some do suppose it to be the herb which is called Dent de lion.

Leopardus, a lybarde.

Lepadusa, the isle of Sicile.

Lepide, pleasantly, pratily.

Lepidium, is an herb which Vergilius Marcellus supposes to be that which
the apothecaries do call Setrac. Ruellius describes it to have leaves when they
be young like to laurelle, but they be softer. Finallye it is like a sword
blade rebated, the stalk ryseth in heyght a cubite, and has a great root
with a thyck rynde, and a pythe like to wood.

Lepidus, a, um, nete, polyte, and pleasant, as well in speech as in gesture.

Lepista, a little pot or viole.

Lepor, oris, and lepos, ^^is, pureness or netenes in speech. also the good
grace and dilectablenes in speech and gesture.

Leporarium, an enclosure, or place enclosed, wherein are kept any beasts for
pleasure or hunting.

Leporinus, na, number, of an hare.

Leporis palatium, an herb callid Southistell, in greek Sonchus.

Lepra, lepry.

Leprium, a city in Achaia.

Leptoludiae, black fygges.

Leptus, the weight of a karat and an half. Andreas Alciatus in tres
posteriores libros, A karate is the third part of Obolus, which is half a
serupyll.

Lepus, poris, an hare.

Lepusculus, a leuret or young hare.

Lerna, a lake in Achaia about Argos, and a fenne in the which was the
serpente Hydra with many heedes. In to this lake the people of the cities of
Argus and Mycene did throw all the ordure and sweapynges of their streets and
houses. Thereof came the proverb:

Lerna malorum, whereby was sygnified an heap of myschiefes, or any person in
who^ is all vice and abomination.

Lernaeus, a, um, of Lerna.

Leros, an ylande in she sea Icarie.

Lesbos, an isle in the sea callid Egeum, wherein was the city callad Mytilene.

Lesbius, a, um, of the isle of Lesbos.

Lesbia regula, is spoken, where as rayson is applied to the act, and not the
act to reason: and where the law is accommodate to manners, and not manners to
the law. Hereof speaks Aristotle Moralium li.5. Of that which is infynite,
the rule is infynite, like the leaden rule of Lesbos, which serves for
buyldyng, and is changed to the fascyon of the stone.

Lessus, us, a lamentable voice used in the buryeng of men, as we do say, alas.

Lestorum, a region of Indie.

Lestrygones, a people in the extreme part of Italy, which did eat the
companyons of Ulysses, rostyng them on broches.

Letalis, le, mortal.

Letania, uel Litania, a supplication or common prayer.

Letatus, slain.

Lethargus, or Letargia, which of some is called Veternus (is as Paulus Egineta
writes) a disease in that part of the head, in the which the power of reason
is contained, possedyng the same place that phrenesy does, that is to say the
brain, but the cause and matter be contrary, for in this is continual
necessity of sleep, hard to be awaked, the matter being a moist and very
cold humor, washyng the brain, and compellyng one to sleep. Alexander
Trallianus adds thereto, that therein is such a forgetfulness, that he which
is syrk can not remember what he would speak. Co^stantinus says, that where
sometime they do gape, they do forgette to close their mouths. It is sometime
called Vera, and than is it of a pure cold matter, and sometime it is called Non
uera, and than is it of a cold matter myxt with a little blood or choler,
seldom it happeth of melancholy. Sometime it follows an other sycknes, as a
fleumaticke fever, or the sycknes of the lungues called Peripneumoniia, in
these dyseases, by heat the fleume is made subtle, and is plucked up to the
brain, where a cotidiane fever and that be together, sometime the fever
departs in the space of.vii. days, and leaves behind that syckenes.

Lethargicus, he that has the slepyng or forgetful syckenes.

Lethe, a river of hell, the water whereof as soon as it is drunk, causes a man
to forget al thing that is passed. it is also a river in Africa.

Letifer, ra, rum, deadly, bryngyng or causynge death.

Letificus, ca, cum, causyng death.

Leto, are, to slay.

Letum, or Lethum, death.

Leua manus, the left hand.

Leuca, a promontory or elbowe of land, nyghe to Corinthus.

Leucacantha, is (as Ioannes Agricola affyrmeth) a thorny bushe coming up in
hedges and diches, having white flowers, which ar soote: orels (says he) a
kind of thystelles, which be square and full of pryckes. Albeit Manardus
supposed it to be that which the Arabians do call Bedeguar. Ruellius affyrmeth
it to be that which Dioscorides does call Rhamnus, the Romans Albam spina^,
white thorn, growing in hedges, having straight up branches full of
pryckes, little leaves somewhat long, fatty, and soft. Some is whiter than
other, the darker colored has brother leaves, and somewhat ruddy, the twigges
be in length almost five cubits, the fruit thereof is white, broad, thynne, and
fascioned like a codde. Now have ye the sundry descriptions of the great
learned me^, of this time, divine you what Leucacantha is, for to so diverse
opinyons I can not find one english, except I should call it white bryer.

Leucanthemis, an herb, which physicians of late days call camomyll.

Leucates, a mountain in Epiro. also an isle.

Leuce, a lyttel town not far from Smirnia. Also an herb like Mercury
having a white line in the myddle of the leaf.

Leu^bia, is the general name to all kinds of vyolettes, not withstanding it
is proprelye taken for the yelowe violettes, which some do call hearts ease,
the Arabians do call it Cheni.

Leucola, an isle by Cypres.

Leucoma, the web in the eye when it is roted

Leucomum, white cotton.

Leucophaeus, a brown or a russet color.

Leucophaeatus, he that does wear a russette garment.

Leucophlegmantia, a white dropsy.

Leucophlegmatia, or Leucophlegmatias hyderos, one kind of dropsy, wherein all the body swells unequally.

Leucopu^, and Leucopus, white of natural color.

Leucosia, an isle against Pestanum, in the sea Thyrrenum.

Leucosyria, a country, which is now called Cappadocia.

Leucothaea, the goddess which was called Matuta and Aurora.

Leucothea, was daughter of Orcamus of Babylonia, whom being gotten with child
by Phoebus, her father did bury her alive, but Phoebus (as poets feign) did
transfourme her unto a tree, out of the which rounneth frankyncense.

Leucrocuta, a beast in Inde, of the greatness of an ass, having legs like an
heart, the head, neck, tail, and breast of a gray or badger, the feet cloven,
a wide mouth unto the ears, in the stead of tethe one hole bone, in his voice
he will resemble the speech of a man. Note here, that Pliny says, that this
beast in his heed is of the fascion of Meles, and Meles is the beast called
Taxo, which is a graye or a badger And Solinus says, that he has the head of
a camel, which perchance was the fault of the writer or prynter, which unto
Meli, added Ca, and made it Cameli.

Leuctra, a town in Laconia in Greece.

Leuctrum, a town in Boeotia.

Leui, one of the sons of Jacob the patriark.

Leuiathan, a dragon of the sea: it is taken in holy scripture for the dyuell.

Leuiculus, a, um, somewhat light. also wanton.

Leuidensis, se, thynne wrought, and of small substance.

Leuifidus, da, dum, of light credence or trust.

Leuir, ri, the husbands brother.

Leuis, leave, light.

Leuia uina, small wynes.

Leuita, among the Jews was a mynyster in their ceremonies under their
priests.

Leuitas, tatis, lyghtnes.

Leuiter, lightly.

Leuo, are, to lift up. sometime to take away, to abate or mynyshe, to mitigate,
to make easy or light.

Leuare aliquem onere, to dyscharge one of his bourdeyn.

Leuare animum, to recreate the spirit.

Leuare annona^, to minish the p^ce of vitailes

Leuare facinus alicuius, to excuse oone of a mischeuous deed.

Leuare ictum serpentis, to heal one stunge with an adder.

Leuare laborem alicui, to ease him of his labor, or to put him out of pain.

Leuare metum alicui, to put one out of fear

Leuare morbum alicui, to make his sycknes more easy.

Leuare populum frumento, to help the people with corn in time of scarsitie.

Leuare suam authoritatem, to minysshe his authority.

Leuus, a, um, light. alsoo when it is spoken of worldly things, it sygnifieth
left, unhappy, contrary. when it is referred to celestial things, it
betokens right, fortunate, prosperous. For that which to us is the left
hand, to them which are above us, and do look toward us, is the right hand.

Lex, legis, law, also a statute or decree.

Lex municipalis, the peculyar law, which every city has.

Lex orchia, a law, which assygned how many persons should be boden to
souper, and that men should soupe at their doors, to ^hintent that it might
appear, how the law was obeyed.

Lex plagiaria, whereby men were whipped.

Leges Centuriatae, laws made by the assemblies called Comitia Centuriata,
Read Comitia.

Leges Curiatae, laws made in the assemblis called Curiata comitia, which
were called by tribes.

Leges Tribunitiae, laws made by all the common people, which were also callid
Plebiscita.

Lege agere, to sue in the law. also to do execution.

Legibus soluere, to dispense or grau^nt a placarde to one to do any thing
contrary to a law made.

Lexipyreti, medicines, which do heal men of fevers.

Lexouij, people in high France about Burbon

L ANTE I.
LIA, one of the wives of Jacob the patryarche.

Liae, be holes in the top of a mast, which do receive the cabuls or ropes.

Liba, an isle in the Indian sea.

Libadion, an herb called the less centory.

Libamen, minis, Libamentum, and libatio, a taste or say taken, proprely in
sacrifice.

Libanius, the name of a great rhetorician.

Libanos, a tree growinge in Arabia, out of the which runs frankyncense,
which of Euripides is callid Libanos, and the tree Libanotos, contrary wise of
Sophocles and Galenus, the tree is callid Libanos, and the gum Liban^tos.

Liban^tis, tidis, an herb called rosemary.

Libanotus, a wind, which does blow out of the northwest.

Libanus, a mountayn between Araby and Phenicia. it is also a tree, which
brings forth incense.

Libella, the diminutiue of Libra. it was also a small coin, and of them were
two sorts, one was worth the tenthe part of Sestertius, the other the tenthe
part of Denarius: it is alsoo the line and plummette of a mason or carpentar.

Libellio, a writer of books.

Libelliones, caryers of letters.

Libellorum praefecti, masters of the requests which do receive bylles of
supplication, being put in, to the king or prince.

Libellulus, a very little book.

Libellus, a little book. also sometime an epistle, a supplication, a libelle
or declaration in the law, of debt, trespass, covenant, and other like.

Libens, willing.

Libenti animo, gladly.

Libenter, willingly, gladly.

Libentiae, dilectations, pleasures.

Libentina, one of the names of Venus.

Liber, liberi, the fynder of wine, callid alsoo Bacchus and Dionysius.

Liber, libri, a book or warke written, the inner rynde of a tree.

Liber, ra, rum, free, at liberty, not bounden, large or great.

Liberalia, orum, the festyual days of Bacchus.

Liberalis, le, lyberall.

Liberales arts, the lyberal sciences, or sciences belongyng to a free man.

Liberalis forma, a good favor.

Liberale ingenium, a free courage.

Liberale iuditium, and liberalis causa, where a man contendeth for his
liberty.

Liberalitas, tatis, lyberalitie.

Liberalis causa, where a man contendeth for his liberty.

Liberaliter, liberally. Exercitum quem in Asia ductauerat, luxuriose, nimisque
liberaliter habuerat, The army which he had with him in Asia, he let them
have to much their pleasure.

Liberaliter eruditus, well taught.

Liberaliter uiuere, to live without vile occupation.

Libere, frankly, lyberally, without constraynt.

Libere uiuere, to live at pleasure.

Liberi, children, as well women as men.

Liberides, conyes.

Libero, are, to deliver, to set at liberty.

Liberare creditorem, to content, or satisfye him, of whom money is borrowed,
to pay dettis.

Libertas, tatis, liberty taken always in the good part.

Libertinus, and Libertus, he that of a bondsman is manumysed or infranchised.

Liberum arbitrium, free will.

Libet, it lyketh or contenteth.

Libethra, a cave, wherein was a well, callid Libethros, where the Musis being
conversant, were therefore called Libethrides.

Libethrides, the Muses, or ladies of sciences.

Libethrus, a mountain in Macedonia, where the Muses did dwell.

Libidinarius, a haunter of lechery.

Libidinosus, lecherous, wylfull, pleasant.

Libido, dinis, sensualite, unlawful apetite or lust. sometime it signifies
only appetite or will.

Libitina, a goddess in whose temple were sold all things pertaining to
sepulture or funeralles. sommetyme for buryenge. Also for death, or the biere
whereon dead bodies are carried.

Libitinarius, he that has the surueyinge and charge about burienges.

Libo, are, to taste any thing, sometime to touch. sometime to sacrifyce,
sometime to take.

Libra, a pound, among the Romans conteinyng.xii. ounces, which is called a
pound troyweyght. Sometime a pair of balances. it is also one of the.xii.
signs.

Libra Attica, read in Mina.

Libralis, le, a pound weight.

Libramentum, poyse or weight.

Libraria, a lybrary.

Librarius, a seriuener, a bokebynder.

Librarius, a, um, pertaining to books or of a pound weight.

Librile, the hanging equally of the balance.

Librilla, a cougell or stone to throw at one.

Libripens, dis, a weyer. it was also among the Romans he, which bought a
bo^dma^ or slave, taking a pound weight of brass in his hand, and saying: This
man, which with this money and brason pound is bought to my use, by the laws
of the Romans, I say is min own.

Libro, are, to wey, to poyse, to make weyghty, to houer.

Libs, a wind, the which blows out of the southe.

Libum, a chese cake.

Liburni, people of the country callid Liburnia also common messangers.

Liburnia, a part of Dalmatia or Slauony, now called Croatia.

Liburnu^, liburna, liburnas, and liburnica, a light ship or foyst.

Libya, was among the Greeks the general name of all Aphrica: Not
withstandyng it is of the Romans taken only for that part of Aphrica, which
is from Egypt, to the weste occean, contaynyng Cyrenaicam, Aphricam minorem,
Numidiam, and Mauritaniam. The Spaniardes do call them al commonly Mores

Libycis, cidis, a town in Judea, on the east part of the river of Jordan.

Libycontes, stones, which are not very clear.

Libycus, ca, cum, of Libia.

Libyophoenices, people in Africa.

Libys, and Libyssa, a man and woman of Libya

Licenter, rashely.

Licentia, license, unlawful or immoderat liberty.

Licentiosus, rash, vsyng unlawful liberty.

Liceo, cere, to cheapen.

Liceor, ceris, ceri, to set the price.

Licet, it is lefull. sometime it is used for may. Mihi licet, I may. Tibi
licet, thou may. sometime be it so, admytte it. Licuit esse ocioso
Themistocli, Themistocles might have be^ without travail.

Nobis non licet esse tam disertis, We can not be so well spoken.

Per me uel stertas licet, thou may sleep for me until thou routest, or I
will give the leave to route.

Lichas, a measure, which excedeth not four fyngers.

Lichen, an herb called Lyuerwort.

Lichenes, ryngwormes or tetters.

Lichenis, a foul breakyng out, which begins about the chyn. Some do take
it for the french pockes.

Lichnis agrestis, called also Tragonaton, and Anthirrhinos, an herb like to
lynseede, having almost no rote, and a blue flower with seeds like a caulfes
snoute. It grows among corn in some countrays.

Licia, be thredes, which sylk women do weaue in lyncelles or stools.

Liciatorium, a weauers shyttell, or a sylke woman's tauell, whereon sylke or
threde being wounden, is shot throught the web or lome.

Licinia, a kind of olyue trees.

Licitator, toris, a cheapener, a chapman. sometime it signifies a broker.

Licite, lefully.

Licitor, aris, ari, to bye and selle for gaynes, or to bargayne by exchange
or cheuysaunce, to fight, to deceive a man by a crafty bargayn.

Lictor, a sergeant, or other like minister to execute corporal punysshement.
A Consule of Rome had.xii. Other head officers had six, which bare every one
in their hands rods and axes bounden together, to do with them execution,
as they were commanded.

Lictorius, a, um, pertaynyng to sergeantes and other like officers.

Lictus, ta, tum, lycked.

Lidoron a tyle in length one foot and an half, in bredthe one foot.

Lien, enis, the spleen.

Lienicus, and Lienosus, he that is sick in the spleen.

Ligamen, minis, Ligamentum, a bond.

Ligellum, a cotage.

Liger, eris, a river in France called Loire.

Lignarius faber, a carpentar.

Lignator, a caryer of wood.

Lignile, fuel, or a wood stacke.

Lignor, aris, ari, to go to carry wood.

Lignosus, a, um, as hard as wood.

Lignum, wood.

Ligo, are, to bind.

Ligo, onis, a spade.

Ligula, a little tungue. it is also a spoone called also Cochlear, which in
measure contains.iii. dragmas, and one scruple.

Ligur, a man or woman of Liguria.

Liguria, a part of Italy from the hyl called Apeninus, unto the sea called
Thuscum, also from the river of Varus unto the river called Macra. In it be
the cities, Genua, Sauona, Naulum, Albigena.

Ligurio, ire, to eat lykorousely, or to devour sweet or daynty meats. also
to eat dayntily or curiousely.

Liguritor, toris, a dayntye feeder, an eater of delycate meats.

Ligus, guris, of the country of Liguria, a Ianuens of Ianeway.

Ligusticum mare, the sea that is by Ieane.

Ligusticus, ca, cum, of Liguria.

Ligustrum, a tree having leaves like an olyue tree, but they be brother and
softer, and more grene of color, which does bear white flowers and sote,
whereof is made an oil called oleum Cyprinum. And this tree does grow in
watery places, as wyllowes and salowes do, and bearith a black fruit like to
an elder tree, they which do take it for the bushe called Priuet, be much
deceived. it is also an herb, which some men do call Mayor, and grows by
hedges.

Ligyes. are people of Asia, which with Xerxes warred against the Greeks.

Lilietum, a place where do grow many lylies.

Lilinum, oil of lylyes.

Lilium, a lylye.

Lilybeum, a town in Sicile where one of the Sibilles lies buried.

Lima, a fyle.

Limaria, the fyshe called Tuny, when it does not excede one foot in length.

Limatulus, a little fyled.

Limatura, powder, which comes of fylyng.

Limax, cis, a snayle. also a man, which prieth or seeks for some thing to
consume.

Limborarius, a maker of gardes or purfles.

Limbus, a purfle of a woman's garment, or a guard of a man's garment.

Limen, minis, signifies not only the thrashold of a door, but also the
haunse. sometime it sygnifieth the entree of the door sometime frendshyp after
the exposition of Seruius.

Limenarcha, the wardeyn of the ports.

Limes, mitis, sygnyfyeth a bound or buttynge in fyeldes.

Limetanei agri, fields lyenge in the extreme marches of a country.

Limetanei milites, soudiors which were appointed to keep and defend the marches
of thempire.

Limitatus, ta, tum, bounded lymytted.

Limito, are, to bound or lymytte how far a thing does extend.

Limo, are, to fyle, to polyshe.

Limones, fruit called lymons, whereof no mention is made of ancient authors,
except it be among them, which are called Citra.

Limonium, an herb growyng in meadows or moorysshe grounds, having leaves
like to beetes, but less and more weak, and has a stalk like a lylye full
of leaves, and has a red seed.

Limuici, or Limouices, Lymosyn in Poyters.

Limus, a vesture from the bealy downewarde. also mud or slyme, which is in
the water.

Limus, a, um, crooked, awry, a skewe.

Limis oculis spectare, to look wa^to^ly on the one side, to cast a wanton eye,
to look a skew.

Linamentum, lynnen.

Linarius, a warker of lynnen.

Lindum, a city in England, which some do suppose to be Lyncolne, some
Lynne.

Linea, a carpentars line or cord. it signifies also every line generally,
either made or imagyned to be.

Lineamentum, the fascion of a body.

Linearis, re, pertaining to a line.

Lingo, xi, gere, to lycke with the tunge. also to suck down by little and
little.

Linctus, tus, lycking or suckynge down.

Lingones, people of France in the countreye called Langres.

Lingua, a tunge. also a language. also an instrument, wherewith men do take
medicines or salues out of a box.

Lingua bula, an herb called Langdebeofe.

Linguax, acis, a great speaker, full of words.

Lingula, a little tungue. also a lachet or lingell. also Lingua and lingula,
do sometime sygnifye a spoone.

Lingulaca, a woman full of words. also a fish called a soole.

Linio, iui, ire, to annoynte.

Lino, ni, ere, to annoint or lay on some thing that is sick. also to line.

Linostrophron, an herb, which is also called Marubium, horehounde.

Linozostis, an herb called Mercury.

Linquo, liqui, linquere, to leave.

Lintearius, a mercer of lynnen.

Linteo, onis, a lynnen weauer.

Linteolum, a piece of lynnen clothe.

Linternum, a town in Campania, where Scipio Aphricanus dyed, and is buried.

Linternus, a river in Campania.

Linteum, a sheet. it is also taken for all lynnen clothes. sometime for
sails.

Lintres, little botes made of holow trees.

Linum, lynnen.

Linus, the most ancient poet, a Theban, whom Vergilius callith the son (...)
^pollo and Vtania one of the.ix. Muses.

Linx, a beast, which has the face (...) a lion, the body spotted like a
Panther, (...) is of the greatness of a do, whose vryne i^ sodaynely turned
into a stone.

Lipara, an isle by Gre^ce. It is alsoo a soft plaster.

Liparis, a river in Cilicia.

Lipopsichia, a sowndynge, where one seems to be dead.

Lipopthymia, a traunse.

Lippio, iui, ire, to be porreblynde, or sandblynd, or dymmeof sight.

Lippitudo, the blearenes of the eyes.

Lippus, bleare eyed, having droppyng eyes.

Lipsana, scrappes, or leaving of vytayles, or other things.

Liquamen, and liquatum, grease or talowe molten, sewet.

Liquefacio, cere, to melte.

Liquentia, a river in Lumbardy.

Liqueo, iui, ire, to be liquide or soft, as oil.

Liquesco, scere, to relente.

Liquet, it appears, it is sure.

Liquido, plainly, apparently, purely.

Liquido, are, to dyscouer, or make to appear.

Liquidus, da, dum, lyquide, runnyng, and soft, sometime pure, also prosperous.

Liquo, are, to melt.

Liquo, ere, to run out, as lykour does.

Lira, a rydge of land, which is over the furrowe. sometime it signifies an
harp:

Lirae, be tryfles or iapes.

Liratim, in rydges.

Liris, a river in Italye, by the town called Minturnae.

Liro, are, to make rydges.

Lis, litis, debate, variance, controversy.

Litem aestimare, to assesse damages and costs for the playntyfe in an action.

Litem contestari, I suppose does sygnify as much as that which our lawyers
do say, to enterpleade, when one which is not party to the action, comes
in, or is called in, to plead with the other, to the intent to save his title
or interest, which is supposed that he has with them.

Litem perdere, to lose his action.

Litem suam facere, where one medleth in an other man's matter, as it were his
own.

Lisus, a river in Thracia, which Herodotus writes was drunk up by the army
that Xetxes king of Persia led into Greece.

Litera, a letter. Literae, a letter or letters that he sent. sometime it
signifies sciences.

Litera salutaris, was in the old time, A, as betokenynge absoluynge. Litera
tristis, B, as signifyenge condemnyng.

Literae fugientes, blind letters, which either in defaut of the ynke, or of
the parchement, or for ancienty, may not be radde.

Literarius, a, um, pertaining to letters or scyences.

Literate, like a learned man.

Literator, oris, a grammaryan, or a master of grammar.

Literatus, lernyd.

Literatura, grammar, writing, learning.

Literosus, lettered.

Lithargyrium, lytarge or white lead.

Lithargyrus, a stone of silver.

Lithiasis, the grief of the stone.

Lithocolla, a cement, wherewith stones are joined together.

Lithoglyphus, a grauer in stones.

Lithologema, a heap of stones.

Lithospermon, an herb which has seeds like stones, and grows among corn,
which herb cures the stone of the bladder. some do suppose it to be grummell.

Lithostratus, a place paued with square stones.

Lithotomia, a masons warkehouse or quary.

Liticen, a blower of a small trumpet.

Litigator, oris, a stryuer.

Liugiosus, a, um, full of strife.

Litigium, a debate or varyance.

Litigo, are, to varye, to strive, to sue oone an another.

Lito, tare, to please god with sacrifyce, and to obtain my desire.

Littoreus, a, um, and littoralis, le, of the sea side.

Littus, toris, the banks as well of the sea, as of a great river. sometime
land buttynge on the sea called the sea side.

Lituania, a country, which is part of Sarmatia called Luten, and joins to
Polonia on the north, and is under the king of Poole.

Litura, a blottyng or stryke through that, which is written, cancellynge.

Lituro, are, to blot or strike through, or cancel.

Litus, ta, tum, enoynted.

Lituus, a crooked staff, which the diuinours called Augures, held in their
hands, when they appointed places in their divination. also a scepter and a
trumpet.

Liueo, ere, to be black, to envy.

Liuesco, scere, to envy.

Liuidus, a, um, he that has his skin black with beatyng also envious.

Liuius, the prince of latin hystoriens.

Liuius Andronicus, was the first latin poet which wrate comedies or
tragedies in latin about the second wars of Carthage. alsoo he wrate xxii.
books of the yearly acts of the Romans, which books were called Annals.

Liuonia, is also a part of Sarmatia beyond Luten north, having on the
weste the sea called Germanicum.

Liuor, the color which is left on the skin, after beatynge or whyppyng,
called commonly black and blue, sometime it is taken for envy. Liuor edax tibi
cuncta negat. The gnawynge envy denies the all things. Rabiem liuoris
acerbi, Nulla potest placare quies, No quyete can content the ragynge of
bitter envy.

Lix, ashes.

Lixa, a skullyon, which caryeth wod or water in an host, or to the kytchen.

Lixabundus, he that for a small reward does most vile scruice.

Lixinium, lie made of ashes to wasshe clothes clean.

Lixo, are, to whette.

Lixos, a town in Africa.

L ANTE O.
LOBA, a kind of the grayn called Millium, which has great stalks six
foot hight. it is alsoo the leaf which grows next the ground in every
kind of grain.

Lobus, the lap of the ear.

Locarium, the hyre of a house or lodging.

Locatarius, he that lets a house or land, a lessour.

Locator, oris, idem.

Locellus, a little place.

Locito, are, to let.

Loco, are, to set or lay, as a house is set in a place, a foundation is
laid, also to lay up, as a thing is to be kept. also to let a thing to hire,
or to rent, to make a lease. sometime to give in marriage.

Locarefiliam, to bestow his daughter in marriage.

Locrenses, and Locri, people of Locrus. There were also people so named in
Greece.

Locrus, a city in the uttermost part of Italy, which was named Magna
Graecia.

Loculame^ta, places made with bourdes, wherein tame culuers, and other birds
or conies are kept to bread.

Loculatus, ta, tum, divided into sundry places.

Loculus, a littell place. also a pourse, an almorye, a littel coffer, a biere
whereon dead bodies are borne to be buried.

Locuples, pletis, rich, abundant, sufficient.

Locuples fideiussor, a sufficient surety.

Locupleto, are, to make rich of yearly revenues

Locus, a place, sometime a family or kindred. also stead, as Loco patris te
habeo, I take the instead of my father.

Locus obiurgandi, occasion to chyde.

Loci, plural. numer. the secret parts of a woman.

Locusta, a fly with long hinder legs, which bourneth corn with touching
of it, and deuoureth the residewe. In India be of them three foot of length,
which the people of that country do eat. it is also a sea fish, like to a
creuis, callid a lopster.

Locutor, and Loculeius, he that speaks much, a prater or a ^angler.

Lodex, uel lodix, icis a shete.

Loedoria, a taunt or reproach in scoffing.

Loelaps, a blast of wind turned from the earth upward.

Log, is the same measure of the hebrews, that Sextarius atticus, is among the
Greeks read more in Sextarius.

Logica, logike one of the liberal sciences, the craft of reasonyng or
arguyng.

Logion, a place where iuges give sentence, also a gatherynge of rent, or
other revenues.

Logodaedalus, a vain talker, which uses eloquent words without quyckenes
of sentence, or does more study for the aptenes of an oretion, than for the
grauite of the sentence

Logographi, they which do write books of account.

Logomachia, a contention with words, or an indiscreet altercation.

Logos, used for a latin word, is taken for tryflynge words or vain language.

Loligo, ginis, a fyshe which has his head between his feet and his bealy,
and has also two bones, oone like a knyfe, the other like apenne.

Lolium, a vicious grain, callid ray or darnel, which commonly grows among
wheat, and if it be eaten in hot bread, it makes the head gyddy, as if a man
were drunk.

Lombricus, a lamprey.

Lomentum, bean meal.

Longa Alba, a city in Italy.

Longaeuus, long lived.

Longanimis, he that suffers long.

Longanon, a gutte, out of the which ordure ysseweth.

Long, an aduerbe, sygnifyeth long, far, exceeding.

Longinquus, a, um, far of, far, strange.

Longisco, scere, to be long.

Longitudo, dinis, length.

Longobardi, Lumbardes.

Longobardia, a regyon of Italy, called Lumbardy.

Longum, a long time.

Longurius, a long polle.

Longus, a, um, long.

Lopades, a shell fyshe.

Loquacitas, tatis, babblynge.

Loquacito, are, to babble or speak much.

Loquax, acis, a babblar.

Loquela, speech.

Loquitor, tari, to speak much.

Lora, sieve Lorea, a drink made of grapes after that they be pressed, called
Second.

Lorarij, servants which served to bynd men, or to beat them, when they
were by their masters commanded.

Lorica, an haberion, a place made upon walls like an open galery, with grates
of timber or hurdelles, to keep men from falling* it is also the wall plate,
before that mortar is laid on it.

Loricatio, wallyng with mortar.

Loricatus, armyd with an haberion.

Loricion, a mantell.

Lorico, care, to put on a habergeon.

Loricula, inwarfare is a muniment or fortification, that the besyegers of
cities do make.

Loripes, edis, whose feet are as if they were bounden or gyrte.

Lorum, a thonge of lether, or a colar, or other like thing, wherewith beastis
are bounden or tied. sometime a whyp wherewith a man or beast is whypped.

Lotaringia, a country beyond Pycardy and Normandy.

Lothoringia, a country called Lorayn.

Lotium, vryne or pysse.

Lotophagi, people in Affrike, which do live by eating only of a fruit
called Lotos.

Lotos, and Lotis, tidis, is a notable trec in Affrike, or herb, of whose
fruit if a stranger do eat, he does incontinently forget his own country.

Loxias, one of the names of Apollo.

L ANTE V.
LVBENS, lubenter, lubenti animo, with a good will, gladly.

Lubentia, and libentia, mirth, pleasantnes, most proprely in words.

Lubido pro libido, sensualle appetite. Lubido est obseruare quid agat, I have
a desire to espy what he does.

Lubrico, care, to make slypper.

Lubricus, ca, cum, slypper, waueryng, sometime ready to slyppe or slide.

Luca, a city in Italye, of which the inhabytauntes are called Lucenses.

Lucae boues, were taken of the old latyns for elephantes.

Lucani, people of the country of Lucania.

Lucania, a country belongyng to the royalme of Naples, between Poyle and
Calaber.

Lucanica, a puddyng made of porke, a sausage.

Lucanus, a famous poet, which wrate the battle between Caesar and Pompey.

Lucar, money bestowed in woods, dedicate to goddis called Luci.

Lucaria festa, feasts which the Romans made in holy woods.

Lucellum, a little gain, a small market.

Lucens, that which has his light of an another thing.

Luceo, luxi, lucere, to shine.

Luceres, the third part of the people of Rome distributed by Tatius and
Romulus.

Luceria, a city of Apulia.

Lucerius, a king of Ardea, which help Romulus against Tatius.

Lucerna, a lantern.

Lucernarius, the lantern bearer.

Lucernula, a sconse.

Lucesco, cere, to be bright or clear as day.

Lucetia, one of the names of Juno.

Lucetius, a name of Jupiter.

Luci, by day.

Lucibile, that which is light of it self.

Lucido, are, to make clear or to give light.

Lucidus, da, dum, clear.

Lucifer, the day sterre.

Lucifico, care, idem quod lucido.

Lucifigus, ga, which flees from light, and delyteth in darkness.

Lucigena, engendered of light.

Lucilius, the name of an old poet.

Lucina, one of the names of the moon, called also the goddess of birth.

Lucini, they which have little eyes, and small sight.

Lucius, a man's name.

Lucretilis, an hyl in the country of the Sabines

Lucrifuga, he that flees from lucre or gaynes.

Lucrinus, a mere or great water in Campania.

Lucrio, onis, a covetous manne, an inordinate gayner.

Lucror, aris, ari, to gain or to win.

Lucrum, lucre or gain.

Lucta, wrastlynge.

Luctatius Catulus, a citesen of Rome.

Luctiferum, cause of waylynge.

Luctifieus, ca, cum, idem.

Luctitor, tari, to wrestle often.

Lucto, idem, quod Luctor.

Luctor, aris, ari to wrestle.

Luctuosus, a, um, lamentable.

Luctus, tus, weeping and waylynge, the habit of mourning.

Lucubro, are, to make any thing by candel light.

Luculente, clearly.

Luculente uendere, to sell at a high price.

Luculenter, gentylly, proprely.

Luculenter scribere, to write honestely and gentylly.

Luculentus, ta, tum, full of light, clear.

Luculenta foemina, a very fair woman.

Luculenta plaga, a great wound.

Luculentae diuitiae, abundant riches.

Luculentus author, he that writes in a gentle styls.

Luculentus homo, a famous man.

Lucullus, the name of a noble Romayne.

Lucus, a high and thycke wood. sometime it sygnifieth light, when it is of
the fourth declination. it is also a city by Spayn by Co^postella, which is
now called Lucensis.

Ludia, a daunsynge or merry wench full of sport.

Ludibriu^, a mock, or any thing that is mocked.

Ludibundus, a, um, playeng, or full of play.

Ludicrum, any play or pastyme, or an interlude

Ludicrus, cra, cru^, pertaynyng to play or mirth.

Ludifico, care, to mock.

Ludij, and Ludiones, players in enterludes or stage plays.

Ludius, and ludio, onis, a player.

Ludo, si, dear, to play, to mock or deceive in game.

Ludere in numerum, to daunse measure.

Ludere operam, to lose his labor.

Ludere otium, to pass the time.

Ludus, play in acts, mirth in words, alsoo a schole or place of exercise.

Ludos aliquem facere, to mock one.

Ludi, in the plurell noumber be taken for those things which we call
syghtes, as the pageantes at London on Mydsomer night. sometime for such
triumphs as be made by kings with iustynge and turnayenge.

Ludi Circenses, was runnynge with charyottes in the great compassed place at
Rome called Circus.

Ludi compita^litij, callid also Ludi Liberales, were plays made in high
ways to the honor of Bacchus called also Liber.

Ludi Florales, were abominable plays used at Rome in the presence of all the
people, in the which played only common women al naked in wanton words and
motions, satisfienge the peoples detestable appetites.

Ludi gladiatorij, were far from all humanity, and a spectakle of cruelty,
for in them men without quarrel and harneys faughte in great numbers with
weapon, each couetyng to kill other, and to show al points of beastly cruelty
diverse of them having nets made of cords to draw unto them their
adversaries.

Ludi gymnici, were exercises in rounnyng, leapyng, throwyng of the darte or
stone, and wrastelynge.

Ludi Lupercales, wherein gentylmens sons being naked, and having little
whyppes in their hands, ran about beatynge every man that they met
laughing upon them.

Ludi Megalenses, were plays made to the honor of her which was called
mother of goddis.

Luentinum, Powes land in wales.

Lues, pestilence in men, murtayn in beasts.

Lugdunum a city iu France called Lions.

Lugeo, luxi, lugere, to mourn, to lament.

Lugodinum, a city in Holland called Vtricht, in latin also Traiectum.

Lugubris, bre, pertainyng to mourning.

Vestis lugubris, a mourning garment.

Luma, a bremble.

Lumbago, ginis, feebleness of the loins.

Lumbare, breches of hosen.

Lumbi, the loins.

Lumbrici, littell fysshes taken in small ryuers which are like to lampurnes,
but they be much less, and somewhat yelowe, and are called in wyltshire,
prides.

Lumen, luminis, light.

Lumina praeferre, to inspire.

Luminibus obstruere, to stop up the light, to let that the light may not com
into a house

Luminare, that which gives light.

Luminosus, a, um, full of light.

Luna, the moon.

Lunaris, re, pertaynyng to the moon.

Lunaticus, he that is made or syck at a certain time of the moon.

Lunatus, ta, tum, like the moon.

Luo, ere, to suffer punyshement or death.

Luere capite, to have the head stricken of.

Lupa, a female wolf. also an harlot.

Lupanar, a brothell house.

Lupanaris, re, pertaining to a brothell house.

Lupanarium, a brothelhouse.

Lupari, to meddle with common harlottes.

Luparius, a hunter of wolfes.

Lupatum, a hard bytte.

Lupercal, a place dedicate to Pan, the god of shepeherdes.

Lupercalia, sacrisices and plays made to Pan.

Luperci, ministers of that solemnity.

Lupinus, a kind of poulse corn having one stalk, the leaf in five
divisions, the coddes creuesed about, having in it five or syx grains hard
broad and read. They be common in France and Italy, but here uneath known.

Lupinus, na, number, of a wolf.

Lupulus, and Lupus salictarius, an herb called hoppes, wherewith biere is
brued.

Lupus, a wolf. also a bytte for a horse. alsoo a hoke to draw up things out
of a pytte. also a kind of spyders. also a fyshe which some men take to be a
pyke.

Lupus est in fabula, a proverb, when he comes which is spoken of.

Lupum auribus tenere, a proverb in things that be daungerouse, either to
retain or to let go.

Lura, the mouth of a bottell.

Lurco, care, to eat rauenousely.

Lurco, onis, a deuourer of his own substance.

Luridus, da, dum, pale of color.

Luscinia, a nyghtyngale.

Lusciosus, porreblynde. Luscio, is the disease.

Luscitus, he that sees plainly by night.

Luscus, porreblynde. sometime a man having but one eye.

Lusitania, the realm called Portugal.

Lusito, tare, to play often.

Lusorius, a, um, pertaynyng to play.

Lustralis, le, pertaining to ryotte and lecherye. sometime a thing done every
fyfth year.

Lustrici dies, the day when a child is first named, which in men children
was the nynthe day, in women children it was the.viii. day, It may now be used
for the day of christenyng of children.

Lustro, are, to go about in circuit. It was also among the old Romans, to
lead about an army, a sheep, a sow, and three bulls, thin king that thereby the
host was purged of such grievous offense as had been committed against their
goddis. also to consider in the mind, to shadow, to behold about.

Lustror, aris, ari, to search out.

Lustrum, a den or cave of wild beasts in woods, an hyd place and vile, a
house where gluttony and lechery is haunted. also the hantyng of the same vices.
sometime it signifies the space of five years. also the general purgation of
the cite by sacrifyce every fifth year.

Luter, eris, a cup wherein wine is delayde with water.

Luteola, a little flower of the color of yelowe in greatness and sauoure not
much unlike a violette.

Lutesco, scere, to be clay.

Lutetia, the city of Paris in France.

Luteum oui, the yolke of an egg.

Luteus color, the color of yelowe, approaching toward red, of the color of
the yolke of an egg, or of wax new made.

Luto, are, to clay.

Lutra, sieve Lytra, a beuar, or a beast much like to it, which gnaweth trees
asunder, and does haunte great waters, and lives like an otter.

Lutum, clay.

Lux, lucis, light.

Luxatus, whose bones are out of joint.

Luxo, are, to louse or make louse.

Luxurio, ire, to excede, to abound more than is necessary in the body or
personage.

Luxurior, aris, ari, to abunde excessiuely in things concerning the mind or
goods. also to be wanton with to much wealth or prosperity

Luxuriosus, to prosperous, or living in to much pleasure.

Luxuriosus, a, um, excedyng in abundance.

Luxus, Luxuria, and Luxuries, all superfluity or excess, as well in carnal
pleasure, as in sumptuous fare, apparel, or buyldyng.

L ANTE Y.
LYAEVS, one of the names of Bacchus, called god of wynes.

Lycaeus, a mountain in the country of Archadia.

Lycaeum, was the schole of Aristotle in Athens

Lycaon, the king of Archadia, whom Jupiter turned into a wolf.

Lycaones, people in Asia the less, nere to Lycia as writes Ptholome.

Lycaonia, a country in Asia: after some writers it is a part of Archadia.

Lycastus, a city of Candy.

Lychnis, or Lychnitis, an herb whose flower shyneth by night, and first
springs, and longest dureth: which in drink helps them that are stungen
with the Scorpyon.

Lychnites, white marble.

Lychnobij, they which do turn the day into night, and the night into day.

Lychnus, a match of a candell. sometime the self candell.

Lycia, a countreye in Asia the less, between Pamphiliam and Cariam, in the
which ar great cities Patara and Myra. sometime there were.lxx. cities.

Lycidas, the name of a Centaure, and of a sheparde in Virgile.

Lycion, a thing made with the juice of an herb, wherewith soore eyes be cured.

Lycisca, a dog comen of a wolf and a dog.

Lycius, one of the names of Apollo.

Lycoctones, a venomous herb called alsoo Asconitum.

Lycurgus, a king of the Lacedaemonians, which gave to them their first laws.

Lycus, a river in the country of Cesaria.

Lydia, a country in Asia, on the east ioynynge to Phrigia, on the north to
Mysia, on the south upon part of Caria. In this region is the hyl called
Emolus, out of the which comes the rich river called Pactolus* Read of them
in their own places.

Lydi mali post hos Aegyptij, A proverb applied where two ill persons be
comparyd together, and the one being found very ungracious, the other
deserves the less dysprayse.

Lydius lapis, a touch stone wherewith the fynenes and coursenes of gold is
tried. it is alsoo used sometime for a proverb, applied to them which have a
quycke and exact judgment.

Lydus, a, 3^m, of the country of Lydia.

Lyenteria, or Lienteria, for I find it written sometime with Y, sometime with
I, is a fl^^e of meat undigested sent forth in the same qualities that they
were received, without alteration in color, lykour, or savor. Of this
syckenes be two kinds, The one (as Paulus writes) comes of the exulceration
of the bowels, that is to say wounds or soores in them, or of other
dystillations or reumes. The other kind comes of debilytie of the powers
which should tetayn^ in the stomak that which should serve for nourysshement.
Causes of this sickness be twelve. The quality of the meat received, the
quantity of that which annoyeth oppressyng the stomak, and infeblinge his
virtue retentiue, much effusyon of melancoly to the mouth of the stomach,
much and laborious sterynge immediately after meals, the stomach being full,
much drink with meat or after, causynge the meat to run down to hastily,
lack of order in catynge: reume descendyng into the stomach, much fleume
gathered in the stomach and bowels, feebleness in digestion, and the virtue
retentiue in the stomach, debylitie in the virtue attractiue in the liver by
reason of opylations, an inward sore by the touching whereof, the meat slyppeth
away, by closenes of the poores and passages of the body, whereby al
superfluites be turned inward

Lygdamus, a Sicilian of the city of Syracusis, a puissaunt wrastlar, whose
bones after his death were found to have no marrowe.

Lympha, water.

Lymphaticus, a mad man, which like to a wood dog, runs hither and
thither.

Lympidus, a, um, clear, smothe.

Lynceus, was a man, who (as Varro writes) could see ships on the sea.Cxxx.
miles from him, and did number them. And some wrate that he could see through a
wall, and therefore they which have very sharp syghtes, be said to have
Lynceos oculos, the eyes of Lynceus.

Lyndus, a city at the Rhodes, where they did sacrifice to Hercules with
reprochis and cursis

Lynter, eris, a cockbote.

Lynx, cis, a beast like to a wolf, having many spots, whose sight does
perce all things. it is also a bird which has a tungue like a serpent.

Lyra, a harp.

Lyricen, cinis, an harper.

Lysander, king of Lacedemonia. When it was laid to him for a reproach, that
he did more by subtlety than by prowes, He answered in this wise, where the
lions skyn does not profit, a man must sow or tie a foxes skin to it. Not
withstanding in any noble man that practice is seldom commended.

Lysanias, an orator of Greece.

Lysias, an orator most pleasant, of whom Quint* speaks.

Lysimachia, a city in Ponto, which fell down with an erthquake.

Lysimachium, is thought of Mainardus to be the herb which we call
marygouldes. Leonicenus takes it to be that which dyers do occupy, and is
called also Lutea and Corneola. Whereunto Ruellius accords and says, it is
that wherewith clothes are dyed green. By his description it is the wede called
wod waxen growing in pastures somewhat like unto brom with small yelow
flowers, which is so bitter that no beast will eat of it.

Lysimachus, a noble man of Macedonye, the scholar of Calisthenes, and one of
the most valyant capitaynes of Alexander.

Lysippus, an excellent karuer.

Lysius, a river of Archady.

Lytra, a wourme in a doggues tungue.

M ANTE A.
MACARIVS, THE name of a man. In latin it sygnifieth blessed.

Macedo, onis, a man or woman of Macedony.

Macedonia, a royalme in Greece, first called Emathia. On the north it bou^deth
(as Ptholomeus writes) upon the sides of Dalmatia, Mesia superior, and
Thracia, on the west it stretches to the sea called Ionium. Pius describes it
to be joined on the south and weste to Thracia, and that the south side lies
on the backs of Thessalia and Magnesia: the north on Paeonia and Paphlagonia,
that it has also on the south Epirus, on the north Illiria, which varyeth
not much from Solinus, Who says moreover, that it is divided from Thracia
with the river called Strimon.

Macedonicus, ca, cum, of Macedony.

Macellarius, a vyttaylour or sellar of al manner of vyttayle.

Mecellum, a place where all manner of vitayle to sold.

Macellus, is sometime taken for a lean man.

Maceo, and Macesco, scere, to be lean.

Macer, cra, crum, lean.

Macer Aemilius, an old poet which was in the time wha^ Ouidius was, who as
he says wrate of birds in verses, also of the virtues of herbs, but it was
not that Macer, whose warkes we now have of the virtues of herbs, but rather
he, unto whom the younger Pliny provoked to write some thing like to his uncle.
Finally that little book of herbs is right profitable in diverse places to be
ku^ned by heart of a young scholar which delyteth in that matter, not
withstanding the first Macer wrate more eloque^tly, and is commended therefore of
Quintilianus. He wrate also of the batayl of Troy, and of venomous beasts.

Macer, uel Macis, is now in doubt whither it be the spice commonly called
macis, which is a rynde about the nutmyg, forasmoche as Dioscorides writes of
Macer, where he never made mention of nutmyg. And Plinye says, that Macer is
the rynde of a certain rote of a tree of the same name. And also Dioscorides
says that it is a thycke rynd, and much straynyng the tungue, which taste is
not perceived in our macis, and they are also very thyn. And Galene calls
them dry in the third degree, and equal in heat and cold, but we find them
hot in taste. And Auicene affirms them to be hot and dry in the seco^^
degree, which is confirmed by Constantine, who says, that they be ri^des of
the boughs of the trees that bear nutmygges.

Maceresco, scere, to make soft with lyeng long in lycour.

Maceries, and maceria, a wall of stone without mortar, made in the steed of
an hedge. alsoo leanness.

Macero, are, spoken of the body, sygnifieth to make lean or thynne, or soft
by stepyng in licour, referred to the mind, it signifies to vex or inquiete.

Machabaeus, the first of that name, was Judas the third son of Mathathias
the Jew, he was a valyant man in his faith and of an invincible courage. In
so much as with three thousand men only he vanquyshed Lysias the lieutena^t of
king Antiochus end his son, and with them forty thousand foot men, and.vii.
thousand horsemen, and slew of them five thousand. Afterward in Galilea he
slew of the host of Timotheus an other of the kings capytayns first three
thousand, and afterward eight thousand. After ward by a vyllage called
Adassis, he with one thousand faught with Nycanor a capitayn of king Demetrius
and nine thousand with him, at the which battle Nicanor was slain, and of
the nine thousand almost none escaped. Finally where to much trustyng to his
prosperytie in wars, in going against Bacchis a capitayn of king Demetrius
having a great host, and taking with him but two thousand, of the which at
the last remained only with him but eight hundred, he faught until it was
night, and made a wonderful slaughter of enemies. But whiles he enforced
himself to come to Bacchis, which was on the right corner of the battle, and
there faughte so nobly, that he scattered that corner, sleinge many about him.
Finally being enuyronned with them that were in the left corner, he being
stryken with many wou^des, was slain with much difficulty, Before
thincarnation of Christ about.CCCv. years

Machaera, a sword.

Macherophorus, a sword bearer.

Machaeropios, a cutlar, or a bladesmyth.

Machaon, the son of Esculapius, an excellent Machina, a thing craftily
invented, or a crafty invention, an engyne.

Machinor, aris, ari, to invent craftyly, to divise to imagyne.

Macidatus, ta, tum, wette.

Macies, and Macritudo, leanness.

Macilentus, lean.

Macio, aui, are, to make lean.

Macra, a river which rounneth between the mountains of Liguria.

Macreo, ere, to be lean.

Macresco, scere, to wax lean.

Macrobii, people in Affrike, which of Pomponius be also called Meroeni, whose
country is inuyronned with the river of Nilus like an isle. They live half as
much lenga^ as men do here, and be fair and goodly personages, reverend and
lovers of virtue. There is more gold than in Persia, and therefore that which
is less precious they do more esteem, decking them selfs with ornaments of
copper and brass, and making gyues of gold. They live commonly.Cxx. years,
and do wash them selves in a fountain, which causes their bodies to smelle
like unto violettes.

Macrobius, the name of a great learned man.

Macrochera, a garment with long sleues.

Macrochie, he that has long hands.

Macteae, precious meats.

Macticus, he which has great chekes, and a gapynge mouth.

Macto, are, to slay or kylle also to beat. sometime to honor. also to
increase. Ferunt laudibus, mactant honoribus, They extol with praysyng, they
increase in honor.

Mactare deos, for Mactare dijs.

Macte animi, be of good courage.

Macte uirtutis and uirtute, proceed in virtue, goo forth and do well.

Macti ingenio, men of excellent wits.

Mactra, an hutche wherein bread is put, some do call it a brake wherewith dow
is wrought.

Macula, a spotte, a blemysh, also infamy or reproach. Sometime the masshe of a
net or hole between the thredes. also a net, images wrought in marble.

Maculo, are, to spotte or make foul.

Maculosus, spotty, unclean or foul.

Madagastar, an isle beyond the furthest part of Ethiope southe, and was
founden by the Portugalles in the time of Emanuel king of Portugal. This isle
is in circuit four thousand miles, and is very rich. Therein be great
olyfantes, lions, panthers, and such other beasts, the inhabitants be of
Macho metes sect.

Madaura, a city set in the bounds of Getulia and Numidia.

Madefacio, cere, to weate, to wash, to bayne.

Madefio, fieri, to be washed.

Madeo, dear, to be wette or washed.

Madesco, scere, to sweat or be through wette.

Madian, a city beyond Arabia on the southe part in the desert of the
Sarasins, against the east part of the red sea.

Madido, dare, to make wette.

Madidus, da, dum, wete or washed with licour

Madifico, facere, to make wette.

Mador, oris, moisture, sometime sweatte.

Mados, a certain kind of white vynes.

Madulsa, drunken.

Maeander, a river of the country of Phrigia, which has many tournynges and
wyndinges, and of that all crooked and subtylle tournyng ways, means, and
diuyses, be called

Maeandri. There is also of that name a mountain in India.

Maedia, a city in the realm of Thracia.

Maee, a kind of great crabbes of the sea.

Maemacreticon, the month of September.

Maenala uel Maenalus, a high mountain in Archadia.

Maenalius, for Archadicus, therefore Maenaliu^ carmen is taken for an
inchauntment. Maenalius aper, for a bore of Archadia.

Maenapij, Gellars, or people of Gellarlande.

Maenas, adis, a fyshe. Look after in Mena.

Maenades, women which did always follow Bacchus, runnyng about with their
hear scattered like mad women.

Maenoles, one of the names of Bacchus.

Maeonia, is a country in Asia the less, called also Lidia.

Maeonius, a, um, of Maeonia. Homere the excellent poet was named Maeonius,
either because that he was borne in that country, or else that his fathers name
was Maeon.

Maeotis, a great mere in the country of Scithia, which is always frosen.

Maeotidis paludes, fennes whereunto the said river runs.

Maereo, es, look after in Mereo and Mereor.

Maero, are, to make heavy.

Maeror, heaviness with weeping.

Maestitia, and Maestitudo, heaviness.

Maesto, and Maestifico, care, to make heavy.

Maestus, ta, tum, sorrowful.

Magalia, vyllages.

Magi, among the Caldeys and Persians were men of excellent knowledge in
philosophy natural and Mathematical, and knew the hyd virtues and operations
of things, and the sons of the kings of Persia, were taught by them to
govern and minyster their public weal, according to the form of the
universal order and governance of the celestial world. Such were Magi, or
the three kings, which came and sought Christ, and offered to him gold, myrre,
and frankincense, adaptyng their present unto the double nature of him, unto
whom they gave it, who was both god and man, king, and priest. Now is that
name improperlye used for a wytche, an inchaunter, a worker with ill spirits,
which may be better called Venefica, Necromanticus, Incantatores, or other
names, as before and after be rehearsed.

Magia, magike, which is in two sorts: one is the secret knowledge of the
natural qualities and hyd operations and causes of things, and that is called
Magia naturalis, natural magike. An other is superstitious and dyuellishe,
called wytchcraft, sorcery, or other like detestable names, which is unlawful
by the laws of god and man.

Magicus, ca, cum, pertaynyng to magike.

Magida, a kind of bread.

Magidae, kytchen bourdes, or instruments pertaynyng to the kytchen.

Maginor, aris, ari, to tryfle.

Magis, more.

Magister, stri, a master or teacher of sciences.

Magister populi, the chief ruler of the people, by the which name the
Dictatour among the Romans was called.

Magister scriniorum, an officer like to the master of the rolls.

Magister scripturae, seems to be a general surueyour.

Magisterium, the dignity or office of a master

Magistratus, tus, a great officer, a man having authority in governance of
people. all be it that some have more authority by the laws and some have
less.

Magistro, are, to rule.

Magmata, confections made of diverse sweet spices in paste only for the
savor, as pomanders and washyng balls. sometime it is taken for the dregs
of sweet oils.

Magna Graecia, that part of Italy from Laurentum to Cumas.

Magnalia, great things to be wondered at.

Magnanimitas, tatis, valiantnes of courage or heart, magnanimity.

Magnarius, a great merchant.

Magnas, atis, and Magnatus, a noble man, a man of great estimation.

Magnes, etis, the lode stone that has the virtue to draw to him iron, which
vnproprely we use to call Adamant, where Adamas is the dyamonde, as before is
declared.

Magnesia, a part of Macedonia.

Magna, at a great price.

Magnificentia, a dysposition and administration in doing or making of great
things and sumptuous.

Magnifico, are, to extolle.

Magnificus, he that does great things.

Magnus, a, um, great.

Magog, the son of Iapheth.

Maguderis, a kind of colewortes.

Mahumethes, or Mahumetha, was borne in Arabia (as the more part do write) of a
poor house or family, and first was a byer and sellar of camelles, afterward
fell in acquayntance with a munke named Sergius, which was an heretic, by
whose means he declared him self to be a prophet, and took on him to refourme
as well the old law as the new law, and making other laws, which for the
pleasantnes of them allured to them much people, so that gatherynge to him a
great host, first wasted Syria, and wan Damascum the chief city thereof. And
having in his aid the Arabians called Scenitae, a valiant people (who had
displeasure against the emperor Heraclius, because he paid not to them their
wages) he wan other great royalmes. And at the age of.xl. years dyed, as some
do suppose in the falling syckenes, which he long time did dyssemble,
faynynge that the angel Gabriell was than sent unto him in message, whose
bryghtnes he might not sustain. He was buried at Medina, three days iourneye
from the red sea, an.C. miles from Mecha, where as is the chief temple of his
law. He was after the incarnation of Christ. Dv. years.

Maia, the mother of Mercurius.

Maialis, a barowe hog.

Maiestas, tatis, majesty, the greatness, dignity, or excellent estimation or
honor of a king. Among the old Romans it was the power and authority of
the people of Rome, unto whom Appellation (called Prouocatio) was from all
other dignities. The dignity of the Senate was called the authority of the
Senate. Tantus autem consensus municipiorum, coloniarumque prouinciae Galliae,
ut omnes ad authoritatem huius ordinis maiestatemque Pop. To. defendenda^
conspirasse uideantur. There is now such agreement of wylles of the towns
confederat and subject unto us in the parts of France governed by us, that
all men there seem to conspyre, how they may defend the authority of this
Senate, and also the majesty of the people of Rome.

Maiestas imminuta, where any man goth about to derogate any thing of the
kings authority royal, as also of the empire and high power of the people of
Rome. It may be taken for treason. Si maiestas est amplitudo ac dignitas
ciuitatis, is eam minuit, qui exercitum hostibus Pop. To. tradidit, If majesty
be the honor and authority of this city, he goes about to appayre it,
which has delivered the host to the ennemies of the people of Rome. Also de
partitione oratoria. Maiestas est in imperij atque Pop. To. dignitate, quam
minuit is qui per uim multitudine^ ad seditionem uocauit, Majesty is in the
authority of the empire and people of Rome, against whom he plainly commits
treason, who so ever he be that violentely provoke people to a sedition. For
the word Minuere maiestatem, the later writers vsyd Laedere maiestatem.

Maiestatis crimen, is treason against a king, it was among the Romans
conspiracy against the senate and people, which was also called Perduellio,
and of hystorians is named Coniuratio, and it is more than Maiestas imminuta,
for therein only they do derogate or take away some part of the royal
authority or honor due to the person or city, in the other they endeavor
them to distroye them utterly, or to bring them in subjection. Maiestatem
conseruare, to have or retein still the dignite of an emperor or king, or
people in one like honor and reverence.

Maiestatem constituere, to preserve authority that it decay not, but to
retain stylle the estimation thereof.

Maiestatem soluere, idem quod imminuere.

Mayor, oris, greatter.

Maiorana, an herb called Maioram.

Maiores, auncetours, progenitors.

Maiorina, a kind of olyues which be not ripe before the syxt Idus of February.

Maius, the month of May.

Mala aurea, orenges.

Malaca, a city in Spain an other in Inde.

Malache, malaches, a kind of malowes, the stalk whereof does grow into the
greatness of a tree.

Malachites, a stone of a dark grene color.

Malacisso, are, to knede or make soft.

Malacia, caulme of the sea. alsoo the grief of the stomach, not sustaynynge
meat, abhorrynge all things, as a woman with child. Sum do call it the
abomination of the stomach.

Malacostracha, soft as fysshe without shelles.

Malacus, ca, cum, soft.

Malagma, it is, a mollifienge plaster, whereby hard impostumes be made soft or
ripe.

Malasso, are, to make soft or ripe. alsoo to exercise.

Male, ill, vnhappyly, vncommodiousely, mischeuousely.

Male acceptus, ylle entreated, ill handeled, shrewdely welcome.

Male accipere, to entreat one ill.

Male accipere uerbis, to give ylle language to one.

Male audire, to be ill reported of, to have an ill name.

Male cadere, to chance ill.

Male cogitare de aliquo, to have ill opinyon of one.

Male conciliatus, he on whom a man has lost all that he has bestowed.
Fugitive pro di, male conciliate, Come forth my there, on whom I have lost all
that thou costest me.

Male formido, I am ill or sore aferde.

Male maceror, I am ill vexid, I am ill at ese.

Male me habeo, I am sick.

Male me haber haec res, I am sorry or ylle apayde for that matter, or that
matter greueth me soore.

Male mereri, to dodispleasure to one, to deserve displeasure.

Male meritus est de me, he has ill entreated me, or has done me displeasure.

Male metuo, I am ill aferde.

Male moratus, ill manerde.

Male morigerus, disobedient, or froward

Male odi, I hate deadly.

Male optare, to curse.

Male precare, to ask a vengeance.

Male ^uada, she that gives shrewd counsel.

Male uertar illi, god send him yuell luck thereof, ill may he broke it.

Malea, a promontorye or hylle lyenge into the sea by Laconia, which is
daungerouse for ships to pass by.

Maledicentia, detraction, ill report.

Maledico, xi, cere, to curse.

Maledicus, ill tunged, or he that speaks ylle of every man.

Malefica, a wytche, which with sorcery does hurt to men or beasts.

Maleficus, a harm doer.

Malefice, myscheuously, harmefully.

Maleficium, and Maleficentia, damage, wrong, displeasure, hurt, a myscheuous
deed.

Maleloqui, and maledicere, to curse.

Maleuolentia, walyce, ill will.

Maleuolus, malycious.

Maliacum mare, the sea about Thessalia.

Malicorium, the rynde of a pomegranade.

Malign, enuiously, disdaynfully, maliciousely.

Malignitas, tatis, wyckednes, malignitie, envy, malice, unprofitableness, the
vice contrary to liberality.

Malignor, and maligno, to bear malice, to be hateful.

Malignus, a, um, wicked, cruel, enuyous, and couetouse.

Maligna uia, an ill way.

Maligna lux, a dymme light.

Malignus ager, ground that is ylle to be brought to tylthe.

Malitia, contrary to virtue and goodness. some time it signifies subtlety
with deceyte.

Malitiose, malitiousely.

Malitio^us, malitiouse.

Malleatus, a, um, hammered.

Malleo, are, to warke with an hammer.

Malleolus, a little hammer. it is also a small bough or twygge of a vine.
Also Malleoli, be sometime taken generally for small styckes, they be sometime
taken for the bones of the ancle.

Malleus, an hammer.

Malluuium, and Malluuiae, aru^, a basyn, wherein men do wash their hands.

Malo, I had leauer, or rather, mauis, mauult.

Malobathron, which in latin is called Foliu^, is a sweet herb growing in
India, upon waters without any root.

Malobathrum, a sweet ointment, wherewith men were wont to wash their hear.

Malta, a clay, which touching any other matter or substance, sets it on
fire. read in Asphaltum, and Bitumen.

Malna, an herb called malowes.

Maluauiscus, read in Althea.

Malum, being an aduerb, signifies with a mischief or like thing. Quid uos
malum ergo me sic ludificamini? Than wherefore with a mischief do you thus mock
me? Quid tua (malum) id refert? What with a mischief reckest thou therefore, or
have thou therewith to do?

Malus, a, um, ill, contrary to good. sometime labor, vexation, sycknes,
grief, malice.

Malae fidei possessor, he that weti^gly possedeth an other man's lands or
goods wrongfully.

Malus, in the masculine ge^der, a mast of a ship.

Malus, an appull tree, the feminyne gender.

Malus Assyria uel Medica, an orange tree.

Malum punicum, a pomegranate.

Malum terrae, read Aristolochia.

Mamertini, people in Campania.

Mamilla, a little dugge or (...).

Mamma, a dugge or pappe.

Mammare, to give the dug or breast to a child.

Ma^meata, a woman with great duggis or brestis.

Mammillare, a kerchiefe, wherewith women do cover their pappes.

Mammona, in the language of Syria, worldly substance, richesse.

Mammosus, sa, and mammeatus, ta, tu^, having great dugges.

Mammothreptus, the child that souketh long, so is it interpreted by saint
Augustine in his exposition of the psalms. Not withstandyng Erasmus in ratione
conciona^di interprets it a child wantonly brought up.

Mamphula, a certain bread used in Syria, which ere it be through baken,
fallith into coals.

Mana, in the old time was taken for Bona, good

Manapia, a town in Ireland called waterford.

Manceps, cipis, he that byeth or hyreth any thing of the people.

Mancinati, persons condemned.

Manciolae, little hands.

Mancipi, the interest or right of a thing.

Mancipatio, the assurance by lyuery and possession.

Mancipium, that which is solemnly bought before witnesses. also a man's proper
goods or cattall. sometime a bondsman.

Mancipij sui esse, to be his own man, and none other man's subject or servant.

Mancipio accipere, to take possession or lyuery and saison.

Mancipio dare, to deliver possession, reserving a rent.

Mancipo, are, to deliver in bondage, to deliver possession, to make lyuery and
season.

Mancupi, the solemn form or manner of bieng any thing before wytnes, by
livery and season, or possession taking, with other things executed, requisite
for the assurance of any bargayne and sale.

Mancupio accipere, to take a thing with wara^ty of him, the which gives or
sells it.

Mancupio dare, to give or sell a thing with warranty.

Mancupes, the principal takers of land, or other thing, whereof grows
yearly revenues. Also they, which do take on them to perform any work in
great.

Mancus, lackyng one hand. also generally that which lacks any thing
necessary.

Mandatarius, he to whom commandment is given.

Mandatum, a commissyon. also a commandment, a charge.

Mandatus, ta, tum, given in charge.

Mandibula, a iawbone, wherein the teeth be set.

Mando, onis, a great eater, or he that is always eating.

Mando, di, dear, to chewe meat, or grynde it with the teethe.

Mando, are, to commit. Memoriae mandare, to remember, to put in remembrance,
to leave in memory, or for a memorial.

Mandare aeternitari, to write a thing, to thin tent to be in perpetual
remembrance.

Mandare curam, to leave the charge unto one

Mandare fidei alicuius, to put a man in trust with a thing.

Mandare literis, to put in writi^g or memory.

Mandare memoriae, to kunne by heart.

Mandare monumentis, to put in perpetual remembrance the act of any man.

Mandare se fugae, to run away.

Mandare terrae semina, to put sede into the ground, to sow grain.

Mandra, an houell or other like place, wherein cattle do save them selves
from the heat of the son or tempest.

Mandragora, an herb which Dioscoride says was of sum called Circea, because
that it was feigned, that Circe the great sorceresse used the rote thereof in
her amorous drynkes. The juice of the root, or wine, wherein the root is
boiled, will cause one to sleep a dead sleep, wherefore surgions do give it to
them whom they will cut. It is also used for other purposes in phisyke.

Manduces, images carried about in pageantes with great chekes and wide months.

Manduco, are, to chewe meat.

Manduco, onis, a great eater.

Manducus, idem.

Mane, carely, also the morning.

Maneo, mansi, manner, to abide, to tarry, to persyst, to happen hereafter.

Manner promissis, to keep promys.

Mane dum, tarry a while.

Manes, the good and bad angel. sometime they be taken for deuylles, sometime for
spirits or souls not purged of sin. sometime for the peynes which souls
do suffer.

Mango, onis, was taken for a seller of children to abhomynable uses. It is
also taken for such one as polisheth or paynteth a thing with a falls color,
to sell it the derer. it is sometime taken for sellers of horses.

Mangonicus, ca, cu^, pertaining to that craft.

Mangoniu^, the craft to make things salable.

Mangonizo, zare, to polyshe, paynt, or teymme a thing, to make it more
vendible, or to be better sold.

Mania, madness. read in Phrenitis.

Mania, was also among Gentiles a goddess, called the mother of them, which
were named Lares or Larui, unto the which goddess they used a while to offer
men's heads in sacrifyce. But afterward, by the means of Iunius Brutus which
was consulle, they did change that sacryfyce into garlike heads and the
knoppes of poppy. It was also that wherewith nouryces did put children in fear
when they cried, which women use to call the bugge, or the goblyn.

Maniacus, a mad man.

Maniae, arum, defourmed personages.

Manicae, sleues of a garment. also manakles to tie the hands together. also
gauntlettes and splyntes, and mittaynes or long gloves.

Manicata uestis, a garment with sleues.

Manichaei, a set of heretykes, so called of an archcheretyke called
Maniches.

Manicula, a little hand.

Manifestarius, a, um, clear, euydent, openly known, notorious.

Manifest, clearly, manyfestly.

Manifesto, an aduerb, signifies clearly, plainly

Manifesto, tare, to manifest or make apparent.

Manifestum, manifest or clear.

Manifestum habere, to know surely.

Manifestus mendatii, proved a liar.

Manimoria, things which do abide in remembrance.

Maniolae, yles against India, beyond the river of Ganges, where as be rocks
of Adamant stones, which do draw to them ships that have iron noyles.
Maniolae, were also little popettes made of dowe, given to children.

Manipularis, and maniplaris, captayn of a bend of men.

Manipulatim, by bendes.

Manipulus, an handefull, a grype, a bend of men, proprely of.x. soldiers.

Manliana imperia, cruel governance or rule, without any mercy.

Manlius, a noble Romayne.

Manna, in holy scripture was a certain delycate thing, which god rayned to
the Jews being in the wyldernes, which lay on the ground white, and like to
the sede of colyander, which was wonderful pleasant in eating and by lykelyhode
wholesome as ingendryng no putrefaction. We now name it commonly angels food.

Manna, used in phisyke, is in two sorts, one is a dew congeled on trees in
certain places, and falls as meldewe does here in England, and is gathered
and sold very dear for a medicyne to pourge choler easyly. Some supposed it to
be that which Dioscorides callyth Eleaeomeli, some that which he calls
Saccharum. But Manardus and Musa do affirm the contrary. Not withsta^dyng that
which Galene in his warke De alimentorum facultatibus calls Mel roris,
seems to be this Manna. But Auerroys puts it among those things which
were found after Galenes time. An other Manna called Manna Turis, which is
the crummes or fragmentes of frankincense, which with the rynde of the tree
falls in gatheryng of frankincense. The first is temperate between hot and
cold without any degree: this other is of the temperature of incense, but that
it is more byndyng.

Manor, aris, ari, to steal.

Mannus, an amblyng hackeney.

Mannulus, a nagge, a little horse.

Mano, are, to run out as lycour does also to drop out, to appear out, as
sweat out of the pores. Alsoo to descend, to proceed.

Manat tota urbe rumor, the brute thereof was sown or sprad throughout the
city.

Manantia ulcera, soores which do wax more and more.

Manobarbuli, were darts wrought with lead. also they which used to bear
them.

Mansio, sometime sygnifieth a days journey. but among ancient writers it
sygnifyed the place where an host did rest in journey. alsoo the places where
currours or men riding in post does change their horses or waggens were
called Mansiones. The space of the first after the account of old capitayns was
a hundred and fyfty furlong, which is.xviii. miles a half mile and a quarter
of a mile.

Mansisterna, a pytcher pot.

Mansito, tare, to abide long.

Manstus, stolen.

Mansuefacio, facere, to make ge^tyl or tractable

Mansuefactus, made gentle or tame.

Mansues, for mansuetus.

Mansuesco, scere, to wax tame or gentle.

Mansuetarius, he that breaks a horse, or makes any other beast tame.

Mansuetudo, dinis, mekenes, gentylnes, a moderate temperance betwixt pride and
simplicite.

Mansuete, mekely, gentylly.

Mansuetus, ta, tum, meke, gentle, tame.

Mansum, meat, which the nourices do chew, and after give it to the child,
putting it into his mouth.

Manius, a, um, chewed.

Mansutius, a gourmandour, or great eater.

Mantaelum, and mantelium, and mantile, a towel wherewith men do wype their
hands, when they have washed. also a cloak.

Mantes, it is, a diuinour or coniecter of things to come.

Manteum, a place where dyuelles in ydolles gave answers.

Mantice, tices, the art of divination.

Mantica, a bag. sometime a cloak, a wallet.

Manticora, a beast which is in India, in body like to a lion, but more rough,
having a face like to a man, and in his mouth.ii. rewes or set of teethe, the
tail of a scorpion, and the voice of a small trumpette, and is of color
read, and will never be made tame.

Manticula, a pourse.

Manticularia, towelles or other like things, wherewith men do wype their
hands.

Manticularius, a stealer of napry. also a pyckepourse or cut purse.

Manticulatio, slynesse, deceyte.

Manticulor, aris ari, to do a thing slyly, as to pycke a purse.

Mantinea, a city in Greece.

Mantiscinor, aris, ari, to steal or pyke craftily.

Mantissa, the addition in weight.

Manto, the son of Tiresias the Theban prophet, who led his father, which was
blind.

Manto, tare, the most ancient writers vsyd for frequenter manner, to tarry
oftentimes.

Mantua, a noble city in Lumbardy, where Vergyle the excellent poet was borne.

Mantuanus, a, um, of Mantua.

Mantuariae tunicae, sleued iackettes.

Manuarius, a, um, manual.

Manubiae, the pray taken of ennemies. also money for the which the pray was
sold.

Manubinarius, the partners of a pray.

Manubrium, the hylte or handle of a weapon or instrument.

Manui, among the old Romans in their songs callid Saliares, signified good
or honest me^.

Manuleatus, ta, tum, having long sleues.

Manumissio, an infra^chisement of a bondsman.

Manumissus, infraunchised, manumised.

Manumitto, to manumise or infranchise a bond man.

Manuor, idem quod furor.

Manuria, acote with sleues.

Manus, a hand, a grapul to fasten ships together. sometime it signifies a
multitude of men in the aid of one. sometime power. sometime writing. also the
nose or snoute of an olyfant. Manus iniectio, attachment. also season or
seizure of a thing, whereunto we make title

Manum ini^cere, to sease or take possession.

Manuconsertum ex iure uocare, to challenge right or property in a thing, and
offer to try it by the law. Read Gell. li. ix. Cicero pro Murena, and De
oratore lib. i.

Manum conserere, to fight hand to hand.

Manum ferulae subducere, to suffer to be corrected in lernyng, to be content
to be taught.

Manum non uerterim, I will never go about it, I will not turn my hand for it.

Manum habere sub pallio, to be ydell.

Manibus pedibusque, with all might and main.

Manibus pedibusque ire in sententiam, is in a parliament, great counsel, or
other greatte assembly, to have the consent of many men, the greatter part
consenting to one man's opinion or sentence, do go toward him, holdyng up
their hands, in token that they be thereunto agreed.

Manum de tabula, a proverb, signifyeng, Leave whiles it is well.

Manum and mentum, was an old proverb, whereby men were warned of chances
which happened suddenly, and in so short a time as a man might bring his hand
to his chynne. Like to the same is an other proverb of the greeks. Multa
quidem cadunt inter calicem supremaque labra. Read that in M ante V.

Mapalia, cotages builded round like ouens.

Mappa, a table clothe.

Marasmus, is a kind of the fever called Hectica, in the which the moisture of
the substancial parts of the body is exhauste or dried up, and the flesh
resolved. wherefore Galenus exhorts the physician not to go about to cure
him, whom this syckenesse has attached. For although hew extingushe the heat,
yet will the dryness that is left, like unto age consume the pacient. The
causes thereof be the same which are of Hectica, the one and the other is
called in english a consumption fever. but this may be called a mortal
consumption, because it is incurable.

Marathon, a town in the country of Athenes distant from thens.x. miles,
where Theseus slew a terrible bull, and Milciades vanquished the Persians.

Marathusa, an isle wherein is abundance of fenell, and it is also called
Clazomenia.

Maratrum, idem quod feniculus, fenell, which is hot and dry in the second
degree.

Marceo, cui, cere, to be corrupt.

Marcere uino, to be consumed with drunkenness. Marcet animus, his courage
fails him

Marcesco, idem quod Marceo.

Marcescere otio uel desidia, to be lost with ydelnesse and slouthe.

Marcescente adhuc stomacho pridiani cibi onere, The stomak being yet oppressed
with the meat of yesterday.

Marcellus, a proper name.

Marchia, a country in base Germany.

Marcidus, da, dum, rotten.

Marcidae aures, hanging cares.

Marcidus somno, unlusty with to much sleep

Marcipor, oris, the servant of Marcus.

Marconiani, people in Germanye, which are now supposed to be either of
Boheme, or of Morauia.

Marcor, oris, corruption or putrefaction, sluggardy.

Mardi, people adioynyng to Persia.

Mare, the sea.

Mare coelo miscere, to trouble all the world.

Mare mediterraneum, is the sea which comes from the west occean and enters
by the stra^tes of Marrocke, and passes between Spayn and Barbary, diuidyng
Europa^ from Africa, and enters into Asia, taking not withstanding diverse
particular names: as Balearicum, Llgusticum, Tyrrhenum, Carpathium, Aegeum* etc.

Mareotis, otidis, a river in Egypt. also a part of Libia, a part of Epi^us.

Mariotides, grapes of that country.

Marga, a kind of earth called marle, which is a fat clay and chalk myngled.

Margaridae, small dates round and white.

Margarita, margaritum, margarites, Margaris, ridis, a perle, a margarite.
sometime generally all precious stones ar called Margaritae.

Margaritarius, a seller of perles.

Margariteferus, ra, rum, that which brings forth or has plenty of perles.

Margina, a region in Asia.

Margo, ginis, the brym or edge of every thing, the margent.

Margus, a river in Asia.

Maria, a proper name.

Mariaba, the chief city in Saba.

Marituis, Luneburgh in Almayne.

Marinus, na, number, of the sea.

Mariscae, unsavory fygges, wild figs, fygges which do open that the seeds
do appear. also great piles or hemorroides in the fundement.

Mariscus, a bull rushe.

Marita, a wedded woman, a wife.

Maritigenus, a, um, come of the kind of Mars.

Maritimus, of the sea side, or of the sea.

Marito, are, to wedde.

Maritus, a wedded man, husband.

Marius, a proper name of a man.

Marmarica, a country in Affrike.

Marmaritis, an herb supposed of Dioscorides to be fumitory, of Pliny
bearefoote.

Marmor, oris, marble stone.

Marmoratio, building with marble.

Marmoratus, ta, tum, wrought with marble.

Marmoreus, a, um, of marble.

Marodunum, Caermerden in wales.

Marpesus, an hill in the isle callid Parus.

Marpesius, of the same hylle.

Marplacidae, ships orb arges used in Media.

Marra, a mattocke to pare away weeds.

Marrubium, an herb called horehounde, it is hot and dry in the second
degree.

Marrucini, people in Italy.

Mars, martis, called god of battle. sometime it is taken for battle.

Mart suo, of his own proper wit, without any counsel.

Marsi, a country in Italy called Aprutium.

Marspiter, the father of Mars.

Martia, a country in Italy.

Marsupium, a pouche or a pourse.

Martiaca, wages given to soldiers.

Martiacus, ca, cum, belongyng to wars.

Martialis, borne under the planet of Mars.

Martius, a, um, pertaynyng to Mars.

Martius campus, a field at Rome dedicate to Mars, where the young men of Rome
did exercise them self. also there were their assemblies for the election of
their great officers

Martius, mensis, the month called March.

Martyr, in greek, a witness.

Martyrium, martyrdom.

Mas, maris, a man, or mankind.

Masculesco, sci, scere, to be manly, greatte, or wise, to be comen of the male
kind.

Masculo, are, to make manly or strong.

Masculus, a, um, manly, great, wise.

Masdoranus, a mountain, which diuydeth Parthia from Armenia.

Maspetum, the leaf of an herb, of the which comes Beniowyne.

Massa, paaste a lump of any thing.

Massa auri, a wedge of goulde.

Massagetae, a people in Asia, which runnyng on horseback through deserts,
do drink their horses blood myxt with milk, they also do eat their
parents, if they dye for age, but if they be sick, they cast them to wild
beasts to be devoured.

Massica, a country in the south part of Spain

Massicus, a mountain in Campania.

Massilia, a cite in high France, callid Marsiles

Massiliensis, se, of Marsiles.

Masimissa, king of Numidia, and great friend to the Romans.

Massylia, cum y, a country in Affrike, among the western Moors.

Masticeos, reverend, honorable.

Mastiche, a soote gum, called Mastix.

Mastigia, and Mastigeus, a knave worthy to be beaten.

Mastigophorus, a fellow worthy to be whypped also certain ministers, which
with whippes, removed the people, where there was much prease.

Mastix, cis, a whyppe.

Mastos, a treat of a cestern whereby water does run out by a cock or spoute.

Mastruca, a garment, which men of Sardina used to wear.

Mastrupari, to touch dishonestely the priuye members of a man.

Masurius, the name of a famous lawyer, which wrate on the laws civil

Matella, an vrynall or other vessel, seruyng to that purpose.

Matula, idem.

Matellio, onis, idem.

Mateaeotechina, the vanity which is in a science or craft.

Matter, matris, a mother.

Materfamilias, ae, an housewyfe, goodwyfe of the house, she that has
governance of other women, be she married or unmarried.

Matter matrima, she that is a mother, and has mother living.

Materia, and materies, matter whereof any thing is made, be it metal, wood,
stone, earth, or any thing else.

Materialis, le, that which is of some matter.

Materiarius, a carpentar.

Materiatus, ta, tum, tymbred.

Materior, aris, ari, to warke in timber.

Materis, a french spear, or a iauelyn.

Matertera, an aunte or mothers sister.

Mathematicus, he that is ku^nyng in aulgrym, musyke, geometry, and astronomy.

Mathesis, and Mathema, learning by a demonstration.

Matralia, the solemn feasts of Maruta, called the mother of goddis.

Matresco, scere, to be like a mother.

Matricida, he that kylleth his mother.

Matrimonium, wedlock, matrimony.

Matrinuis, whose mother yet lives.

Matrix, cis, the mother or mattice in a woman, in the which the child is
conceived. alsoo matrix is any female kind that conceyueth and bears. also
the city in a country, where as is the archebysshops sea, is called Matrix
uibs, which in greek is called Metropolis. It is also the pythe of a tree.

Matrona, a wife, also the name of a river in Burbon.

Matronalis, pertaining to a wife.

Matruells, the son or daughter of my mothers sister.

Matta, a matte.

Mattiacae pilae, soap balls.

Mattiacum, a town in Germany.

Maturate, hastily, quyckely, Iube maturate Illa^ exire huc, Bid her coin
forth quyckly.

Mature, tymely, nor to soon, nor to late.

Maturesco, scere, to be ripe.

Maturitas, tatis, rypenes in all thing, and as it were perfection.

Maturo, are, to make ripe or perfect, to do a thing perfectly in due time
and mesure. some time to do a thing spedily or quyckely.

Maturus, a, um, ripe, perfect. sometime it sygnyfieth aged.

Matura aetas, full or perfect age.

Maturus, liomo, an aged man.

Matuta, the morning, or morrow.

Matutinus, a, um, of the morrow.

Mauors, ortis, Mars.

Mauortius, a, um, pertaynyng to Mars.

Mauri, people called Moors.

Mauritania, the country now callid Morisco, or of Mores, lyeng on the west
part of Africa, between the sea called Mare Mediterraneu^ on the north, and
Libya on the south. Martianus says, that in length it is ten times xxxviii.
miles, which is.CCClxxx. miles, and in breadth toward the south.CCCC. lxvii.
miles.

Mausoleum, a sepulcher or tomb, which Arthemisia made for her husband
Mausolus, which for the excellent workemanshyp was accounted to be one of the
meruayles of the world, and for the famousnes thereof, every great and
notable sepulcher is called Mausoleum.

Mausolus, the king of a realem called Caria.

Maxilla, the cheke done.

Maximates, the greattest men in authority.

Maximitas, tatis, ancient writers used for greatness.

Maximus, a, um, greatest or most in estimation.

Maza, a take made of flower and milk.

Mazaca, a city in Cappadocia under the hylle called Argeus, now called
Cesarea.

Mazeras, a river in the mouth of the sea, callid Mare Hircanum.

Mazonomiu^, a platter wherein meat is carried.

M ANTE E.
MEANDER, a river in Phrigia, which by sundry wyndynges, at the last falls
into a creek, which divides Miletum and Priena in Greece.

Meapte, mine own.

Meatus, tus, a passage or way. also the pores of the body, out of the which
do come sweat and vapors.

Mecastor, a form of sweryng, as who says, so Castor help me.

Mechanicus, a crafts man.

Mechanica ars, a handy craft.

Mecoenas, atis, mynyon to Augustus the emperor, and because he was the
supporter of great learned men, all favorers and succourers of lernyd men be so
called.

Mecon, in greek is popy in english.

Meconium, is the juice of the leaves and heddes of popy pressed out, which
sum do use in the stead of Opium.

Mecum, with me.

Mecum facit, it makes for my purpose.

Mecum sentit, he is of mine opinyon.

Medea, wife unto Jason, a wytche and cruelle woman, she was daughter of Oe^tes
king of Colchos and Hipsea his wife, whose hystory is sufficiently known in
all tungues.

Medela, remedy by medicine.

Mederga, for erga, toward me.

Medeor, eris, eri, to heal or cure.

Media, a country in Asia, having on the north the sea called Hyrcanum, on the
west Armeny the more and Assyria, on the south Persia on the east Hircania and
Parthia.

Media uocabula, words which may be taken in a good or ill part. as
Tempestas which sygnifyeth tempest and time. Facinus, a notable deed good or
ill. Valitudo, health or syckenes, and other like.

Medianus, na, um, that which is in the mydle.

Mediastinus, a, um, the myddelmoste.

Mediastimus, a drudge or lubber, which does in the house al manner of vile
service, as swepe or cleanse the house, carry wood to the kytchen and other like
drudgery.

Mediastrinus, the servant, which has the rule of the house under his master.

Medica, an herb, which I suppose to be clouer grass, with purple round
flowers.

Medica mala, orenges.

Medica malus, an orange tree.

Medibile, in state to be healyd, curable.

Medicabilis, le, curable.

Medicamentarius, a physician.

Medicamentarius, a, um, pertaining to medicine

Medicina, medicamen, medicamentum, a medicine. sometime it signifies poison.

Medicinalis, le, medicynable.

Medico, and Medicor, aris, ari, to heal or cure.

Medicus a physician.

Medicus, ca, cum, pertaynyng to phisyke.

Medimnus, was a mesure of the greeks, whereof were two sorts, one was called
Atticus, and contaynyd of our measure.vi. gallons, one pottell, and one quart.
An other was called Georgicus, which was of our measure one bushel, a pecke,
and one pynte, it receives.xlviii. Choenices.

Mediocris, diocre, measurable, in a mean, moderate.

Mediocritas, tatis, a mean.

Mediolanium, the city of Orleance in France. it was also a city in
Westphalia in Almayn callid Munster, which forasmoch as the people thereof were
infected with the heresye of Anabaptists, and other detestable errors. It was
destroyed by the princis of Almayn, about the year of our lord god a thousand
five hundred thirty and nine.

Mediolanum, the chief city of Lumbardy, called Myllane. also a town in
Lankashyre, called Manchester.

Mediouratrices, Mastright in Brabant.

Medioximus, a, um, mean, or in the mids.

Medipontus, an instrumente wherewith ropes are made.

Meditabundus, careful, studiouse.

Meditate, studyously, perfectly on the fyngers ends.

Meditatio, a thynkyng or diuisyng in thought. alsoo an exercise as well of
mind as of body.

Meditatorius, a, um, which belongs to medytation.

Mediterraneus, in the myddle of the land, and furthest from the sea.

Meditor, aris, ari, to think depely, and in thinking to find out, to
purpose, to lay snares, to sing or play swetely.

Meditari se, to exercise him self.

Meditrina, the goddess of physike.

Meditrinalia, ceremonies used by them, which drank must or new wine.

Meditullium, the myddell.

Medius, a, um, the mids equally distant from the extremities. sometime mean.

Medium commune, among all.

Medio, uel de medio tollere, to kill.

Medius, a mean or mediator between.ii. me^.

Mediusfidius, an oath, which although some time it had an other
signifycation, yet may it now in a commune form of speaking be used in
this wise, by the faith of my body. Sens Dius for Jupiter, and Fidius for
filius, be now out of use.

Meduacus, a river about Venyce, called now Burnt.

Medulla, marrowe, which is in bones.

Medullitus, innerly into the marrowe.

Medullo, are, to take out marrowe sometime to express utterly. Narra iam rem
nobis omnem, atque emedulla, Tell and express utterly to us all the hole
matter.

Medusa, a lady, of whom fables do report, that her hears by Minerua were
tournyd into adders, and they which beheld her were turned into stoones,
whom Perseus afterward slew. She is sometime taken for one of the furies of
hell.

Mefansilium, a certain weapon to throw.

Megabizi, priests of Diana, which always were gelded.

Megaera, a fury or turmentour of hell, which Paynyms supposed did provoke
and styre men to woodnesse.

Megalenses, and megalesia, plays to the honor of Cybele.

Megalesia, the festival day dedicate to Cybele, callid the mother of goddis
among Pyanims.

Megalium, a sweet ointment.

Megaloprepeia, an honorable facion in gyuynge or imployenge of great things,
which besemeth a man of great courage.

Megaloprepes, he that does great things, according to his dignity.

Megara, a city belongyng to Athenes. it was also the name of one of Hercules
wives.

Megaris, idis, a country in Achaia.

Megistanes, whom we do call nobles or pieres of the realm.

Me hercle, an oath sworn by Hercules.

Meio, iere, to pysse.

Mel, mellis, honey.

Melamphyllon, an herb.

Melampus, a man's name.

Melamirus, a fyshe having a black tail.

Melancholia, melancholy. sometime madness.

Melancoryphus, a bird called a fynche.

Melandria, the lean parts of the fysshe called Tunny.

Melanthia, an herb called also Nigella.

Melanurus, a kind of perches called ruffes.

Melculum, a wanton word spoken by lovers unto their paramours, my little
honey.

Meleagrides, birds, which we do call hens of Genny.

Melegina, an isle in the Venecian sea.

Melenetus, a kind of fawkons very little of body, black and puyssaunt,
which haunteth mountains, and feeds her birds alone, a merlyon as I
suppose.

Melibeus, a shepardes name.

Meliboea, a city in Thessaly.

Meliceris, ridis, a soore or skale in the head like a honey comb, out of the
which comes an humor like honey.

Melicerta, whom the gentyles did honor for one of the goddis of the sea,
called alsoo Palaemon.

Melicraton, wine and honey sodden together.

Melicus, a musytion.

Melilotos, an herb called Melylote.

Melimela, sweet appuls.

Melina, a sweet shaulme.

Melinus, na, number, white russette, or a gynger color.

Melioresco, scere, to be better.

Melipecta, meats made with honey.

Melis, seu melius, a beast callid a gray, abrock or a badger.

Melisigenes, was the first name of Homerus the poet.

Melisphillon, smallache.

Melissa, a woman, who with her sister Amalthea nouryshed Iupyter. it is alsoo
an herb commonly called baulme.

Melissus, the name of him, which did first sacrifice unto ydols. also the
name of an ancient philosopher.

Melita, sieve Melite, an isle lyenge between Sycile and Affryke, wherein is
plenty of honey, and is now called Malta, where at this time the company of the
knights hospytilers do inhabyte, as they did at the Rhodes.

Melitaei canes, and melitenses, were praty little hounds, in the which
ladies took pleasure and delight, which were brought out of the said isle of
Melite.

Melites, a precious stoone of the color of an orange.

Melitites, a drink made of honey and must, or new wine.

Mellarius, a honey man, or sellar of honey.

Mellarius, a, um, of honye.

Mellatio, the time of dryuyng of hyues, when honey is taken out.

Mellatium, new must, wherein honey is sodden

Mellene, a city in Arcadia.

Melleus, a, um, of honey. also sweet. Vox mellea, a sweet voice.

Mellica, a kind of pulse, of the color of read, of the form of Myll.

Mellificatio, making of honey.

Mellifico, care, to make honey.

Mellificum, idem.

Mellifluus, a, um, sweet as honey.

Melligo, ginis, a meile dew, which falls on leaves of trees, and sometime
on corn.

Melilla, my honey, my swetyng, a word of wanton dalyers.

Melliloquus, a sweet speaker.

Mellisones, they which do practyse dressynge of honey.

Mellitones, places where bees be nourished.

Melliturgus, a warker or maker of honey.

Mellitus, a, um, myxt with honey.

Mellium, a dogs colar.

Melitus, the name of him which accused Socrates.

Melizonum, a confection made with honye claryfyed.

Melo, a river called also Geon.

Melodes, he that syngeth ku^nyngly and swetely.

Melodia, melody.

Meloessa, an isle by Sicile, in the which was great plenty of sheep.

Melomeli, when appuls very ripe and fair be conserved in honey.

Melonia, uel Melona, called the goddess of honye.

Melos, odis, melody, armony.

Melota, uel melote, a shepes fell or skin.

Melpomene, one of the nine Muses.

Membrana, parchement, or velume, wherein men do write. also the ouermooste
skin of any thing.

Membraneus, a, um, of parchement or velume.

Membranulum, a small member.

Membrare, to form members.

Membratim, by every member.

Membratura, the setting or order of members.

Membrosus, a, um, having a great membre.

Membrum, a membre.

Memerylus, a little tree like a citron tree.

Memet, my self.

Memini, I remember.

Memnon, the son of Thiton, which came to the aid of the Troyans.

Memnoniae aues, birds which were supposed to grow of the ashes of Memnon.

Memor, oris, he that remembers.

Memorabilis, le, worthy remembrance.

Memoratus, tus, and Memoratio, a reme^bryng.

Memoria, memory, remembrance.

Memoriale, a thing which should be remembered.

Memoriosus, he that has a good memory.

Memoriter, perfectly by heart, or with good remembrance.

Memoro, are, to remember, sometime to tell, or expound, to recyte, or rehearse.

Memphis, a great and famous city in Egypt.

Memphiticus, of that city.

Memphe, idem.

Mena, a little fyshe black or blue in summer, and white in winter, which I
suppose may be well called a menowe. all be it Theodorus Gaza, does translate
Maenides, calling them sometime Aleces, which we call herrynges, and
Maenidia, he translateth paruas Aleculas, little hearynges, called pylchardes.

Menaechmi, the name of a comedy of Plautus.

Menalippa, queen of Amazon, whom Hercules vanquyshed.

Menapij, people of the country called Gellarlande, or Gylderlande and Cleue.

Menander, a famous poet, a writer of commedyes.

Menaria, an isle in the sea between Carthage and Sicile.

Menceps, he or she that is out of their wit.

Menda, and mendum, a faut or vice in writing.

Mendaculum, a little fault or lie.

Mendatium, a lie.

Mendax, acis, a liar.

Mendaciloquus, a tellar of lies.

Mendicabulum, beggynge.

Mendicitas, tatis, and Mendicimoniu^, beggary.

Mendico, care, to beg.

Mendicula, a certain vesture.

Mendicus, a beggar.

Mendix, an office among the old Italyans called Osci.

Mendosus, a, um, faulty.

Menecrates, was an arrogant and proud physician, who because he chanced to
heal sundry persons, of whose health me^ did despair, and therefore in
commendyng him called him Iupyter. He afterward named him self Menecrates
Jupiter.

Menelaus, was king of Lacedemonia brother to Agamemnon, and husband to the
fair Helene, for whom Troy was destroyed.

Meneletus, a bird like to a small egle.

Menestheus, was duke of Athenes, son of Thescus and Phedra.

Meniana aedificia, buyldyng outward in prospectes or galleryes.

Meninges, the rysine wherein the brain is inclosyd.

Menix, an isle against the less Africa.

Men's, it is, the highest and chief part of the soul. sometime it signifies the
mind, will, intent, or memory. sometime advise or counsel.

Mente captus, a mad man.

Mentis compos, of hole mind or perfect remembrance.

Mensa, a table or bourde to eat on. sometime dinner or supper.

Mensarius, the banker or exchanger, of whom men do borowe money upon gain,
called exchange.

Mensio, a measure.

Mensis, a month.

Mensores, they which do lay out the bounds of land between man and man, or
town and town.

Menstrualis, pertaynyng to a month, or of the space of a monethe, or during
the time of a month.

Menstruatus, ta, tum, that which has flowers like to women.

Menstruum, a woman's natural pourgation, called flowers.

Menstruus, a, um, that which happens every month, or is done monthly.

Mensura, a measure.

Mensurnus, a, um, monthly.

Menta, and Mentula, the privy members of a man

Mentagra, a disease, which covers the face with a foul scabbe, and it was
callid of the greeks Lichen. Some do suppose, that it is the same disease,
which is now called the french pockes.

Mentastrum, wild mynte.

Mentha, an herb called mynte.

Mentibor, for mentiar, I shall make a lie.

Mentigo, ginis, the scabbe which is among sheep callid the pox.

Mentior, iris, iri, to lie.

Mentiri se esse aliquem, to feign to be an other person.

Mentiri sexum muliebri motu, to feign him self to be a woman.

Mentoas, the famous river, which is now called Danubius.

Mentor, an excellent grauer of vessel.

Mentum, a chynne.

Menus, a river in Germany.

Meo, are, to goo, to flow.

Meopte ingenio, by mine own wit, of mine own nature.

Mephiticus, ca, cum, stynkynge.

Mephitis, a stenche or ill savor, which proceeds of corupt water or likor,
mixed with earth.

Meracus, ca, cum, and Merax, racis, pure with out any myxture.

Vinum meracum, wine without any water.

Meraculum uinu^, wine but a lyttel alayde.

Mercalis, le, vendyble, or that which may be bought.

Mercator, oris, every byer, a merchant.

Mercatura, the feate of marchandyse.

Mercatus tus, the act of byenge.

Mercatus, ti, a market or fair.

Mercatus, ta, tum, bought.

Merceditius, an hired servant.

Mercenarius, idem.

Mercenarius, a, um, that which may be hired.

Merces, cis, merchandise, ware, chaffare.

Merces, cedis, wages, the reward of labor or service.

Praediorum merces, revenues of land.

Mercimonium, that which is tournyd in byenge and selling.

Mercor, aris, ari, to bye for to selle for gaynes* sometime to bye generally.

Mercurialis, an herb called Mercury.

Mercurius, was of the paynyms called god of eloquence, and messanger of
Jupiter, it is the name of one of the.vii. planettes.

Mercurij dies, wenysday.

Merda, the excrement or ordure of a man or beast

Merdo, are, to expel ordure, to shite.

Merenda, meat eaten at after noone, a collation, a noone meal.

Mereo, ere, and Mereor, eri, to take wages, to deserve, to exercise a vile
occupation also Merere, to serve in wars.

Merere stipendia, to take wages as a sowldyour, or to be a sowldyour.

Merere alicui, to do service to one.

Merere equo, to be a man of arms, or to serve on horseback in wars.

Merere pedibus, to be a foot man in wars

Mereor been de te, I do somewhat for the, I deserve to have the my friend, or
to have thy favor.

Male mereor de te, I do the displeasure, I do ill deserve thy favor.

Mere, purely.

Meretricie, hooryshely.

Meretricium, hooredome, or brothelry.

Meretricius, a, um, pertayngng to brothelry.

Meretricor, aris, ari, to live in brothelrye, to play the harlotte.

Meretrix, icis, an harlot, or brothell.

Mergae, pytcheforkes for to take up sheues.

Mergites, gripes of corn.

Mergi, vynes or other small trees, which are bowed, and have the tops bow
wise, turned and set in the earth.

Mergo, si, gere, to drown in the water.

Mergulus, an instrument where the match of a lamp is contained.

Mergus, goris, a bucket to draw up water.

Mergus, gi, a foul of the sea like to a gul, which diueth under the water to
take fyshe, and by often dyuynge perceyueth signs of tempest coming, and than
suddenly with a great cry he flees out of the myddle of the water unto the
land.

Meribibulus, he that drinks much wine with out water.

Meridianus, a, um, pertaining to none.

Meridiatio, noone rest.

Meridies, noone tide.

Meridio, are, and meridior, ari, to dyne, to eat meat at noone, to sleep at
noone.

Meridionalis, le, of the southe.

Merismos a figure called alsoo Distributio, whereby the oration is distributed
into sundry sentences.

Merito, worthily, with good cause.

Merito, are, to be worthy. also to serve in wartes, sometime to gain.

Meritoria, houses or shoppes let to hyre.

Meritorius, a, um, that which is let or set for advantage.

Meritoria taberna, a house wherinto a man is received for his money.

Meritum, a benefytte or pleasure, a deserte good or ylle.

Meritum est meum, it is in my defaute.

Meritus, ta, tum, deserved, convenient.

Meritus, a mountain in the third part of Europa, beyond Greece.

Mero, was in skorne the name of Nero, because he was so great a drynker of
wine.

Meroe, an isle on the great river of Nilus in Egypt.

Merobiba, she that drynketh wine without water.

Meroctes, a little stone of the color of lekes, which sweateth a lykour
like to milk.

Meropes, men of diverse languages.

Merops, a bird which does eat bees.

Meropus, a mountain in Greece by Thessaly.

Meros, a hill of Inde, at the foot whereof is the city called Nisa.

Merso, are, to drown often.

Merto, idem.

Merula, a bird called a black macke or owsyli, with a yelowe beke. also a
fysshe called merlynge or whitynge.

Merum, wine vnlayde, without water.

Merus, a, um, soole, mere, pure.

Merx, cis, one kind of marchandyse.

Mes, in the Arabian tungue is a pease of the Greeks, as Manardus writes li.
1. epist. 3. Serapio says, that it is a grain having in it a figure of an eye
with the appull thereof very black.

Mesa, a river which runs by Brabande, and the land of Luke and Gellar,
called the Mase.

Mesapia, a country called also Apulia.

Mesauli, entrees between the halle and the pariar.

Mesentericae uenae, are veins which like to roots of trees, do receive
nourysshement, from the stomach and bowelles, dysposyng it into all the body.

Mesenterion, is a bowel joined with the midresse, and unto the back, which
lets that the juice of meats be not sucked to hastylye or vnprofytablye by
the other bowels. Alex. Benedictus. Julius Pollux writith, that Mesenterion is
a skin compact of veins and synewes, ioynyng to the raynes and stomak,
sendyng nouryshement unto the liver. Galenus in Anato. says, that it is set in
the myddell of the bowelles, and is also called Mesarchon, because he wrappeth
and incloseth all the veins, which do come from the liver unto him, with also
the arteries adioynynge unto him. It is alsoo called in latyne Medianum.

Mesia, a country ioynyng to Hungry, Myse.

Mesochorus, he that plaieth on a flute or other pype in the mids of the
daunsers.

Mesoleucos, a precious stone, black, having a white struck in the niddes.

Mesomelas, a kind of that precious stone, which is callid Achates, which
being white is divided with a black line.

Meson, was one which first invented to bring into comedies servants and
cooks. whereof it is supposed, that the cooks of cities and towns were of old
time called Mesones, as strange cooks were called Tettiges. Coelius antiq.
lec. li. 3.

Mesonauta, a drudge in a ship, or a ship page, which does all vile service
in the ship

Mesonyxion, mydnyght.

Mesopotamia, a country in the orient, lienge between the two noble ryuers
Tigris, and Euphrates, and has on the southe Babyloniam, and on the north the
great mountain called Caucasus.

Mespilus, a medlar tree.

Mespilum, a fruit called a medlar.

Messala Coruinus, a noble senator of Rome, of whom Tully in his book of
orators called Brutus, writes in this wise, I may not omytte to speak of the
excellency of Messala. Beware do not think that any is like unto him in
constance care and study about the weal publyke, also in eloquence, wherein
he wonderfully does excel. And not withstandyng being such a man, two
years before that he dyed, he so lost his remembrance, that he forgate his own
name. Which has happened to diverse other men of great wisdom and lernyng. He
lived in the time of Julius Caesar and Augustus emperors.

Messalina, wife to the emperor Claudius, a woman of insatiable lechery.

Messana, a city in Sicile.

Messapia, a part of the country of Apulia.

Messene, a city in Greece.

Messenij, the people of that city.

Messenia, a region in Achaia, having.xviii. mountains, in the which was a
city callid lyd Messenae.

Messiah, Christ.

Messis, harvest, sometime it signifies the corns or the grapes new mowen or
gathered.

Messio, onis, a reapynge.

Messor, oris, a reaper.

Messorius, ria, rium, pertaynyng to reapyng.

Meta, a butte or prycke to shoot at, sometime a mark or gowle in the field,
whereunto men or horses do run. sometime a bound in lands. also a reyke of
corn or heye. also the lower stone of a mylle.

Meta lactis, a cheese.

Metabasis, a passage.

Metabole, change.

Metagonium, a promontory or mountain lyenge into the sea, which diuydeth
Africa from Numidia.

Metalepsis, a figure, whereby a word is put from his commune signification.

Mettalli, hired sowldyours.

Metallici, they which do dygge and warke metal out of the mines, wherein
metal is found.

Metallum, metal.

Metamorphosis, eos, a tra^sformation or changynge of figure.

Metaphora, a translation of words from their proper signification.

Metaphraenum, that part of the back which is against the heart, the spleen,
the lungues, and the liver.

Metaplasmus, a figure called transformation. it is a translatyng of words
being in prose, into a form of meter, either for necessity, or for to
augment the elegancy.

Metapontum, a city in the realm of Naples.

Metapontini, people of that city.

Metempsichosis, the transposyng of souls after the opinyon of the
Pythagoriens, out of one body, into an other body.

Metathesis, where one letter is transposed from one place in a word into an
another, as Timber Tymbre.

Metaurus, and metaurum, a river of Vmbria, which runs into Flaminia.

Metellus, the proper name of diverse noble Romans.

Meteora, ar books of Aristotle, wherein he treteth of sterres, and such other
celestial things.

Meteoria, speculation in high things.

Meteorologus, he that is studyous in such speculation.

Meteoroscopus, a beholder of high things.

Methodus, a compendious or ready way, or a rule certain to learn by any
science.

Methymna, a city in the isle of Lesbos.

Meticulosus, rymerouse or fearful.

Metior, tiris, tiri, to meet or measure, to give by measure, to pass over.

Metius Sufferius, was captain of the people called Albani, in the time of
Tullus Hostilius king of Romans. Who calling him to battle against the
people callid Fidenates. He came, but abydyng which host should have the
victory, he abstayned to fight. Wherefore Tullus after that he had vanquished
his enemies, caused Metius to be ryed to sundry horses, and to be drawn in
pieces.

Meto, messui, metere, to reap.

Metoecus, was he which came out of one country or city, and dwelled in an
another. such were wont to pay certain head silver, which was named Metoecium,
and was the value of.xii. Dragmas.

Metona, a town in Greece called Modon.

Metonymia, a figure called denomination, as Bacchus for wine, Venus for
lecherye, Cupido for love.

Metor, aris, ari, to set bounds, to mesure land, to dyspose.

Metopion, oil of almondes. also a tree in Africa, which dystylleth down
gum like to roseyn.

Metoposcopus, he that consydereth a man's face, and thereby judges his
conditions or affectes.

Metreta, or Metretes, is a certain measure, whereof be two sorts: the one is
called Attica, and contains of wine a hundred pou^des, of oil.xc. pound, of
honey a hundred and fyfty pounds, and is of our measure.vi. galons, one
pottell, and one quarte. And so it receives.xii. Choas atticas. The other is
called Georgica, but it is of equal measure with Attica.

Metropolis, the chief city.

Metropolitanus, a man of that city.

Metropolites, the bishop of the chief city.

Metrum, a verse.

Metuo, tui, tuere, to fear or dread with tre^bling

Metus, rus, fear, dread.

Metys, the refuse of wax.

Meu, an herb.

Meuania, a city in the part of Italye, called Vmbria, wherein Propertius the
poet was borne.

Meneusa, a city in Wales callid saint David.

Meus, a, um, mine.

Mea quidem sententia, in mine opinyon.

Meo nomine, for my cause, on my behalf.

Meum est, it is my duty or my part, or mine invention.

Meus sum, I am mine own man, or subject to no man, or in no man's danger.

M ANTE I.
MI, to me. sommetyme it is the vocative case of meus.

Mica, a very small portion of any thing as a crumme of bread, or of glass,
sand, or metal being fyled.

Mico, care, to glysten or shine.

Micant gladij, the swords do brandyshe.

Micant uenae, the veins do beat.

Dignus qui cum in tenebris mices, is apapplyed to one, which is reputed to be
an honest man and a trusty, which will keep touch and deceive no man. It may
be in this wise translated in a commune form of speaking. He is one, with
whom thou may assuredly bargayne. also to hold up now one finger, now
two, as men do wha^ they treat or bargayn together by signs.

Miconium, an herb called popy.

Microcosmus, a lyttel world.

Micrologia, curiosity about things of no valor.

Micrologus, a little communication.

Micropsichia, feeble courage, faint hearted.

Micropsichi, they which have faint hartis.

Micturio, ire, to pysse, or to have will to pysse.

Mictyris, poor folks potage.

Mida, a worm bredyng in beans.

Midas, a king of Phrigie, who excellyd all other in richesse.

Miaesia, a town in Macedonia.

Migratio, a remouyng in journey.

Migro, are, to remove from one place, to dwell in an another.

Migrare in mucronem, to be poynted.

Migrassit for migrauerit.

Mihi, sometime it sygnifieth to me, sometime against me. Si quid peccat Demea
mihi peccat, What so ever it is that Demea has donamys, it is against me, it
is my harm, and none others. sometime it signifies of me, or by me. Syrus est
praehendendus, atque adhortandus mihi. Syrus must be gotten and cou^sayled by
me.

Mihipte, Cato used for mihi ipsi.

Milciades, a noble capitayn of the Athenienses, who with a xi. thousand Greeks
vanquished vi. hundred thousand Persians in the fields of Marathon. Afterward
by the people of Athenes he was condemned and cast into prison where he died,
and might not be suffered to be buried until his son had taken on him the
gyues which his father did wear.

Miles, militis, a man of war, a soldier.

Miletus, a city in Ionia, an other in Creta, an other in the isle of Lesbus.

Milesius, a, um, of that city.

Miletum, a city in the country of Athenes.

Militaris uia, the high way.

Militariter, warrely.

Militia, war, sometime the exercise of war.

Milito, are, to go on warfare, or to be in wars

Milium, a small grayn called myll.

Mill, and millia, a thousand.

Millearium, a mile also a cawdron. also a pyller in Rome, wherein was graven all the ways of Italye.

Millefolium, or Millefolia, an herb called milfoyle or yarowe, or noseblede.

Millepeda, a worm having a great numine of feet.

Millesies, a thousand times.

Millesima pars, the thousand part.

Milliarius, a, um, of a thousand weight.

Millies, a thousand times.

Millus, a mastyues colar, made of lether with n^yles.

Milo, onis, the name of one which at the game of Olympus, with his bare hand
slew a bull, and after carried him a furlong, and the same day eat him every
morsel. It was also a noble Romayn, for whom Tully made an oration contaynynge
incomparable eloquence.

Meluina ^ibia, a corner or small shaulme.

Miluus and miluius, a kyte. there is also a fyshe and a sterre of the same
name.

Miluinus, na, number, of a kyte, or like a kyte.

Mimallones, women dedicate to the foolysshe ceremonies of Bacchus.

Mimas, a mountain of Thracia.

Mimus, a bourder or a rayler, which in mocking other men in gesture and
countenance, does follow them, faynynge to be the same persons whom they do
reprove. Mimi be verses counterfaytinge much wantonness without any reverence,
having not withstandyng some wise sentences myngled therewith.

Mimicus, ca, cum, of such wanton fascion.

Mimographus, a writer of such wa^te^ matters

Mina, among the Greeks sometime sygnifyed a poyse or weight. sometime a coin.
The poise was of three sorts, one was called Mina attica, which wayed.xii.
ounces and an half. Mina medica, wayed.xii. ounces. Mina Alexandrina,
weyed.xx. ounces. When it signified coin, there was of it alsoo two sorts:
one called Mina or mna attica Solonis, whithe contained a hundred Dragmas, of
our money now curraunt.xivii. s. xi. d. An another was Mina or Mna uaetus,
which was lxxv. Dragmas.xxxv. s. xi. d. q.

Mina italica, as Diodorus says, was a pound weight, and.iiii drammes.

December minae or mnae, be of our money.xxiii. pound xix. s. ii. d.

Centum minae, or mnae, be.CCxxxix. pound xi. s. viii. d.

Minae, arum, thretenynges. also battylmentes of walls.

Minax, acis, full of thretnynges.

Minaciter, thretnyngly.

Mincius, a river of Italy which compasses the city of Mantua, and rounneth
in to the great river of Po called Padus.

Minei, people of Arabia, nigh to the red sea.

Minera, and mineralia, ar of some usid for mines, out of the which metal is
dygged.

Minerua, called goddess of doctrine and wisdom, which was also named
Pallas. some time Minerua is used for nature, wit, or craft, Crassa Minerua,
uel pingui minerua, grossly, rudely. Inuita minerua, against nature.

Minerual, and Mineruale, a reward given sometime by scholars unto their
masters, in meat or drink.

Mingo, gere, to make water, to pysse.

Miniacius, a, um, red, of synople color.

Miniatula, red wax.

Miniati libri, lymned books, having letters of diverse colors.

Minime, and Minimum, lest. Minime gentium, least in all men's opinions.
sometime minime signifies no, in no wise. Minime doctus, unlearned. Minime
sapiens, unwise.

Minime mirum, little marvel.

Minio, are, to dye red.

Minister, stri, a servant.

Ministerium, service. sometime generallye all warke. sometime ministeria be
servants.

Ministro, are, to serve, to give a thing in doing service.

Minitabundus, thretenynge soore.

Minitans, thretnynge.

Minitor, aris, ari, to thret sore.

Minitari ferrum and flammam, to thretten to slay and to burn.

Minium, synople or red lead,

Minius, a river in Spain.

Minoa, the name of a city in Sicyle, of an other in the isle called Amorgos by
Sicile.

Minor, aris, ari, to thretten.

Minor natu, the younger.

Minoris dimidio, less by half.

Minos, was the king of Crete, and gave to them laws, whom paynyms for his
excellent justice, supposed to be chyefe judge of Hell.

Minotaurus, was a monster in Creta whom the poets do feign to be borne of
Pasyphae the wife of king Minos, being part like a man, part like a bull,
which being enclosed in the place called Labyrinthus was fed with the flesh
of men. But after he was slain by Theseus, with the help of Ariadna daughter
of Minos.

Minthos, dunge or ordure.

Minturnae, a city in Campania.

Minuo, ere, to minyshe.

Minuere aes alienum, to pay dettes.

Minurizo, are, to sing small, or to feyne in singing.

Minus, less.

Minutal, a meat made with chopped herbs, a iussell.

Minutarius, a seller of trifles or small haberdashe ware.

Minutatim, piece meal, in gobbettes.

Minutim, idem.

Minutia, the smallest thing that may be seen.

Minutum, idem quod Lepta.

Minutus, a, um, minyshed

Minutus animus, a feeble courage.

Minyae, a town in Thessalia.

Miniariae, mines, they be also veins of metal, out of the which is taken
sinope.

Mira, wonders or meruayles.

Mirabilis, le, meruaylous, wonderful.

Miraculum, a miracle, a thing exceeding nature or common reason.

Mirifico, care, to make wonderful.

Mirificus, ca, cum, wonderfully done, meruaylous.

Miriones, men having wry mouths.

Mirmeciae, wertes in the privy parts.

Mirmillones, chalengers at fighting with swords.

Miror, aris, ari, to marvel, to like a thing.

Mirum in modum, in a meruaylous fascion.

Misanthropos, he that hates the company of men.

Miscellanea, a mixture of diverse things.

Misceo, cui, scere, to myxe or meddle together, to confound together, to
trouble or to do a thing out of order or reason, sometime it signifies to
serve one with drink.

Miscere tumultum, to set men in a rore, to make a commotion.

Misellus, a little wretch.

Miser, eri, a wretch. sometime innocent.

Miserabilis, le, miserable, wretched, lamentable.

Miserabiliter, miserably, lamentably.

Miserandus, to be pitied.

Miserator, he that does an act of charity on him whom he pitieth.

Misericors, dis, merciful.

Misere, miserably.

Misere amat, he loves excedyngly.

Miseresco, scere, to be moved with pity.

Miseret me, I have pity.

Miseretur, I am moved with pity.

Misertum est, men have compassion or pity.

Miseria, misery, infelicitie.

Miseritudo, idem.

Misericordia, pity.

Miseratio, idem.

Misericorditer, pitifully.

Miserior, eris, misereri, to have pity.

Miseriter, misarably.

Miseror, aris, ari, to have pity.

Misogynia, an hater of women.

Missenus, an hill in Campania.

Missiculo, are, to send often.

Missile, all things that are thrown.

Missilia, things which the aunciente empetours were wont to cast among the
people as bread, cakes, sweet oyntmente and such like things which was done
in the Theater, in the feasts called Saturnalia.

Missio, a message. also leave to depart.

Missito, tare, to send often.

Missus, a, um, sent.

Missus, us, a course, when oone thing cummeth in a distaunce after an other,
a turn.

Missum facere, to omit or pass over a thing. also to give leave to depart.

Misy, is that which the apothecaries do call vitriole.

Mitellum, a little miter.

Mitesco, scere, to wax tame or quiet. sometime to wax ripe.

Mithra, the Persians do call the sun, and also the chief priest of the
sun.

Mithrax, a stone of the color of a rose, but against the sun he is
chaungeable,

Mithriaca sacra, ceremonies of the sun.

Mithridates, a puissant king of Ponthus in Asia.

Mithridaticum, a medicine like to triacle, called Mitridate.

Mithylenae, arum, a city in the isle of Lesbos.

Mitigo, are, to mitigate, to swage.

Mitifico, to pacify or make quiet.

Mitis, re, meke, simple, quiet.

Mitra, a myter. It was also attire of men and women's heads, among the
Egiptians.

Mitterin, an isle six days saylinge out of England, wherein is great plenty
of tynne.

Mitte sanguis, a blood lettyng or a blood shed.

Mitto, misi, mittere, to send, to leave or lay a part, to give.

Mittere sanguinem, to let blood.

Mittere in consiliu^, to let the iudes depart to give sentence, after that
the orator has fynished his oration, or the lawier his plea.

Mitte hanc noxiam, forgive me that fault.

Mitte hunc ire, let him go.

Mittas frenum affectibus, bridle thine affections.

Miua, is an Arabike word, and sygnyfyeth the juice of fruits boiled until
it be as thycke as honey. It is now only taken for a syrup made with the juice
of quinces, wine and sugar or honey, as in old time it was made.

Mixtarius, a cup, wherein wine is alayed with water.

M ANTE N.
MNA, idem quod mina.

Mnemosyne, memory.

Mnesterae, woars.

Mnestheus, the name of a Troyan.

M ANTE O.
MOAB, a city of Araby. also the name of one of the sons of Loath, of who^
the people are called Moabitae.

Mobilis, le, moveable, sone moved.

Mocontiacum, or Moguntia, the city of Me^tz in Almayne.

Moderatio, moderation, temperaunce.

Moderator, oris, a governor.

Moderatus, ta, tum, moderate, temperate.

Moderor, aris, ari, and Modero, are, to govern, to rule, to set a measure in
things, to moderate.

Modestia, modesty, temperaunce.

Modeste, temperately, soberly, advisedly.

Modestus, temperate, well aduysed.

Modialis, le, that which conteyneth a bushel.

Modicus, ca, cum, which excedeth not, measurable, sometime little or few.

Modicus cultu, meanly apparayled.

Modico graduire, to go a soft pace.

Modice, meanly, measurably.

Modificor, caris, cari, to take the measure of a thing.

Modiolus, a buckette, where with water is drawn out of a well: or a pot
fastened to a whele, which brings up water, and pours it out.

Modiparatores, men ordained to see measure kept.

Modius, a bushel: it was properlye a measure of dry things, which
contained.xvi. Sextarios, and contained of our measure one galon. one pottel
and one quarte saving four ounce measures. uide postea in sextario.

Modius agri, ground conteyninge every way.C. feet.

Modo, now, now late, sometime it signifies so that. Non refert, modo id
faciat, It makes no matter, so that he do it. also only. Modo ne. G.
Declinandu^ est de uia, modo ne summa turpitudo sequatur. A man may leave the
high way, so that there follow no dishonestie.

Modo ne id demum sensisti Pamphile, Perceyuedst thou it not until now
Pamphilus

Modulor, aris, ari, to make or do a thing by number and measure. also to
sing.

Modulus, and Modulamen, a song, a modulation, the time in singing.

Modus, manner, measure, furme fascion, way, quantity, end. Etsi nihil
scripsit, nisi de modo agri, although he wrote nothing but of the quantity of
the field.

Modo nostro, after our fascion.

Modum habere, to keep a rule or order in any thing.

Modum statuere, to give a rule.

Modum constituere, idem.

Modum adhibere alicui rei. to set a thing in a reasonable order. Saltare ad
tibicinis modos, to dance after the minstrelles playinge or tunes.

Modus agri, measure of land.

Moechor, aris, ari, to commit auoutry.

Moechus, an auoutrer or lechour.

Moechisso, are, to commit auoutry

Moenia, walls of a town or castle.

Moenitus, ta, tum, walled.

Moereo, ere, to be sorrowful.

Moero, are, to make one sad and heavy.

Moeror, oris, sorrow.

Moestitia, idem.

Moesia, a prouynce in Asia nygh to Pontus.

Moestiter, heuyly, sorowfully.

Moestus, a, um, sorry or sorrowful.

Moesto, are, Moesitifico, care, to make sorrowful.

Moga, a country in Asia, called now Cesaria.

Moguntia, a noble City in Germany, called Mense.

Mola, a mylle, it is also a great piece of flesh without shape, grown in a
woman, which causes them sometime to think that they be with child, it is
also a cake made of mele and salt.

Molaris, a cheke tothe.

Molaris, re, and Molarius, ia, um, perteyninge to a myll.

Molendinarius, ia, um, idem.

Molarius equus, an horse, which dryueth about a malte myll.

Molendinarius, a myllar.

Moles, a thing that is very great and weighty: sometime it is taken for
difficulty.

Molestia, grief.

Moleste. greuousely.

Molesto, are, to grieve, to offend, to do dyspleasure to one.

Molestus, a, um, that which greueth, offends, or discontenteth.

Molesta tunica, a garment which was myxt with some matter, which gathered
fire, put on some persons that should suffer death.

Moletrina, a mortar or querne, wherein any thing may be ground with the hand.

Molimen, the force or endeavor in doing a thing.

Molitio, and Molimentum, idem.

Molior, iris, iri, to move, to be moved, or stirred to do a thing. Moliri
classem, to prepare a nauye. Moliri iter, to perform a iourneye. Moliri
habenas, to rule. Moliri insidias, to lay snares, to lay in awayte Moliri
arcem, to build a fortress. Moliri bellum, to make war. Moliri is sometime
to deuyse or invent, also to go about to do a thing, to make, to be tarried
or let.

Moliri moram, to tarry.

Molitor, oris, a myllar.

Mollesco, scere, to wax soft, to be pacyfyed from wrath.

Molestra, a shepes fell.

Mollicies, and mollicia, softness, tenderness. delicateness, womanlynesse.

Mollicina, fine clothe or sylke.

Molliculus, la, tender, delycate.

Mollifico, to make soft or tender.

Mollio, ire, to make soft or tender, to pacify or appease, to make wanton or
tender.

Mollis, soft, tender. molle ingenium, a wit which lyghtelye takes. Mollis
homo, a man effemynate, or womanlye, not hardye or constante of wit, inuolued
in wanton pleasures and sensual appetite. sometime mollis sygnifieth ripe,
also remysse, sometime pleasant, also easy to be pleased.

Molliter, gentylly, with good will, easily, delycately, patiently.

Mollitudo, inis, softnes and gentylnes.

Mollusca, a nutte with a soft shale, a fylberd.

Molluscum, the wenne of a tree.

Molo, molui, lire, to grynde.

Moloch, was an ydoll of the Ammonites, sygnifienge in hebrew a governor or
counsailour. It was also called Molchom, sometime Milchom.

Molochinus color, a color like to the flowers of mallows.

Molochinarius, he that dies the said color

Molorthus, a plumrule, such as masons and carpenters do occupye in squarynge
of stone and timber.

Molossa gens, people in the part of Greece called Epirus, they were also
called Molossi.

Molossus, a mastiue dog. it is also a foot in meter.

Molothros, a kind of white vynes.

Molucrum, a square piece of timber, whereon the paynyms did sacrifyce. It is
also the trendyll of a myll. Also the swellynge of a woman's bealy, which does
hap as well to maidens, as to wives.

Molybdena, also Plumbago, is the oore of lead or silver, it is also one of
the kinds of the herb called Persicaria.

Molybditis, the spume or foam of lead.

Momentaneus, a, um, that which dureth but a little whiles, or shortly
alters.

Momentatius, a, um, that which is done in a little space.

Momentum, the least part of time, which can not be assigned, a momente, it
is also a portion more or less, of any thing or matter also the estimation or
value of a thing.

Nullius est momenti, it is of no value.

Pari momento sors, it is one chance, of like value of effect.

Momordi, the preterperfect tense of mordeo.

Momus, called the god of reprehencion.

Momo satisfacere, to content him, whom almost nothing may please.

Momo iudice decertare, to contend before a rigorous and extreme judge.

Mona, which the greeks do call Monna, is an isle nyghe to Britannia, puissaunt
of people in the time of Cornelius Tacitus, where they that fled from the
Romans were socoured, I suppose it to be the isle now called Man, and not
Anglesey, for as much as that is joined to Britayne. there is also an other
isle of that name in the river of Reene, nyghe to Friselande and not only nyghe
to Britayne:

Monachus, a solytarie person, all be it that it is used for a monk.

Monachris, a mountain in Archadia.

Monarcha, a prince, which rules alone without piere or companion, monarche.

Monarchia, the rule of one monarchy.

Monas, monadis, the number of one, unity.

Monasterium, a place solytarie.

Monedula, a bird called a Choughe or Cadesse.

Moneo, monere, to warn, to put in remembrance. to beade one to dynner or
supper.

Monitor, toris, he that warns a man, or puts him in remembrance.

Moneta, money. also the name of Juno.

Monetalis, le, perteynynge to money.

Monetarius, a maker of money, a coyner.

Monile, a colar or be, which women use to wear about their necks. It is
also a poytrell of a horse.

Monimentum, read after Monumentum.

Monitio, warning.

Monitus, tus, idem.

Monitorius, a, um, that which does warn or exhort.

Monobeli, they which have a long thing like to spyttes. Also they that be
very high in personage and above other. Lampridius in uita Alex.

Monochordium, an instrumente, having many strings of one sown, saving that
with small pieces of cloth, the sounes be distinct, as Clauycordes be.

Monochromatos, a protrayture of one color.

Monoechus, a haven of Liguria.

Monoceros, otis, an Unicorn.

Monoculus, a man having but one eye.

Monodia, a lamentable or mourning song, such as is songen in funeralles.

Monodos, was a man, which instead of tethe, had but one bone, like as
king Pirrhus had.

Monogamus, he that never had but one wife.

Monogammi, men lean and yuell colored.

Monogrammus, a picture only drawn with a line.

Monologium, a long tale of one matter.

Monomachia, a battle, wherein only two men do fight.

Monomachus, he that fyghteth alone, without help of any other man.

Monomeri, people in the east part of the world which have but one leg,
wherewith they go by leapes more swyftlye thanne any beast.

Monophagia, a meal of one only meat or dyshe.

Monophthalmus, idem quod monocidus.

Monopodium, a table set on one foot or trestyll.

Monopolium, where oone manne ingrosseth things, to have all in his own
hand, that no man may gain, but he only. It may be also one countreye or
market, that takes away the gaynes from other countries or markettes.

Monoptaton, a word having but one case.

Monosceli, men in India, which have but one leg, so great, that therewith
they cover them selfs from the son.

Monostelon, where as is but one pyller.

Monotropos, solitary, of one facion always.

Monoxylon, a boat made in oone piece of timber.

Mons, it is, a mountain or hill. also an hepe of things or any other thing in
the form of an hill.

Mons feratus, a country in Italye.

Monstrificus, a, um, monstrous.

Monstro, are, to show.

Monstrum, a monster, that which excedeth or lacks in natural form or
order.

Monstrosus, monstrosa, strosum, monstrous

Montanus, a, um, of a mountain.

Monticulus, a little hylle.

Montigena, borne on a hylle.

Montiuagus, wandrynge by hills.

Montosus, a, um, full of hills.

Monumentum, a remembrance of some notable act, as sepulchers, images,
pylars, great stones, inscriptions, books, and other like: whereby any thing
excellent, concerning great wits, kunnyng, enterprise in arms, puyssaunce,
or richesse is remembered.

Monycha, chae, the name of sayncte Austens mother.

Monychus, a giant, one of the Centaures.

Monyma, the wife of king Mithrydate, which after that her husband was
vaynquyshed, killed her self.

Mopsopia, the country of Athenes.

Mopsus, the name of a poet.

Mora, taryenge, leisure.

Moram creare, to prolonge the time, to delay. Moram facere, idem.

Per hunc nulla est mora, He lets it not.

Nec mora ulla est quin eam uxorem duca^, There is no let but that I may wedde
her.

Faxo haud quicquam sit morae, Look that thou tarry not, see that we tarry not
for the.

Inijcere moram and relligionem iudicandi iudicibus, to make the judges aferde
or scrupulouse, and to defer judgment.

Quid ergo erat morae and tergiuersationis? Than what was the let, and that he
went no farther in the matter?

Moralis, le, pertaining to manners.

Moramentum, taryenge, or abode.

Moratus, instructed in good manners.

Moratoria cautio, gage to pay at a day certain which he has in respyte.

Morata oration, an oration, which represents the manners and fasshyon of him
that speaks.

Morbidus, a, um, sick or skabbed.

Morbificus, ca, cum, that which causes disease or syckenesse.

Morbosus, a, um, full of syckenesse.

Morbus, syckenesse, disease, a sore.

Morbo affici, to be sick.

In morbo esse, idem.

In morbum delabi, to fall sick.

Morbo laborare, to be sick.

Ex morbo conualescere, to be recovered from syckenesse.

Morbus arcuatus, the iaundyse.

Morbus animae, a vice inueterate and hard to be cured, as ambition, auaryce.

Morbus animi, trouble or vexation of spyryte.

Morbus regius, the yelowe iaundyse.

Mordacitas, a bytynge.

Mordax, acis, he that does byte, be it with the tethe, or with language.

Mordeo, momordi, dear, to byte, to detracte, or rebuke vehemently.

Mordere frenum, to gnawe on the brydelle, which is spoken where it sygnifyeth
one to repugne against servitude or bondage.

Mordicibus, with bytynges.

Mordico, care, to hurt with bytynge.

Mordicus, bytynge hard and fast, as a man holds a thing fast with his
teethe.

Mordicus tenere, to hold fast, to persyste obstynately in an opinion or
sentence.

Moria, in Greek, is in english foolysshenesse or folly.

Moriar, a manner of an oath, sygnyfyenge I would I should dye, or I pray god I
dye.

Moribundus, dyenge.

Moribus, according to the manner and custom.

Moriger, geri, obedient.

Morigeratus, idem.

Morigeror, aris, ari, to obey, to do as a man byddeth, to confourme one man's
manners to an others.

Morini, people in France, dwelling about Turwan.

Morio, onis, a fool.

Morior, iris, and eri, moriri, and mori, to dye.

Morologus, sygnifyeh him, that speaks folyshely, or vnsensybly.

Moror, aris, ari, to tarry, or abide, to let, or cause to tarry, to be mad.

Non moror, I will not let.

Moros, a fool.

Morosi, waywardly.

Morositas, waywardnes.

Morosus, waywarde, diverse in condytions, whom no manne can please, more
curyouse than needs.

Morotis, and morosis, a madness or frenesye, where a man loses his memory.

Mors, it is, death.

Morsicatim, bytynge one an other.

Morsiuncula, a little bytte or snacke.

Morsus, us, a bytte with the tethe, a taunte in speaking.

Morsus, a, um, bytten.

Mortalis, le, mortal.

Mortarium, a mortar, wherein things are brayed or grounden. Victruuius.
it is also the place where lyme and sand be mynglyd to make mortar.

Morticina caro, moreyne flesh, which dies by it self, carayne.

Morticini, corns which be on men's fete.

Morticinum, corrupt.

Mortiferus, a, um, which causes any thing to dye.

Mortuale, pertaining to dead men.

Mortuum mare, a great mere in Syria, wherein no heavy thing may synke.

Morula, a little taryenge.

Morum, a mulbery, or black beary.

Morus, a mulbery tree, and a bremble that bears black bearyes.

Mos, moris, a manner, a condition, also custom.

Mos bonus, a good fashyon.

Mosa fluuius, a river which is called the Maze, and rounneth between the
duchye of Brabant, and the land of Luke.

Morem gerere, to obey.

Moscatulae, peaeis which do savor like musk.

Moscouia, a greatte countraye in the north part of the world, beyond
Polonia, which conteyneth in length four hundred miles, and above. The
people thereof be called Moscouitae, in english Moscouytes, they have a
greatte duke, who names him self Emperor of Russye: they be Chrystened, and
do observe the ryghtes of the Greeks. And their language is the tungue of
Slauonye, which is alsoo vsyd in Boheme and Polle.

Mosca, a river in Moscouia.

Moscna, is the chief city of that countreye, through the which the said
river of Mosca does run.

Mosculus, a calfe, also an herb.

Moschum, musk.

Moscus, a Regyon in Asia nygh to the river of Phasis, divided into three
parts, in the one do dwell people called Colchi, in the second Hiberes, in
the third Armenij.

Mosillus, a dyminutiue of Mos.

Mosini, people in Asia toward the north.

Motabilis, always mouynge.

Motacilla, a bird called a wagtayle.

Motiuus, a, um, mouynge, not abiding.

Moto, are, to move often.

Motus, ta, tum moved.

Motus, tus, mouynge.

Moueo, ere, to move, to remove or put away, to depart from a place, to stere
or provoke.

Mouere calculos in utraque part, to make dyffycultie on the one part or the
other.

Mouere animum, to styre or allure the mind.

Mouere tragoedias, to do things to be lamented.

Mouere camerinam, to styre things, which shall be to his own dyspleasure,
that begins it.

Mouere haeredes, to put the heirs out of possession.

Mouere nuptias, to trouble the wedding.

Mouere stomachum, (...) cause one to be very angrye.

Ego istaec moueo, I care much therefore, or do pass much therevppon.
spoken in mockage.

Mouere aliquem a sententia, to make oone to change his opinyon.

Mouere Senatu, uel de Senatu, to put one out of the Senate, or to depryue him
of that authorytie.

Mouere aluum, to make one to be soluble or dysposed to the stool.

Mox, anon, forthwith.

Moses, or Moses, sygnyfyeth drawn up or taken up from the water. It was the
name of a noble prophet son of Amram, of the trybe of Leui, who brought the
Israhelites from the bondage of Pharao king of Egypt, with most wonderful
miracles, and governed them by an exceeding wisdom and pacyence. He dyed
before the incarnation of Christ.MCCCCLXII. being of the age of.Cxx years, his
eyes being never dymmed nor his tethe louse.

M ANTE V.
MVceo, cui, to be fylthy or vynewed, pallyd, or dead, as wine, which has
lost his verdure.

Mucesco, scere, idem quod Muceo.

Mucidus, da, dum, fylthy, vynewed.

Mucor, oris, fylth, vinue, such as is on bread or meat long kept.

Mucro, onis, the point of a sword or knyfe. sometime it is taken for a
sword.

Mucronatus, ta, tum, poynted.

Mucus, the fylthe, which comes out of the nose.

Mugil, uel Mugilis, a fysshe of the sea, hauntynge the coostes among the
skalyd fysshes most swyfte: Of color white, they be of the Greeks called
Cestrei and Plotae, and communely they be named Cephali Of them be diverse and
sundry kinds, dyuyded by the Greeks, as it shall appear in their places: It
is an insatiable fysshe, and therefore has a greatte bealye, and therefore
except he be emptye, he abides stylle in a place, and being aferde, he hydeth
his head, weenynge that all his body is alsoo hid, they be so desyrouse
each of the kinds of the other, that when fyshers have taken the males, and
tied them by a line, and let them down into the sea, all the females when
they have perceived the males, do gather together, and coming to them are
taken in the nets. Likewise the male kind does gather together, and do
follow the female kind.

Muginor, ari, to murmr.

Mugio, gire, to bellowe like a cow or bulle: sometime it sygnyfieth the noise
of thunder, or great wyndes.

Mugonia, a gate at Rome, whereby cattle did enter into the city.

Mugitus, tus, bellowynge of kyne, or other noise like.

Mula, a Mule, which beast sommetyme is gotten of an ass stalyon and a mare
sometime of a horse stalyon, and a female mare, as Columella writes. In Syria
(as Aristoteles writes) Mules do both get foles, and bring forth foles.
There has been founden of them at Athenes, which were four score years
old, as that author writes. It is also the name of an herb like to
Scolopendriu^, so translated by Theodorus Gaza.

Mularis, re, pertaining to a mule.

Mulcedo, dinis, a gentle and sweet handlynge or intreatynge.

Mulceo, si, cere, to pacifye, to appease, to mytygate, to make sweet, to
annoynte, to polysshe.

Mulciber, eris, one of the names of Vulcane, called god of fire.

Mulctor, ctaris, ctari, to punysshe, or be punysshed.

Mulcta, a penalty, a condempnation, a fine sessed.

Mulctam dicere, to give an iniunction, to set a pain.

Mulctam irrogare, idem.

Mulctam committere, to forfayte, to run in the pain.

Mulctam remittere, to pardone.

Mulctra, the mylkynge, the payle, wherinto it is mylked, which is also called
Mulctrale.

Mulctrum, the act of mylkynge.

Mulei, certain shows of purple color, which the kings of Alba ware, and
afterward the noble men of Rome.

Mulgeo, mulsi, mulgere, to milk or stroke.

Mulgo, are, to publyshe.

Muli mariani, forkes, whereon fardelles were trussed and borne by men.

Muli mariani, a proverb referred unto them, which be obedient to every
commandment, be it never so greuouse. It may also be applied unto them,
which be inuolued in perpetual and intolerable labors and business.

Muli mutuum scabunt, mules do gnappe one an other, A proverb applied to
persons ill and defamed, when one of them commends the other.

Mulier, eris, a womanne, proprely she that is no vyrgyne.

Muliebria, natural euacuations, which women have, called their flowers.

Muliebre folliculum, dicebant uuluam.

Muliebris, bre, pertaynyng to women.

Muliebritas, delicatenes, tenderness.

Muliebriter, womanly, delycately, tenderly.

Mulierarius, a follower, or dotar on women. also that which is done or prepared
by women.

Mulieraria manus, woman's help.

Muliero, rare, to essemynate or make like a woman.

Mulierositas, tatis, the vice of loving many women.

Mulierosus, a great lover of women.

Mulio, onis, and mulius, a dryuer of Mules. a Mulettour. It is alsoo a
certain kind of gnattes.

Mullus, a fyshe of a mean quantity, having two barbes or wartes on the
nether lyp, the color toward grene, with some yelowe lines, which I suppose
is called a mullet, in greek it is called Trigle^, among the ancient Romans,
it was in such estimation, that in the time of Claudius the emperor. Asinius
Celer one that had been consule paid for one of the said fyshes.viii.
thousand Sestertia, which after the rate of this present time, is of our
money.

Mulseus, a, um, sweet as honey.

Mulsum, wine and honey sodden to gyther.

Mulsus, a, um, any lycour myxt with honey.

Multa, idem quod mulcta

Multatitius, pertaining to a forsayt, or pain assessyd.

Multesima, a part representynge an infynite quantity. Quam parunla pars,
quam multesima constat, so little a portion, se of how wonderful greatness
it is.

Multibaibus, he that has much hear on his bearde.

Multibibus, he that drynketh much.

Multicauatus, a, um, full of holes.

Multicaulis, le, having many stalks.

Multicolor, of diverse colors.

Multicolorius, a, um, of many colors.

Multifacio, ere, to make much of, to esteem much.

Multifariam, many ways, in many facions.

Multifarius, diverse manners or conditions.

Mulifer, bearing abundantly.

Multifidus, da, dum, having many slyttes, kleftes, or creuyses.

Multiforatilis, le, with many holes.

Multiformis, me, of many facions or fygures.

Multiformiter, in diverse facions.

Multigeneris, re, of diverse kinds.

Multi iugus, a, um, diverse, many diverse, manyfolde.

Multiloquus, full of speech.

Multimodus, da, dum, of diverse sorts or manners.

Multinummus, a, um, having much money.

Multipartitus, ta, tum, being dyuyded into many parts.

Multipes, having many feet.

Multiplex, plicis, manyfolde, diverse.

Multipliciter, dyuersely or manyfoldly.

Multiplico, care, to multiplye, or to make much more.

Multiplicatio, multiplyenge or augmentynge.

Multipotens, puyssant.

Multiscius, a, um, knowing much.

Multisonus, having a great sound.

Multitia, garments made of fine threedes or sylke.

Multiuagus, a great wanderer.

Multitudo, tudinis, a multitude or greatte number.

Multiuidus, he that sees much.

Multiuolus, desiring diverse things.

Multo, and mulcto, are, to punish, to condemn, to put fro, to entreat ill,
or disorder.

Multare matrimonio, to deuorce, or dyssolue matrymonye.

Multopere, for magnopere.

Multus, ta, tum, much, many.

Multus in opere, oftentimes in business or very much occupied.

Multus sermo ad multum diem, much communication all the day long.

Multa nocte, late in the night.

Multo mane, in the morning betyme.

Multum, an aduerbe sygnyfieth much. sometime a long season.

Multo, joined to aduerbes and prepositions do augment the virtue or vehemence
of them.

Mulus, a mule.

Mundanus, of the world.

Mundanus, a, um, worldly.

Munditer, klenly.

Mundities, and Munditia, klenlynesse.

Mundifico, are, to klense.

Mundo, are, to wype, to make clean.

Mundus, the world, a woman's attire.

Mundus, da, dum, clean, nete.

Muneralis, le, pertaining to gifts.

Munerarius, he that at his own charge makes pastyme unto the people, with
men taught of purpose, to fight hand to hand unto the utterance.

Muneror, aris, ari, and Munero, are, to reward.

Mungo, xi, gere, to make clean, properly ones nose.

Municipalis, le, privately or particularly, belonging to one city.

Municipale ius, the private law of every particular city.

Municipalia magisteria, civil offices in every city or town.

Municipatim, town by town.

Municipium, a city or town incorporate, hauy^ge their proper officers and
laws.

Municeps, a citizen, or burgeyse, enioyeng the lyberties of the town.

Munificentia, liberalite in gyuing of rewards.

Munificus, lyberall. Munificentior, more lyberall. Munificentissimus, most
lyberall. In the old time Munifici, were taken for them, which consented to
that, which their friends did or spoke.

Munimen, and munimentum, a fortyfication of a town or castle.

Munia, commune duties, offices.

Munio, iui, and ij, nire, to fortyfye, to prepare, to repair.

Munire a frigore, to arm him, or make defense against the cold.

Munire uiam, to make the way of such sort, that no man may pass. sometime to
make a way that one may pass easyly.

Munis, he that bears the charges, which the people should do.

Munitio, onis, a fortress or strong hold for the wars.

Munito, tare, the frequentatiue of Munio.

Munitor, toris, he that does fortify.

Munitus, ta, tum, made strong to defend, fortyfyed.

Munus, neris, a gift, a charge, a duetye or office. Muner^^ ^^mmune plays
and gaye syghtes for (...) ^^ople to behold, to rejoice them, preparyd by
officers of cities. As in Rome, sundry plays, sword players, called
Gladiatores, hunting of wild beasts. Alsoo now in the city of London, the
watches and syghtes on mydsommer nyghtes.

Munus uitae. Cicero. Omni in munere uitae, In all affairs wherewith a man in
his life does meddle.

Munusculum, a small gift.

Munychia, orum, the solemnities of Pallas.

Muraena, a lampraye.

Muraenulae, small chains, which womenne do wear.

Muralis, le, pertaynyge to a wall or boulwarke.

Muralis corona, a garlande given to him, which in the syege of a city first
skalyd the walls, and entered.

Muralis herba, an herb called perytorye, or pelytorye.

Murani, were the kings of Alba.

Muratus, ta, tum, walled.

Murcia, goddess of slouthe.

Murcidus, a man without aduysement.

Murciolum, the seed of that which is called Lenticula.

Murcus, a slothful or luskyshe person.

Murex, icis, a shelle fyshe, of whom comes the lykour, which makes purple
color. sometime it sygnyfieth the same color. Also an herb, which grows
in a pytte, where no son shyneth.

Murginor, ari, to tarry, to be slothful.

Murgitana regio, a country in the south parts of Spain.

Murgizo, murgizonis, an ydell or slowthfulle person.

Muria, water, wherein salt is sodden, bryne.

Muriaticus, ca, cum, being long in bryne.

Muricatus, salted in bryne.

Murices, caltrappes, like three iron pryckes, so joined, that being thrown,
oone standethe vpryghte, vsyd in battle for horsemen.

Muricati gressus, where one gothe fearfully, as if he went on caltrappes or
thorns.

Muricidus, a mousekyller, a fool, a rat kyller.

Muries, a bryne made with salt sodden in water.

Murina, a wine mixed with spyces.

Murinus, a, um, belonging to a mouse.

Murmilonica scuta, targettes, wherewith men faught upon walls.

Murmur, the noise of rounnynge water.

Murmurillum, idem.

Murmurabundus, and murmurator, he that murmureth.

Murmuratio, a grutchynge or bruylynge in the mind with noise.

Murmuro, to murmoure, or make noise like to water.

Murmurillo, idem.

Murmurillum, a murmuring.

Murrha, a stone of diverse colors, clear as crystal, having spots purple
and white.

Murrheus, and murrhinus, a, um, of that stone called murrha, whereof cups,
pottes, tables, and other vessels were made: there be of them diverse sent
from Venyce.

Murrhina, seu murrhynia, was wine made with diverse spyces, as that which is
called ypocras.

Murtia, one of the names of Venus.

Murtius, a hylle at Rome, called alsoo Auentinus.

Murus, a wall, a bulwark.

Mus, muris, a mouse or ratte.

Mus Arancus, a kind of myse called a shrew, which if it goo over a beasts
back, he shall be lame in the chyne, if he do byte any thing, it swells up
to the heart, and the beast dies.

Musa, a sweet song.

Musae, Muses, were maidens, whom Poets feigned to be the daughters of
Iupyter, and Memory, and that they were ladies and governors of poetry and
musyke, which were in number nine. Some call them gyuers of eloquence, and
do name them goddesses. It is sometime taken for poetry, or study of
humanytie.

Musae mansuetiores, studyes more gentylle or dylectable.

Musis auersus, he that has forsaken the studyes of eloquence.

Musaea, Musaica, and Musiua, be warkes kunnyngly painted, that they seem to be
in some place imbocyd out, in some place graven, although it be all plain.

Museus, an ancient poet, which was in the time of Orpheus, and was one of
them which went with Jason to the wynnyng of the fle^e of gold.

Musaeum, a house, whereunto learned men in all scyences used to repair and
dyspute: it is also a house dedycate to the Muses. Such oone was first made
by the kings of Aegypte, called Ptholomei in Alexandria.

Musca, a fly.

Muscula, a small fly.

Muscari, to be covered with moss.

Muscarium, and muscaria, a flappe to drive away flies. It is alsoo the top
of fenelle, dylle, and such other like herbs, wherein be the seeds.

Muscarius, a, um, pertaining to flies.

Muscenton, a certain Rose, that spryngeth of a stalk with many small
branches, and has leaves like to an olyue tree.

Muscerda, mouse dunge.

Muschus, a beast, which bears musk, a musk catte.

Muscinus, a, um, of a fly.

Muscio, onis, a catte.

Muscipula, a trappe, wherewith myse or rattes are taken.

Musculus, a lyttelle mouse. Sommetyme an engyne of war, whereby they are
defended, which do approach the walls of a place besyeged, to fylle the
dyches. It is also a little fysshe, which guydeth the whale that he do not
run^e on rocks.

Musculi, be certain pieces of hard flesh compacte with synewes in the body,
which do enclose the spiritual members.

Muscus, moss, which grows in wells and moist places, sometime on trees,
specially in cold countries.

Musica, and musice, musyke.

Musice, dylectably or in an armony.

Musicus, ca, cum, pertaining to musyke.

Musicus, a musytian.

Musicum studium, the study in making of commedyes.

Musimon, a little nagge.

Musmones, sheep with heary wolle.

Mussitabundus, a man speaking to him self pryuyly.

Mussito, tare, to speak or talk alone.

Musso, are, to talk softely and secretelye, to keep silence.

Mustace, a tree, hayng leaves like to laurel, but greatter and weaker.

Mustacula, a little instrument made with two rules, between which the show
is put, whiles the sole is in sowynge.

Mustaceus, and mustaceum, a cake or paste made to comfort the stomach.

Mustela, a beast called a wesell, also a fysshe, like a lamprey.

Mustelinus, a, um, of a wesyll.

Musteus, a, um, sweet as must, or musty.

Mustulentus, ta, tum, idem.

Mustricola, a cordwayners last, whereby he shapeth a show.

Mustum, new wine, new al^, new beer.

Mustus, ta, tum, new, young, late made.

Mutabilis, le, chaungeable, mutable.

Mutatio, a change.

Mutatus, ta, tum, changed, altered.

Mutae arts, pyctures or images.

Muteo, mutui, tere, and mutesco, scere, to be muete or dumme.

Mutica spica, a corn without a berde.

Mutilatus, ta, tum, mynished in some thing, or where any thing is cut of.

Mutili, horned beasts, of nature lacking horns, as oxen, gotes. etc.

Mutilus, la, lum, lacking sum pryncypalle part, mutilate.

Mutilo, are, to cut of, to mynysshe, to take away.

Mutina, a city in Italye, called in the vulgar tungue Modona, which is now
under the subjection of the Duke of Ferare, where as was the great bataile
between Augustus and Brutus.

Mutinensis color, a natural color, as woulle or clothe never dyed.

Mutio, tiui, tire, to speak softly, or with an imperfect voice, to muttre.

Mutito, tare, to feast one an other.

Mutius, was a noble familye of the aunciente Romans. In the which one was
called Mutius Sceuola, who at the time that Porsena king of Thuscanes laid
syege to Rome came in a beggars apparayle into the camp of Porsena, and
intending to have slain the king, he slew his Secretarye. Wherefore he was
taken and brought to a greatte fire to be bourned, into the which wyllyngly
he thraste his hand, that had failed to slay the king, and suffered it to
be bourned to ashes, affyrmyng that besides him there were three hundred which
had auowed to make like attemptate, wherewith the king abashed, and fearing
the invincible courage of them, he made peace with the Romans taking pledges
of them, and raysynge his siege, departed without molestynge of them ever
after.

Mutuatio, a borowynge.

Muto, tare, to change, to translate, to barter one thing for an other.

Haud muto factum, I do not repent me.

Muto, tonis, the pryuie member of a man.

Mutuatitius, a, um, borrowed.

Mutuli, scaffolde holes, or places made on the walls for culuers to bread in.

Mutunus, who was also called Priapus.

Mutuo, together, or one an other. Mutuo diligebant, They loved one an other.

Mutuare, sygnifieth both to borowe and to lend.

Mutuor, aris, ari, to borowe.

Mutus, he that can not speak.

Mute, dumme.

Mutuum, a lone, that which is borrowed.

Arge^tum nusquam inuenio mutuum, I can borowe money no where.

Mutuo appendere, to lend.

Mutuum rogare, to ask again that which was lent.

Mutuus, a, um, one for an other, mutual.

Mutuus amor, mutual love, where one loves an other equally.

M ANTE Y.
MYA, a shell fyshe in the sea called Bosphorus, which brings forth little
read stones, and round.

Myagrus, the god of flies.

Mycaene, and Mycaena, a city in the part of Grecia, called Peloponesus, and
a little region, where Agamemnon reigned, the chief capytayne of the greeks
against Troy, called now Morea.

Mycon, the name of a famous paynter.

Mycone, nes, a little isle.

Mydia, an isle, named also Delos.

Mydriasis, a syckenes of the eyes, where no color of the eyes are changed,
but makes them much brother, albeit it takes away the sight, or makith a man
to se the less, and the things, which be seen, to seem less tha^ they are.

Mygala, a field mouse with a long snowte, called a shrewe.

Mygale, a ratte.

Mygdonia, a part of Macedonia on the sea side, where Niobe was turned into a
stone. Aristotle says, that it is a part of Phrigia, ioynyng to Lidia.
Solinus says, that it was called Bebrycia, and after Bythinia.

Myloechos, a butterfly, which is in mylles.

Myoparo, onis, a kind of ships used in the sea called Mare Tirrhenum.

Myophnos, a kyller of myse.

Mymphur, a tourners pynne or spyndel, whereon he tourneth or warketh any thing.

Myra, a city in Licia, whereof saint Nycolas was bishop.

Myriarches, a captain of ten thousand men.

Myriades, many times ten thousand.

Myrias, adis, the number of ten thousand.

Myrica, a little bushe callid in Italy Tamarico.

Myrinus, the male kind of a lamprey, which has a tothe out of his mouth.

Myrmus, the proper name of Apollo.

Myriophillum, an herb called mylfoyle.

Myristica nux, a nutmygge.

Myrlea, a town in Bythinia.

Myrmecia, a little warte.

Myrmecites, a stone, wherein is the figure of an emotte.

Myrmetium, a kind of spiders like an emote, having a black bealy with white
spots.

Mirmillones, were sword players, where the one provoked the other to battle.

Myrsenium, a kind of fenell, having greatter leaves and a sharper taste.

Myrsum, a town in the part of Greece called Peloponesus.

Myrmicoleo, a little beast, which deuoureth emotes.

Myrobalanum, a fruit growing in India, like unto plummes or damsyns, whereof
be diverse kinds, which easylye do pourge all superfluouse humors, and also
comfort nature, in so much as a man, which eats them, being
condyte, shall not look oldely.

Myrobrecharij, they which do make sweet oyntmentes.

Myron, onis, the name of an excellent karuer. also old oil.

Myropola, a sellar of oyntmentes.

Myropolium, a place where oyntmentes were sold.

Myrothetium, a box of sweet oyntmentes.

Myrrha, a sweet gum called myrre.

Myrrheus, and myrrhinus, a, um, of myrre.

Myrtetum, a place, where Myrtelle trees be set.

Myrteus, and myrtinus, a, um, of myrtelles.

Myrtopetalum, an herb called bludwort.

Myrtoum, a portion of the sea, which is between the seas called Aegeum and
Ionium.

Myrtus, a lyttelle tree, bearing bearyes of sweet odor.

Mys, mios, the name of a kunnynge grauer: also a shelle fyshe of the sea.

Mysia, a country beyond Hungary, toward Greece. Ptholomeus writes of two
countries called Mysia, the more and the less, and both in Asia, beyond
Bythinia, not far from Ida.

Mysteria, mysteries, things secret or hid in words or ceremonies.

Mysticus, ca, cum, mystycall.

Mystris, a fysshe called a sea mouse.

Mythologia, a declaration or exposition of fables.

Mythos, a fable.

Myxa, the fylthe which comes out of a man's nose.

Myxus, a snuff of a candell.

N ANTE A.
NABATHEI, ARE people inhabytauntes of the countraye called Arabia felix,
which are very contynent, and in preparynge and keeping their commodities,
also right prudent, as Strabo writes, in whom ye may read more abundantly
of their manners, not much expedyent to be declared in this place.

Nabathaea, a part of Arabia called felix, lyeng between the Persian sea, and
the red sea.

Nabis, a beast in Ethiope having a head like a camel, a neck like an horse
and feet like an ox.

Nablum, or Nablium, an Instrument called also Psalterium, read there more of
the description thereof.

Nabuchodonosor, the nynth king of Babylon or the third king of Caldeys,
which is named of Berosus, Nabogodrosus, of the hebrews, Nabucadnasar. He by
the occasyon of his great dominions and wonderful, fell to such pride, that
he would have his image honored for god. Wherefore he finally was of almighty
god suddenly transsourmed into an horrible monster, having the head of an
ox, the feet of a bear, and the tail of a lion, and did eat heye as a
beast, and after that he had in that form done penance, by the continual
prayers of Daniel the prophet, god being meued with mercy, restored him to his
prystinate form: and afterward he lived well, and commanded, that the very god
of heaven should be only honored. he was before the incarnation of Christ,
six hundredth thyrty and three years, he reigned.xliiii. years.

Nacae, fullars of clothe.

Nactus, the participle of Nanciscor, sygnifyeth gotten or optayned. Inde
nactus est laudem incomparabilem, whereby he has gotten praise incomparable.

Nae, truly, or now in good faith. Nae illi uehementer errant, Truly they be
out of the way, or in a wrong opinion. Nae ego multo libentius emerim
diuorsorium Tarracinae, Now in good feith, I had lever have bought at Tarracina
an house to lodge in.

Naeera, a woman's name.

Naeuia, sommetyme sygnyfyeth a lamentable song. sometime the song which the
noutyce does wantonlye sing in dandelynge her child.

Naides, elfes or fayryes hauntyng ryuers and fountayns.

Nain, a city of Galile.

Nais, a river in the east which runs out of the mountain of Taurus into
the sea called Pontus.

Nam, a conjunction causall, set most commonly in the first part of a
sentence. Namque in the second or other place, it signifies therefore.
sometime it is put for Autem. fyllyng only the sentence without any other
sygnifycation.

Nanciscor, nactus sum, nancisci, to get, to opteyne, to find.

Nancitor, for Nactus erit.

Nanque, set before other words signifies truly, put after betokens for.

Nanum, a little vessel and broad, called also Scitulus barbatus.

Nanium, a little woman.

Nanus, a dwarf or a very little person.

Nannetes, a town in lyttel Britayne, called Nauntes.

Napataei, people in Ethiope.

Napeae, Goddesses of flowers and woods or rather elfes, hauntynge woods.

Napaei, people of the isle of Lesbos.

Naptha, a certain kind of maunde or chalky klay, somewhat liquide (as Strabo
writes) whereunto if fire be put it kyndleth in such wise, that if little
water be cast thereon it bourneth more feruentely. and may be only extincte
with greatte abundance of water, or with vynegre, alume, and byrdelyme, there
is wonderful plenty thereof found by Babylon in the country called Ecbatanis,
as Plutarchus writes in the life of great Alexander.

Napina, a garden of Nauewes.

Napitae, people of Scithia.

Napus, a Nauew which is a kind of rapes. it is sone boiled but it nourishes
less, the greeks do call it Bunias.

Nar, a river which runs into Tiber. there is a another river of that name
in Germany, which comes out of the great river of Danubius or Donowe.

Narane, a river in Dalmatia, about a hundred miles from Epidaurus.

Narbasis, a town in Spain.

Narbonensis Prouincia, a part of Gallia having on the east the mountains,
on the southe the sea called Mare gallicum, on the weste the mountains called
Pirenei* on the north the mountain called Iura, it conteyneth the countries
called Sauoy, Dophyny, Prouaunce and Languedock, it was in the old time
Gallica Brachata.

Narcissus, an herb and flower having the leaves next the ground like to
daffadyll or brother like to a lylly, a bare stalk and grene in the top
thereof a flower, white or purple, the sede in a thynne skyn, black greatte and
long, the rote being round.

Narcoticus, ca, cum, stupefactife or making a member insensible.

Nardus, a plant whereof Plyny remembers.ix. kinds, but that which is called
Spicanardi, is of Galen and Plinye supposed to come out of Inde, which some
men do think that we do lack, that which we have comes out of Siria, that
which is Nardus gallica, some do suppose it to be Lauander or that which is
called Spike.

Nardinus, na, um, of Nardus.

Nares, Nosethrylles.

Narica, a certain little fyshe which swymmeth very swyfte.

Narius, a river in Vmbria.

Naritia, an isle in the sea called Aegeum.

Naruia, a town in Italy.

Naruiae, and Naruienses, people of Naruia.

Narratio, a narration or report of a thing.

Narratiuncula, a little narration.

Narrare stomachum, to speak what he thinks, to utter his stomach.

Narthecium, a place apt and convenient to keep spices or medicines in.

Nasamonae, people dwelling in the myddell of the sands of Lybia, among whom
is the preciouse stone founden called a Carbuncle.

Nasamonites, a stone of color sanguine with little black veins.

Nascor, sci, to be borne, in herbs and trees it sygnifieth to spring or
grow.

Nascitus uentus, the wind ryseth.

Nasci in pedes, to be borne the fete forward.

Nasica, the surname of a noble Romayne called Scipio.

Nasiterna, a vessel with handelles and a wide mouth.

Nassa, a we will or bownette wherewith fysshe is taken.

Nasturtium, an herb called Cresses, which was among the Persyans in such
estymation, that the young men when they went in hunting did eat none
other meat, supposyng that thereby their spyrites were made more quycke and
lively.

Nasus, a nose. sometime it is put for sharpness or quycknesse in speech,
wherefore we use to say of him, which can pratily taunt or mock one. so that
uneath it may be perceived. Hic nasum habet.

Naso suspendere, to mock covertly.

Nasutus, he that can taunte or mock wyttylye. sometime it sygnifieth him, that
has a great instrument.

Nasute, wyttyly, mockyngly.

Nasutila, a shrewde wenche.

Natalis, le, and Natalitius, a, um, pertaynyng to birth, as Natalis dies, the
day of the birth or nativity.

Natales, the stock or family whereof one comes. Natalibus clarus noble of
blood.

Obscuri natales, base bloudde.

Natalibus restitui, to make a gentylman and to give to him arms.

Natalitia dare, to make a feast at the day of ones birth.

Natatilis, le, that which can swymme.

Natatitius, a, um, that which does swymme.

Natator, toris, he that swymmeth.

Natatorium, a place made to swymme in.

Natabulum, idem.

Natatio, swimming. Natatus, idem.

Nates, the buttockes.

Natex, naticis, of Plinius called Nerita, is a fyshe, having a shell, great
round and smothe, saving that there be on it like to read seeds of popye.

Natinatores, trauaylers about many things.

Natio, the people of a countray (as Festus writes) which had their beginning
in the same place, where they dwell, and came not out of other countrayes. it
sometime signifies a fellowship or company being in an order.

Natio candidatorum, the ordynarye fellowship of them, which do sue for great
offices.

Natiuitas, tatis, birth.

Natiuus color, natural color.

Natiuus sal, salt grown in the place where it is founden.

Natiuum malum, natural myschiefe.

Natiua uerba, words not deryued from other.

Nato, tare, to swymme often. sometime it sygnifieth to go, to sail, to be
rowed in a barge or galey.

Natrix, tricis, a water snake. also an herb, the root whereof smells like a
goote.

Natura, Nature. it was of some Gentyles taken for god creator of all things.
Of Seneca lib. 4. de Beneficijs. what other thing is Natura than god or reason
dyuine sown in all the world, and the parts thereof. Aristoteles Phisic. 1.
Nature is the beginning and cause of mouyng and rest in that thing where it
is by it self, and not by any other thing hapnynge. sometime it sygnifieth
manner and facion sometime the privy member of mankind or beast.

Naturae satisfacere, to dye.

Naturae cedere, idem.

Naturae suae rationem habere, to have regard unto his conditions.

Naturalis, le, natural.

Naturalia, privy members.

Natus, ta, tum, borne, grown, brought forth.

Natus animo leni, he that is of a soft and gentle nature.

Natus annos sedecim, syxtene years old.

Natus, and nata, substantyues, a son and a daughter.

Natu mayor, the elder.

Natu maiores, the most ancient.

Natu grandis, old or ancient.

Naualis, le, pertaynyng to ships.

Nauale, the docke where ships are laid up or made, at Venyce the Arceuale.

Nauarchus, the patron or master of ships.

Nauarchis, nauarchidis, the patrons ship.

Nauci, a shale of a nutte, a thing of naught.

Nauci esse, to be worth nothing.

Nauci facere, to set naught by.

Naucleriacus, and nauclerius, a, um, pertaynyng to the master of a ship.

Nauclerus, and nauiclarius, a master of shyppis.

Naucrates, a city in Egypt.

Naufragium, wrecke on the sea, sometime it sygnifieth loss or detryment.

Naufragium facere, to lose a ship by tempest.

Naufragus, ga, gum, pertaynyng to ship wrek.

Naufragus, he that escapes on live after that the ship is lost. it is
sometime taken for one fallen in poverty.

Nauia, a holowe tree like a ship, occupied when grapes be gathered.

Nauicularius, he that lets ships to hyre. sometime a pylote.

Nauiculator, toris, idem.

Nauiculor, lari, to govern a ship. sometime to go on the water in a ship or
bote.

Nauicularia, the art of gouernynge a ship or rowing.

Nauiculariam facere, to frayte a ship, to set ships to hyre for carieng of
marchandyse.

Nauigabilis, le, where a ship may pass.

Nauigatio, exercise in going on the water.

Nauiger, gera, geru^, which will bear a vessel.

Mare nauigerum, the sea that will bear a vessel.

Nauigium, al sorts of vessel to sail or row in.

Nauigia speculatoria, brigantines or ships of espiall.

Nauigo, gare, to go or be carried on the water in any vessel.

Nauigare in portu, to be in suertie.

Nauigiolum, a little bark.

Nauis, a ship.

Nauem deprimere, to droune a ship.

Nauis pompatica, a ship made with chambers and bankettynge parlours only to
solace with, it is also called Nauithalmus.

Nauiter, for gnauiter, diligently with dexterity, valyantly.

Naulium, a town in Lumbardy.

Naulum, the frayte or fare paid for passage over the water.

Naumachia, battle on water or the place where the battle is.

Naumachiarij, they which do battle on the water.

Naumachiarius, a, um, perteynynge to that form of battle.

Nauo, are, to employ with all his power.

Nauare operam, to do all his endeavor.

Nauare beneuolentiam, to declare or use all the benevolence that a man may.

Naupegus, a ship wryght or carpenter.

Nauplium, a fyshe like a Cuttell. Plin. li. 9.

Naupontus, a river in Slauony.

Nausea, disposicion or will to vomyte, sometime abhorynge of things.

Nauseam discutere, to put away the disposition of vomitynge.

Nauseam facere, to vomyte.

Nauseosus, a, um, that which provoke one to vomyte.

Nauseo, are, to have an appetite to vomyte. sometime to reiecte or abhor a
thing.

Nauseabundus, disposed to vomyte.

Nausicaa, daughter of Alcinous king of Pheaces, who finding Ulysses after
that he escaped drownynge, brought him to her fathers palayce.

Nausio, ire, to open as a bean does when he spryngeth.

Nausithous, sun of Neptunus and father of Alcinous.

Naustibulum, a hyue like a ship.

Nauta, or Nauita, a ship man.

Nautea, the ordure which issues out of the pumpe of a ship. also Curriours
bleche.

Nauticus, a ship master.

Nautilus, a certain shell fyshe of the form of a boat, and does swym the
bealy upward.

Nautilia, the craft of shypmen.

Nauus, quick, active, valiant, he that does a thing suddenly without much
study.

Naxos, an isle in the sea called Aegeum.

Nazareus, a man dedicate only to the service of god, or that had a special
vow for a time.

Nazareth, a little town in Galilea.

Nazara, a city in Cappadocia, called also Caesaria.

N ANTE E.
NE, an aduerbe signifienge forbedynge or dyssuadynge. Tu ne cede malis, give
thou no place to adversity. sometime it is a conjunction copulative, and
sygnifyeth no, or neither. sometime it is causall. as Vide ne pereas, take heed
that thou do not lose thy self.

Ne multa, to make short, without many words, or in few words.

Ne plura, it suffiseth, or it is inoughe.

Ne longum faciam, to make short.

Ne sim saluus si aliter scribo ac sentio, I pray god I be dead, if I write
otherwise tha^ I think.

Ne uiuam, idem.

Est ne hic Crito sobrinus Chrisidis? Is not this Crito cosen germayne to
Chrisis? Honestum ne factu sit an turpe dubitant, They doubt whether it be
honesty to do it or dishonestie.

Ne ue hoc ne ue illud, neither this nor that.

Ne dicam, I will not say, or I dare not say. This clause Ne dicam, if it
follow a substantyue, the adjective is put in the accusatyue case, but if it be
put between a substantyue and an adjective, the one and the other shall be
the nominative case.

Homo imprudens, ne dicam stultum, not stultus, because the substantyue homo
goes before Crudelis, ne dicam impius and sceleratus Castor, not sceleratum
Castore^, for as much as the substantive Castor follows. in other cases is
none ambiguitas, for always the adjective and the substantive must accord, as,
Non faceres haec magistro conscio, ne dicam praesente, not praesentem.

Ne, an aduerbe rational for Ergo, Verg. Me ne incepto desistere uictam?
because I am vaynquished, shall I therefore cease of mine enterprise?

Ne amicis nihil tribuamus epulamur, To thyntente that our friends shall not
think that we will do nothing for their sake, we do eat and banquet.

Ne, sometime signyfyeth demanding, as, Datur ne illa hodie Pamphilo nuptum?
but shall she be married to day unto Panphilus? Ego ne, who? I.

Nea, an isle between Lemnos and Hellespontus.

Neapolis, a noble city of Campania, set on the borders of the sea called
Mare mediterraneum, and was first called Parthenope. Of this city the
countries of Campania, Apulia, and Calabria, be now called Regnum
Neapolitanum, the realm of Naples.

Nebula, a little white cloud.

Nebulo, lonis, a knave.

Nebulosus, clowdy,

Nebulosus ager, a country having often times clouds over it, where by it is
temperate.

Nebrides, the skynnes of red dear and falowe.

Nebrundes, the genitours of beasts.

Nec, nor.

Nec opinato, by adventure.

Necnon, also.

Necesse, and Necessum, of force, it must needs be, necessaryly.

Necesse habere, to have need.

Necessarius, a kynseman.

Necessarius, a, um, necessary.

Necessitas, tatis, need, necessytie, an alyaunce or bond of amity.

Necessitudo, dinis, idem.

Necessario, necessaryly, of necessity, nedefully.

Necim, ancient writers used for Nec cum.

Nec ne, or not.

Neco, care, to slay.

Necatus, ta, tum, slain.

Neci datus, slain without weapon.

Necromantes, a Necromancer, he that calls up damned spirits.

Necromanticus, idem.

Necromantia, necromancy.

Nectar, a pleasant lycour which the poets feigned to be the drink of
gods. sometime it signifies immortalytie.

Nectareus, a, um, immortal, dyuine.

Nectarea herba, an herb called also Inula ca^pana, Elicampane.

Nectarites, a drink made with the same herb.

Necto, nexui, nectere, to knytte, to wind or brayde lases or other like
things.

Nectere causas, to make excuses.

Nectere aliud ex alio, to hang one thing by an other.

Nectere dolum alicui, to inuente a mean to deceive or mock one.

Necti, when the dettour was delivered to his creditour in bondage.

Necubi, in no place.

Necunde, if from any place.

Nedum, not only, where the thing of least estimation is put last, as
Funderem pro te sanguinem, ne dum pecuniam, I would spend for the not only my
money, but also my blood. but where the thing of most estimation is put
last, it signyfieth, nor yet, as. Ne crederem tibi obolum, ne dum uitam meam.
I will not commytte my life unto thy credence nor yet lend the one halfe-peny.

Nefandus, da, dum, horrible, not to be named

Nefarius, a, um, cursed, unworthy to live.

Nefas, a thing detestable.

Nefasci dies, days in the which it was not lefull to speak three words.

Nefrendes, pigs weyned, called shootes.

Negabundus, he that denies.

Negatio, a denyenge, a nay.

Negatiuus, a denyar.

Negito, tare, to deny.

Negligo, glexi, gligere, to neglecte or have little regard to a thing.

Neglectus, tus, small regard.

Neglectus, ta, tum, not regarded.

Negligentia, negligence.

Negligens, it is, negligent.

Negligenter, negligently.

Nego, gare, to deny, to refuse, to say nay.

Negato esse ituram, say she will not go.

Negaris saepe esse domi, They say that oftentimes thou art not at home.

Negotialis, le, perteynynge to marchaundyse, or occupation.

Negotiator, a merchant man.

Negotior, ari, to exercise marchaundyse in strange countries. also to be in
business.

Negotiosus, having much business, in body or mind.

Negotium, business, affayre, charge, care.

Dare negotium, give in charge.

Sui negotij been gerens, he does well his busynes, or he exployteth well his
affairs.

Plurimum in eo negotij habui, I trauayled much in it, I had much a do with
it.

Negotium magnu^ est nauigare atque id me^se Quintili, it is much a do to
sail there, specially in the month of July.

Negotium facessere, to trouble or vex one.

Est mihi negotium, I have somewhat to do

Ita negotium est, The matter so requires.

Nullo negotio, without pain, easyly,

Nil est negotij it is lightly done.

Sed quid negotij quamobrem succenses mihi? what is the matter why thou art
angry with me?

Obiectum est mihi negotium, I am in trouble.

Negotiolum, a little business, or matter.

Negotiorum curator, a Solycitour, or a factour.

Neleides patronimicum, of Neleius, as i^ where of the progeny of Neleus.

Neleus, father of duke Nestor.

Nem, sometime, also except.

Nemea, a wood in Greece, where Hercules slew.iii. horrible lions.

Nemeaeus, a, um, of Nemea.

Nemesis, the name of a goddess, whom the paynyms supposed to be the punysher
of greuouse offenders, some called her Fortune. Suidas says that Nemesis, is
Justice, complaynt, reproach, envy, fortune.

Nemartes, fayryes of the sea.

Ne my quidem, applied to him that dare not speak one word.

Nemeti, people of a city in Germanye called Spyres.

Nemo, no man, none.

Nemo non, some man.

Nemo homo, for nemo omnino, none at al.

Nemo unus, not one man.

Nemorosus, a, um, full of woods.

Nempe, an aduerb of confyrming, for because truly, sometime it signifies for.

Nemus, nemoris, a wood serving for pleasure.

Nemoralis, le, perteinynge to a wood.

Nemorensis, se, idem.

Neemias, a jew, and cupberar to Artaxarxes king of Persia, a man of great
learning and holiness, whoo being in great favor with the said king,
opteyned both license and aid to reedifye the city of Jerusalem, before the
incarnation of Christ. CCCC. xlvii. years.

Nemrod, is interpreted rebel, or governor sleapynge, he was the son of
Chus, son of Cham, the second son of Noe. He is of some written Nimrod, of
some Nembroth. He was also called Saturnus babylonicus. and was the first that
took on him to reign over men, and attempted to build the great toure of
Babylon, intending to have raised it above the clouds, thinking thereby to
have escaped if any floude should eftsoon have happened. He was before the
incarnatyon of Christ.MM.Clxx. years. after the creation of the
world.M.DCClxxxviii.

Nenum, was of old time used for Non.

Neo, neui, nere, to spynne.

Neogamus, newely wedded.

Neomagus, a town in France called Nemure. it was also a city in Britannia,
which some men do suppose to be Chester.

Neomenia, the moon while she is in chaungynge and lacking light.

Neophitus, a man newely entered into any profession, a new man, also a tree or
herb new sprongen up.

Neoptholemus, sygnyfieth a knight new made, it was the surname of Pirrhus,
which was son of Achilles.

Neotericus, one of late time.

Nepa, and Nepes, a scorpion.

Nepenthe, a drink co^^ectioned or made by Helene wife of Menelaus, which
caused them that drank thereof to forget all sorrow. some do suppose it to be
made with the herb called Borage, in latyne Buglossa. wherefore that herb is
of some men so called.

Nepeta, a city in Tuscane, it is also an herb called Calamynt, but thereof
be two sorts, the oone more with leaves some what hoar. which I suppose to be
Nep. the other is less having leaves like penye royal, but somewhat
greatter, which of some men is called wild penny royalle and grows in
plasshy grounds, Dioscorides seems to make three kinds of Nepeta.

Nephalia, (...) feasts of sober men where no wine is used, but only meathe.

Nephele, a greek word signifies a cloud. it was also the name of a woman,
mother of Helles, which gave the name to the sea called Hellespontus.

Nephritis, a syckenesse and grief in the raines

Nepos, nepotis, the sons son, or daughters son. it sometime sygnifieth a
ryotous person.

Nepotes, sygnifieth all the succession following sons and daughters.

Nepotor, tari, to live or spend riottously.

Nepotulus, diminutiue of Nepos.

Nepotatus, rus, ryote or superfluouse dyspences.

Neptis, the sons daughter, or daughters daughter.

Neptunus, called god of the sea.

Nepus, sluttyshe.

Nequa, no where.

Nequalia, detrimentes.

Nequam, an ill man.

Nequando, at no time.

Nequaquam, in no wise.

Nequior, warse.

Nequissimus, warste of all.

Nequiquam, in vain.

Ne quicquam, not.

Ne quid nimis, no thing exceeding, or nothing, to to.

Nerquino, are, to deny. also to be wanton.

Nequinum, a city in Italy now called Naeruia..

Nequinant, old writers used for Nequeunt, they may not.

Ne quis, lest that any man or that no man.

Nequitia, vnthryftynesse, where one is given to all voluptuousenesse.

Nequiter, vnthryftyly.

Nequitus, idem.

Nereides, fayries of the sea.

Nereus, a god of the sea, and sometime it is put for the sea.

Nerium, a tree which has leaves like an almonde, which some do call
oleander, some Rosagine. it is also promuntorye, or elbowe of land in Galitia,
lyinge into the west sea, not far from Compostella.

Nero, called also Domitius an emperor son of Gn. Domitius Nero, adopted into
thempyre by Claudius, who married his mother Agrippina. this man although he
were brought up by the reverend and wise Senera, yet by the inevitable
corruption of his nature he became horrible viciouse, in so much as he caused
him self to be gelded and cut in the form of a woman, and so to be abused,
and by his cruelty made his own mother to be slain, and the city of Rome to
be burned, he in the mean time playing on a harp, and synging the destruction
of Troy. Finally he being hated of all men, was slain in a cave wherinto he
fled, when he was but.xxxii. years old, and had rained.xiiii. years, in
the.lvii. year after the incarnation of Christ.

Nerio, the wife of Mars.

Nerites, is translated by Theodorus, Natix, read before.

Neruiae, harp strings, or lute strings.

Neruiceus, a, um, of synewes.

Neruicus, he that has grief of the synewes.

Neruij, people inhabytynge in Tournay and the countreye adioynynge.

Nerulani, people nyghe to Rome.

Nerulonenses, people in Campania.

Nerulum, a town in Lucania.

Neruosus, a, um, having great synewes, or many synewes. it also signifies
strongely made in body.

Neruus, a synewe, also a fetter or give, wherewith the legs are tied, also
force or strength also the string of an instrument.

Neruos intendere, to employ strength.

Nerui reipublicae, provision for defense of the country, that is to say,
strong men, treasure, ships. etc.

Nerui belli, money and men of arms.

Neruulus, a diminutiue of Neruus.

Nerua, called also Cocceius, a good and noble emperor, who being a Gentile,
in the beginning of his reign did set at liberty al christen men which were
accused or banyshed. he so much exceded in lyberalitie toward pore men, that
he thereby lacking treasure, caused his apparayle, plate and rich stuff to be
sold, for his necessity, and ordained that the chylderne of poor men should
be kept with the common treasure, and determined nothing by him self, but
only by the consent of excellent wise men. yet not withstandinge his
synceritie and virtuous life, he lacked not traitors, whom he did tolerate
wonderfully, and at the last dyed, when he was of the age of.lxxi. years, when
he had raygned one year and.iiii. months after the incarnation of
Christ.lxxxxix. years.

Nesa, a country in the isle of Sicile ioynynge to Aethna.

Nescio, nescire, not to know, to be ignorant.

Nescitur, it is not known.

Nescius, he that is not known, or does not know.

Nesium, or Nesis, an isle by Campania.

Nesia, a nymphe of the sea.

Nessotrophion, a place where duckes be kept to be made fat.

Nestor, a duke of Greece, which came to the siege of Troy, who in gyuynge
counsel was reputed most excellent, and lived (as he him self said) three
men's ages.

Nesus, a river in Thracia.

Nessus, a Centaure which ravished Deianira the wife of Hercules, who being
wounded to death gave to Deianira a poison, wherewith the shyrte of Hercules
being washed and put on him, his body did rot with most horrible peynes,
which he not susteynynge, did enter into a great fire and let him self be
burned.

Nestorius, a greatte heretyke, bishop of Constantinople, the year of our
lord. CCCC. xix. whoo denied Christ to be god, of him the heretics holding
that opynion were called Nestoriani.

Neu, for ne ue, or not. Neu lachrima soror, weep not suster. some time it
signifies nor, when it is doubled. Neu se, neu Pompeium absentem imperatorem
aduersariis ad supplicium tradant, obsecrat. He desired them that they would
not betraye neither him nor Pompey their capitayn unto their ennemies to be put
unto cruel death.

Neuceria, a city in Vmbrya, a part of Italy.

Neue, or not, nor yet.

Ne unguam, in no wise.

Neuolo, I will not.

Neuri, people in Scithia, of whom it is written, that in Summer they were
turned to wulfes.

Neurobatae, walkers on cords or ropes.

Neustria, Normandy.

Neuter, tra, trum, none of them. neither the one nor the other.

Neuterutri inuidet, the one does not envy the other.

Neutro aduerbium, neither in the one part nor in the other. Ti. Liuius.

Neutrobi, idem.

Neutiquam, in no wise, in no condition.

Neuus, a mole, or other like mark, in the body or vysage.

Nex, necis, violent death.

Nexilis, le, any thing that may be knytte.

Nexo, ui, nexere, to knyt often.

Nexus, a, um, knyt or bounden.

Nexus, us, a bond, an oblygation.

Nexi, were free men which bound them selfs to serve, to be therefore
acquitted of their dettes.

Nexus inire, to be wrapped in bonds.

Nexu solutus, discharged of bond.

N ANTE I.
NI, but if, except, lest that.

Nicander, a famous poet which wrate of poisons.

Nicator, a vaynquishour.

Nicea, a city in Bithinia, where as was holden the holy counsel against
Arrius, in the which was present the noble Emperor Constantinus magnus.

Niceteria, rewards for victory, as rings colars of gold, or garlandes, some
do wryt it, Niceretia,

Nicopolis, a city in Egypt where Octauian vainguished Antony and Cleopatra.

Nicepsus, a greek physician and a great magiciane, about the year of our
lord.DC.l.

Nicomedia, a noble city in Bithinia, where dyed Constantine the Emperor,
called Magnus.

Nicolaitae, were heretykes which took that name of one Nicholas which was
one of the vii. deacons in the time of the apostoles who being blamed of them
for his ialosy, brought his wife that was fair among all the dysciples,
saying that who so would should use her. thinking thereby to purge him self
of ialosy which was laid unto him, whereof other ill men taking occasion
believed that every man might lefully use every woman that he lusted, which
heresy (as reason would) was condemned immediately, but it is to be feared that
it is not klerely extincte.

Nicostrata, called also Carme^tis, was mother to Euander king of latins and a
prophetis.

Nicromantia, or more rather Necromantia, is art magike in calling up damned
spirytes, with supersticiouse ceremonies.

Nicto, tere, to vent as a hounde or spaynell.

Nicto, tare, to wynke.

Nictor, idem.

Nidifico, care, to build a neste.

Nidere, to shine, to give a savor.

Nidor, doris, a savor of a thing burned or roasted. sometime grynnynge or
showing of the teethe. sometime brightness.

Nidus, a neste, sometime the bird which bredeth, also a vessel like a
neste, also boxes or chestes wherein grocers, or mercers, do put their wares be
called Nidi.

Nigella, an herb which bears a black sede of good savor, which profyteth
against rewnes.

Nigellus, a, um, broune of color.

Niger, gra, grum, black, sometime it sygnyfyeth purple.

Nigidius figulus, an ancient Romayne which was a greatte philosopher of the
sect of Pythagoras, and wrate wonderful subtylly. about the year of our
lord.xlviii. he dyed in exyle.

Nigredo, dinis, blackenesse.

Nigrities, idem.

Nigri facio, to make black.

Nigreo, and Nigrico, care, to be black.

Nigrifio, fieri, to become black.

Nigris, a fountain in Ethiope, which some do suppose to be the head of the
famous river Nilus.

Nigro, are, to make black or to be black,

Nigror, groris, blackenesse.

Nihil, and Nihilum, no thing, or naught.

Nihil cum fidibus graculo, nihil cum amaracino sui. The daw has naught to do
with a lute, nor the sow with oil of maioram. A proverb applied to him
which presumynge of his wit, medleth with things whereof he can not skyll.

Nil, no thing.

Nilion, a stone like a topace but that it is more duskyshe.

Nilus, a great and famous River, runnynge through Aethiopia and Egypt, and
is supposed to be one of the three ryuers of Paradise, called in holy scripture
Gehon, all be it to me it seems unlikely. for as much as in Genes. it is
written that Gehon is he that enuyroneth all the land of Ethyopia, and makes
no mention that it passes through Egypt, all be it that Egypt and the river
of Nilus were more nyghe to Moses when he wrate Genesim than Aethyopia was, and
also Nilus was famous, for the virtue of the water thereof which surroundynge
or over flowynge the country of Egypt made the ground wonderful fertile
many years after in so much as without labourynge the earth, it brought forth
abundance of sundry gratnes and plants, dilectable and profitable to be eaten,
also beasts of sundry kinds with out other form of generation: specyallye
when the river came to the depenesse of.xl. cubits, like wise when it exceded
not.viii. cubittes, there succeeded much fa^yne or scarsitie. Strabo.

Niliacus, and Niloticus, ca, cum, pertey^^nge to the river of Nilus.

Nimbifer, feri, the brynger of storms.

Nimblis, an isle in the sea called Ionium.

Nimbus, a great shower of rain, a storm of rain or hayle, a great blaste of
wind, a tempest of wether, a certain vessel out of the which wine is drawn.

Nimbosus, a, um, stormy.

Nimirum, undoubtedly, sometime it signifies Scilcet, sometime At, sometime it
is added to an answer Quintil, Vter melior dicetur Orator? nimirum qui homo
quoque melior, which shall be said to be the better orator, even he that is
also the better man.

Nimis, and Nimium, do signify excess in much or little. Nimis magnus, to
great. Nimis paruus, to little. Nimis bonus, to good. Nimis malus, to ill.

Nimietas, that excess.

Nimie, and Nimio, aduerbes sygnyfyenge to much.

Nimius, a, um, to much.

Nimius animi, he that has to great a courage In dando nimius, to liberal,
prodigal.

Nimiopere, an aduerbe signifyenge excedyngely.

Ningo, ningere, to snow.

Ninguidus, a, um, where there is much snow

Ninus, king of Assyria, and son of Belus, who was the first that made
war and subdued countries, he conquered unto Inde, and vaynquished Zoroastes
king of Bactria, which first invented art magike: and also caused first
money to be current: he had to his wife Semiramis, of whom ye shall read in
the letter S. He rayned lii. years and was before the incarnation of
Christ.MM.lv. years.

Niniue, seu Nisibis, a city in Assyria builded by Ninus, which in compace
contained three days iourneye, there was an another city of that name in the
corner of Judea toward Arabia.

Ningulum, of old writers was used for nullu^.

Niobe, bes, daughter of Tamalus king of Phrigia and wife to Amphion, a
womanne of much wisdom, who brought furthe.vii. sons and as many daughters
of excellent beauty, whereof she auauntynge and preferrynge her self above
Latona, mother of Apollo and Diana. Latona being therewith angrye, commanded
Apollo to slay all the sons, and Diana to slay all the daughters which being
done, Niobe the mother of them vaynquished with discomforte and heaviness, lost
her speech, and remained without meuynge, wherefore the poets feigned that she
upon the sepulcher of her children was transfourmed into a stone.

Niphantes, a river in Scithia.

Niptrum, a lauer.

Nis, of old time was used for nobis.

Nisaee, was a Nymphe or fayry.

Niseus, a place in the country of Media, where was a good bread of fair
horses.

Nissa, a city in Lydia.

Nisi, excrepte, or but if.

Nisus, a king of whom it is written that he had one golden hear, which
caused him to be always victoriouse: but his daughter called Myrrha at the
request of oone with whose love she was taken, stale away the said hear,
whereby her father was vainquysshed and slain. it is also a kind of hawks.

Nisus, a, um, the participle of Nitor.

Nisus, us, endeavor, inforcement.

Nisyros, an isle nyghe to Greece.

Nitedula, a glowe worm that shyneth in the night.

Nitella, a tothe pykar. sometime it sygnifyeth elegancy in speech.

Niteo, tere, to be neat or clean in body, garments or other thing. also to
shine.

Niteico, scere, idem.

Nitide, clenly gorgeousely.

Nitido, dare, to make bright or kleane.

Nitidus, a, um, clean, bright.

Nitere, sometime sygnifieth to live pleasantly.

Nitor, teris, nui, to endeavor, to enforce or labor to do a thing.

Nititur hasta, he leaned to his spear.

Niti alis, to flea.

Consilio niti, to leave to counsel.

Nititur in coniectura, it rests in conjecture

Niti pari iugo, to take as much pain the one as the other.

Niti pro aliquo, to take ones part.

Nitor, toris, clennesse, bryghtnesse, gayness.

Nitrea, a country in Egypt, and the name of ii. cities above Memphis.

Nitrum, some do suppose it to be that which is called salt peter, but I
doubt thereof because Dioscorydes writes that Nitrum is light of a ruddy
color or white, having holes like unto a sponge, and was put in to the pot
with herbs whereby they were made more tend^^ and apt to be eaten, and I had
some given to me which was of a carnation color and not glistenyng like our
salt peter.

Niualis, le, perteynynge to snow.

Niuatus, ta, tum, made cold as snow.

Niueus, a, um, like snow.

Niuosus, a, um, full of snow.

Nix, niuis, snow.

Nixurio, ire, to attempt to do a thing

Nixus, borne or brought forth into the world.

Nixus, us, the birth of a child.

N ANTE O.
NO, nare, to swymme.

Nobilis, le, noble, famous.

Nobilitas, nobility, estimation.

Nobilito, tare, to make noble, to promote to dignity, to bring into renoume.

Nobiliter, nobly.

Noceo, cui, cere, to hurt.

Noctesco, scere, to wax night or be dark.

Noctes attice, the title of a book which Aulus Gelius made, so called
because it was written at Athenes in the winter time.

Nocticorax, a crow which cries by night.

Noctifuga, the thing which may not sustain night.

Noctiluca, a name whereby the moon is called. also a little beast which
shyneth by night.

Noctiuagus, a wanderer by night.

Noctu, in the night, or by night.

Noctua, an oule.

Noctuae Athenis, oules to Athenes. a proverb, where one sends to a man any
thing whereof he that receives it has plenty.

Nocturnus, na, um, perteynynge to night.

Nocuus, a, um, that which does hurt.

Nodo, dare, to knytte.

Nodus, a knot, a thronge of men in battle.

Nodosus, a, um, knotty.

Nodus Herculis, Hercules knotte. A proverb applied to a thing which by no
menes may be loused.

Nodum in scirpo quaerere, to seek a knot in a rushe. a proverb where oone
makes a thing difficult or doubtful, which is very plain to be understand
or is scrupulouse in a thing without cause.

Noe, Berosus.
signifies rest, or ceasynge from labor, it was the name of a holy
patriarch, which was the son of Lamech, whom only god elected with his
wife and.iii. sons to be preserved from the vniuerall floude, which for the
horrible sins of men than living, almighty god sent over the world, when
Noe was of the age of.DC. years, who by the commandment of god made a greatte
vessel, called in holy scripture an Arch; which contained in length.CCC.
cubits (as sayncte Augustine says) geometrical, every cubite containing
vi. commune cubits which is.ix. feet, so it was in length two thousand
seven hundred feet, in bread fifty cubits which was.CCCC.l. feet in
depenesse.xxx. cubits, which was.CClxx feet, wherein were also saved of al
kinds of beasts and fowls male and female, and after that the floude ceased,
the Arche remained on an hill in Armenia called Cordiei. and Noe lived after the
flood CCCl. years, and so he was.DCCCCL. years old when he died, which was
after the creation of the world MM.vii. years. and before the incarnation of
Christ. M.DCCC. lv. years, he was of the gentiles called Ianus. and sum time
Vortumnus.

Noegeum, a white napkyn.

Noema, a sentence.

Noenon, of old time used for Non.

Noelae, wertes which be in the chekes of swyne or gotes.

Noes, a river in Thracia, which runs into the river called Danubius or
Ister.

Nolo, a town in Italy.

Nolani, people of that town.

Nolito, for Noli, do not.

Nolo, I will not.

Nomarcha, he that has preemynence in the ministration of laws, a mayre or
other like.

Nomades, people in Scithia which is in Europa, which feedyng only cattal
have none other habitation but where the cattle do tarry. I suppose that they
be the Tartarians next to Polonia and Russy.

Nomae, paynefull sores.

Nomen, inis, a name given unto children, as John or Thomas, Marcus or Lucius,
sometime it signifies honor, authority or great blood, sometime bruyte or
renoume. sometime cause, as eo nomine, for that cause Multis nominibus, for
many causes. Hoc uno nomine, for that only cause.

Nomen soluere, to pay dettes.

Nomen transfer, to borowe of one man for to pay an other.

Nominibus honestis, for an honest consideration.

Nomenclatio, the numbrynge of names and surnames.

Nomenclatura, idem.

Nomendator, or Nomenculator, one which knowing the name of every person
served among the Romayues, to instruct them of such as they should solicit
to grant their voices in election of officers.

Nomina, dettes and dettours, also articles of account or sums.

Nomina facere, to lend to many men.

Nomina exigere, to ask dettes or sue dettours.

Nomina idonea, sure dettours.

Nomina expedire, to pay debt struely.

Nomina explicare, to discharge dettes.

Nomina expungere, idem.

Nominare, to name or appoynte.

Nominatim, by name.

Nominatio, a namynge or appointment.

Nomisma, coin of money.

Nomissis, nine pound weight.

Nomophylax, philacos, he which has the custody of books wherein laws are
written.

Nomus, a jurisdiction or mayraltie.

Non, no nor not.

Nonaginta, fourscore and ten.

Nongenti, nine hundred.

Nonagesimus, a, um, the fourscore and tenth.

Nonagecuplus, fourscore and ten times more.

Nonagecuplex, fourscore and ten double.

Nonagenarius, he that is fourscore and ten years old.

Nonagies, fourscore and ten times.

Nonae, nonarum, in the mids of March, May, June, and October, be the.vi.
days, which do follow the first day. in other months, it be the.iiii.
days which do follow the first day of the month.

Nonacris, a place in the countray of Archadia.

Nonus, ua, number, the nynthe.

Non ita pridem, not long agone.

Non modo, not only.

Nonnullus, some man.

Nonnunquam, sometime.

Non sobrius, drunk.

Non tacenda, praise worthy.

Noricum, a countraye in Germania ioynynge to Bauiere.

Norma, a rule or squyre.

Normalis, right to the rule.

Normatus, ta, tum, set in rule.

Normula, a little rule.

Noruegia, a country beyond Denmark.

Noscito, tare, to know much.

Nosco, noui, noscere, to know.

Noscomion, an hospytall for sick men.

Noster, stra, strum, our, or of our familye or house.

Nostras, of our country or householde.

Notae, notes, ciphers, marks, signs.

Notae eximere, to acquit or dyscharge of reproach or dishonor.

Nota, defamation.

Notam inurere, to defame.

Ad coenam non ad notam te inuito, I bad the to souper, and not to reprove or
defame me.

Notabilis, le, notable.

Notabiliter, notably, euydently.

Notarius, a clerk which writes instruments or plees.

Notare, to note or mark, to reprove. sometime to accuse. also to perceive.

Notare uitium, to reprove vice.

Notatio, consyderation, aduysement.

Notatus, ta, tum, marked.

Notesco, scere, to be known, or made known.

Nothia, given to bastardes.

Nothus, a bastard.

Notificare, to notify or make to be known.

Notio, and notitia, knowledge.

Notus, ta, tum, known.

Notus, ti, the southern wind.

Nouacula, a barbours rasour.

Noualis ager, land sown every other year.

Noualia plur. idem. Verg.

Nouantum Chersonesum, a place in the weste place in Scotland, called
Cokermouth.

Nouatianus, a priest of Rome, and sometime chaplayne to saint Cyprian began
an heresy, called Catharon. which was that they which had renounced the
faith, should not be received to penance.

Nouelletum, a late grown vine.

Nouello, are, to tylle new ground, or set new vynes.

Nouellus, a, um, very new or young grown.

Nouem, nine.

Nouenus, a, um, the nynthe.

Nouenarius numerus, the number of nine.

Nouendium, the space of nine days.

Nouendiale sacrum, the terrement the nynthe day after the buryenge.

Nouenniae plur. a city in Thracia.

Nouerca, a stepmother.

Nouercale odium, the accustomed hate which stepmothers are wont to bear to
their husbands chylderne.

Nouercari, to do like a stepmother.

Nouitius, a, um, new begun.

Nouo, are, to make new.

Nouocomensis, a citesyn of Nouum comum.

Nouum Comum, a city in Lumbardy.

Nouuncium, a wayghte of nine ounces, or a measure of nine inches.

Nouus, a, um, new, fresh commen.

Noui homines, men late come to wourshyp or honor.

Nouissime, at the last.

Nouissimus, a, um, the last.

Nouiter, newely, or lately.

Nox, noctis, night.

Noxa, pain, sometime offense or hurt.

Noxae eximere, to acquyte one of trespass.

Noxis, uel noxijs solutus, acquyted of felony or trespass.

Penes te est noxa, the offense is in the.

Noxam auertere ab aliquo, to discharge one of trespass.

Noxae dedere, to render a vyllayne or beast, which have done harm, in
recompense thereof.

Noxam contrahere, to fall into syckenesse, or to take harm.

Noxam concipere, idem.

Noxam facere, to do harm.

Noxam nocere, idem.

Noxia careo, I am not in the fault.

Noxalis actio, was an action against the lord for an offense done by his
vyllayne: in the which if the playntyfe did recover it, should be a
sufficient discharge and recompense of the lord, if he did deliver his
vyllayne to the playntyfe.

Noctescit, it is night.

Nox intempesta, the deep of the night, when all thing is in silence.

Nox concubia, the time of night when every man is laid to sleep.

Noxiae esse, to be blamed or reproved for any thing. In noxia, idem.

Noxijs uacuum esse, to be in no fault.

Noxius, a, um, harmefull, doing dyspleasure.

Noxitudo, among old writers was used for Noxa.

N ANTE V.
NVBES, a white cloud.

Nubecula, a little cloud. it sygnifieth also an heavy countenance.

Nubilarium, an house wherinto corn is carried for fear of rain.

Nubilare, to make clowdye.

Nubilis, maryable.

Nubilosus, a, um, full of clouds.

Nubilus, a, um, clowdy.

Nubo, psi, bear, to be wedded. alsoo to be joined unto.

Nucamenta, are hanging down of nut trees like rattes tails.

Nuceria, a town in Campania.

Nuceus, a, um, of a nutte.

Nucifrangibula, a nutknacker.

Nucleus, the kernel.

Nucula, and Nucella, a little nutte.

Nudipedalia, ceremonies done barefooted.

Nuditas, nakydnesse, want of any thing. sometime playnnesse, without
obscurity or dyssimulation.

Nudius tertius, the day before yesterday.

Nudius quartus, four days agone.

Nudata castra, the camp was left without men.

Nudatus defensoribus murus, The wall was abandoned, and without men to
defend it.

Nugae plur fables, tryfles.

Nugalis, le, pertaining to tryfles.

Nugamenta, tryfles.

Nugator, a tryfler.

Nugatorius, a, um, tryflynge.

Nugax, a tryfler.

Nugigerulus, a bearer out of fables.

Nugiuendus, a fellar of tryfles and fables.

Nugor, gari, to tryfle.

Nullatenus, in no wise.

Nulli consilij, for Nullius consilij.

Nullibi, no where.

Nullo negotio, easyly.

Nullorum hominum homo, like no man.

Nullus, a, um, none* sometime it sygnifieth non. Terent. Si non quaerit, nullus
dixerit, If he do not inquyre, tell not.

Nullus sum, I am undone.

Nullus du^, no man until this day, never man.

Number, for An.

Number ego te spoliaui? Did I rob the?

Number nam, for Number, or Vtrum.

Numnam tu hic relictus custos? Art thou left here to watch us.

Numa, was king of Romans next after Romulus, that is to say, the second
king, and was chosen by the people and senate of Rome, of a poor gentylman,
dwelling in a town of the Sabines callid Cures, for his excellent virtues and
learning, being of the discipline of Pythagoras, he being king by his polycye
and ceremonies by him invented, he brought the Romans, which during the time
of Romulus were continually occupied in wars, in such a wonderfulle quyetnes
and honest form of living, that the countrayes enuyronnynge them by the
space or xl. years, had them in such reverence, that they did never during
that time, move war against them.

Numa^o, the having of money.

Numella, or Numellae, a tumbrelle, whereinto men be set, having therein
their hands and legs.

Numen, the power or will of god. sometime it sygnifieth god. sometime
apparayle.

Numerabilis, le, that which may be numbered.

Numeralis, le, pertaynyng to number.

Numerarius, and numerator, he that reckeneth by number.

Numeratus, ta, tum, numbered.

Numerato, promptly, at hand.

In numerato habere ingenium, to have a wit apt unto every thing.

In numerato, in redye money. Plin. li.xxxi. Claudius Isidorus testamento suo
dixit, qua^uis multa civilly bello perdidisset, tamen relinquere ^eruorum
quatuor millia, iuga bou^tria millia sexcenta, reliqui poecoris ducenta
quinquaginta millia in numerato po^do sexcenta millia, Claude Isidore rehearsed
in his testament, that not withstandyng that he had lost much in the cyuile
wars, yet did he leave four thousand bondemen, three thousand and six
hundred yokes of oxen, of other cattle.CC. and fyfty thousand, and in ready
money six hundred thousand pound.

Numerare, to number or tell, or account.

Numerosus, a, um, great in number.

Numerus, number. sometime quantity, specially in grain or things measuryd.
it is also harmony, or an order in syllables. sometime company assemblyd,
specially of the warste sort of people.

Numeris omnibus absolutus, perfytte at all points.

Numeri, be sometime taken for verses.

Numida, a man or woman of Numidia.

Numidia, a countreye between Carthago and Mauritania in Aphryke, and now is
called Barbaria, where sommetyme raygned Masinissa. In that countraye is
founden most excellent marble. The chief city there was named Cirta,
which was very strong, and so puissant of men, that in the time of Strabo it
might arm ten thousand horsemen, and twenty thousand footmen.

Numantia, a city in Spain about Biskaye, which was of such valyantnesse,
that being besieged of the Romans.xiiii. years contynually, it not only did
resyst, having but.iiii.M. men to defend it, but also vanquyshed.xl.
thousand Romans, at the last it was destroyed by the last Scipio, when he
had besyeged it a long time. for when they had long sustained famyne, and
might not issue forth to fight in battle, they burned them selfs and all
their goods.

Numicus, a river in Italye, by the City Lauinium, in the which Aeneas was
drowned.

Nummarius, a, um, pertaining to money.

Nummarius, a keeper of money.

Nummatus, rich of money.

Numisma, matis, money.

Numitor, father unto Rhea, which was the mother of Romulus.

Nummularius, he that keeps a bank of money.

Nummulus, a little piece of coin.

Numus, and numisma, money or coin. some do write it with double m.

Nummus argenteus, as Leonardus Portius writes, was also that, which also was
called Denarius Romanus, and weyed a dram and the third part of a dram,
which was.iiii. scriples.

Nummus aureus, although it were altered sundry times, yet the same Portius
does gather of the first chapyter of the.xviii. book of Pliny, and of
Suetomus in the life of Otho, and Plutarchus in the life of Galba, that at that
time Nummus aureus, was in valewe.xii. Nu^mi argentei, and in that wise it
agreed with the Venetiane ducate, which was worth.xii. of our grotes, when
eight of our grotes made one ounce.

Nummus adulterinus, counterfayte or forged money.

Nunc, now, at the last.

Nunc temporis, now adays.

Nunc iam, even now.

Nunc primum, idem.

Nuncubi pro nunquid and alicubi.

Nuncupo, pare, to name or to call a thing by some name, to pronounce, to
recyte.

Nun cupare uotum, to make a solemn vow.

Nundinae, fayres, martes, they were among the old Romans kept every nynthe
day, whereunto all people resorted. and than all laws, which were new made,
were proclaimed.

Nundinalis, pertaining to fayres.

Nundinatio, byenge and selling.

Nundinari, to bye or selle, as they do in fayres openly.

Nunquando, for number aliquando.

Nuntiatio, a report.

Nuncio, are, to show, to report, to tell.

Nuntium, a message.

Nuntius, a messager, or message.

Nunquam, never, or it is impossible.

Nunqua^ hoc uno die efficiatur opus, it is impossyble that this enterprise may
be brought to pass in one day.

Nunquam non, always.

Nunquid, used in a questyon.

Nunquid ego sum? Is it I?

Nunquis, Nunque, Nunquid, is there any?

Nunquid uis? Will ye any thing with me? Will ye any thing command me?

Nunquid praeterea, Is there any thing else?

Nunquidnam amplius tibi cum illa fuit Charine? Had thou any thing else
to do with her?

Nuper, late, not long agone.

Nuper admodum, but a while agoo.

Nuperrimus, he that was or came last.

Nuperus, a, um, late done or happened.

Nuptiae, plur. a wedding.

Nuptialis le, pertaining to wedding.

Nupturire, to coueyte marriage.

Nuptus, ta, tum, wedded.

Nuptus, Nupta, substan. husband, wife.

Nuptus, tus, marriage.

Nursina, a city of the Sabynes not far from Rome, set on the hills of
Vmbria.

Nursini, people of that city.

Nurus, the sons wife.

Nusquam, an Aduerbe, in a place, and to a place. Teren. Ille autem bonus uir
nusquam apparet, He is in no place an honest man. Plaut. Te nusquam mittam, I
will send the no whyther.

Nusquam pedem, he shall not goo one foot further.

Nusquam gentium, no where.

Nusquam non, every where.

Nuto, tare, to becken or shake the head, or to make a sign with the head.
sommetyme to lean and be ready to fall in dekay. sometime to doubt, which
part to take or to lean unto.

Nutricatus, tus, nourture.

Nutritious, the nourses husband.

Nutritious, tia, tium, pertaining to nourysshynge.

Nutricula, a nouryce.

Nutrimentum, nouryshement.

Nutrix, tricis, a nouryce. alsoo a place where men do sow trees or herbs,
to the intent that when they have taken root, they will remeue them, and
set them in a gardeyne or orcharde.

Nutus, tus, the sign that oone makes with his eyes or head, declaryng his
intent some time it sygnifyeth the will or pleasure of one.

Nutu, and renutu, with a beck toward and from ward.

Nux, nucis, a nutte.

Nux auelana, a fylbert.

Nux iuglans, a wall nutte.

Nux muscata, uel Myristica, a nutmygge hot and dry in the second degree.

Nux pinea, a pyneapp^ll.

N ANTE Y.
NYCTERIS, a reremouse or back.

Nycticorax, a night crow.

Nyctileia, sacrifyces by night.

Nyctilopes, they that do see nothing toward night.

Nyctimene, the daughter of Nyctes, who after that she had lain with her
father, she was tournyd into an oule.

Nymphae, maidens of the sea, elfes, sometime the muses. alsoo young bees before
that they do fly.

Nympha, does sygnifye the spowse or bryde new married.

Nymphea, called also Nenuphar, an herb and flower called the water lyly, in
the plurel number it sygnyfieth baynes naturally warm.

Nymphus, the bryde groom.

Nysia, a certain kind of yuy.

O ANTE A.
OAN INTERIECtion used in wondering. sometime with a vocatyue case. sometime a
nominative case. sometime a vocatyue case. sommetyme in exclamation sometime in
lamenting. O me perditum, Alas I am undone. sometime in skorninge. O praeclara^
sapientia^, O the goodly wysedom. sometime of reioycyng. O factum been* O that
is well done. sometime it is the voice of him that is suddenly stryken, or
speaks to one that he saw not before. Quis hic loquitur? Misis salve. O salve
Pamphile. Who talks here? Misis god save you. O Pamphilus welcome.

O, for utinam. Vergil. O tantum libeat mecu^ tbi sodida rura, I would to god
the homely fields as well did like the as they do me.

Oatarica, the spaume of fyshe salted.

Oaxis, a river in the isle of Crete or Candy.

Oaxus, a city in Crete or Candy.

O ANTE B.
OB for at, Ob rem, for my profytte. Oboculos, before mine eyes.

Ob tacendum, for ut taceat, that he should not tell.

Obaeratus, bounden by ernest money.

Obacero, are, to let a man that he can not tell out his tale.

Obambulo, are, to walk against an other, also to walk together, or with an
another.

Obacerbo, are, to make one angry.

Obaresco, scere, to dry all about.

Obaro, are, to ea^e about.

Obaudio, ire, to here hardly, or vnwyllyngely. sometime to obey.

Obba, a bottell.

Obbibo, bear, to drink all out.

Obcaeco, care, to blind.

Obcaecare fossas, to cover dyches.

Obdo, dear, to thruste again, or put to.

Obdormio, ire, to sleep fast or soundly.

Obdormire crapulam, to sleep until he be eftsoon sobre.

Obduco, xi, cere, to lay over, or cover a thing, sometime to uncover or open
also to bring against or overthwart a place.

Obducere cicatricem, to cover a wound with skin.

Obducere callum dolori, to cause one to sustain or suffer pain or grief

Obdulcesco, scere, to be sweet about.

Obdureo, rui, ere, and obduresco, scere, to be hard.

Obduro, are, to make hard.

Obedio, dire, to obey.

Obediens dicto, he which does that he is commanded to do.

Obedientia, obedyence.

Obedienter, obedyently.

Obedo, obedere, to consume or eat al about.

Obeliscus, a great stoone, square like a butte. waxynge smaller and smaller,
until the top, of a great heyghte, made plain by a warkeman. There were of
them diverse in Rome.

Obelus, a spytte or brooche, alsoo a long stryke in writing like a spytte,
for a note or dyuersytie.

Obeo, iui, ire, to go to, to goo about, to be at hand, to mete with one, to
dye, to do.

Obire mortem, obire diem, to dye.

Obire uadimonium, to go to be surety.

Obire le gationem, to go in ambassade.

Obire prouinciam, to exercise authority.

Obire bellu^, to go to battayl, to make war.

Obire haereditate^, to take possession of lands, wherein a man has a state of
inheritance.

Obire coenam cum aliquo, to go to bankettes with one hither and thither.

Obire oculis, to look here and therabout.

Obire pedibus regiones, to go into diverse countrayes on foot.

Obedibo, was in the old time used for obediam, I shall obey.

Obequito, tare, to ride about.

Oberro, are, to wander about.

Obesco, care, to feed fat.

Obesitas, fatness.

Obesus, a, um, in Virgile is fat, in Neuio it sygnifyeth lean or little,
it is most commonly taken for fat in the body.

Obex, bicis, an obiecte or let.

Obfirmare animum, to be stubborn or obstynate.

Obfirmatus, stubborn or obstinate.

Obfirmate, obstinately.

Obgannio, and oggannio, ire, to whyster in one ear. Also to tell a thing
often.

Obherbesco, scere, to grow up as herbs done.

Obiaceo, cui, cere, to lie about.

Obiectaculum, that which is set or thrown before one to make him afraid,
or to let him that he shall not pass.

Obiecto, rare, to object or often impute, or lay to ones charge. also to cast
out.

Corpora bello obiectant, They put their bodies in the danger of war.

Obiectum, any thing that is before a man's eyes, and may be seen.

Obiectus, ta, tum, thrown or laid against.

Obiectus, tus, the layeng or setting of a thing before ones eyes.

Obijcio, ieci, ijcere, to lay or throw against, or to lay before one, to lay
to ones charge.

Obijcere mente^ alicuius, to put into a man's head, or to bring one in a
fantasy.

Obijcere moram, to make one to tarry.

Obijcere praeuaricationem, to lay a mattier to ones charge.

Obijcere relligionem, to make one to be seru pulouse.

Obijcere solicitudinem, to make one careful or pensyfe.

Obijcere spem, to put one in hope.

Obijcere terrorem, to make one aferde.

Obigitare, to stere or move before.

Obinunt, they dye.

Obiratus, ta, tum, very angry.

Obiter, by the way, incidently, beside the purpose, in the mean time,
precisely.

Obitus, ta, tum, the act or conclusyon.

Obitus, tus, the dyeng or decesse of a man* sometime the coming of one. The
ancient writers took obitum for the access of one.

Obiurgo, are, to chyde or rebuke.

Obiurgatoriae literae, letters of rebuke.

Obiurgatio, chiding, rebukynge.

Obiuro, rare, to bind by an oath.

Obiurgator, and obiurgatrix, he or she that chideth or rebukes.

Oblaedo, laesi, dear, to hurt soore.

Oblatio, offrynge. also an aid or subsidy.

Oblatus, ta, tum, offered.

Oblatro, trare, to bark against one.

Oblatrator, he that barketh or makes exclamation against one.

Oblecto, are, and oblector, ari, to delight. to take pleasure in a thing.

Oblectatio, oblectamen, and oblectam entum, recreation.

Oblicio, to take recreation or pleasure.

Oblido, dear, to hurt.

Obligo, are, to bind.

Obligare se furti, to commyt felony, sometime to confess felony.

Obligare aliquem sceleri, to charge oones conscience.

Obligare scelere. Cicero pro domo sua. Populumque scelere obligasses, Thou
had made the Romans partners of thy myscheuouse act.

Obligare nexu. Cicero pro Murena. Is periculum iudicij praestare debet qui se
nexu obligauerit, He that joins him self with an other in any bond, must
abide the ieoperdy of the judgment or condemnation.

Obligare sacramento, to charge oone with an oath.

Obligari periculo iusiurandi, to be charged with an oath.

Obligari sponsione, to be tied by his promise or covenant.

Obligatio, an obligation or bond.

Obligurio, ire, to eat delycate meats gredyly or rauenouselye, and to
consume goods in feastynge and bankettynge.

Obliquitas, crokydnesse.

Obliquus, a, um, contrary to straight, crooked.

Oblique perstringere, to taunte or check.

Oblimo, are, to cover with mudde or soft clay, sometime to stop or daube.

Oblimare rem, to spend his goods.

Oblino, ere, to imbrue or make foul.

Obliteratus, ta, tum, scraped out, or blotted.

Oblitero, are, to scrape out or put out of remembrance.

Obliteratio, a scraping or blotti^g out of a word

Oblitescere, to be hid.

Oblitus, ta, tum, forgotten.

Oblitus, imbrued, defiled.

Obliuiosus, a, um, forgetful.

Obliuiscor, sceri, sci, to forgette.

Obliuioni dare, idem.

Obliuium, forgetfulness.

Obliuio, onis, idem.

Oblocare, for locare.

Oblocutio, yil report.

Oblocuuio, are, old writers used for Mente errare, to be in an ill opinion,
to err.

Oblongum, long.

Obloquor, eris, qui, to speak against or contrary, to report ylle, to
curse.

Obloquutor, an ill reporter or detracter.

Oblucinass^, to have erred.

Oblucinior, are, to err.

Obluctari, to wrestle or strive against.

Obludere, to play with one.

Obmanens, abiding long.

Obmoliri, to set some thing with great labor, against the place whereby one
must needs pass.

Obmordeo, ere, to byte.

Obmoueto, move or put to.

Obmutesco, as we commonly say, I hold my peace, I speak not, I hold my
tunge.

Obnato, tare, to swymme against.

Obnecto, to knytte fast.

Obnexio, a fast knyttynge.

Obnexus, a, um, fast knytte.

Obniger, gri, very black.

Obnitor, teris, ti, to resyste.

Obnixe, an aduerbe sygnifyenge with all his might or power, or fyrmely.

Obnixus opibus, he that keeps him self strongly for his richesse.

Obnoxious, a, um, bounden, subject, apt, in danger. sometime it sygnifieth
gylty or fautye. Sum tibi obnoxious, I am bounden unto the. Obnoxious morbis,
subject to syckenes. Periculis obnoxious, subject to perils. etc. Minari
interdum ferro, nisi sibi obnoxia foret, And thretened her sommetyme with his
weapon; if she would not be obedyent to his requests. Obnoxium feris, Cast
out to wild beasts.

Obnoxie, fearfully, like a subject or slave.

Obnoxium ingenium, a dyshonest wit.

Obnoxia curae arua, fyeldes necessary to be thought on, or to be provided for.

Obnoxia munera and officia, among the ancient writers were taken for them
for offices, the mynistration of the which was vile and dyshonest, which also
mynyshed lyberty or nobylitie of birth.

Obnoxious gratiae iudex, the judge which regards favor or pleasyng of the one
part.

Obnoxia corpora, bodies dyseasyd or not in health.

Obnubo, bear, to hyde.

Obnubilo, are, to make dark.

Obnubilus, a, um, clowdy or dark.

Obnuere, to cover the head or body.

Obnuntiare, to deny, to resyst against a thing purposed.

Obnuntiatio, was a declaration of the dyuynours called Augures, to the chief
officers of Rome that any thing should not be enter prysed or done that was
purposed, by reason of certain signs or tokens, which the said dyuynours
perceived by the flight or voice of birds, which was contrary unto the
purpose that they went about.

Oboleo, lere, to stynke.

Obolus, a wayght contaynynge three Siliquas, or c^rettes, and is half a
scruple. It was alsoo a coin of silver, but that varyed according to the
countraye where they were curraun^ as Obolus, Atticus, Romanus, Hebrai^^.

Obori^ oboriri, to begin to spryng or come forth^

Obrad^rasi, dear, to shave against the hear.

Obortus, a, um, begun or sprung. as Rumor obortus, tidings spronge.

Ob rem, for the purpose.

Obrepo, pere, to come priuylye or steal in, to come unawares or unlooked for*
sometime to deceive one.

Obrepere ad honores, to comme or attain to honor by crafty dissimulation.

Obreptio, the gettyng or obteynyng of a thing in form aforesaid.

Obreptitiae literae, letters obtained by the said means.

Obreptare for frequenter obripere.

Obrideo, dear, to laugh against one.

Obrideo, si, dear, to laughe at one, or to mock one.

Obrigeo, gui, gere, and obrigesco, scere, to be or wax styffe for cold.

Obrion, one of the yles called fortunate.

Obryzum, pure or fine gold.

Obripio, ripui, ripere, is in hydyng some thing which should be spoken, to
atteyn the thing that we desire.

Obrisio, a mocks.

Obrodo, rosi, dear, to gnawe about.

Obrogo, are, to check or interrupte a man in his speech.

Obrogare legem, to derogate one law by an another.

Obrumpere for rumpere.

Obruo, ere, to overthrow, to cover a thing in casting an other thing over
it.

Obruere sale, to keuer with salt, or to poulder.

Obruere uoluptatibus dolore^, to put away sorrow with hauntynge much
pleasure and pastyme.

Obrui aere alieno, to owe very much or be in great debt.

Obruere memoriam alicuius, to put one clean out of remembrance.

Obrui magnitudine negotij, to be ouercharged with the importance of the
assayre or business.

Obruit eum obliuione uaetustas, ye it is so long time passed that it was,
that it is clean out of his remembrance.

Obliuione obruere facta sua, to cause his acts to be forgotten.

(...) risu testem, to make the witness to be so laughed at, that he darste
not speak any more.

Obruitur uulgi sermo hominum interitus, The speech (...) people is lost when
men be dead.

Obrutus, ta, tum, overthrown, covered, perished.

Obrutum situ uaetustatis, it is lost or perished for age, or it is so long
agoone that it was, that it is now out of remembrance.

Obrutus niuibus, keuered with snow.

Obruta itinera strage, the ways were full of menslayne or killed.

Obrutania fulmina, lyghtnynges, which suddenly happen, throwy^^^ down, and
burning things, before they be procured or looked for.

Obsaeuio, ire, to be wode angry against one.

Obsaturo, rare, to be filled to much with a thing.

Obsaluto, are, to offer my self to salute one.

Obsatum, old writers used for hallowed.

Obscoene, like a rybaulde without shame.

Obscoenitas, villainy in acts, rybauldrye.

Obscoeno, are, to bring or cause ill luck.

Obscoenus, na, number, abhomynable, all thing which is to be eschewed,
dishonest, unclean, pernicious, also bryngyng ill luck.

Obscuritas, darkness, difficulty, vngentylnes of bloudde.

Obscure, darkely.

Non obscure, plainly.

Obscuro, are, to make dark, to shadow, to hyde, to keep in silence or from
the knowledge of other, to make of no reputation.

Obscurus, a, um, dark, hid, dyffuse, unknown, of no gentle bloudde.

Obsecratio, a special desire.

Obsecro, are, to beseech or heartily pray, Obsecrare ab aliquo, to desire of
one.

Obsecr^, is sometime an aduerbe. Hem, obsecro an is est? How I pray the, is
that he?

Obsecundo, are, to make prosperouse, alsoo to obey or do all thing at an other
man's will, to make a thing better than it seems to be.

Obsecundanter, obediently.

Obsepio, iui, ire, to enclose about with an hedge

Obsequela, dylygence, endeavor.

Obsequia, things done to the pleasure or appetite of him that they be done
for.

Obsequens, obedyent.

Obsequenter, obedyently.

Obsequentissime, with great obedience.

Obsequere animo, Take thy pleasure, make good chere.

Obsequibilis, dylygent, redye to do that, which is commanded.

Obsequiosus, idem.

Obsequium, redynes to do all that is commanded. sometime it sygnifyeth flattery.

Obsequor, eris, qui, to follow an other man's pleasure.

Obsequi animo, to make good chere.

Obsero, seri, serere, to sow, or set about, to plant.

Obsero, are, to lock or shut a door.

Obseruabilis, le, mete to be observed, worthy to be had in reverence.

Obseruantia, reverence, obseruaunce.

Obseruatio, idem. wait as of espyall.

Obseruo, are, to awayte dilygentely with the eyes, and also the mind, to
honor, to take good head, to have in reverence.

Obseruare ianuam, to keep the door.

Obses, idis, an hostage, or pledge in wars.

Obsessi, they which are besyeged, that they may not issue out of the place
where they are.

Obsessor, oris, he that lays siege.

Obsidiae, arum, lyenge in awayte, to take away any thing craftily.

Obsidianum nitrum, a glass which is pure black.

Obsidionalis corona, a garlande given to them, which delivered a town or
fortress besyeged with enemies, which was of grass.

Obsidior, aris, ari, to lie in awayt to take one.

Obsidium, obsidio, obsessio, a syege about a town or fortress.

Obsidio, onis, idem.

Obsido, and obsideo, sessi, dear, to lay siege.

Obsidere stuprum, to espy a time to defloure a woman.

Obsigno, are, to close letters and seal them, also to sign them.

Obsignator, toris, he that puts to his seal or sign to a deed or
instrument.

Obsipo, are, to throw or cast, as when men of the country do say,

Obsipa pullis escam, Cast meat to the chyckens.

Obsisto, stiti, sistere, to resyste.

Obsistere obuiam, to mete with one.

Obsitus, ta, tum, wrapped, set about with herbs or trees.

Obsitus annis and pannis, very old and ill clad.

Obsitus squalore uestis, ill and sluttyshly clad.

Obsitus aeuo, very aged.

Obsita tenebris loca, very dark pla^es.

Obsolesco, scere, to decay, to wax old, to be out of use. Obsolere, idem.

Obsoletus, ta, tum, decayed, old, out of use, worn as a garment when it is bare.

Obsolote, porely apparayled.

Obsonium, all meats except bread and potage.

Obsonus, na, nu^, that which has an ill sown.

Obsono, and obsonor, ari, to feast or banquet.

Obsonito, tare, idem.

Obsonatio, feastynge or bankettyng.

Obsonator, and obsonatrix, he or she that makes feasts or bankettes.

Obsono, are, to sown ill.

Obsorbeo, bui, bear, and obsorbo, psi, bear, to suppe up all. Obsorbo, idem.

Obsordeo, dui, sordere, to be fylthy, or unclean, or sluttishe. Nonius
declares it to wax old.

Obstaculum, an obstacle or impedyment.

Obstetrico, care, to do the office of a mydwife.

Obstetrix, tricis, a mydwyfe.

Obstinat^, obstinately, or fyrmely.

Obstinatus, ta, tum, obstinate, fyrme, or stable.

Obstinatio, obstinacy, styffenes in opynion.

Obstino, are, to be obstinate, or persyste, fyrme in one sentence or purpose.

Obstipo, pare, to stop.

Obstipus, crouped shouldred.

Obstitum, crooked, sometime vyolated.

Obstro, stiti, stare, to withstand, to let.

Obstragulum, a keuerynge of a bed.

Obstrepo, pere, to cry out on one, or make a noise.

Obstrictus, bounded, tied.

Obstrigillo, are, to resyst or repugne against. to speak in detraction of
one.

Obstringo, xi, gere, to bynd or tie.

Obstringere fide^, to make a faithful promys

Obstringere se scelere, to confess the offense.

Obstrudo, si, dear, to hyde, to stop a man's throat, that he can not eat
meat.

Obstrudulentum, a stoppynge.

Obstruo, xi, struere, to shut, to stop.

Obstruere luminibus, to let that a man can not look out of his wyndowes, or
to stop his lyghtes.

Obstructio, a stoppynge.

Obstructus, stopped or shut.

Obstupidus, da, dum, astonyed.

Obstupefacio, facere, to abasshe, or make abashed.

Obstupesco, scere, to be abashed.

Obstupeo, idem.

Obsum, obfui, obesse, to hurt or hinder, or indamage.

Obsurdesco, obsurdescere, to be or wax deffe.

Obtego, idem quod Tego.

Obtempero, perare, to obey, or be at commandment.

Obtendo, to lay an excuse, to keuer over.

Obtendiculum, a coulourable answer.

Obtentus, tus, a pretense.

Obtero, triui, obterere, to tread or thruste down, to suffocate, to bruyse.

Obtestatio, an humble desire. properly not to do a thing. also to take god or
some other thing to witness.

Obtestor, aris, ari, humbly to beseech, to desire for gods sake, or for the
remembrance of some thing, which to him that is desired, is thankfully herd.

Obtexo, ere, to wayue about.

Obticeo, cui, cere, to keep silence, not to speak.

Obtritus, ta, tum, worn out.

Obtritus, tus, wearynge, foulynge.

Obturamentum, the head of a ponde.

Obturo, are, to shut.

Obturatio, shutting.

Obtineo, nere, to opteyne, to hold, to reteyne still, to get, sometime to
have. Si istam animi firmitudinem obtines, salui sumus. If thou haste that
fyrmenesse of courage, we be saulfe.

Obtinere litem, to get the thing that he sued for, to recover his suite by
judgment.

Obtinere primum locum, to be chief or pryncipall.

Obtinere ordinem, to keep the order.

Obtingere, to hap.

Obtigit, it happened.

Obtorpesco, obtorpui, pescere, to be very slow or dull.

Obtorpere, idem.

Obtorpet manus, my hand is on sleep.

Obtorqueo, obtorsi, obtorquere, to wrynge or wrythe about.

Obtrecto, tare, to ill report, to deprave, to have in despite.

Obtrectator, toris, an ill reporter, or backebyter.

Obtrectatio, ill report, dispraysynge.

Obtrigo, are, to bind by an oath.

Obtrudo, si, dear, to thruste down, to put to with force. Obtrudit fores, he
pulled to the door. Also to set forth. Aliquid prius, obtruclamus, Let us
first set forth somewhat.

Obtrudere uxorem, to give to a man a wife against his will or appetite.

Obtrunco, uncare, to slay, also to stryke of a man's head.

Obtueor, eri, to behold steadfastly.

Obtuor, idem.

Obtundo, dear, to stryke, to break, to make dulle, to hurt a man with
speaking, to make wearye.

Obturare, to stop.

Obturbo, bare, to trouble all.

Obtusus, a, um, dulle.

Obtuse, dully.

Obtutus, tus, and obtuitus, a look or regard.

Obuagio, gire, to cry out, as a child.

Obuallo, are to enuyronne of compass about with a dyche or wall.

Obuaricator, toris, he that tourneth one out of the right way, or lets him
that he may not pass.

Obuaro, are, to peruerte.

Obuaricio, care, to stop or let one of his passage

Obuenio, nire, to come against, to mete with. also to happen.

Obuensio, onis, revenues.

Obuersor, aris, ari, to be present, or before the eyes, to come in
remembrance.

Obuerto, and obuerso, tere, to turn again, or back. Sed mihi ante oculos
obuersabatur reipub. dignitas, quae me ad se rapit, But before mine eyes came
the estate of the publyke weal, which plucketh me unto her.

Obuiam, an aduerbe, which sygnifyeth before in the way, against one. Obuiam
ire, to goo against one, to prevent.

Obuia urbs inimicis, the city easy to be taken with ennemies.

Obuiam mittere, to send men to mete with one in the way.

Obuiam fit, he met with me.

Obuiam ire periculis, to prevent danger.

Si nihil obuiam est, If there be nothing in the way to let.

Obuio, are, to mete with one.

Obuius, a, um, that which meteth with one.

Obumbro, brare, to make dark with a shadow. sometime to defend.

Obuncus, a, um, very crooked.

Obuolo, are, to flee against.

Obuoluo, uere, to wrappe together.

Obuos sacro, the ancient Romans used for obsecro, I beseech you.

O ANTE C.
OCca, an harowe or dragge, which has iron teethe, wherewith cloddes are
broken.

Occatio, a breakyng of cloddes, or harrowing.

Occator, he that harroweth.

Occaeco, care, to make blind.

Occalleo, ere, to wax or be hard flesshed, or brawned, like as a bore is.
Occallesco, Idem.

Occano, and occino, occanui, and occini, occanere, and occinere, to sing
against one, to lay in rebuke.

Occaso, sere, to be lost or undone.

Occasio, occasyon.

Rara occasio, not ready at hand.

Occasiuncula, a small occasyon.

Occasus, us, death of man or beast. also the going down of the son, or
sonneglade.

Occatorium, an harrowynge.

Occedo pro accedo.

Occentassint for conuitia fecerint, They shall give rebukes or words of
reproach.

Occento, tare, to cry out against one with rebukefull words.

Occentus, tus, where one syngeth against an another, It may be alsoo taken
for a countertenour.

Occepso, pro incepero, I shall begin.

Occidens, it is, the weste, or ponent.

Occidens sol, the sun going down.

Occidentalis, le, of the weste.

Occidi, is a sygnifycation of sorowfulnes as it were, I am undone, or utterly
lost.

Occidi, I am dead, I am love.

Occidit memoria, the memory or remembrance is lost.

Occido, di, dear, to slay or wound to death, to fall greuousely, to torment
or molest one.

Occido, dear, to fall down, to peryshe utterly, to dye, to go down, as the
son does, and other sterres.

Occidit spes nostra, our hope is lost.

Occiduum, the plac^ where the son gothe down.

Occiduus, a, um, (...) down.

Occilare, to beat ^^uffet.

Occino, nere, to (...) to an other.

Occissimus, of all (...) most lost or desperate

Occisio, onis, a sl^^^hter or death of men or cattle.

Occidio, onis, idem.

Occipio, pere, to begin.

Occiput, and occipitium, the hinder part of the head.

Occisus, a, um, killed.

Occisa res est, the matter is dasshed or marred.

Occitantur, for frequenter occiduntur, they be slain here and there, or in
diverse places.

Occlamito, tare, to cry out.

Occludo, dear, to shytte fast.

Occludere linguam, to stop a man from speaking.

Occlusus, occlusior, occlusissimus, fast shut.

Occo, occare, to harrowe and break cloddes and balkes in the corn fields.
Also to cover with earth.

Occulo, lere, to hyde.

Occultatio, an hydynge.

Occulto, tare, idem.

Occultus, ta, tum, hyd, which is not known.

Occulte, privily, unknown.

Occumbo, cubui, cumbere, to be slain, to be deadly wounded.

Occupatitius ager, the fyelde which is neglected of the owner, and labored
by other.

Occupo, are, to occupy, to get or take before an other man, to use in
commune, to take or hold a thing with force, to let or empeche, to possede,
sometime to lend for advantage, to preuente, to let.

Occupans, it is, he that does occupy or use a thing, the occupier.

Occupatus, let, in business, occupied.

Occupatio, a color in rhetorike, where the playntyfe in preventing the
words of the defendaunt, reherseth that which he will lay for excuse, and
disproueth it.

Occupare consilium, to find advise or counsel.

Occupare locum to take or keep a place with force.

Occurro, si, rere, to meet with, to come to remembrance, to offer him self.
Also to resyste, to run, to come to mind, or remembrance, also to be
proffered.

Occurrit peruionibus herba haec, this herb heals kybes on the heels.

Occurso, are, the frequentatiue of occurro, to come often to remembrance, to
mete often, or run against one.

Occursus, us, a runnynge against one.

Oceanius, a, um, of the occean sea.

Oceanus, the broad sea called the Occeane sea, which compaceth the world and
adds to his name the name of the countries by which it passes. as Oceanus
Britannicus, the sea next to England and Scotland. Oceanus Indicus, the
Indiane sea.

Ocellatus, ta, tum, that which has eyes, or holes like to eyes.

Ocellus, a little eye.

Ocha, a goose.

Ochus, a river which passes through Acarnania, a country in Greece.

Ocquinisco, scere, to humble him self or disable him self.

Ochra, oker, which paynters do use.

Ocris, old writers called a broken hill, hard to go up to.

Ocreae, leg harnes, botes.

Ocreatus, booted or harnessed on the legs.

Ocrinum promontorium, sayncte Michaelles mount in Cornwall.

Orior, aris, ari, to be unoccupied, or without business.

Otiosus, ydell, unoccupied, quyete.

Otium, vacation from labor, leyser, quyetnes ydelnes, lack of busynes.

Octapitarum promontorium, a place in wales, called sayncte Dauyds.

Octauia, the sister of Augustus, and wife of Antonius, whom he afterward
forsook. A another was daughter of Claudius the emperor, and wife to Nero who
caused her to be slain.

Octauius, the father of the noble Emperor Augustus.

Octauianus, the name of Augustus before that he took on him the monarchy.

Octangulus, a, um, eight cornered.

Octauus, the eight. Octauum, idem.

Octies, eight times.

Octingentesimus, a, um, the eight hundred.

Octingenties, eight hundred times.

Octingenarius, eight hundred years old.

Octingenti, eight hundred.

Octingeni, and Octingenteni, idem.

Octingentuplus, eight hundred fold.

Octo, eight.

October, the monthe of October.

Octoduri, Seyne and Valeif in France.

Octogenarius, of four score in number, or four score years old.

Octogeni, four score.

Octogesimus, the last of four score.

Octogies, four score times.

Octoginta, four score.

Octonus, a, um, the number of eight, in sundry parts.

Octopes, having eight fete.

Octophorum, a lyghter borne with eight me^.

Octoplus, four times as much.

Octuplicatus, eight times doubled.

Oculatus, full of eyes, also quick sighted circumspecte, espyenge a thing
shortly.

Oculatus testis, a witness which saw the thing.

Oculeus, full of eyes, wyly.

Oculus, an eye, also a young budde of a tree.

Oculis captus, blind.

In oculis gestare, and In oculis esse and far, to love one so much that he
can not be satisfied with beholdynge of him.

In oculis habere, to attend upon one, or to behold intentifely or steadfastly.

Vin hodie facere quo tuo uiro, oculi doleant* wylt thou now do that which
shall make thy husband loathe to see the?

Oculi eruditi, when one knows whether a Oculitus eam amat, he loves her as
well as his own eyes.

Oculum exculpere, to crache out ones eyes.

Oculos tollere, to begin to be merry. thing be well done or no.

Intendere oculos, to set the eyes to behold steadfastly.

Oculos tenere, to make me^ to wonder at the excellent warkemanshyp of a thing.

Oculi, the blewe spots in the feathers of a pecockes tail.

Oculissimus, he that seethe most clearly.

Oculatio, the taking away of superfluouse buddes from a tree or vine.

Oculus Christi, (...).
an herb which is also called filius ante patrem.

Oculum adijcere, to be in love with a thing which is seen.

Ocymum, an herb called basyle.

Ocyor, swyfter, ocyus, idem.

Ocyssimus, a, um, most swyfte.

Ocyus, sooner, quicklyer.

O ANTE D.
ODaea, places, wherein singing is exercysed.

Ode, a song.

Odfacio, for olfacio, cere, to smelle.

Odi, I hate, or have hated: Odisse, to hate or have hated.

Odinoliontes, a fyshe which cleueth to a ship and makes her to abide as If
she lay at anchor. uide Remora.

Odiosus, he that is hated, displesant, troublous, tediouse.

Odiose, with hate, displeasantly.

Odit eum cane peius, and angue, He hates him wars thanne a dog or a
serpente: as who says, mortally without hope of reconcylynge.

Odites, one of the sons of Ixion the Centaure.

Odium, hate, displeasure, tediousenes, ra^cour.

Odio esse, to be hated.

Odium capere alicuius rei, to be offended or discontent with any thing.

Odium concitare, to procure hate or dyspleasure.

Odoeporicon, an Itenerary, wherein is written the distaunce of one place from
an other, or a like thing, as the iestes of princes are, assignynge their
iourneys.

Odoramen seu Odoramentum, a perfume.

Odores, plur. is taken of Columella for sweet gummes and spyces.

Odor, oris, and odos, savor, sent.

Odoramentum, every thing that sauoureth well also savor.

Odorarius, a maker or seller of things that smell sweet.

Odora canum uis, the qualite or power which dogs have, to take a sent.

Odoratus, tus, the smelling or sent.

Odoratus, ta, tum, that which is performed sometime that which does savor,
odoryferous, or smelling sweet.

Odorator, a hounde made to the suite.

Odoriferus, a, um, idem.

Odorifer, ra, rum, odoryferouse or sweet in savor.

Odorisecus, a hounde or spanell, which hunteth by sent.

Odorariuestigijs, to draw as a hounde does.

Odoro, and odoror, ari, to smell, to perceive.

Odorus, a, um, that which sends forth savor, or has a good savor.

O ANTE E.
OEAGRVS, a river in the country of Thracia.

Oeanthe, a City, also the flower of a vine.

Oebades, king Darius horsekepar, by whose polycy he atteyned to the kingdom
of Persya.

Oebalia, the country in Greece, called also Laconia.

Oebalus, a man's name.

Oechalia, a city in Laconia.

Oeconomia, the ordering and prouydyng of things concerning household, also
an order in writing, whereby every thing is set in his proper place.

Oeconomica, perteynynge to household.

Oeconomicus, he that can order and govern a house.

Oeconomus, a steward of household.

Oeci, places, where women do sit and work with woull or sylke.

Oecumenicus, universal, perteynynge to all the world.

Oecumenicum consilium, a general counsel, wherein things are universally
treated concerning all countries.

Oedema, an impostume or botche commen of a fleumatike matter, in the which is
no grief

Oedipus, the son of Laius king of Thebes, whom his father delivered to his
shepherde to kill, but he pityenge the child made holes in his feet and did
hang him on a boughe but he being so found of the shepeherde of Phorbas
king of Corinthe was brought to the queen, who lackyng children, brought him
up for her son, afterward in a skyrmyshe, vnwetynge he slew his own
father, and assoylynge the subtylle ryddle or questions of Sphinx the monster,
he opteyned the kyngedome of Thebes and the queen called Iocasta which was
his mother, by whom he had two sons Polynices and Etheocles but when he
knew that he had slain his father, and wedded his own mother, for sorrow he
cratched out his own eyes.

Odipodioniua, nia, um, belonging to Oedipus.

Oenanthe, the flour of a wild vine growing in hedges called Labrusca, but
Dioscorides. li. 3. says that it is an herb which has a leaf like
persenepes, a white flower, a big stalk, an hand bread high, sede like
orage, a great rote with many round heads li. 5. he says that it is the
flower of a wyld vine, sone after he says that it is the grape of the wild
vine. Theodorus Gaza does translate him. Vitiflora.

Oenanthinum, an oyntmente made of the said beary.

Oeneus, the father of Deianira, the last wife of Hercules.

Oeno^ne, the concubine of Paris before that he ravished Helene.

Oeneus, king of Archadia, father of Meleager, whereof he is called Oenides.

Oenomaus, the son of Mars, father of Hippodamia.

Oenisteria, was a certain sacrifice at Athenes made by young men newely
berded, which was done before that they did cut their hear that was long,
which sacrifyce was in this wise, a certain measure of wine was brought into
the temple of Hercules whereof the young men drank a little, and gave the
resydue to all other that were present.

Oenophorus, a servant, which brings wine to the table.

Oenophorum, a pot wherein wine is carried,

Oenopola, a vyntenar, or tauernar,

Oenopolium, a wine tavern.

Oenotria, Italy.

Oenotrides, two yles nyghe to Calabria.

Oesipum, the fylthy oil, which is in wulle, that is in the flanks of a
sheep, or about his neck, which oil is sodden out, and used for medicyne.

Oestrum, woodnesse, or mad fury: also a fly which makes a great noise, when
he flies some do suppose it to be a dor, like to a be, but that he is black
and greater.

Oeta, a mountain between Thessalia, and Macedonia.

Oe^ta, the father of Medea, wife of Jason.

O ANTE F.
OFFA, a puddynge, also a dyshe made with fat brothe, hard cheese, pepper,
and cynamom, or other like iunkat. sometime it is taken for a morsel.

Offa penita, a piece of flesh cut of with the tail.

Offarius, and offaria, a maker of such iunkettes.

Offatim, in morselles.

Offector, toris, a dyer.

Offella, a little morsel, as of flesh mynced, al so a pottage made with
pieces of flesh, as stued brothe or forced gruell.

Offendo, dear, to meet with, to fall into, to find by chance, to stryke or
hit any thing unware, to offend. Offendere apud alique^, to do a thing,
which lyketh not them that do see it done. also to displease.

Offendiculum, an impedimente or let, an obstacle.

Offendimentum, and offendix, the knotte of a rybon or lase, wherewith a bonet
or hatte is knyt fast to the head.

Offensa, an offense or displeasure.

Offensam subire, to be in displeasure of one.

Offensatio, a metynge.

Offensaculum, that which is laid in a man's way, whereat he stumbleth.

Offensator, satoris, he that stackereth in reading, as if he were not perfect
in reading, or reads otherwise than it is written.

Offensans, it is, that which hurts or lets.

Offensio, onis, hurt or harm. sometime dyspleasure or hatred.

Offensiones belli, faults in battle.

Offensiones, incumbraunces.

Offensioni esse, to do displeasure or harm, between offensio and offensa,
seems to be this diversity, that Offensa is in him that offends or greueth.
Offensio, in him that is grieved or offended, Nam quod negas te dubitare quin
magna in offensa sim apud Pompeium hoc tempore, non uideo causam cur ita sit
hoc quidem tempore, where ye do not doubt but that now at this time I am in
Pompeys great displeasure, I se no cause why it should be so at this present
time. Nec tantum intelligebam ei esse offensionis, qua^ tum literae tuae
declarant Nor I understand that he was so much displeased as your letters make
mention.

Offensionem subleuare, Cice. de Amicitia. Vna illa, subleuandum offensio est,
that one offense or grief is to be eased or helped.

Offensionem obliterare, to pardon or forget an offense or displeasure.

Offensiones lenire. Cice. O multas, and graves offensiones, quas quidem tu das
opera^ ut lenias. O how many and greuouse displeasures are done, which ye go
about to mittigate or excuse.

Offensionem deponere. Cice. fam. epist. li. 13. Cum tantum literae meae
potuerunt ut his lectis, omnem offensionem suspitionis quam habueras de Lisone
deponeres. Sens my letters might do so much, than when ye had rad them, ye
did lay aparte al displesures which ye had against Liso, engendered of
suspicion.

Offensum, idem quod offensio. Cic. ad At. 2. Scito nihil unquam fuisse tam
infame, tam turpe, tam denique omnibus generibus, ordinibus, aetatibus
offensum, quam hunc statum qui nunc est. Know this for a suertye, that there
was never thing so reprochefull, so dishonest, finally so displeasaunt to all
sorts, degrees and men of every age, as this present state that now is.

Offenso, are, to hit often, or to let, to thraste against a thing.

Offensiuncula, a small offense or displesure.

Offercio, cire, to stuff or fill.

Offero, obtuli, obferre, to offer, or present, to give wyllyngly, to promise.

Offerre auxilium, to promise aid.

Offerre crimen, to put a complaynt against one.

Offerre incendium, Cice. ad Pont. Domus ardebat in Palatio non fortuito, sed
oblato ince^dio, My house in the Palaice did burn not by any chance, but by
fire thraste in by some man.

Offerre mendicitatem, to bring one unto poverty.

Offerre relligionem, to make a scrupule or doubt in conscience.

Si se in uia obtulerit, occisum iri iam ab ipso Milone uideo, Cice. If he mete
with Milo in the way, I perceive he will sle him.

Si nihil offeret se quod sit probabilitati illi contrarium, If he find no
thing contrary to that which may appear to be true.

Offerre se alicui, to present him self to one or before one.

Offerre spem, to put one in hope.

Offerre stuprum, to assaye by means to defyle a woman married or unmarried.

Offerre moram, to let.

Offerre se obuiam, to mete with one.

Offerre stuprum, to commyt aduoutry.

Offerre uitium uirgini, to defloure a virgin.

Offerumentae, strypes. Ne offerumentas habebis plureis in tergo tuo, quam vlla
nauis longa clauos, tum ego ero mendacissimus, and if thou have not mo strypes
on the skyn of thy back, than a galy has nails, I shall be the falsyst liar
that ever was.

Offerume^ta, offrynges, things offered to god.

Officina, a werkehouse, a shop.

Ex eadem officina uenit, it was of one man's doing.

Officialis, ale, perteynyng to offices or duties.

Officialis, an offycer.

Officio, ficere, to hurt, sometime to do, also to dye clothe.

Officere luminibus, to stop the lyghtes.

Officiosus, a friendly or seruisable manne, or he that is glad to please, or
does well his duty.

Officiosus dolor, a grief which proceeds of a good cause or reason.

Officiose, diligently, seruisably.

Officium, office, duty, or a thing, which ought to be done. It is sometime
taken fo honor done to one, and it may be used for that which we do call
homage, done in such form as our law does appoint it, it is also taken for
benefyte, properly it is that that ought to be done, and is mete and conuenyent.

Officium usurpare, to do his duty.

In officio esse, to do his duty, to do his endeavor.

Officia intercedere. Cic. fam. epist. 13. Multaque and magna inter nos officia
paria and mutua intercedunt, Between us has been sundry and great pleasures of
like importance done one to an other.

Officium promereri, to do pleasure.

Cic. in oratione ante exiluim. Non conuenit enim cum ego ad promerendum
officium tam fuerim expedius, uos ad referendam gratiam esse tardiores. It is
not reason that sens I was so ready to do you pleasure ye should be so slack
to do like wise for me.

Officio fungi, to do his endeavor or duty.

Officium praestare, officium confer, idem In officio continere, to keep him
his friend.

Officij causa prosequi aliquem, to keep company with one to do him honor or
worship.

Officia mutua, pleasures done one to an other.

Offirmo, are, to abide in one purpose or opynion, to be obstinate.

Offlecto, xi, tere, to turn a thing contrary or about.

Offoca, are, to power water into the mouth of a man or beast.

Offritiae, crafty or deceytfull taches.

Offringo, ere, to break with a ploughe, land cared before.

Offuciae, cawtelles, crafty ways to deceive.

Offula, a little morsel

Offundo, fusi, dear, to power about, to make dark or blind, to stayne, to
cast in, or bring in.

Offundere errorem alicui, to abuse or deceive one.

Offusus terror oculis, auribusque, fear was both at his eyes and cares.

Offusa animis caligo, their minds were made blind.

Offuco, care, to put water or other lycour into a man's mouth, to sowke done,
as they use to do to sick men, which for feblenesse can not by them selfs
take any sustenaunce.

Offusco, care, to make black, or dark.

O ANTE G.
OGD OVS, a king of Egypt, which first builded the city of Memphis.

Ogdo, adis, the number of eight.

Ogdolapis, a river which comes out of the hyls called Alps, and runs
to Rome.

Oggannio, ire, to prate, to braule, to speak with chiding.

Oggero, ^si, gerere, to cast in or set.

Oculos oggerere, to cast or set the eyes on one.

Oggrassari, to go.

Ogyges, he which first builded the city of Thebes.

Ogygeus, a, um, made or found by Ogyges.

Ogygea, an isle between Phenicea and Syria where Calypso dwelled, which
detained with her Ulysses.

Ogigidae, The banes.

Ogyris, an isle in Siria.

O ANTE H.
OHE, an exclamation, sygnyfyeng that he, which speaks that word, is
saciate or weary of that, which he sees or hereth.

Oh, an interiection signifienge a cry when one meteth with his friend, whom
of a long time he has not seen, sometime it is used in meruaylynge with a
contempt. sometime in affyrmynge. sometime in sorowynge. sometime reioyeynge.

O ANTE I.
Oinomeli, wine and honey sodden together.

O ANTE L.
OLEA, is most properly the fruit of an olyue: yet sometime it is used for an
olyue tree.

Oleaceus, a, um, oily.

Oleacum, a color, which is myxt with grene black, yelowe, and white.

Oleaginus, a, um, of an olyue tree.

Oleagineus, idem.

Olearis, re, and olearius, a, um, perteynynge to oil.

Olearia cella, a cellour for oil.

Olearius, a maker of oil.

Olearus, one of the yles called Ciclades,

Oleaster, a wild olyue.

Oleastellus, uel Oleago, is that which Serapio calls Mezereon.

Oleastrinum, oil of wild olyues,

Oleatus, a, um, of oil.

Oleitas, the time of gatherynge of olyues.

Olenus, a City of Archadia, where the goote with whose milk Jupiter was
nouryshed, was brought up, and therefore the sign of sterres which was
supposed to be the same got, is named Olenia.

Oletare, to corrupt or make stynkynge. leg.xii. tabu. Ne quis aquam oletato
dolo malo, ubi public salit. Si quis oletarit, sestertiorum de cem millium
mulcta (...) No man by craft corrupt water where it pryngeth to a commune
use, he that does corrupt it shall forfait ten thousand sestertius, which do
amount of our money.xxv. li. xiii. s. iiii. d.

Olentica, things which have an ill savor.

Oleo, eui, and olui, olere, to savor, to have savor.

Olent illa super cilia maliciam, that sturdye looks do sygnifye that thou art
maliciouse. Aurum huic olet, this fellow smells that I have money.

Iucunde olere, to have a sweet savor.

Been olere, to have a good savor.

Male olere, to stynke.

Rosa recens a longinquo olet, a rose newely gathered is smelled far of.

Oleosus, a, um, full of oil.

Olesco, lescere, to grow.

Oletum, a place where olyues do grow, also the dunge or ordure of a man,
properlye it is a draught or iakes.

Oleum and operam perdere, to lose labor and cost.

Oleum, oil.

Olfacio, feci, facere, to smell.

Olfacto, are, to smell much or often.

Olfactus, tus, the sense of smelling.

Olibantum, a measure of wine.

Olidus, da, dum, that which has greatte savor, either good or badde, most
communly stynkynge.

Oligarchia, the state of a common weal where a few persons be in authority.

Olim, sometime, as well in the time passed as in the time to come, now late,
long time passed, ones.

Olitor, a gardynar, or seller of herbs and roots.

Olitorius, a, um, perteyninge to a pot garden.

Oliua, an olyue tree.

Oliueta, the time of gatheryng of olyue beries

Oliuetum, a place where do grow olive trees.

Oliuina, plenty of olyues, also revenues, which do come of olyues.

Oliuitas, and oleitas, the quality of olyues, the gatherynge time of olyues.

Oliuo, are, to gather olyues.

Oliuum, oil olyue.

Olla, a pot.

Ollares, grapes conserved in pottes.

Olli, for illi.

Ollula, a little pot.

Olophernes, chief constable to the great Nabugodonozer king of Assyrians, a
valiant captain: not withstanding being ouercharged with wine and to much
trusting in the beaulty and plesaunt speech of the Hebrewe lady Judith, he
was by her slain in his bed, an^ ^ad his headde stryken of and brought to
his ennemies, before the incarnation of Christ. years.

Ololygones, crokynge frogs.

Olor, oris, a wild swanne

Olorinus, na, um, of a swanne, as, Cantus olorinus, the singing of a swanne.

Olus, leris, herbs which serve for pottage, pot herbs.

Oluscula, small herbs.

Olus atrum, an herb called Alysander.

Olympia, a city between the hills of Ossa and Olympus.

Olympiacus, ca, cum, perteynynge to that plays or hill.

Olympias, piadis, the space of fine years, whereby the old Greeks did
account, as we do now, by the years of our lord, as the first Olympias, the
second, the third, and so forth.

Olympicus, ca, cum, of Olympus.

Olympicum certamen, was a game or price kept on the hill of Olympus by all
the princes and cities of Greece every fyfth year in the honor of Hercules,
who first began it. In the which were all these maystries proved. Runnynge on
foot to a goll, also runnynge furthe and back again two furlong also
wrastlynge, fighting with fystes, runnynge with horses, wrastlynge with hands
and legs, runnynge and wrastlynge of children, fighting in harneyse,
runnynge with ii. horses, and leaping from the one to the other, coursynge
with charyottes, runnynge with mares, but so as in the myddell of the course,
he that did ride should leap down and holding fast the brydell should make
an end of his course. There was also contention and vyctory of poets
rhetoritia^s musicians and subtyle disputars. in the place did grow a wild
olyue tree whereof garlandes were made and given to the victours, hereto
assembled out of all the Cities and countries of Greece, in the which time,
was either war appointed or leages concluded, these great games were also
called Olympia.

Olympionices, he that has had victory in the games at Olympus.

Olympius, a, um, heavenly.

Olympus, a mountain or hill in Greece, between Thessalia and Macedonia, above
the which appears no cloud: and therefore among the poets it is usurped for
heaven.

Plutarchus in uita Aemilij, says, that it is ten furfonge in heyght.

Olynthus, a city in Thracia.

Olyras, a river in Greece by the place called Thermopylas.

Olysippum, a city in portugal, now called Vlysbona, in english Lusseborn.

O ANTE M.
OMASVM, a fat gut or chitterlynge.

Omen, minis, luck, also a word or sentence sodaynelye spoken, after the
which some thing happens to follow according thereunto, above the expectation
of the^ which herd it.

Omentum, the call or sewet, wherein all the bowelles are lapped, also the
thynne skin in the head, wherein the brain is contained: of some called the
ryme of the brain, and of surgeons Pia matter.

Omentatus, ta, tum, myxte with sewet.

Ominor, aris, ari, and omino, aui, are, to guess what shall happen or follow.

Ominator, oris, he that tells a man's luck or fortune.

Ominosus, a, um, lucky.

Omissus, a, um, left, not meddled with. Omisso animo.) Vbi te uidi animo esse
omisso, when I saw that thou caryddest for nothing.

Omitto, omisi, omittere, to forbear, to leave, to neglecte.

Omit hunc, let him alone, pardon him.

Omit me, let be, let me alone.

Omit iracundiam, be angry no more.

Omit solicitudinem, care not for it.

Omit timorem, be not aferde.

Omit de ea re dicere, speak no more of the matter.

Id omitto, I will not speak thereof.

Vt omittam de eo plus loqui, I will pass over to speak any more of him.

Omissis iocis credo, in ernest I do believe.

Omne tulit punctum, he touched every point, A proverb applied to him,
which omytteth nothing expedient or necesary, and is therefore of all men
commended.

Omnibus numeris, in all points Res est o^nibus numeris absoluta, it is a
thing perfyte in all points.

Omnifariam, all manner of ways, of every kind.

Omnifarius, a, um, sundry, diverse.

Omnigenus, a, um, of every kind.

Omnimodus, da, dum, all manner.

Omnino, holly, throughely, always, fynallye, only.

Omnino in familia non erat, he in no manner of wise was in the house.

Miserrima est omnino ambitio, ambition in every thing is most miserable.

Omnibus partibus, al manner of ways, to al intentes.

Omni ratione, idem.

Omnipotens, it is, almighty.

Omnis, ne, all.

Omniparens terrae, the earth brings forth all things.

Omophagi, they which do eat raw flesh.

Omphax, acis, a grape not fully ripe.

Omphacium, lycour made of fruit that is not ripe, as of grapes, and than it
is called ver juice, it is also of other fruits and flowers.

Omphacium uinum, a grene wine not pleasant or sweet.

Omphacinum oleum, oil made of olyues, not being ripe.

Omphacomeli, a syrup made with the juice of grene grapes and honey, Paul. Egi.
Meuse, Auicen. Anto. Musa. Io. Agric.
they make it now a days with the said juice and sugar, and do call it
Syrupus de agresta.

Omphale, a maiden which was Queen of Lidia, whom Hercules did serve, and
she caused him to spynne in a rock.

Omutesco, tescere, to be dome, and can not speak.

O ANTE N.
ONae, sweet fygges.

Onager, onagri, a wild ass.

Onerarius, a, um, that which serves for bourden.

Onero, are, to charge, bourden, or lade.

Onerare populum, to put impositions or taxes on the people.

Oneratus, ta, tum, bourdayned, laded.

Onerarius, raria, rarium, that whereon bourdayne is laid.

Onerariae naues, ships which serve for bourdeyn, they may be taken for
hulkes.

Onerosus, a, um, bourdeynous, chargeable.

Onixes, a kind of marble.

Onyscus, a worm, which bends him self like a bow when he goes, which
is red, and found under trees, which have lain long on the ground.

Onoba, a city.

Onocentaurus, a beast half a man, half an ass.

Onocrotalus, a bird like to a swanne, which putting his head in to the
water, brayeth like an ass.

Onomatopeia, a word made of sown or pronouncynge, as bletynge of a sheep,
lowynge of cow, hissynge of an adder.

Ononium, a blind nettell.

Onus, oneris, a bourden, a lode, a charge.

Oneri esse, to be chargeouse to one.

Onus deponere, to discharge one.

Onus imponere, to give to one in charge.

Oneri premi, to be to much charged.

Onere opprimi, to be over charged.

Onus suscipere, to take charge.

Onus tollere, to bear charge.

Onus sustinere, idem.

Onustus, ta, tum, loded, charged.

Onyx, ychis, a white stone, like to a man's nail, also some be found in
Inde, which are of diverse colors, having white spots like unto eyes. it
is supposed of some men to be also that which is called Conchula Indiae.

Onychinus, na, um, made of the stone called Onyx.

Oonae, yles in the north occean where the inhabitants do live with eggs of
fowls.

O ANTE P.
OPACO, care, to shadow.

Opacus, ca, cum, shadowed, or in the shadow.

Opacitas, shadow of trees or vmbrage.

Opera, rae, warke, labor.

Operae, plurali tantum, warkemen, laborers, factours.

Opera, warkes, buyldynges, pryuate or commune.

Operae est, it needs.

Opera mea, by my means.

Operam perdere, to labor in vain.

Operam Iudere, idem.

Operam ponere, to take labor and pain about a thing.

Operas reddere alicui, to pay to oone his hyre.

Orestes, and Lycurgus, una opera mihi sunt sodales qua iste, Orestes and
Lycurgus be as well my companyons as he.

Haud censebam istarum esse operarum patrem. I did not think that my father
meddled with these matters.

Spero alicunde hodie me bona opera aut mala tibi inuenturum esse auxilium
argentarium. I trust that ones to day I shall by good means or bad find
some money to help the with.

Operam do, operam impendo, operam nauo, I do mine endeavor, I put to my
diligence I spend my labor.

Operam impendere and dependere, to take pain about a thing.

Operam Iudimus, we lose our labor.

Operarius, a labourer.

Operarius, a, um, that which is done with labor, or pertayneth to labor or
warke.

Eadem opera, after one way.

Operatus, ta, tum, wrought.

Operatus. Liuius. Eo tempore quo corpus addictum atque operatum Reipu. esset,
During the time that the body shall be employed about seruyng the commune weal.

Operculo, are, to keuer a vessel.

Operculum, a keuerynge or lydde.

Opere praecium, profitable, necessary, a joyful thing, much to be esteemed.

Operimentum, any thing that keuereth.

Operio, rui, to keuer, or hyde.

Operior, riris, riri, to tarry, to abide.

Operor, aris, ari, to warke.

Operatio, the warke, or that whereaboute a man labors.

Operositas, tatis, trauaylynge.

Operosus, a, um, busy, dyligent in labourynge, laboryouse, peynefull.

Opertorium, a covering.

Opertus, ta, tum, keuered.

Ophestes, the son of Lycurgus slain by a serpente.

Ophiaca, pertaining to serpents, they were books, which Nicander, and
Petridius wrate, of the nature of serpents.

Ophiophagi, people in Ethiope, which do eat serpents.

Ophiucus, the name of Esculapius, because that he is ymagyned to hold a
serpent in his hand. some write that it is a sign in heaven, which some do call
Hercules, other Esculapius

Ophites, a stone having spots like a serpent.

Opthalmia, is a sycknes of the eyes, which inflameth the bones of the head,
the knyttynges of the eyes, the thyn skynnes thereof and synewes, and all the
holowe part of the eye, with the forhead and balls of the chekes, it comes
either of smoke or heat of the son, or duste, or by a fall, or a stroke, or
sometime of an humor, sanguyne, choleryke, fleumatyk, or melancholy.

Opici, they which used abominable ribaldry.

Opicus, ca, cum, unclean, dyshonest, shameless.

Opifex, ficis, a warkman, a crafts man.

Opificium, the warke. Opificina, idem.

Opigena, Juno. Juno was so called of women, because they supposed, that she
help them when they trauayled.

Opilio, onis, a sheparde.

Opima spolia, the spoil, which by one chief Captain is taken from an
other in battle as his cote armure or harneys.

Opima praedia, manours profitable of great revenues.

Opime, abundantly, rychely.

Opimo, are, to make fat.

Opimus, ma, mum, fat. also rich.

Opimium, seu opimianum uinum, wine which might endure good, two hundred years.

Opinabilis, le, that may be conceived in opinion.

Opinio, onis, opinyon, sometime hope, alsoo fame, estimation, judgment.

Opino, for opinor, I suppose.

Opinor, aris, ari, to suppose, to have opinion.

Opinatus, ta, tum, supposed.

Opinator, toris, a supposer.

Opipare, plentuousely.

Opiparus, a, um, abundant, fresh, or gaye.

Coena opipara, a delycate souper.

Opis, opem, aid, Terent. Nisi eum quantum dij dant tibi opis seruas. Except
thou keep him if god be thy good lord.

Nihil opus est in ipsis, They can not help or succor the. Omni open, with all
his might.

Opis, opis, a lady, companyon to Diana, she was alsoo wife to Saturnus, and
by her is signified the earth among the Poets.

Opistographus, a book written on the back side.

Opisthotonicus, he that can not turn his neck

Opisthotonos, the crycke or disease, which lets a man to turn his neck.

Opiter, itris, he whose father dyed before his graundfather.

Opitulor, aris, ari, to help.

Opitulator, toris, a helper.

Opitulus Jupiter, Jupiter the helper at need.

Opium, the juice of an herb called black popy, also Opius, is he that
fights in armure.

Opobalsamum, balm natural, which in a part of Judea, called Hieraconthe,
stylleth out of a little thorn.

Opoponax, acis, the juice of an herb called Panax.

Oporice, a medicine made of fruits.

Oporae, all fruits which do grow in the have end of summer.

Oporotheca, a place wherein fruit is kept.

Oportet, it behooves, it is expedient or necessary

Oppedo, dear, to fart against one.

Oppeto, tere, to dye, also to be slain.

Oppedere febrem, to fall into the fever.

Oppidanus, a citise^ or towns man, Opidicus, ide^.

Oppidatim, town by town.

Oppido, an aduerbe, sygnifienge very much, sometime it sygnifieth forthwith,
verily.

Oppidulum, a little town.

Oppidum, a wallyd town or city.

Oppignero, are, to lay in pledge.

Oppilo, are, to stop or shut.

Oppelo, ere, to fylle full.

Opploro, are, to lament.

Oppono, ere, to lay or put against, to oppose.

Opponere, to prepare a garyson to make defense

again a siege.

Opponere corpus pro patria, to put him self in danger for his country.

Opponere, to lay in gage.

Opponere causam, to lay an excuse.

Opponere nomen alicuius, to thretten with one, or in ones name.

Opportunus, na, number, that which is in dew time, and as it ought to be,
inclyned to a thing.

Oportunus iniuriae, feet or apt to take wrong.

Opportune, opportunately, conveniently, as it ought to be, in due time and
measure.

Oppositus, ta, tum, the participle to Oppono.

Oppositus, tus. Laterum nostroru^ oppositus and corporum pollicemur, We
promise that we will put our bodies and lives in ieoperdy for the defense thereof.

Oppositio, contrary setting or puttyng.

Oppressio, onis, an oppressyon or violatyng.

Per oppressione^ eripere, to take by violence.

Oppressor, oris, an oppressor, or he that does grieve or harm one.

Oppressus, the participle of opprimo.

Oppressus a praedonibus captus est, Being ouerlayde with thieves, he was taken.

Opprimo, ere, to oppress, to keep or shut in, to take suddenly, to rauysshe
a womanne, to grieve, to thruste hard.

Opprimi aere alieno, to be much in debt.

Opprimere animos formidine, to make them aferde.

Opprimere mentionem, to put a thing to silence.

Opprimi inuidia, to be hated.

Opprimere iuditio, to undo one by suite.

Opprimere orationem alicuius, to stop one in his tale.

Oppressus graui somno, He was in a dead sleep.

Nox certamina coepta oppressit, The night came on, and did let the contentions
which were begun.

Opprimere occasionem, to cause the occasion to be lost.

Opprimere pede, to tread under foot.

Opprimi ruina, to be slain with the falling down of some thing.

Opprimere bellum exortum, to cease the war that is begun.

Os opprime, stop his mouth.

Opprimere aliquem, to take one unawares.

Opprimere aliquem consilio, to overcome one by wisdom.

Opprobrium, and opprobramentu^, a reproach.

Opprobro, are, to obiecte against one, to reproach.

Opprobratio, rebukefull speaking.

Oppugno, are, to assault.

Oppugnare bona alicuius, to assay means to make one to lose his goods.

Oppugnare aliquem capite and fortunis, to cause one to lose his life and
goods.

Oppugnare uerbis commoda patriae, To speak against the profit of his
country.

Oppugnatio, an assiege or assault against a fortress.

Oppugnator, toris, he that lets the profit of an other man, or gothe
about to do him dyspleasure.

Ops, opis, the sister and wife of Saturn: also it sygnifyeth aid or help.

Opes, richesse, puissance or power.

Opsonator, atoris, a purueyour of vytayles, or Catar.

Opsonatus, tus, and opsonatio, preparation for dinner or supper.

Opsonito, tare, to prepare often for dinner or souper.

Opsonium, all thing belonging to a meal, except bread and drink.

Opsono, nare, and obsonor, onari, to prepare things necessary for dinner,
souper, or banquet.

Optabilis, le, that which is desired.

Optabiliter, pleasantly, dylectably.

Optato, with desire.

Optato aduenis, ye be welcome.

Optatum loquere, speak courteysly, speak not so rygorousely.

Optice, the science whereby the reason of sight is known.

Opticus, ca, cum, perspectife, pertaining to syghte.

Optimates, the head men of a city, alsoo they which defend the part of
nobylitie and rich men.

Optima fide, without fraud.

Optimatus, tus, the state or condition of head men of a town or countray.

Optime, very well.

Optimo iure, with good aid, or with good reason.

Optimus, best or very good.

Optio, the choice, the request or desire. it was also to a capytayne in
wars, a mynyster to do his commandment, and he assystent unto him.

Optionem facere, to give the choice to one.

Optionem dare, idem.

Si optio esset, if I, thou, or he might chose.

Optio, in the masculine gender, preaste money which souldyours do receive to
provide their necessaries.

Opto, tare, to desire, to chouse, to require. Adopto, coopto, exopto, uide
suis locis.

Opulento, tare, to make rich or plentuouse.

Opulentus, ta, tum, rich, abundant.

Opulentia, and opulentitas, richesse, abundance

Opulenter, rychely, plentuousely.

Opulesco, scere, to be rich.

Opulus, a wyche hasyll tree.

Opuncalo, he that syngethe like to a shepeherde.

Opus, opuntis, a city in Locris.

Opus, operis, a warke, a labor. Eius opere, by his mean or dylygence.

Opus est, it is necessary, or need. Si opus sit, if need be.

Opus intestinum, that which most commonly is called implementes of householde,
properly of timber, as fourmes, stools, cupbourdes and other like things.

Opus est conuento. Ita res subita est, celeriter mihi hoc homine opus est, The
chance is so sudden, or the matter requires such haste, that I must needs
speak with the man shortly or quyckely.

Opus est facto, it must needs be done, or executed.

Opus est remissam. Vosmet uidete iam Laches and tu Pamphile, remissam opus sit
nobis an reductam domum, Now Laches and Pamphile advise your selves well,
whither it be necessary, that she be sent home, or fetched home.

Opus sunt tibi, thou haste need of them. Vt cum desponderim, des qui aurum ac
uestem, atque alia quae opus sunt, That when I have affyaunced her, thou
deliver money and apparayl, and al other things needful. Opere maxumo, with
all means possible, in most hearty wise. Rex Seleucus me opere orauit maxumo,
ut sibi latrones cogerem, King Seleucus desired me, as much as he possyblye
moughte, that I would geate him souldyours to be about his person.

Thais maximo te orabat, opere ut cras redires, Thais desired the as hartyly as
she can, that thou woldeste comme again to morrow.

Opusculum, a little warke.

O ANTE R.
ORA, the extreme part of every thing, as the edge, the brym, the skyrtes, the
hemme, the border, the cabull that tyeth the ship. It is also a clyme or
particion of the fyrmament.

Ora uulneris, the over parts of the wound.

Ora marittima, the sea side.

Oraculum, where aunsweres were given by ydolles: sometime the answer,
sometime the saying of some wise man.

Oraculum edidit Deus, god said.

Orarium, the vestement, wherein the priest does say mass.

Orata, a fyshe called a gylte head.

Oration, an oration, a prayer.

Orator, toris, an orator.

Oratoria, Rhetorike.

Oratoriae, like an orator, or in form of Rhetorike.

Oratorius, a, um, pertaining to an orator.

Oratus, tus, prayer.

Orbelon, a place in Thracia where Orpheus did dwell.

Orbs, dyshes, the holes of the eyes. sommetyme the eyes.

Orbem facere, where people do gather them round together in battle.

Orbi, they which have lost their chylderne, also orphans.

Orbiculatus, ta, tum, made round.

Orbiculus, a little cerkle, also a pully.

Orbicus, ca, cum, round.

Orbile, lis, the circuit of a roufe.

Orbis, a cerkle, also the world.

Orbita, a wheel. sommetyme the tracke that wheles do make in the ground.

Orbitas, the lack of chylderne: sometime the lack of a father. also any
lack.

Orbitus, ta, tum, round as a cerkle.

Orbo, are, to depryue.

Orbus, proprely blind. sometime lacking any thing.

Orca, a great monster of the sea, also a greatte vesselle, as a butte or vate,
wherein R^nnyshe wine is put. Alsoo a box, wherein dyce be shaken, and after
thrown on the tables, sometime a coffer, wherein womennes payntynge is kept.

Orcas promontorium, the north end of Scotland.

Orchades, thyrtye Isles in the sea by Scotland.

Orchestra, a place, wherein the Senators and honorable persons sat to
behold plays.

Orchis, an herb called also Satyrion, it is also a certain kind of fyshe.

Orchomenus, a mountain in Thessaly. alsoo a city in Euboea.

Orcomana, a beer, whereon dead corses do lie.

Orcula, a rundelet.

Orcus, a river of hell. alsoo an another in Thessaly. it is sometime taken for
hell.

Ordeaceus, a, um, of barley.

Ordinarius, a, um, wherein order is observed ordinary, sometime a skoffer or
gester.

Ordinare, to order or dispose.

Ordior, iris, orsus, iri, to begin to speak.

Ordo, dinis, order, the dew place, the astate of men.

In ordinem redigere, to keep one within his bounds, that he do not excede his
degree.

Ordines, is in battle that, which is called the raye.

Ordines seruare, to keep the raye.

Ordine ponere, to set in a raye.

Ordo longus, a great multitude.

Ordines ducere, to be a captain.

In ordinem cogere, to bring under obeysaunce, to correct them, which be
out of order.

Ordines conturbare, to break or skatter the raye.

Ordinatim, in order.

Ordinatio, ordinance.

Ordoluci, hills which do diuyde Scotland and England, called now Cheuiet.

Orea, the bytte for a horse.

Oreus, a name of Bacchus.

Orestes, the son of Agamemnon.

Ore tenus, to the mouth.

Oreto, or Oria, A town in Spain called Calatraua.

Orexis, is most taken for vomyte, all be it it sygnifieth appetite to eat.

Organa, all instruments of musyke.

Organum, an instrument pertaynyng to building, also an ordinance of wars.

Organarij, makers of instruments.

Orgia, ceremonies or songs, pertaining to infernal goddis, or to Bacchus.

Orgyia, a measure contaynynge six foot, Suidas does write that it is the
space, which is contained between the hands stretched abroad, which I
suppose is a spanne.

Oria, a fysshers boot.

Orichalcum, a mettalle, which as I suppose is lattyn.

Oriculum, for auricula, a little care.

Oricos, a city of Epire.

Oriens, orientis, the East.

Orificium, the mouth of any thing.

Origanum, an herb called organny.

Origines, called also Adamantius borne at Alexandria in Egypt was son of
one Leonides the martyr, a man of most excellent kounnynge and virtue from
his chyldhode, wherein he so wonderfully prosperyd, that being an infaunt he
lyenge on sleep, his father camme into the chaumber, and taking away softely
the clothes, he kyssed the chyldes breaste, as a Temple having within it the
holy gooste, gyuynge thanks to God, that had sent to him such a son. At
the time that his father was martred. Origene being alsoo desyrouse of
martyrdom, yet a young child, ran in among other, which were led to be
slain, and by all means proffered him self to dye with them. Which his
mother perceyuyng, who most entierly loved him, she first lamentably intreted
him to withdraw him, but he therewith was more inflamed toward martyrdom than
withdrawn. wherefore his mother used this craft, at night when he was in his
bed, she stale away his clothes, so that in the morning wha^ he would have
gone forth, he might not come by them, wherefore he was constrained to tarry at
home. Which deceit of his mother he complained to his father than being in
prison, desyrnge him to persyst constantely in his good purpose. After the
martyrdom of his father, he contynually gave him self to the study of holy
Scripture, which he had tasted before, in reading Gentyles warkes by his
fathers instruction. All be it in Phylosophye and all other scyences, he did
excelle all other men of his time, before that he was twentye years old. At
eyghtene years old, he expoundynge openly Gentile Authors, he so interlaced
holy doctrine, that he converted to the faith of Christ many great lernyd
men which were his hearers. His living was alsoo so straight and virtuous,
that he drew many until him, and was among all men had in a wonderful
reverence. yet he never ceased in all persecutions, to comfort and confyrme
men in the imbracynge of martyrdom, and did contynually read openly, and
alsoo write innumerable books in the expoundynge of holy scripture. Not
withstanding that he alsoo lernyd the Hebrew toungue perfytely, he went into
diverse countrayes preaching. And for the greatte fame that was of him,
Mammea, the mother of the Emperor Alexander Seuerus sent for him to Rome, and
herd him, and as sum do suppose was by him converted. Whereof ye may read in
the book which I translated out of Eucolpius, and called it the Image of
Governance. He most straightly observed all the precepts of the Gospel, in
contynuall fastings and watchynges, having but oone garment, and going always
bare foted, and counsayllynge all his hearers to renounce all that they had,
and to give it in alms. He also gelded him self, not only to be the more
chaste, but alsoo for because that in the time of persecution he taught the
word of God, as well pryuilye as openly to men and womenne, he might let
that the Paynyms should not speak dysshonestye of him, and of those, which
repaired to his Sermones and lessons, which although he did secretelye, yet
God would not have it hid, so that it camme to the ear of Demetrius the
bishop of Alexandria, who first wonderynge a^te the stomach and virtue of
the manne, praysyng the feruentnes of his faith, he said unto him, Now
stycke to thy doctrine and preaching, sens thou haste not left unto thine
adversaries any occasyon of suspycion: but afterward the same Demetrius styred
with envy against Origene, laid it in reproach against him openly, finding
nothing else wherewith to dysprayse him. He that will know more of Origene,
let him read the.vi. book of Eusebius in historia ecclesiastica, and saynct
Hierome De scriptoribus ecclesiastic. he was after the incarnation of Christ.
204. years.

Originalis, le, that which one has from his birth.

Origo, ginis, a beginning, kind.

Orion, the son of Neptunus. sum feigned that he came of the vryne of
Iupyter, Mercury, and Neptune in this wise. One Enopius when he had lodged
those goddis, and had killed for them an ox, he desired of them to grant to
him a son, than those three pyssed in the hyde of the ox, which being laid
in the ground, thereof came Orion, as it were Vrion, For Ouros in greek, is
vryne. Orion being an hunter, when he would have defloured Diana, he was slain
with a scorpyon, and translated among the sterres, and there is the sign
called in latyne Iugula.

Orior, eris, and oriris, riri, to be borne, to rise, to appear.

Oriundus, commen by auncetours out of some country or city. sometime borne.
Nati Carthagine, sed oriundi a Syracusis, Borne at Carthage, but by ancetours
descended from Syracuse in Sicile.

Oriza, a grain called Ryce, which is most commonly eaten in Lent, with
almond milk.

Orizon, is the furthermost part of the fyrmament, that man's eye can determyne.

Orminium, an herb like to horehounde.

Ornamenta, sommetyme does sygnifye those which are worthy praise.

Ornamentum, apparayle, also honor, praise or commendation.

Ornithoboscion, a house where poultrye is fed, a cowpe.

Ornithon, thonis, a place wherein birds are kept.

Orno, nare, to garnysshe, to deck or trymme, to make fair, to prepare, to
make meet, to honor with some authority or dygnitie, also to praise.

Ornare suffragio, to help one with his voice or good report.

Ornare fugam, to run away.

Ornate, trymly, gorgeousely.

Ornatus, he that is in great dygnytie or authorytie.

Ornatissimam de me sententiam dixit, He gave me a very honorable report.

Ornatus, ta, tum, apparayled, trymmed, garnished, instructed, fournyshed.

Ornatus, tus, apparayle, trymmyng, deckyng.

Ornus, a wild ash with great leaves.

Oro, orare, to pray, to demand, to speak openly and eloquentely, as
Orators do, to plead.

Orobanche, an herb growing among beans or peasyn and destroys them.

Orobia, a kind of Frankyncense in lyttelle graynes.

Orobitis, a green color like to the blaades of corn.

Orobum, a kind of poulse corn I suppose it is Tares, look before in Eruum.

Orontes, a river by the city of Antioche.

Orphanus, he which lacks his father and fatherly succor.

Orpheus, borne in Thracia son of Oeagrius, or as some do write of Apollo
and Calliope, and aunciente poet and most excellent harper, who as the
poets surmysed, did delight beasts and infernalle spyrytes, and me^yd stones
with the sweetness of his armonye. whereby he recovered his wife Eury dices
out of hell, at the last he was slain with lyghtnynge, or as some do write,
was torn into pieces with women.

Orrea, a town in England called new Castle.

Orosius, a wourshypful priest borne in Spayn right eloquente and expert in
hystoryes, he wrate seven books against them, which said that the decay of
the commune weal of Rome, happened by the doctrine of Christ. he was sent by
saint Augustyue unto sayte Hierome, who was than in Judea, to learn of him the
raison of the state of the soul.

Orsus, he began.

Orsus, he that begins to do a thing.

Orsus, a, um, begun.

Orthodoxia, the right opynion or faith.

Orthodoxus, a man of the right oppynyon or faith.

Orthogonus, a right corner.

Orthographia, the right form of writynge. it is also a platte for building,
wherein is painted or set out the figure of the holle warke with the reasons
of the same.

Orthopnoea, a disease, when a man ran not fetch his breathe, but holding
his neck^ vpryght.

Orthopnoeci, they which have that syckenesse.

Orthostadios, a garment, which was always worn vngyrte.

Orto luce, as soon as it was day.

Ortus, ti, uide Hortus.

Orti pensiles, gardeynes made on howses, or pyllours.

Ortus, ta, tum, borne, sprunge, begun.

Ortus, tus, the birth or nativity. Also the rysynge of the son.

Ortygia, the name of an isle.

Ortyx, tygis, a bird called a quayle.

Oryx, gis, a beast of the kind of gotes.

O ANTE S.
OS, oris, the mouth, also the visage, some time the proporcion of all the
body. sometime countenance, also presence, and language.

In ore est omni populo, all the people speaks of him.

Omnes uno ore authors fuere, They were all of one accord.

Os ad male audiendum prebere, to suffer him to rebuke him to his face.

Per ora hominum ferri, to be publysshed or spoken abroad.

Os distorquere, to set his mouth a wrye, to mock with the mouth.

Os ducere, idem.

Os durum, a shameless person.

Os impudens, idem.

Os alicui laedere, to say ylle of oone to his face.

Os hominis insignemque impudentiam cognoscite, Consider you the boldness and
presumption of this fellow.

Duarum and uiginti gentium ore loquebatur, He spoke xxii. languages.

Os portus, the entrye of an haven.

Os sublinire, to mock or deceive craftyly, with fair promyses.

Ossiculum, the diminutiue of Os.

Os, ossis, a bone Ossum, idem.

Osae, laws concerning devotion.

Osanna, I pray the save us.

Osasum, for Odi, I hate.

Oscedo, dinis, yanynge or gapynge. sommetyme stenche.

Osci, people in Italy.

Oscillo, are to bow down.

Oscilla, little images of wax to be offered.

Oscillum, a little mouth. sometime a little image or poppette.

Oscines, birds, which by their voices do sygnyfie somewhat to come or
happen.

Oscinum, a general name of birds, which do sing, a singing bird.

Oscis, the abhomynable use of carnal sin.

Oscito, tare, to gape, as men do for lack of sleep.

Oscitor, tari, idem.

Oscitatio, gapynge. Alsoo quyetenesse from labor.

Oscitans, he that gapeth as it were for lack of sleep. also he that cares
for nothing, sure, fearing nothing, neglygent.

Oscitanter, softely, without any courage, as if one were almooste on sleep.
Alsoo neglygentely.

Oscitabunde, idem.

Osculana pugna, battle, wherein they, which were before vaynquysshed, have
the vyctorye.

Osculatio, kissing.

Osculum, a little mouth. also a kiss.

Osiris, the son of Iupyter and Niobe, the first king of Argyues, and after
leauyng that royalme to his brother, he went into Egypt, and there he raygned
and married Isis, finally he was slain by Typho his brother, and was long
sought for by Isis his wife, who at the last fyndyng his body, she buried it
in an isle called Abatos, where the Egyptians afterward fyndyng an ox, they
supposed that Osiris was become a god, and taking that ox with them to the
city of Memphis, they honored him for a god, and calling him Apis, they
ordained to him certain ceremonies, a little while after, they drownynge him
in the river, they sought for an another like ox with waylynge and weepynge,
which being founden, they cried with much gladness, and brought him to the
city, He was before the incarnation of Christ 2012. years.

Osyris, is also an herb, which some do suppose to be wild lynne or wild
flax.

Ossa, a high mountain in Thessaly.

Osseus, a, um, bony, or of a bone, as hard as a bone.

Ossiculatim, oone boon from an another in pieces.

Ossifragus, ga, gum, that which breakethe boones.

Ossilegium, a gatherynge of boones.

Ossiculum, a little bone.

Ossuaria, a shryne or like thing, where the bones of dead men are put.

Oftendo, di, dear, to show.

Ostendere se, sieve animum suum, to declare his courage, or what he intends
to do.

Ostendere se uirum, to prove him self a man, to do valiantly.

Ostentatio, boostynge.

Ostentare periculum capitis, to menace one to kill him, or to cause him to dye
as a transgressour.

Ostentare iugulum pro capite alterius, to offer to dye, to save the life of an
other man.

Ostentata occasio, the occasyon present.

Ostentare spem, to put in hope.

Ostento, ostentare to show often. also to bost, or aduaunt.

Ostentui esse, to be poynted at.

Ostentum, a thing which happens seldom, and betokens, that some strange
thing shall happen. As a blasyng sterre, thunder on a fair day. Sometime it
sygnifieth a thing monstruouse.

Osten tus, tus, a skorne.

Ostia, ostiorum, the entrees of great ryuers, sometime havens.

Ostia, a town night to Rome.

Ostiarius, a porter.

Ostiatim, from door to door.

Ostiensis, a little haven at Rome.

Ostigo, the skabbe which happens to sheep.

Ostium, a door or gate.

Ostracismus, a manner of exylynge of men at Athenes, which excellyd other in
power or authorytie: which exyle was done by delyuerynge of oyster shelles,
wherein the name of him, which should be exyled, was written.

Ostracum, a shelle.

Ostrea, an oyster.

Ostreum, idem.

Ostrearius panis, Brown bread, the which men are wont to eat with oysters.

Ostreatus, ta, tum, hard as an oyster.

Ostrifer, the place in the sea, which is apt to engender oysters.

Ostrinae uestes, garments of purple color.

Ostrum, purple, or other like color.

Osus, osurus, participles of Odi.

Osus sum, osus es, osus est, I hate, thou hate, he hates.

O ANTE T.
OTHRIS, a mountain of Thessalye, where dwelled the people called Lapithae.

Otior, swyfter.

Otior, ari, to be ydell or at rest.

Otiose, ydelly, at leisure, surely, without care.

Otiosus, a, um, ydell, sure, without care.

Otiosus dies, holy day, a playenge day.

Otiosus animus. Terent. Animo iam nunc otioso esse impero, Now I charge the
care for nothing.

Otiosa res, a thing that requires no care or study.

Otiosae sententiae, sentences which have no virtue or power to move the
audience.

Otiosus studiorum, he that studyeth nothing

Otiose dormire, to sleep without care, or to sleep soundly.

Otiose negotium gerere, to go neglygently about his busynes.

Otiose, care thou not.

Otium, ydelnesse, vacation from labor. alsoo leisure, rest, quietness,
contrary to labor and business.

Tenere otium, to maynteyne quyetnes.

Suppeditare otium studio, to pass the time in study.

In otio esse, to sytte at home and do nothing.

Abundare otio, to have much leisure.

Affluere otio, idem.

Otium operis, when they labor no more.

Otij plurimi res, the matter requires leyser.

Othryades, a man's name of Lacedemonia.

Othrys, a hylle in Thessaly.

Otides, birds like to partryches.

Otus, a shryche oule.

O ANTE V.
OValis corona, a garlande of myrtelles, given unto him, which had victory
without effusion of bloudde.

Ouatio, a small triumph of a prince or capytayne, which had vyctorye of his
enemies without slaughter of men, or where battle was not denounced: in the
which triumph the captain went on foot, or (...) ride on a horse, with a
garlande of (...) on his head, and his souldyours (...) about him.

Ouatus, ta, tum, which is in (...) of an egg.

Ouans, ouantis, reioysynge, being joyful.

Ouidius, surnamyd Naso, borne in a town called Sulmo, and brought up in Rome,
and diligently instructed in latin letters, from his tender age, he gave most
diligent study to the making of verses, from the which he was withdrawn by
his father, and put to lern retorike, where in a while he much profited and was
in the noumbre of the best orators of that time, and was advanced to sundry
authorities and made a senator. Not withstanding he chiefly did dedicate him
self unto poetry, wherein by nature he was made excellent in facylitie and
abundaunce of sentences, he was in good favor with the emperor Augustus. of
whom at the last he was exyled into Pontus, where he spent the rest of his
life in a town called Tomos, among people most barbarouse, who not
withstanding lamented his death, for his courtaysye and gentylnesse of manners.
The cause of his exyle is uncertain, saving that some do suppose that it was
for abusing Iulia daughter of the emperor Augustus, although the pretense of
the emperor was, for the making of the book of the craft of love, whereby
young minds might be styrred to wantonness. He was before the Incarnation of
Christ. years.

Ouicula, a little sheep.

Ouifera gallina, a broude hen.

Ouile, a fold or sheep house.

Ouillus, a, um, of a sheep.

Ouinus, a, um, idem.

Ouis, a sheep.

Ouo, are, to rejoice with noise or voice in a multitude.

Ouum, an egg.

Ouum ouo simile, one egg like an another, applied unto them, which be like of
conditions or person.

Ouo prognatus eodem, of one father and mother, or brought up under one
master, or in one school.

O ANTE X.
OXacantha, a barbery tree, callid of some Berberis.

Oxellu^, a city in England callid Chester.

Oxycratum, water and vyneger sodden together, called also Posca.

Oxygala, sower milk.

Oxygarum, sharp sauce.

Oxylapathon, sorrel. Oxalis, idem.

Oxylla, great sorrel.

Oxymeli, honey and vynegre sodden together.

Oxyphoenix, nicis, the tree which bears the fruit called of the
apothecaries Tamarindi.

Oxypora, oyntementes and emplaysters myxt with vyneger, to the intent that the
virtue of the other ingredic^ce may the better penetrate

Oxyporon, sharp sauce.

Oxyporopola, he that sells meat in sharp sauce or sowce.

Oxyrinchus, a city in Aegypte, so named of a fyshe called Oxyrinchus, for as
much as the Egyptians worshypped two fysshes for goddis, that is to say,
Lepidoru^ and Oxyrinchu^, also two birds, a hawke, and the bird called Ibis.
also two beasts, an ox, a dog and a catte, and some honored a crocodyle,
and some Ichneumon, a lyttel beast, which kylleth the crocodyle. in the said
city was the fysh called Oxyrinchus specially worshipped.

Oxysaccharum, sugre and vynegre sodden together, of some men called Syrupus
acetosus symplex.

Oxytoca, medicines to make a woman to bring forth her birth quyckely.

d Oxytriphillon, an herb called Sorrel de boys or Alleluya. Oxys, idem.

O ANTE Z.
OZE, stynkynge of the nose.

Ozena, soores in the nose, which causes a stynkyng savor in the nose.

Ozinum, an herb called basyll.

P ANTE A.
PABVLARIS, pabulare, perteynynge to forage or meat for beasts.

Pabulatio, forragynge.

Pabulator, a forragiour.

Pabulor, aris, ari, to go in forragynge. sometime to feed, as a beast does.

Pabulum, forage or meat for beasts.

Pacate, peasybly.

Pace tua, pace uestra, by thy license, by your leave, or license.

Pachiri, hills in the less Asia.

Pachisos, a river of Sicile.

Pachynus, a mountain in Sicile, on the sea side, or an elbowe of the land
there, which now is called Cauo pascinio.

Pacifer, feri, a brynger of peace.

Pacificatorius, a, um, that which does pacifye.

Pacifico, care, to pacifye.

Paciscor, sceris, sci, to make couenaunte, to bargayne.

Pacisci uitam ab host, to render him to his ennemy his life only saved.

Cum Xerxe nuptias, filiae eius paciscitur, I agreed to mary the daughter of
Xerxes.

Pactus est duo millia, he couenanted to give two thousand.

Paco, are, to mittigate, to apease, to accord.

Pactilis, le, platted. Pactilis corona, a platted garlande.

Pactio, an accord, agreement, a treatise.

Pactitius, a, um, done upon condition.

Pactoliopes, exceeding richesse.

Pactolus, a river in Lydia, having golden gravel.

Pactum, sometime a participle sygnifyeng couenaunted, promised, sometime a
nowne, signifyenge a couenaunte.

Pactum transitionis, a saulfe conduit, to pass from one country to an other,
a pasporte. Has tibi nos pactus legibus dare iussit. He commanded us to give
this money upon a condition.

Pactae induciae, truce accorded.

Alio pacto, otherwise

Nullo pacto, in no wise.

Eo pacto, in this manner of wise.

Pacuuius, a famous writer of Tragedies born at Brundusium in Calabria, was
susters son of Ennius the poet, he is commended of Quintiliane for the
gravity of his sentences, the ponderousenesse of his words, and the
authority of the personages, which are in which are in his tragedies and
commedies that somewhere his style seems very rude, is to be ascribed to the
time and not to his faut He lived until the age of lxxxx years before the
coming of Christ years.

Padus, a famous river in Italy which there is named Po. Cato in originibus,
says that the Tuscanes called it Botigon, the Liguryans. Botigum, Plinius
calls it Bodincum that is to say having no bottom, the Greeks did call it
Eridanus, it comes out of the hill called Vesulus, which is the highest
part of the mountains called Alps, and runs by the marches of Liguria,
and so passes under the ground and ryseth eftesones in the country called
Vibonensis, and caryeth with him.xxx. other ryuers in to the Veneciane se,
named Adriaticum.

Padusa, a river which some say is an arm of the Po.

Paean, an hymn in the praise of Apollo, sometime the same Apollo. It is now
taken for any hymn, made to the laud of God, or our Lady.

Paegdaium, lodging for servants and children.

Paedagogium, a bond servant.

Paedagogus, he that is appointed to awayt on children to se them well ordered.

Paedaretus, a man's name.

Paederastes, a lover of children in unhonest wise.

Paederastia, a viciouse love of children.

Paederotes, a preciouse stone called also Opalion, there appears in it the
fyry bryghtnes of the Carbuncle, the shynynge pourple color of the Amatist,
the grene sea of the emeraulde, all shynynge to gether with an incredible
mixture. Pli. li. 37. ca. 6. There is also a bremble and herb, whereof Plinius
makes mention. li. 19. ca. 8. and Dioscorides. li. 3. et 4. called Paedaeros,
some suppose it to be a kind of berefore.

Paedia, erudition and institution in good arts as Gellius teaches.

Paedico, paedicaui, paedicare, to commytte buggery.

Paedor, paedoris, sluttyshnesse, uncleanness, fylthe.

Paedotribes, and pedotriba, a scholemayster.

Paeon, a foot in meter, which is of one long syllable and three short.

Paeonia, an herb called Pyonie. also a country in Europa, and is a part of
Macedony.

Paestum, a city in Lucania, where there is abundaunce of roses.

Paestanus, na, number, of that city.

Paetus, he that looks as if his eyes were half closed.

Paganalia, ploughmens holy day, as wakes be now adays.

Paganus, a man of the country, or of the vyllage. it is also he that desires
to be in the nu^bre of soldiers, and is not yet admitted.

Pagasa, a town of Thessaly, which after was called Demetrias.

Pagatim, vyllage by vyllage.

Pagina, the side of a leaf in a book. it is also the place in the trayle of a
vine where every branch is fastnyd.

Paginula, a little side of a leaf in a book.

Pago, gis, pepigi, gere, pactus, to make covenant, or contracte.

Pagus, a vyllage.

Pagyris, the name of a river and of a city, of which the people are called
Pagyritae.

Pala, a spade. also a piele to put in breadde in to the oven. also a sanne
to make wind. also the brodest part of a ring.

Palae, wedges or pieces, or gaddes of mettalle when it is fined.

Palaca, pieces of fine gold.

Palaemon, onis, was called a god of the sea.

Palaestina, a countreye in Syrie, ioynynge to Araby, called in holy scripture
Philistum.

Palaestra, a wrastlynge place. also the exercise of wrastlyng. It is also the
comelynes of mouynge and gesture, according to the state or degree of the
person, which shows it.

Palaestricum, idem.

Palaestricus, a wrastler.

Palaestricus, ca, cum, pertaining to wrastlyng

Palaestrita, he that uses wrastlynge.

Palam, openly before men, that al me^ mayse it.

Palam facere, to reuele or bring to open knowledge.

Res palam est, the matter is openly known. or the thing is manifest.

Palamedes, the son of Nauplus king of the isle called Euboia, a valyant
capytayn of the greeks, at the siege of Troy, where by the false surmyse of
Ulysses, he was slain of his people it is written of him that he found certain
letters of greek by the order of a flight of cranes.

Palangae, leauers or porters, wherewith they lift and bear timber, and such
like things of great weight.

Palango, are, to bear on leauers or porters.

Palangari, men which do bear on leyuers or porters, things of great poyse
or weight.

Palatiar, and Palatual, a sacrifyce done at Rome on the hill called Palatinum.

Palatio, onis, a foundation made in a maryse ground with pyles of timber.

Palantes, they that wander about, and wot not whyther to go.

Palanteum, a city builded on the hylle called Palatinus.

Palantia, the daughter of Euander.

Palantia, a city in Arragonia.

Palatha, a tarte of fygges.

Palatim, an aduerbe sygnifienge scattered and wandrynge here and there.

Palatina officia, offices within a princes palayce or court.

Palatinus mons, an hill at Rome.

Palatium, a palaise of an Emperor or great king.

Palatus, seu palatum, the roufe of the mouth.

Palea, chafe of corn, also a grystell, which falls down from the neck
of a cock or capon.

Palearium, the Dewelappe of a rudder beast, also a place, wherein chafe is
kept.

Paleatus, made or myxte with chafe.

Pales, called goddess of shepeherdes and of pasture.

Palene, a city, so called of Pallena, the daughter of Sython, and wife of
Cletus.

Palepaphos, a city of Cypres.

Palescamander, a river in Troy.

Palicenus, a fountain in Sicilia.

Palilia, shepeherdes holidays kept in the honor of Pales.

Palimpsestus, parchemente rased.

Palingenesia, a regeneration or second natiuytie.

Palinodia, a contrary song, or retractynge of that, which one has spoken
or written: Now of some men called a recantynge.

Palinodiam canere, to retracte that, which one has spoken or written.

Palinurus, was the Master of the ship wherein Aeneas camme in to Italye.
Also an elbowe of the land of Sycile in to the sea.

Paliurus, a bryer, which bears a cod, wherein are three or four black
seeds, I suppose by the description both of Theophrastus and Dioscorides,
that is the fyrse or gorss, although in some place it may be greater than in
an other place.

Palla, a womannes gown.

Palace, a concubine.

Palladium, the image of Pallas.

Palladius, a man's name, which wrote of housbandry.

Pallancana, a sharp oynion, which causes the eyes to water.

Palladius, a, um, that longs to Pallas.

Pallas, antis, the son of Euander, sometime king of Latynes, also a giant,

Pallas, adis, called goddess of battle, and also of wisdom.

Pallax, acis, a concubine, such as one keeps instead of his wife.

Palleo, lui, lere, to be pale.

Pallescere, idem.

Palliastrium, a course mantell.

Palliate fabulae, comedies or enterludes made in Grecia, and the personages
therein were Greeks, as Togatae fabulae, were enterludes in Rome, and the
personages Romans, so called because the ouermoste habyte of Greeks was
called Pallium, of the Romans Toga.

Palliatus, cladde in a mantell.

Pallio, are, to concele or hyde.

Palliolatim amictus, cladde in a palle.

Palliolatus, idem.

Palliolum, a short mantelle.

Pallium, a mantell, such as knights of the garter do were.

Pallor, oris, a palenesse of color.

Paluster, stris, tree, and tra, trum, of the fenne.

Palma, the palm of the hand. also a measure called a handebrede, sometime an
ore to row with. Also a palm tree or date tree. sometime it sygnifyeth vyctorye.

Palma christi, called also Buchaides, an herb of the kind of Satyrion, but
having rotes like the palm of ones hand.

Palmam praeripere, to take the praise or honor from an other.

Palmare facinus, an act worthy the palma or sign of vyctorie.

Palmarium, worthy the sign or token of vyctorye.

Palmaria spacia, a handbrede space.

Palmata, and palmaris uestis, a garmente of bawdekyn, which the consule did
wear in time of peace, and the vyctour in time of war.

Palms, itis, the small and tender branches, most properly of a vine.

Palmetum, the place, wherein date trees do grow.

Palmeus, a, um, of a palm tree.

Palmifer, and palmiger, that bears palm, or date trees.

Palmipedalis, a measure of a foot and handebrede.

Palmipedes aues, all birds, which have hole fete, as commonly al water fowls
have.

Palmipes, splay footed.

Palmyra, a great castle or fortress in the myddell of Syria.

Palmyrena, a country in Syrie.

Palmo, are, to bind to gether: Also to do any thing with the palm of the
hand.

Palmosus, full of palm trees.

Palmula, a little oore or sculle. also a date.

Palmus, and palmeum, a measure. If it be palmus mayor, it is of five fyngers,
or a hand dredth. if it be minor, it is but four fingers

Palo, are, to hedge or pale in: also to wander.

Palor, palaris, to go a sunder here and there scattered.

Palpebrae, the hears which do grow on the cheeks.

Palpitatio, quakynge of the flesh.

Palpito, tare, to quake or tremble.

Palpator, toris, and palpo, ponis, a flatterer.

Palpatio, flattery.

Palpo, and palpor, ari, to feel, also to flatter.

Paludamentum, a cote armure, it was also a womannes garment.

Paludatus, clad in a cote armure.

Palumbarius, a certain hawke, which is long and black, and flies the
most part by night.

Palumbes palumbis, a wood culuer.

Palumbina caro, the flesh of a wood culuer

Paluster, tris, tree, perteynynge to fenne or maryse.

Palus, li, a stake or post.

Palus, paludis, a fenne or marise.

Pamisus, one of the five pryncipall ryuers of Thessalia.

Pamphylia, a region in the less Asia, lienge on the south side of the
mountayn Taurus and marches on the realms of Phrigia and Caria.

Pamphagi, people in Ethiopia, which do eat of all manner of things.

Pampillum, a chariotte.

Pampilona, a city in the realm of Nauer.

Pampinarium, a heap of grene branches, it is also the tender branch,
which grows out of the hard tree.

Pampinarius, a, um, and pampineus, a, um, of grene branches.

Pampino, are, to cut of the small branches of a vine, or to pull away the
leaves that the son may come to the rote.

Pampinula, an herb called also Pimpinella.

Pampinus, a vine leaf, or grene branch.

Panagron, a great swepe net, which takes all manner of fyshe.

Pan, panis, called the god of shepeherds.

Panagyris, a commune assembly of people, be it a fair, mart, markette, high
feast, or ceassions: also the place where those assemblyes be.

Panagyrica oration, and Panagyricum carme^ that which was recited in prose or
verse at such an assembly.

Panaria ebrietas, Coelius writes that he has rad for Arrogantia, and
licentia.

Panax, acis, an herb which has a leaf like to the leaves of a fygge tree.
Also a long stalk mosye, and on the top a knappe, wherein are sweet seeds, with
a sharp sent, and has a yelowe flower, and growith in diverse parties of
Grecia.

Panarium, a pantry, where bread is kept.

Panathenea, were among the Athenienses certain solemn ceremonies, whereof
some were great and kept every fyfth year, some were less, and they were
yearly celebrate, they were sometime called Athenaea.

Panchaia, a region in Arabie, called also Sabaea.

Pancarpia, a garland made of diverse flowers, or of all flowers that may be
found.

Pancraciastes, a man expert and excellent in all feasts of actiuitie.

Pancratium, exercise in all feats, as wrestling, runnynge, leaping, casting
of the bar, and other like exercyses of strength.

Pancratius, he that does exercise the said feats.

Panchrestum, a saulue for every sore.

Pancreum, is between flesh and kernel lienge between the stomach and the
liver.

Panda, a city in Inde, where the great Alexander builded the third city of
his name, the vttermoste end of his iournaye. Also in the same place were
aulters builded by Bacchus, and after by Hercules, thanne by the queen
Semiramis, last by Cyrus.

Pandana porta, a gate of the city of Rome, which was first and last
opened, for all things to be brought into the city.

Pandecta, comprehendynge all things: it is also the volume of the law
civil, called the digestes.

Pandiculatio, gapynge.

Pandiculor, aris, to gape as they do, which come from sleep.

Pando, didi, dear, passum, and pansum, to open

Pando, aui, are, to bow down.

Pandocheus, an inholder.

Pandochium, an in, or commune lodginge.

Pandus, a, um, open.

Pandora, the mother of Deucalion unto who^ sundry gods gave sundry gifts.
Pallas gave to her wysedom, Venus beaulty, Apollo music, Mercurius eloquence,
and therefore she was called Pandora, which signyfyeth having al gifts.
Hesyodus the poet writes that Jupiter sent her into the world to deceive
mankind.

Pangaeus, an elbowe of Thracia.

Pango, pepegi, and panxi, pangere, to set, to plant, to join one thing to
an other, to fasten, to drive in, to write, to sing, to tell, to make.

Panhormus, a city in Sicile.

Panicum, a sudden fear, whereby some time men be distraughte, or out of
their wits.

Panicula, that which on some herbs or trees do hang down, long and
round, as on great oaks, also peache trees, and pyneaple trees, rosiars, and
reeds.

Panicum, a grain which grows like to mi^t and has at the least ten
leaves, the stalk small with a red pendaunt full of corn, some purple, some
red, some black or white, the Italyans do call it Melica.

Panis porcinus, an herb called also cyclaminus, rapum terrae, umbelicus
terrae, and Artamita.

Panifex, ficis, a baker.

Panificium, the craft of bakynge.

Panis, breadde.

Panis nauticus, byskette.

Panis secundarius, raunged bread, or chete bread, or crybell bread.

Paniscus, a god of the woods.

Pantacratiasta, he that fyghteth with hands and feet.

Pantathlus, he that contendeth in all manner of games.

Panneus, a, um, woullen.

Pannicularia, things of small valor.

Pannicularius, a draper that sells cloth.

Panniculus, a piece of clothe.

Pannonia, the countreye now called Hungaria which took that name of an other
Hungaria now named Iulira, a countreye in the north part of the world not
fre from the river called Tanais, and is trybutarye to the Moscouites. The
bounds of Hungry is now much larger than it was of old time, and has on the
weste Owstryke and Beme, on the southe the part of Slauony that lies on the
sea called Adriaticum, on the cast Seruia on the north Polonia, and Moscouia.
The country is right fertile of grain, and rich of gold and silver, and as
the inhabytauntes there do report, there is in that country a river, in the
which if iron be oftentimes deped, it will be turned in to coper. That this
noble realm is now destroyed and under captivity of Turks, it is to be
feared that all christendom shall sore repent, that being sometime reputed
the puissaunt bulwark to all Christen realms, against the intolerable
violence of saryzons and turks.

Pannonia superior, the countraye now called Austria.

Pannones, Hungarians called also Paeones.

Panormum, a city in Sicile, now called in Italion Palermo.

Pannosus, he that wears poor apparel.

Pannuelium, a handkercher.

Pannus, clothe.

Panomphaeus, a name of Jupiter, signyfyeng that he hereth all men's voices.

Pansa, plain foted.

Panielmos, the full moan.

Pantagia, a river in Sicile.

Pantasilea, a queen of Amazon.

Pantheon, a temple of all the gods.

Panthera, a beast having on his skin lyttel round spots, some blewe and
some white, it is said that herdes of cattle do meruaylously delight in the
sweet savor that comes from them, and in beholdynge of them, and therefore
feeling by the sweet air where they have their resort, thither will all
beasts come, not being aferde but only of their fyerse look, and therefore
the Panthers hydynge their heads do suffer the rest of their bodies to be
looked on, that they may the more easylye take their proye of the cattaylle
being dismayed. The people of Hircania, does more often kill them with a
poison called Aconitum, than with weapon, but the Panthers feelynge them selves
poisoned, do seek for the dunge of a man, which if they do find and eat,
they be forthwith delivered, they be so lively that they do live a great while
after that their bowelles be clean out of their bodies: it is also written
that he which is washed or euoynted with the broth wherein a cock is boiled,
the Panthere will not touch him. In the west part of Aethyopia toward the
sea, there is people called Agriophagi, whose king has but one eye, which is
in his forehed, that people do live with eating the flesh of Pantheres and
Lions.

Pantheron, a net, wherewith all manner of foul is taken

Pantices, a greatte bealy, also the flux.

Pantomimus, a dyssard, which can feign and counterfayte every man's gesture.

Panurgia, subtyltie.

Panus, panula, and panulla, a kernel in the share or gryne of a man, or
behind the care. It is also a weuers roll, whereon the web of clothe is
rolled or wounden.

Papare, to call dad as a child does.

Papas, a father, as chylderne do call dadde.

Papaueralida, wild popy.

Papauerata uestis, a garment not pure white but of the color of popye.

Papauer, eris, an herb called popy.

Pape, an interiection of wonderynge, will y^ see, a wonderful thing.

Papaeus, in the tongue of Scithia, sygnyfyeth Jupiter.

Paphlagonia, a country in the less Asia, and it joins to Galatia, where as
dwelled the people called Heneti, of whom came the Venetians. It is bounded on
the cast with the river called Halys, runnyng out of the south between Siria
and Paphlagonia.

Paphos, and Paphia, a city in the ylande of Cypres, which was dedicate to
Venus, whereof she was called Paphia.

Papia, a city in Lumbardy, called Pauia.

Papilio, onis, a butterflye.

Papylio, a pauillion for the wars.

Papilla, a lyttel wheale or poushe in the skin of a man. Also a cock in a
coundyte, whereout water comes. More over the nyppell or teate of a womanns
breast.

Pappa, pap made with milk and flower.

Pappo, pappare, to eat.

Pappus, a grandesyre or graundefather. It is also an herb called groundswel,
also the flour of thystelles which like to feathers do fly away with the
wind.

Papula, a whelke.

Papyrus, seu papyrum, is a great rushe, which grows in the fennes and marys
grounds in Egypt and Syria, ten cubits high: whereof the first paper was
made, whereon men did write. we have growing in our fenny grounds like
rushes with black knoppes, long and round, which are called

Now Papyrus is called paper, wherein men do use to write or prynte books.

Papyratius, of paper, or of the said rushe.

Papyrius, the surname of a noble Romayne.

Par, ris, like, equal, meet, even, reasonable, a pair.

Par est, it is like.

Par aetate, of one age.

Paribus animis, of like affection.

Par ingenium nactus, he has found one of his own fascion.

Par sapientia ad formam, as wise, as he is fair or tall.

Par praetium tanti laboris, the recompense or reward was such, as was
equivalent to so great a labor.

Par, idem. all one.

Pares esse nostro exercitui non potuerunt. they moughte not be so strong as
our host.

Paradelos, the greatte daysy with the yelowe knoppe in the myddell. it is
called of the apothecaries Consolida media.

Pares, two like one to the other in form or degree.

Parem esse, to be sufficient, to do or sustain a thing.

Paria, payres, two together of any thing.

Paria facere, to requite, to do one thing for an other, like for like.

Par refer, idem,

Par, pari, to recompense one thing with an other, of equal estimation.

Par impar, a game that children used, called even or odd.

Parabilis, le, that which may be sone gotten, or will be sone ready.

Parabola, a comparison, or resemblaunce.

Paracletus, an exhortar, a comfortar, an advocate.

Paraclytus, a man infamed, ill reported of.

Paradiastole, a dilatinge of a matter by an interpretation.

Paradigma, an example.

Paradisus, Paradise. it signifies a gardeyne.

Paradoxa, a sentence, contrary to the opynion of the more part.

Paradromis, a galary, or walk.

Paraenesis, a precepte containing an exhortation.

Paraeneticus, ca, cum, containing such precepte or instruction.

Paragoge, is a figure, when a letter or syllable is added to a word, as
Dicier for dici.

Paragraphe, a thing written before a sentence

Paragraphus and paragraphum, a paragrafe.

Paralipomenon, left out, unspoken, or unwritten, which ought to have been
spoken or written.

Paralleli, lines in the sphere of the world equallye distaunte whereby the
son, when he passes, causes varyation in hours of the day.

Paralion, an herb called also Esula.

Paralysis, is a syckenesse called the palsy where in either all the body or one
member, or many members be mollyfyed, and be depryued of feeling and meuynge.
it happens either of an impostume so stoppynge the roots of the synewes, that
they being depryued of the spirits annimall which serves for them, they
become lost, or else of a flumatike humor gross and vndygested which
stops the said places. Sometime of a stroke or fall, whereby the joints
of the back boon, are loused, and the synewes which come from the nuke or
nape of the head are stopped, otherwhyle the synewes and the rotes of them be
hurt with a bruise, and induces the palsy, specially in an old man.

Herba paralysis, the lyttel white daisy with red tops.

Paralyticus, he that is taken with the palsy.

Paranymphus, he that is the mediator in matrymony between the man and the
woman: she which is on the womannes part is called Pronuba.

Parapechium, a light cloak.

Parapherna, that which is added unto the womannes dower, called the ioynture.

Paraphrasis, an imitation of words, setting out the sense or meaning of the
autour more plainly.

Paraphrastes, he that does not translate word by word, but expresses the
sentence of the autour more openly.

Pararium aes, was double wayges, given to horsemen for having two horses.

Parasanga, a mile in Persia, conteininge fifty furlonges, Herodotus says.xxx.

Parasceue, a preparation, also good frydaye.

Parasiopesis, a figure in speaking, when we feign that we will not speak,
and yet covertly it is declared what we do mean.

Paratus, a haunter of other men's tables un called for, alsoo he which to
fylle his bealye with meat and drink, speaks always to the appetite of him,
with whom he dines or soupeth.

Parasitari, to hold up a another man's tale for a diner or souper.

Parasitaster, he that counterfayteth him that is called Parasitus.

Parastatae, certain stones in pylars. Parastata, also one of the bones in the
shanke of the leg.

Parastates, stones, which do sustain both sides of a door, called Iambes.

Paratragoedio, are, to brag or crake, to speak great or high words.

Parcae, ladies of desteny, also it signifies the self destiny, or
disposition in prolongynge or shortnynge life, the names of the ladies be
Clotho, Lachesis, Atropos.

Parco, peperci, parcere, to spare, to forgive, or pardon, to let or prohibit,
to leave, to for bear or absteyne.

Parcere pretio, to spare for cost.

Sumptui ne parcas, Spare for no cost.

Parcere ualetudini, take heed to thyn health.

Parcere uoci, not to speak loud.

Parcitur, imper sonale, Ci Neque parcetur labori, they will stycke for no
labor.

Parcere metu, to put away fear.

Parce, scarcely, nyggardly, nyghely, fair and softly.

Parciter, idem.

Parcitas, frugalitie, or moderation in living.

Parcimonia, nygardshyp, or scarsitie.

Parcus, a nygarde.

Parcus, ca, cum, nyghe, or nygarde, scarce in expenses, sometime it signifies
seelde.

Parcus comitatu, he that has a small train.

Parcus opera, an easy warkeman, he that is more ydell than occupied.

Pardus, a lybarde.

Pardalianches, the venoumouse herb called also Aconitum.

Pardalus, a bird of dunne color, which flees in flocks.

Parectata, and parectatus, he that is newely issued out of a chyldes years,
and begins to have the tokens of a man.

Parectonia, the mother of Plato, the most noble philosopher.

Parens, father, mother, or any other auncetour, sometime it is used for him
which cares much for a nothers welthe and defends it.

Parentela, auncetry.

Parentalia, feasts made at the burienge of auncetours.

Parenthesis, is a sentence comprehended with in an other sentence, without any
detrimente thereunto, being marked with one half circle at the beginning, and
an other at the end, as in this wise. Nihil adeo principem decet, (quod omnes
quidem fatentur) qua^ tum iustitia, prudentiae, atque liberalitati aequaliter
coniuncta, Nothing so well becomes a prince (which al men do confess) as
Justice equally joined with wisdom and bounteousnes.

Parento, rare, to celebrate the funeralles of auncetours or friends.

Paranomasia, a figure in speaking, where one word is like to an other, but of
diverse sygnyfycations. Nam inceptio est amentium, non amantium, this
beginning is of mad men, not of lovers.

Paratus, ta, tum, ready.

Parate, redily.

Pareo, rui, rere, to appear, to be seen, to obey.

Parergon, some thing added to, being non part of the matter, as when a
payntour does make an image, he does add to trees or towns.

Parethonium, a white color that peynters do lay, which is found in Egypt.

Paribit, for pariet, she shall bring forth a child.

Parici, iuges assigned for capital cause, as murder or felony that requires
death.

Paries, etis, a wall of a house.

Parieti loqueris, thou speak to the wall, which may be s^^d of him that will
not eftsoon reherce that, which he hereth spoken.

Parietaria, an herb called Pelitory of the wall.

Parietinae, old watles.

Parilia, festival days, which the Romans kept for preservation of their
cattle.

Parilis, le, equal.

Parilitas, equality, similitude in quantity or quality.

Pario, peperi, parere, to bring forth children the like thing in beasts,
sometime to bring forth generally, or to geate.

Parere sibi gratiam, to get favor.

Tibi mill passus peperit morae. He has caused the to tarry whiles thou
moughteste have rydden or gone a mile.

Parere perfugium pedibus, to saulfe himself by runnynge away.

Parere uerba, to speak words ot spoken before.

Paretonium, a city with a great haven in Egypt.

Paris, ridis, the son of Pryamus king of Troyanes, whose historye is so
commonly known that I need not to write it.

Parrhasius, An excellent payntour who contendinge with Zeusis, which of them
had most kunnyng, Zeusis brought forth a table in the which he had so
craftily painted grapes that birds flewe to them and pecked on the^ Parrhasius
brought forth a another table, in the which was painted only a sheet so
fynelye wrought that all men iuged it to be a very shete, tha^ Zeusis required
Parrhasius, that he should take away the sheet and show forth his wark, whereat
Parrhasius laughed, and iested on Zeusis meryly, than Zeusis perceyuyng it,
knowleged his error, and granted to Parrhasius the victory, saying to him:
yesterday I deceived birds, but to day thou haste deceived me being a crafts
man.

Parithmia, be kernelles in the innermoste parts of the rotes of the toungue,
called also Tonsillae.

Parius, a, um, of the isle called Parus, from whens is brought marble stone
caled Pariu^ marmor.

Parito, tare, to prepare.

Pariter, in likewise, equally, semblably.

Parma, a targat, which foot men did use.

Parmula, a buckelar, it is also a city in Italy.

Parnasides, the nine muses, or ladies of scyences.

Parnassidae uestes, apparayle belonging to maidens.

Parnassus, a mountain in Greece, having two tops, under the which the
nine muses did inhabyte or dwell.

Paro, are, to prepare, to get, to apparel.

Paro, onis, a little ship or brigantine.

Parochus, an offycer, which provided for wood and salt for ambassadors,
also it is now used for a priest, which is a curate, or paryshe priest.

Paroecia, a paryshe,

Parodus, a passage.

Paroemia, a proverb accommodate to the matter and time.

Paroeci, paryshoners, or they which do dwell within one paryshe.

Paropsis, idis, a potage dyshe, or potyngar.

Paros, an isle in the sea called Aegeum.

Parotis, tidis, is an apostume behind the care which comes of a matter
distillyng from the head into the burres or kernelles of the ears engendered
of an inflammation of the body and blood.

Paropamisus, a mountain ioynynge to Inde and the country called Bactrae, it
is also the name of a great river that runs through Scithia not far from
the north Ocean, and some do name it the dead sea or frosen sea.

Paroxismus, the fytte in a fever.

Parrhasia, a country in Grecia, called also Archadia.

Parrhasius, an excellent payntour.

Parricida, murderars of their parents, betraiours of their countraye,
sumetyme murder generally.

Parricidium, murder of kynsfolke, or treson to the proper country.

Parricidium, Matricidium, murder of father and mother.

Pars, partis, part.

Parts facere, to deuyde in porcions.

Parts primas agere, to be the chyefe personage, properly in an interlude.

In part aliqua haerere, to be in some favor.

Priores parts habere apud aliquem, to be in great credence or favor with one.

Priores parts tribuere alicui, to give one the most praise, or praise him
most.

Parts alicuius agere, to do an other man's office.

Parts meae sunt, it is mine office or charge

Parts defendas tuas, defend thine own matter or cause.

Non sunt meae parts id facere, it belongs not to me to do it.

Pars bona, the more part.

Magna ex part, for the mnore part.

Ex part, partly.

In part idem.

In omnes parts, holy, in what manner so ever it be.

In optimam parte^ accipere, to take a thing in worth or in good part.

Pars, for Partim, partly. Milites pars uictoriae fidutia, pars ignominiae
dolor, ad omnem laetitiam, audatiamque processeruut.

The men of war partly upon trust of victory, partly for sorrow of the
reproach that they had taken, became at the last to be full of courage and
merry.

Pars, is taken of Plautus, for the wife. Satur de me loquitur et de part mea,
Now that his bealy is full, he talks of me and of my wife.

Parts prime, the chief part.

Parsimonia, moderate expenses.

Parsi, the pretertence of parco, I have spared

Parthenium, an herb which by Dioscorides description has little leaves
like to Coryander, a flower with white leaves, and is in the myddell somewhat
yelowe having a great and ill savor, also he gives the same name to the herb
called Helcine, which is Peritory of the wall, the first is of some
apothecaries called Matricaria. Ruellius reproves them which do suppose that
Parthenium is the herb called Cotula fetida, which is rather Buththalmos, for
Cotula has leaves like to fenel, and so has Buphthalmos, and not like to
Coriander. Some do affirm that one kind of Parthenium is feuerfu, called also
Matricaria, the second is tansy, the third camomyll, the fourth Cotula fetida,
the fifth Bupthalmos, that is to say oxeyes, which is like to Cotula, and
stynketh not, the sixte mercury, the seventh peritory, the eight motherworte,
sum do put maioram for oone kind.

Parts, sometime sygnifieth duty.

Parthenope, the old name of the City of Naples.

Parthia, a country in Asia, which has on the southe the red sea, on the
north the sea called Hircanum, on the east the people called Arij, on the
west the realm called Media.

Parthi, people of that country.

Parthicus, a, um, of the country of Parthia.

Partiarius, a partynge fellow, or copartner.

Particeps, cipis, he that takes part.

Participo, are, to give part, or take part, to make an other man partner, or
of counsel.

Particula, a portion.

Particularis, re, particular.

Particulariter, particularly.

Particulatim, idem.

Particulones, coheyres, or comperceners, which have inheritance to gether.

Partim, partly, in part, some time part. Partim hominum uenerunt, part of
the men did come.

Partio, onis, a birth.

Partior, iris, iri, partitum, and partio, ire, to part to deuyde.

Parthissus, a River on the North part of Germania.

Partite aduerbium, divided in pieces or parts

Partitio, a particion, or division.

Partitudo, for partus, the birth of a child.

Partus, ta, tum, gotten with labor.

Parturio, iui, and iri, to labor as women do in travail with child.

Partus, tus, and parti, and partuis, the birth of a child, sometime the
child self.

Parulis, a swellynge of the gummes.

Paruifacio, cere, to set little by.

Parui aestimo, idem.

Parui duco, idem.

Paruipendo, idem.

Paruitas, the lyttelnesse.

Parum, little.

Parum est, it is a small matter.

Parumper, a little while, or time, also ^^erye little: sometime quickly.

Paruus, a, um, little or small.

Parua sunt foris arma nisi est consiliu^ domi, Armor is a small matter
abroad, if there be not good council at home.

Paruulus, a little one.

Paruulus, a, um, very little.

Parum habere, to set little by.

Paruulum aduerbium, paruulum differt, It is but a small diversity.

Pasalli, pomanders.

Pascales, sheep or pultrye, which do feed at large.

Pasca, Easter.

Pascalis, le, perteynynge to Easter.

Pasceolus, a lether bag.

Pascito, tare, to feed.

Pasco, paui, pascere, and Pascito, are, to feed to give meat to a another, to
nouryshe or bring up, to augment.

Pascere oculos, to content or please the eien with the beholdynge of a thing.

Pascito, tare, to feed often.

Pascor, sceris, pasci, to feed as beasts done.

Pascua, and pascuum, pasture.

Pascuus, a, um, that which serves to feed cattle.

Pasiphac^, the wife of Minos the king of Crete, who having company with a
bull, brought forth the monster called Minotaurus, which was half a man and
half a bull.

Passales, be as well sheep as pultrye, which feed abroad.

Passer, eris, a sparrowe, also a fysshe called a playce.

Passerculus, a little sparowe.

Passili, a lyttel grayn called vatches or fitches.

Passim, here and there, sometime it signifies from all places, some time
indyfferently, also over all.

Passio, a passion, grief.

Passiuus, a, um, that which sygnifieth passion or causes passion or grief.

Passiui amatores, they which do love all women indifferently.

Passum, a wine made of grapes much withered in the sun, it is also a licour
made with great reasons steped long in very good wine until they swelle, and
than to be bruised and the licoure pressed out, and sometime they do put thereto
some water, and than isit called fecundarium.

Passus, a, um, spread abroad, or open.

Passus, us, a pace, which does conteyne five feet.

Pastillus, uel pastillum, a pasty.

Pastinaca, an herb called parsnyppes, also a fish.

Pastino, are, to de^ue in a gardeyne: repastino, uide in R.

Pastinatus, tus, deluynge.

Pastinatio, idem.

Pastinum, a debyll, or setting stycke.

Pastio, onis, pasturynge or feeding of cattle.

Pastomis, an instrument, which is set on the nosethryls of horses, that
will not be ruled, and is called of horsebreakers, barnakles.

Pastophori, certain priestis in Egypt pertaining to Isis.

Pastophorium, the chaumber of the Sexten, or him which keeps the temple.

Pastor, oris, a sheparde or herdman.

Pastoralis, le, pertaining to the shepeherde or herdeman.

Pastorius, a, um, idem.

Pastoricius, a, um, of fedyng or grasing of catel.

Pastus, a, um, he that has eaten.

Pastus, tus, meat, feeding, pasture.

Patagium, a cloak of cloth of gold, used to be worn on rich garments.

Patagiati, they which do wear rich clokes.

Patagiarij, the craftesmenne that makes such clokes.

Patara, a city in the country of Licia, where Apollo was chiefly honored.

Patauium, a city in Italy called Padua, nygh unto Venyce.

Patauini, men of that city.

Patefacio, cere, to make open, to declare, to disclose.

Patefio, fieri, to be disclosed or discovered.

Patella, a little pan or askyllet.

Pateo, tui, tere, to be open.

Patet locus tria stadia, the place is four furlonge in breadth or length.

Patent omnibus, al men may perceive them.

Acutis morbis adolescentia magis patet, youth is more subject to sharp or
daungerouse syckenesses.

Patens, open.

Patens uulneri, in danger to be hurt.

Pater, tris, a father.

Patera, a broad piece or bolle of gold or silver.

Paterfamilias, the good man of the house.

Paterpatratus, to whom it pertaynyd, when trues should be taken, to receive
the oaths and appointment of both parts, and was therein chief and principalle
ambassador.

Pater patrimus, he that is a father and has his father living.

Paternus, a, um, pertaynyng to a father.

Patesco, scere, to be open.

Pathe, troubles or vexations of mind, passions.

Pathetica oration, an oration mouynge the heater to indignation or pity.

Pathmos, an isle in these called Aegeum.

Patibulum, a woden lock of a door, or a bar wherewith the door is made
fast, also a place of tourment, a gybbet, galowes, or cross.

Patillum, a pair of tongues or other like instrument, wherewith coals are
taken up.

Patina, a dyshe wherein meat is carried.

Patinarium, meat which is stewed upon a chaffynge dyshe.

Patior, pateris, pati, to suffer, to endure.

Pati a uita, to sustain hunger.

Pati aegre, to be ill content.

Pati aequo animo, to be well content.

Pati fortiter, to suffer pacyently.

Pati iniquo animo, to be angry for a thing.

Indigne pati, to be discontent.

Pati facile, not to be discontent.

Patior non moleste, I am not dyscontent.

Nullum patior esse diem quin in foro dicam I do let no day pass, but that
I plead some matter.

Pati aeuum, to have duryd well.

Grauius accusas ^ patiturtua consuetudo, is do accuse more greuousely than ye
be wont.

Nec ulla segetu^ minus dilationem patitur, There is no corn that typeth more
hastyly, or would sooner be reaped.

Pati febrem, to have the fever.

Pati iactiuras, to have had losses.

Pati impedimentum, to be let.

Pati imperium, to be under subjection.

Pati supplicium, to be put to death.

Pati solicitudine^ pro aliquo, to take thought for one.

Pati poterunt oculi me cum Gabino sententiam dicere? May I endure to sit with
Gabinius in judgment.

Patiens, it is, a participle sygnifyeth pacient, indurynge.

Patiens, a nowne joined with a genitine case.

Patiens nauium Tyberis, Tyber may bear a ship.

Patiens operum, he that can endure to labor.

Patiens uaetustatis, that which dureth long.

Patienter, patiently, measurably.

Patientia, pacyence.

Patienter praestare, to suffer and let pass.

Patibilis, le, sufferable.

Patitor, suffer thou.

Patrae, trarum, a city in Achaia.

Patrator, oris, he that does a thing.

Patres conscripti, senators.

Patria, a country.

Patriarcha, a prince or chief manne of the fathers, It was also the name of
dygnitie, of five chyefe Archebysshoppes, as of Rome, Antyoche, Alexandry,
Jerusalem, and Constantinople.

Patriarchatus, the dygnitie of a patriarche.

Patricida, he that kylleth his father.

Patricidium, the murder of a man's father.

Patrice, nobly, or like a noble man.

Patricius, a senators son, or commen of senators.

Patrimonium, goods commen by inheritance, patrymonye.

Patrinus, and Patrimis, he which has his father living.

Patrinus, a, um, of the father, or pertaining to the father.

Patritus, ta, tum, that which happens to one by his father.

Patrius, a, um, of the country also pertaynyng to a father.

Patrizo, and patrisso, are, to be like a father.

Patro, are, to persourme.

Patrare facinus, to commytte a myscheuouse deed.

Patrocynor, aris, ari, to defend them, which be poor, or be falsely accused.

Patroclus, a noble greek, companion to Achilles.

Patrocinium, defense of men being in trouble or suyte.

Patronymicu^ nomen, a name taken of an ancetor, as Priamides the children of
Priamus.

Patronus, he that is advocate on the defendantes part.

Patrueles, cousyn germayns, or right cousyns on the fathers side.

Patruus, the fathers brother.

Patruus magnus, my fathers uncle.

Patruus maximus, my grandfathers uncle.

Pattagia, a river in Sicile.

Patulico, care, to be open.

Parulus, a, um, wide open.

Patulus bos, an ox or cow, whose horns do stand wide open.

Paucis, in few words.

Paucus, ca, cum, few.

Paucitas, tatis, fewness.

Pauculus, a, um, very few.

Paucies, seldom.

Pauciens, idem.

Paucitas, few in number.

Pauens, it is, he that fears for a time.

Paueo, ere, to fear.

Pauera, wheat which spryngeth not well out of the hose, when it grows
ineare.

Pauesco, scere, to be aferde.

Pauicula, a pauynge bytell, wherewith stoones be driven into the ground, in
the making of a pauement.

Pauidus, he that always fears.

Pauide, fearfully.

Pauimento, are, to make a pauement.

Pauimentu^, a pauement, or place paued, a flore

Pauio, ire, to stryke.

Pauito, are, to be soore aferde.

Paulatim, little and little.

Paulisper, a very little while.

Paulum, and paulo, a little.

Paulo, a little.

Paulominus, little less.

Paulo mox, by and by.

Paulo prius, a little erst.

Paululum, very little.

Paululum modo, never so little.

Paululo tum erat contenta, she was than content with a very little.

Paulum, little.

Paulus, was a name most commonly of the Romans, of the which one was
most excellent, named Paulus Aemilius, son of Lucius Paulus. This man
ascendyng by all dignities unto Consul, was captain of the wars in Spayn,
where he faught two battayles, wherein were slain.xxx. thousand Spanyardes,
and wan.CCl. wallyd towns and not withstandyng returned to Rome not one grote
the rycher, for he was lyberall and sumptuouse, and not very rich. Afterward
he made war against the Ligurians, which were about Ieane, where having with
him but only.viii. thousand, he put to flight.xxx. thousand, and brought
them to subjection. Finally he faught against Perseus king of Macedonia, and
vanquished him, and brought him and his children prisoners to Rome in triumph,
which was in this form* The senators apparailed in white sylke, sat in stages
made about the market place to behold the triumph, all the temples were set
open, and filled with flowers and soote perfumes, the triumph was divided into
three dais, the first day uneath suffysed to the beholdynge of images, as well
painted as wrought in stone and metal, by most excellent warkemen, which
were carried in.CCl. chariotes, the second day was brought forth the harneyse
and artyllery of the Macedones, and the apparayle of horses, which was in
such sort, that it was in a manner terryble to the vanquyshers to behold it.
After followed three thousand men, which did bear silver coin in CCCl.
vessels, of silver every vesselle being in weighte three talentes, which was
CCxl.li.after.ixxx. li. to every talente, every vesselle was borne of four
men. Other did bear greatte cups and pottes of silver.

The third day the trompettes came before blowynge the blouddy soundes. After
them came an hundred and twenty oxen their horns gylt, and thereupon were set
fyllettes and garlandes, and were led with young men gyrt and prepared to
sacryfyce them, and chylderne bare cups of goulde and silver, to serve to
the sacryfyce. After them followed they, which bare money of gould in golden
vessels, every of them waying three talentes. also the number of the vessels
were.CCxl. Than followed they, which carried the pot which Aemilius had
let make all of precyouse stoones, wayenge ten talentes, which was.DCCC.
pound* alsoo they that bare all the plate of the kings Antigonus, Seleucus,
Thericius, and Perseus, which was innumerable. After came the charyotte,
wherein was Perseus harneyse, with his dyademe set thervppon. Soon after his
two sons and oone daughter led, and with them a greatte number of their
nourices masters and governors, weeping and holding up their hands unto the
people. Whereof many were meuyd to tears, so that the tryumphe seemed to be
myngled with gladness for the vyctorye, and with heaviness for compassyon.
After his chylderne and servants followed forthwith Perseus in a black
garment, trembling and troubled in spyryte, whom ensewed a greatte company
of his Counsayllours and officers, beholdynge him sorowfullye with tears,
which moore constrained diverse of the Romans to weep for pytie that they
had of their myserye. After him were borne four hundred crowns of goulde,
which were given to Aemillus by the cities of Greece for his virtue and
prowess. Thanne followed Aemilius him self sitting in a charyotte very
rychely apparayled, having a robe of pourple tynsette, and bearing in his
hand a branch of lawrelle, as a man beside that honor worthy to be
looked on. Than after came the men of war, which had been with him, in
order of such bendes and companyes as do belong unto battle, every of them
bearing in his hand a branch of laurel, and singing versis myxt with merry
tauntes. some singing the praises of Aemilius, whom they beheld and wondered
at for his excellent qualyties. But now behold Aemilius being in that state
and condytion, that nothing lacked in him that man could wysshe for, yet his
life was not unmixed with aduersyties. He having four sons, of the which
two he had given in adoption to Scipio Aphricanus, and Fabius Maximus, the
other two he kept at home with him, the oone of them dyed five days before
the tryumphe, being syxtene years old: The other being twelve years old,
dyed the third day after the tryumphe. Which cruelty of Fortune, all men
lamented, that had brought so greatte heaviness into the house, repleate with
gladness, reioycynge, and noble renoume and had meddlyd tears, sorrows, and
lamentation with vyctorye joy and tryumphe. But therefore Aemilius never abated
his courage, but calling the people together, made to them a noble oration,
declarynge to them that he was nothing deceived by Fortune, for as much as
when she seemyd to him most favorable, he thanne more fearyd her than any
thing else, and although she had taken from him good sons, whom he
appointed to succeed him, yet sens she had showed her extreme malice to him
and his bloudde, he had good trust now, that the people of Rome should
remain prosperouse without any peril. O noble heart, O valiant courage
wourthy to be left in remembrance, he brought so much goulde and silver
into the treasourye of the Romans, that there neded no task to be set on
the people, until the first battle between Octauyane and Antonye, which
was four score years and above. yet he left in patrimony uneath five hundred
four score and twelve pound, and in treasour little or nothing. This
hystory have I been meued to write for the diverse pleasant and notable
things, which be therein contained, with the vnsuretie of prosperytie, wherein
all men are blinded which do desire to have it. One thing would be
remembered, although Aemilius was a favorer of the nobility. yet was he of
the people better beloved than Scipio who only studied to serve their
pourposes, for his humanytie equally myxte with gravity and severity, he was
brought to earth, not with sumptuouse preparation, but with love and favor not
only of his countreye men, but alsoo of his enemies, for as many of
Liguria, Spain, and Macedonia as than were at Rome. They that were young and
strong did bear the corpse, the old men followed calling him benefactour
and conseruatoure of their Cities and countrayes. Plutarchus in Vitis.

Paulus, the Apostelle of Christ was borne in Judea, in a town called
Giscalis, and was of the Trybe of Beniamyn. And the town being taken by the
Romans, he went with his parents to Tharsum a city in Cilicia and dwelled
there. But afterward he was sent by them to Jerusalem to learn the laws,
and there was taught of one Gamaliel, a great learned man, he being with other
at the martyrdom of saint Steuyn, received letters of the bishop, willing
him to go to Damascum, there to persecute them that believed in Christ, and in
the way he was by revelation changed from a persecutour to a vesselle of
election. And afterward when he had converted Sergius Paulus, than being
Proconsule at Cypres to the faith of Christ, by him he was called Paulus,
where before he was named Saulus. Finally he suffered martyrdom by beheadyng,
after the passion of Christ.xxxvii. years, and the fourtenth year of the
reign of Nero. Haec Hieronymus and Sophoronius. the resydue of his life
appears in the Acts of the Apostles, his learning and mystycall wisdom is
well showed in his epistles, in the which as saint Peter says, be sum
things hard to be understand, and that men unlearned and inconstant do
deprave, like as they do the other parts of scripture to their own pardicion.
These words I would to god men would consider in these days, and read the said
epistles with a reverend fear and devotion, not presumyng on their spirit
only, but conferryng it either with the counsel of men very well studied and
catholyke, or else with the approuyd expositions of most holy doctors, or if he
may not come by the one or the other, rather to leave of until he may be
discretely satisfied, than to addicte him self to any new opinyon, that is to
say contrary to that which the catholyke church has vertuousely vsyd.

Paulus Samosatenus, an horrible herityke, bishop of Antioche a man of exceeding
pride and intolerable vanite, about the year of our lord 267. his heresy was,
that Christ began of our Lady, and took his first beginning of the earth,
and was a man only of our commune nature, which herifye was condemned by a
general counsel holden at Antioche, and Paulus excommunicate by all the
counsel, and an other bishop put into his place, and he by the commandment
of the emperor Aurelianus was of the people pullyd out of the Church.

Pauo, onis, and pauus, a pecocke.

Pauor, oris, extreme fear.

Pauper, pauperis, a poor man.

Pauper, peris, an adjective poor.

Pauperies, and paupertas, tatis, poverty.

Pauper, ra, rum, poor.

Pauperculus, and paupercula, a poor manne or poor woman.

Paupero, are, to make poor.

Paupertinus, na, number, poor.

Pausa, a pawse, leisure.

Pausanias, was the general captayn of the Lacedemons in the great batayl
against Xerxes and yet afterward was he condemned of treason.

Pausias, a noble payntour.

Pauso, are, to pawse.

Pauxillatim, by little and little.

Pauxillisper, idem.

Pauxillus, a, um, very little.

Pax, pacis, peace, a quyete liberty.

Paxillus, a little stake.

Pax sequestra, a truce between two hosts.

P ANTE E.
PECCATVM, a sin, an offense.

Pecco, care, to offend or sin, to fail in any thing.

Peccatur, there is a fault.

Pecorarius, a herdemanne, also he that does hyre cattle.

Pecorarius, a, um, pertaining to cattle.

Pecorinus, na, number, of rother beasts.

Pecten, inis, a weauers lowme. alsoo a comb. it is also the place about the
privy members, where hear does grow. it is also the styckes, wherewith a man
stryketh doulcemers when he does play on them, also a fyshe called
Scaloppe. alsoo the long grain of a tree, by the which the wodde cleaves.

Pectinatim, in the facyon of a comb.

Pectino, to kembe, also to harowe corn whiles it is in grass.

Pectitus, ta, tum, kembed, or harowed.

Pecto, x^i, tere, to kembe or trymme hear, to card woulle, to set a harp
or other like instrument.

Pectoralis, le, pertaining to the breast. Fascia pectoralis, a breast
kerchiefe.

Pectorium, a certain carte sommetyme vsyd in France.

Pectorosus, a, um, great breasted.

Pectunculus, a little Scalop.

Pectus, pectoris, the breaste, sommetyme heart or courage.

Pectusculum, a little breaste.

Pecuaria, store of cattelle. alsoo places where they be kept, also a multitude
of cattle. also revenues that comes of cattle.

Pecuariam rem facere, to bread cattle.

Pecuarius, a breder of cattle.

Pecuarius, a, um, belonging to cattle.

Pecu, indeclinabile. Pecua, in the plurell number, cattle, beasts.

Peculator, and peculatrix, he and she that steals a commune treasour.

Peculatus, robberye of the commune treasure, or of a prince.

Peculiaris, re, proper or special.

Peculiariter, properly, specially.

Peculio, are, to punyshe by the pourse.

Peculiosus, rich, of great substance.

Peculium, substance, that richesse, which is only in money and cattall, a
man's proper goods.

Peculor, aris, ari, to steal a commune treasour or any thing from a prince.

Pecunia, money, it is taken of the old Ciuillions, for all things which we
call cattle.

Pecunio^us, rich.

Pecus, pecudis, seu pecus pecoris, all manner of cattle, sometime the
multitude or flock of cattelle, sometime it is taken only for sheep or gotes.

Peda, and pedatura, the step or token of a man's foot.

Pedalis, of a foot.

Pedamen, and pedamentum, a stake or forke, whereby a vine, hoppes, or other
like thing is sustained or borne up.

Pedaneum, idem.

Pedaneus, a, um, of the quantity of a foot, in length, or dystaunce.

Pedanei iudices, interyour iuges, which went on foot.

Pedare, to set proppes, or to proppe up a vine or tree, that it shall not fall
or bow down.

Pedarij, were Senators, which did not show their opynions in words, but
only meuynge them selves toward those persons, which had raysoned, whose
sentences they did approve, like as they do in the parlyament house.

Pedatim, where one foot goth with the other, foot by foot.

Pedatio, the setting up of vynes.

Pedato, suddenly.

Pedatus, footed.

Pedecosus, lousy, or full of lyce.

Pedepressim, a foot pace, softly.

Pedes, fecte in meter, sometime lyse.

Pedem struere, to take him to his feet, to run away.

Pedem refer, to retreat or go back.

Pedem confer, to come to a point of a matter in controversy.

Pedem ponere, to begin a matter.

Pedem reuocare, to retreat or re^^le back.

Pedes, an aduerbe, signifies on foot, see more hereof in Pes.

Pedes, ditis, a foot man in battle.

Pedester, he that gothe on foot, or is on foot.

Pedestris oration, a numerouse spekyng or writynge in the form of a verse, or
meter, although it be not a verse.

Pedetentim, softly and fair, by little and litel.

Pedica, any thing, wherewith the foot is tied, as a fetter, a pair of gyues,
or stocks.

Pedicillus, a little worm which bredeth between the skin and the flesh

Pediculatus, ta, tum, any thing which has a stalk, as the most part of
fruit.

Pedicularis morbus, the lousy syckenes.

Pedicosus, and pediculosus, lousy.

Pediculus, a fysshe, the stalk of an apple or pear, or other fruit. also a
louse.

Pedio, dire, to stamp with the foot.

Pediolus, a little foot.

Pedissequus, and pedissequa, a servant, who follows always the master or
maystresse.

Peditatus, an hooste of footmen.

Pedo, pepedi, pedere, to fart.

Pedum, a shepecroke.

Peganon, the herb called Rue, or herb grace.

Pegasides, the Muses.

Pegasus, a horse, which was feigned to have wings: it is also a sign or
number of sterres in heaven.

Pegma, matis, a stage, whereon pageantes be set, or whereon plate and
iewelles do stand to be looked on.

Peieratio, perjury, a forswearynge.

Peiero, are, to swear falsely.

Peior, peius, warse.

Pelagus, the sea.

Pelagicus, ca, cum, of the sea.

Pelamis, midis, fyshe called Tuny.

Pelargos, a bird called a storke.

Pelasgis, a country in Greece callid Archadia.

Pelasgi, people which came out of Greece, and inhabyted Italy, they be also
Arcadiens.

Pelasgicus, ca, cum, of Arcadia.

Pelias, a king of Thessalia, uncle to Jason.

Pelicus, a prince, of whom the people called Peligni, took their name.

Pelides, the surname of Achilles.

Peligni, people in Italy, which came out of Illiria.

Pelion, a hill in Thessalia.

Pella, a city in Macedonia. also a payle, wherinto kyne are mylked.

Pellax, acis, he that deceives with fair wordis

Pellacia, fair speech to deceive.

Pellex, she that is a wedded man's harlot.

Pellicator, a deceyuer with fair words.

Pellicatus, the ill company which a wedded man leads with an other woman.

Pellicio, pellexi, cere, to deceive with fair words, to move a man plesantly
to do a thing.

Pellectus, meuyd, tempted.

Pelliceus, cea, ceum, of a skin or hyde.

Pellicula, the skin.

Pelliculo, are, to cover with a skin.

Pellio, onis, a skynner.

Pellis, a skin.

Pellitus, cladde in skynnes.

Pello, pepuli, pellere, pulsum, to put out, or expel. sometime to bring.
Scipionis animum non mediocri cura pepulit, It brought Scipio not in a little
care.

Pelluceo, cere, to shine bright, to shine through

Pellucidus, da, dum, very clear.

Pellucide, clearly.

Pelluo, luere, to wash clean.

Pelluuiu^, a basin, wherein men's fete ar washed.

Peloponnesus, a country in Greece, called now Morea, and lies between the sea
called Ionium, and the sea called Aegeum.

Pelops, pelopidis, which vanquysshed on horseback in rounnynge Oenomaus,
father of Hippodamia, and wedded her.

Peloris, a kind of shell fysshe.

Pelorus, a hill in Sicile on the sea side.

Pelta, a tergat or bucklar, like an half moon.

Peltati, they which do wear such bucklars.

Peluis, a basin.

Pelusium, a city in Egypt.

Peminosus, a, um, stynkynge.

Penates, the gentyles called goddis of man's life: they be sometime taken for
the most secret parts of the house.

Penarius, and penarium, a cellar or storehowse.

Pendeo, es, pependi, pendere, pensum, to hang, or be hanged, to depend,
sometime to be in pain.

Pendere promissis, to trust to promyses.

Pendere, sygnifyeth also to be in doubt.

Pendere animi, to be in doubt or fear. some time to long or desire to know.
Plancus Ciceroni. Ego animi pendeo quid illud sit negotij, I long to know
what the matter is.

Pendere poenas, to be punyshed.

Pendet dragmas december, it wayeth ten drammes.

Pendet ab eius ore, he harkeneth dyligently what he says.

Pendent opera interrupta, the wark remains imperfect for a while.

Pendere rei, is said of them that be suyd, and do tarry a long time or they
be dispached.

Pendens, he that is hanged.

Pendens uinum, wine yet in the grape.

Pendo, is, pependi, dear, to ponder or way, to consider, to esteem or value,
to pay, to susteyn or suffer, look for dependo, suspendo, expenin their first
letters.

I endere poenas magistro, to be ^eten of the master.

Pendere supplicia, to recompense an offense by death.

Pendulus, la, lum, that hangs.

Pene, almooste.

Penelope, the daughter of Iearus and wife of Ulysses, most chaste wise and
constante above all the women of her time, who in the xx years in the which
her husbond was absent, she being assaulted with diverse wowers which would
she or no abode in her house, she might never with fair means nor menaces
be inducyd to marye, or to consent to commytte any folly.

Penelopes, birds called also Meliagrides.

Penelopes telam retexere, sygnifyeth to do and undo, to take much labor in
vain.

Penes, with or at.

Penes hunc, with him, or in him.

Penes te, it is in the.

Penetrabilis, trabile, that may yerce or be perced.

Penetrale, the inner part of the house.

Penetro, are, to perce or enter.

Peneus, a river in Grecia which dyuydeth the countrays of Elis and Achaia.

Penicella, a paynters pencelle, wherewith he paynteth.

Penicillus, peniculum, and penicillum, a paynters pensell.

Peniculamentum, the hemme of a garmente, the skyrtes.

Peniculus, sieve peniculum, any thing which serves to brushe or wype clean
any thing.

Peninsula, a place almooste enuyronned about with water.

Penis, a tail, also the secret member of a man.

Penitus, ta, tum, tayled, having a tail, alsoo penitus inward.

Penitus, an aduerbe, utterly, to the uttermost, far of.

Penna, a pen or quylle.

Pennarium, a pennar.

Penniculum, a fether.

Penniger, pennigera, gerum, that which bears feathers.

Pennula, a little fether.

Pensa, that which is paid for a thing brought. the payement Pensa, in the
plurell number, thredes of flax or woull, when it is spunne, which may be
called yarne.

Pensator, a wayer.

Pensiculate, wayghtyly.

Pensiculo, are, to ponder a thing.

Pensilis, le, that which hangs or stondeth on high.

Pensile horreu^, a garnard where corn is kept.

Pensilis homo, a man hanged.

Pensi nihil habere, to ponder or consider nothing, not to ponder or consider
any thing, to care for nothing, or not to care.

Pensio, a pensyon or yearly rent.

Pensito, tare, to way and consider a thing dilygently.

Pensitare, to pay.

Pensitatio, recompense.

Pensitatus, ta, tum, thought on.

Pensiculo, are, idem quod pensito.

Pensitor, a ponderer or wayer Verborum pensitatores subtilissimi, The most
subtyl ponderers of words.

Penso, are, to way or ponder, alsoo to esteem a thing, sometime to bye.

Pensare uicem alterius, to be in the steed of an other.

Vaeteribus benefactis noua pensantes maleficia, to recompense new displeasures
with old venefytes or pleasures.

Pensare singula, to consider every thing dylygently.

Pensare aliquid ex alio, to change oone for an another.

Pensior, and hoc pensius. Plaut. Altera utra sit conditio pensior, uirginem an
uiduam hab ere? Which think you the better bargayne to have the maid or the
wydowe?

Pensiuncula, a little pencyon.

Pensor, oris, a wayer.

Pensus, a, um, wayed, examyned. sometime it sygnifieth good and wise.

Pensum, the flax, which is bounden on the distaffe, out of the which the
threde is drawn. sometime it sygnyfyeth the threde that is spunne. It is alsoo
the execution or mynystration of an office. also regard that oone has to a
thing.

Pensilis hortus, a gardeyne made upon the roufe of a house, or upon pyllers.

Pensilis urbs, a city standing on vaultes.

Pentaphillon, seu Pentepatalon, an herb called cynke foil, which has five
leaves. The physicians of late time do suppose it to be Tormentyl, wherewith I
am not satisfied.

Pentacontarchus, a captayn of fyfty men.

Pentadactilus, a broche or spyt in five parts with one handell. it is alsoo
the herb called Pentaphillon, cynquefoyle.

Pentapharmacum conuiuium, a dinner or supper, wherein are five sundry dyshes of
meat, read Spartianum in uita Hadriani.

Pentapolis, a country between Palestina and Arabia, wherein were the cities of
Sodom and Gomor, burned by the vengeance of god for sin against nature.

Pentarchus, he that is captain of five men.

Pentateuchus, the volume of the five books of Moses, that is to say, Genesis,
Exodi, Numeri, Leuiticum, Deuteronomium.

Pentathlus, he that exercyseth any of these five games, casting of the balle,
or tryndell, runnynge, leaping, wrastlynge, and throwynge the darte.

Pentecoste, Whytsontyde.

Pentelici hermae, were little images of Mercurius made of marble called
Pendelicus, which was one of the most fair stones that images might be
wrought of.

Pentesilea, a queen of Amazon, which was slain at the syege of Troy.

Pentimimeris, is a part of a verse, where a sentence is fynyshed in the first
syllable of the third foot.

Pentorobon, an herb called also peony.

Penula, a cloak, worn when it rayneth.

Penularium, a cloak bag.

Penulatus, cloked.

Penuria, extreme necessity, penury.

Penus, penoris, and penum, and penu, and penuarium, a storehouse, sometime
store or prouysion of vytayles.

Penussime, utterly.

Peonia, an herb called Pyonye, which bears a red flower, and great
round seed wherein is meruaylous virtue against the falling evil.

Peplis, an herb like to pourselane, and is of some men called wild Purslane.

Peplos, an herb, having small leaves like rewe sommewhat brother, the top
round, spredde, on the ground, the length of ones hand, the seed being
under the leaves, little and round, less than white popy, some apothecaries
do name it Esaia rotunda.

Peplus, uel peplum, a kerchiefe or other like covering of the head.

Peperci, I have spared, or forborne, or pardoned.

Pepigi, and pupugi, the pretertence of pungo. Also pepigi, is the pretertence
of pango. Pepigit foedus, He made a league or alyance.

Pepo, onis, a kind of Melones, called Pompones.

Peptica, medycynes, which do make good concoction in a man, that the meat
eaten, may dygeste well. Alsoo saluts and oyntementes, which do make
impostumes ripe.

Per, sygnyfyeth by, joined with an another word, it sygnyfyethe perfection.
Perpulchrum, Very fair. Pergraue, Very greuouse. Per aetatem, for or by
reason of his age. Per fidem, per fortunas, per dexteram te oro, I pray the for
the love of god.

Caesar mihi ignoscit per literas, Caesar writes to me that he has pardoned me.

Per maturitatem dehiscens, It is cloven by to much rypenesse, or by reason
that it was to ripe.

Per me licet, I am content.

Per multas aetates, of a long time.

Per metum, for fear.

Per nebulam scire, to know the one half or not certainly.

Per noctem, at night.

Per omneis dies, every day, or day by day.

Per otium, at leisure.

Per potestatem, under color of authority. Obsecro ut per pacem licet te
alloqui, I pray you let me talk with you, without dyspleasure, or I pray
you hear me pacientely,

Per se sibi quisque charus est, Every man of his nature loves best him self.

Per silentium adesse aeque animo, to hear without speaking one word.

Per silentium, without noise.

Per stadia duo, the space of two furlonge.

Per speciem uena^di urbe^ egressi, They went out of the town, by making
semblance to go on hunting.

Per summum dedecus, with great shame.

Per te stetit, it lay in the.

Per tempus, all at a time, or in time.

Pera, a scryppe or bag.

Peractio, accomplyshement or performance.

Perago, egi, agere, to perform, to make perfect to consider, to draw or cause
to be drawn with force. Peragere reum, to accuse one, and do sue him to a
condemnation.

Peragere oi^a secu^ animo, to consider every thing, or to dygest every thing
in his mind.

Peragere cibum, to dygeste meat.

Peragere mortem, to dye.

Peragere res gestas, to write all that is done.

Vbi sententiam meam uobis peregero, After that I have showed you mine opinyon.

Peragro, are, to walk or go about a place.

Peragrare per animos hominum, to pass by men's hearts, or as the people do
favor.

Peragrare latebras suspitionum, to seek all conjectures, whereof suspicion may
happen.

Peragratus, ta, tum, gone about.

Peragratio, a going about.

Perambulo, are, to go through, sometime to ride through or about a country
or field.

Peramo, are, to love well.

Peranno, annare, to continue or live over year.

Perardeo, dear, to bourne out or through.

Perareo, ere, to dry up, to be very dry.

Peraresco, idem.

Peraro, are, to tylle all through.

Perbacchor, ari, to be oftentimes drunk.

Perbelle, very well, right well.

Perbibo, bibere, to quafte or drink all out.

Perbitere, for praeire, to go before.

Per causam, for a cause.

Perca, a fyshe called a perch.

Percalleo, lee, to be waxen hard.

Percallere usum alicuius rei, to know perfytely the use of any thing.

Percautus, ta, tum, very subtle or wytty.

Percelebro, are, to publyshe in all places.

Perculit eum illud, that abateth his courage, or struck him to the heart.

Percellere pectus pauore, it troubled his spirit with fear.

Perculsus animus et abiectus, his spirit was troubled, and his courage abated.

Percenseo, sere, to recounte or reken.

Percingo, gere, to gyrde about.

Percedere, to depart.

Percello, li, lere to stryke and overthrow.

Percino, nere, to sing still, to continewe singing.

Percipio, caepi, cipere, to perceive, to take or receive, to comprehend, to
learn.

Neque agri, neque urbis odiu^ me unquam percipit. I am never weary to be either
in the country or in the city.

Percipere usum alicuius rei, to use a thing.

Percipere opinione, to doubt of a thing.

Perclam, very privily.

Perduaxo, for perdo.

Peredia, a meal, where men eat hungerly.

Perceptio uerbale.

Perceptio fructuum, the taking of the profit or revenues.

Perceptio animi, understanding.

Percitus, styrred.

Percitus insania, mad.

Percoarcto, are, to bring into a little room.

Percolo, ui, ere, to worship much.

Percrebresco, bui, bescere, to be publyshed or sown abroad in all places.

Percrebuit, the bruyte or voice of people was.

Percolo, ui, ere, to worship much.

Percontor, aris, ari, to search to enquire busily

Percoquere, to boil thoroughly.

Percoctus, well boiled.

Percudo, di, dear, to break.

Perculsus, and percussus, stryken.

Percunctor, aris, ari, to enquire, to demand.

Percuro, are, to heal perfytely.

Percursum animo, plainly known.

Percurro, rere, to run apace, to run by, to tell or read a thing
quickly.

Percurso, are, to ouerrunne.

Percutio, cussi, tere, to stryke or smite.

Percutere fores, to knock at the door.

Percutit animum, it brake his heart, it struck him to the heart.

Percuti sydere, to be taken, or have the use of his members taken from him.

Percussae de coelo turres, The towers were beaten down with thunder.

Percutere foedus, to make a league or alyaunce, one prince with an other, or
one country or city with an another.

Percutere fossam, to dyg a dyche or trenche.

Percussor, a murderar.

Perdite, extremely.

Perditus, ta, tum, lost, peryshed, without recovery, out of hope.

Perdius, abiding all the day, or watchyng all the day, or he which does any
thing in the day time.

Perditium, the herb called pelytory of the wall, read Helxine and Parietaria.

Perdix, dicis, a partryche.

Perdo, didi, dear, to lose, to slay.

Perduco, duxi, ducere, to bring to an end, to bring or lead by force or
other means.

Perduellio, onis, treason against the king, or the country. also a traitor.

Perduellis, an ennemy.

Peredo, edi, edere, to eat all.

Peregre, out of a man's proper country.

Peregre uado, I go out of the country, or on pylgremage. Peregre uenio, I
come out of strange countries, or from pylgremage.

Peregrinor, aris, ari, to go into strange countries or on pylgremage.

Peregrinus, a stranger or alyen.

Peremptalia, among Augures, were those lightnynges, which did utterly
dystroy and put away the significations of other lyghtnynges and tokens
precedynge.

Perendie, the day next after to morrow.

Perendinus dies, idem.

Perennis fluuius, a course of water, that comes with rain, or a brook that
is only made with rain.

Perenniter, continually.

Perennis, ne, perpetual, ever during.

Perennitas, tatis, continuance, long abiding.

Perenno, are, to dure or continue.

Per exiguum tempus, a very short while.

Pereo, iui, uel ij, ire, to be lost or consumed. also to dye.

Perire ab aliquo, to be slain by one.

Perierunt aedes, the howses be down, or in ruin.

Perijt illi pudor, he is not ashamed.

Nullus otio perit dies, no day is lost with ydelnesse.

Tua art uiginti minae pro psaltria periere, By thy craft I have cast away
twenty nobles on the singing wenche.

Ne pueri pereant fame, that the chylderne dye not for hunger.

Quod si fit pereo funditus, if it be so, I am utterly undone.

Perire morbo, to dye in a syckenes.

Peream, I would I should dye than.

Perit ab animo, his courage fails him.

Perire mulierem, to dye for the love of a woman.

Pererro, are, to go or ride all about.

Perfacul, the ancient writers used for facile, lightly.

Per fas and nefas, by right or wrong, by oone way and other.

Perfect, perfytely.

Perfectus, a, um, perfytte, accomplysshed, opteyned.

Perfector, oris, he that brings a thing to pass, or to a point.

Perfero, ruli, far, to bring in conclusyon. also to bring or tell
tidings sommetyme to suffer or endure.

Perficio, cere, to accomplysshe, to bring to a point, to opteyne.

Perfidiosus, a, um, full of dysloyaltie.

Perfidiose, disloyally, traitorously.

Perfido, dear, to trust much.

Perfidus, false of promise, he that does any thing against the trust that
is put in him dysloyall.

Perfidia, falsehode against promise or trust, disloyalty.

Perfidus, very trusty.

Perfines, for perstringas, strain thou hard.

Perflatus, a great blaste of wind.

Perflo, are, to blow vehemently or strongly.

Perfluo, xi, fluere, to run out as water does out of a broken vessel.

Perfodio, dear, to bore or perce through, to stryke through, to dygge
through, or to the bottom or depest of any thing.

Perfore, to come well to pass.

Perforare, to perce, or to make an hoole through.

Perfortiter, myghtily.

Perfossus, a, um, perced through, stryken or dygged through.

Perfracte, obstinately.

Perfrigefacio, perfrigefacere, to make very cold.

Perfrico, care, to rub much.

Perfricuit faciem, aut frontem, aut os, Is in a proverb as much to say, as
he has laid apart shame, or he is shameless or without abashement.

Perfrictae frontis, without shame or honesty.

Perfringere, to break in pieces.

Perfructus est, he has taken the fruit or pleasure of a thing, he has used
or exercysed a thing, or has left the use or exercise thereof.

Perfruor, perfructus, perfretus, aut perfruitus, perfrui, to take all the
profit or commodity, to take pleasure or recreation in any thing.

Perfuga, he that flees to the contrary part in battle, or forsakes his
captain.

Perfugio, gere, to run unto one for succor.

Perfugium, a place whereunto a man runs to have succor, or to be kept from
danger. It is also taken for any thing, whereby a man may be succored.

Perfunctorie, passing over lightly.

Perfunctorius, a, um, that which passes lightly away, or taryeth not long.

Perfunctus, he that has done diligently his duty or office.

Perfundo, perfudi, fundere, to pour out or drop out, or still out,
Perfunditque genas lachrimis, The tears dropped down on his cheeks.

Perfundere animum relligione, to be scrupulouse.

Perga, a town in Pamphilia, whereof Diana was called Pergaea.

Pergama, orum, the towers of Troy.

Pergamena charta, parchement.

Pergama sieve pergamus, a city in Asia, which Silenus the river passes
through, that same city is called Troy.

Perge, go to, pass forth.

Perge in uirum, play the man, go to like a man, go to hardely.

Pergin? wylt thou not leave? wylt thou not be gone.

Pergrandis, de, very great.

Pergo, perrexi, pergere, to go, to proceed, to endeavor to do a thing, to
continue, to make have, to assaye. Ire perrexi. I endeavored to go. Suspenso
gradu placide ire perrexi, I assayed with a light pace to go softly.

Pergunt domos eorum, they went to their howses. etc.

Pergo praeterita, I will not speak of that which is passed.

Domum ire pergam, I will make haste to go home.

Pergraecor, aris, ari, to be ryotouse, in eating, drinking, and hauntynge
harlottes.

Pergraue, very grievously.

Pergula, a galery, properly where it is open on both sides. It is also the
place in a ship, wherein men do walk, also a vine raised in the form of an
herber. sometime the company of warkemen, obeyinge to the chief warkeman.

Pergulana uitis, a vine runnyng on a frame.

Perhibeo, ere, to say, to give, to affirm.

Praetium perhibere, to set a price.

Perhibere testimonium, to bear witness.

Perhibere uerba, to say.

Perhorreo, rere, to be sore aferde.

Perhorresco, idem.

Perhumane, and perhumaniter, right gentilly.

Perhyemo, are, to endure all the winter.

Periander. one of the seven wise men of Greece

Periclimenon, an herb called wodbynde which bears the honysucle.

Pericles, a noble and valyaunte capytayne of the Atheniensis, excellent in
wit and natural eloquence, and was instructed in philosophy by Anaxagoras,
so that thereby he atteyned to meruaylouse great knowledge, and noble courage
and patience, in so much as wha^ a lewd person followed him to his house
reuylynge him by all the way, when he was come to his door, than being
night, Perycles commanded one of his servants to take a torche and bring
him which had rebuked him home to his house: Also he being in great estimation
and authority among the people of Athenes, would never be at any feasts or
bankettynges, nor receive of any man anypresentes or gifts, nor did go to
every assembly or counsel, or being there did speak or reason in every
matter, but reserved him self to things of very great importance, and yet than
seemed he to be very tymerouse, but yet was his eloquence so excellent, his
voice and pronunciation so pleasante, his sentences so ponderouse and
vehement, that he never spoke, but that thereto all men consented, and therefore
it is written of him that he did fulminate his words, that is to say, that
they proceeded from him as thu^der and lightnynge. He was of such temperance,
that although he seemed to have all the Athenyensis at his commandment, yet he
never increased his own revenues the worth of oone ferthynge, but augmented
the commune tresure excedyngelye, and such spoil as came to his part in the
wars, he did imploye upon grain and vittayle dividing it among the people,
in the time of necessity, only he was unfortunate in his own children, his
eldest sone Xantippus, persecutinge him with sundry displesures and openly
mockyng him, Not withstanding as it was reason, he dyed miserably before his
father* Finally Pericles being sick unto death, the noble men commen unto him
to comfort him, speking softly they communed of his prowess, where he had
victory in nine great battayles, he herynge what they spoke, said unto
them, that he much maruayled that they extolled so much that thing, whereof
the more part perteyned to fortune, and had happened to diverse other capitaines
as well as to him, and that which was most to be praised, they spoke
nothing of it, for never man (said he) by mine occasion had cause to put
murnynge garments upon him. Plutarchus in uitis. He was before the incarnation
of Christ. 441. years.

Periclitor, aris, ari, to be in peril, also to experience or prove a thing.

Periclitatio, experience or assaye.

Periculose, daungerously.

Periculosus, a, um, daungerouse.

Pericuium, peril or danger, sometime experience or proof.

Periculum facere, to prove.

Perhiodus, a clause, a circuit in words, or continuance in speaking.

Perhiodice febris, fevers, which come by course or fyttes.

Perillus, was an artifycer, which made a bull of brass wherinto (being
glowynge hot) men should be put, that in tourmentynge of them, by their
ceienge, and noise should issue out like the mowynge or belowynge of a bulle,
the which engyne when Perillus had given to Phalaris, the cruel tyrant, he
caused the crafts man to be first put into it, to prove his own experience.

Perimo, emi, imere, to kill.

Perimere reditum alicui, to let or stop one of his way.

Perimere consilium alicuius, to break or disappoynt ones enterprise.

Peremptus, ta, tum, killed.

Peridoneus, a, um, very mete.

Periegesis, a compass or cyrcuite.

Perij, I am lost or distroyed.

Perij animo, my heart or courage is gone.

Perire mulierem, to love a woman fervently.

Periclymenum, an herb called wodbynde or honysuckle.

Perinde, so, inlyke wise, even like, very much uen as, in this fascion.

Perinde atque capta urbe, like as if the city had been won.

Nulla re perinde motus quam responso, He was not so much moved with any
thing as with the answer.

Sed perinde erit ut accoeperis, but it shallbe even as thou will take it.

Aduentus non perinde gratus fuit, his coming was not very pleasant, or
acceptable.

Perinephra, the greeks called those bestes which were fat about the kydneys.

Perinthus, a city of Thrace, which now is called Heraclia.

Periodicus, ca, cum, that goes and comes by courses.

Periodica febris, a fever which comes by courses, as tertians and quartanes.

Perioeci, companions or dwellers to gether in one house.

Peripatasma, the hanging of a house, with tapesrye or other like thing.

Peripateticus, a philosopher of Aristotle's seete or opinion.

Peripheria, a circumference.

Periphrasis, circumlocution, one word expressed by many.

Periplorema, a figure, when a part of a sentence nothing necessary, is
added unto a verse.

Peripneumonia, an apostome in the lunges, procedynge of thycke humors, and
commonly follows pleuresy.

Peripneumonicus, he which has that disese.

Peripsema, matis, the powder or dust that comes of fylynge or shauynge of
metal or wodde.

Periscelis, idis, sloppes which women were wont to wear.

Perissologia, a superfluous speaking.

Peristerae, house culuers or doves.

Peristereon, a culuer house.

Peristerotrophium, idem.

Peristroma, tapes^y, or couerlyddes of Aras or Verdure.

Peristylium, a place set about with pyllers.

Perite, aduer, wisely kunnyngly.

Perito, rare, to peryshe or be lost.

Perithous, the companyon of Theseus.

Peritia, cunning in any science.

Peritus, cunninge, perfect in a science.

Periuro, rare, to swear vntrewelye to be perjured.

Periuriosus, a man which is often forsworn.

Periurus, forsworn, perjured.

Periurior, more forsworn.

Periurium, perjury.

Perizoma, matis, a breche.

Perizonium, a corse or broad gyrthe, wherewith maidens were wont to be gyrte
under their pappes.

Perlego, legere, to read over all.

Perlecebra, a thing which pleasantly draws a man to favor it.

Perlepidus, perlepida, perlepidum, veraye fair.

Perlibenter, with a very good will.

Perliberalis, very lyberall.

Perlibro, to way diligently.

Perligo, gare, to bind hard or fast.

Perlitus, ta, tum, anointed hard.

Perloquor, qui, to speak out all to an end, to speak perfitely.

Perlucidum, and pellucidum, clear that a man may se through, as water,
glass, horn.

Perluo, luere, to wash over or all.

Perlustro, st^are, to behold all about.

Permadesco, to be much wette, or to be made very moist.

Permadefacio, cere, to make very moist or to wete much.

Permadeo, idem.

Permagnus, a, um, very great.

Permano, and permanesco, are, and nescere, to be disclosed, known, or
diuulgate.

Permaneo, mansi, nere, to abide.

Permano, are, to run all over, or to fall into to be declared openly.

Per manus traditum, that, which is left from one to an other, or is taught
by one to an other. As the father tells or leaves to his son, and he to
his son, and so contynually by line.

Permaturesco, scere, to be through ripe.

Permerdo, to defyle over all.

Per me, aut te, aut illum, aut aliquid aliud stare, When we, or any other
thing is the cause, that a thing is not done. Omnia iam parata erant, nisi
per eum stetisset. Now al things were ready, if by his occasion it had not be
let.

Permessus, aut permessis, ssidos, a river in Greece, dedicate to the Muses.

Permisceo, permiscui, miscere, to myxte all together.

Permissio, a sufferaunce.

Permitto, misi, mittere, to suffer, to yield or deliver, to thraste in, to
throw down, to commytte, to send forth, to let down, as to let down
one by a rope, or other like thing.

Permittere equum, to give to the horse the brydell, or to let go at his
pleasure.

Permittere sese, to yield him self.

Permittere, to give leave.

Permittere iracundiae alicuius, to give place to one when he is angry.

Permittere omnia iuditio alterius, to submit him self to the judgment of one.

Permissus, us, license or leave.

Permulceo, cere, to appease, addoulce, or mittigate a man's displeasure.

Permulti, very many.

Permuto, mutare, to change one thing for an other.

Permutatio, an exchange.

Permutator, he that exchaungeth.

Perna, the pestyll and also the gammonde of bacon.

Pernego, are, to deny stiffly.

Perniciabilis, pernicialis, and perniciosus, causynge death mortal.

Pernicies, death, great damage, destruction.

Pernicitas, swyftenesse.

Pernitior, tius, warse, more dangerous, more full of myschiefe.

Pernicissimus, cissima, mum, warste, most daungerouse.

Perniciter, dangerously, mischeuously.

Pernio, onis, a kybe on the heel.

Perniunculus, a little kybe.

Pernix, cis, swyfte, flyghtye, sometime stubborn, also deedly.

Pernocto, noctare, to tarry all the night, to watch, to pray, to rest, to
walk, to stand, to dwell, to sleep, to lie out of his own house.

Pernosco, scere, to know perfectely.

Pernumero, are, to tell out money.

Pernox, all night, during all the night.

Pero, onis, a shoe of raw lether, also a sack.

Per opus est, it is very necessary.

Perogiganus, perogita, he that puts a stalyon to the mare, to season her.

Peroleo, to savor or stnke much.

Peronatus, he that wears raw lether shoen boteux or cokars like a ploughman.

Perorior, iris, re, to begin, spring, or grow by the occasion of some thing.

Peroro, are, to speak or reason to an end, to reason perfectly, sometime to
move the herers to indignation.

Perorare in aliquem, to plead against one.

Perorati o, the last part of an oration, wherein the affectes of the hearers
are chyefelye styrred.

Peroriga, he that helps one to horseback.

Perrori, a people of Aethiopia.

Perosus, sa, sum, extremely hated.

Perpaco, care, to set all thing in peace.

Perparum, very little.

Perparce, very scarsely, very nyghely, or nygardely.

Perpasco, perpaui, perpascere, to feed to the vttermoste.

Perparuus, a, um, a very littell one.

Parpaucus, ca, cum, very few.

Perpauxillus, a, um, idem.

Perpauefacio, pauefeci, facere, to make soore afraid.

Perpello, perpuli, perpellere, to constrayne, to move or induce one to do a
thing.

Perpendicularis, are, that is dyrectely down right.

Perpendiculum, a plumlyne, such as masons and carpenters have, with leadde at
the end whereby they do prove the evenness of their squares.

Perpendo, dear, to examine, also to consider.

Perpense, advisedly, with a consideration.

Perperam, amiss, ouerthwartely, vnhappyly wrongfully.

Perperi, fools, ideotes, shrewes, lycrs.

Perperitudo, shrewdenes, foolyshenes.

Perpero, are, to mar a thing.

Perpes, perpetis, perpetual.

Noctem perpetem dormire, to sleep all night long.

Perpessus, he that suffers with much pain.

Perpetim, perpetually, without ceasynge.

Perpetro, trare, properly to do or to commytte an act good or ill.

Perpetuo, are, to continue without ceassynge.

Perpetuus, petua, petuum, perpetual, everlasting, continual, holl, not in
portions or diuyded.

Perpetior, perpeti, to suffer pacientelye, to endure.

Perpessio, endurynge.

Perpeto, perpetere, to ask importunatelye, without cessynge, to perform.

Perpetratio, an act good or bad.

Pepetuitas, eternity, an everlasting contynuaunce.

Perpetuum, and perpetuo, aduerbes signifieng continually, always, for ever.

Perplaceo, perplacui, perplacere, to content very much.

Perplector, perplecteris, plecti, to bind or twyste hard or fast, to meddle
so to gether, that a man can not know what the thing means.

Perplexe loqui, to speak now one thing, now an other, that a man wotteth
not what he means.

Perplexim, idem.

Perplexor, aris, ari, to speak doubtfullye, as words, wherein are two
intendementes. At scio, quo uos pacto soleatis, perplexarier, pactum, non
pactum est. Non pactum, pactum est, quod uobis lubet. Well, I know well
inoughe, in what fascion you are wont to speak, that a man can not tell
how to take you: it was promised, it was not promised, it was not promised, it
was promised, even as it lists you.

Perplexabile, a word spoken, which has two diverse understandings, or
that which is one thing in herynge, an other in understanding.

Perplexabiliter, doubtfully.

Perplexus, plexa, plexum, perplexed, twysted to gether, or hard to be loused,
intrycate, doubtefull.

Perpluit, perpluere, to rain in the myddel of a house.

Perplus, much more.

Perpol, an oath, sygnifyenge by Pollux. sometime the word Per, does perteyne
to the words following. Perpol quam paucos reperias meretricibus fideles
euenire amatores. By God thou fyndeste very few true lovers happen to
commune womenne. Where per belongethe to quam paucos, and not to Pol.

Perpoto, perpotare, to drink all day, or to drink still, or continually, or
until one be drunk.

Perpotatio, a contynuaunce in drinking, drunkerye.

Perpulcher, perpulchra, perpulchrum, very fair.

Perpulchre, very well done.

Perprurisco, perpruriscere, to have a greatte ytche, or desire to clawe or
scratche.

Perpurgo, gare, to make all thing clean or neatte.

Perputo, perputare, to declare all. Nunc operam date, ut ego argumentum hoc
uobis plane perputem, Now take ye head, that I may plainly declare all this
matter unto you.

Perquam, added to any nowne adjective, augmenteth his power. Perquam doctus,
Very well learned. Perquam stolidus, very folyshe.

Perquiro, quisiui, quirere, to make dyligente search, to examyne.

Perraro, very selde.

Perrepto, tare, to go softelye, or with much pain.

Perrideo, perrisi, perridere, to laugh heartily.

Perrisio, sere, to scorn, to laughe at one, or to make an other to laughe.

Perrogo, gare, to desire heartily.

Perrumpo, rupi, rumpere, to break on sunder, or in the mids.

Persa, a man or womanne of the countreye of Persia.

Persaepe, very often.

Persancte, very devoutly, or solempnely.

Perscribo, perscribere, to write a thing through, or to an end, to regyster
or inroll a thing.

Perscriptio, a deed of a man's own writing.

Perscrutor, scrutari, to search or inquire dyligentlye.

Persefacul, the old and ancient writers used for perfacile, very lightly, or
very casily.

Persenex, persenis, very old.

Persentisco, scere, to perceive well.

Persephone, the surname of Proserpina, and signifies the virtue of seeds in
springinge.

Persepolis, a city in the country of Persia.

Persequor, eris, qui, to pursue, to continue in that, which is begone, to
persecute, to be avenged.

Persequi aliquem bello, to war against one.

Persequi aliquem uestigijs, to follow ones steps.

Persequi numeris cursus syderum, to calculate the course of the sterres.

Persequi iniurias, to aduenge.

Persequi factis quod dicimus, to do as we speak.

Persequi imperium patris, to do the fathers commandment.

Persequi ius suum, to defend his right.

Persequi poenas alicuius, to revenge ones death.

Persequi promissa alicuius, to solicit one to keep his prommyse.

Persequi uita disciplinam recte uiuendi, To live according to the doctrine of
living honestely.

Persequi uoluptates, to addicte or give him self to live pleasauntly.

Persea, a tree which grows very high, the wood is black, the leaf and
flower like to a pear the leaf never falls, and bears always fruit,
which is of the quantity of a pear, in form long, and enclosed in an husk
like an almonde, grene in color, and has with in him a nut like a damsyn but
that it is less and softer, the fruit is sweet and dilectable, light of
digestion, and although it be excedyngely eaten it hurts not, and the rote
is very great.

Persero, perseui, perserere, To sow about or abroad.

Perseuerantia, a stable abiding in any thing reasonable.

Perseueranter, constantly.

Perseuero, rare, to continue with a steadfast mind.

Perseus, a noble knight, which delivered a fair lady called Andromeda from
a whale, and also slew Medusa, which turned men in to stones. Also it is a
sign among the sterres.

Persia, a country in the east part of the world which has on the north
Media^, on the west Susianam, on the este Carmaniam, on the southe the persian
sea called Sinus persicus. where now Sophy reigns.

Persica poma, a fruit called peaches.

Persicus, ca, cum, of Persia.

Persideo, dear, to sytte by,

Persisto, stere, to abide, also to tarry.

Persido, to perse unto the botome.

Persolata, an herb called Clote leaves, which bears great burtes.

Persoluo, uere, to pay truly, to pay all, to accomplish.

Persoluere grates, to give thanks.

Persolus, alone, without company.

Persona, a visour, like to a mannnes face, also person or personage, among
diuynes and late philosophers: sometime the quality of a man.

Personatus, a masker, or he that wearethe a vysour.

Personata felicitas, a counterfayte felicity.

Personata uulnera, hydden wounds.

Personata, an herb, which growethe by the water side, having great broad
leaves like gourdes, but that they be greatter and harder: I suppose it to be
the herb, which in some country is called Donye.

Personatus, tus, a mask.

Persono, personare, to sown out, or sown perfectly.

Perspecto, tare, to look well about.

Perspectus, ta, tum, plainly perceived or known.

Perspicacitas, tatis, quickenesse of syghte consyderation.

Perspicace, advisedly, with good consideration

Perspicaciter, idem.

Perspicientia, perfect knowledge.

Perspicue, clearly, openly, evidently.

Perspicax, acis, he that sees quickly, and does all things with
consideration.

Perspiceo, spexi, spicere, to see or understand plainly.

Perspicuitas, ratis, clerenesse, properly in words or sentences, casynes.

Perspicuus, a, um, clear, plain, easy.

Perspisso, an aduerbe, very late.

Perstino, are, to set a price on a thing.

Persto, as, stiti, stare, to abide firmly.

Perstrepo, pui, ere, to make a great noise.

Perstrictores, iuglers.

Perstringo, perstringere, to wringe hard, to towche a thing shortly in
speaking or writynge, to dull or dark with to much light.

Perstringere aures, to fill the ears with noise. Perstringre nomen aut fama^,
to give a man an ill name.

Persuadeo, persuasi, persuadere, to induce one to believe or trust, to advise,
to stir vehementely.

Persuasibile, and persuasibiliter, in such wise as it may persuade.

Persuasor, oris, a perswader or inducer to do^ a thing.

Persuastrix, a woman, which induces or moves one to do an act.

Persuo, ere, to sow up all.

Pertaedeo, dear and pertaedescere, to be very werye.

Pertego, tegere, to cover all.

Per tempus, in time convenient, in season.

Pertendo, dear, to extend.

Pertento, tare, to tempte, to assaye or prove much.

Pertero, triui, terere, to rub or frot a thing.

Perterreo, rui, perterrere, to make aferde.

Perterrefacio, cere, idem.

Pertesus, displeased, annoyed Sermonis pertesus, weary of the communcation.

Pertesus ignauiam suam displeased for his slouthfulnes.

Pertexo, texi, texere, to make an end, to conclude, properly to wayue out, or
to weaue perfectly.

Pertica, a staff, a rogel, a perch or poll, wherewith ground is met.

Pertimeo, and pertimesco, pertimescere, to fear much.

Pertinatia, obstinacle, perseverance, constance.

Pertinaciter, obstinately.

Pertinatius, more obstynately.

Pertinas, acis, obstinate, he that holds fast.

Pertinatior, pertinacissimus, more and most obstinate, sometime constant.

Pertineo, pertinere, to extend to a thing, to touch a thing.

In tuas pertinet aedes, ti comes home to thy house, or touches thy house.

Gratius mihi futurum, quam si ea tua liberalitas pertinuisset ad rem
familiarem meam. It shall be to me more pleasure, than if ye had extended
that your liberality toward mine own proper commodity.

Pertinet, a verb impersonall.

Pertinet ad te, it belongs to the, it concerns the.

Pertinet ad re^, it apperteyneth or belongs to the matter.

Pertinet somnium ad hoc, it is even as I dreamed.

Eadem bonitas etiam ad multitudinem per tinet, it besemeth as well the people
to have that goodness as other men.

Pertineo, pertinere, to perteyne or belong, to be joined to,

Pertinax certamen. a soore batttayle where neither part will give over.

Pertinax fama, a fame or brute which dureth ever.

Pertingo, tingere, to touch much, to join hard unto a thing.

Pertisum, old writers used for pertesum.

Pertolero, are, to endure to the end, to sustain valiauntly.

Pertondeo, dear, to clyppe or shere all.

Pertractare, to touch or handell.

Pertraho, xi, here, to draw to with force.

Pertranseo, siui, and sii, ire, to pass through.

Per transennam inspicere, to look on a thing fer of, or on part, and not on
all.

Pertranslucidus, so clear that one may look through it.

Pertundo, tudi, tundere, to stryke hard, or break a thing in strykynge.

Pertundo, tusi, tu^dere, to beat with hammers

Perturbo, are, to trouble much, or vex.

Perturbatio, a trouble of mind.

Pertubate, with trouble of mind, unquietly.

Pertusa uasa, vessels cracked or broken in some part.

Peruade,

Peruado, peruasi, uadere, to go over all.

Peruagor, ari, to wander about, to be publyshed.

Peruello, elli, eliere, to pluck, sometime to prycke.

Peruellere aliquem, to pluck or pull at one.

Peruellere ius, to dispraise the law.

Peruelim scire, I would feign know.

Peruenor, ari, to hunt over all.

Peruenio, nire, to come to a place or to an end Peruenire ad nummos, to come
by the money that is owed.

Si ad heru^ haecres peruenit peristi pulchre, If this thing come to thy
masters ear, thou have spun a fair threde.

Sine me peruenire quo uolo, let me speak that which I intend to speak.

Peruenire ad manus, to come to handstrokes

Peruenire ad primos, to be set among the best.

Peruenire in potestatem, to be in subjection.

Peruenire in tu^elam, to be in ward.

Peruersus, a, um, froward.

Perverse, malyciousely, myscheuousely, ouerthwattly.

Perverse uides, thou see naughtily.

Peruerto, to make ill, to peruerte, or deprave.

Peruertere officium, to do contrary to his duty.

Peruertere aliquem, to destroy one.

Peruestigo, gare, to find in seeking.

Peruestigator, oris, he that seeks or looks for a thing.

Peruicax, acis, hard ouerthwarte, ill to entreat, stubburne, obstinate,
sometime constant

Peruicatia, obstinacy: but sumetyme it is used in a good part, and taken for a
perseverance and constancy in a good act. Pertinacia, all way in an ill
part.

Peruicatior, oris, more obstinate, more stubbourne, sometime more constaunt.

Peruicaciter, obstynatly, stubburnly, constantly.

Peruico, for peruicaci.

Peruigil, lis, he that watches, also diligent and industriouse.

Peruigilium, much watch: also watchinges or vigiles before solemn days.

Peruigilo, are, to watch all night.

Peruinco, uici, uincere, to surmounte.

Peruitere, the old wrytars used, for perire, to be lost, to peryshe.

Peruiuo, uixi, uiuere, to live long, or until the vttermoste. Et si peruiuo
vsque ad summa^ aetatem, tamen breue spacium est perferundi, quae minitas mihi.
Although I live yet to the vttermoste age, yet is the time lyttelle to suffer
all: wherewith thou thretnest me.

Peruius, uia, uium, that may be gone in, penetrable.

Aedes fient peruiae, ye may come in to the house when ye list.

Peruia uentis domus, open to all wyndes or a wyndy house.

Peruolo, are, to flee out, or to the end.

Peruoco, care, to call them all.

Peruro, ussi, urere, to bourne all, or every where.

Peruolo, peruelle, to desire.

Perula, a little bag or scrippe.

Perusia, a city in Italy.

Peruulgatus, ta, tum, commonly used or known

Pes, pedis, a foot, which now conteynethe xii. inches, the old foot
contained.xvi. fingers bredthe.

Pedes aduerbium, on foot.

Pedibus, idem.

Pedibus stipendia facere, to be a foteman in war.

Pedem nusquam, I removed not one foot.

Pedem efferre, to go forth.

Per me pedibus ista trahantur, do what they will I care not.

Pedem refer, to retrayte.

Pedibus ire in sententiam, to be of the opinion that other are. It was the
fascion among the Romans, that the senate when diverse had showed their
opinion, the residue look which part they leaned unto, they went from their
places to those which had raysoned according to their minds and opynio^s, and
these were called Pedanij Senatores. Pede presso, fair and soft, a soft pace.

Pes corninus, read in Batrachion, and Ranunculus.

Pes gallinaceus, is oone of the kinds of fumitorie, growing in walls, and
hedges, and has leaves not unlike in fascion, but grener, and has a purple
flower.

Pestanae, certain vallayes in Campania, where flowers do spring twyse in the
year, whereof the most perfyte roses be called Pestanae rosae.

Pessinus, nuntis, a town in Phrigia.

Pedes, and pedibus, put for an aduerbe, signyfieth on foot. Pedes agmen
circuibat, the host went about on foot. In agmine non nunquam equo, saepius
pedibus, anteibat, In the hooste, he went always before, sometime on
horseback, but more often on foot.

Pes, a louse: also a cord, wherewith the sail in a ship ^^^ente.

Pesnas, old wrytars used for pennas.

Pesestas, in old time used for pestis Pestie^ce

Pessimus, the superlatiue degree of Malus.

Pessime, very ill.

Pestifer, Pestiferus, a, um, that which brings in pestilence.

Pestilens, it is, pestilent, unwholesome.

Pessulus, a bar or bolt, wherewith doors or gates be made fast.

Pessum, an aduerbe, which signifies backewarde, downewarde, under foot.

Pessum, ire, to come to naught.

Pessum premere, to tread down or underfoot.

Pessundo, didi, dare, to cast under foot, to put to the warse.

Pessundare alique^, to set at naught, to bring to naught.

Pestis, Pestilentia, and Pestilitas, a pestilence, a mortality of men.

Petalismus, a punishment in the citieof Syra cusis in Sicile, which was that
the names of the rulars there being written in the leaves of olyues, they
diuidinge them self, the citizens which had offended were exiled for five
years.

Petalitis, an herb called hearts tungue.

Petalum, a leaf.

Petasatus, he that wears a hatte.

Petasati, were the surnames of Castor and Pollux.

Petaso onis, a flyche of bacon.

Petasus a hatte, a round covering of a house.

Petaurista, a iuglar, a tumbler.

Petaurum, a cord, or a staff, or a bourde, or other like thing, whereon
light personages do dance and prove maystries, it is also a rouste, where
pultry does sit in the night.

Petesso, sere, to ask or require.

Petigo, tiginis, a tettar that runs over all a man's face.

Petilansura, the houfe of a white horse.

Petilara, things that are dry.

Petilus, la, lum, small.

Petilius, a flower which grows among brem bills, in the later end of
somer, and is like a wild rose in color, and has five small leaves, the
budde of diverse colors, having within it yelowe seeds.

Petilia, a city in Lucania.

Petimen, a sore in the shulders of beasts, which I suppose is a fassion.

Petitia, a certain kind of appulles.

Petisso, sere, old wrytars used for Peto, to ask or demand.

Peritor, toris, he that asks or demaundethe: among lawyers he is called the
demaundaunt, also it is a beggar, which asks alms from door to door.

Petoritum, a chariot or wagon.

Petiolus, a little foot: also a perch whereon fruits or oynious be hanged.

Petitio, onis, a petition.

Peto, petij, perere, to ask, get or atteyne. to desire, to lay awayte, to
abide, to strike, to goo to a place, to seek. with a sword. Petere gladio, to
stryke with asworde. Petere ueneno, to poison. Petere blandicijs, to flatter.
Petere tactu, to feel. Petere mutuum, to borowe: also to remember. Petere
iugulum, to kill, to follow, Petere auribus, to here. Petere naribus, to smell.
Petere oculis, to behold. Petere osculis, to kiss. Petere ui, to enforce.
Petere, is also to assail or make assault on one.

Petra, a great rock growing on the land.

Petrones, Carles of the countreye, also a wether sheep.

Petroselinum, an herb called Persely.

Petulans, it is, wanton, dishonest, reprochefull, proud, viciouse, ready to do
wrong.

Petulantia, wantonness, viciousness, pride.

Petreus, a, um, of a stone.

Petreleon, an oil, which naturally runs out of a stone.

Petrosus, a, um, stony or full of stones.

Petulenter, wantonly, proudely, dishonestly.

Petus, he that has one eye less than the other.

Petulcus, wanton.

Peuxedarum, an herb which has a lyttelle stalk like to fenell, busshye by
the ground, and has a yelowe flower, a black root, and is full of juice, and
has a great savor, he that does gather it, feleth pain and whyrlynge in
his head, except that his head and nosethrylles be anointed with oil of
roses. Dioscorid. Joan. Agricola supposes it to be that, which is called
Foeniculum Porcinu^, which I suppose we do call dog fenelle.

Pexo, are, to kembe.

Pexae uestes, some men in expoundynge Plinye, do suppose Pexas uestes to be
of such thing, as is shorn, as fine woullen clothe, or veluette.

Pexati, they which do wear such manner of clothe, or sylke.

Pezitae, moussherons growing at the roots of trees.

P ANTE H.
PHaeaces, people of the I Will of Corcira.

Phaecasius, a show.

Phaedra, the wife of Theseus, and stepmother to Hyppolytus daughter of Minois
king of Creta.

Phae^ton, Phae^tontis, a word of three syllables, the son of Phoebus and
Clymenes, who with long desire optayned at the last of his father, that he
moughte oone day govern or lead the charyotte of the son, but he being
unable to that office, the horses ouerthrewe the charyotte, and burned all the
world. Whereof Iupyter being aferde lest that he also should be bourned,
therefore strykynge Phaeton with lightening threw him into the river called
Padus and Erydanus.

Phae^tontides, the systers of Phae^ton, look Heliades.

Phae^tusa, daughter of the son, read Heliades.

Phagedaena, a runnyng canker or pocke, which shortly eats the flesh unto
the bones.

Phagones, great eaters.

Phalacron, bold.

Phalacrocorax, acis, a water crow, it may sygnyfye a coote.

Phalango, gare, to move or drive a thing upon rollers.

Phalaris, a cruel tyrant, which raygned in the city of Agrigentum.

Phagus, a beche tree.

Phagineus, a, um, of beeche.

Phalangae, staves, whereon men do carye packes, plain staves, also leauers,
to lift things that be heavy.

Phalangarij, porters, which do carry packes.

Phalangium, a spyder, which styngyng one, he dies soon after.

Phalanx, angis, an hoos^e of footemenne, set in such order, that they may
incountre with their enemies, foot to foot, man to man, shylde to shylde. it
is also the beam of a balance.

Phalanges, are the joints or spaces in the fyngars: They be alsoo rollers,
whereon shyps or great pieces of timber be removed.

Phalarica, an instrumente of war, wherein wild fire is enclosed, that
when it is by shot fastened to timber, it bournethe all shortly.

Phalerae, a trapper or bardes for a horse.

Phaleratus, trapped or bardyd.

Phalerata dicta, gay words, pleasant speech.

Phalerij, a city in Tuscane.

Phalernus, read before in Falernus.

Phalisci, a certain people in Italy on the higher part of Tuscana.

Phanaticus, frenetycke, he that has vain vysyons.

Phaneta, one of the names of Bacchus.

Phanni, fantasyes, which happen to men in dreams.

Phanias, is taken of Hyperides and Lysias for an usurer.

Phanio, saynct Augustine in his epystles says, was taken for oone, which
brought good luck with his coming.

Phantasia, is dyuersely taken of philosophers and physicians. Galenus
interiorum. 3. The affection called Phantasia, is none other thing but the
corruption of understanding. Aristoteles de animal. 2. Phantasia is an
operation of the power fantastical, that is to say a meuynge from the actual
sense. Also Phantasia is of the treasoure of power anymall, keeper of the
fourmes or fygures first conceived in the commune sense or perceyuyng.

Phantasma, matis, a vysyon.

Phanum, a temple.

Phara^o, was the name of all kings of Egypt, until the time of Solomon. In
the Egyptiane toungue Pharao sygnyfyethe king. Josephus.

Pharetra, a quyuer for arrows.

Pharetratus, he that bears a quyuer.

Pharias, phariae, a serpente, which makes a furrowe in the ground with his
tail, as he crepeth, and so lyfteth him self up.

Pharisaei, were among the Jews certain men, which professed a form of
living more strayghte and devout thanne other of that people, and therefore
they were called by that name, for as much as Phares in the hebrewe tungue
sygnyfyeth dyuyded, they professed contynence, vyrgynytie, fast or abstynence
from meat twyse in the Sabbate days. They slepte only upon bourdes, sum
upon stoones, or else on thorns, to keep them from styrrynge of flesshely
appetyte. They ware on their forehead scrowes of parchemynte, wherein were
written the ten commandments given by God unto Moses, which they called
Philaterias. They had in great reverence their elders,, in so much as they
would not with a word dysplease them, not withstanding they believed that all
thing happened by constellation, and yet took they not away free will from man
They affyrmed that souls were immortal, and that god should come in judgment.
Hereby they came in a wonderful credence with people, whereby they drew to
them great multitudes, and of them were diverse good men, among whom was saint
Paul, as he him self confesses, Nicodemus and other which were afterward
Christis dysciples, although the multitude, taking that profession only for
vaynglory, perverted that honest form of living into hypocrysie, deceyuyng
the people, whom Christ sharply rebuked, and declared their folly, and yet
with some of them which by lykelyhode were good men, he dyned, and other wise
used them familyarlye. Euangelistae, Paulus, Josephus, Hieronymus,
Chrysostomus etc.

Phariseus, a Pharisey, which was of a sect of Jews, which lived in a more
strayter form than the commune people did.

Pharius, a, um, is put for Aegyptius.

Pharmacentice, that part of phisyke, which heals with medycines.

Pharmacopola, a potycary.

Pharmacum, a medycine, sometime it sygnyfieth poison.

Pharos, a lyttelle isle in Egypt against the mouth of the river of Nilus by
the city of Alexandria. In this isle was set a very high tower, wherein
were greatte lyghtes all the night long, for the comfort and surety of
them, which were in vyage either on the sea, or on the land. Whereof all
other towers made for that purpose be called Phari.

Pharusij, people of Lybia, which now are exceeding poor.

Pharsalia, a country in Thessalia, where the battaylle was between Julius
Caesar and Pompey.

Pharsalos, a city in Thessalia, nyghe to the which was the great and sharp
battle between Julius Caesar and Pompeius, where Pompeius was vanquyshed and
fled. it is also called of Lucanus, Pharsalia.

Phasae, a word of hebrewe, which sygnyfieth a departing. it is commonly
called Pascha.

Phasellus, a little ship called a galyon.

Phaseoli, are a sort of poulse corn, whereof be diverse kinds, one is named
Dolichus, which grows in gardeynes, with a long stem, and is succouryd
with styckes set about it, they be shortly corruptid with wete. Aetius
says, that only they among all other poulse were eaten with their husks,
But Ruellius affyrmeth, that it was not the commune Dolichi, but they which
were of diverse colors, and facyoned like to little kydneys. Look of them
in Smilax. An another kind is called also Phasillus, which is very small,
some being white, and sum read, with little stalks rounnynge on the
ground, and lyenge holow, having leaves like in fascyon to yuy, but softer
and full of veins, coddes like to fengreke, the brothe of them nouryssheth,
and makes indyfferent juice. An another is that which is also called Smilax,
of whom read in his place. An another is called Isopyron, whose leaf is like
to anyse, and has on the top lyttelle heddes, full of seeds like to Nigella.
I have no certain english for this poulse, and I dare not coniecte what it
is for fear of dysdayne. But by these descriptions men of mean wits may
find what it is, in beholdynge at their eyes diverse sorts of poulse.

Phasianus, a fesaunt.

Phasis, a great river in the countreye of Colchos, it is also a city there.

Phasma, Phasmatis, an horrible vysyon or sight.

Phauorinus, a famous and eloquente philosopher borne at Orlyaunce in France,
In him were three things principallye to be meruayled at. The first that
being a french manne, he not withstanding was so excellent in the Greek
tungue, that besides his greatte learning, he left behind him a noble
remembrance of the greek eloquence. The second, that being Eunuchus, or an
imperfecte manne, he was accused of adulterye. The last was, that having the
emperor Adriane excedyngly dyspleased with him, he not withstanding ouerlyued
him, never having any damage by him, which was to the most high
commendation of that noble Emperor, having this sentence oftentimes in his
mouth, but in greek. The king is thanne to be esteemed most excellent when
he being displeased with his inferioure, refraynethe his anger.

On a time when the Emperor dysputed with him, and in the end he seemed to
suffer the Emperor to have the vyctory. Afterward his friends asked of him,
how it happened that he which only applied him to study of letters, and was
reputed to be the greattest philosopher in Athenes, might be vanquyshed of so
great a prince, who was occupied in the great affairs of the empire, he
answered that it was no shame to be vanquyshed of him, which had.xxx. legyons
of men at his commandment.

Pherecydes, a famous Philosopher and writer of Tragoedies, which dyed of the
lousy sycknesse.

Pheretra, things borne at great feasts or triumphs, as pageauntes or jewels
of gold or silver, images and such like things.

Pheretrius, Iupyter.

Pheretrum, a thing, whereon pageantes are borne, also dead corpsis.

Phiala, the general name to all plate, which serves for wine.

Phiala, a pot or cup of gold or silver, which serves for wine.

Phidias, an excellent warkeman, in making great images of gold or yuory.

Phidiacus, ca, cum, of Phidias.

Phiditia, the soupers, which the Lacedemonyans vsyd, which were openly kept
with a meruaylous temperance, every man bringing his measurable porcyon of
meat and wine.

Philadelphia, a city in Mysia, ioynynge to Lydia.

Philadelphus, called Ptolomeus king of Egypt, who made a lybrarye in the
which were fyfty thousand books. He also caused the.v. books of Moses to
be translated into greek by.lxxii. interpretours doctors of the Jews.

Philagathus, he that loves goodness.

Philanthropos, a lover of mankind also gentle and kind.

Philargyria, covetousness, auaryce.

Philargyrus, couetouse.

Philema, a kiss.

Phlieni, were two brethren Carthaginenses, of whom it is written, that where
they of Carthage, and they of Cyrene, did strive for their bounds, it was
agreed, that of each city two men should issue, and where that they met
should be the bounds. Than the said brethren being sent, they went a great
way into the bounds of the other, er they might return. And when they of
Cyrene did se that they were prevented, they took it displeasantly, and menacyd
the two brethern that if they would not go back, they should be put quyck
into the earth, but they not with standing would not depart. Wherefore they
being buried on live, their country me^ made over them two aulters, which at
this day be called Arae Philenorum, which are now within the royalme of
Tunyse.

Philenus, he that loves wine.

Philetes, a kysser.

Phileteria, an herb called wild sauge, it was also a scrowe which the
phariseys did were on their forheades, wherein were written the ten
commandments. Hieron. Io. Chrisost. In the decrees of Gregory they be taken
for charms or inchantmentes written. also in Consilio Laodicensi, we do read
Phileteria facere.

Philippus, king of Macedonia, son of Amyntas, and father of the greatte
Alexander, a prince from his chyldhode of excellent wit and prowes, of whom
these notable things be remembered. After that he had vanquyshed the
Athenienses at Cheroneam, he began to rejoice of his felicity, but to the
intent that he therefore should not be the more prone to injuries toward his
subjects, nor to have indignation at them whom he vanquyshed, he than and ever
after caused a child to come to his chamber door in the morning and to say
alowde, Phylip thou art a man mortal, which he observed so constantly, that
he never went out of his chamber, or received any counsaylours or suitors,
until the child had thryse spoken those words, notwithsta^dynge that he was a
paynyme. On a time the Athenienfes sent an ambassade unto him, which after
that he had patiently herd, he said to the ambassadors when they should
depart, Know you (said he) any thing which may be pleasure unto your city,
among them was Democrates, for ill tungue called Thersites, he forthwith
answered the king, If thou said he, will hang up thy self. Which answer
troubled the resydue of the ambassadors, and did set all the other hearers in
an indignation with a great charm. But Philyp most gentylly and coldely
answered. Say you to the Athenie^ses, that they which for anger can not
absteyne from such words, be much prowder of courage, than they that do
suffer it spoken without any punysshement, and do easyly dygeste so proud an
iniurye. Alsoo where one named Machetas had a matter in varyaunce before him.
Phylyppe taking lyttelle heed^ what was spoken, and sometime sleapynge, at the
last he gave judgment against Machetas, who cryenge out with a loud voice
appealed, wherewith Phylyppe being fore moved, with a grieuouse look, to
whom I pray the (said he) doste thou appeal? I appeal said Machaetas unto
your self, but being better awaked, and taking head what is spoken. Philyp
being through waked, and herynge eftsoon the matter, when he perceived that
Machaetas had wrong, he would not reuerse the judgment, but the su^me of money
wherein Machaetas was condemned he him self paid it of his own treasure of
his pacyence, subtlety of wit, and valyant courage, many have written
aboundauntly, which in the reading are both pleasant and profitable. He
was before the incarnation of Christ. 358. years.

Philippeus, pei, a certain coin of gold sometime vsyd in Grecia.

Philippi, a city in Thracia.

Philippenses, men of that city.

Phillyra, a nymph, on whom Saturnus begat Chiron, who therefore is sommetyme
called Phillyrides.

Phillitis, an herb called hartis tungue.

Philocalus, a good man, a kleanely manne, or elegant.

Philocares, an herb called horehounde.

Philoctetes, the son of Paean, was Hercules companyon, and buried him, and
had his arrows.

Philodolus, he that loves his servants.

Philoginos, he that doteth on women.

Philologus, a lover of letters. also a greatte speaker.

Philomela, a nyghtyngale. also a fair maiden, which was defloured by Thereus
husband to her sister, whom poets do feign was transfourmed to a
nyghtyngale.

Philomusus, amorous of the Musis.

Philonicus, a brawler: sommetyme a lover of vyctorye.

Philopaes, he that loves children.

Philoponus, laboriouse, peynefull.

Philosophaster, he that would be like a philosopher.

Philosophia, phylosophye, the love or fauourynge of wisdom.

Philosophice, like a philosopher.

Philosophicus, ca, cum, philosophical.

Philosophor, aris, ari, to study wisdom.

Philosophus, a philosopher.

Philothesia, a solemn feast among the Greeks

Philoxenia, hospytalitie.

Philoxenus, he that keeps good hospitality.

Philtrum, a drink charmed, which causes a man to be mad for love.

Philura, seu philyra, small things hanging down of trees or herbs like
unto hears.

Phyma, matis, a sore on the finger, which may be called a whytblowe.

Phineus, king of Arcadia who by the inticeme^t of his second wife did put out
the eyes of his sons which he had by his first wife, but by the just
vengeance of god he was also made blind, and the foul rauenouse birds
callid Harpyiae, defiled and devoured the meat that was preparid for him. but
those birds at the last were driven away by Zetus and Calois, whom he had
courtaysly intertayned.

Phlebes, veins.

Phlebotomia, bloudlettynge.

Phlebotomum, the instrumente, wherewith blood is letten, a fleume.

Phlegethon, ontis, a river of hell, which always bourneth.

Phlegias, the son of Mars, a king in Thessaly, and father of Ixion.

Phlegrei campi, be in Thracia where Iupyter had battle with gyantes.

Phlius, a place in Grecia.

Phlox, a yelowe flower like a vyolet.

Phlegma, matis, fleume.

Phlegmon, onis, and phlegmone, nes, an inflammation of blood, which grows
into an impostume in some part of the body or member.

Phoca, a sea calfe, it may be supposed to be a seal, which is fyshe, and
bredeth on the land.

Phocis, cidis, a little country in Grecia between Atticam and Boeotia^. in
Phocide is the town of Delphos.

Phocenses, people of Phocis.

Phoceus, and phocaicus, pertaining to Phocis.

Phoebus, the son.

Phoenices, people in Syria.

Phoeniceus, a, um, right krymson.

Phoenicia, a regyon in Syria, next to Judea.

Phoenicopterus, a great bird, having feathers of krymson color.

Phoenissa, a woman of Phenicia.

Phoenix, nicis, a bird, which lives above syx hundred years, and finally
caryeng sweet spyces up to a high mountain, by the heat of the sun, and
labor of her wings, kend leth fire, whereby she being all bourned, of her
axen ryseth an other like bird. it is also a date tree, or paulme, also a
little river in Grecia. it was also the brother of Cadmus, which reigned in
Phenicia. also one which was tutour to Achilles.

Pholoe, a mountain in Archadia, full of wod.

Phonascus, he that teaches one to pronounce and moderate his voice.

Phorbas, a sheparde that found Oedippum, after that he was hanged up by the
feet.

Phorcus, one of the sons of Neptunus, which was taken for a god of the sea.

Phoroneus, the most ancient king of Grecia.

Phosphorus, the day sterre.

Photion, a noble Atheniense, which had been disciple to Plato and Xenocrates,
afterward one of the chief governors of the city of Athenes was a man of such
wonderfulle gravity and consta^ce, that he was not lightly seen to change his
countenance, either to laugh or to morn, nor to have his hands out of his
habyte, except in war, and when he was in the country, he went always bare
footed, except it were in the cold winter, whereof there was no better token
than to see Phocion go shodde. His speech was short, grave, vehement, and full
of quycke sentences, and therefore the most eloquente orator Demosthenes,
called him the hatchette that did cut of his words. He was of such a
constaunce, that where Apollo at Delphos made answer that one man in Athenes
was of a contrary opinyon to all the city. When that was reported, Phocion
rose up and said, Leave (said he) country men, to search whom pour god
means, for I am that oone manne, whom nothing lyketh which is now done
in the commune weal of this city, when he had made an oration unto the
people, and they praysynge him consented unto him, he turned him to them that
were next him, and said, Alas what have I done, I fear me least sum
foolyshe word has escaped vnwetynge me, sygnyfyeng that the people seldomme
allowed any thing that was good, or not foolyshe. On a time when he raysoned
contrary to the mind of the people. Wherefore they murmured and would have let
him, It is at your pleasure country men said he, to compelle me to do that
that I would not, but to speak otherwise than I think, that no man living can
cause me, he was so reverend a personage, that the great king Alexander in
the beginning of his letters after that he had vanquisshed Darius, he
saluted no man but him and Antipater. He refused infinite treasour sent unto
him by Alexander, and although he had been the general capytayne of the
Athenienses in sundry wars, and honorably achieuyd his enterpryses, yet was
he best content to live poorly. Finally he was of his unkind countreye men
condemned to death, whereto he went with the same countenance, that he
had in authorytie, when oone which was condemned with him, lamented and
fearyd to dye. Phocion tournyng unto him said: Why art thou not glad, that
thou shalt dye with Phocyon? And when one of his friends asked him, if he
would any thing to his son, I would said he, that such wrong as the
Athenienses do to me, he shall not remember. What a wonderfulle word of a
Paynyme was this, who followed Christis doctrine, er Christ was borne. 333.
years.

Phrasis, The propre form, or manner of speech, which in one countraye is
oftentimes diverse, as Southern, Northern, Deuenysshe, Kentyshe, French,
Pycarde, Gacoygne, Walon. some do set the negative before the affyrmatiue, some
contrary, sum speech is quycke, some grave, some flouryshynge, some
temperate.

Phrene, the myddreffe, which dyuydeth the vmbles of a man or beast, from the
bowelles.

Phreneticus, he that is vexed with a frenesy.

Phrenitis, seu Phrenisis, a syckenesse called frenesye.

Phrine, a famous harlotte at Athenes.

Phrygia, a royalme in Asia the less, having on the east Cappadociam, on the
southe Lycaoniam, on the west Troadem, on the north Galatiam.

Phrygium melos, was a melody or tune in instruments, wherein semyd to be (as
Lucianus says) a manner of a dyuyne fury, allbeit Porphyrius callyth it
barbarouse. Cassiodorus says, that the melody called Dorius gives wisdom,
and gives chastity. Phrygius styreth to battle, and inflameth the desire of
furye. Aeolius appeaseth the tempests of the mind, and brings in sleep.
Lydius quyckeneth understanding in them that be dulle, and induces appetite
of celestial things.

Phrygio, onis, a browderer.

Phrynos, a lysarde.

Phryx, gis, a man of Phrigia.

Phthia, a city in Thessalia.

Phthiriasis, a syckenesse in the which lyse do grow in such multitudes,
that they devour the body.

Phthirophagi, people dwelling nyghe to the greek sea, which lived only by
fyshe.

Phthisicos, he that has the consumption of the lunges.

Physeter, a great fisshe in the French occean sea, which ryseth like to a
pyllar above ships, and spouteth out water.

Phthisis, is a sore in the lunges with a consumption of all the body coming
of a feuerouse heat consumyng or of a heat artificial and humors in the
stomach. The cause is a reume sharp and long contynuyng of choler or salt
fleume, it hapnith of a squince or apostume in the vuula when by the rupture of
them the putryfied matter descends to the lunges, or of a pleurisy or
Peripneumonia, when they being healyd, the putrified matter is not purged
within the space of.xl. days, or by long stoppyng of hemoroides or flowers,
or by the coldenes of the air received, straynynge the spiritual members, or
by the heat of the air dryeng and scorchynge the lunges, or by a great and
long cough, or by other inforcement, in syngynghygh, or bearyng a heavy burdeyn.

Phu, a plant or herb, which some call Valeriane.

Phygeton, a little swellynge or botche, hard and read, burning and
pryckynge.

Phylira, a tree called also Tylia.

Phyllis, a womanne, daughter of Lycurgus, king of Thrace, which hynge her
self, despayrynge of the coming of Demophon, whom poets feign to be turned
into an almonde tree.

Phyllitis, an herb called hartis tungue.

Physica, natural causes.

Physicus, a physician.

Physiologus, he that dysputethe of naturalle causes.

Physionomia, seu physiognomia, a rule to know a man's natural affections by
his visage or form of his members.

Phyton, one of the names of Apollo.

Phytonicus, and phytonica, he or she which has a spirit within them, that
gives answer of things to come.

P ANTE I.
PIabile, for the which satisfaction may be made and god pleased.

Piacularis, are, that which is given or offered to god for satisfaction.

Piabilis, that which may be pourged or satysfyed.

Piacularia auspicia, tokens in sacrifyce of some heavy chance to come.

Piaculum, any thing done for satisfaction of some greuouse sin, sometime a
great and haynouse offense.

Piamen, seu piamentum, that which was given or occupied about satisfaction.

Pica, a bird called a pie.

Picatus, picata, picatum, pytched or rasyd with pytche.

Picea, a pytche tree.

Picenum, a countraye in Italye called Marca Anconitana.

Picens, it is, a man of that countray.

Picentus, ta, tum, of the country of Picenum.

Piceus, a, um, of pytche.

Pico, care, to dress with pytche.

Picris, wild lettuse.

Pictarium, a table pertaining to Judges or bishops. it is sometime a
plaster for the stomach or head.

Pictes, a wrastler.

Pictones, a cuntray in France callid Poyters.

Pictor, toris, a peyntour.

Pictura, an image peynted.

Picturatae uestes, imbroudred apparayle, or rather of bawdekyn.

Picturo, are, to make sundry pyctures.

Picus, a little bird, which makes a hole in trees, wherein he breeds: it
was alsoo the name of an old king of Latynes.

Picunnus, a pie.

Pie, and pienter, mercyfully, deuoutely, lovingly.

Pieria, a mountain in Greece, dedycate to the Musis.

Pieria, was a maiden borne at Myos a city of Ionia, daughter of an honorable
man, called Pythes, of whom is this hystory worthy of remembrance. There
happened to be war between the inhabitants of Miletu^, and them of Myos, but
in such gentle facion, that the women of Myos were always suffered on the
solemn feast of Diana, to come to Miletum, and do sacrifyce to Diana,
which there was chiefly honored. Pieria coming thither in the company of her
mother, one Phrigius the eldest son of Nebeus duke of Miletum, beholding her
beauty, began to love her excedyngly, and after the manner of lovers,
desiring to do some thing thankful unto the maiden, demanded of her what he
might do, which might be to her most pleasant and acceptable. The maiden
being wytty, and also loving to her country and friends, answered him, that
to her it should be the greattest pleasure, if he would endeavor him self to
bring to pass, that she moughte oftentimes with a greatte sort of her
compaynyons repair to Miletum, without any damage. Phrigius perceiving, that
nothing moughte so much content the maiden as peace. He calling the people
together exhortyd them to conclude a peace with them of Myos to be with them
in alyaunce, whereunto they accordyd, and the name of Pieria was ever after in
so honorable a remembrance, that all honest womenne vsyd for a proverb, to
wysshe so to be louyd, as Phrigius louyd Pieria.

Pierides, were daughters of one Pierus, which did compare in singing with
the Musis, but they being vanquyshed, and giuyng to the Muses reprochefull
words, they were by them turned into pyes. Ouidius Metamorph. 5. they be
sometime taken for the musis of an hylle in Thessalia called Pie^ris or
Pie^rius.

Pierides, the Muses.

Piens, it is, merciful. etc.

Pientior, pientissimus, more and most merciful, most loving toward his
parents or country.

Pietas, tatis, the reverend love toward a man's propre countreye and
parents, of dyuynes it is taken for the love and honor dew unto god.
Lactantius calls it justice, and devout wourshyppyng and knowledge of god.

Pigeo, gui, gere, sometime it is a verb impersonalle. Piget, to be soorye to
have done a thing.

Obsecro ne quid plus minus ue faxit quod nos postea pigeat, I require you
let him not do any thing more or less, whereof we may after repent us.

Id non piget, he repe^teth not of that he has done.

Piger, gri, slow.

Pigritia, pigrities, pigredo, pigritas, pigritudo, slownesse, ydelnesse.

Pigmentum, payntynge, also false color in speaking, dysceytefull words,
pleasant lies.

Pigmentarius, a maker or seller of payntynge.

Pigne, slouthe.

Pigneratio, a pledgynge or gagynge.

Pigneratitius, a, um, that which is laid in pledge.

Pignora, is sometime taken for children.

Pignora capere, to take a dystresse.

Pignero, pignerare, and pigneror, pignerari, to lay to pledge or guage,
sommetyme to take pledge.

Pignus, pignoris, a gage or pledge.

Dare pignus cum aliquo, to lay gauge against one.

Ponere pignori, to lay in gage or pledge.

Pignori opponere, to be bound for rent or any other payment.

Pignora auferre, to take a dystresse.

Pignus amoris, a token of love.

Beneuolentiae pignus, a token of favor.

Pignora, children.

Pignora capere, idem quod pignora auferre.

Pignoris capio, a nowne sygnyfyeth a distress. Mars ipse ex acie fortissimum
quenque pignerari solebat, The most valyant men be they, which in battle
be sonest dispached, or Mars uses to sease for him self the valyantest men.

Pignerator, he that takes a gage.

Pigresco, scere, to be or waxeslowe.

Pigre, slowly.

Pigredo, slothfulness.

Pigrefio, fieri, to be madeslowe.

Pigritia, slownesse.

Pigritudo, idem.

Pigror, idem.

Pigro, are, to hold back, or tarry one.

Pila, a mortar, wherein any thing is beaten with a pestylle. also a pyllar, a
balle, or any thing round as a balle.

Pila ludere, to play at tenyse.

Pilades, a gentylman of Phocea, which was so faithful a friend to Orestes
(with whom he kept company whiles he was mad) that he would never forsake
him, but followed him into the countreye called Taurica, where strangers were
sacrifised unto Diana. Where Orestes being apprehended, wha^ he should be
slain, Pylades would needs dye for him that he might escape.

Pilani, they which fight with darts.

Pilates, a certain stone that is white.

Pilatim, one pylar by an other.

Pilatus, armed with darts.

Pileatus seruus, a slave that is sold with his cappe on his heed.

Pilentum, a wagan.

Pileolus, a little bonette.

Pileus, a cappe. sometime liberty, forasmoche as bondmen, when they were
infranchysed, ware copped cappes.

Pilo, are, to begin to be hearye, or grow in hear.

Pilosella, an herb called commonly mouse ear.

Pilosus, a, um, heary.

Pilula, a little balle. also a pylle made for purgations.

Pilum, a barbours knyfe or rasour, also a dart of five foot long and a half.

Pilumnus, a man which found the manner to dunge land, and to grynde corn.

Pilus, a hear.

Pilus, idem quod pilum, it is also a pestell to bray or break any thing
withal in a mortar

Pimpinella, an herb called Pympernell.

Pimpla, a place by the mountain called Pernasus, of the which the Musis be
called Pimpleides.

Pinaster, a wild pyne tree.

Pina, a fyshe that has two great shelles.

Pinachidia, tables made in books.

Pinachotheca, a case or place wherein tables at put or set.

Pinarij, an ancient house or family in Italye, of the which were the
priests that sacrifysed to Hercules.

Pindarus, a Thebane poet, and chief of them which were called Lyrici.
Wherefore Alexander when he distroyed the city of Thebes, he caused the house
of Pindarus to be preserved with all his family.

Pindo, dis, si, sere, to bray or grynde.

Pindus, a mountain in Thessalia, alsoo a city there.

Pinea nux, a pyne appull.

Pinetum, a wodde of pyne trees.

Pineus, a, um, of a pyne tree.

Pingo, xi, pingere, to paynt, to deuyse and set in order.

Pinguedo, and pinguitudo, tudinis, fat or fattenesse.

Pingue, inconuenyent, sommetyme fruitful, commodyouse.

Pingues horti, gardeynes that bring forth good herbs.

Pingui Minerua, grossly, rudely.

Pinguefacio, cere, to make fat.

Pinguesco, scere, to be fat.

Pinguiarius, he that loves that thing which is fat.

Pinguitudo, fatness.

Pinguiter, greacyly.

Pinguis, gue, fat, he that is fat, corsye, vnweldye.

Pingue, grease.

Pingue otium, much ease or rest.

Pinguis toga, a gown of course clothe.

Pinna, a quyll or pen, the harder part of a fether.

Pinnae, imbatylmentes of a wall, a muskle, which is founden in muddy waters.

Pinnae, the fynnes of a fyshe.

Pinnaculum, a pynnakle of a tower.

Pinnula, the over part of the ear, a little quyl.

Pinsito, tare, to bray in a mortar.

Pinso, sui, sere, to braye or grynde.

Pinso, are, idem.

Pinsor, he that grindeth in a quern, also a baker

Pintia, a town in Spain called Valladolite.

Pinus, pinus, a pyneappull.

Pio, ij, ere, to honor god.

Pipatio, a clockynge of a hen.

Pinetum, a place where pynes do grow.

Pinus, seu pinea, a pyne tree.

Pipare, to clock like a hen.

Piper, eris, pepper.

Piperitis, an herb which by his description, seems to me to be that which
we do name costemary.

Pipio, iui, ire, to peep like a chycke.

Pipio, onis, a pygeon.

Pipilo, are, to chyrpe like a sparowe.

Pipulum, a rebuke.

Pirum, a pear.

Pirata, a rouer or robber on the sea, a pyrate.

Piratica, the practyse of pirates or robbers on the sea.

Pirrhica, a daunsynge in harneys.

Pisa, a city in Greece between the two mountains of Olympus and Ossa: alsoo
a city in Arcadia.

Pisae, arum, a city in Italy called Pise.

Pisani, people of the city of Pise.

Pisarurus, a river in Italy.

Pisaurum, a city in Italy called Pesero.

Piscor, aris, ari, to fyshe.

Piscaria, the fyshe market.

Piscarius, a, um, pertaining to fyshyng.

Piscarius, a fyshemonger.

Piscatorius, a, um, pertaining to a fysher.

Piscator, oris, a fysher.

Piscatus, tus, and piscatio, the act of fyshyng.

Piscina, a fyshe ponde, it is also generally every ponde, although therein be
no fyshe.

Piscinalis, le, pertaynyng to fyshe.

Piscinarius, he that nourysheth fyshe.

Piscis, a fyshe.

Pisces, also one of the twelve signs.

Piscosus, a, um, that may be fysshed, or is fulle of fyshe.

Pisculentus, idem.

Pisciculus, a little fyshe.

Pisei, people of the city Pisa in Grecia.

Pisidae, people in Asia.

Pistacia, a certain kind of nuttes.

Pisistratus, a noble manne of Athenes, which changed the common weal of
that city from the rule of the people, to the rule of one governor: and
therefore he was called a tyrant, not withstanding that (as he wrate unto
Solon, which maynteyned the popular astate) he ruled by their own laws, and
was ryghtwyse and gentle unto the people.

Piso, sere, is proprely to braye, for in the old time men used to bray or
break corn in morters, but after that they had querns to grynd with the
hand, they used Pisere to grynde, and Pisor for a grynder.

Piso, sonis, the name of a noble famyly or house in Rome.

Pistillum, a pestyll.

Pistor, oris, a baker.

Pistoria, a city in Italy.

Pistoricus, ca, cum, and pistorius, a, am, pertaining to bakynge.

Pistrilla, a mylle.

Pistrinum, and pistrina, a bakehouse, or grinding house, sometime it
sygnifieth for peynefulle service.

Pistris, a ship.

Pistrix, cis, a woman baker, also a monstruouse fyshe in the Indiane sea.

Pistura, the craft of bakynge.

Pistus, ta, tum, grounden or brayed.

Pisum, a pease.

Pithacusae, yles in the sea against Campania.

Pithacua, a certain tyle, sommetyme made in Spain, which being cast into
the water, would not synke.

Pitheta, a comette or impression in the fyrmament, which is like a tun, and
does appiere as it were through a myste.

Pithecium, a deformed or ill favored woman.

Pithonoscomes, a place in Asia, where after the Idus of August, great flocks
of storkes do assemble together.

Pitpit, in the old tungue of Oskes, sygnifyed quicquid, what so ever.

Pittacus, one of the seven sages of Grecia, and was of the city of Mytelene.

Pityocampe, a wourme which is in a pyneappull tree, whose bytynge is venymouse.

Pitysma, spetryll.

Pitho, the lady and presydent of eloquence, to persuade.

Pitisso, are, to syppe or drink little.

Pituita, fleume or rewme descendyng from the head, also the pyppe which
chyckens have.

Pituitosus, fleumatyke.

Pitylisma, matis, an exercise, where a man goth fast on his toes, and moves
his arms forward and backewarde.

Pitylisso, are, to exercise in that form.

Pityides, the innermost kernel of the pineapple.

Pityusa, an isle by Grecia called also Myletus, It is also an herb of the
kind of spourge, which the Apothecaries do call Esula. Actuarius writes,
that the barbarouse people do call the root of Pityusa, Turbit. but it is the
turbit which is white and thycke, and comes from the hyl of Garganus, which
is of the.ii.kind of spurge, and is not that turbit which apothecaries now
have, read more in Turbit.

Pius, a, um, religiouse, devout, piteouse, gentyl, chaste, he that loves his
parents or country.

Pix, picis, pytche.

Pix liquida, tar.

P ANTE L.
PLacabilis, easy to be pleased.

Placabilitas, the virtue thereof.

Placabiliter, thankfully, contentfully.

Placator, toris, a pacyfier of debate.

Placae, plates of gold or silver.

Placendus, a, um, that which ought to content.

Placenta, any pleasant thing made in pas^ry.

Placentia, a city in Liguria.

Placentini, people of the city of Placentia.

Placeo, cui, cere, to please, to like, to glory.

Placet, it lyketh me or him, or it is his pleasure or advise.

Senatui placet, the senate has ordained.

Placet sibi, he stands well in his own conceypte.

Placide, quyetly, patiently, peasybly.

Placidus, da, dum, gentle, meke, pacient.

Placidus dies, a pleasant day.

Placita, studies or exercyses. Ipse placita maiorum colebat habitu seuaero, He
in a sage garment, haunted the studyes of the ancient fathers.

Placitum, a fyrme consent in an opynion, an ordynance.

Placitus, ta, tum, that which lyketh or contenteth.

Placo, care, to pacyfie, to appease.

Pladatores, a disease, whereby the eye lyddes wax feeble, and will uneath be
plucked up.

Plaga, the first syllable being long, sygnyfieth a wound, the first
syllable being short, it sygnifieth the armynge cord of a net, also a great
space of heaven and earth called also Clima.

Plagae, the shetes of a bed, or blankettes.

Plagiaria lex, a law made against them which were called Plagiarij, which
for their offense were whypped.

Plagiarius, he that whyppeth men. Also he that byeth a man for a slave,
knowing him to be free. Also he that intyseth a man's servant to go from his
master, also a stealer of books

Plagiger, he that is borne to be whypped.

Plagiosus, a school master, which is a great beater.

Plagium, the offense, for the which one is whypped.

Plagosus, full of strypes, or he that beats much.

Planaratrum, the culter of a ploughe.

Plancae, plankes.

Planci, they which be splaye footed.

Planctus, tus, waylynge, sorowynge.

Plancus, a noble man of Rome.

Plane, truly, clearly, thoroughly.

Planeta, a planette.

Plango, xi, gere, to weep or wayle, to stryke or hytte.

Plangor, plangoris, a noise made with the mouth, as in laughinge, or weeping.

Planidus, plain.

Planidior, more plain.

Planities, a plain or level ground.

Planior, playner, euenner.

Planipes, he that goes without shows. also a player in an interlude.

Planta, the foot with the toes. Sometime only the sole of the foot. also a
plant or tree newely set: sometime an herb that growweth low.

Plantago, ginis, an herb called Plantayne.

Plantaria, settes or plants, or the places where plants be set.

Plantaris, re, pertaining to the foot.

Plantarius, a, um, mete or ready to set.

Plantigerae arbores, trees which brings forth settes.

Planto, tare, to set or plant.

Planula, a plain, a ioyners instrument.

Planus, na, number, plain, even, clear, apparent.

Planum facere, to declare or expound.

Planus, ni, a deceyuour or mocker. also a iuglar, which makes things to
seem in appearance, where in deed no such thing is, as water to comme into
the house, or trees to grow, or money of leaves or stones.

Plani pisces, fishes which be flat and not round.

Plasma, plasmatis, the warke of a potter, or of him, which works in earth,
also a plaster

Plasmo, are, to make pottes, or any other thing of earth.

Plastes, a warker of images or other like thing in earth.

Plastice, the craft of warkynge in earth.

Platanus, a plane tree.

Platanetum, a place where plane trees do grow.

Platanodes, a promontory or hill in Italy.

Platanonis, ne, of plane tree.

Platea, a high way or street, also a court in great places more over a see
gull.

Platalea, a bird which follows water fowls that do take fyshes, and do
pecke them so on the head, that they let go their proy, which Platalea takes
and lives therewith.

Plateae, a city in Boeotia, not far from Thebes

Plateenses, people of the City of Platee in Greece.

Plato, the prince of all philosophers, in wisdom, knowledge, virtue and
eloqence fer exceeding all other gentyles, was borne in Athenes, whose father
was named Ariston of an ancient and honorable house, his mother was called
Perictiona, descended from Solon the maker of laws to the Athenyenfis and one
of the seven wise men of Greece: lyenge in his cradelle, bees were founden to
bring honey into his mouth without hurting the child, which diuinours did
interpret, was a signification that from him should flow eloquence most
sweet and dylectable. The night before that he was brought unto Socrates to
be instructed, Socrates dremed that he held between his knees a white signet,
who having feathers quickelye grown, flewe up toward heaven, and filled the
air with most sweet tunes, the day after Plato being brought by his father
to Socrates, he beholding the child: this is, said he, the bird whose image I
beheld the last night. His name first was Aristocles, but after he was
called Plato (as some do suppose) because that he was broad in the shulders,
other do write, for as much as he had a broad visage. In his youth he exercysed
his body in wrastlynge and other feats of actyuitie: and until he was.xx.
years old he gave him self to make amerouse verses which after that he came
to here Socrates, he threw in to the fire and bourned, and than most ardently
and attentifely he herd Socrates doctrine during the time that he lived. And
after that, he did not only here the most famous philosophers and
Geometrytians in Grecia, but also he went into Italy into Africa and Egypt,
to here the mystical sciences. and it is thought that he herd some of the
prophets, which at that time lived, sense there be founden in his warkes
sentences not aborrynge from our catholic faith. he was not ignoraunte of
marciall affairs, for he had fought in three great batayles, he chase a place
by Athenes called Academia, wherein he taught, and therefore his disciples were
called Academici, there was in him a meruaylouse sharpness of wit with an
in comparable dexterity in disputinge and making of aunsweres, his constaunce
temperaunce and gravity, with courtaysye in language were of al other
incomparable, he was so desyrouse of knowledge that he was no less studiouse to
lern, than he was to teache other. wherefore he being skorned of one, which
asked of him how long he would be a scholar, so long (said he) as I shall not
repent to be wyser and better. He is called Diuinus Plato for his excellent
doctrine, which conteyneth many things (as sayncte Augustine says) which
does accord with holy scripture, in so much as therein is perceived the
first part of Genesis unto Spiritus domini ferebatur super aquas, and the
mystery of three persons in divinity is therein expressed. he dyed as he was
writing being of the age of four score and one years, before the incarnation
of Christ.CCC. xlii.years, read more of him in Dionisius.

Plaudi, they which have great hangyng ears

Plaudo, plausi, plaudere, to rejoice with countenance, to clap the hands to
gether.

Plausibilis, plausibile, that which the people does receive with joy, and
clapping of their hands, acceptable.

Plausus uel Applausus, the consent of people with voice, or other noise.

Plautus, a poet of Comedies borne in Vmbria, wha^ he had spent all his
substance on plaiers garments, and thereby was brought unto extreme poverty,
he was feign for his living to serve a baker in tourninge a querne or
handemyll, and when he was vacant seo^ that labor, he wrate most eloquent and
plesaunte comedies, wherein he was reputed so excellent, that Epius Stolo said
of him, he doubted not but that the muses would speak as Plautus did write, if
they should speak latin. He was in the time of Cato called Censorius.

Plaustrum, seu plostrum, a carte.

Plausus, sus, a reioycynge with voice and gesture, clappynge of hands
together for joy.

Plebecula, the poor people.

Plebeius, a, um, of the people.

Plebeius, plebeius, one of the comminalte, not being a gentilman.

Plebeus, idem.

Plebicola, a favorer of the comminaltie.

Plebiscitum, a law which sometime was made by the only consent of the
common people of Rome, without the authority of the senate.

Plebs, bis, seu plebes, plebei, the commune people.

Plecto, plexi, plectere, to punisshe, to strike.

Plecti capite, to be beheded.

Plectrum, an instrumente, wherewith men played on the harp or dulcymers,
for hurtynge of their fyngers. Also a spur set on a fighting cock, when
he lacks natural spurs.

Pleiades, the seven sterres, which maryners do use in trienge of costs.

Plemmyrium, a city in Sicilia.

Plene, largely, abundantly.

Plenilunium, full moan.

Plenitudo, dinis, fullness.

Plenus, na, number, full.

Plena manu, abundantly, liberally.

Illum ingressum pleno gradu cohortari, no^ intermittemus, we will not cease
to exhort him with all our power, when he is ones entered.

Grave and plenum carmen, a verse which fills well the ears.

Pleniore ore laudare, to give more abundance of praises.

Plenissimum testimonium, a very large testimony or witness.

Plenus animi, couragiouse.

Plenus officij, redye to do pleasure to every man.

Plenus uini, drunken.

Plenus sanguinis, a great murder.

Plenus somni, sleapy.

Adolescentia plena spei maximae, youth wherein men have a special hope.

In plenum dicere, to speak generallye or of all.

Plerus, plera, plerum, of old time was used for more, Plera pars, the more
part.

Plaerique, pleraeque, pleraque, many, a great sort.

Plerusque, pleraque, plerunque, the more part of any thing.

Plerique, signifies some.

Plerique omnes, for the more part.

Plerunque, oftentimes, sometimes.

Pleonasmos, a figure, wherein is superfluity of words.

Plethrum, a measure of land, containing a hundred feet.

Pleuritis, tidis, and pleuresis, a sickness in the side, called the
Pleurisy.

Pleuriticus, pleuritica, he or she, which has the Pleuresy.

Pleuitas, vnnobilitie, baseness of bloudde.

Plexus, a, um, wounden or bounden.

Plico, caui, uel plicui, care, to fold.

Plicatilis, le, that which may be folden.

Plinius, the name of two noble learned men, the one wrate the most excellent
warke, called the history of Nature, the other wrate eloquent Epistles, and an
oration to Traiane in his commendation, which oration is called Panegyricus.
There is also a warke of the practice of phisyke in the name of Plinius, but
whether it were of the first Pliny or no, it is not very certain. some
calls him Valerianus.

Plocum, a small reed.

Plodo, si, dear, to make noise with hands or feet.

Ploro, are, to weep.

Ploratus, tus, weeping.

Plorabundus, he that wepeth much.

Plostrum, for plaustrum, a wayne or carte.

Plostrarius, a, um, that which belongs to a wayne or carte.

Plostellum, a lyttel wayne.

Plota, a lampraye.

Ploti, they which have plain feet without holownes in the soles of the
feet.

Ploxinum, a coffer or cheste.

Plumo, mare, to be in feathers. Also to enbrowder.

Pluma, a fether.

Plumula, a little fether.

Plumarius, ria, rium, of feathers, a warker with feathers.

Plumatilis, le, made of feathers.

Plumbago, aginis, a vain of metal or oore, wherein is both silver and lead,
it is also an herb, which has leaves like sorrel, and a great rote and
roughe.

Plumbea ira, wrath which long continues.

Plumbatura, soulder of lead.

Plumbata, a pellet of lead.

Plumbatio, sowlderynge.

Plumbarius, a plummer or worker in lead.

Plumbatae, balls or clubbes of lead, wherewith men faught.

Plumbeus, bea, beum, of the color of leadde leady, or heavy as lead.

Plumbeus homo, a lumpyshe man without courage or spirit.

Plumbo, are, to leadde, to sowlder or join mettalle.

Plumbum, leadde.

Plumesco scere, to be or wax penned.

Plumare, idem.

Plumeus, a, um, of feathers.

Plumiger, that bears feathers.

Plumo, are, to be fethered, or have feathers.

Plumula, a little fether or plume.

Pluo, plui, ere, to rain.

Plura, many. Pluria, idem.

Plurifarius, a, um, of diverse fascions.

Plurifariam, many ways, in many places.

Plurimifacio, cere, to set much by.

Plurimum, very much.

Plurimus, very much, many, long.

Plurisfacio, cere, to make more of.

Plus, more. Pluris uendo, I selle for more or deerer.

Plus december millia capta, there were taken mo than ten thousand.

Vt cum matre plus esset, that he moughte be the longer with his mother.

Plures, for multi.

Plus ue minus ue, more or less, or about that number.

Pluris authoritas, more authority.

Pluris aestimare, to set more by.

Pluris aedificare, to buyld derar.

Plurima stragula, good store of tapesrye.

Hoc ego utor uno omnium plurimum, that do I use more than any other man.

Ibi plurimum est, he is most often there.

Plurimum aetatis, the more part of my life.

Plusculus, a, um, a little more.

Plutealis, le, that which is set in a table or case.

Plutealia sigilla, small Images in tables or cases.

Plutus, called god of richesse who was painted blind.

Pluteum, a space or distaunce, whereby the lower pyllers were dyuided from the
higher in the front or foreparte.

Pluteus, an engyne of war, made of hurdels keuered with lether or sack
clothe, which kept in the war, men whiles they wrought out of danger of
ordynance, under the which men do approach to the walls of a town also
hutches or greatte coffers, or other like places, wherein books, tables, or
such things ar kept.

Pluto, tonis, called god of hell, the son of Saturnus.

Pluuia, rain.

Pluuialis, pluuiatilis, and pluuius, a, um, rayny or of rain.

Pluuia aqua, rain water.

Pluuiosus, full of rain.

Plyssima, ancient writers used for plurima, very many.

P ANTE N.
PNEVMA, atis, spirit or wind or brethe.

Pneumaticus, ca, cum, wherein wind or brethe is used.

Pneumonici, they which be sick of the lounges.

P ANTE O.
POCILLATOR, pocillatoris, He that brings cups to the table, or a cup
bearer.

Pocillum, a little cup.

Poculum, a cup, sometime a draught.

Pocillum, a diminutiue of Poculum.

Poculentus, ta, tum, all thing good to be drunk.

Podagricus, and podagrosus, sa, sum, fulle of gout.

Podagra, a peynefull disease in the legs or feet called the gowte, which
comes of a superfluouse humor, specially fleume raw and viscouse, myxt with
choler or sharp blude, runnynge by the veins called Venae capilla res, and
the fleshy parts of the members, until he be commen between the bones of the
joints if the humor be hot, the place is red and exceeding hot, the pain
very greuouse, with much swellynge, the urine red, if the matter be sanguine,
if the humor be cold, the redness of the place is little: but more
extendynge to white, much swellynge and blewenesse of matter melancholye: Also
more hardness, and the urine more clear.

Podalyrius, one of the sons of Aesculapius and a great surgeon, he came to
the siege of Troy with his brother Machaon.

Padaris, a long gown to the fete.

Poderis, a strait garmente of lynnen clothe, it may now be called the Albe,
which priests do wear when they say mass.

Podex, dicis, the arse hole.

Podia, the cord, wherewith the sail is spread.

Podium, a place made without a wall, for me^ to stand and behold things,
also a stage, whereon is set candelles or books.

Poema, matis, and poesis, a poets warke.

Poenalis, le, penal, peynfull.

Poena, pain, tourment, execution.

Poenam pendere, to suffer punishment.

Poenas petere, to be aduenged, to punish.

Poenas reddere, to be punished.

Poenas luere, idem.

Afficere poena, to punish.

Committere poenam, to run in the danger of a pain, for doing or not
doing a thing.

Consurgere in poenam, to arise to punysshe one, or to se one tourmented.

Dare poenas, to be punyshed.

Exigere poenas, to cause one to be punished.

Expendere poenas, to be punished.

Persoluere poenas, idem.

Persequi poenas, to be revenged.

Repetere poenas homicidij, to bring an appele against one for murder.

Sumere poenas, to punish.

Poenio, ancient writers used for punio.

Poenitens, it is; penitent, repentaunt.

Poenitendus, da, dum, to be asshamed of, to be little esteemed.

Poenitentia, repentance, penance.

Poeniteor, I am in pain, I am greurd.

Penitudo, repentance.

Poenitet, tebat, tere, to repent.

Me haud poenitet, I care not, I am not sorry therefore.

Poenitet ambarum ornatae ut sumus, I am ashamed of us both, that we be this
apparayled.

Eum poenitet deformem esse natu^, he is ashamed that he is so deformed.

Nosmet nostri poenitet, we be not content with our selfs, we be ashamed of
our selfs.

Senectutis eum suae poenitet, he takes his age impatiently.

Tam diu aute^ uelle debebis, quo ad te quantum proficias non poenitebit. Thou
should have will to tarry so long, until thou shalt be well content and
pleased with the profit that is in that study.

Malo me fortunae poeniteat quam uictoriae, I had lever be sorry for my fortune,
than ashamed of the victory.

Poenitet me uerbi tui, thy speaking does not content me.

Poenitet me hominis, I am ashamed of the man.

Me quantum hic operis fiat, poenitet, I am not well content with that that is
done.

Poenitens, it is, he that repents him

Poenitendus, da, dum, that whereof a man ought to be ashamed, or mislyketh.

Poenitendum, a gerundife. Non est eius praeceptoris, poenitendum. He needs
not to be ashamed of that master, or may be content with such a master.

Poeniturus, he that shall repent.

Poenitentia, repentance, it is also now called penance.

Poenula, a cloak.

Poeon, a man whom Homer calls excellently learned in phisike.

Poeonia, an herb called Pyonie. also a region or country in Macedonia.

Poenicus, ca, cum, of Affrike, read Punica.

Poeninsula, a place, which for the more part is enclosed with water.

Poenus, a man of the city of Carthage, or an Affricane.

Poesis, the art of poets.

Poeta, a poet.

Poe^tice, ces, poetrye.

Poe^tice, after the manner of poets.

Poeticus, ca, cum, poetical.

Poetor, aris, ari, to exercise poetry.

Poetria, and poetris, idis, a woman poet.

Pogonia, a blasynge sterre, with a long beam before like a berde.

Pol, an aduerbe of swearynge, as it were by Pollux.

Polemonium, an herb Leonicenus and Manardus do suppose it to be that which is
called Ruta agrestis, wild rue: some do call it wood sage, it has a square
stalk, on every side leaves like saulge hoar and somewhat roughe, and a tufte
on the top wherein is a black sede, a rote of the length of a cubite, and
somewhat white, some have supposed it to be the gilofloure called the stok
gilofloure. Ruellius says that it grows on high grounds and barayne.

Polenta, was barleye ordered in this form. They steped barley in water one
night, and dried it, and the next day they fried it, and than ground it, and
so kept it long, which their slaves and pultry did eat.

Polentarius, a, um, perteinyng to barley ground as is before said.

Polite; freshely, gayly, klenly.

Politia, civility, politic governance.

Politicus, politica, liticum, civil or perteining to a city.

Politiones, they which are diligente in husbandrye.

Politius, more clean or trim.

Polium, an herb called poley.

Pollen, linis, wheat flower, sometime poulder.

Polleo, lere, to may.

Plurimum mari pollent, they be very strong on the sea.

Pollens medicina Hippocrates, Hippocrates was excellently learned in phisike.

Pollere moderatione and constantia, to be very moderate and constante.

Pollere questu, to yield much gain or advantage.

Plus pollet, it is of more force or puissance, or virtue.

Pollet eius authoritas, he is of great authority, or great estimation.

Pollent, they are very good.

Pollens uini, he that drinks much wine.

Pollentia, puissance.

Polliceor, polliceri, and polliceo, pollicere, to promise.

Pollicitatio, a promise.

Pollinaria cribra, a rangynge sieve, wherewith the flower is sifted from the
branne, it may be called also a boulter.

Pollinarius, a, um, perteynynge to flower.

Pollit, for pila ludit.

Polimenta, the stones of boore pigges.

Polio, poliui, polire, to polysshe, to garnysshe.

or deck.

Politus, ta, tum, polyshed, decked, trimmed.

Polities, cleanlynesse.

Pollentia, power, also a city.

Polleo, ere, to may, to have power, to shine.

Pollex, licis, a thumb of the hand, it is also an inche, which is a finger
bredthe and a half.

Rosa metitur quae pollice primo, the rose cut which is of the first
gatheryng.

Pollicaris, re, of a thumb.

Pollincio, linxi, lincere, to dress a dead body with sweet oyntmentes, it
may be now taken for the chestynge of men, and dressynge them with sweet
gummes, that the dead bodies may be the lengar without ill savor.

Pollinctor, he that does that manner of business.

Pollinctura, the ministration in baulmynge or chestinge dead bodies.

Pollintor, toris, a baker thatsyfteth meal.

Pollis, linis, and pollen, inis, meal.

Pollubrum, a basin, wherein men do wash their hands.

Polluceo, cere, to minister sacrifice, specially to Hercules.

Pollucere, to shine bright.

Polluctum, idem.

Pollucibiliter, costely, gorgiously.

Pollucibilis coena, a costely supper.

Polluo, luere, to polute or defyle.

Pollutus, ta, tum, poluted, defiled.

Polus, the pole, There be imagined to be two certain points in heaven, as it
were the ends of an extree, wherabout heaven is meuyd, the one is in the
north, and is called Polus arcticus, The other in the Southe, called Polus
antarcticus.

Pollux, lucis, was brother to Castor, both being borne at one bourden, which
Poets do feign to come of one egg, laid or brought forth by a woman,
called Leda, with whom Jupiter companied in lykenes of a swanne.

Polyarna, he that has many lambs.

Polybotes, a giant, whom Neptunus slew.

Polycarpus, he that has many flowers.

Polycnemon, an herb called wild organum.

Polycrates, a tyrant, which was so fortunate that he never suffered any
aduersite, or grief, wherefore he at the last dredyng the change of the favor
of Fortune, having a ring with a stone of an excellent valewe, did cast the
same ringe into the sea, to the intent that he would suffer some displeasure,
and so satisfye fortune: but a fyshe deuouringe the ring was the same day
taken of a fysher, and given to the king, for the greattenesse of the fyshe,
which being opened, there was the said ringe found and brought to the king,
whereat as well he, as all other about him meruayled. Sone after the same king
was oppressed by his people, and hanged.

Polydamas, a Troyane, one of them which betrayed the city with Eneas and
Anthenor

Polydorus, the son of king Priamus and Hecuba, who was by his father in the
time of the wars at Troy sent to Polymnestor king of Thracia with a great
sum of gold, to be kept out of the peril of wars. But the city of Troy
being taken, Polymnestor to enjoy the treasure slew the child, wherefore
afterward queen Hecuba crached out the eyes of Polymnestor.

Polygonum, an herb, which is also called Sanguinaria, and has leaves like
to Rewe, but it runs on the ground as grass, the juice thereof put into the
nose, stops bledynge. It is supposed to be swynes grass, or knote grass.

Polygonaton, an herb which Ruellius says is that which is called commonly
Sigillum Salomonis. Manardus affirms it to be that which of the Arabians is
called Secacul, of some Genicula, or Sigillum sanctae Mariae, of Io. Agricola,
it is supposed to be that which Italions do call Fraxinella.

Polyhistor, oris, he that knows much, or of many things done.

Polilogus, he that has many words.

Polymitus, mita, mitum, of twyne or twisted thredes.

Polymita, a garmente made of twysted threde or sylke.

Polyhymnia, one of the Muses, which word signifies much memory.

Polymorphus, of many forms or fascions.

Polymyxos, a candelstycke, which bearethe many lyghtes.

Polyphagus, a great eater.

Polyphemus, was a gyaunte that had one eye in his forehede, which was put
out by Vlyxes.

Polypodium, an herb like to fern, growing on trees.

Polyposus, he that has a sore in the nose.

Polypus, a fyshe having many feet, which changes his color often: Also a
piece of flesh, growing in the ouermoste part of the nose, which causes a
stinkynge air out of the nose.

Polyrizon, that which has many roots.

Polysyntheton, a figure, where many articles come into a sentence, as Ille
trahebat, Hic uo ciferabatur, He drew, and he cried out.

Polytes, one of king Priamus sons.

Polytrichon, an herb called maydenheare.

Polyxena, the daughter of king Pryamus whom cruel Pirrhus slew on the tomb
of Achylles.

Pomarium, an orcharde, sometime a place wherein fruits be kept.

Pomeridianus, and postmeridianus, a, um, any thing done after none.

Pomiferus, a, um, bearing appuls, having plenty of appulles.

Pomilius, and pomilio, onis, a lyttel personage a dwarf.

Pomoerium, the ground without the walls of the city, which might neither
be plowed nor inhabyted, the territory.

Pompa, a pomp, or solemn sight.

Pompeius, called Magnus, for his sundry and incomparable victories, whose
father was called Po^peius Strabo, had so good a grace in his visage, that
from his chyldehode, he meued the people of Rome most entierlye to favor
him. for his singular benevolence, co^tinence of living, marciall experyence
and knowledge, pleasantness of speech, fidelytie of manners, and easiness in
speaking to. He never required any thing without shamefastness nor granted
any thing but with a glad countenance. In his visage appiered always both
nobility and gentilnesse so that when he was in his flourishinge youth, there
shyned in him manners both princely and reverend. Scilla the cruel and proud
tirant had him in such estimation, that where he would not arise to any other
man, were he never in so high a dignity, He met with Pompeius coming
toward him, and putting of his bonet saluted him by the name of great
captain, called at that time in latin Imperator. He triumphed for his
victories in Affrik being almost a child nor yet admitted into the senate,
contrary to the ancient order of Rome. He vaynquished the valiant Capytayne
Sertorius, a man at that time most famous in prowess, being an exile in
Spain and before was invincible. He also vainquyshed Mithridates the great
king of Pontus, and where a great number of the concubines of Mithridates,
women of excellent beaultie were taken and brought unto him, he would not
company with any of them, but sent them unto their friends. He subdued these
realms: Armeniam, Cappadociam, Paphlagoniam, Mediam, Cholcidem, Iberiam,
Albaniam, Syriam, Ciliciam, Mesopotamiam, Iudeam, and Arabiam, for the which he
triumphed, after that he had twice before triumphed, for the winning of Spain
and Affrike. In this triumph he brought in to the commune treasure of gold
and silver in money and plate.xx. thousand talentes, which if they were
commune talentes, it amounted to.xx. hundred thousand pounds. if they were
the great talentes.xxvii. hundred and.xxvi. thousand.DC.li.xli.xiii.s.iiii.d.
in our money, besides that which was given to the men of war which had
served him, and that was to every one, a thousand and five hundred brason
pence, of our money.vi.li.v.s. which in so great an host as perteyned to the
conquest of so many countrayes extended to a wonderful sum of money, whereby
may appear the riches of the Romans. Afterward by the mediation of the friends
of both parts, Pompeye took to wife Iulia the daughter of Julius Caesar,
which lived not long, and the amity between Pompey and Caesar decresed, and
at the last the insaciable ambition of them both brast out, the one not
susteynynge the others honor, whereof came the war civil between them,
wherein Caesar with a fewer number vainquished Pompey, who privily fled by sea
into Egypt, where under the saulfe conducte of the king Ptholomeus, he was
slain in a boat, his head stricken of and his body cast on the stronde,
where it was poorly buried, when he had lived.lx. years and above, and from
his youth in most high honor welthe and prosperity, on whom it seemed that
fortune had most prodigally powered all her treasure.

Pomponius Atticus, an honorable Romayn of a gentill and ancient house, from
his child hode amiable of visage with a sweet voice and pronunciation, and
therewith having a sharp wit and apt unto learning, for the diuysion and
parts taken at Rome, he went and dwelled at Athenes where he was of the people
most tenderlye beloved, as well for his honorable virtues, as for his
benefits toward them, for being left rich by his fathers substance and
great revenues. He often times reliued the necessity of the comune people,
wherefore he was there had in a synguler reverence, and for his abode in Athenes
and excellency in their eloquence he was called Atticus. He did not only with
his treasure keep the people out of vsery: but also in a time of scarsitie he
gave to every citezen seven measures of wheat called Medimui, which was of
our measure.v. bushelles and di^, one pecke, one galon, and one quarte to every
one, he was loved of every man, and he was charitable to all men. When Cicero
went in exile he gave unto him CCl. thousand Sestertios, which amounts of
our money to M.xli.li.xiii.s.iiii.d. Sylla not withstanding his great pride,
had him in reverence. He most loved Hortensium and Ciceronem, princes of
eloquence, and although he him self were as well in the latin tunge as in the
greek as perfect as any man, yet would he never practice in matters, nor would
ask or sue for auctorie, he relyeued with his money contrary parts as
Antonium and Brutum. one to the other mortal ennemies. He lent great sums
of money without taking of vsery, and help ladies whose husebandes were
banyshed, as well with money as with his counsel and solicitation. Of Pompey
and Caesar he was equally loved when they were ennemies together. Finally his
quiet living was to no man anoyaunce, but to every man thankful: his house
was pleasant and not magnifike, nete and not very sumptuouse, al his
servants, were very well learned, and read well and wrate very fair, nor
there was so simple a boy in the house but that he could do both, the residue
were artificers, such as made things necessary and conueniente for his
house. Caesar Augustus when he most flourished made alyaunce with him for his
excellent temperance and honesty in living, for the which all noble men
favored him, also he married his wifes son Tiberius, who was afterward
emperor, to the daughter of Atticus daughter, and no day escaped that the
emperor wrate not unto him, semblably did Antonius the emperors enemy. Such
grace had he to be favored of all men, to live out of the danger of enuiouse
authority, to pass his time in the most dilectable paradise of knowledge,
and to have as well thereof abundauntely, as also living sufficient for the
mayntenaunce of his estate being a knight, and to aid his friends and
countrymen in their necessite. When he had lived.lxxvii. years, he died of a
fistula with a wonderful patience and voluntary abstinence, and was buried at
Rome, all good men following the corpse, and the people and al other lamenting He
wrate diverse excellent warkes in Greek and latin, which are perished to the
inestimable detriment of them that be studiouse.

Pompholix, is an herb which (as Manardus writes, is that which the
Apothecaries do call Nill.

Pompeiopolis, a city in Nauer called Pampilona.

Pompeianus, of Pompeius part, or a favorer of Pompeius.

Pomum, the general name of all fruits, it is most used for an appull.

Ponderitas, hefte, poyse.

Pondero, raui, rare, to way, to ponder, to consider, to esteem.

Pondo, indeclinabile, sometime it signifiethe a pound weyghte, Olei pondo
octaginta, four score pound weight of oil. sometime weyghte only. Corona
aurea librae pondo, A crown of gold of a pound weight. Sometime it signifies
a value of money, which like as Mina among the Greeks contained a hundred
Dragmas so pondo among the Romans contained an hundred Denarios of silver.

Pondus, deris, poise or weight.

Magna auri pondus, a great waighte or sum of gold. it does also signify
charge or bourden.

Habere po^dus apud aliquem, to have authority about some man, or to be in
great estimation with one.

Eius filius eodem est apud me pondere quo fuit ille. His son is with me in
the same, or as much estimation as ever was he.

Pondusculum, a littell or small weight.

Ponderosus, a, um, weighty.

Pone, after, or behind.

Pone eum esse uictum, put the case that he be vainquished.

Pono, posui, ponere, to put, to set, to cesse, to build, to lay aparte.

Ponere spem, to hope.

Accusatorem ponere, to suborne or hier one to accuse a man.

Ponere ante oculos rem aliquam, to set before his eyes, to cause him to
remember to make a thing to appear clear.

De rebus ante oculos positis disputare, to dispute of things clear and out of
question.

Quod erat ante oculos positu^, that no man had any doubt in.

Been ponere beneficium apud aliquem, to do pleasure to one that will require
it.

Castra ponere, to pitche or set a camp in wars.

Posituu^ consilium in fortuna, Fortune has thereof the disposition, or it is
at the will and pleasure of fortune.

Ponere curam, to set a side care.

Ponere curam in re aliqua, to take care for a thing.

Custos in frumento publico est positus, He had the charge given to him of the
common graynardes.

Ponere dies multos in rem aliquam, to employe or spend much time about a
thing.

Est. n. positum in te totum, it is in the wheit shall be done or not.

Ponere exemplum, to allege an exaumple.

Ponere se extra culpam, to discharge him self of that which is laid unto
him.

Ponere fundamenta, to lay the fundation.

Po^ere in admira^dis, to tell it for a marvel.

Ponere aliquid in admiratione, to marvel at a thing.

Ponere aliquem in aequo duobus summis, to esteem one equallye as much as two
the greattest.

Ponere in aequalitate, to esteem the oone as much as the other.

Neque ego hoc in tua laud pono, alia sunt tua facta atque consilia summa
laud digna, Nor I accoumpte this among thy praises, there be other of thyn
acts and procedynges that do deserve as much praise as may be gyuyn.

Ponere in promptu, to dysclose to all men.

Ponere in solemn, to set against the sun.

In optima spe sibi ponere aliquid, to have good hope in a thing.

Ponere in uitio, to take it in an ylle part, to interpret is to the warste.

Ponere mala initia, to begin ill.

Ponere loco contumeliae, to reproach one of any thing.

Ponere in beneficij loco, to take it for a fre^dly turn or pleasure.

Tantum in ea art ponitis, ye set so much by that art.

Munus been positum, a gift well bestowed.

Ponere nomina rebus, to give names to things.

Ponere omnia in uoluptate, to esteem noothynge so much as voluptye or
carnal apperyte.

Ponere operam, to bestow labor.

Been opera posita, peynes well bestowed.

Ponere operam alicui, to attend about ones business.

Ponere oua, to lay as a hen does.

Ponere pro certo sum ueritus, I dare not affirm it for truth, I dare not
assure you that it is so.

Been ponere officiu^ apud aliquem, I have not lost my labor in doing him
pleasure.

Sumptus nusquam melius potest poni, A man could never have better bestowed
his money.

Ponere multum temporis in aliquo loco, to tarry a great while in a place.

Vbi cunque posuit uestigia, by all the way that he passyd, where so ever he
went.

Ponere iubebam de quo quis audire uellet, I bad him purpose what so ever they
lysted to hear.

Tum uenti posuere, than the wind ceased.

Ponere consilium, to leave his enterprise.

Ponere de manibus, to lay out of his hands.

Ponere dolorem, to cease to be sorrowful.

Ponere feroces animos, to leave his fiersenesse and cruelty.

Ponere arma, to lay aside their weapon, or harneyse.

Ponere metum, to take a good heart.

Ponere pudorem, to be shameless.

Ponis mihi porcum, thou seruest me at the table with porke.

Ponere pallium, to lay his garmente in pledge.

Pone eum esse uictum, put the case that he is vaynquyshed.

Ponunt philosophi, the philosophers do write. etc.

Ponere in gratia uel gratiam, to bring into favor. Cic. ad At.

Pons, pontis, a bridge.

Pontia, an isle in the sea called Ligusticum, on the southe part of Italy,
wherein Pylatus was borne, and thereof was called Pontius Pylatus.

Pontica nux, a kind of fylberdes, which camme from the countreye called
Pontus in Asia.

Ponticum, is a taste, which has no sent to be dyscerned.

Ponticulus, a little bridge.

Pontifex, ficis, an archebysshoppe.

Pontificatus, tus, the dygnitie of a bishop.

Pontificius, a, um, of a bishop.

Pontones, whyry boots.

Pontus, is the sea, which is between the fenne called Maeotis, and the isle
called Tenedos. It is also a great cuntray joining to that sea, which
conteyneth the royalmes of Colchu^, Cappadociam, Armeniam, and other diverse
countrays. it is sometime put generally for the sea.

Popa, fat, grease.

Popana, fat oyntementes.

Popanum, a cake of breadde.

Popellus, the little or poor people.

Popina, a tavern or vyttaylynge house, where meat is eaten out of dew time,
a Cooks shop.

Popinatio, ryotte.

Popinalis, le, pertaining to ryotte, or places of ryotte.

Popino, nonis, a commune hauntoure of vyttaylynge houses.

Popinor, aris, ari, to eat out of dew time, to be ryottouse.

Poples, poplitis, the hamme of a man's leg behind the knee.

Poppisma, matis, the noise made with the mouth and the hand, in riding, or
wanton dalyaunce.

Populabundus, wasting the countreye, or he that gothe in fourragynge or
robbynge of countrayes.

Popularis, re, pertaining to the people, accepted or favored of the people.
Alsoo it sygnyfyeth a famylyar friend, or as we use to call country man.

Nihil tam populare quam bonitas, Nothing more pleases the people than
goodness or virtue.

Praestat diuitem esse ac popularem, quam nobilem ac mendicum, It were better
to be of the commynaltie, and rich, than of the nobylitie, and a beggar.

Popularia loca, places where the comminaltie does assemble.

Populari nomine a nobis appellantur, In the commune form of speaking, they
be called. etc.

Populare ingenium, holding with the lyberty of the people.

Popularitas, frendeshyp by occasyon that they be countrymen. also the favor
that one bears to the commune people.

Populariter, and populare, homely, like the people, according to the manners
of the people.

Populatus, ta, tum, wasted, distroyed.

Populatia, boys plays.

Populatim, of all the people, also euerychone.

Populatio, a wasting of the country, a forragynge.

Populare, to get the favor of the people.

Populator, a fourrageour or waster of countrayes.

Populeus, a, um, of a poplar tree.

Populinus, idem.

Populnus, and populneus, idem.

Populetum, the place where poplar trees do grow.

Populifugia, was a day in the month of June at the which day by reason of a
rumor, the people fled.

Populor, popularis, to waste or dystroye a country.

Populosus, a, um, full of people, populouse.

Populus, people, properlye it is all the states of the people besides the
sovereign Governor. All be it the Romans made a dystynction between the
Senate and the people, writing in their standerdes and coin. Senatus
populusque Romanus, The Senate and people of Rome.

Populus, a tree called a popular, whereof one is called white poplar, whose
stem is long and plain, and the leaves always shaking, grene within and
white on the back, the other is called black poplar, which has the bark
rough, and fewer leaves than the white.

Porca, a sow, a rydge of land, a balke.

Porcarius, a, um, of a swyne.

Porcarius, a swyneherde.

Porceo, cere, to prohybyte.

Porcetra, a young sow or yelte.

Porcinus, na, number, of a hog.

Porcellus, a pygge.

Porculus, idem.

Porculatio, bringing up of swyne.

Porculator, a fatter of swyne.

Porculetum, idem quod porca.

Porculus, a shoot, a porcatte.

Porcus, a hog.

Porcus troianus, a hog roasted with many other beasts and fowls within his
bealye.

Porgam, used of the ancient writers for porrigam, I will deliver or take to
one.

Pori, poores in the body, out of the which issues sweat.

Porphyretes, a red marble.

Porphyreticus, ca, cum, of read marble.

Porphyriacus, ca, cum, of purple color.

Porphyrio, a bird which drynketh as if he did byte the water, he has
long read legs and bylle.

Porraceus, cea, ceum, of the color of leeke blades.

Porrecte, straight out.

Porrectus, ta, tu^, extended in length or bredthe, stretched.

Porriginosus, a, um, like to leekes.

Porrigo, porrexi, rigere, to spread out, to offer, to overthrow.

Herbam porrigere, to confess to be vaynquyshed.

Porrigere manum, to give aid or succors.

Porraceus, a, um, of a leke.

Porro, surely, also long before, far of, after, in time coming, beyond,
forsothe.

Porro. Si ire porro pergas, if ye go further.

Vt quiescant porro moneo, Finally I advise them to leave or sytte stylle.

Quid restat nisi, ut fiam miser? What remains, but that in the end I am
undone.

Etiam ne est quid porro? Is there any thing else?

Quid deinde porro, What more followed after.

Porro, is sommetyme a conjunction, and is as much as Sed. sometime it is a
conjunction expletyue, to fylle up only the number of the sentence.

Porro autem, and that more is.

Neque porro, for neque etiam.

Se porro pueros a senibus audisse dicebant, That they being very young,
herd old men say. etc.

Porrus, and porrum, leekes.

Porsena, the name of a king, that besyeged Rome, to have brought in Tarquinus.

Porta, a yate.

Portendo, dear, to sygnyfye before a thing happens.

Portentiferus, tifera, tiferum, that which sygnyfyeth strange or monstruouse
things coming.

Portentificus, ca, cum, idem.

Portentosus, a, um, monstruouse, sygnyfyenge ill luck or adventure.

Portentum, a thing monstruouse, or very seldom seen, which may sygnifye
somewhat to come.

Porticus, cus, a porche.

Portio, a portion.

Portiuncula, a little portion.

Portiusculus, the pylate of a ship, which rules the maryners.

Portitor, oris, the customer of a haven* alsoo a porter, that does bear
things that be bought, whyther as the byer will have him. Also he that bears
men fro the haven to the ship.

Porto, tare, to bear, to bring.

Portorium, the frayte paid for passage or caryage of marchaundyse. also
custom or tallage.

Portulaca, an herb called Purselan.

Portuosus, full of havens.

Portus, tus, an haven.

Res est in portu, the matter or thing is safe. In portu nauigare, to be out of
danger.

Posca, a sauce made with vyneger and water.

Poscinumius, mia, um, that which requires money.

Posco, poposci, poscere, to ask, to require, to provoke, to assail.

Poscunt pugnam, they offer to fight, or do battle.

Poscere maioribus poculis, to quaft or drink deep one to an other.

Poscere aliquem clamore, to cry after one.

Vbi res poscit, where it is requisite.

Cum usus poscit, when need is.

Pos, a bridge.

Positio, a setting of a thing.

Positura, idem.

Positus, ta, tum, put or set.

Positura, and positus, tus, a setting or putting.

Possessio, onis, possession.

Possessio fidutiaria, a possession which oone gives to an other upon
condytion that he shall redelyuer possession upon certain things performed,
or when he were thereto required by him, which gave possessyon, it might have
been called a possessyon in use, when feoffementes of trust were vsyd in
England.

Possessor, oris, he that has the possession, the owner.

Possideo, sedi, sidere, to possede.

Bona ex edicto possidere, when one has goods given him by judgment or
decree.

Bona public possidere, to have goods forfayted or confyscate.

Possidere palmam, to get the price.

Breui tempore totum hominem, totamque eius praeturam possederat, In a lyttel
while he had gotten into his hands both the man and his office holly.

Possum, potui, posse, to may.

Non potuit quin suo semone aliquem familiarium participauerit, He could not
forbear but with his talking he made some of his companyons privy, or of his
counsel.

Huc fac ad me ut uenias si quid poteris, Do what ye can to come hither to
me, if it be possible.

Potest plurimum ad Caesarem, he may do much, or is in good credence with
Caesar.

Potin es ut desinas, Canste thou not let aloone.

Incende hominem amabo te quoad potest, On good fellowship prycke forward the
man as much as is possible.

Post, after, afterward, behind.

Postea, afterward.

Postergo, are, to leave behind, to cast back.

Posteri, they which do succeed us in blood, as sons, their children, and
their succession.

Posterior, he that comes after.

Non posteriores feram subauditur parts, I will not be the last.

Paulo aetate posterior, a little younger.

Omnia liberate posteriora ducere, To regard nothing or pass upon nothing
but liberty.

Posteritas, taris, the world to come.

Posterius, later, slower, vyler.

Posterus, ra, rum, that which comes after.

Postera dies, the day after. Posteri pedes, the hinder fete.

Postfero, to set after or behind, to set less by.

Posthabeo, bear, to put back or set less by.

Posthac, from hensforthe.

Posthamus, ma, a child borne after that the father is dead.

Posthumus, ma, mum, following, or to come.

Posticum, and posticus, a backedoore,

Postica, all that is behind us, like as Antica is all that is before us, It
is alsoo a line which dyuydeth the fields from the East to the weste.

Postilena, a crouper.

Postis, a post.

Postliminium redire, is when any manne happeth to go from us to our enemies,
and after retourneth home.

Postmitto, postmittere, to leave behind, to forgette.

Postmodum, afterward.

Postquam, after.

Postremo, finally.

Postridie, the day after to morrow, the day following the day before expressed.

Postomis, a brake, wherewith a horses mouth is broken, and is made to bear
his head easyly.

Postremus, a, um, the last of all.

Postremi homines, ungracious men.

Postremum me uides, it is the last time that thou shall see me.

Postulo, are, to require, to demand a thing which is dew to the asker.
also to accuse or sewe one in the law, or to complain on one, sometime to
desire.

Postulare quaestionem, to desire that the parties might be straytely
examyned, properly by tortures or tourmentes.

Postulare ius, to make a reasonable request.

Budaeusin annot.

Postulatio, a supplyeation made to a prince.

Postulationibus uacare, to dyspache suyters, to here complayntes.

Postulationes, supplycations or bylles of complaynte.

Potens, it is, mighty, puissaunt, hable.

Potentia, power, puissance, habilite, great rule. it is also a place in Italy
called Sancta Maria de Loretto.

Potenter, myghtyly, puissantly.

Potentatus, tus, power.

Pote, for potis.

Potestas, tatis, power, authority, counsaylle, and reason.

Potestatem sui facere, to suffremen to come to him, or to speak with him.

Potestatem gerere, to exercise an authority or office.

An erit haec optio and potestas tua? Shall it be at thy choice. etc.

Praesertim cum tota potestas huius rei tua sit, Specially sens all the matter
rests in the, or is in thy power to bring to pass.

Quae tum erat potestas, according as it was lefull at that time.

Vix adipiscendi potestas modo fuit, Uneath or with great pain I might come by
it.

Potestas mittendi non fuit citius, I could no sooner send.

Quoties mihi certorum hominum potestas erit quibus recte them, non
praetermitta^ etc. When or as often as I may have sure men, to whom I may
deliver my letters, I will not forgette to write unto you.

Cum potestate proficisci in prouinciam, to go into the countray appointed him,
having authority to rule there.

Potestatem dare, to let or suffer, to give leave.

Potestatem facere, idem.

Potestatem sui facere, to let or suffer men to speak with him.

In potestate alicuius esse, to be under an another man's rule or obedyence, or
to be at his commandment.

Peruenire in potestate^ alicuius, to be brought in subjection.

Ponere in potestate alicuius, to put him unto his mercy.

Potestur, for potest, he may.

Potio, onis, a drink.

Potiono, are, to give a medycine.

Potior, potitus sum, potiri, to have in possession, to obtain, to take
pleasure of.

Potiri urbis, to win the city.

Potiri uoluptatum, to live in pleasure.

Potiri rerum, to be king or master of all the world.

Potiri regni, to win the country.

Potiri laborem, to endure pain.

Qui bello potiti sunt, which have won it at the swords poyne.

Potior, for Fruor.

Potior, potius, and potissimus, for Melior, Optimus.

Potior sit qui prior ad dandum est, Let him be in better condytion, or have
more advantage, that first gives.

Iudicabit nulla ad legendum his esse potiora, He shall judge none more worthy
to be rad than they.

Nihil mihi potius fuit, quam ut Masinissam conuenirem, There was no thing
that I more longed than to mete with Masinissa. The first thing that I did
I went to Masinissa, I desired nothing more than to see Masinissam.

Potissimus, a, um, the best of all other, or the chief or the pryncipall.

Potius, rather.

Potissimum, or potissime, most rather, chiefly, pryncipally.

Potitij, was an ancient famylye or kynrede among the old Latynes, whom
Hercules called to his bankette, after that he had slain Cacus, And afterward
they were constytute the priests of Hercules, read Fenestellam.

Potis sum, I may, potis est, it is possible.

Potitius, Hercules priest.

Potito, tare, to use to drink.

Poto, tare, to drink: Alsoo to give drink to oone.

Potare totos dies, to sytte all day drynking, to be drunken.

Potatum dare, to give drink to one.

Potator, and potor, a drunken knave.

Potorium, a cup.

Potus, ta, tum, that which has drunk, and that which is drunken.

Potus, tus, drink.

P ANTE R.
PRAE, before, in regard, or in comparyson, for. Prae amore, for love. Also
of. Prae studio, of study. Praeur sygnifieth than. Modestior nunc quidem est
de ue^bis praeut dudum fuit, He is more soft or gentle of words, than he was
wont to be, or than he was late.

Prae se far, to show semblaunt or by countenance.

Sanus si sim, prae te medicum mihi experam, If I be well advised I will look to
have a better physician than thou art.

Nihil hercle hoc quidem, prae ut alia dicam, This is nothing in regard of
that that I will tell the.

Prae formidine, for great fear that he had.

Prae gaudio, for joy.

Prae manu, and prae manibus, before hand.

Praeacutus, very sharp.

Praealtus, very deep.

Praebitere, to pass by, or pass forth in journey. sometime perire, tolese,
to cast away.

Praebeo, bui, bear, to give, to show.

Praebere aurem, to harken.

Praebere aures conuitijs, to suffer patiently rebukes.

Ceruices praebere, to offer his head to be stricken of.

Praebet errorem, it gives occasion of error.

Praebere indignationem, to be cause of indygnation.

Iusta praebere, to keep tacke, to do that, that he has taken upon him.

Non possum satis narrare quos Iudos praebueris intus, I can not well tell
how many mockes thou haste gotten among them, or how they laugh at the
within in the house.

Os praebere, to take blows or suffer to be bobbyd.

Os praebere ad male audiendum, to suffer one to speak ill to his face.

Strenuum hominem praebuit, He played the man, he showed him self valiant, or
did valyantely.

Se aequum praebere, to be indifferent, to do justice without rygour.

Se aequabile^ praebere, to be always of one sort

Se attentum auditorem praebere, to be a dilygent hearer.

Quo quomodo se in ea quaestione praebebat etc. How so ever he behauyd him
self in that matter.

Se credulum praebere, to give hasty credence

Se docilem praebere, to be easyly taught.

Se alicui facilem praebere, to grant gentylly to ones desire.

Se facilem praebere in hominibus audiendis admittendisque, to be wyllyng and
gentle to here men, and to be spoken with all.

Gladij speciem praebet, it is like in fascyon to a sword.

Erroris speciem praebere, to give occasyon of error.

Speciem triumpho praebere, to set forth the triumph to the best show.

Tyrannum praebere, to behave him like a tyrant.

Vim glutini praebet, it is as good as glewe, or it is of the same force that
glewe is.

Baculorum usum senectuti praebet, It serves old men in the stead of a staff.

Praebia, orum, things given to sy^ke men.

Praecaluus, balde before.

Praecarus, ra, rum, very dear.

Praecaueo, uere, to provide that a thing happen not.

Praecedo, cessi, dear, to go before.

Praecello, lui, lere, to excelle.

Praecentio, that which is songen or playde at the beginning of a song or
balade.

Praecentor, toris, he that first syngeth, it may be taken for the chaunter in
a quyre.

Praeceps, cipitis, a high place stepe down.

Praeceps, headlynge, suddenly, hastily.

Praeceps homo, he that is to hasty in his business, and does things
unadvisedly.

Praeceps ingenio in iram, hot or hastye in wrath.

Praeceps in auaritiam and crudelitatem animus, The mind inclyned to
covetousness and cruelty.

Quo iure quaque iniuria praecipitem me in pistrinam dabit, Be it right, be it
wrong, he will thruste me into the myll house.

Praecipitem abire, to come to mysery.

Praecipitem dare, to thrust one out hedlynge.

Agunt eum praecipitem poenae ciuium Romanorum quos securi percussit, The
cruelle punyshement of the Romans whom he had byheaded, caused him to fall
so hastily.

Praecipitem ferri, to rounne down or falla down from a high place.

Praeceps in occasum sol, the sun was down

In praecipite esse, to be in great danger.

Praecipitem trahere, to pull him down from a high place, or astat^.

In praeceps, suddenly, hastily.

Bis patet in praeceps tantum, it is twyse or two times so deep.

Praeceps animi, stourdye or hastye in all his acts.

Praeceps senectus, at the pyts brynk for age.

Praeceptum, a precepte, a rule given, a commandment.

Praecingo, ere, to gyrde about.

Praecidanea porca, a swyne, which the paynyms did sacryfice before they did
cut down their corn.

Praecidaneus, a, um, that which is first killed.

Praecido, dear, to speak or tell precisely, or certainly, to stryke, to cut
of, to beat, to deny styffely. Plane sine uila exceptione praecidit, Trewely
he styffely denied it without exception.

Praecidere spem, to put out of all hope.

Praecino, nui, nere, to sing before or first, also to tell a thing before it
happens.

Praecipio, coepi, cipere, to prevent or take first, to forsee, also to
command.

Praecipitium, a down right place or step, dangerous to be gone on.

Paercipito, tare, to throw down headlynge.

Praecipitanter, headlynge, unadvisedly.

Praecipuus, a, um, chief, special, pryncipall, soueraygne.

Praecipue, chiefly, specially, principally.

Praecise, precisely, determynately.

Praecisum, hard, intractable, cutted, very short. Qui praecisis
conclusionibus obscuri, Salustium atque Thucydidem superant, The which being
hard to be understand in their cutted sentences do excede both Saluste and
Thucydides.

Praeclamo, are, to cry before.

Praeclare, very excellently, very nobly, very well

Praeclarus, very noble. sometime it sygnifieth good.

Praecognitus, ta, tum, known before.

Praeco, conis, a crier, a publisher of things.

Praeco feralis, the belle man which in some town goth about declaring who is
late dead.

Praeconium, a solemn cry, sometime it sygnifieth praise or glory.

Praecoquor, queris, qui, to be soon ripe.

Praecordia, the skin, which dyuideth the over part of the body from the
nether, it is also taken for the place under the rybbes, some time all the
numbles, as the heart, the spleen, the lunges, and liver.

Praecox, cocis, and praecoquus, a, um, sone ripe, or tymely ripe.

Praeda, a proy, a thing gotten or taken in wars.

Praedabundus, going on forragynge in the time of war.

Praedaceus, a, um, of a proy. Praedatiuus, idem.

Praedator, a seker for a proye.

Praedator ex socijs, a robber of his company.

Praedensus, a, um, very thycke.

Praedestino, are, to purpose before.

Praedes, uide praes.

Praediator, oris, a man of law expert in actions real, or matters
concerning lands.

Praediatorius, a, um, pertaynyng to lands.

Praedicatio, a publyshyng or open declaration.

Praedico, care, to publyshe, to tell a thing openly, to praise.

Praedico, xi, cere, to tell before.

Praediolum, a little manor.

Praedisco, didici, discere, to understand before.

Praeditus, ta, tum, adourned also Praeditus moerore, replenyshed with heaviness.
Praeditus lachrymis, washed with tears, or full of tears

Praeditus authoritate, in authority.

Praeditus spe optima, to have good hope.

Praedium, a manor.

Praedonulus, a little robber.

Praedo, donis, a robber of countries.

Praedor, aris, ari, to rob a country, or to take prays.

Praedotiunt, they chiefly desire.

Praeduro, are, to be harder than it was wont.

Praeeo, iui, ire, to go before.

Praefacio, feci, facere, to set more by.

Praefanda, not honest to be spoken or rehearsed.

Praefari, to speak or say before.

Praefari honorem, is where one says to his better. Saving your reverence or
honor.

Praefari Diuos, to pray to god, before that one enterpryseth any thing.

Praefatio, onis, a preface.

Praefecturae, may be called Sheryffewykes, among the Romans it sygnified the
prouynces, where the said officers had jurisdiction.

Praefectus Praetorij, was with the emperors the principal officer in his
court, as now in France the great master.

Praefectus urbis, was a great offycer in Rome, to whom it belonged to see
that the high ways to the city were well maynteyned, that the waters were
kept clean, that the channel of the river of Tyberis, were skoured and kept
from shelues* also to deliver grayn out of the commune garners, and dyuyde it
among the people. He was also called Praefectus Latinarum, as Gellius writes.

Praefecti prouinciarum, may be taken among us for sheriffs, but more properly
for such as have like jurisdiction as the chaumber-layne of Northwales, and
the high stuarde of southewales were wont to have, that is to say peculiar
authorite to determe matters within the compass of their office.

Praefecti aerarij, were they which had the charge of keeping the commune
treasure.

Praefectus fisci, was he which kept themperours treasour.

Praefectus scriniorum, was a like officer as now is the master of the rolls,
and was also called Praefectus libellorum, in the which office was Papinianus
the greatte lawyer in the time of Seuerus the emperor.

Praefero, tuli, far, to prefer.

Praefericulum, a great basin, which was carried before him that did sacrifyce.

Praefestino, are, to make to much have.

Praefica, a woman, which is desired to lament at the buryeng of men or women.

Praeficio, faeci, ficere, to put in auctorytie, or to give rule.

Praefectura, an authority or rule.

Praefectus, a rular.

Praefigo, xi, gere, to shut before.

Praefinio, mui, ire, to determyne before, to assygne or appoint.

Praefinitus, ta, tum, prefyxed.

Praefluere, to run before a place.

Praefoco, care, to strangle or choke.

Praeformido, are, to be aferd er the stroke come.

Praefractus, cta, ctum, hard and unflexible, which will rather break than
bow: also that which was before broken.

Praefracte, obstinately.

Praefrigidus, da, dum, very cold.

Praefulcio, cire, to fortifye.

Praefulgeo, fulsi, gere, to shine much.

Praefurnium, the mouth of an oven or furneys.

Praegelidus, da, dum, exceeding cold.

Praegestire, to leap for joy.

Praegigno, nere, to begin, to bring in first.

Nolebam ex me morem praegigni malum, I would not that an ill custom should
be brought up by me.

Praegestio, ire, to rejoice much.

Praegnans, antis, a woman with child. it is the same of any beast.

Praegnans sus, a sow with farrowe.

Praegrandis, de, very great.

Praegrauatio, a great grefe.

Praegredio, gredi, to go before.

Praegrauo, are, to grieve much.

Praegustare, to take assay.

Praehendo, di, dear, to take. Manum praehendere, to take by the hand.

Praehensatio, a sollycityng or labouryng for the attaynynge of some great
office.

Praehenso, are, to embrace or set hand on one to solycite.

Praeiacio, ieci, iacere, to cast before a thing.

Praeiacio, cui, cere, to lie before.

Praeire iuramentu^, to minister or give an oath.

Praeiuditium, a thing which being ones decyded and determined, makes a
rule or example to men that do follow, to dyscusse semblably in a like mattier.
As those which we do call ruled cases or matters in the law, which be as
examples to iuges.

Praeiudico, to judge before, sommetyme to judge by example of an another like
mattier before judged or discided.

Praeiuro, are, to swear before other.

Praeiuratio, the oath that is taken by him that first swears.

Praeiurator, toris, he which first takes an oath as the fore man of a Iurye,
or the first witness, or any other, after whom other men do swear, according
to the oath given unto him.

Praelabor, beris, by, to fall first, to slide.

Praeliaris, are, pertaining to battle.

Praeliator, toris, a warryour.

Praelicenter, very wantonly.

Praelior, aris, ari, to fight in battle.

Praeliganeum uinum, a praeligando, which I suppose to be so called, either
because it is first tounned or put into vessels, or else because it is
put into a sack, which is fast knytte before.

Praeligo, gare, to bind before.

Praelium, battle, also the fight in battaylle. sometime the act of
generation.

Praelongus, a, um, very long.

Praeloquium, the beginning of a communication, or thing spoken, as that which
in the toryke is named exordium.

Praeloquor, queris, qui. to speak or tell before.

Praeluceo, cere, to bear light before one, as a torche or candel, also to
give more light than an another.

Praelucere alijs uirtute, to shine in virtues before other.

Praeludium, a proheme, or that which musytians and mynstrelles do play at
the beginning, er they come to the song, which they purpose to play.

Praeludo, si, dear, to play before.

Praelum, a press.

Praelumbo, are, to break ones loins.

Praeluo, luere, to purge or wash clean before.

Praemando, daui, to send before.

Praemanibus, ready at hand.

Praemature, to soon, or before the just time.

Praemature uita careo. I dye before my time.

Praemeditor, taris, tari, to advise before a man do a thing.

Prae me fero, prae me tuli, prae me far, to declare by deed, word, or
gesture.

Prae te fers iracundiam, Thou sheweste thy self to be angry, also to
confess, also to have before him a thing (as it were) in remembrance.

Praemercor, caris, cari, to bye before hand.

Praemessum, a sacrifyce or offering to Ceres, of the ears of corn that was
first reapyd.

Praemetium, the first croppe.

Praemiatores, thieves which steal by night, as we might say, which commytte
burglary.

Praemiator, is a rewarder.

Praemineo, nui, ere, to be better than another or excel above an other in
astate or virtue.

Praemior, aris, ari, to give rewards.

Praemiosus, rich of money.

Praemissio, a sendynge before.

Praemitto, misi, tere, to send before.

Praemium, a reward given to him, which has done any notable and laudable
thing.

Premoderor, aris, ari, to play before on an instrument.

Praemodum, above measure.

Praemolestia, fear of a thing to come.

Praemollis, le, very tender or delycate.

Praemoneo, nui, nere, to forewarne.

Praemonstrator, toris, he that tellethe or shows a thing before that it
happens.

Praemonstro, strare, to show before.

Praemordeo, dear, to byte or rebuke before.

Praemorior, riris, riri, to dye er the time come.

Praemunio, iui, ire, to prepare, to fortify a place before that the enemies
do come.

Praenarro, rare, to tell before.

Praenato, tare, to swymme before.

Praeneste, a city in Italy.

Praenestini, people of the city of Preneste in Italy.

Praenestinus, a, um, of Preneste.

Praenomen, the first name, as Marcus, Quintus, Lucius, and as we now have the
name at baptysme.

Praenimis, too, too, far to much.

Praenosco, noui, noscere, to know before.

Praenoto, tare, to make annotations or inscryptions.

Praenuncio, are, to show before.

Praenuncius, the first messanger, he that first brings tidings.

Praeoccupatio, a figure in Rhetoric, when we will say that we will not
tell a thing, and yet thereby couertely we will declare the matter, or make it
suspected.

Praeoccupo, pare, to take or posseede a thing by preuencyon.

Praeopto, tare, rather to desire.

Praeordinatio, the first ordinance.

Praeordinator, he that made the first ordinance.

Praeordino, are, to ordeyne before.

Praeparcus, ca, cum, very scarce or nygarde.

Praeparo, are, to prepare, to make ready.

Praepedimentum, a let before.

Praepedio, diui, to let much.

Praependo, dear, to hang before.

Praepes, praepetis, swyft, light in flight.

Praepetes aues, were the birds, which showed them selves first to the
dyuinours called Augures, whereby they supposed to know what should ensue.

Praepeto, tere, to begin first.

Praepilatus, ta, tum, headded with iron, as a Iauelyn or darte, also sharp
before like the head of a dart, though it has none iron, as the horns of a
lopster, wherewith he swymmeth.

Praepinguis, very fat.

Praepondero, rare, to way more, to be more worth.

Praepolleo, lere, to excede other.

Praepono, sui, ponere, to put or set before.

Praepositus, ta, tum, set or advanced above other, set in authority.

Praepositus, ti, he that is in authority, or chief in any office.

Praepotens, very puissaunt or mighty.

Praepoto, tare, to drink before to drynge good luck in drinking.

Praeposterus, ra, rum, overthwart, out of order.

Praeposteri homines, they that do that thing last, which they should have
done first.

Praepostere fieri, to be done against all good order. As when the servant
commands his master, the people their rulers, or a fool a wise man.

Praeproperus, ra, rum, very quycke or hasty.

Praeputium, the skin which covers the head of a man's privy member.

Praerancidus, a, um, very unsavory.

Praeripio, pui, pere, to prevent, to catch.

Praerideo, dear, to laughe before.

Praerisor, oris, he that laugheth before one.

Praerodo, si, dear, to gnawe or eat very much.

Praerogo, gare, to employ or give before.

Praerogata beneficia, benefyttes before employed.

Praerogatiua, and praerogatiuum, a prerogative where one is preferred before an
other.

Praerumpo, pere, to break a sunder.

Praeruptus, ta, tum, all to broken, it is sometime taken, where a hill is
broken by the sides, and hard to go on.

Praerupta loca, places broken here and there, that no man may pass.

Praes, praedis, he that undertakes for an other which has bounden him self
for any thing touching the comminaltie.

Praesagium, and praesagatio, among the ancient writers, a perceyuinge of a
thing before that it happens, sometime a conjecture.

Praesagio ire, to divine or tell what shall happen.

Praesagibat animus, frustra me ire cum exire domo, when I went out of my house
my heart gave me that I should go in vain.

Nescio quid profecto mihi, animus praesagit mali, In good faith my heart
gives me, that some ill shall happen I wot not what.

Praesagus, a pronosticatour, or perceyuer of things er they hap.

Praescientia, an understanding and perfytte knowledge of all that shall happen.

Praescius, he that knows perfectly things er they happen.

Praescio, scire, to know before.

Praescribo, psi, bear, to assign, to note or entitle, to put, to lay before,
to tell before, to appoynte or determyne.

Praescriptio, and praescriptum, a rule, a law, an order, a form.

Praescriptum, a precepte, a form, a rule.

Praeseco, care, to cut before, sometime to cut on sonder.

Praesegmina, the paringes of a man's nails.

Praesens, it is, present. In praesentia, and in praesentiarum, at this present
time.

Praesens animus, a strong or good courage, also favorable. Deum praesentem
habet, he has god favorable unto him.

Mihi tua domus te praesente absente pateat, let thy doors be open to me
whether thou be at home or no, or let me be welcome to thye house whether
thou be there or abroad.

Praesens Deus God gives to us incontine^t that that we demand.

Praesens medicina, the medicine that cures forthewith.

Praesentius, better.

Praesentissimus, a, um, the best, the surest.

Praesentissimum uenenum, the greatest and most fervent poison: also strong.

Praesentissimum remedium the most spedy or sure remedy.

Prasentaneum argentum, money to be paid in hand.

Praesentaneum remedium, a short or sodeyn remedy.

Praesentia, presence.

Praesentio, and praesentisco, cere, to feel or perceive before, to doubt of a
thing.

Praesento, tare, to have ready.

Praesepe, and praesepium, and presepes, a stable, a stall, a shepehouse.

Praesepio, pire, to hedge before a thing.

Praesertim, specially.

Praeseruatio, a preservation.

Praeseruare, to preserve.

Praeses sidis, he that has authority in a province next under the prince, a
lieuetenaunt or viceroy, sometime it signifies a defendour also sure. Locum
praesidem, a sure place.

Praesideo, dear, to be in more authority, or of a more dignity: also to have
authority or rule.

Praesideratio, tempest, which comes at the beginning of winter, sooner than
it is looked for, or is accustomed to happen.

Praesidero, are, where tempeste comes very sone, and before the time
accustomed.

Praesicco, care, to dry before.

Praesidiarius, a, um, that which is ordained to be aid to an other thing.

Praesidium, a garrison of men with a captain set by the chief captain, to
defend a fortress. some time it is taken generally for all manner of aid or
defense: also for a fortification of a thing.

Praesilio, silire, to lepe before, to sterte out.

Praesisto, tere, to stand or be set before.

Praespeculor, ari, to look before.

Praespicio, spexi, spicere, to see before.

Praestabilis, le, excellent.

Praestabilius, better.

Praestantia, excellency.

Praestat, it is better.

Praestans, it is, excellent.

Praestanter, excellently.

Praestega, a place open before and covered behind like a porche, where men do
sytte for recreation after their business.

Praester, a venymous serpente, of whom he that is stryken, dies for thyrste.

Praestes, stitis, of the ancient writers called a prelate.

Praestigiator, toris, a iugglar.

Praestigiae, things which do seem to be that, that they are not.

Praestigium, a iugglynge cast, an inchauntement, a delusyon.

Praestino, are, to prepare in byenge a thing.

Praestituo, ere, to determyn before, to prescribe or appoint before, what
shall be done.

Istam enim culpam, quam uereris, ego praestabo, for the blame, which thou
fear, I will take upon me.

Praesto, stiti, stare, to be better than an another thing, wherewith it is
comparyd, to excelle, also to undertake, to warrante, sommetyme to grant, also
to do, to be benifyciall, to beware, to eschew, to fear, to do or perform, to
give, to exhybyte, to represent or show, to lend, to assign or appoint, to
do a thing.

Non modo facta sed etiam dicta omnia praestanda nobis sunt, we ought to make
answer not only for our deeds, but also for all that we speak.

Emptori damnum praestare, to recompense the byar for all his losses or damage.

Praestare culpam, to take the charge of damage upon him.

Nihil est sapientis praestare nisi culpam, A wise man should take nothing
upon him but that which shall happen through his defaulte.

Praestare fidem, to be faithful

Praestare fidem publicam, when the consul or other great officer perfourmeth
that which he promised.

Praestare nihil debeo, No man ought to lay that unto me.

Mussalam Caesari praestabo, I will undertake that Messala shall be Cesars
friend.

Praestat officium, to do his deuoyre.

Praestare iusiurandum, to take an oath.

Praestat, it were better, Prestat furi hic suspendi

que, apud inferos ardere. It were better for a thief to be hanged here, thanne
to lie in the fire of hell.

Praesto, an aduerbe, ready, at hand. Praesto sis, help me. Praesto esse, to
appiere, as men do in places of judgments, also to be ready to help.

Praestolor, aris, ari, to tarry, to be at hand, or ready to do service.

Praestringo, xi, gere, to bind fast, to shut to dasell the eien, to touch
quickly, or shortly, to shave, to grieve somewhat.

Praestruo, struxi, struere, to ordeyne first, to build.

Praesul, lis, a prelate.

Praesulatus, tus, the dignity of a prelate.

Praesulto, are, to leap or dance before.

Praesultor, praesultoris, He that leadethe a dance.

Praesum, fui, praeesse, to be before or above an other, to be of more dignity,
to be in auctorytie.

Praeesse negotio, to be chief in the business.

Praesumo, sumpsi, sumere, to take first, to preuente.

Praesumere animo, to coniecte.

Praesumptio, a taking or receyuynge before: it is also that, which is called
preoccupation, when we declare first what our aduersarye will say, or what is
the judges opynion: and against that we do argue, to dyssolue it with reason.

Praesuo, ere, to sow before.

Praesurgo gere, to rise before or first.

Praetego, gere, to hyde or cover chiefly.

Praetendo, ere, to lay for a thing er it come: also to carye or bear before,
also to show or pretend, to allege, to set a thing about for an enclosure.

Praetendere auribus, to stop the ears.

Praetendere retia, to lay nets.

Praetendere sepem, to make an hedge about

Praetento, tare, to tempte or assaye before.

Praetenuis, e, very small.

Praetenue, very sklenderly.

Praeterduco, cere, to lead before, to lead forth

Praetergredior, di, to pass by, to go beyond.

Praeteritus, ta, tum, passed.

Praeteriti, dead, departed, decessed, also they which in suynge for an
office, did suffer repulse, or were put back.

Praeter propter, for an other cause than that which is rehearsed

Praeter, except, also beside, over and above, before. Praeter oculos, before
the eyes, against or contrary. Praeter morem, against the custom or fascion.
Praeter spem, unlooked for.

Praeter opinionem, other wise tha^ I thought

Praeter caetera, more than the other. Praeter aequum, against reason.

Praeterbito, tare, to go by.

Praeterea, moreover, beside, none else Mihi credis praeterea nemini, Thou
beleuest me, and none else. also it signifies afterward.

Praetereo, iui, ire, to go over or pass, to leave out a thing, which should
be spoken of, to pass over.

Praeterire non potui quin and scriberem ad te I could not forbear but that I
must needs write unto you.

Praeterijt me haec res, I had forgotten that matter.

Et hoc te praeterit, non id solum spectare so lere. And do not thou know,
that not only the thing is to be considered.

Non me praeterit, I know well inoughe.

Nos nobilitate Mago praeterijt. Mago was the best borne of them all, or was
of a greatter blood than any of them

Praeterfluere, is of a water to ru^ne by a place.

Praetermitto, misi, mittere, to leave untouched to forget, to leave out, to
pass over a thing, leaving a thing undone or unspoken.

Praetermissio, forgetting or leaving out of a thing.

Praeter quam, but only, otherwise than, more over, beside.

Praeterquam quod, but.

Praeterueho, here, to carry through.

Praeteruehere aliquid silentio, to leave a thing unspoken of.

Praeteruerto, tere, to put one thing, before an other, Cice. Si habes aliquid
quod huic sermoni praeteruertendum putes, If ye have any thing, which ye
think ought to be spoken before that ye will speak of this matter

Praeteruolo, are, to pass through quickly.

Praetexo, ui, ere, to make or ordeyne first, to cover or hyde, to speak
colourably.

^raetexta, a long garment mixte with purple silk, which was the vesture of
noble men's sons, until they came unto.xvii. years of age, and therefore such
children were called

Praetextati, but they had also about their necks, a little round jewel
of gold, facioned like a heart, wherein was enclosed some thing of great
virtue. Praetexta, was also the robe of astate, which the king of Romans, or
the other chief officers did wear when they sat in their majesty.

Praetexta comoedia, an interlude, wherein at personages of high dignity.

Praetextatus, ta, tum, dyshoneste, or unclean in speech or acts. Festus
takes it in the contrary sense.

Praetextati anni, youth.

Praetextata aetas, idem.

Praetextati mores, honest conditions.

Praetextatus sermo, communication without ribauldry.

Praetextatus, he that did wear Praetextam.

Praetextum, a pretense or color.

Praetiamitatores, officers which went before the prelates called Flamines,
proclayminge openly, that all men should cease of their warke, because it
was not leful to those prelates to behold any man warkynge.

Praetimeo, ere, to be sore aferde.

Praetingo, gere, to touch before.

Praetondeo, to sheere or klyp, or round before

Praetoritius, a, um, for Praetorius.

Praetorium ius, law made by the Praetor.

Praetor, toris, in the old time was every officer which had the rule of any
army. Asconius. Afterward he had iuridicall authority, being as it were the
chief judge, and had as it were other judges sittinge under him, whereof the
full number in the city of Rome was.lxxv. Cic. in Pisonem. But Asconius upon
the oration Pro Milone, says that the judges appointed were.lxxi. and after
that as well the plaintiff as the defendaunte had each of them drawn out.v.
there remained but.li.

Praetorianus, he that is attendant to him that is Praetor.

Praetorium, the house or pauilion of him that is Praetor. it is also a princes
palaice or manor: it is sometime the place, where judgments are given,
sometime the counsel, whereunto Pretores are assembled.

Praetorius, he that has been Praetor.

Praetorius, a, um, belonging to the office of Praetor.

Praetura, the dignity and ministration, of him that is Praetor.

Praeualeo, lere, to prevail, to be better or of more value.

Praeualidus, da, dum, very strong or mighty, sometime very great.

Praeuaricatio, is a collusion: also it is where one touches a thing
lyghtely, which ought to be inculked with a more plain declaration, or else
repeted, as making much to the purpose.

Praeuaricor, aris, ari, to swerve from truth to go out of the right way, to
leave vnsaide that, which should be spoken, to touch a thing shortly in
speaking, to warke by collusion, in suffringe his adversary to opteyne, to
hurt an other person.

Praeuaricator, toris, he that leaves the right way, or speak not that
which ought to be spoken: also he that in speaking for him self aydeth the
cause of his adversary, or does any thing by collusion.

Praeueho, here, to bring first.

Praeuelo, are, to cover or hyde before.

Praeuello, lere, to pull or pluck before.

Praeuenio, nire, to come before or preuente.

Praeuentio, a prevention.

Praeuideo, dear, to foresee, to beware.

Praeuersus, a, um, that which is done or sped first, or before any other.

Praeuerto, uertere, to set more by, or to care more for. Nec me uxore^
praeuortisse dicant, prae repub. Nor let them not say, that I set more by my
wife, than by the weal public Also to turn or set aside. Neque praeripio
pulbamentum, neque praeuorto poculum, Nor I take away thy meat, nor set or
turn aside thy drink.

Praeuertor, deponens, idem quod praeuerto, also to goo before. Inde illico
praeuertor domum, from thens I went home before. also to be turned forth.
Foreis enim clausit, ne praeuorteretur for as, he has shytte fast the door,
lest he should be turned forth. Also to do any thing first or before any
other thing. Praeuorti hoc certum est rebus alijs omnibus, Surely this shall be
done before any other thing.

Praeuertere serio, to turn it to ernest. Si quid dictum est per iocum, non
aequum est id te serio praeuortier. If any thing be spoken in iape, it is not
reason to turn it to erneste.

Praeuerti pigritiae, to be taken with sloth. Cave pigritiae praeuortier,
beware that thou be not taken with slouthe.

Praeuertere aliquem prae republica, to set more by one than by the weal
publyke.

Praeuerti rebus omnibus, to be more set by than any other thing, or to be
first done.

Mandatis rebus praeuerti uolo, I will first do that which I am commanded.

Nec aliam rem praeuerti censebat, Nor he would that any thing should be done
before that.

Praeuertere animum alicuius, to opteyn ones favor before any other man.

Praeuertere serio, quod dictum est ioco, To take a thing ernestly that was
spoken in iape Illud praeuertamur, let us first speak thereof or we come to
the matter.

Iusiurandi relligionem amori praeuertere.

To esteem the oath more than the love.

Praeuersum fulgur, lyghtnyng which is not known, whether it be by day or by
night.

Praeuius, he that goes before, or leads the way.

Praeustus, ta, tum, burned at the sore end.

Praeuolo, are, to flee before.

Pragmaticus, a practiser in the law.

Pragma, in Greek, is in latin negociatio, an act or business: also an
exercise of marchaundise.

Pragmatica sanctio, a determination of practisians of the law.

Prandeo, prandi, and pransus sum, prandere, to dine.

Prandiculum, a brekefaste.

Prandiolum, a little dinner.

Prandium, a dinar.

Pransito, tare, to dine or eat often.

Pransor, oris, he that is at diner, or he that is boden to dinner.

Prasinus, na, number, green like leekes.

Prasius, a grene stone.

Prasoides, a stone of the color of leekes.

Prassium, an herb called horehounde, Read Marrubium.

Pratensis, se, of the meadows.

Pratense foenum, medowe hay.

Pratulum, a little medowe.

Pratum, medowe.

Praue, shrewedly, naughtly, unhappily, ouerthwartly.

Prauitas, shrewdenesse, unhappiness, ouerthwartnesse.

Prauus, a, um, crooked, shrewde.

Praxiteles, an excellent caruar in stone.

Precarius, a, um, that which is borrowed, at the will of the lender, that
which is occupied, at an other man's pleasure.

Precario, by desire at another wans will.

Preces, prayer.

Precium, price, value.

Preciosus, a, um, dear, preciouse.

Precor, aris, ari, to pray.

Prehendo, prehendi, dear, to take. Et manum prehendi, and osculum detuli tibi,
I took you by the hand, and also gave you a kiss.

Praehenso, uel prenso, are, to solicit or labor men to give their voices, to
some man.

Prelum, a press, such as printours have.

Premo, pressi, premere, to press: sometime to vex, to dygge, to prese on, to
thruste, to destroy, to thruste down, to constrayne, to restrain.

Premere dolorem, to hyde heaviness or sorrow. Premit alto cord dolorem, he
hid his sorrow in the secret part of his heart.

Premere, to drive or put out.

Premere, to shyt or close. Presique oculos, ac vulnera laui, I closed his
eyes, and washed his wounds.

Premere, to cut away. Et ruris opaci, false premes umbram, and with a sith
thou shall cut away the shadow of the dark fields.

Premere, to tread down. Veluti qui sentibus anguem, pressit humi nitens,
like as he, which thrasting his foot to the grund, treads down the snake,
that lies in the brembles.

Premere testimonio, to connicte a man by witness.

Prendo, look Praehendo,

Presa porca, a swyne which was offered in sacrifice to Ceres, in satisfaction
for a hoole householde, for as much as a part of that sacrifice was made in
the presence of the corpse which than was to be buried.

Pressatus, ta, tum, oppressed, charged trodden down.

Presbiter, biteri, an ancient, or father in years or dignity. it is used for
a priest.

Presso, are, to press or thruste together.

Pressus, ssa, ssum, subtylle, compacte, heuye, pressed.

Pressura, oppression.

Pressus, ssus, and pressura, pressynge, also oppression.

Press, in a few words, briefly.

Prester, a venemouse worm called also Dipsas

Pretiosus, a, um, preciouse, dear, of greatte estimation.

Pretiosior, pretiosius, more preciouse or dear.

Pretium, the price or value, also the reward: sometime peril or danger.
Pretio emptas meo, bought with my peril or danger.

Pri, of old time was used for Prae.

Priamus, the noble king of Troy, whose history is to no man unknown.

Priapismus, a sickness, wherein the privy member of a man always stands,
without having any appetite to lechery.

Priapus, an ydole, unto whom the Painimes, committed their gardeynes to keep.

Pridem, late, sometime long agone.

Pridianus, a, um, that which is done the day before.

Pridiani cibi, meats dressed the day before.

Pridie, the day before.

Primaeuus, a, um, the elder.

Primarius, a, um, chief.

Primas, atis, in chief authority, among the people.

Primanus Tribunus, he that assigned trybute to the first legion.

Prima lux, the spring of day.

Prima uespera, the evening.

Primae, (...) chief praises. Cui primae sine co^trouersia deferebantur, to
whom the chief praises were given without any controu^rsy.

Primas tenere, to have the preeminence, to be chief, to hold the better
part.

Primas dare, to esteem above other.

Primatus, the chief authority.

Primitus, first.

Primetium, sacrifice of the ears of corn, which were first gathered after
that they were reped.

Primores, the tops of any thing.

Digitulis primoribus, with the fyngar tops.

Labris primoribus, with the fore part of the lyppes.

Primoribus labris gustare, to touch a thing scantely, to smatter of a thing,
and not to know it substanciallye or perfitely.

Primicerius, chief ruler.

Primigenus, gena, genum, first borne or grown.

Primigenius, a, um, that comes naturallye of it self, and is vnmyxte.

Primigenia, the title of the eldest child in inheritance.

Primipara, she that has her first child.

Primipes, he that in battle fyghteth first with a sword, and after
chaungynge his form of fyghtyng, uses a Iauelin or dart.

Primipilaris, is he that fights next to the sta^darde. it is most properly
the captain of a company in the fowewarde.

Primitium, the principal or chief.

Primipilus, a Captain of a company in the forewarde or vauntgarde, which
had under him four hundred soldiers.

Primiter, and primitus, first.

Primitiae, the first fruits.

Primitius, a, um, the first or soremoste.

Primitiuus, a, um, that which has none other beginning.

Primesius, a stake, whereto a cabell or rope of a ship is tied.

Primo, an aduerbe sygnifieth first.

Primodum, for Primo.

Primogenia uerba, words which be not diriued from any other.

Primogentius, ta, tum, first begotten.

Primordium, the first beginning.

Primores, the first, the chief. Primores uiri aut foeminae, Noble men or
women, or gentil men and gentle women.

Primulus, the diminutiue of primus.

Primulum, forthwith.

Primum, an aduerbe, which signifies first er ever, at the beginning.

Primus, a, um, first, best, the chief. Primo quoque tempore, at the first
time.

Prima quaque occasion, at the first occasyon that shall happen.

Primula uaeris, some do suppose it to be daysyes. Ruellius supposes it to be
a kind of Verbascum.

Princeps, cipis, a prince, the first or chyefe.

Principalis, le, principal, also perteyninge to a prince.

Principaliter, principally.

Principatus, the soueraignetie.

Principio an aduerbe, first, or at the beginning,

Principia, the place in a Camp, where as are pighte the pauilions of the head
capitaynes, but the more proper signifycation thereof is, that it is the second
ward in battle, where in old time were the princes and noble men Also it was
taken for the order of raye of noble men.

Principior, piari, to begin.

Principor, pari, to rule.

Principium, the beginning.

Prior, the first, prius.

Priora tempora, the old time.

Priscus, a, um, aunciente, or of the old time.

Pristinus, na, number, that which was many years passed. Sometime it signifies
the first, aunciente.

Pristis, a fyshe, of wonderful length, and sclender, which cutteth the
wawes, as he swymmeth.

Priuatus, he that is in none auctorite or dignite

Priuatus, ta, tum, that is properlye a man's own, that which perteyneth to
one man or few, also particular. Sometime it signifies deprived.

Priuatim, and private, priuyly, aparte.

Priuernum, a town in Campania.

Priuignus, na, the child by an other husband, or other wife, which is dead,
son or daughter in law to the husband or wife.

Priuilegium, a law concerning private persons, also a private or special
law.

Priuo, are, to take away, to deprive.

Prius, an aduerbe, signifies before.

Priusquam, before that.

Priuus, ua, uum, private, singular, every man's own or proper.

Pro, for before. Pro rostris, at the bar or place of pleadynge. Pro tribunali,
in the place of judgment. also after or according. Pro Pla^onis sententia,
according to the sentence of Plato. Pro opere, in the warke, Pro merito,
according to his deseruynge. Pro curia, before the court. Pro uirili, to my
power.

Pro comperto, for a suertie.

Pro explorato. idem.

Pro indiuiso, without division.

Pro nihilo ducere, to set naught by.

Pro ridiculo putare aliquem, to laugh at one and make him a fool.

Nemo satis pro merito gratiam Regi refert No man does thank the king,
according to his merits.

Pro opibus nostris, according to our power.

Pro mea consuetudine, according to my custom.

Pro spe nihil contigit, no thing happened according as men hoped.

Pro uirili part, to my power or his power.

Pro rata part, according to his rate or portion.

Consilium pro tempore et pro re capere. to take counsel according as the
time and matter required.

Pro horum temporum perturbatione, considering this troublouse time.

Pro mea authoritate uideor posse, men think that I may do it having regard
to mine authority.

Pro re nata, according to the affairs that do happen.

Pro meo iure dico, I tell you franckely.

Pro meo iure, by mine authority.

Pro suo iure agere omnia, to do all things at his own pleasure or by his own
auctorite

Pro caetera diligentia, according to the diligence whereto he has been
accustomed.

Excubare pro templis, to watch in the temple or church.

Laudati pro contione, praised before all the people, or at a great assembly.

Pro suggestu, in the pulpyt.

Pro aede Iouis, before the temple of Jupiter.

Pro se quisque, every man to his power.

Pro testimonio dicere, to bear witness.

Mayor quam pro numero hominum editur pugna, the battle was greater than one
would have thought should have been of that number of persons.

Pro eo ac debui grauiter molesteque tuli. I took it greuousely, even as I had
cause.

Pro sancte Jupiter, O blessed Jupiter.

Pro deum atque hominum fide^, O the faith of god and man.

Proauus, my great graundfather.

Proauia, my great grandame.

Probabile, that which may be proved.

Probatica piscina, a ponde, where sheep are washed.

Probatio, a proof.

Probatus, ta, tum, proved.

Probe, honestly, well, wisely, joined with an nowne adiectine, it sinifieth
Valde.

Probiter, idem.

Probus, a virtuous man, a good man.

Probitas, goodness.

Problema, it is, a sentence purposed, having a demand thereto annexed.

Probo, are, to prove, to praise, to approve, to assaye, to show by reason, or
example that a thing is good.

Probare se, to declare him self an honest man

Tuo ex ingenio alienos mores probas. thou estemeste other men to be like the,
or to be according to thy conditions.

Probabiliter. Illa cur e ueniant quis probabiliter dixerit. How that might
be who can tell by any reason.

Probalitas, an apparaunce of truth.

Proboisis, dis, a long snowte, as an Olyphant or swyne has.

Probro, are, to reproach or rebuke.

Probrosus, a, um, reprochefull.

Probrum, a reprochefull act. also a reproach or rebuke, an infamy.

Procax, procacis, malaperte in asking, or desyringe, shameless, wanton in
crauynge, ill tounged.

Procacitas, malapertnes, or wantonness in asking or crauynge.

Procare, to wowe, to crave, to be importunate

Procapis, a progeny, which comes of one head.

Procaciter, malapertely, wantonlye, without shame.

Procalo, are, to call one to.

Procatum, and procitum, void, or of none effect.

Procedo, cessi, cedere, to go forth, to precede, to prosper.

Proceed tu huc, come forth.

Procedere, to go from his house with great pomp.

Procedere obuiam, to go to met with one.

Procedite in medium, go forth.

Procedere in philosophia, to profit in philosophy.

Processit aetate, he is now old.

Processit eo insolentiae, he is woxen so wanton.

Eo ira processit, the anger so inereaced.

Totidem dies procedent emptori, the byar shall have so many days profit.

Nihil procedit, the thing came not forward.

Processus. Scripsit se in graecis literis magnu^ processum habere. He wrate
that he had much profyted in greek.

Proci Penelopes, was a name given to them which in wanton pastimes do consume
both their own goods and also other men's.

Procella, a storm.

Proceleumaticus, a foot in meter of four fete short.

Procello, ere, to streke, to turn up so down.

Procellosus, a, um, stormye.

Procensu, the company or fellowship of young men in the city, as we behold in
London the Bachelors together, when the Mayre takes his oath.

Proceres, the head men of a town.

Procerus, a, um, long, talle.

Proceritas, length, tallness.

Proceriter, an aduerbe, which signifies long, or of length.

Proceritus, rita, tum, incensed or provoked with an ill spirit, mad or
wood.

Proceriti lapides, vengeable.

Pro certo, surely.

Procet, for prouocet, let him provoke, let him appeal.

Processus, us, process or success.

Procestrium, a galerye to go from one chaumber to an other. also the ouermoste
part of the walls within the imbattilmentes, where men may go: some do call it
a trenche before the camp, in defense thereof from artillery.

Prochyta, an I Will in the sea, in the gulf or rode of Puteolis, a city in
Campania.

Procidentia, when any thing falls out of his place.

Procidentia any, when the bone of the foundement appears out.

Procido, dear, to fall down prostrate.

Procieo, ere, to provoke or call from far of

Procinctus, tus, the provision before that any thing is done also the state
of an army wha^ they be ready to give battle.

Procingo, xi, gere, to prepare, to make ready.

Procinctus, ta, tum, ready, prepared.

Procincta classis, a nauye prepared redye to fight.

Procino, cinui, nere, to pronounce in singinge to singe out.

Procio, ciui, ire, to ask.

Procito, rare, to provoke.

Proclamo, are, to cry out, to proclayme.

Procliue, redily, easily in doing.

Procliuis, ne, ready to fall, inclyned. Also redye or easy to be done.

Procliuitas, tatis, inclynation to evil, facilite.

Procliuiter, easily.

Proclus, a noble philosopher of the sect of Plato.

Proco, and procor, ari, to ask malapertly. also to dalye with wanton
language, to eye or behold a woman wantonly.

Proconsul, lis, he that was sent with an extra ordinary power of Consul in
to a prouynce of the Romans.

Proconsularis, re, perteyning to the Proco^sul.

Procrastinatio, a delay.

Procrastino, nare, to prolonge the time, to defer.

Procreo, are, to begette chylderne.

Procreatus, ta, tum, begotten.

Procubitor, toris, he that keeps watch and ward without the camp.

Procubo, bare, to watch.

Procudo, dear, to strike or beat a thing, to make it less or thynner.

Procul, far of, from far.

Procul urbem, far from the city.

Procul muros, far from the walls.

Proculco, care, to tread down.

Proculdubio, out of doubt, doubtless.

Proculeio, ere, to extend, to promise.

Proculiunt, old writers used for promittunt, they promise.

Proculus, he that is borne when his father is far out of the country.

Procumbo, cubui, cumbere, to lie flat or prostrate, to come narowe together.

Procuro, rare, to do or solicit an other man's business, to increase
diligentely, to help or sustain, or succor.

Procurare Prouinciam, to govern and rule the country.

Procuratorius, ia, um, perteyninge to a proctour or factour.

Procurare prodigia, to use certain ceremonies and sacrifice, to the intent
that things monstruouse should not take any ill effect.

Procurator, toris, a proctour or factour.

Procuratio, ministration of things concerning an other man.

Procurro, rere, to run far, or beyond.

Procuruus, ua, um, very crooked.

Procursatores, fore ridars in battle.

Procus, a wower, to have a woman in marriage, but most properly where there be
two, which woweth every one for him self.

Procyon, a sterre called the dogsterre, which appears in the canicular days.

Prodeambulo, are, to walk forth.

Prodeo, diui, uel dii, to goo forth or out of a house, to come before one.

Prodire in aciem, to fight in the vaugarde of an host.

Prodire obuiam, to go against one, or to go to mete with one, which is
coming.

Prodire in publicum, to go abroad, to go in the streets.

Prodigium, a thing seldom seen, which signifies, that some thing shall
happen very good or very ill, as blasynge sterres, fyres, or figures in the
fyrmamente, things monstruouse or against nature.

Prodigiosa precia, unreasonable pryces.

Prodigo, digere, to lashe out money in vain, or in things not necessary,
sometime to sygnifie some strange thing to happen.

Prodico, dixi, dicere, to speak more or prate.

Quamobrem excutiemus omnes istorum delitias, omnes ineptias, si prodixerint.
Wherefore we will set forth al these men's pleasures and fantasyes, if they
will prate any more.

Prodigalitas, prodigalitye, or outragiouse expenses.

Prodige, excessiuelye, outragiousely, prodygally, wastefully.

Prodigialis, digiale, that which perteynethe to the procuryng of strange
tokens or signs

Prodigiator, he that by strange tokens or signs, tells before what shall
afterward happen.

Prodigiosus, sa, sum, that which make the strange signs or tokens.

Prodigitas, prodigality.

Prodigus, prodigal, wastefull, an outrageous expender.

Prodimentum, a treason or betrayenge.

Prodinunt, for prodiunt, used of Ennius, to issue or come forth.

Prodius, further in.

Proditio, treason.

Proditor, toris, a traitor.

Prodo, didi, dear, to put of.

Tibi nos prodimus ac confitemur te cistellam habere. Thus we say and confess
unto the, that thou have the casket.

Prodere conscios, to appeche his fellows.

Prodere dogma, to disclose the secrets.

Prodidisti et te, et illam miseram, et gnatu^, Thou haste deceived thy self,
and also the poor woman and thy son.

Antequam arcem proderent hostibus, before that they had rendered up the
castelle to their ennemies.

Prodere posteris, to leave to them that come after us.

Prodere patriam, to betraye his own countreye.

Prodere exemplum, to punish men to the example of other.

Prodere fidem, to falsefy his faith, to do contrary to his allegiaunce, or
his solemn promise.

Prodere legem, to frustrate the intent of the law.

Prodere officiu^, to do contrary to his duete.

Prodere gloriam et laudem posteris, to leave after him example of praise and
renoume.

Prodere uitam, to put his life in ieoperdy.

Prodere interregem, to name him that shall be in that rome.

Prodere, to put in writynge.

Prodere uitam, to put his life in danger.

Prodidit memoria, it is written.

Vt quidam poetae prodiderunt, as some poets have written.

Prodi^us, betrayed or deceived.

Prodromus, he that runs before, as a lackey, or he that brings ridinges
of ones coming. Prodromi, be also sterres in heaven, the which do rise in the
North east.viii. days before the canicular days.

Produco, duxi, ducere, to prolonge, to bring forth, to consume or spend.
Producere aliquem falsa spe, to hold or keep one in a fools paradyse, to put
forward: also to follow

Productilis, le, that which is made out at length with beatynge.

Producere, to set forth to hyre. Audientem dicto matter produxisti filiam.
Thou being her mother, and she being obediente unto the, thou have set her to
hire.

Producere filios, to beget children.

Productio, the making of a thing long.

Producte, an aduerbe, signifies long.

Productus, ta, tum, made long or set out at length, also brought or put out.

Proaedifico, care, to build.

Proaedificatum, that which being a private place, is made commune or publyke.

Profanatum templum, the church suspended, where any horrible crime is therein
committed.

Profano, are, to convert things being hallowed to a temporal use.

Profanum facere, idem.

Profanus, na, number, that which is not hallowed, temporal, men unlearned, and
that do hate learned men. Also that which is joined or annexed unto the temple.

Profari, to pronounce, to speak abroad.

Profectio, a passage or setting forth toward a viage, a departinge from the
place, where a man is.

Profecto, in very deed, for sothe.

Profectus sum, the pretertence of proficiscor, I went.

Profectus, tus profit.

Profectum facere, to profit or goo forth, properly in study and learning.

Profero, tuli, far, to bring forth, to show forth, to pronounce, to
enlarge, or dilate, or make greatter, to prolonge.

Proferre dolum, to put a disceyt in experience.

Proferre gradum, to advance him self forward.

Professio, an open confession, an open redinge or lecture.

Professor, oris, a reder in open schools.

Profesti dies, warkedayes.

Proficio, ficere, to profit, to proceed.

Proficiscor, cisci, to go and to come, to depart from a place.

Profiteor, to promise openly, to tell frankelye or boldly. Also to tell or
declare, how much a man has of money, cattle, corn, or any other thing.
Also to speak or auaunte. Also to discover or confess a thing. also to read
openly a lesson.

Proflare, to drive down with a blaste.

Profligo, gare, to overthrow, to drive away to bring to destruction, to put
to flight.

Profligatus, ta, tu^, overthrown, driven away put to flyghte, dystroyed.
sometime it signifies finished, brought to a point.

Profligati homines, men that have in folly wasted their substance.

Profligo, gis, gere, to strive much.

Proflubeo, ui, ere, to run out.

Profluens, it is, a river, being a participle, it signifies flowynge.

Profluo, xi, ere, to rounne out of a thing, to run from far.

Profluuium, a flyxe or laske.

Profluus, a, um, that which flows.

Profore, to profit. Quae noc^ere sequar, fugiam quae profore credam, That
which has done harm will I follow, and eschew will I those things which I
believe should profit me.

Profugio, gere, to fly far.

Profugium, a place whereto a man flies for succor, also a thing, whereunto
one resorteth for succor.

Profugus, he that goth far out of his own countreye.

Profunditas, depenesse.

Profundo, fudi, fundere, to poor out largely, to spend excedyngly.

Profundere palmites, is of a vine, when she sendethe forth a greatte
noumber of branches.

Profundere clamorem, to cry out as loud as one may.

Profundere in aliquem, to do to one all the pleasure that lies in his power.

Profundere uires animi atque ingenij, to employ all his power and wit in
bringing a thing to pass.

Profundere uitam pro patria, to spend his life in defense of his country.

Profunda auaritia, insaciable auaryce. Profunda cupido, insaciable couetyse.
Profunda libido, insacyable lechery.

Profundus, da, dum, deep, sometime high.

Profusus, exceeding lyberall.

Profusae epulae, excessive bankettynges.

Progener, ri, the housbande of my daughters daughter, or sons daughter.

Progemmare, to bourgen.

Progenies, progeny, succession in bloudde.

Progigno, nere, to get a child.

Prognare, openly.

Prognariter, hardyly.

Prognatus, ta, tum, borne.

Prognosis, prescience, or knowledge before that a thing happens.

Prognosticon, a pronostycation.

Progredior, gressus sum, gredi, to goo forth or before.

Progressus, sa, sum, passed over.

Progressus, us, a marchynge forth, or passing forth.

Progressio, idem.

Progymnasma, an assay or proof in exercise.

Prohibeo, b^i, bear, to prohibyte, to forbid, to turn away.

Prohibete a uobis uim meam, take heed that I do you not dyspleasure.

Prohibete aditum matris a filij sanguine, turn or let ye the mother that
she slay not her son.

Prohibere potione, to keep one from drynk.

Prohibere itinere, to stop him of his way.

Proiecta, the over parts of a house, which do leave outward from the nether
part, as they be now in some towns toward the streets: some men do call them
garrettes.

Proiectare aliquem probris, to rebuke one.

Proiectitius, a, um, a child cast forth and nouryshed of a stranger.

Proiectura, a penthowse to convey rain from the walls.

Proiectus, ta, tum, thrown or cast ont afar.

Proiecta audatia, fool hardynesse.

Proiectus puer, a child which is laid abroad in the street, no man knowing
who is the father or mother.

Proiectus ad audendum, foolehardy.

Proijcio, ieci, ijcere, to throw or cast, to set forth, to leave, to
extend or hold out a thing at length.

Proin, therefore.

Proinde, therefore, wherefore, like as.

Prolabor, beris, by, to slide or slyppe forth.

Prolabi timore, to fall down for fear.

Prolabi longius, to wander far of.

Prolabi in misericordiam, to become merciful

Prolabi cupiditate, to be abused by his covetousness.

Prolapsa huc libido, his wylfulnesse is come to this.

Prolambo, bear, to lycke.

Prolatio, an extendynge forth. also pronouncynge, or pronunciation, sometime
bryngyng forth or showing of a thing.

Prolatare, to defer or put of, until a longer time.

Prolatus, ta, tum, set forth, brought forth.

Prolectare, to provoke pleasantly.

Prolectibilis, le, that which tyckleth or pleasantly mouyth one.

Prolepsis, a figure in speaking, where we do preuente, to dissolve by reason
that, which we think to be in the opinion of our adversary, or of the judge.

Proles, issue or fruit of a man's body. also of a beast.

Proletarij, among the Romans were they, which for poverty were not able to
go to the wars, and therefore they were left at home to get chylderne.

Prolibo, are, to taste, or to sacrifice before.

Prolicio, prolixi, prolicere, to induce or draw. Eius amor cupidam huc me per
tenebras prolicit, The love of him has drawn me hither in the dark, being
desirous of his company.

Prolixe, lyberally, abundantly, at length.

Prolixo, prolixare, to make a thing sharp in length. Quare magnopere
mouendus purator est, ut prolixet acie^ ferramenti, and quan tum possit,
nouaculae similem reddat, wherefore the cutter of the vine ought to be warned,
that he make sharp in length the point of the instrument, and as much as he
may, that he make it like to a raser.

Prolixus, a, um, long, large, sommetyme superfluouse.

Prolixitas, and prolixitudo, length, largenes.

Prolocutio, the first speech or first entree into communication.

Prologium, idem.

Prologus, a prologue.

Prolongo, are, to prolonge, to defer.

Proloquium, the beginning of an oration or sentence.

Proloquor, queris, qui, to speak at length, to tell a long tale. Also to
speak before, to speak that which we think, to declare our opinion.

Proludo, dear, to flourysshe, as musytians do, before they come to the
principal matter, and as fence men do with the sword, or the two handstaffe.

Prolugeo, xi, gere, to mourn longer than has been accustomed.

Proluo, ere, to wasshe much, to drown or surrounde.

Proluuies, the fylthe or ordur, which is washed of any thing.

Proluuium, idem. Also prodygalitie.

Promellere, to promote or set forth suyte in the law.

Promercalia, things set forth to be sold, specially that which is sold by
retayle.

Promercale aurum, gold sold in such wise, that besides the just value, so
much gold remains to the sellar, as may serve to his proper use, as our
nobles and royalles sold beyond the sea, at a greatter price than they be
valued at here in this realm.

Promercor, caris, cari, to bye things good cheap, to the intent to sell them
dear, to bye at the first hand, to sell them at retayle.

Promereo, rui, rere, to deserve, to do pleasure or service to one.

Promereor, reri, idem. Also to bynd one by his acts to do for him* also to
help, to profit.

Promereri de aliquo, to do a man a good turn.

Promerens, it is, he that does pleasure or service. Promerenti optime, hoccine
praetij redditur, He that has done very good service, shall he have this
reward for his labor?

Promeritum, desert, pleasure or service done.

Promeneruat, old writers used for monet, he exhorts or warns.

Prometheus, the son of Iapetus, he first invented the making of images,
wherefore the paynymes supposed that he made men. And feigned, that he went up
into heaven, and there did steal fire to make his image have life, wherewith
Jupiter being wroth, caused him to be bounden on the hylle called Caucasus, and
an egle standing by him, eating his heart, by the which is sygnified that he
was studyous and a great astronomer.

Promico, are, to extend or set out at length.

Prominenter, at length.

Prominentia, the extendynge or setting out at length.

Promineo, nui, nere, to appear far of.

Promisca^, old writers did use for promiscue.

Promisceo, cui, cere, to myngle together.

Promiscue, one with an other, myxte.

Promiscuus, scua, scuum, confused, myngled one with an another.

Promiscuam operam dare, one to do for an another.

Promissa barba, a long bearde.

Promise, long, in length.

Promissio, a promise.

Promissor, he that promyseth.

Promissum, a promise.

Promitto, misi, mittere, to promise, to let grow in length, also to threten.

Promo, prompsi, mere, to speak out, to tell, to take out of a coffer, or other
like thing.

Promontorium, a mountain or high place of a land or country, which lies
as it were an elbowe into the sea ward.

Promoueo, uere, to advance or profit, to enlarge, sometime to go back or
defer.

Promptarius, a, um, that from whens any thing is brought or taken.

Promptaria cella, a prison from whens men be brought to be whypped or hanged.

Promptarium, and promptuarium, a storchous.

Prompte, promptly, redyly.

Promptior, more prompte or ready.

Promptitudo, promptness.

Prompto, tare, to bring often forth.

Promptus, ta, tum, prompte, ready to do a thing without taryenge. also ready.
Promptum ingenium, a ready wit. Res est in promptu, The thing is ready also
manifest. In promptu res est, The thing is manifest.

Manu promptus, ready to stryke.

Promptus ingenio, quycke spyrited or having a lively wit.

Nec promptu^ est dicere, it is not easy to tell.

Promulco nauis agitur, the ship is drawn with a boat.

Promulgator, and promulgatrix, he or she that does publyshe a thing.

Promulgo, are, to publyshe.

Promulgatio, a publycation.

Promulsis, idis, Mede, made with water and honey.

Promurale, a countermure, one wall without an another.

Promus, he that has the keeping of the store house or dry larder.

Pronepos, potis, and proneptis, my sons or daughters son or daughter.

Prone, redyly.

Pronis, old writers used for prona, prosteate or on the ground.

Pronomen, a pronowne.

Pronuba, she that attends on the bryde, and is housewyfe during the feast.

Pronubo, psi, bear, to have a rule in weddynges or ioynynge of couples.

Pronubus, he that leads the bryde hoome to her husbands house, and has the
surueyeng of the house, during the time of the solemnysation.

Pronubus, he that does celebrate the solemnity in marriage, it may be now
taken for the priest, which does mynyster the solemn words of matrymonye.

Pronunciatio, a pronunciation or vtteraunce of speech

Pronuntiatum, a statute.

Pronuntio, are, to pronounce, to declare openly, to give sentence, to say.

Pronuper, long agoone.

Pronurus, the wife of my sons son, or daughters son.

Pronus, redye, inclyned, stowpynge down, nygh hand.

Pronus ad meridiem locus, the place lies toward the southe.

Prooemium, a proheme or beginning of a mattier.

Propago, gare, to spread as a tree does on the top, to make to spread, to
send far of.

Propagatio, a spreadynge.

Propages, a long rewe.

Propago, ginis, an old vine spredde in many branches. Sometime it sygnyfyeth
kind or generation.

Propalam, openly, clearly in the syghte of all men.

Propalo, lare, to tell abroad, to grow in length

Propatruus, my great grandfathers brother.

Propatulum, wide open.

Prope, nygh, almost.

Prope diem, now every day, shortly.

Propello, propuli, pellere, to drive or put away, far of.

Propemodum, almost.

Propendere, to hang up. Also to examyne or consider far of.

Propensus, inclyned.

Propenso ai^o facere, to do it with a good will.

Propensior in neutram partem, indyfferent.

Propere, quyckely, hastily.

Properatim, quyckely.

Properanter, and properiter, idem.

Properantia, and properatio, an approchyng.

Properitas, the same among old writers.

Properus, a, um, quycke, sudden.

Propero, rare; to go quyckely or hastily, to say or do any thing quyckely or
hastily.

Propertro, trare, to command that a thing be done.

Prophasis, an excuse.

Prophetis, and prophetissa, a woman prophet.

Propheto, tare, to prophesye, to sing praises to god: sometime it sygnifieth
to preach or interpret.

Propheta, a prophet, he that tells things, which shall happen.

Prophetia, a prophecye.

Propilo, are, to make sharp before.

Propina, a place by the common baynes, where after baynynge men took their
refection.

Propino, nare, to drink to an another man, to quafte, to bring to, sometime
to give.

Propino tibi salutem, I salutethe.

Propinator, a cupbearer.

Propinquus, a neighbor. Alsoo a kynsman, of alyaunce.

Propinquitas, assynitie, alyaunce.

Propinque, nygh.

Propinquior, quius, nerer.

Propitiabilis, le, that which is soon bowed or inclyned to desires.

Propitialis, idem.

Propitiatio, sacrifyce to appease or pacyfy goddis displeasure.

Propitium, sometime sygnifieth very devout or loving.

Propitius, content, not dyspleased or angry.

Propitij, peasyble men, or men soon appeased or satisfied.

Propius, nerrer, or nerre.

Proplastice, ces, the craft to make mouldes, in the which any thing is cast
or fourmed.

Propingeon, the place in a bain or hot house, in the which fire enclosed,
sends forth heat.

Propitiatorium, a table set on the arc of the old testament.

Propitio, and propitior, ari, to appease, or to make merciful, or favorable.

Propitius, a, u^, appeased, favorable, merciful.

Propior, nerer.

Propoma, a drynk made with honey and wine.

Propola, he that sells any thing at retayle, specially vyttayle, a hukster.

Propolis, a subburbes of a town. It is alsoo that which bees do make at the
entry of the hyue, whereby cold and other annoyaunce is defended.

Propono, proposui, ponere, to purpose, to be aduysed, to promise a price or
reward for any notable act, to set out to the show.

Propontis, a sea between Greece and Asie.

Proportio, a proporcyon.

Propositio, a matter pourposed to be dysputed or reasoned. It is also that,
whereby we show generally, whereof we will speak.

Propositum, a purpose.

Propraetor, toris, he that was in the steed of

Praetor, or mayre.

Poprie, proprely, partycularly.

Propritim, idem.

Proprietarius, a, um, whereunto the propertye of a thing belongs.

Proprietas, property.

Proprius, propria, prium, propre, or particular.

Culpa mea propria, in mine own defaut. sometime it sygnifyeth perpetual.

Voluptates deorum propriae sunt, The plesures of the gods be perpetual.

Propter, for. Sometime nygh also at or in.

Propterea, therefore.

Proptosis, a dysese where the eyes meued with inflammation, do fall out of
their places

Propudium, shame, dishonestie. Also the most abhomynable use of lecherye, in
an inconuenyent form.

Propugnaculum, a fortress, a strong hold.

Propugnator, toris, a defendour.

Propugno, are, to fight far of, to fight valyantly, to defend.

Propulsator, he that resysteth a thing, or dryueth any thing away.

Propulso, are, to put of, to drive away.

Propylaeum, a porche.

Proquaestor, toris, he that exercyseth the office of Quaestor in his absence.

Prora, the forepart of a ship.

Prorepo, prorepsi, prorepere, to crepe further.

Proreta, he that has the rule of the forshyppe or deck.

Prorideo, ridere, to laughe afar of.

Proripio, pui, pere, to withdraw or depart, joined with me or se, Domum se
ex curia proripuit, He departed or withdrewe him homewarde from the court.

Prorito, tare, to provoke.

Prorogatio, a prolongynge or delayenge.

Prorogo, gare, to prosonge.

Prorsus, and prorsum, utterly, always, i^ any wise, straight toward a place,
surely.

Prorsi, lymyttes in boundynge of lands dyrected into the east.

Prorumpo, rupi, rumpere, to break forth, to send forth with vyolence, to
leap or go out of a place with vyolence, to brast out.

Proruo, ruere, to drive down, or beat down.

Prosa, prose, that which is not meter.

Prosapia, a progenye, a dyscente of bloudde, a petygree.

Proscenia, the place wherein enterludes were played by the personages.

Proscindo, scidi, scindere, to cut out or under, to infame, to rebuke
shamefully.

Proscribo, scripsi, scribere, to sell openly, to proclayme any thing to be
sold, to banysshe, to condemn.

Proscribere, is properly to cause by ordinance to be proclaimed, that who so
ever fyndeth one, he may lefully slay him, and have a reward for his labor.

Proscriptus, he that is so proclaimed.

Proscriptio, that manner of condemnation, also an attaynder.

Proscripturio, ire, to ymagyne a proscription.

Proseco, are, to cut a sunder.

Prosecta, bowels cut in sacrifice.

Proseda, a strumpet or common harlot.

Prosedanum, a disease, which happens to rams at blysomynge time.

Proselytus, a stranger borne, converted to our form of living.

Prosemino, are, to sow forth.

Prosequium, an affection.

Prosequor, qui, to follow after, to pursue.

Prosequor amore, I love. Prosequor odio. I hate. Prosequor honor, I honor.
Prosequor uerbis, I chafe him with words.

Prosequor officijs, I show to him greatte kyndenesse, I do him many
pleasures. Prosequi praemio, to reward.

Prosequi dicto improbum uerbum alicuius, to rebuke sharpelye one for speaking
dyshonestly.

Proserpere, to creape of slide forth like a serpente.

Proserpi na the wife of Pluto, daughter to Iupyter and Ceres, she is taken
sommetyme for the moon.

Proserpinaca, an herb callid also Polygonon. read there.

Proseuche, a prayer to god, also a beggyng.

Proseucha, a beggar.

Prosferari, to be opteyned.

Prosicium, that which is cut of from any thing, and cast away.

Prosilio, lij, to leap forth.

Prosocer, ceri, the father of my wives father.

Prositum, old writers used for propositum, purposed.

Prosodia, the craft of accentyng.

Prosonomasia, the likeness of oone word or name to an another: as locus and
lucus, orator, and arator.

Prosopis, the clote leaf or great burre.

Prosopopoeia, where as personnages are supposed or feigned to speak, as one
manne to an another, a man to a beast, one beast to an other etc.

Prospectus, tus, a sight far of, a prospecte.

Prospecte, aduysedly.

Prospecto, spectare, to behold, properlye far of.

Prospere, prosperousely. Prosperiter, idem.

Prosperitas, prosperity.

Prospica, and Prospicus, he that beholdethea thing far of.

Prospices, for prospice, behold.

Prospiro, are, to fetch breath or wind.

Prosper, and prosperus, prosperi, prospero, that which gives felicity.
Felix, he that receives it.

Prospicientia, providence, circumspection.

Prospitio, spexi, spicere, to se far, to foresee to provide, to beware.

Prospicuus, circumspecte.

Prostasis, preemynence.

Prosthesis, an addition of a letter, as gnatus, for natus.

Prosterno, straui, sternere, to overthrow, or to vanquyshe in battle.

Prostibulum, a commune brothelhouse, also a commune harlotte. Prostibula, idem.

Prostituo, tuere, to be a commune harlot.

Suam pudicitiam prostituere, to abandone her chastity to any man that will
company with her.

Prostituere pudicitiam, to be commune to all men or women in the act of
lechery.

Prosto, stare, to stand far of, or before, also to stand to be sold or
hired.

Prosubigo, gere, to dygge deep.

Prosum, fui, desse, to be profitable.

Prosumia, a little bark.

Prosumirium, a place without the walls of Rome, where the bishops of the
gentyles made their diuinations, or took their significations of things to
come.

Prosupero, are, to exceed, or have more than enough.

Protasis, a proposition.

Protego, texi, tegere, to defend.

Protectio, a defense.

Protector, toris, a defendour.

Protentus, ta, tum, stretched out.

Protelo, lare, to defer or tracte the time, to put out, to drive away, to
vex.

Protendo, dear, to set forth, or put forth, to stretche forth.

Protenus, a great way hens.

Protero, triui, te^ere, to tread down.

Protermino, to incroche.

Proterreo, rere, to make aferde far of.

Proteruia, wantonness, it was also a sacrifice, wherein the manner was, that as
much as was left uneaten, should be consumed with fire, whereof came the
proverb next following.

Proteruiam fecit, he has consumed all that is left.

Proteruio, ire, to play the wanton.

Proterue, proudely, immoderately, shamefully. Quis est, qui tam proterue,
foribus facit iniuriam, Who is he, that so proudely rappeth at the door? Ecce
autem tu quoque proterue iracundus es, Lo and thou also art shamefully angry.

Proteruiter, idem.

Proteruitas, tatis, pride, folly.

Proteruus, he that is so proud and fierce, that now he stryketh and beats
down an other and treads him under his feet. also lewd or knauyshe and
malapert.

Protesilaus, duke of the city called Phylax in Thessalia, who went with other
to the siege of Troy. And when there was answer given to the Troyanes, that
who first took land in the countray of Troy should be slain. Protesilaus with
a valiant courage, arrived before any other, and was slain by Hector, whose
wife wept so much for him, that she alsoo dyed, and would never be comforted.

Proteus, the son of Oceanus and Tethys called of the Paynymes a god of the
sea, whom Homerus names to be the herdman of the fysshes called Phocae, and
also a prophet, not withstanding he would not give answer, but being
constrained by Ulysses, he alsoo turned him self into sundry fygures,
sommetyme being like a flame of fire, sometime like a bulle, an another time
like to a terryble serpente. Homerus Odyss. Vergilius Georg. 4. In very deed
he was king of Egypt in the time of Priamus king of Troy. Of him camme this
proverb. Proteo mutabilior, More chaungeable than Proteus, applied to him,
which in his acts or words is unstable.

Protestor, staris, stari, to declare manifestely, what should be exchued and
not done.

Protestator, he that manifestly declares what is to be exchued and not done.

Protestatio, a protestation.

Protina, for protinus, forthwith.

Protinus, a far of. also forthwith, without taryenge.

Prothymia, promptitude, also gentyl entertainmente. Proh Di immortales quot
ego ^oluptates fero, quot risiones, quot iocos, quot suauia, saltationes,
blanditias, prothymias? O lord god, how many pleasures have I, what
lawghinges, what pastymes, what bassinges, daunsynges, dalyaunces, and sweet
entertaynementes.

Prothyrum, a porch at the utter door of a house

Protipon opus, an image or form, whereof mouldes are made, in the which
things be cast of metal or earth.

Protocollum, that which is first made or written, which requires correction.

Protogenes, of the first kynred or famylye, it was also the name of an
excellent paynter.

Protogenia, the daughter of Deucalyon and Pirrha.

Protogenus, the first child.

Protologia, a preface.

Protollo, lere, to prolonge.

Protomartyr, the first martyr.

Protomedicus, the chyefe physytion about a prince.

Protomysta, the chief priest or deane.

Protonatorius, a protonotary, or chief sccrybe or Secretary.

Protopages* and protopagus, first made or wrought, or late made.

Protoplastes, and protoplastus, first fourmed, so was Adam called.

Protos, proton, first.

Prototocos, a woman late bringing forth her first child.

Prototomus, the stalk which is first cut.

Prototypus, and prototypon, the first example, or pattern.

Protraho, traxi, trahere, to differ or prolong.

Protrepticus, a book to instruct one, a doctrinal

Protrimenta, meat mynced small.

Prouectus, ta, tum, promoted.

Prouectus ad dignitatem, promoted or advanced to honor.

Prouectum ingenium, a long proved wit.

Prouectus, aged.

Prouectus aetate, aged, run far in years.

Proueho, uexi, uehere, to bring or carry further. also to promote, advance.

Prouenio, ire, to come forth, also to grow, or increase, to happen or
chance. Nimis proue^tu^ est nequiter, It is ungraciously chanced.

Prouentus, tus, revenues, yearly profytes.

Proverb, dylygently.

Prouerbium, a proverb.

Provide, cyrcumspectly.

Prouidens, dentis, foreseinge, provident.

Prouidentia, prouydence, foresyght, sometime it is used for god.

Prouidentior, prouidentissimus, more prouydent, most provident or circumspect.

Prouideo, dear, to provide, to foresee, to beware.

Prouidus, prouydent, cyrcumspect.

Prouinciae, were countrayes, which the Romans gatte far from Rome, where
only their officers did rule. Prouincia, is some time taken for the rule or
authority of an offycer, also an office, also for a countray or realm. also
charge.

Prouinciam suscipere, to take charge of a thing.

Prouinciam coepisti duram, thou haste taken a matter upon the hard to bring
about.

Prouincialis, he that dwells in a prouynce.

Prouinciatim, from countray to countraye, or one countray with an other.

Prouiso, sere, to see or behold, to go to see.

Prouocator, he that provoke one, or he that appealeth, the appellant.

Prouocatio, an appeal to an higher court.

Prouoco, care, to call from a far, to stere, to inuit, to provoke, to
exhort also to appeal to an higher judge, to defye one in battle. De
Caesare transactum est neque iam prouocari in integrum potest, As touching
Caesar that is at a point, nor it can in any wise be called again, or that
which is done, can not be undone.

Prouolo, are, to fly away, or beyond, also to run from aferre.

Prouoluo, uere, to roll or tumble a great stone or other like thing.
sometime to lie down prostrate.

Prout, for Sicut, as.

Prox, of old writers was taken for proba uox, a good voice or noise.

Proxeneta, a brokar.

Proxime, next.

Proximi, for proximo, Die proximi, the next day.

Proximitas, nyghenesse, neyghbourhead.

Proximior, more nere.

Proximo, are, to approach or draw nygh.

Proximurium, a place without the walls, ioynyng to the city, where bishops
did assemble in their convocation.

Proximus, a, um, next.

Prouulgo, aui, are, to publishe, or declare openly to the people.

Prudens, prudentis, wise, prudent, knowing, expert.

Prudenter, wisely.

Prudentia, wisdom in desiring and eschewynge of things.

Prugnum, old writers used for pronum, prone or apt.

Pruina, froste.

Pruinosus, a, um, frostye.

Pruna, a bournynge cole.

Prunella, an herb called commonly Brunella, burnette.

Prunellus, the tree which bearythe wild sloes.

Prunetum, an orchyarde set with damsyn^ trees, or plumme trees.

Prunioli, small musherons.

Prunus, a damsyn tree or plumme tree.

Prunum, a damsyn, prune, plum, slo, or bullase.

Prurio, rij, rire, to ytche.

Pruritus, tus, ytchynge.

Prurigo, ginis, ytchynge with a delectation, as in the sterynge of lechery.

Prusias, a king of Bythinia, unto whom Hannyball fled, after that he was
banyshed from Carthage.

Prymnesius, a post or stake, whereunto the cabull of a ship is tied.

Prymnos, a nymph or maiden of the sea, one of the daughters of Oceanus.

Prytaneia, a counsel assemblyd of great officers and judges.

Prytaneium, a counsel house.

Prytanis, the president or chief of the counsel.

P ANTE S.
PSallo, li, lere, to sing.

Psalmodia, a diverse or myxt song.

Psalmus, a song proprelye to god, or of God.

Psalterium, an instrument like to a harp, also the Psalms called the Psalter.

Psaltes, a singing man.

Psaltrix, tricis, and psaltria, a singing woman.

Psecas, adis, a drop.

Psegma, the poulder or duste, which comes of the fylynge of brass.

Psellus, the name of an old writer, which wrote of dyete.

Psephisma, atis, a decree.

Psephopecta, an auditour or caster of acco^pte.

Pseudoadelphus, a counterfayte brother.

Pseudoangelus, a false messager.

Pseudolus, a false servant.

Pseudomartyr, a false witness.

Pseudopropheta, a false prophet.

Pseudothyrum, a false posterne.

Pseudo, faulse or counterfayt, and every other nowne joined therewith, is
thereby made false or counterfayte, as Pseudopropheta, a false or counterfayte
prophet.

Psilotrum, an ointment to take away hears.

Psimmithium, that which we do call Ceruse or white lead.

Psitta, a fyshe which we call a playce.

Psittacus, a popyniay.

Psycolutres, he that delyteth to bathe in cold water.

Psycomantium, a place where Nigromancers do call up spirytes.

Psora, scab bydnesse.

Psora, an herb, which Ruellius doubts whyther it be that which we
commonly call Scabiose, but that has a long leaf, and being broken on
sunder has in the breaking little thredes like to a copwebbe, and has a
fair blewe flower. it grows commonly in dry meadows.

Psylli, people in Lybia, whose bodies are venym to serpents, and they also
do cure the styngynge and poysonnynge of serpents by suckynge the place
which is venymed.

Psyllium, an herb called also Pulicaris herba.

P ANTE T.
PTE, a syllable joined oftentimes to the ablative case, as meapte, tuapte,
suapte, mine own, thine own, his own.

Pterigium, a lyttelle skin, which grows from the corner of the eye, and
keuereth the sight: it is also a grief under the foreparte of the nail, when
the flesh gothe from the nail with pain.

Pteris, fern.

Pteromata, great arches over the roofes made like wings.

Pterna, the lower part of a sail.

Plithia, a part of Thessalia where Achylles raygned.

Prisana, the water, wherein barley is sodden, also barley husked, or
excorticate, also frumenty made of barley.

Ptisanarium, a mortar, wherein barley is brayd.

Ptocotrophia, an hospytal for beggars, a spittell house.

Ptolomeus, the name of diverse kings of Egypt.

Ptosis, ruin, also the case of a nowne.

Ptolemais, maidis, the name of a city in Phoenicia, first called Acha.

Ptyas, adis, an adder having the color grene, drawyng toward the color of
gold.

Ptynge, a ravenous bird, which takes his pray by night, and sometime
fyghteth with the Egle so valyantly, that in crabbyng together, they fall
both down to the ground, and are taken by shepardes.

Ptysis; is spettyll, it is alsoo an exulceration or soore in the lungues, with
a consumption of all the body, and spettyng of bloudde.

P ANTE V.
PVbens, he that is between a young man and a boy, of the age of.xiiii. years.

Pubesco, scere, to grow as a child does toward man's state. it is also of
herbis and trees

Pubeo, es, and pubesco, ere, to begin to have a bearde benethe, sometime to
spring, as herbs done.

Puber, beris, and Pubes, beris, a young mosye boarde, which spryngeth in the
nether parts of a man at fourtene years of aege, of a womanne at younger years.
Wherefore a man or womanne at those years is called Pubes. sometime youth, or
a multitude of young men: also the privy parts of the body. also being an
adjective, it signifies young or tender.

Pubertas, the young aege of men and women, when they begin to be apt unto
generation. it is also the first coming forth of hears about the privy
members.

Publicani, were they, which took in ferme of the people of Rome the rentes
and revenues due to the city at a rent certain.

Publicanus, a fermour.

Public, and publicitus, openly in the face of the world Sumptus public
dati, his expenses borne of the city or town.

Public redimere, to bye it of the commune treasoure.

Public bona possidere, to have goods confyscate or forfayted.

Public uenire, to come before all the world.

Public dicere, to make an oration before the people.

Public propter duas causas nihil scripsi, for two causes I wrate neither to
the senate, nor to the people.

Quae prohiberi publicitus interest, The which it shall be expedient for the
people that it be forbode^, or it is the peples part to forbede.

Publicola, a favorer of the people, the which name was given to Valerius,
which was one of the first consules of Rome.

Publico, care, to publyshe, to manifest, to make openly known. also idem quod
edere, to abandon in commune as harlottes done, some time to confyscate.

Publicus, ca, cum, commune, but more proprely, publyke, that is to say,
pertaining to every state of the people ioyntely and severally. See the true
definition thereof in my book called the Governor.

Publicum consilium, the commune counsayl.

Carere publico, not to come abroad, or among people.

Publica sacra, sacrifyce done for the people.

Publica fides, a saulfe conducte, a general license.

Publipor, poris, Publius boy, or servant.

Publius, the name of a Roman, as Marcus is.

Pucinum uinum, wine growing nyghe to the gulf of Venyce.

Pudefio, fis, fieri, to be ashamed.

Pudenda, the pryuy members.

Pudendus, a, um, a thing to be ashamed of.

Pudens, it is, shamefaste.

Pudenter, with shamefastnes, bashefully.

Pudeo, dui, dear, to be ashamed.

Pudet, pudebat, puduit, puditum est, to be asshamed.

Pudibunde, shamefastly.

Pudibundus, da, dum, shamefast.

Pudice, chastely, honestly.

Pudicitia, chastity, cleanness of living.

Pudicitiam habere, to be vyolated in the act of lechery.

Puditum, ashamed. Nonne esset puditu^, si hanc causam agerent severe? Had it
not been a shame if that they had pursewed that matter rigorousely?

Pudicus, ca, cum, chaste.

Pudor, doris, a moderation that lettith the mind that it do not any thing
wa^tonly, or dishonestly, shamefastness, to say or do any thing dyshonest.

Puella, a wenche.

Puellaris, re, chyldyshe.

Puellascere, to wax young ageyn, to be maide^ly.

Puellus, a little child, a babe.

Puer, a child, a boy. also a servant.

Puera, a woman child, called in Cambrydge shyre, a modder.

Puerilis, puerile, of a child, chyldysshe, or boyisshe.

Puerilitas, a chyldes act, childyshnes, boyishnes

Pueritia, chyldehode.

Puerulus, an infant.

Puerpera, a woman that lies in of child.

Puerperium, the time of a woman to travail of child, sometime the child, also
the birth.

Pugil, a champyon.

Pugillaris, and pugillare, phiraliter Pugillares, a pair of tables to write
in.

Pugillatorius follis, a balle filled only with wind, which is stryken with
a man's fyste, and not with the palm.

Pugiunculus, a short dagger.

Pugillatus, wrastlynge with colars.

Pugillus, a handful, in gatheryng of herbs or other like thing.

Pugio, onis, a dagger.

Pugna, battle, the act of lecherye. alsoo an assault, a dysceyte.

Pugnaciter, valyantly in battle.

Pugnator, toris, a fyghter.

Pugnax, acis, a great fyghter.

Pugnatior, and pugnacissimus, more or most fighting.

Pugnicula, a skyrmyshe.

Pugnitariola, idem.

Pugnitus, in battle.

Pugno, are, to fight, sometime to repougne, to strive.

Pugnus, a fyste.

Pulcher, chra, chrum, fair, strong, good, tall.

Pulcherrime, most beautyfully.

Pucherrimus, a, um, fairest.

Pulchralis, le, fair.

Pulchre, an aduerbe, sygnifyeth fair, beautyfully, well fauouredly, sometime
valyantly. alsoo wisely. sometime it is put for ualde. Ac dum accubabam, quam
uidebar mihi esse pulchre sobrius, and when I laid me down, I thought my
self to be very sober.

Pulchellus, a fair little one.

Pulchellus puer, a fair little boy.

Pulchrior, oris, and Pulchrius, fayrer.

Pulchritas, beauty.

Pulchresco, scere, to be fair.

Pulchritudo, dinis, beaultie, tallness of personage.

Pulegium, an herb whereof there is male and female, the male has purple
flowers: the female white, it is taken for commune penyroyall but Hermolaus
Barbarus doubtethe whether Pulegium be penyroyall or a kind of Calamint.
Manardus writes that there is no diversity between our Pulegium, from the
other having in it the same qualities. Theophrastus and Plinius do write that
the branches thereof hanged up in the larder, in the deep of winter, do bring
forth flowers which also now might be easily proved. also being drounke
with mellicrate, that is to say honye and water boiled to gether, it purges
melancoly excedyngely.

Pulex, licis, a flea.

Pulicinus, a, um, of a flea.

Pulicosus, a, um, full of fleas.

Pullarius, the keeper of chykens.

Pullarus, a wesyll or Stote, which kyllethe chyckens.

Pullaster, a young chycken.

Pullatio, hatchynge of chyckens.

Pullatus, a mourner. Sometime a man in pore apparayle, sometime rude, unlearned.

Pullesco, scere, to spring or burgen.

Pullicenus, a new hatched chycken.

Pullicies, a bringing forth or hatchynge of chyckens, also the folynge of
coltes.

Pulligo, ginis, blackenesse

Pullinus, na, number, of a colte. Pullini dentes, coltes tethe, which be first
cast.

Pullulatio, a spryngynge forth of a thing in growing.

Pullulasco, scere, to bourgen.

Pullulo, lare, to spring, to come up young.

Pullus, young, tender, in all kind living, also a colte or fool, also a
chycken.

Pullus, a, um, russet, sometime black, but rather puke color, between russet
and black.

Pulmentarium, potage made with flesh or fyshe, as forced gruell, or coleyse.

Pulmentum, gruell.

Pulmo, the lunges or lyghtes.

Pulmonarius, he that is disesed in the lunges.

Pulmonaria, an herb called Lung worte.

Pulmonia, be certain apples, which be called in some place a hundred
shyllinges.

Pulpa, the wood of all trees which may be divided by stringes, it is also
taken for carnositie or fleshy parts sometime for the soft matter which is
enclosed in an hard shell, as pulpa cassiae fistulae, for the inner part
thereof which is called also Medulla.

Pulpamentum, a delycate dyshe or meat.

Pulpitum, a hault place or pulpyte.

Pulls, a meat made of meal, water, honye, cheese and eggs. It may be taken
for potage.

Puliatiles uenae, the poulses of a man or womanne.

Pulsatus, ta, tum, stryken as a harp or other instrument is, which has
stringes.

Pulsim, as a thing were stricken.

Pulso, are, to beat, to stryke, to hurt, to play on a harp, or other like
instrument.

Pulsare hostium, to knock at the door.

Pulsus, the wrest of the arm, whereto the hand is joined: but it is more
properly the poulse or stroke that the arteryes or beating veins do make,
whereby the strength or debilitie of the sickness is known in touching them.

Pultarius, a potage dyshe.

Pulto, rare, to beat at a door.

Pulticula, a little potage.

Pultiphagi, and pultiphagonides, great eaters of potage.

Puluero, rare, to lay with douste, to de dusty.

Pulueresco, scere, to be turned in to poulder or duste.

Puluerius, a, um, of poulder or duste.

Puluerulentus, ta, tum, full of duste.

Pulueratio, a layenge of fine earth about vines.

Puluinar, a bolstar of a bed. also a bed which was wont to be made in
temples, as it were for the gods. It is taken sometime for a temple, also a
tabernacle, wherein an image stands.

Puluinatus, ta, tum, soft as a pyllowe.

Puluinus, a pyllowe, sometime a fetherbed, also a cushyn, also a bed of
herbs in a gardeyne, also grauel, also an engyne, wherewith ships are brought
into the docke.

Puluis, ueris, powlder, duste.

Puluisculus, fine powder or duste.

Pumex, micis, a pomeyse to make parchement smothe, also to take clean out
spots or letters.

Pumico, care, to pomeyse.

Pumicosus, a, um, like a pomeyse.

Pumigatio, pomeysynge or polyshynge.

Pumigatus, ta, tum, pomaysed, or polyshed.

Pumilis, little in stature.

Pumilio, onis, and pumillus, a dwarf, or any thing little in stature.

Punctim, foynynge.

Punctus, seu punctum, a point or title.

Punctus temporis, a moment, the least part of time,

Pungo, pupugi, pungere, to prycke.

Punicus, a, um, of Africa.

Bellum punicum, the war that Romans had with Carthaginensis.

Punicum malum, a pomegranate.

Punicus, aut puniceus color, read.

Punio, iui, ire, to punish.

Punitio, punishment.

Pupa, a young wenche, a gyrle, a modder, it is also a poppette, like a gyrle.

Pupilla, the ball or apple of the eye.

Pupillaris aetas, the noneage of him that is in ward.

Pupillus, he that is in ward, or within age, not able in years to occupy his
proper land. also he that has no father alive.

Puppes, and puppis, the foreparte or deck of the ship.

Pupus, a young child, a baby, also a poppet, or image like a child.

Pupugi, the pretertence of pungo, I have prieked or punched.

Pure, purely. Puriter, idem.

Purgamen, seu purgamentum, filthe which comes of any thing that is cleansed.

Purgatio, a purgation or purgynge.

Purgo, gare, to make clean, to purge. also to excuse.

Purifico, to purify, or make pure.

Purificatio, a purifyenge.

Purime, old writers used for purissime, most purely.

Puritas, tatis, pureness, cleanness.

Puro, rare, to make pure.

Purpura, a purple, which is a shel fish, whereof purple color comes.
sometime it signyfyeth a garment of purple.

Purpurarius, a, um, perteyuynge to purple color.

Purpurasco, scere, to be of purple color.

Purpurissum, idem quod purpurissa.

Purpureus, a, um, of purple color.

Purpuratus, apparayled in purple.

Purpurati, be the noble men of a realm called Peers.

Purpurissa, red payntyng, wherewith harlottes do paynte their visages.

Purpurisso, are, to paynte the visage ruddy.

Purulentus, ta, tu^, full of matter or corruption

Purus, ra, rum, clean, pure, fine.

Pus, puris, matter, which comes out of a soore.

Pusillanimis, faint hearted, feeble couraged.

Pusillanimitas, faint courage, cowardyse.

Pusillanimiter, cowardely.

Pusillus, a, um, little.

Pusio, a boy.

Pustula, a pushe or little wheale.

Pusulae, blystars, which do rise on bread when it is baken.

Pusum, and pusam, old wrytars used for Puerum and Puellam. a boy and a gyrle.

Pustulatum argentum, roughe silver when it is new molten.

Putamen, minis, the shall of a nutte, or paring of an apple or pear.

Puteal, the seat of a great officer, also the cou^rynge of a well.

Putealis, and puteanus, a, um, of a pyt or well.

Puteana aqua, well water.

Putearius, he that diggeth a pytte or well.

Puteo, tui, tere, to stynke.

Puteoli, a city in Capania.

Puteus, a well.

Puticuli, places where the commune people was buried.

Putidus, da, dum, stynkynge, unsavory, unpleasant.

Putilatum aurum, pure or fine gold.

Putisco, scere, to stink.

Putitius, a fool.

Puto, taui, tare, to cut of or pluck away, that which is superfluouse,
properly from trees. also to suppose, to consider, to discuss, to gather, or
confer, to esteem, to judge. Putare rationem, to make account, or to take
account.

Rem ipsam putasti, thou have said truth.

Rationem secum putare, to consider and way the matter.

Putor, toris, stenche.

Putrefacio, to make to stynke.

Putreo, triui, trere, to wax leave, to be resolved into stinkinge matter.

Putresco, scere, to putrify.

Putris, tree, corrupt, rotten.

Putridus, da, dum, idem.

Putredo, dinis, corruption.

Putulentum, stynkynge.

Putus, ta, tum, pure, tried, fine.

Pur^m putum, fined.

P ANTE Y.
PYCNOSTYLON, a house or place builded, where pyllars stand thycke together.

Pycta, and Pyctes, a wrastler with a coler.

Pyctatium, a table, wherein the names of Iuges were written.

Pygargus, a beast like to a falowe dear: it is also a bird like to a hawk,
having a white tail, I suppose him to be that, which we call a ringetayle.

Pygmachia, wrastlynge with colars.

Pygmachus, a wrastler.

Pygmaei, people between Jude and Cathay. which are but one cubyte long.

Pympleides, the musis.

Pyr, fire.

Pyra, a bonfyre, wherein dead bodies were burned.

Pyralis, a fly, which commethe of the fire, and as long as he is therein, he
lives: and when he is far from it, he dies incontinent.

Pyragmon, one of the names of Vulcanus. it was also one of the gyauntes called
Cyclopes, who is also called Acmonides.

Pyrama a certain rosen.

Pyramus, a young man, which slew him self for the love of a maiden called
Thisbe: it is also a river in Cilicia.

Pyramid, midis, a great thing of stone or other matter, which is broad
beneth, and upward is small and sharp on the top.

Pyratium, a kind of sider, called Pery.

Pyrausta, a worm lyuinge in the fire, It is also a kind of spyders, which
hurts honey combs.

Pyrenei montes, mountains, which do dyuyde France from Spain.

Pyretru^, and pyretra, an herb called Pelitory.

Pyrethi, certain inchantours in Cappadot^^a.

Pyrethia septa, places enclosed which had in the myddell of them an altar on
the which was kept fire continually bournynge.

Pyretus, a burning fever.

Pyraeus, an haven at Athenes.

Pyrgitis, the herb called hearts tunge.

Pyrgobaris, a house builded like a tower.

Pyrgoteles, was a cunninge grauer in stones.

Pyrgus, in latyne a tower: also a box, out of the which men do cast dyse,
when they play: it is also a certain company of horse men in battle.

Pyriasis, a certain plaster to assuage the burning of a fever.

Pyrim, a littell kernel.

Pyrites, every stone, out of the which fire may be stryken.

Pyrobola, a smythes hammer, wherewith he beats on hot iron.

Pyroboli, arrows or darts which send forth fire, when they be shot or
cast, and do burn the thing that they do touch.

Pyrobolarij, they which do shote such darts.

Pyrocorax, a crow with a red byll. I suppose it to be of the kind, whereof
cornyshe chowghes are.

Pyrodes, he that first struck fire out of a flint also a stone of fyry color.

Pyromantia, a dyuination by fire.

Pyrrhica, uel Pyrrhiches, was a certain furme of daunsyng and was the first
exercise to the wars of the Lacedaemonians, which they began when they were
but five years old

Pyrrhiadae, was the ancient name of the people called Molossi.

Pyrrhichistae, uel Pyrrhicharij, they that do exercise the said dance called
Pyrrhica.

Pyrrhichius, a foot in meter of two short syllables.

Pyrrhus, in latin Flauius, sieve Rufus, he that has a ruddye or fyry visage,
by the which name the son of Achylles was called, and a king of Epyre was
so called, which did make war to the Romans.

Pyrum, a pear.

Pyrus, a pear tree.

Pythagoras, a man of excellent wit, borne in an isle called Samos, which
being subdued by Polycrates the tyrant. Pythagoras forsook his country and
went in to Egypt and Babilonia, to learn mystical sciences, and afterward
came into Italy, where he continued the residue of his life. He was the first
that named him self a philosopher where before men of great learning were
called wise men: and because he would exchue the note of arrogance, when one
demanded of him what he was, he said Philosophus which signifies a lover of
wisdom. He was in sharpness of wit passing al other and found the
subtle conclusions and mysteries of Arthemetike Music and geometrye. Plato
wondereth at his wisdom: his doctrine was dyuine, and commodyouse, the which
he teaching to other, enjoined them to keep silence five years and here him
dilygentely, er they demanded of him any question. He never would do sacrifice
with any blood, he would eat nothing that had life and lived in a
meruaylouse abstinence, and continence, and was in such auctorite among his
disciples, that when in dispucions they maynteyned their opinion, if one
demanded of the^ why it should be as they spoke, they would answer only Ipse
dixit, He said so, meaning Pythagoras, which answer was reputed as
sufficient as if it had been proved with an inevitable reason, so much in
estymation was he for his approved troth and incomparable learning. He was
noted to be expert in magike, and therefore it is written of him, that nyghe to
the city of Tarentum he beheld an ox bytynge the tops of beans there
growing and treading it down with his feet, wherefore he bade the herd man
to advise his ox that he should absteyn from grain: the herd laughing at
him, said, that he never learned to speak as an ox, but thou (said he) that
semeste to have had experience therein take mine office upon the Forthwith
Pythagoras went to the ox and layinge his mouth to his ear, whistred some
thing of his art, a meruaylous thing the ox as if he had been taught, left
eatinge of the corn, nor ever after touched any, but many years after myldely
walked in the city and took his meat only of them that would give it him. Many
like wonderful things is written of him. finally his disciples, for their
wisdom and temperaunce were always had in great estimation. he was before
the incarnation of Christ. 522. years.

Pythagoricus, he that was of the sect of Pythagoras.

Pythagorista, idem.

Pytheum, was the place in the which Apollo gave aunsweres.

Pythius, one of the names of Apollo.

Pythia, thiorum, plays made in the honor of Apollo.

Pythius, a Lydian dwelling at a town in Phrigia called Celaenae, who had
such abundance of gold, that he received Xerxes hinge of Persia with all his
hole army which was innumerable, and that with great magnifycence, and offered
moreover to give tresoure as well for prouysion as also for wages, to have had
his son discharged of the wars which Xerxes taking displeasauntly, caused
the young man in his fathers sight to be cut in sunder. This man gave also to
Darius, father to Xerxes, a plane tree of gold and a vine of the same metal.
yet he taking thought for his son enclosed him self in a sepulcher which
he let make, and there fynyshed his life myserably, and in extreme sorrow.

Pytho, a city in the country called Phocis, the people where of were named
Delphi.

Python, a dragon, which was slain by Apollo.

Pythopolis, a city in Asye, in that part, whi-whyche is called Mysia.

Pytisma matis, a spyrtyng out of small spyttell.

Pyxacantha, and Pyxacanthos, a barberye tree.

Pyxis, idis, a box.

Pyxidicula, a little box, properly wherein medicines are put.

Pyxidatus, ta, tum, made like a box.

Q ante V.
QVA, which way, by what place.

Qua, sometime is put for Tum, Qua dominus qua aduocati sibilis co^scissi, now
the master and than the advocates were hyssed at.

Qua iteneris, qua de Bruto, what for the vyage, what for the affairs of
Brutus.

Non qua filius alicuius, sed qua homo aestimatur.

Men have not regard whose son he is, but that he is a man.

Quadantenus, unto what part.

Quadi, people of Boeme, or Boemia, which did eat the flesh of horses and
wuifes.

Quadra, a trencher, whereon meat is cut. sometime a lof of bread, cut square.

Quadragenarius, naria, narium, of forty years old.

Quadragenus, a, um, forty. Quadragena scuta, forty crowns.

Quadragesima, Lent.

Quadragesimus, a, um, the fortieth.

Quadragies, sometime signifies forty times, but in computation, sometime it
signifyethe but his own number, and that being added to an other number to
multiply it, as quadragies centena.xl. hundred, quadragies millena.xl.
thousand, but being set by it self to signifye the quantity of a thing, it
was multiplied by an hundred thousand. as quadragies sestertium, forty hundred
thousand pence. Like wise all other aduerbes of that sort, as Decies,
duodecies, uicies, trities, centies, ten hundred thousand, twelve hundred
thousand. etc. L. Portius, supposes that in the old time was some dyfference
as an N, or a titel added to the word when it was multiplied by an hundred
thousand, as Deciens, which moughte be committed in the defaulte of the wrytar
or pryntour, and he puts an example of Varro de Analogia, and an other of
Pedianus in. 2. Act. in Verrem. This should I have written before in the
declaration of Decies, which may be done at the next edition of this warke.

Quadrans, the fourth part of As, also a quarterne of a pound. sometime it
signifies the accord in reckenynge, where the receypt and allowaunce be
equal.

Quadrans operae, the fourth part of the journey or task in labor, or warke.

Quadrans pedis, a quarter of a foot.

Quadrantalis, le, Plini. Crassitudine quadra^tali, four fingers thick.

Quadrantal, a ineasure called also Amphora, and is in form a foot square, as
a dye, and co^teyneth in him.xlviii. measures called Sextarij, and.viii. of the
measures called Congij

Quadraginta, fortye.

Quadrangulum, a figure having four corners.

Quadrangulus, a, um, four cornered.

Quadrantaria, a harlot that will company with a man for a farthynge.

Quadratura, a square.

Quadratus, ta, tum, four square.

Quadrata statura, a mean or competente stature.

Quadratiboues, great and strong oxen.

Quadratum corpus, a body well compacte and of a good stature.

Quadricornium, having four horns.

Quadriduanus, a, um, of four days contynuaunce.

Quadriennis, four years old.

Quadriformiter, in a square.

Quadringati, certain coin, having in them the printe of a chariotte.

Quadrilibris, four pound weight.

Quadrilinguis, he that speaks four sundry languages.

Quadrimus and quadrimulus idem.

Quadrilibris, bre, that which does way four pounds.

Quadringentenus, a, um, the four hundredth.

Quadringentesimus, idem.

Quadringenti, tae, ta, four hundred times.

Quadringenties, four hundred times.

Qudringentuplus, a, um, four hundred times so much.

Quadrigenus, idem, Liuius Vectigal iussus pendere denarios quadringenos
quinquagenos, He was commanded to pay for tribute or pention.CCCCl. grotes.

Quadripartito, in four parts.

Quadriennium, four years.

Quadrifariam, on four parts.

Quadrifidus, da, dum, that which may be slytte in four parts.

Quadriformis, me, that is of four diverse fourmes or facions.

Quadriga, a carte drawn with four horses. sommetyme a carte horse.

Quadrigarius, a carter.

Quadriiugi, four beasts yoked to gether.

Quadrilaterus, ra, rum, with four sides.

Quadrimembris, of four parts.

Quadringenta, and Quadringenti, four hundred.

Quadrinoctium, four nights.

Quadrinus, a, um, for quatuor.

Quadripartitor, tiri, to divide in four.

Quadriremis, a ship with four rows of oores, or with four tops.

Quadrisyllabum, of four syllables.

Quadriuium, where as four ways do mete.

Quadro, are, to bring in square, to consent or agree.

Quadrum, a figure of four square.

Quadrupedantia, and quadrupedia, four footed beasts.

Quadrupedo, dare, to go on four feet.

Quadrupliciter, four manner of ways.

Quadruplico, care, ^o double four times, or to make a thing four times as
much as it was.

Quadrurbs, a city, unto the which do come, or are brought all the people,
being left in four cities, by the which name the city of Athenes was
called of Actius the poet.

Quadrus, a, um, square.

Quadrupes, quadrupedis, a beast having four feet.

Quadruplatores, were they, which for accusynge of other, had the fourth
part of the goods of them, that were condemned.

Quadruplex, four double.

Quadruplo mayor, four times greatter.

Quadruplo, and quadruplor, ari, to appeache a man for to have part of his
goods.

Quadruplum, four times as much.

Quae, the which, woman or other female kind.

Quae malum, what a myschiefe.

Quaecunque, all that, what so ever.

Quaerceus, a, um, of oak.

Quaercicus, ca, cum idem.

Quaercus, cus, an oak.

Quaercerus, ra, rum, cold, with a shaking, as in a fever.

Quaeritabundus, studyouse or dyligente in seeking.

Querneus, and quernus, querna, quernum of an oak.

Quaero, quaesiui, quaerere, to demand, to ask, to get, to search, to
examine.

Quaerere liberos, to get chylderne. Plaut. Liberorum quaerendorum causa ei
credo ux or data est. I suppose he had a wife given him to the intent to get
or have children.

Quaerere locum iniuriq, to go about to do harm.

Quaerere sitim, to provoke thirste.

De pecunijs repetundis, quaerere, to give in formation against one of
extortion or bribery

Quaerere rem tormentis, uel per torme^^ta to examine a man by manacles or
other like tourmentes to make him to confess the act.

Facile uictum quaerere, to get his living easily.

Quaeritur inter medicos, physicians do dispute. etc.

Quaerquetum, and quaercetum, a grove of oaks.

Quaerito, ritare, to seek, search, or inquyre diligentely.

Quaesitor, a justice or commissioner to inquyre of crimes, defaultes, or
abuses against the law.

Quaesuio, an inquiry, an examination, a search.

Quaeso, siui, sere, to beseech.

Quaesticulus, a little gain.

Quaestio, a question.

Tibi ne quaestioni essemus, to thintente that thou should not seek for us.

Quaestionem afferre, to move a question.

Polliceri in quaestionem seruos, to offer his servants for to be examined of
the truth.

Decernere quaestionem, to awarde process in criminal causes.

Postulare quaestionem, to require that information may be given against one.

Quaestionem adhibere, to minister turme^tes

Exercere quaestionem inter sicarios, to sit in commission upon murdrers.

Quaestiuncula, a small or light question.

Quaestionarius, an examynour.

Quaestor, toris, the tresorer of the common tresory, a tresorer of the wars,
a Lieuetenant to the chief capytayne in wars also a justice by commyssion of
Oyer and Determiner.

Quaestores paricidij, justices to inquyer of treson, or murder. we may call
the coroners by that name.

Quaestores urbani, were as the chamberlayns of London be now.

Quaestores aerarii, officers of the receypte, as the chaumberlaynes and
tellers be now.

Quaestorius, quaestoria, storium, perteynynge to the receypte.

Quaestorium, was such a place as the eschequer is.

Quaestor aerarii, a general receyuour, but it seems to be such an offycer,
as the eschecoure is now in Englade.

Quaestorius, torij, he that had been in the of fyce of Questor.

Quaestorius, a, um, that perteyneth to the office of Questor. Vir quaestorius,
a man which has been in that office.

Questuariae arts, crafts whereby men do gain money.

Quaestuosus, a, um, of much gain, studious of great lucre.

Quaestura, the office of Questor.

Quaestus, tus, gain, wynninge.

Qualibet, where it lyketh the.

Qualisqualis, what so ever.

Qualiscunque, such as it was.

Qualiter, in the fascion or form.

Qualis, le, what, of what quality.

Qualitates, qualities, as foul, fair, wise, foolysshe, strong, weak,
dylygent slow. etc.

Qualius, a basket, out of the which wine runs, when it is pressed: also a
basket or ha^per, in the which women do put their spyndels, their bottomes of
threde, and such like things. some do write it with a single.l.

Quam, than, sometime after that, sometime before that. Pridie quam
occideretur, The day before that he was slain. Quam been, how well. Quam
fortiter, how valaintly. also it is often joined with the superlatyue degree,
to make it more vehemente: as,

Quampaticissimi, as few as may be. Quam doctissimus, excellently learned.
sometime it imports as much as very. Cum quo qua^ familiarissime uixerat,
with whom he lived very familiarly. Also it signifies as much. Duplo accepit
quam perdiderat, He received double as much as he lost.

Quam uellem Menedemum inuitatum, O I would feign that Menedemus were boden.

Quinto die quam sustuleris, condire oportebit, the fyfthe day after that ye
have taken them away. etc.

Quampridem non edisti, How long is it sens thou eatest any meat.

Huc euasit, quampridem pater nihi and matter mortui essent. etc. To this it
came, how long it was agone that my father and mother dyed. etc.

Quamlibet, quantumuis, quantumlibet, what so ever.

Quammox, as sone, suddenly.

Quamobrem? wherefore? for what cause? what to do.

Quam pene, almost, it lacked but a little.

Qua^plures, how many, very many, a great sort

Quamplurimus, quamplurima, quamplurimum, very much.

Quampridem, long before.

Quamprimum, very shortly or sone.

Quamuis, and quanquam, although. sometime for Quantumuis.

Quandiu, as long, duringe the time.

Quando, when, also sens that.

Quandogentium, when.

Quandudum, How late sens? how long agoo?

Quanquam, all be it, although.

Quandoque, sometime.

Quandoquidem, for as much as.

Quanti, for how much, of what price or valewe.

Quantillus, and quantulus, a, um, How lyttel or small.

Quantillum, how little.

Quantitas, quantity.

Quanto, how much.

Quantisper, how long.

Quantus, ta, tum, how much, which is referred to number, weight, and
measure.

Quantus homo in dicendo, O that he is a man that can speak well.

Quanta mea sapientia est, as fer as my wit can perceive.

Quantum, how much, as to, as concerning.

Quantum intelligo, as far as I understand

Quantum suspicor, as far as I suppose. Also according as Id de imperatore
Romano, quantum euentus, postea praedictum paruit Iudaei ad se trahentes,
rebellarunt, The jews gatherynge that of the Emperor, according as the
thing, which was before showed of that which should happen, appeared
afterward, made rebellion.

Quantum potes, in all speed that thou may

Quantuscunque, how much, or how many so ever it be.

Quantuslibet, idem.

Quantusquantus, idem.

Quantulum, as little.

Quantuluscunque, how little so ever it be.

Quanuis, all be it, all though.

Quanuis, for ualde.

Quapropter, wherefore.

Quaquauersus, and quaquauersum, on every side. Quaqua, idem.

Quare, wherefore.

Quarto, and quartum the fourth time. all be it properlye Quarto signifies the
fourth in order, as Quarto Consul, he that had three in the office before him.
Quartum Consul, He that has been the fourth time Consul.

Quartana, a fever quartayne.

Quartanarius, he that has a quartayn fever.

Quartarius, a Mulettour or keeper of mules, which takes but the fourth part
of the wages or gain.

Quartusdecimus, the fouretenthe.

Quartus, ta, tum, the fourth.

Quasi, Like as. Amas me quasi filium, thou loueste me, as if I were thy son.
also, as who says, as though. Tu obijcis, quod uxorem repudiauerim, quasi
tuidem non feceris. Thou imbraideste me, that I have forsaken my wife, as who
says, thou have not done so to.

Quasillum, a little hamper.

Quassabundus, he that shakes or moves his head.

Quasso, are, to shake much or often, also to break.

Quassus, and quassatus, quassata, satum, shaken, braste.

Quatefacio, cere, to make or cause to shake or move.

Quatenus, how much, to the intent. also for as much, also how, how much, or
as much*

Quater, four times.

Quaterdecies, foureten ^^imes.

Quatergemini, four childerne at one burden. Quaternarius numerus, the number
of four.

Quaternio, quaternionis, a quayre, as in a book, a leaf being folded into
four parts.

Quaterni, four.

Quaternus, a, um, the fourth.

Quaternum denum, the four tenth.

Quatinus, a conjunction, which signifies for for as much.

Quatio, quassi, quatere, to shake a thing, also to vex, to cast out.

Quatriduum, four days, the space of four days.

Quatuor, four.

Quartus, ta, tum, the fourth.

Quadruplus, pla, plum, four double.

Quae, for and, sygnifieth and. Also that is to say

Quearah, a measure of the jews, conteyninge two ounces and.ii. drammes.

Quentia, old writers used for potentia, puissaunce, power.

Queis, for quibus.

Queiscum, for cum quibus, with whom.

Quemadmodum, like as.

Queo, quis, quiui quire, I may.

Quercus, cus, uel ci, an oak.

Querceus, a, um, of an oak.

Quercicus, ca, cum, idem quod quernus.

Quercerus, ^a, rum, quyuerynge or shaking for cold. sometime it was taken for
greatte and greuouse, as Festus says.

Quercerum, a grove of oaks.

Querela, and querimonia, a complaynte.

Queribundus, a, um, lamentable.

Quaerimoniarius, a complaynant.

Quernus, na, number, of an oak.

Querna folia, oken leaves.

Quaeror, quaestus sum, quaeri, to lamente or complain.

Querqued^l^, a waterfoule called a teale.

Quaerulus, la, lum, that which complayneth, or is full of complayntes. It is
put sometime of the Poets for shrylle or loud in synging. Cicadae querulae,
grassehoppers, which do sing loud, or with a shrill voice.

Quaesitah, among the jews did sygnifye a coin, sometime a lamb, sometime
a sheep.

Quaestus, tus, a complaynte, a lamentation.

Quari, people in Gallia Narbonensie.

Qui, the which. Also sometime it signyfieth how. Efficite, qui detur tibi,
Do what ye can, how or by what means thou may have her. Qui uocare* How
art thou called? Also it signifies why. Dauo istuc dedam negoti. S. Non
potest. P. Qui? S. Quia habet aliud magis ex sese. I will commytte this matter
to Dauy. S. That may not be. P. why? S. For he has an other greatter matter to
do for him self. Also it signyfyeth from whens. Qui istaec tibi incidit
suspectio From whens is this suspicion happened unto the? Also it signifies
would to God. Qui illum Di omnes perdiunt, I pray god that a vengeance light
on him. also it signifies because. Nam in prologis scribundis, operam
abu^itur, non qui argumentum narrer, ^ed qui malenoli uaeteris Poetae
maledictis respondeat, For he spends his labor in writing of Prologues,
not because he will tell the argument, but for as much as he would make
answer to the yuel reports of the old enuiouse Poet. Also it sygnifiethe
wherefore. Qui enim beatior Epicurus, quod in patria uiuebat, quam Metrodorus,
quod Athenis? Wherefore was Epycure more happy that he did dye in his country,
than Metrodorus that he died at Athenes.

Quia, for, alsoo it signifies that. Sed tamen recordatione nostrae amicitiae
sic fruor, ut be atae uixisse uidear, quia cum Scipione uixerim, All be it I
take this pleasure in remembrynge our frendeshyp, that I may some to have
lived most fortunately, that I lived in Scipiones company. also it signifies
for as much. Sed quia multis and magnis tempestatibus uos cognoui fortes,
fidosque mihi, eo animus ausus est maximu^ atque pulcherrimum facinus incipere,
But for as much as in many great storms or dangiers I have proved you to be
valyaun^e, and faythefull unto me, therefore my heart is bold to begin an
excellent and commendable enterprise.

Quia nam, wherefore.

Quia ne, in deed.

Quias, quiatis, for cuius, cuiatis.

Quias, a, um, for cuius, a, um.

Quibus in extremis, for quorum in extremo. Literae dantur mihi a te, quibus in
extremis scriptum est? I received letters from you, in the last end of the
which it is written.

Quicquid est, all that is, what so ever it be, what so ever.

Quicquid pauxillum, never so little.

Qui cum, for cum quo. Qui cum loquitur filius? with whom does my son talk?

Qui^unque, who so ever.

Quicquam, any thing.

Quid, What. Quid causae est? What is the cause? Quid aetatis? How old? of
what age? Quid animi? What mind? Quid animi est? What mind is he of? Quid
captiuorum? How many prisoners? Tum Captiuorum quid ducunt secum? Than how
many prisoners do they bring with them? Quid id sit hominis, cui Lyco nomen
siet? What man is he, whose name may be Lyco? Quid mulieris uxorem habes, What
manner of woman haste thou to thy wife? Quid rei est?

What is the matter. Ibo intro ut quid huus sit rei sciam: I will goo in, that
I may know what the matter is. Quid rei est tibi cum illa? What have thou to
do with her?

Quid sententiae? What is his or thine opynion? Quid istuc uerbi est? What
meaneste thou thereby? also quid is taken for Aliquid, somewhat. Also ob quid,
for what, or wherefore. Quid? senem quoad expectas uestrum But now? how long
will ye tarry for your master? Note here that after the daily form of speaking,
quid is rehearsed, when we pass from one matter to an other. Quid mecum est
tibi? what have I to do with the? Quid faceret aliud? what should he do else?
Quid eo? what to do? Propere curre ad Pamphilum. P. quid eo? D. Dic me orare ut
ueniat. Run quickly to Pamphi^us. P. what to do? D. Say that I prayed him to
com. Quid uerbis opus est? what need many words?

Quid multa uerba, idem. Quid multis moror? what shall I long tarry? Quid mea
refert? what care I? also quid signifies wherein. Quid enim indigens Affricanus
mei? wherein had Scipio any need of me? Quid istic? Si certum est facere,
facias: uerum ne post conferas culpam in me? what would thou I should do? if
thou be determined to do it, go to on gods name: but afterward put not the
fault in me.

Quidnam, what is it, or wherefore is it?

Quidnam ille commotus uenit? what is it that he comes so chaufed? Also it
signifies what. Reuiso quidnam Chaerea hic rerum gerat, I come to se what
Cherea does here.

Quid ni, why not? Quo ore appellabo patrem tenes, quid dicam? S. quidni, With
what countenance shall I speak to my father? Wotest thou what I will say? S.
wherefore should thou not do so? Also it signifies ye. Archimedem nosti? P.
quidni? Knoweste thou Archimedes? P. ye mary do I.

Quidam, one, any man, in the plurell number it signifies same.

Quid agimus, What shall we do?

Quidem, an aduerbe, affyrmynge that, which to spoken. Sometime it signifies
verylye. sometime it has no sygnification, but is only a distinction of
things: as Ego quidem scribo, tu uero legis, Ille autem dormit. I do write,
thou redest, he also slepeth.

Quid ita, for Cur, wherefore.

Quidpiam, any thing, or any wise.

Quid quaeris, What will thou more? what needs any more words?

Quid tum denique, Quid ergo, quid tu^ postea,

Quid itaque, quid interea, quid demum, All these do signify, whereto speak
thou this? what than, or what meanest thou hereby?

Quiescas, uel quiesce, hold thy peace, leave.

Quiescas caetera, care not for the rest.

Quies, and quietudo, rest, ease, sleep.

Quiesco, eui, escere, to take rest, to cease.

Quietalis, was a name of Pluto, called God of Hell.

Quietus, ta, tum, quyete, peasyble, in rest.

Quietus esto, care not.

Quilibet, cuius libet, cuilibet, who thou wylt. also it sometime sygnifyeth
vile or base in estimation.

Quidliber, what I, thou, or he will.

Quin, but, why not? Quin uenis, why come thou not?

Quin pergis, why go thou not?

Quin dic quid est, go to tell me, what it is.

Quin for etiam. allsoo. Pudet me. S. Credo, neque id iniuria: quin mihi
molestum, I am asshamed. S. I believe, and not without a cause: And I am also
soory therefore. Quin taces? Wylt not thou hold thy peace. Also it sygnyfieth
but yet, or but for all that. C. Perij, S. Quin tu animo bono es. C. I am
undone. S. But for all that be thou of good chere. Alsoo therefore. Quin ru uno
uerbo dic, quid est quod me uelis, Therefore tell me at oone word, what thou
would have me do. Also more over, or that more is. Quin, ipsi pridem tonsor
ungues dempserat, collegit, omnia abstulit praesegmina, And that more is, the
other day, the harbor paryd his nails, he gathered the parings together, and
carried them al away with him.

Quin taces, hold thy peace, or care not for it.

Qunarius, a, um, the number of five. Quinarius lapis, a stone of five pound
weyghte.

Quinarius, narij, was among the old Romans their half penny, which was
five pound weyghte of brass called As, It is two soulces of french money,
which is of our money.

Quincentum, of old writers was used for quingentum, five hundred.

Quincunx, quincuncis, of five ounces. Also the gain of five in oone hundrede
by exchange amongeste Merchants. It was alsoo an order of setting of trees
in a gardeyne or orchyarde very exactely, that which way so ever that a man
did look, the trees stood dyrectely one against an another, as in this form
following.



Quincuntialis, le, of five inches.

Quincuplex, plicis, five double, or five fold.

Quincuplus, a, um, five times so much.

Quindecies, fyftene times.

Quindecim, fyftene.

Quindeceremis, a barge with fyftene ores.

Quinde cuplex, fyftene double or fold.

Quinde cuplus, pla, plum, fyuetene times so much.

Quindenus, a, um, the fyuetenthe.

Quin ergo, wherefore than. Quin ergo quod iuuat, quod charum aestimant, id
semper faciant, Wherefore than, what so ever lyketh them, that which seems
pleasant unto them, let them do it as long as it pleases them.

Quingenarius, adiect. wayenge five hundred pounds.

Quingeni, and quingenti, five hundred.

Quingentarius numerus, the noumbre of five hundrede.

Quingentenus, and quingentesimus, the five hundrethe.

Quingenties, five hundred times.

Quingentuplus, a, um, five hundred times so much.

Quinimo, but rather, but that more is.

Quinquagenarius, a, um, of fyfty years old.

Quinquaginta, fyfty.

Quinquagenus, a, um, of fyfty.

Quinquagesimus, a, um, the fyftieth.

Quinquagies, fyfty times.

Quinquagesies, idem.

Quinquangulus, a, um, five cornerde.

Quinquatria, triorum, a feast dedicate to Pallas, which duryd five days.

Quinquatrus dies, a feast so called, because it was after the fyfthe Idus of
March.

Quinque folium, an herb called cynkfoyle, or five leaued grass.

Quinque, five.

Quinquies, five times.

Quinquemestris, tree, of five months.

Quinquenalis, le, that which happens or is done every fyfth year.

Quinquennis, ne, of five years.

Quinquennium, the space of five years.

Quinquepartior, tiris, tiri, to divide in.v pertes.

Quincupertitus, in five parts dyuided.

Quinquertium, the exercise of five sundry crafts.

Quinquertiones, they which exercysed five sundry crafts.

Quinqueremis, a galeye with five rewes of oores, it may be now taken for a
ship with five tops.

Quinqueuiratus, an office or auctorite, wherein five men were associate.

Quinqueuir, one which is in the said authorite.

Quintana porta, was a gaate in the Camp, where the army was lodged, which
was the chyefe gate next to that which was called Praetoria, where the
markette was wont to be kept.

Quintus, ta, tum, the fyfthe.

Quintia porta, and quintia prata, was a gaate and meadows at Rome, which took
their names of one Quintius, a noble co^sul of Rome.

Quintilis mensis, the month of July.

Quintipor, oris, the boy or servant of Quintus.

Quintius, and Quintus, the names of diverse Romans.

Quintius, a, um, pertaynyng to Quintius.

Quinus, a, um, five, Quini denarij, five pens.

Quipote, how is it possible.

Quippe, surely, for as much, sommetyme ye trewely.

Sol Democrito magnus uidetur, quippe homini erudito, in geometriaque perfecto,
The sun seemed greatte to Democritus, no mer^^tayle for he was a great learned
man, and perfect in geometry.

Quippe quas. Plaut. Argenti minas se habere quinquagita quippe ego quas nudius
terrius meis manibus numeraui, I say that he had fifty pounds in money, that
is to say, that which I my self paid him.

Quippini, why not.

Quire, for posse, to may.

Quirinalis collis, an hylle at Rome where the temple of Romulus was set.

Quirinalis porta, the gate next to that hill.

Quirinalia, orum, days, in the which men did sacrifyce to Romulus, called
Quirinus.

Quirinus, a, um, the surname of Romulus.

Quiris, quiritis, a Romayne.

Quirites, was a name whereby the Romans were called of their first king
Romulus, called Quirinus, as it were Quirinus people.

Quiritatus, tus, a cry of Romayne chylderne.

Quirinus, was the name of Romulus, after that he was taken for a god.

Quiritare, to cry out, to styre up the Romans with a cry.

Quisnam homo est, What man is that?

Quisputas, idem.

Quisquam, any man. it is sommetyme vsyd in the femynyne gender for any woman.

Quisquam gentium, idem.

Quisque, every manne. Doctissimus quisque, Every well^ lernyd man. Decimus
quisque, Every tenthe.

Suo quisque tempore, every man in his time Tertio quoque uerbo, at every
third word.

Quisquiliae, arum, pluraliter, be those things which in making clean of a
gardeyne or orcharde, be carried out, as styckes, leaves, and weeds, it is vsyd
of Cicero for noughty men, the refuse of all other.

Quisquilium, a little branch of a kind of holy, which bears grain,
wherewith scarlet and krymsyn colors be made.

Quiuis, in the genitive case cuius cuius, who so ever.

Quiuis, in the genitive case cuiusuis, any man: one of them.

Quis, quae, quod, uel quid, who or what.

Quis, is sometime taken for some man.

Quispiam, some man.

Quisquis, who so ever.

Quo, whyther. Quo abis, whither ghost thou?

Quo non. Perreptaui usque omne oppidum, ad portam, ad locum, quo non? I went
all the town about, to the gate, to the laake, there is no place but that I
was in it. Alsoo it sygnifyeth from whense and where. Illuc quaeso redi, quo
coepisti, I beseech the turn back again, where thou begannest. Also,
because. Non pol quo quenquam plus amem, aut plus diligam, eo feci, In good
faith I did it not because I more loved or favored any man. also, wherefore.
Forma bona memini uidere, quo aequior sum Pamphilo, I remember she is well
favored, wherefore I am the less dyspleased with Pamphilus.

Quo gentium, whyther. also Quo, sygnifieth, that. Neque enim id feci, quo tibi
molestus essem, Nor I did it not, that I would dysplease you. also, to what
purpose or use. Quo mihi fortunam, si non conceditur uti, For what purpose
shall fortune serve, if I may not have commodity by it?

Quoaxo, are, to cry like a frogge.

Quoad, until, as long.

Quoad eius, as much as he may.

Quoad quenque peruenit, aut peruenerit ex praeda, ex manubijs, ex auro
coronario? How much of the pray or spoil, garlandes or crownis of victours is
comen, or shall come to any of your hands?

Quoad eius facere possum, as much as I may do.

Quoadusque, until.

Quocirca, wherefore.

Quod, that, wherein. Sed si quid sit, quod mea opera opus sit, aut tu plus
uides, quam ego, manebo, But if there be any thing, wherein ye shall have need
of my service, or that ye perceive more than I do, I will tarry. alsoo it is
put for Quem. Alienum hominem intromittat neminem, quod illa aut amicum, aut
patronum nominet, She may let in no man, whom she will call derlynge, or
master. Nube grauida candicante, quod uocant tempestatem albam, grando
imminebit, When there does appiere a greatte cloud, that waxes white, which
they call a white tempeste, ye shall have hayle shortly after: also it
sygnifieth for as much or because. Senatusconsulta duo facta sunt odiosa, quod
inconsulem facta putantur, Catone and Domitio postulante, Two acts of
counsel were made very displeasant, for as much as they were supposed to be
made, at the desire of Domitius and Cato: also it signifies but. Quod si
quiescem nihil euenisset mali, But if I had let it alone, there had none ill
happened, or it had been well enough. Also as much. Tu uelim, quod cum
commodo ualetudinis tuae fiat quam longissime poteris, obuiam nobis properes, I
would that ye, as much as may be with the health of your person, make speed
to meet with us, as far from home as ye can. Also it sygnyfieth why. Si ad
uitulam spectes, nihil est quod pocula lauds, If thou consyderest the caulf
well, there is no cause why thou should praise so thy pottes. In uiam quod
^edes hoc tempore, nihil est, There is no cause why thou should take thy
journey at this time. Also it signifies wherefore. Quod te per genium,
dextramque, Deosque penates osecro and obtestor, uitae me read priori,
Wherefore I beseech and pray the for thy good aungelles sake, and for the love
between the and me, and for the saints which be thine auouryes, restoore me
eftsoons to my first life, or to the state that I was in erste. Alsoo it
sygnyfieth, as to that. Sane quod tibi uir uideatur esse, hic nebulo magnus
est, As to that, that thou thynkest him a man, surely he is a stourdy
vacabounde.

Quod absque molestia fiat, so that it be no dyspleasure unto you. Quare
pergratum mihi feceris, si eum in amicitiam receperis, atque eum (quod absque
molestia fiat) si qua in re opus ei fuerit, Wherefore ye shall do me syngular
pleasure, if ye take him into your favor, and (so that it be no dyspleasure
unto you) when need requires, be good lord or master unto him.

Quod quidem, no that. Non nouisti me? P. quod quidem ueniat in mentem. Do
thou not know me? P. No that I remember me.

Quodammodo, somewhat. Quamobrem ut hi, qui superiores sunt, summittere se
debent in amicitia, sic quodammodo inferiores extollere, Wherefore likewise as
they, which are superior in state or degree, should humble them selves in
frendshyp, so they which are inferyour should advance and set them selves
forewarde.

Quodcunque, what so ever.

Quodcunque militum, for quotcunque milites, Vos hortor, ut quodcunque militum
contrahere poteritis, contrahatis, I advise you, that as many souldyours as ye
can get, ye gather unto you.

Quominus, for Vt non. Si poterit fieri, ut ne pater per me stetisse credat,
quo minus haefierent nuptiae, uolo, If it may be brought to pass, that my
father may believe, that it is not in my fault, that this marriage is not
concluded, I am content.

Quomodo, how, by what reasone, in what manner, by what mean? Quomodo tibi res
se habet? How is the matter with the? Sed quomodo dissimulabat? But in what
manner did he dyssemble? Primulo diluculo abijsti ad legiones, By time in the
morning thou wentest to the army. Amph. Quomodo? In what manner or fashyon?
Alsoo it sygnyfyeth wherefore. Illa quidem nullum sacrificabit. G. Quomodo?
quid igitur me uolt? She will do no sacryfyce. G. Wherefore? what thing would
she than with me?

Quomodocunque, how so ever it be. Sed tamen quomodocunque, quanquam sumus
pauperculi, est domi quod edimus, yet how so ever it be, though we be poor
folks, we have at home somewhat to eat.

Quomodolibet, idem.

Quondam, sommetyme, ones, sygnifyeng the time paste, or time to come. Quondam
tua dicere facta Tempus erit, The time shall be ones, when thine acts shall be
declared. Alsoo it is put in the time present.

Quondam etiam uictis redit in praecordia uirtus, Ye, and in them that are
vanquysshed, sommetyme good courage eftesoones imbraceth their stomachs.
Sometime it signyfyeth always. Vt quondam in stipulis magnus sine uiribus
ignis, Like as in stubbyll or holme fire is always great without any puyssaunce.

Quonam, whyther. Eamus intro, sequere. S. Quo tute agis? C. quonam nisi domum.
Let us go in, follow me. S. whyther wylt^ thou go? C Whyther should I go but
home to my house?

Quoniam, for as much as.

Quo officio es? what is thine office?

Quopiam, any whyther. Iturane Thais quopiam es? Thais, will thou goo any
whyther?

Quoquam, any whyther.

Quoque, also.

Quoquo, where so ever.

Quoquopacto, In any manner of wise. Tum si maxim fateatur, cum amet aliam, non
est utile hanc illi dari, qua propter quoquo pacto caelato est opus, Than if he
utterly confess it, for as much as he loves an another, it were not
conuenyent, that he were married to this woman, therefore in any manner of wise
this thing must be kept secret.

Quoquomodo, idem.

Quo quouersum, seu quoquouersum, every way, on every part. Eius imperio
classem quo quouersum dimittunt, By his commandment they dyspatched the nauye
in every part. Rates duplices quoquouersum pedibus triginta e regione solis
collocabat, He set ships double against the son, thirty feet every way.

Quorsum, seu quorsus apud Plinium, whither, to what place, or thing.

Quorsum istuc? to what purpose? or place.

Quot, how many.

Quota pars, how small a portion?

Quotannis, year by year, every year.

Quotennis? of what age? how old?

Quot annos natus, idem.

Quotenus, a, um, how many.

Quotidiani sumptus, daily expenses.

Quotidianus, Quotidiana, Quotidianum, a thing that is or happens daily, or
day by day.

Quotidiana forma, a common beauty or facion every day seen.

Quotidie, daily, every day.

Quoties, how oftentimes.

Quotiescunque, as often.

Quotquot, as many.

Quotuplex, how many sorts.

Quotuplus, how much in measure or weight?

Quotus, ta, tum, of what number, how many, Hora quota est, What is it a
clock?

Dic quotus es? Tell how many be of you?

Quotas aedes dixerit, id ego admodum incerto scio, How many howses he spoke
of, I am not well assertayned, or I remember not well.

Quotusquisque, how many.

Quouis, whyther, or to what place ye will.

Quouis gentium, idem.

Quousque, how long, how far.

Quousque tandem, how long yet.

Qur, and Quor, wherefore.

Quum, seu qum, when, in the which.

Quum primum, as soon.



R ANTE A.
RABIA, old writers used for Rabies.

Rabidus, da, dum, mad or wodde, as a mad dog.

Rabidus dens, an akyng tothe.

Rabies, madness of a dog

Rabiosus, sa, sum, mad or very angry, wood angry.

Rabio, ire, to be mad or wood as a dog.

Rabiosulus, a, um, somewhat mad.

Rabula, one which is hasty or wylfull, in any cause, jangling, or full of
words.

Racemarius, a twygge of a vine, out of the which the grapes do spring.

Racematio, the gatherynge of grapes after that the great clusters be gathered
to make wine, the glenyng of grapes.

Racematus, ta, tum, that has grapes.

Racemosus, full of grapes.

Racemus, a grape or a cluster of grapes.

Racha, a reprochefull word of Hebrewe, which sygnyfieth thryftlesse,
braynlesse. finally it is a rebukefull word, sygnyfyenge the extreme ire of
the person that speaks it.

Radicitus, from the root, or up by the root,

Radicitus euellere, to pluck up by the root.

Radico, care, to root or take root.

Radicula, an herb, the juice whereof is good to wash woulle, also a little
root. Ruellius says, that the apothecaries do call it Saponaria^, and some
call it Herbam fullonum, the Moors do name it Condisum.

Radio, are, to send forth beams like the sun.

Radius, a beam of the sun, or other bryghte sterre, sometime of the eyes:
also a rod or yard, that Geometricians have to describe lines, also a
weauers shyttell, wherewith he throws yarn into the web. also the spoke of
a wheel, also an instrument, wherewith measures be shaven: alsoo long olyues
or oil bearyes.

Radix, dicis, a root.

Radices montis, the foot of an hill.

Rado, si, dear, to shave, or make smothe, to cut or pull up, to hurt, to rent,
to offend, to fatigate. Aures delicatas radere, to offend or fatigate
delycate cares.

Radula, an instrument to shave with.

Radulanus, a, um, that which is shaue^ of from any thing.

Rage, a town and castelle in England called Notyngham.

Raia, a sea fyshe called Raye or skeate.

Ralla, a thynne garment.

Rallum, the staff, wherewith ploughmen in tyllynge do put the earth from their
share.

Ramalis, le, a bowghe.

Ramale, a searyd or dead bough.

Ramentum, a little piece of any thing.

Rameus, a, um, that which is of a bough.

Ramex, micis, a kind of rupture, when the bowels do fall down into a man's
coddes* also a rail or bar, which gothe overthwart a pale or a gate.

Ramicosus, he that is broken.

Ramnus, a white thorn.

Ramulus, and ramusculus, a little bough.

Ramus, a bowghe.

Rana, a frogge. also a syckenesse which does anoye cattelle.

Rana Seriphia, is a proverb applied to them that can not speak in time
conuenyent.

Ranceo, cere, to be moldy or putrified.

Rancide, aduerbe, stynkyngly.

Rancidus, da, dum, ranklyd, moldy, or putryfyed. also unsavory, or unpleasant.

Rancidulus, la, lum, a little moldy or putrified.

Rancor, oris, rankour, fylthe.

Randus, in old time was taken for aes, brass.

Randuscula porta, the brason gate.

Rantum, in the old time was a quarterne of a pound.

Ranunculus, a little frogge or froshe.

Rapa, a plant and rote callid rape. Rapu^ idem.

Rapacia, rape leaves.

Rapatior, more ravenous or catchyng.

Rapacissimus, a, um, most rauenouse.

Rapacitas, raueny.

Rapaciter, rauenousely.

Rapax, acis, rauenouse.

Raphanus, a plant and root called radyshe.

Rapide, quyckely.

Rapidus, a, u^, very swift, as a streme of water.

Rapina, robbery.

Rapinator, a robber.

Rapio, pui, pere, to take by vyolence, haste, or furye also to rauyshe a
woman, to bring one by violence before a judge, or to prison.

Rapere aliquem in ius, to arreste one, or cause him to be arrested to appear
before judges.

Rapo, Raponis, for rapax.

Raptim, hastily.

Raptio, violent taking of a person.

Raptus, rauysshynge or deflourynge of a woman, or the violent taking of a
thing.

Raptito, tare, to take often violently.

Rapto, to take or draw violently.

Raptor, toris, a rauysher or violent taker.

Rapulum, a little rape root.

Rapunculus, a little root which is eaten in salates.

Rara auis, a bird seldom seen, whereby is sygnifyed any thing that seldom
happens.

Rare, seldom, or not often.

Rarefacio, cere, to make thynne or slender.

Rarefio, fieri, to be thynne or slender.

Rarenter, seldom.

Raresco, scere, to wax thynne or not thyck^ grown, to be or happen seldom.

Rari, a sunder, here and there one, or a few.

Raripilus, la, lum, thynne heared.

Rarior, rarius, more selde.

Rarissimus, a, um, seldest.

Rarissime, most selde.

Raritas, seldomnesse. Raritudo, idem.

Raro, selde, rare. Rarenter, idem.

Raro, aui, are, to make scant or selde.

Rarus, ra, rum, selde or not often, thynne, not thycke grown or set.

Rasamentum, shauynge or shreddes.

Rasilis, sile, that may be shaven or made smoth.

Rasito, tare, to shave often.

Rasor, soris, a barber or shauer, also a fydlar.

Rasorius, a, um, pertaynyng to shauyng.

Rasta, a douche mile.

Rastellus, a little rake.

Rastrum, and raster, a rake.

Rasura, the shauynge.

Ratariae naues, ^yghters or wood barges.

Ratare, old writers used for ratificare, to ratifye, to confyrme.

Ratum habere, idem.

Rates, ratis, are pieces of timber pynned together, whereon hay or other like
thing being laid, they are drawn on ryuers, as on the great streams of
Germany and France is now seen, but they be commonly used and taken for
ships, or the side beams of a ship.

Ratiastum, Limogois in Peyto.

Ratiarius, the master of a ship.

Ratifico, care, to ratifye or confyrme.

Ratificatio, a ratification or confyrmation.

Ratio, reason, counsel, purpose, care, respect, cause, the manner, the
way, the form, proportion.

Habenda est ratio rei familiaris, The affairs concerning our householde must
be considered.

Rationem habere cum aliquo, to have to do with one.

Neque illud rationis habuisti, Thou had thereof no consyderation.

Sine ratione officij, without having regard to his duty.

A quo mea longissime ratio, uoluntasque abhorrebat, The which was contrary
to my fantasy or mind.

Vestram nequeo mirari satis ratione^, I can not marvel enough at your
doings.

Mea est sic ratio, so is my fantasy.

Cum ratione aliquid inire, to go abou^e a thing aduysedly, and foreseynge
what may follow.

Nunquamita quisqua^ been subducta ratione ad uitam fuit quin. etc. Never man
was so well aduysed in his life but etc.

Vt ego oculis rationem capio, as far as I can decerne or see.

Pro ratione fructuum, according to the fruit or profit thereof.

Rationibus infer, to put into his reckning.

Rations Galliae procurare, to minyster the affairs pertaynyng to Galliam.

Multis rationibus prouisum, it is many manner of ways provided for.

Rationem inire, to find the means.

Vt rationem te dictare intelligo, at thine account.

Ratio, is also account.

Ratio constat, the mattier apperethe, or is showed.

Rations refer, to yield account.

Rationem dare, idem.

Rationem dictare, to account.

Ratio de integro ineunda est mihi, I must find an other mean.

Rations putare, to sum over a book of account.

Rations confer, to try an account.

Ratiocinatio, reasonynge.

Ratiocinator, oris, a caster of account.

Ratiocinor, aris, to reasone, to gather in argument, to account.

Rationabilis, le, reasonable.

Rationale, that which has the use of reason, allsoo that which a priest
wears at mass on his head, and after puts it back like ahoode.

Rationarius, a book of account. also a book belonging to the counsel of
princis, wherein acts done and to be done are written, also an auditour.

Ratiuncula, a little account or reckenynge.

Ratispona, a cite in Almain callid Rentzpurgh

Ratus, ta, tum, stablyshed, confirmed, supposed.

Pro rata, according to his portion.

Ratus, a participle, sygnifieng supposing.

Ratus sum, I supposed.

Raua uox, a voice that may not be well hard.

Raucae, wourmes being in the roots of trees and eats them.

Rauce, hoorsely.

Rauceo, raucio, cere, to be hoorse.

Raucesco, scere, idem.

Raucus, ca, cum, hoorse.

Nisi ipse iam rumor raucus erit factus, Except that tumor do cease.

Raucedo, and raucitas, hoorsenesse.

Raudus, a thing unwrought and unpolished, it was also taken for aes, brass.

Rauenna, a city in Italy.

Rauilia, purblynde or dull syghted.

Rauio, are, to be hoorse.

Rauis, hoorsenesse.

Rauiscellus, a, um, little brown of color.

Rauus, a, um, hoorse. also Rauus color, a dulle or sad color, a dunne.

R ANTE E.
REalis actio, an action concerning the goods.

Reapse, in the self or very thing.

Reate, a city in Italy.

Reatus, a fault or offense.

Rebellare, to rebelle.

Rebellio, rebellyon.

Rebellis, a rebelle.

Rebito, tare, to return. At unum hoc te quaeso, si huc rebitet e Philocrate,
ut eius mihi facis conueniendi copiam, But oone thing I pray the, if he
return from Philocrates, find the menes, that I may speak with him.

Reboo, are, to sown again.

Recalcitro, are, to stryke with the hele, to kyck.

Recalesco, scere, to wax warm.

Recaluaster, tri, he that is balde before.

Recaluus, idem.

Recalueo, ere, to be balde again.

Recanto, tare, to charm away or charm out a thing, which was brought in by
enchantment, as the wytches called wise women are wont to do.

Recapitulatio, a reher^ynge of things in chapyters.

Recedo, cessi, dear, to depart or go away.

Recedere a condition, a persona, a statu, is to change or alter the
condytion, person, or state. Quanquam id nomen durius efficit ia^uetustas, a
peregrino enim iam recessit, All thowghe auncyentye makes that name dyffuse,
yet is it now altered from being a strange word.

Recello, lere, to pluck back or withdraw.

Recens, it is, new, late, soon after.

Recens aduerbium, newely.

Recentior, newer.

Recentissimus, newest or latest.

Recenti pede recurrere, to run eftsoons after that he has rested him, to
make a fresh course. Postquam thermopotasti gutturem, recipe te, and recurre
pede recenti, After that thou have warmid thy throat with good drink take thy
heart to the, and make a fresh course.

Recenter, newely, freshely.

Recentius, more newely.

Recento, tare, to renew.

Recentor, taris, tari, to be renewed.

Recenseo, ere, to number or tell, to reckon.

Recensus, us, and recensio, a tale or recknyng.

Recensitus, ta, tum, told or reckned.

Receptaculum, the place, which receyuethe things, also a place of surety or
comfort.

Recepti in ciuitatem, they which of strangers be made citisens.

Recepto, tare, to receive often.

Receptitius, a, um, that which is reseruid from other.

Receptus, ta, tum, received.

Receptio, a return back, drawyng or bringing again. Quid tibi huc
receptio ad te est meum uirum? Why drawest thou my housbande eftsoon back
unto thy house?

Receptum, taken in custom.

Receptus, tus, a place of succor, a retreat in battle.

Receptui canere, to blow the retrayte. also it is a proverb, which
signifies to fynyshe or end the contention.

Recessim, an aduerbe, which sygnyfieth going back.

Recessus, us, a going away or back.

Recido, dear, to fall eftsoon, or to fall bakward

Recident in te hae contumeliae, those rebukes shall light on the.

Recidit ad paucos, it is com to a few persons.

Recidit in cassum, it is come to nothing.

Recidipna, a garment to suppe in.

Recidiuus, a, um, eftesones restored, sometime eftsoon decade or fallen.

Recido, di, dear, to cut again, to cut behynd.

Recinium, a square garment, which they that did wear them, did cast the one
part thereof over their shulders at their back, like to french clokes.

Reciniati, they that did wear such clokes.

Recino, ere, to sing again, to sown.

Recipie, Cato uses for recipiam.

Recipio, coepi, cipere, to receive or take, to admytte, to call again, to
bring in saulfgard, to deliver, to undertake, to promise. also recipere, is to
reserve to him self, or to except a thing in gyuyng or bargaynyng.

Recipere se, to return or come again.

Percunctatum ibo ad portum, quoad se recipiat frater, I will go seek at the
haven, until my brother come again.

Recipere se ad coenam, to come to suppar.

Hic homo ad coenam recipit se ad me, This man will come to me to suppar.

Recipe te ad me, come hither to me.

Recipere se ex opere, to return from his business.

Recipere se domum, to go home.

Recipere in aures, to here Non aedepol istaec tua dicta nu^c in aures recipio,
In good sothe I do not here now what thou say.

Recipere se in portu^, to arrive at an haven.

Recipere se in principem, to take on him as a Prince.

Recipere anhelitum, to fetch breath or wynd.

Priusquam recipias anhelitu^, uno uerbo eloquere, ubi ego sum, Or ever thou
fetcheste breath, tell me at a word, in what case I do stand

Recipe animum, take breathe.

Recipere, to recover. Cum quidem me audie^te Salinatori, qui amisso oppido
fugerat in arcem, glorianti atque dicenti, mea opera Quin. Fab. Tare^tum
recepisti: Certe, inquit ridens, nam nisi tu amisisses, nunquam recepissem: For
in my hearing to Salinator, which (the town of Tarentum being lost) fled
into the castle, saying unto him, Thou have recovered Tarentu^ Q. Fab. by my
means: That is true said he, laughing, for if thou had not lost it, I had
not recovered it. also to reserve to a man's own use.

Reciprocatio, a goinge back, or retournynge to the place that he came fro.

Reciproco, care, to turn back, to repete, to goo back.

Reciprocus, ca, cum, that which is repeted or eftsoon rehearsed.

Recisamentum, a little piece, a gobet.

Racisus, a, um, new cut.

Recito, tare, to read that other may hear and understand, to recite or tell
eftsoon.

Reclamo, mare, to deny with a loud voice or cry.

Recliuia, and recliuium, is when the skin of the finger is loose from the
nail.

Recludo, si, dear, to open. Infernas reserat seeds and regna recludat pallida,
Undo he the locks of places infernal, and let him set wide open the pale
regions of death. Justinius puts Reclusus for clausus, shut.

Reclusus, a, um, opened.

Recocta, second or course chese.

Recogito, tare, to remember.

Recognitio, a knowledge.

Recognosco, noui, noscere, to recognyse, to know perfectly, to ouerloke, to
remember.

Recolligo, legi, ligere, to assemble or gather together. also to reconcyle.
Quod scribis, etia^ si cuius animus esset in te offensior, a me recolligi
oportere, quid dicas? Where thou wryteste, that more over if any man be
dyspleased with the, that he should be reconciled by my means, What sayste
thou?

Recolo, lere, to repute, to repete, to call to remembrance.

Recomminiscor, sceris, recomminisci, to remember, or call to remembrance.

Reconcilio, liare, to reconcyle, to restore unto favor.

Reconcilior, reconciliaris, reconciliari, to be reconcyled.

Reconciliare in libertatem, to set at liberty.

Reconciliatio, a reconcylynge.

Reconcinno, nare, to new make, to make mete, properly a garmente.

Recondo, dear, to hyde, to lay up.

Recordor, aris, ari, to remember.

Recoquo, coxi, coquere, to boil or sethe eftsoon, to amend with study.

Recordatio, remembrance.

Recreatio, a recreation, a restorynge.

Recreo, aui, are, to recreate, to refreshe, to restore.

Recresco, scere, to grow again.

Recrudesco, scere, to renew a fault made by princes to their familiars.

Recta, a supper, where they sat al in a rewe.

Rectangulus, is where lines are so joined, that no part is longer or shorter
tha^ an other.

Recta, an aduerbe signifienge strayghte. Cur non recta introibas? why wenteste
thou not strayghte, or the strayghte way in.

Recte, well enough. Quid tu igitur lachrymas aut quid es tam tristis? Pamp.
Recte matter. S. Quid fuit tumulti? Than wherefore doeste thou mourn? or why
art thou so heavy? P. It is well enough mother. S. what was all this noise?

Recte parere, to bring forth a child of a right shape.

Recte, of good right, with good reason. Recte dicis, thou say truly. Recte
est, it is inoughe, or I have inoughe. Tum quod idem ei, recte est, I have also
enough to give him. Recte facere alicui, to do good to a man. Stultus and sine
gratia es, tibi recte facere, quando quod facias perit. Thou art a sole and
without thank, to do him any good, when all is lost that thou do. Recte
far, to take patiently, Si sapis, neque praeterquam quas ipse amor molestias
habet, addas: illas quas habet, recte fearas. If thou be wise, add to no more
grief thanne love brings with him, and them that he brings, suffer
patiently.

Recte, signifies sometime nothing, as Donate says. Rogo number quid uelit,
recte, inquit: abeo. I asked if he would any thing. Nothing, he said, I went
than my way. also ye, straight way. S. Tu rus hinc abis? D. recte, Go thou
now into the country? D. ye straight way.

Recte ualet, he or she is in good health.

Rectius, better.

Rectitas, and Rectitudo, justice or rightwisenes

Rector, toris, a ruler.

Rectus, the nominative case.

Rectum intestinum, the gutte from whense the ordure passes.

Rectus, ta, tum, straight, which is not crooked, upright, just.

Recubitus, p^lyinge at rest.

Recubo, are, to lie and rest.

Recudo, cudi, dear, to new hamer, or new work, as it were on an anduelde:
also it is taken for, to make new, or new prynte.

Recuperatores, judges assigned, or commissioners, for a private matter.

Recumbo, to sit at a table, or at meals: some time to lean on one.
Recumbebat, mecumuir egregius Fidius Rufinus, super eum municeps ipsius, There
satte with me that worshypfull manne Fidius Rufinus, and above him his
neighbor.

Recuperatio, and reciperatio, and reciperantia, was of old writers said,
where there was a law made between the people of Rome, and other nations and
cities, wherein they accorded, that private things taken, should be
redelyuered, which is now used in our leages and intercourse with strange
countres and princes.

Recupero, rare, to recover.

Recupio, cupiui, cupere, to desire much.

Quin ira faciam, ut recupias facere sumptu^, and si ego uetem: And yet will I
so handle it, that thou shalt much desire to spend, although I would forbid
the.

Recurro, rere, to run again, to go or come again quickly.

Recursus, us, a runninge back, a recourse.

Recurso, are, to run often back or again.

Recurue, an aduerbe signifienge downward, bowed backwarde, crokedly.

Recuruitas, taris, a bowynge back.

Recuruo, are, to bow back.

Recuruor, ari, to be bowed back.

Recuruus, a, um, bowed back, or crooked.

Recusabile, that which is worthy to be refused

Recusatio, a refusal.

Recusator, a refuser.

Recuso, are, to refuse, also to defend.

Recutitus, he that is circumcised. sometime exulcerate.

Redabsoluo, uere, to dyscharge or dyspeche. Sequere hac, te redabsoluam, qua
aduenisti gratia, Follow me thither, I will dispatche thy matter, for the which
thou camst hither

Redactus, ta, tum, brought.

In id redactus sum loci, I am in that case.

Redambulo, are, to return. Cura quam optime potes. Er. been ambula, and
redambula, Do the best that thou canste. Er. well get the hense, and come
again quickly.

Redandruo, are, idem.

Redamo, aui, are, to love mutually.

Redarguo, guere, to reprove.

Reddo, di, dear, to render or yield, to deliver to restore, to give, to make.

Reddere certiorem, to assertayne.

Reddere* rationem, to make account, or reckenynge.

Reddere, to put in other. Tempestas uenit, confringit regulas imbricesque, ibi
dominus indiligens reddere alias ne uult, The tempeste came, and brake the
tyles, and the eueses, where as the neglygent owner would not put in other in
their places.

Reddere commorum, to cause one to make haste, to haste him forward.

Reddere dictum ac factum. Videre egisse ia^ nescio quid cu^ seen. S. De. illo
quod dudu^? dictum ac factum reddidi, It seems thou haste done late I wot not
what with the old man. S. Meanest thou that, the other day? thou had not
so soon spoken, but it was done.

Reddidi impetratum, I brought it to pass.

Reddere operam, to requyte a good turn or an ylle.

Reddere alique^, to resemble or be like to one.

Redemptio, redemption.

Redemptito, demptitare, to redeem or bye again often.

Redempto, tare, to redeem.

Redemptor, toris, a redemer, a warkma^ which takes any warke in great.
sometime it sygnifieth him which takes rentes to ferme*

Redeo, diui, dij, redire, to return.

Redhibeo, hibui, bear, to cause the sellar to have again that which he sold.

Redhibitio, restitution.

Redigo, degi, digere, to bring by force or cunning. sometime to restore.

Redigere in ordinem, to compel men to live according to their estate or
profession.

Redis ad ingenium, thou doste after thine old facyon, or as thou art wont to
do.

Redire ad se. Sed paululum sine ad me ut redeam, But let me take breathe a
little. Tandem reprime iracundiam, atque ad te redi: Now leave thy fume, and
remember thy self. Redeam ad pauca, Vt ad pauca redeam, ac mittam illius
ineptias To the intent that I will be short, and pass over his folly.

Redi ad rem, goo to the purpose, or to the matter.

Redijt ad restim res, Opera tua ad restim mihi quidem res redijt, By thy
means I am brought to the point to hang my self.

Rediit ad rastros. Nam si illi pergam suppe ditare sumptibus Menedeme, mihi
illae cuere ad rastros res rediit. Surely if I should maynteyn his expenses
Menedemus, it would bring me to rake corn or grass for my living.

Redit res in eum locum, the thing is come so to pass. In cum iam res rediit
locum, ut sit necesse, The matter is come so to pass, that there is no remedy.

Redit mihi animus, my courage is come unto me.

Redit animo, it comes to my mind.

Redire in concordiam, to be agreed.

Redire in gratiam, idem. also to be eftsoons in favor.

Redimicula, the ornaments or apparaylle of a womannes head: as a veluette
bonette or french hoode.

Redimio, iui, ire, to adourne or apparayle or trymme.

Reditur, is returned.

Redhibitum, restored.

Redico, cere, to tell or say again.

Rediculi, a temple at Rome without the gate called Capena, where Hannyball
being aferde, retired back.

Redimitus, ta, apparayled on the head.

Redimere, to take in charge.

Redinunt, for redeunt, they return or come again.

Redintegro, to begin eftsoons, to renew or refreshe.

Redintegratio, a renewyng.

Redipiscor, sceris, sci, to recover or get again.

Redimo,, demi, dimere, to redeem, to bye, to recover, to recompense, to take
in bargayne.

Redemptores, they that hyre land, or takes any thing in great or task.

Redintegrare, to begin a fresh.

Redintegrato animo, with courage reuyued, with a fresh courage.

Redito, tare, to return by and by.

Reditus, tus, a return.

Reduuia, when the skin comes from the nails of the fyngers. also an
adders skyn.

Rediuiuum, that which retourneth eftesones to life. Also that which of an
old thing is made new or young.

Rediuius, a wourme called a tyke, which sucketh blood from man or beast.

Redoleo, ere, to smelle or savor.

Redonatio, a gyuynge again of the thing that is taken.

Redono, are, to give again.

Redorior, redordior, iri, to begin again.

Redormio, to awake.

Redormitio, an awakynge out of sleep.

Redostio, tire, of old writers was taken for to give thank.

Reducem, and reduces, they do call such which are brought out of exyle or
captivity.

Reducere, to bring saufe. Meque oppido in arcem reduco, And I conveyed my self
quickly into the castle. also to pacifye or appease. Numenque reducant, Let
them appease the wrath or displeasure of god.

Reduco, duxi, ducere, to bring back, or pluck^ back, to deliver or set out of
peril, to reconcyle.

Reducere ad planum cicatrices, to make that wounds may not be perceived or
to make them without a seame.

Reductus, a, um, brought back or safe.

Redundo, are, to ouerflowe, to reflowe or return back, to redounde.

Reduro, are, to stop or close.

Reduplico, care, to double eftsoon.

Redulcero, rare, to impostume or make an impostume in some part of the body.

Refello, to prove falls, to repreue of falsehode, to deny that which is
objected.

Referio, rire, to stryke again.

Refercio, cire, to fyl.

Refero, tuli, far, to bring again, to resemble, to report, to refer, to
revoke, to tell.

Referebam me, I returned. To add, to or ascribe, to turn, to renew, to
bring, to declare or express.

Refero impensum, I make account of that which is bestowed.

Refer rationem, to yield or make account

Refer ad aliquem, to ask one counsel in any matter.

Refer de re aliqua ad Senatum, was wha^ the Comsuls purposed a matter in the
senate desyringe the Senators to reason and consulte thereof.

Refer pedem, to set forth a foot, or goo.

Eutyche hanc uolo rem prius agi, qua^ meum intro refero pede^, I will that this
thing Eutyche be done, or I go one foot in.

Retulit ad me pedem, he came toward me.

Referunt haec ad rem, these things pertein to the matter.

Refero acceptum, Omnia quae uidimus, si recte rationabimus, uni accepta
referemus Antonio. All that we see, if we reckon well, we may impute it only
to Antonie.

Quod uiuit, mihi acceptum refert, He confesses to be long of me, that he now
lives.

Verum omnem tranquillitatem and quietem senectutis refert acceptam clementiae
tuae. But all the tranquillite and quietness of his age, he confesses to
proceed or have received of your mercy and goodness.

Refer gratiam, to give thank. Nunqua^ ego illi possum gratiam refer, ut
meritus est de me, I can never give him thank sufficient for that he has done
for me. Spero^e go mihi quoque tempus tale euenturum, ut tibi gratiam referam
pare^. I trust the time shall come, that I shall do you as much pleasure. Non
enim sperasti mutuam tibi gratiam relaturum, ut uicissim tuos compellare^. Thou
dyddeste not think, that I would in this wise have requited the, in remembering
thine auncetours, as thou haste done mine.

Referri in acceptum, to be brought in a reck^nynge. Posteaquam reus factus
est, primo negabat opus in acceptum referri posse, after that he was accused,
first he denied that the warke moughte be brought unto a reckenynge.

Refer in melius, to turn it to a better use

Refer mores, to express the conditions or manners of an other.

Refer oculos, to cast the look upon one.

Refer par, to requyte. Ille quem beneficio adiungas, ex animo facit, studet
par refer, whom thou gettest with benefyt, he does all things with a good
heart, and studiethe to requite the.

Refer pedem, uel gradum, to step back to retreat.

At illa retulit, quaesiuitque, quidnam mihi uideretur, she told me all, and
asked what I thought therein.

Refert, Cuius consilij magni referebat ^e in ^eresse, At the which counsel,
it had been very necessary* that ye should have been. Parui retulit non
suscepisse, it made little matter, that he took it not. Mea quid refert? What
care I? Mea nihil refert? I have naught to do with it. Tua refert, it is for
thy profytte. Quid refert me fecisse regibus, ut mihi obedirent, si me hodie
hic umbraticus deriserit? What auaylethe it, that I have made kings to obey
me, if now this lewd knave shall laughe me to scorn. Refert, It is expediente
or necessary. Neque enim numero comprehendere refert: it is not necessary, to
rehearse them in number.

Refectus, ta, tum, restored, renewed, amended, made eftsoon.

Reficio, ficere, to recreate, or restore, to amend to make again.

Reficior, ceris, ci, to be restored, recovered from sickness, Also renewed or
new made.

Refigo, xi, gere, to make fast or sure, to thrust in hard. Sometime it
signifies the contrary, to draw out that which is fastened.

Refigere tabulas, and leges, to undo or destroy laws. Acta Antonij
rescidistis, leges refix istis: ye have cancelled the actis of Antony, and
undone or dissolved his laws. Fixit leges, pretioque refixit, He stablyshed
laws, and for money eftesones dissolved them.

Refirmo, are to fasten or stablyshe again.

Reflatio, a contrary wind.

Reflatus, tus, idem,

Reflecto, xi, tere, to bow back, to turn back or again. Quem neque
fides, neque iusiurandum, neque illum misericordia repressit, neque reflexit,
whom neither promise, nor oath, nor yet pite withdrewe or pulled back.

Reflo, are, to blow again or contrary.

Refluo, xi, fluere, to flow.

Refluxus, us, the tide, when the water flows

Refocillatio, a comfortynge or refreshynge, or recreation.

Refocillo, are, to recomforte, to refreshe, to recreate, to fortify.

Reformo, mare, to refourme.

Reformator, a refourmatour.

Refoueo, foui, fotum, fouere, to nourisshe or comfort eftesones, to restore
or set in his first state.

Refractarius, obstinate, in a wilful oppinion.

Refragor, aris, ari, to resist with words, or clamor.

Refrango, fregi, refrangere, aut refringere, to braste open.

Refreno, nare, to pull back one from a purpose.

Refrico, care, to renew a sore or grief, which was out of remembrance.

Animum memoria refricare, to touch one to the heart with the remembrance of a
thing

Refrigeratorius, a, um, that which coleth, or makes cold.

Refrigeratio, a coolynge.

Refrigeratus, ta, tum, kooled: also refresshed or comforted.

Refrigerium, a recreation or aduauncynge of the mind.

Refrigesco, scere, to make cold, to cool.

Refrixit, it is cesed, or is more cooled.

Refrigero, are, to cool, or make cold, to refreshe or recomforte.

Refrina, a bean, which the old Romans were wont to bring home out of
the field to do sacryfyce for the good luck of their corn.

Refuga, an unruly person, which will not be ordered.

Refugio, gere, to flee or run away or back. also to refuse.

Refugiunt memoria nostra ista. These things ben out of remembrance.

Refugere ab admonendo, to leave counsaylynge of one.

Refugere a dicendo, to forbear to speak, for displeasure.

A consuetudine refugere, to leave ones company, or to become strange where
one has been familiar.

Refugium, refuge, succor, or place where one may be succored.

Refugus, a, um, that which gothe away, or is laid aparte.

Refulgeo, gere, to shine.

Refundo, fudi, fundere, to restore that which lacks. Quicquid de erit, ex
meo refundam What so ever does lack, I will make it up of mine own. Also to
pay home again, or to yield. Id erat non tam accipere beneficium, quam
refundere, That was not so much, to receive a good turn, as to do a good
turn. Also to cast up by vomyte.

Quod hesterna crapula ingurgitauerat, palam refudit, That which in his
yesterdayes ryotte he ingourged or devoured, he openly did parbrake or vomyte
it up.

Refutatio, a denyenge, a replycation, an argument to the contrary.

Refuto, tare, to deny, to replye.

Regaliolus, a bird, between whom and the Egle is contynuall hostility, and
is yelowe of color.

Regaliter, royally.

Regalis, le, royal.

Regelo, are, to thawe, or resolve that, which is frosen.

Regenero, rare, to regenerate or eftesones engender.

Regero, gessi, gerere, to put in writing, to bring back, to vomit up.

Regestum, earth cast up.

Regia, a kings house.

Regi^sco, scere, old writers used for crescere, (...) grow.

Regificus, ca, cum, that whereby a king is made.

Regilla, a kings robe.

Regillus, a little king. Also the name of a river in Italy.

Regimen, minis, a rule or governance.

Regina, a queen.

Regionatim, place by place, by every region or cost.

Regio, a region or country, also a cost, as east, weste, north, and southe.

A recta regione deflectere, to go out of the strayte or right way.

Regium, a city beyond the mountains toward Italy, called Rezo.

Regius, a, um, of a king.

Regius morbus, the iaundyse.

Regno, are, to reign.

Regnum, a realm, and the governance.

Rego, xi, regere, to rule, to govern.

Regor, geris, to be ruled or governed.

Regrador, deri, di, to go back.

Regredior, regredi, idem.

Regredo, dear, to revoke, or call again.

Regressio, and regressus, us, a return back, a resort back.

Regula, a rule.

Regularis, regulare, that which is under a rule.

Regulo, are, to rule or direct.

Regulus, a Prince or lord of a little country properly Reguli, be the
chylderne of kings. also Regulus, is a lyttel byrd, called a Wren and a
serpente called a Cockatryce, which sleeth a man with his sight. It was also
the name of a Consule, which for keeping of his promise, was put to cruel
death by the Carthaginensis. Also a great Rhetorician in the time of Plynie.

Reieculae, uel reijculae oues, sheep drawn out of the fold for age or
sickness, kebbers, crones, or cullyars.

Reiectanea, of philosophers be taken for things to be abhorred, as syckenes,
poverty, and sorrow.

Reiectio, parbrakynge.

Reiectio sanguinis, the issuing out of blood at the mouth, the nose, or the
veins.

Reiectus, ta, tum, cast out, cast away, or put forth.

Reijcio, ieci, ijcere, to cast away, to drive back, Tityre pascentes a
flumine reijce capellas, Tityre drive thy gootes that do feed away from the
river. also to refuse, to put away. Me uero tanquam inutilem reiecerunt, As
for me they refused, as a person unprofitable. Si altera illa magis instabit,
forsitan nos reiiciat: If the other will be importunate, perchance they will put
me away.

Reiicere iudices aut testes, to refuse judges or witnesses.

Reiicere, to parbrake or vomyte. Senos sextantes non excessit: aut si
excessisset, reiiciebantur, He exceded not twelve ounces, if he passed that,
they were cast up again.

Relatio, a report, a respect: Among Logicians, it is the effect of the
relative, as the father, the son, the master, the servant, the husband,
the wife. For without the oone, the other can not reteyne his name, for a son
may not be without a father: nor a wife without a husebande, nor a servant
without a master.

Relati in aerarios, were they, which for some defaute were by the masters of
manners called Censores, put out of the number of Citesens, and did only pay
tribute, or heedsyluer, as strangers.

Relative, having relation to a thing.

Relatiuum, a relatife, which has relation to some thing.

Relaxo, are, to lowse.

Relegatus, banyshed.

Relegatio, a banyshement out of his country.

Relego, relegare, to banyshe, to remove, to sever one from an other, to send
away.

Religatus, ta, tum, fast bound.

Relego, legi, legere, to read again.

Relicinus, he that has a good bushe of hear, well trymmed behind.

Relicina frons, a fair large and high forhede, without hear.

Relictus, ta, tum, forsaken or left.

Relictus sum mihi, I am left alone, or I am at my liberty.

Religio, onis, religion, a reverend dread, doubt lest he shall offend, also
conscience, or as a man might say, a scruple of conscience.

In religionem uertere, to fear least god were displeased, to make conscience
of a thing.

Religionem inducere, to bring in fear of gods displease.

Religio est, it is not leful. Huc introiere, nisi necessario, and cast,
religio est, To enter in there, but for necessity and chastely, it is not
lefull.

Religio^e obstri^gere, uel obligare, to charge ones conscience with a matter.

Exoluere relligione* to discharge ones conscience, or to remove one from
scrupulositie.

Relligio est mihi, I have conscience thereof.

Relligio mihi non est quo minus hoc facia^. I have no conscience thereof but
that I may do it.

Religionem alicui afferre, to cause one to be scrupulouse.

Eximere religionem, to put him out of doubt in his conscience.

Exemplarantique religionis, an exaumple of a good or strayte conscience.

Testimoniorum religionem and fidem nunquam ista natio coluit, This people had
never regard to their oath.

Religiose, fearfully, doubtfully, daungerously, scrupulously, aduysedly,
curiousely.

Religiosus, devout toward god, and fearing to offend him.

Religiosus, a, um, timerouse.

Dies relligiosi, days of heaviness for some misaduenture which has happened
on those days.

Delubrum religiosum, a devout place, or a church or chapel whereunto men
have great devotion to come.

Religiosum est id facere, there is a conscience in the doing thereof.

In testimonio religiosi, scrupulouse in bearing witness.

Religo, are, to bind fast.

Religare relligionibus bona alicuius, to give goods to the honor and service
of god.

Relino, releui, relin^re, to open that which is stopped. Releui omnia dolia,
I have broched all the vessels. Nolo ego nos pro summo bibere: nulli
relerimus postea, I would not that we drank all out: for I will for no man set
any a broche afterward.

Relimino, to give light.

Relinquo, liqui, relinquere, to leave. Relinquere animam, to dye. Relinquit
eum animus, His heart fails him.

Relinquere aes alienum, to dye in det.

Arraboni relinquere, to leave a thing upon a pledge.

In medio relinquere, to leave in doubt.

Locum admonitionibus relinquere, to receive the monitions which is given us.

Locum subtilitati nullum relinquere, to do a thing so subtly, that it can
not be amended

Locum uitupera^di alicui relinquere, to give occasion to one to say ill.

Memoriam alicuius rei relinquere, To do a thing whereof shall be left a
perpetual remembrance.

Pecuniam in questu relinquere, to deliver money to have gain thereby.

Scriptum relinquere, to leave it in writing.

Spein relinquere, to hope or trust no more on a thing.

Studium alicuius rei relinquere, to care no more for a thing.

Suspitionem relinquere, to cause suspicion.

Relinquitur, it follows.

Reliqua, that which remains upon a reckenynge.

Reliqua contrahere, to be in arrerage of a term.

Reliquatores, they which ben in arrerage on their account. Also any other,
which have in their hands some part of that, which they ought to have paid.

Spes nulla reliqua in te est, I have no more hope of the.

Reliquiae, that which is left.

Reliquium facere, to leave, to omytte.

Reliquos facere, to leave them.

Reliquias persequi, to pursue that which is begun.

Reliquor, ari, to be behind in paymente of a certain sum.

Reliquus, a, um, the remenaunte, that which remaynethe.

Reliquum est, the rest is.

Reluceo, luxi, cere, to shine or be bright.

Reluctor, tari, to contend or strive again.

Reluo, luere, to pay again that which is borrowed, to fetch home a gage or
pledge. Also to wash eftesones.

Remancipo, are, to sell again a thing to him which first sold it.

Remandere, to chewe the cudde.

Remaneo, si, nere, to abide stylle.

Remano, are, to turn back to a place.

Remansio, an abiding.

Remeculi, little ships, which men of Lemnos used.

Remedium, remedy.

Remeligo, a fyshe which cleauynge to the keale of a ship, causes him to
tarry.

Remendo, are, to amend or correct a fault.

Remeo, are, to return or go back again.

Remigatio, a rowing or saylynge.

Remex, remigis, which do row in a galeye or bote.

Remigium, the rowing of a ship or bote.

Remigo, are, to row.

Remigro, are, to go back, to return.

Remillum, a thing crooked and broad.

Reminiscor, sceris, sci, to call again to remembrance.

Reminiscentia, a remembrance of that, which was ones in the mind.

Remiss, fayntly, without courage, humblye: Sometime merrily.

Remissio, remission, forgyuenesse, a recreating of mind after study or labor,
lack or faintness of courage.

Remitto, misi, mittere, to send to send again, to send back, to release or
forgive, to grant, to let down, to commytte, or remytte, to relinquishe or
leave, to cease.

Remittere animum, to put away care, to vnbende or louse.

Annum remittere, to pardone him for one year.

Ardorem remittere, not to be fierce as he was.

Remittere aliquid adolescentiae, Pardone him somewhat for his youth.

Remittere nuntium, Gratiam habeo tibi, quum copiam istam mihi and potestatem
facis, ut ego ad parents remittam nuntium, I thank the, that thou gyuest me
this leave and also authority, that I may send to thy friends, to provide
for the else where.

Contentionem remittere. to leave conte^tio^.

De supplicio remittere, to pardon him part of his execution.

De custodia remittere, not to be so careful as he was.

Frenos dolori remittere, to abandone him to all sorrow, or to let him self to
be posseded with heaviness.

Ius alicui remittere, to release all his title or right unto one.

Librum remittere, when the bark is louse or fallen from the tree.

Memoriam remittere, to let pass out of remembrance.

Numeros in cantu remittere, to rest in singing, as is the use in prickesonge.

Nuntium uxori remittere, to be deuorced.

Repudium remittere idem.

Officium remittere, to renounce his duty.

Remissus, a, um, dull, remitted, sent again, ceased, or deferred.

Remissus animus, which has no courage.

Remissum corpus, an unlusty body.

Remissius frigus, not very cold.

Remissio, a release, a losing, a withdraweynge. Oculorum remissio, a
withdrawyng of the look.

Remissio morbi, when the sickness is abated or going away.

Remollio, ire, to make very soft, or easy.

Remollescere, to pacify or mittigate.

Remora, a little fyshe, which reteyneth a great ship under sail. also
tarienge.

Remorbesco, to fall eftesones into sickness.

Remordeo, dear, to tourment the mind, or make one heavy.

Remores, birds, which by their flyghte or voice signified, that the thing
purposed was not to be followed.

Remoria, a place on the top of the Hill called Auentinus, where Remus stood,
and by the flyghte of birds, aduysed the buyldyng of Rome.

Remona, the dwelling house of Remus.

Remoror, aris, ari, to tarry or make to abide.

Remorari gradum, to rest him self in a place.

Remotus, ta, tum, fer from, remeued.

Remotus homo a dialecicis, he that passes nothing on logike.

Remota res a memoria a thing not thought upon.

Remotus a culpa, he that is in no fault.

Remoto ioco, in erneste.

Remoto delectu, without having regard more to one than to an other.

Remotus ab inani laud, he loves no vain glory.

Remoueo, ere, to remove, to take away.

Remouete moram, make ye have, speed you.

Remouere se a negotijs publicis, to meddel no more with commune affairs.

Remouere aliquem a Republica, to put one out of the office which he has in
the weal publyke.

Remouere ab oculis, to hyde.

Remouere se art sua, to leave or forsake his craft.

Remouere de medio, to put a thing clean away.

Remouere metum, to put away fear.

Remouere moram, to make haste.

Remouere operam sua^ a populari coetu, to take no more peyn about other men's
busynes.

Repandirostrum pecus, a beast having his nose turned upward, a word used
of Pacuuius and Lucilius ancient poets.

Reciprocicornes, was taken of Laberius for Rams, for the tournynge backward
and eftsoon forward of their horns.

Remugio, giui, gire, to below or low again, to render a great sown.

Remulco, care, and remulculo, is properlye to draw a great ship or barge
with a less vessel, by translation it signifies to draw a thing casely.

Remulcus, a little bote or bark.

Remulinus ager, Remus field.

Remuncopae, instruments, wherewith ships be driven on land.

Remunero, are, and remuneror, ari, to reward to recompense a good turn.

Remuneratio, recompense.

Remus, the brother of Romulus, which builded Rome.

Renanciscor, sceris, sci, to get again.

Ren, renis, a kydney.

Renascor, sci, for denuo nasci.

Renascens annus, the spring time.

Renarro, are, to tell, to repete.

Renato, tare, to swym back, or swym again.

Renes, the kydneys, or the reins of the back.

Renideo, dear, to shine, to savor or smell.

Renitor, ti, to resist.

Renixus, us, resistance.

Renodo, dare, to vnknytte, or undo a knotte.

Renoues, garments made of skynnes of wulfes or other beasts, wherein the
ancient Almaynes were wont to lie in the wars.

Renouo, are, to renew or make eftesones.

Renouello, lare, to make new again.

Rentifolia, a kind of wyld roses, which have neither good savor nor fascion.

Renumero, rare, to pay again money, which is received.

Renuntiata, an I Will by Ethyope, so rich, that the inhabitauntes do give for a
horse by exchange a talent of gold.

Renuntio, are, to report, to signify, to show openly, to renounce, to
refuse, to resign, sometime to restore.

Renuntiare uitae, to refuse to live.

Renuntiatur Consul, he is declared consule.

Renuntiatio, a report, also a resignation of an office, also a summons by an
officer.

Renuntij, they which do carry tidings from one to an other.

Renno, nuere, to refuse, to despise.

Renutus, nutus, a refusal or denyar with countenance.

Reor, reris, ratus sum, I suppose.

Repagulum, a door or wyndowe or other thing that shuts or closes.

Repages, idem.

Repandus, a, um, bente or bowed, and broad backewarde, as ores were in the
old time.

Repando, dear, to bend back.

Reparo, rare, to repair, to restore to the first astate, to renew.

Reparamen, and reparatio, a repayrynge or reparation.

Reparco, parsi, sere, to spare.

Repastinatio, a new dyggynge about vynes. Also a bringing of ground to
temper with much labor and dyggynge.

Repastinatus, ta, tum, new dug or brought in temper.

Repastino, are, to dygge again about vines, to alter land or ground, with
often dygging or labourynge.

Repastinor, nari, to be eftsoon dygged, or brought into temper.

Repauso, are, to take rest.

Repedo, are, to go away, to go back.

Repello, puli, pellere, to put back, to repel.

Repellere sanguinem, to let one blood.

Repellere uim ui, to resyste force with force.

Rependo, di, dear, to recompense.

Rependebatur duplo argento, one paid for it the double wait of silver.

Repens, it is, sudden unlooked for.

Repenso, are, to ponder, to ouersee, to judge.

Repent, sodaynely.

Repentim, idem.

Repentinus, a, um, sudden.

Reperibitur, it shall be found.

Repertor, he that fyndeth.

Repercutio, cussi, cutere, to stryke again, to reuerberate.

Repercutere dicta, to take advantage of one in his words.

Repercussus, sus, a reuerberation or strykyng often.

Reperio, peri, rire, to find by adventure. sometime otherwise. to perceive.

Reperire causam, to find an excuse.

Reperire negotium in hac re, to have much to do with that matter.

Reperire gloriam, to get an honorable renoume.

Reperit suos parents, has she found that they be her father and mother.

Reperies hoc non secus, they shall find it to be none other wise.

Reperitur non ullo uestigio, there is no mention made of him.

Repertitius, he that is founden.

Repertorium, an inuentory.

Repeto, tij, tere, to ask again, to ask often or eftesones, to rehearse
again, or repete, to reuolue, to begin again, to resort eftsoon to a
thing, to call again.

Hem repudiatus repetor, How now, being ones refused, I am called again.

Alta repetita, rehearsed from the beginning, far sought, or far fette.

Repetere poenas, ab aliquo, to be avenged on one.

Repeto, I remember. Me quidem adolescen tulo, repeto quendam principem nomine
alternis diebus declamare, alternis disputare, I remember me, when I was a boy,
that one which was a Prince of name, did one day declame, an other day
dispute.

Repetere reum, to accuse eftesones.

Repetenti memoria, to call to remembrance

Repetundarum accusari, is properly where a man sometime being in greatte
authority and having the rule of a country, is accused and called to a
reckenynge, for all that he has received, being in his office, above that
which is his ordynary allowaunce, also for all thing that he took wrongefully
from any person or town: which was the most necessary action for a publik
well, that might be devised.

Repignerator, he that redemeth or quiteth his gage or pledge.

Repignero, are, to quite or redeem a pledge or gage. It may be taken sometime
with us, that which in our law is called to repleuy: and repignoratio, a
repleuy: and repignoratitia actio for the replegiare.

Replaudo, dear, to make noise with the hands beaten to gether.

Repleo, plere, to fill.

Replicatio, a replycation or vnfoldynge of a thing.

Replico, care, to unfold, also to replye, to displaye.

Replumbo, are, to vnsoulder.

Repo, repsi, pere, to crepe, to run as rotes do in the ground.

Repleo, liui, lire, to polyshe again.

Repolleo, lere, to be much able, to be of power to do.

Repollesco, scere, to be eftesones strong or in force.

Repono, sui, nere, to put or set again in his place, to lay up, to recite
again, to hyde, to redelyuer or restore, to revoke, to repress, to lay to
more, to exaggerate, to heap one on an other, to make to grow again, to bring
again. also to put in by writing.

Et quantum longis carpent armenta diebus

Exigua tantum gelidus ros nocte reponet:

Look how much the sheep in the long days shall byte.

The cold dew in one night with growinge shall requite.

Reponere ceruicem, to wry ones neck now on one side and now in an other.

Reponere aliquem in deos, to do honor to one as it were unto god.

Reponere in numero eloquentium, To esteem him eloquente.

Reponere in optima spe, to have good hope of a thing.

Reponere in suis, to take him for his friend

Reponere fidem, to trust.

Scriptor honoratum si forte reponis A chillem, Thou that writest, if
peradventure thou put in Athilles.

Reponere nummos, to pay again money which is lent us.

Reponere aliquid in uaetustatem, to lay up a thing for the time to come.

Reponere remum, to row no more.

Peto a re ne id a me quaeras, ne tibi idem repona^ cum ueneris. I pray the
ask not that of me, lest I ask likewise of the when thou come.

Semper ego auditor tantum, nunquam ne reponam? shall I be always an hearer and
never a writer.

Reporto, are, to bring back or again.

Reportare laudem ex hostibus, to be praised for his victory.

Reportare victoriam, to have the victory.

Reposco, sci, scere, to ask again that which is mine own, or is as it were
due to me.

Reposcere uicem, to ask one good turn for an other.

Repositorium, a store house.

Repositus, and repostus, ta, tum, laid up, to hyde. Manet alta mente
repostum, Iudicium Paridis, Deep in his mind remained the judgment, that
Paris gave between the goddesses, of the which sprange the occasyon of the
destruction of Troy.

Repotium, when the day after the marriage friends do come and drink with the
bryde.

Reprehendo, dear, to pluck back, to reprove

Reprehensio, caughte.

Reprehensio, a rebuke, a, pullinge back.

Reprehenso, are, to rebuke sharply.

Repehendere manu, to take by the hand.

Repraesento, tare, to represente, to render, to bring in presence, or
present a thing, to lay before one, to show or declare.

Repraesentare se, to be present.

Si repraesentari morte in ea libertas ciuitatis potest. If the city by my
death moughte be restored to liberty.

Repraesentare supplicia, to punyshe sodaynely or hastily.

Repraesentare iuditia, to prevent judgment.

Repraesentare praetium, to pay the money in hand.

Repraesentare diem promissorum, to perform that that he promised.

Reprimo, mere, to refrain, to let, to appese.

Reprimere sermones seu famam, to cause a great fame or report to cease.

Impetum populi reprimere, to appease the fury of the people, or to cease.

Reprimere itinera, to abbreuiate or make the way shorter.

Reprobo, are, to reprove.

Reprobus, a man reproved.

Reproces, sharp.

Reptile, all thing that crepeth.

Repto, tare, to crepe much: also to go softely like a snayle.

Repubescere, to wax young again.

Repudio, are, to forsake, as a man forsakes his wife, also to refuse, to
abandone, or leave

Repudio consilium, quod primum intenderam, I will now leave the counsel that
I first intended to follow.

Repudium, a deuorce.

Repudium remittere, to be deuorced.

Repudium renuntiare, to declare a deuorce.

Is me nunc repudium renuntiare iussit tibi, He wylled me to declare to the,
that he has forsaken the.

Repudiosae nuptiae, marriage, after the which follows soon after a deuorce,
Necessitate me mala ut fiam facis, uerum uideto, me ubi uoles nuptum dare, ne
hac fama faciat, repudosas nuptias, Thou compellest me to be naught, but take heed, that where thou will mary me, by that report he shall make such a
wedding as shall sone after be dissolved or broken.

Repuerasco, scere, to be eftsoon a child, or to wax a child again.

Repugno, are, to repugne or say contrary, to resist.

Repugnare inter se, to be contrary one to an other.

Repugnanter, an aduerbe, which signyfiethe contrariously, displeasauntly. Vt
igitur monere and moneri, proprium est uerae amicitiae, and alterum libere
facere, non aspere: alteru^ pacienter accipere non repugnanter sic habendum est
nullam in amicitijs pestem esse maiorem, quam adulationem, blanditias,
assentationem, Like therefore as to give counsel, and to be counsayled,
properlye belongs to very frendeshyp, also the tone to do every thing
frankely, the the other to take all thing patiently, not displeasauntly. So it
is to be considered, that in frendeshyp there is no more pestilence, thanne
flatterye, fair words, and consenting to al things.

Repugnantia, repugnancy, where one thing agrees not with an other.

Repugnax, nacis, he that is in every thing contrariouse.

Repungo, gere, to prycke again, or mutually displease or offend.

Repulsa, a puttyng back of him, which either demands or looks for authorite
or office.

Repullulo, and Repullulasco, scere, to bourgen eftsoon or spring.

Repulsor, oris, he that puts an other man back.

Repulsus, he that is put back.

Repumicare, to raise with a pomayse.

Reputo, tare, to think often, to consider much, to reuolue in the mind, to
compte. Also to cut of eftsoon.

Requies, rest.

Requiesco, scere, to rest or take rest.

Requiescere in spe alicuius adolescentis, to be content with the hope which
one has in a young man.

Requiescere in sermon alicuius, to be content with one communication.

Requiescere in lectione poetarum, to take pleasure in the reading of poets.

Non requiescere consilio cuiusquam, not to cesse for any man's counsel.

Et mutata suos requierunt flumina cursus.

Verg. the rivers being altered cessed to ru^ne.

Requiro, siui, rere, to seek eftesones or often, to require, to inquyre or
demand.

In quo maiorum nostrorum saepe requiro prudentiam, I find that our auncetours
or elders have therein lacked oftentimes discretion.

Vereor ne literarum officiu^ a me requiras, I fear that ye will blame me for
writing no oftener unto you.

Requisitum est, one demanded.

Requisita naturae, natures necessity.

Res, a thing, the thing, the matter. sommetyme astate, condition, business,
contention, cause, richesse, substance, profytte, weal, experyence, occasyon.

Res est, it is matter in deed.

Res ad manticam redijt, it is all come to a bag and a staff, or a staff
and a walette.

Res comperendinata, a mattier adiourned or deferred until the third day.

Res iudicata, the matter or cause finally determined and adjudged.

Res controuersa, the matter in suite.

Res familiaris, a man's propre goods.

Res forensis, a matter in law.

Respublica, a publyke weal.

Ere nata melius fieri haud potuit quam factum est, Of the occasyon begun it
could not better have been done, than it is. Alsoo it sygnifieth mean. I am
repperi rem, quo pacto, nec fur, nec socius sies, I have now found the mean,
how thou shalt be neither a thief, nor a companyon with him.

Rem facere, to gain or win. Nunquam rem facies: abi, nescis inescare
homines, Thou shall never gain penny, Get the hens, thou can no skylle to
angle men.

Rem habere cum aliquo, to have to do with one, to meddell with one.

Res gerere, to have or make wars. Scipione Aemiliano res in Africa gerente,
Polybius annaliu^ conditor, ab eo accepta class scruta^di orbis illius gratia
circumuectus est, Scipio Aemilianus making wars in Affryke, Polybius the
writer of histories with a certain number of ships was conveyed about that
cost, to inserche that part of the world.

Res semper aliquid apportat noui, experyence brings always some news.

Ad rem redi, to the matter or purpose.

Salua res est, the matter gothe well.

Amicos res inuenit, richesse fyndeth fre^des.

Nunquam rem facies, thou shall never win by it, or never thryue with it.

Re iuuare, to help with deeds and not with words only. Is amicus, qui in re
dubia re iuuat, ubi re est opus, He is a friend, which in a case that is
doutful, helps me with his deeds, where deeds are required.

Quid isti credam? res ipsi indicat, what shall I trust him, the deed self
declares.

Verba ad rem confer, to do as he says.

Vsque adeo ego illius far possum ineptias, and magnifica uerba, uerba dum
sint, uerum enim, si ad re^ conferentur, uapulabit, Hither to I can suffer his
lewdenesse, and bragges, as long as they are but words, but if he do as he
says, he shall smart therefore.

Rem augere, to wax thryfty.

Re uera, in deed, in very truth, matter in deed. Re ipsa, idem.

Ere nata non melius fieri potuit quam factum est, considering the chance or
occasion, it could not be better done than it is.

Pro re nata, the matter co^sydered, to the purpose that happened.

Res tua agitur, thy matter is on hand, or the matter touches the.

Si in rem utrique est, if it be for both their profyttes.

Verba ad rem confer, to do as he says.

Res ipsa indicat, the deed shows.

Resalutatio, a courtayse speaking to him that speaks to you, a resalutynge.

Resaluto, resalutare, to salute him that saluteth you.

Resarcio, si cire, to amend, to refourme.

Resarcire damna, to recompense damages.

Resarrio, iui, ire, to wede eftsoon corn.

Rescindo, scidi, scindere, to cut or break in sunder, to take away, to
destroy, to make void or repel an act or law, to break up.

Coelum rescindere fratres, Ter sunt conati. Thryse the brethren assayed to
break up heaven for to enter.

Rescio, sciui, scire, to know a thing which is hid and kept secret.
alsoo to know a thing after that it is done, which was not known before.

Rescisco, scere, idem quod Rescio.

Rescribo, psi, bear, to write again, to redelyuer, to repay money.

Rescriptum, the letters of a prince, making answer to other letters.

Reseco, are, to cut away that which is superfluous

Resecare ad uinum, to pare to the quycke, to touch the quycke in a matter.

Resecro, crare, to pray or desire eftsoon. also to assoyle one of his auowe.

Resedo, dare, to appease.

Resegmen, the paring of a man's nails.

Resero, are, to open a thing that is closed.

Resero, rere, to sow or set again.

Reseruatio, a reseruato^, a keeping of some thing

Reseruo, uare, to keep a part from other things, to reserve.

Reses, idis, ydel from accustomed labor or occupation.

Resex, secis, that which is cut and spryngeth again, and bears more fruit
than it did before.

Resideo, resedi, residere, to rest, to sytte, to stand fast.

Residet eius rei in te culpa, the fault thereof is in the.

Resido, sedi, sidere, to sytte down. also to abide. Nam Viennensium uitia
inter ipsos residunt, nostra late uagantur, For the fautes of men of Vienne, do
abide with them, ours run abroad, and be every where known.

Residet in uultu, there does rest or appiere in the vysage. Quorum non in
sententia solum, sed etiam in nutu residebat autoritas, In whose sentence not
only, but also countenance, authority rested.

Residuus, a, um, the rest or remnaunt.

Resigno, are, to open that which is sealed: sometime to seal fast, also to
shyt, sometime to restore again, also to resygne or surrendre.

Resignatum aes, wages stopped for negligent service in wars.

Resilio, lij, ire, to lepe back, or step away quikly Ab hoc crimen resilit,
There is no blame to be laid to him.

Resimus, he that has a camoyse nose, that is to say, turned upward.

Resina, rosyn, all like gum which runs out of trees.

Resinatius, a, um, like roseyn.

Resinatus, ta, tum, rased or dressed with roseyn.

Resinosus, full of roseyn.

Resipio, pui, pere, idem quod Resipisco.

Resipisco, resipui, resipiscere, to return to perfect understanding, to be
eftsoon wise where before he erred.

Resisto, resisti, resistere, to resist or withstand.

Resistitur, the remedy is.

Resoluo, uere, to resolve, to destroy, to pay dettes, to remove, to undo or
vnlouse.

Humu^ resoluere, to labor the earth.

In puluerem resoluere, to make in powder.

Resolutio neruorum, the palsy.

Resono, are, to sown again, to make an echo.

Resorbeo, bui, and psi, bear, to pour out or dysgorge the lycour that was
received.

Respecto, are, to see often, to love, to help.

Respectus, ctus, a look or sight, also respect or regard. Neque eo respectu
commotus discesserat, Having no regard thereunto he departed.

Respergo, si, gere, to cast water or other lykour about, to sprynkle.

Respergimen, a sprynklynge or castyng about of lycour.

Respicio, exi, spicere, to look back, to have regard, to provide, to remedy,
to keep, to resrue, to love.

Respicere, to help or succor. Age, me intuis secundis rebus respice, Let se,
now in thy prosperity succor me.

Respicit nos deus, God has pity on us.

Tace modo, deus respiciet nos aliquis, peace now, some god will have pytie on
us.

Respicere se, to take heed or have regard of him self. Non soles respicere
te, cum dicas unjust alteri? Art thou not wont to take heed of thy self, when
thou sayste wrong of an other man? Non tu te cohibes? non te respicis? non tibi
exempli satis sum? Wylt thou not beware? wylt thou not take heed of thy self?
Am not I a good example unto the?

Respiratio, a breathe or vapor.

Respiro, are, to take breathe. also to take comfort, to return to the
first state. Si armis aut condition positis, aut fatigatione abiectis, aut
uictoria detractis, ciuitas respirauerit: and dignitate tua tibi, and fortuna,
uti licebit, If that harneyse, either by condytions of peace being laid away,
or by weariness of both parts being thrown away, or pullyd away by
vyctorye, the city shall recover her first estimation, thou than shalt
enjoy thy possessions and dygnitie.

Resplendeo, dear, to shine.

Respondeo, di, dear, to answer, to appear when one is called, to agree, to
consent or be like or equal, to be against, as one thing set or lyenge
against an other.

Respondere criminibus, to purge us of that that is laid to our charge.
Respondere ad nomina, to appear when he is called.

Non respondere, to make defaute.

Respondere ad diem, to pay at the day.

Respondere superiori, to accord to that which was before.

Respondere patri, to follow his fathers condytions.

Respondere, sometime does signify satisfacere. Hocproprium tuum munus est ut
ita erudiatur, ut and patri, and Scipioni nostro and tibi tam propinquo
respondeat, It is your part specially, that he be so brought up in learning,
that he may satisfye his father, and our friend Scipio, and you, that are so
nygh kynnesman unto him.

Responsio, an answer.

Responsito, tare, to make or give answer, it pertayned proprely to lawyers,
and them which had the interpretation of ceremonies.

Responso, are, to answer.

Responsum, an answer.

Responsus, sus, sui, where one thing does agree with an other, a consent, a
conueniency.

Respuo, ere, to refuse, or reiecte.

Respuit hoc sapie^tissimi cuiusque fides, there is no wise man will believe him.

Respuere imperiu^, not wyllyng to obey him.

Respuit hoc ferri ictum, one could not enter into it with iron.

Auribus hominem respuere, not wyllyng to here him speak.

Restagno, nare, to contain or hold water.

Restat, restare, to be or remain of that thing, that is left, to stand
back, to resyste.

Hoc me restat, that remains or abydethe for me.

Restauro, rare, to restore, or make again.

Restibilis, that which is renewed, or sown again. Restibilis foecunditas,
when the female bears every year.

Restibilis ager, a field which is sown two years together.

Resticula, a small cord.

Restinguo, xi, guere, to stynt or put out, or cesse, as fire, light, and
thyrste.

Restio, onis, a roper. alsoo he that hangs him self.

Restipulatio, a putting in of pledges, put engage or pledge, for to make
answer to an action

Restipulor, aris, ari, to make answer in the law

Restire, to be redye to be sown, ploughed, or dygged.

Restis, a halter or cord, a rope or bounche of garlyke or oynyons.

Restem ducere, when maidens and children daunse together hand in hand, or
with napkyns, leadyng one an other. Ad restim res re dijt, The matter is in
despair, or desperate.

Restito, tare, to abide or tarry.

Restituo, ere, to restore, to yield again, to repair or make again. In
integrum restituere, to restore him unto his first astate.

Pugna^ restituere, to begin the batayl eftsoon Reipub. restitui, to be
remitted to the same astate that he was in before his banyshment:

Restitutio, restitution.

Resto, stare, to remain, to tarry. Hic nunc me credit aliquam sibi fallacia^
portare, and ea me hic restitisse gratia, He wenetij that I work him some
falshede, and that I tarry still therefore. Nulla^ quaerentes uoluptatem Stoici
restant, The Stoike philosophers do resyste or stick to their opinion, seking
for no pleasure.

Restat mihi, it taryeth for me, it shall happen unto me.

Restricte, and restrictim, straytly, or strayte.

Restrictus, nygarde.

Restringo, xi, gere, to bynd or strayn bakward to bind again, to restrain.
sometime it signifies to louse. Apulei. Iumentu^ restrinxit, abireque stabulo
liberum sinit, He lowsed his horse, and let him out at liberty.

Restringit nauseam, it puts away the desire to vomyte.

Resulto, tare, to leap against a thing, to rebounde, to rebel, to leap or
step back.

Resumo, psi, ere, to take again, to resume.

Resuo, ere, to sow again, or make a double styche, also to ryp or undo that
which is sown, to vnstitche. Sume^ti uirilem toga^, tunica lati claui resuta
ex utraque perte, ad pedes decidit: When he came first to man's aege, his
Senators cote being rypte on boothe sides, fell down to his fete.

Resupino, are, to turn upward, or vpryght. to revoke or call back, to
differ, to peruerte.

Resupinus, a, um, vpryght, the belly upward.

Resurgo, rexi, gere, to arise up.

Resurrectio, resurrection.

Retae, trees growyng on the banks of rivers, or in the ryuers.

Retardatio, a taryenge.

Retardo, dare, to make to tarry.

Rete, it is, a n^tte.

Retego, xi, gere, to dyscouer or dysclose.

Retento, are, to retayn often, to empt eftsoon.

Retexo, ere, to untwist or untwine, or unwind. sometime to twist or wind
eftsoon, to dissolve Penelopes telam retexere, to do and undo. Non potest
nisi retexueris illa, he may not except thou change his purpose therein.

Retiaculum, a little net.

Retiarius, he that casts a net, proprely in fighting to apprehende his
adversary.

Retia, nets, sometime it sygnifieth one net

Reticeo, cui, cere, to hold ones peace, to speak no word, to keep secret,
to say nothing.

Reticentia, silence, when one holds his peace.

Reticula, a little net, wherein a man's hear or women's is trussed.

Reticulatus, ta, tum, made like a net.

Reticulum, a caul or coyfe, also a bag, when in meat is carried.

Retinaculum, what so ever holds any other thing, a stay.

Retineo, nui, nere, to hold again, to retain, to keep in remembrance.

Retinere, to hold up, that a man fall not. Ah retine me obsecro. B. Obsecro
quid tibi est? An. Disperij. B. Perij misera, quid stupes Antiphila? O hold me
up I pray the B. Alak what ayleth the? A. I am undone. B. Alas that ever I was
borne, why does thy heart fail the Antiphila?

Retinere, to restrain or let one from doing that, that he would. Pudore and
liberalitate liberos retinere satius esse credo, quam metu, I think it better
to restrain chylderne from their wanton wylles, by shame and lyberalitie, than
with fear.

Si ius suum retinet, if he maynteyne his title.

In officio retinere, to entertayne men to be ever ready to do their duties.

Inuidiam suam apud improbos retinere, to be always hated of unthrifty persons.

Iudicem retinere aliquem, to receive one for a judge.

Iuditum suum retinere, to persevere in his opinyon.

Iustitiam retinere, to maynteyne justice.

Memoria retinere, to remember.

Modum retinere, to keep a measure.

Morbo retineri, to be sick.

Morem retinere, to keep always one custom.

Nummos retinere, to keep back money. which ought to be paid.

Officium retinere, to do well his duty.

Retinens, he that keeps still.

Retiolum, a cawle, or coyfe.

Retondeo, dear, to klyppe all over.

Retorqueo, torsi, quere, to cast backward, to throw or shut again.

Retorresco, retorrescere, to be bourned with the sun.

Retorridus, da, du^, burned or sered, or parched.

Retracto, ctare, to call back, or revoke a thing that is done, to draw back,
to excuse, to lay to an another man, to draw up.

Retractare largitiones, to cease from lyberall gyuynge.

Retractare aliquid, to repete that which is spoken.

Retractare actionem, to begin his action of new.

Retraho, traxi, trahere, to pull or draw back, or to draw to.

Retribuo, buere, to recompense.

Retrica, old writers called the water, wherewith gardeynes are watered.

Retrimentum, the dragges of a thing, sometime ordure or dunge.

Retro, behind.

Retrocedo, cessi, cedere, to go back.

Retrorsum, backewarde.

Retrorsus, a, um, turned backewarde.

Retrospicere, to look back.

Retrudo, si, dear, to put back.

Retundo, dear, to make blunt or dull, that which is sharp. also to beat
often on a thing.

Retusus, a, um, dull, blunt, contrary to sharp. Aliae agrorum parts, quae
acuta ingenia gignant, aliae quae retusa, Some parts of countrays there be,
which do bring forth sharp wits, some bring forth dulle.

Reualesco, scere, to be recovered from syknes.

Reueho, uexi, uehere, to bring or carry back, or again.

Reuelatio, a reuelyng or a disclosing of a thing

Reuello, reuellere, to pluck back, to pull again.

Reuelo, are, to dyscouer.

Reuenio, nire, to come again.

Reuera, matter in deed, or for a truth.

Reuerendus, worthy reverence.

Reuerens, rentior, rentissimus, he that does reverence.

Reuerenter, reverently.

Reuerentia, reverence or honor done to one.

Reuereor, reris, reri, to have in reverence.

Reuersio, a return.

Reuertor, teris, ti, to return. Reuerto, idem.

Reuincio, uinxi, uincere, to bind back, or behind, as to bynd ones hands
behynd him.

Reuincere paratus est, which the lawyers do say, Paratus est uerificare, He
is redye to auerre.

Reuiresco, scere, to become eftesones grene.

Reuiso, sere, to return to see.

Reuiuisco, scere, to be reuyued.

Reuoco, uocare, to call back, to revoke, to bring again, to draw back,
to rail from death, to turn from an enterprise.

Reuocare pedem, to turn back, to recule.

Ad quae exempla reuocas? What examples put thou me for thy defense.

Ad manus rem reuocare, to bring the matter to that point that it comme to
ioynynge of battayie.

Reuocare, to restore or renew. Item circa omnium ordinum statum domi
forisque, aut correxit, aut exoleta reuocauit, aut etiam no ua instituit,
Moreover concerning the state of all degrees, as well within his house as
without, either he did amend them, or renewed those things that were out of
use, or else ordained new.

Reuocare testes, to rehearse the depositions of witnesses.

Reuocare ad curam, to do a thing with much dylygence.

Rem ad sortem reuocare, to cast lottes for a thing.

In lucem reuocare, to bring again in use.

Reuocatio, a reuocation or calling back.

Reuolo, are, to flee back.

Reuoluo, ui, uere, to turn up and down, to reuolue, to turn back, to
remove.

Reuolutus, ta, tum, to be turned back, to be removed.

Reuolutio, a tourninge back to the first place or point, a revolution or
tournynge of celestial bodies or spheres.

Reuorto, tere, old writers used for reuertor, to return.

Reus, he that is sued or accused, sometime he that is gylty.

Reus facti, gyltie of an offense.

Reus agitur, he is sued or accused.

Reus peragitur, he is condemned.

Reus stipulando, he that bargayneth.

Reus uoti, he that has auowed.

Reus de ui, accused of breakyng the peace.

Reum subdere, to accuse one of a great offense

Rex, regis, a king.

Rex sacrificulus, was a chief minyster of sacrifices among the Romans only.

R ANTE H.
RHabarbarum, Rubarbe, a preciouse rote medicinable to purge coler also to
corroborate the stomach and liver.

Rhachinon, a spyder, having a little black head, and is somewhat white,
and has short fete, whose bytynge is as venymouse as the styngynge of a
scorpyon.

Rhadamanthus, was king of Lycia, which was a straight executour of Justice,
and therefore was supposed of the Paynyms to be afterward one of the judges in
hell.

Rhagusium, a city in Dalmatia.

Rhagardes, and Rhagadiae, certain cleftes in some parts of the body.

Rhamnus, a kind of brembles, which is white, and bears more fruit thanne
other do, and also has flowers, and sends forth branches with straight
pricks, not crooked as other are, and has broad leaves.

Rhamnusia, was called goddess of vengeance.

Rhamnusius, a man of a town called Rhamnus, by Athenes.

Rhamponticum, the herb and root callid the more and great Centory, it is
named of Plinius (as Ruellius writes) Rhacoma.

Rhampsinithus, the proper name of a king of Egypt.

Rhaphanus, an herb called radyshe.

Rhebanus, a river in the mouth of Bosphotus, a countray in Thracia.

Rhea, was called the mother of gods, called also Cybele.

Rhea syluia, the mother of Romulus and Remus

Rheda, a charyotte.

Rhedarius, a charyot man.

Rhedones, the city of Reins in France.

Rhegium, a city on the bordure of Italye toward Sycile. also an another city
not far from Parima.

Rheginus, a man of the city of Rhegium in Calaber.

Rhemi, people in France called alsoo Rhemenses.

Rhenones, cotes made of the skynnes of bestis.

Rhenus, a noble river in Germania, called the Rheyne.

Rhenense uinum, Rheynyshe wine.

Rhenenses, people dwelling on the river of Rheyne.

Rheon, Reubarbe.

Rhesus, king of Thracia, which camme to the aid of the Troianes, and was
slain of Diomedes: of whom a river about Troy was called Rhesus.

Rheti, a people in Italy.

Rhetia, a countray in Germanye, having on the weste the hylle called Adula,
on the north it marches upon Danubium, on the east upon the river called
Aenus, on the southe it lies upon the mountains called Alps.

Rhetor, oris, he that teaches rhetoryke.

Rhetorica, rhetorycke, or the craft of eloquence.

Rhetoricor, cari, to speak rhetorike.

Rhetorice, like a rhetoritian.

Rhetus, a giant, whom Dionyse, being turned into a lion slew.

Rhetoricus, an orator, or a man cunning in the craft of eloquence,

Rhetorisso, are, to speak in the form of rhetoryke.

Rheuma, a rewme or distillation of humors.

Rheumatismus, the disease of rewme.

Rhibis, a bremble called Raspis.

Rhinoceron, ontis, a beast that has an horn in his nose, which naturally is
enemy to the Olyphaunt, it is also an oil vessel, out of the which oil
is dropped.

Rhinocerotis nasum habere, is said of them that be wyttye. Iuuenesque,
senesque, Et pueri nasum, Rhinocerotis habent, Young men, old men, and chyldern,
and all be wytty.

Riphaei montes, mountains in the north part of the world, where as is
contynually winter, and snow with huge winds, and joins upon Scithia in Asia.

Rhodanus, a river in France, callid the Rone.

Rhodia, a kind of vynes.

Rhodites, a certain precyouse stoone, of the color of a rose.

Rhodius, of the Rhodes.

Rhodope, a mountain in Thracia.

Rhododaphne, and Rhododendros, a tree, having leaves like to an almond tree,
but greatter and fat seeds, open like a horn, which has in them woulle
like purple sylke, a long root, salt in taste, it grows in watrye places.

Rhodomeli, honey and the juice of roses boiled together, called co^munely Mel
rosatum.

Rhodonia, a gardeyne of roses.

Rhodophone, that part of Syria that gothe over the mountain of Taurus.

Rhodopeius, a, um, pertaynyng to the mountain of Rhodope.

Rhodos, a famous isle in the sea called Capatthium, lyenge beyond Candy,
having on the north, the countray called Lycia, on the south Egypt. In this
isle were borne many excellent philosophers and Rhetoricians, it was sometime
puyssant and rich.

Rhodostacti, idem quod rhodomeli, all be it some do put a dyfference between
them, saying that rhodomeli, has three parts of the juice of roses, and one
part of honey, and that rhodostacti has two parts of the juice, and one of
honey.

Rhombus, a figure four square, having the sides equal the corners crooked.
it is alsoo a fyshe called a Byrt, also a spynnynge whele or turn.

Rhoeas, when the corners of the eien are open, so that there do stylle from
them continual drops.

Rhoeteus, and Rhoeteius, for Troianus.

Rhoetus, a mountain of Troy, where Ajax Thelamonius was buried.

Rhoeton, wine made of pomegranates.

Rhomphea, a sword.

Rhoncus, a rowtynge when one does sleep.

Rhonchis^o, are, to rowte.

Rhopalon, a water lylye, called communely Nenuphar.

Rhoxia, a countray by Polonia.

Rhoxalani, people on the north part of the river of Danubius or Donowe.

Rhus, is that which apothecaries do call Sumach. Manardus lib 1. epist iiii
says that it is also called Ros syriacus.

Rhuteni, a people in France called Rhodes.

Rhymnus, a river.

Rhyndacus, a river, which runs into the sea called Pontus.

Rhyparographus, a paynter of tryfles, a stayner.

Rhytion, a vesselle like to a moon.

Rhythmus, number or armony in speaking, it is also called a ryme.

R ANTE I.
RICA, a garment of purple, hemmed or purfled also a kerchief, which women do
wear.

Ricinus, and ricinum, every garmente that is four square.

Ricinium, and ricinum, a cloak, whereof part was cast over a man's shoulders.

Ricinus, a dog tyke, it is alsoo that which the apothecaries do call
Cherua, whereof is made an oil that serves to diverse uses, Io. Agricola. but
Ruellius makes no mention of Cherua, but says, that the greeks did call it
Cici, and some apothecaries do name it Cataputia mayor, and that the
apothecaries of France do call it Palma Christi.

Ricula, a handkerchiefe.

Rictus, and rictum, a grynnynge or skornefulle opening of the mouth: also
the form of the vysage, when a man grenneth, or a dog brawleth.

Rid^o, risi, ridere, to lawghe. alsoo to skorne or mock,

Ridibundus, da, dum, that laugheth much.

Ridica, a proppe, wherewith a vine, or other like thing is holden up.

Ridiculare, a thing to laugh at.

Ridiculum, idem, also a mock.

Ridiculus, a man whom men do mock or laugh at.

Ridicularius, a, um, idem quod ridiculum.

Ridicule, foolyshely, in mockage.

Ridiculosus, a, um, idem quod ridiculus.

Ridiculose, foolyshely, to be laughed at.

Rigatio, a watrynge.

Rigeo, gui, gere, to be fervently cold, alsoo to be hard or styffe.

Rigentes oculi, eyes which do never move.

Rigesco, scere, idem quod rigeo.

Rigide, styffely, sharply, cruelly.

Rigidus, da, dum, cold, hard, styffe, sharp, or cruel.

Rigo, are, to make weate, or to water a gardeyne or field.

Rigor, rigoris, cold, hardness, styffenes.

Riguus, a, um, that may be easylye weate or watered.

Rima, a chynke or clefte in wod or stone, where it is not close joined.

Rimas agere, to be clouyn or chynked, as timber or bourdes, are with lyenge in
the wind.

Rimam inueuire, to find an excuse, or mean to escape.

Rimor, aris, ari, to search dylygently, alsoo to cleave as timber does.

Rimula, a little chynke or clefte.

Rimosus, a, um, full of kleftes or chynkes.

Ringo, xi, gere, to grynne or show the teth, as a dog does when he will
bark or byte. also to be angry, to braule, to bark.

Ripa, a water bank.

Riparia, a bird which bredeth in water ba^kes

Riparius, a, um, that abides on the water banks.

Ripae, seu Ripei, mountains in Archadia.

Riphaer, mountains in Scithia.

Riscus, a cofer covered with lether: also a lyttel wyndowe.

Risibilis, le, that which can laughe.

Risum concitare, to make one to laughe.

Risum captare, to do a thing which causes men to laughe.

Risum aedere, to laughe.

Risus, laughter.

Risus sardonius, a laughter without myrthe as of them that be mad or cruel.
such as Irishe men use when they be angry.

Rite, directly, truly, even as it should be.

Rituales, books, wherein the form of ceremonies, and old manners and
customs are written.

Ritus, tus, an approved custom.

Riuales, they which equally do love one woman, or be woars together, also
they, whose lands be divided by a river or broke, also they which dwell upon
ryuers.

Riualitas, tatis, envy or obseruaunce betwyxte the lovers of one woman.

Riuinus, a wower, idem quod riualis.

Riuus, a river or borke.

Riuulus, a littell broke.

Riuo, are, is to go to watrynge, as beasts do.

Rixa, a braulynge contention.

Rixose, brawling.

Rixosus, a striuer or brawler.

Rixor, aris, ari, and rixo, to contend with brawling.

R ANTE O.
ROB and Robub, names barbarouse signifyenge juice of herbs or fruits
defecate, read more in Sapa.

Robigalia, the Ceremonies pertaining to Robigus, the preseruatour of corn.

Robigmosus, a, um, much blasted.

Robigo, was honored of the Romans for a goddess, whom they supposed might
preserve their corn from blasting. it is also that vice in corn called
blastinge.

Robigus, whom the old Romans named the god, that preserved corn from
blastyng.

Roboraria, places, which are paled about.

Roboreus, ea, eum, of oken timber.

Roboro, are, to fortify.

Roboses, the old writers used for robur an ok^

Robur, oris, hard oak. It is also strength and hardenesse of the body.
sometime the strength or hardenes of any thing generallye. also a stocks in
prison.

Robus, old writers called red of color. Also all manner of matter, which had
many read veins, was called Robus. It is also a kind of wheat, that yeldeth
fair meal, which we now call red wheat.

Roburneus, a, um, of an oak.

Robusteus, a, um, idem.

Robustus, ta, tum, strong and hard.

Rodo, si, dear, to gnawe as a mouse or other like beast does. sometime to
detracte or backebite.

Rodus, da, dum, a thing imperfect or rude, vnpolyshed, unwrought.

Rogamen, minis, a desire.

Rogatarij, Notaries, which required the parties, that each of them should
promise.

Rogator, rogatoris, a beggar from door to door.

Rogito, tare, to entreat or demand, to inquire often, to ask for a thing.

Rogo, are, to require, to pray, to inquyre, to ask of one, to inacte.

Rogare plebem, to inquire of the commons if they be content that a law shall
pass, or as in our parliament, to go to the question.

Rogare aliquem sententiam, to demand of one what his opinion is.

Rogare sacramento, to swear one, or to give to him an oath.

Rogatio, was among the Romans, when the Tribunes, which were the head
officers of the people, were content that any act should pass, which was made
by the senate, or by the same Tribunes devised.

Rogatus, tus, a desire.

Rogus, a great fire, wherein dead bodies were bourned.

Roma, the city of Rome.

Romanensis, he that comes from an other country, and dwells at Rome.

Romania, is a country called Thracia.

Romanus, a Romayne.

Romanus, na, number, of Rome.

Romandui, Normandes.

Romula, a tree, under the which Romulus and Remus were found.

Romuleus, a, um, and Romulidus, da, dum, of Romulus.

Romulus, the first king of Romans.

Ronchisso, are, to route or snorte.

Ronchus, a routynge, sometime a scorn.

Ronchisonus, he that routeth or snorteth.

Rorarij milites, men which being light armed made the first skyrmyshe in
battle.

Roratio, is a disease in vynes, by the occasion whereof, the chief grapes do
fall away.

Roresco, scere, to be washed with dew.

Rores, dewes.

Rorifacio, cere, to sprynkle.

Roro, are, to dew or drop down like dew.

Rorulentus, ta, tum, full of dew.

Ros, roris, dew.

Ros syriacus, that which is called of the apothecaries Sunach.

Rosa, a rose.

Rosaceus, a, um, of roses.

Aqua rosacea, rosewater.

Rosalia, garlandes of Roses.

Rosarium, a gardeyne or bed of Roses.

Roscius, a Romayn, and a player in comedies, whom for his excellencye in
pronunciation and gesture, the noble Cicero called his jewel, and so much
delited in him, that he contended with him, whither Roscius could set forth
one sentence in mo fascyons of gesture and countenance, or he express the
same sentence in a more diversity of eloquent words. The excellency of this
man in his art, how it was esteemed and favored of all the Romans, it
appeared well in that they gave to him for a contynuall stipende; one thousand
of their grotes for every day, which did amount of our money xvi. pound:
xiii. s. iiii. d. And Lucius Sylla being dictatour gave to him a ring of
goulde, which was the token of a knight at that time, as a colar or chain of
gold is at this time.

Rosetum, a gardeyne of roses.

Roseus, a, um, of a rose, or of the color of a rose.

Rosidus, da, dum, wette with dew.

Rosio, gnawynge.

Rosmarinum, Rosemary, or a little snowte.

Rostellum, a little beak or bylle of a bird.

Rostra, strorum, rostris, was a place in Rome before the court called Hostilia,
wherein was a pulpyte, in which the orators of Rome were wont to stand, when
they preached to the people, or declared any matter, of the which proceeded
this word, Pro rostris, in the pulpyt, or at the bar.

Rostrati naues, ships having pikes of iron without the stem.

Rostrum, a beak of a bird, a snoute of a beast or fyshe, also the stem of
a ship or bote.

Rota, a whele, also a kind of fyshe.

Rothomagus, the cite of Roan in Normandy.

Roto, tare, to turn a thing like a whele.

Rotula, a little whele. Rotella, idem.

Rotunde, roundly, aptly, elegantly, handsomely, proprely in words.

Rotunditas, roundnesse.

Rotundo, dare, to make round.

Rotundus, da, dum, round. sometime well compact or facyoned.

Ore rotundo loqui, to express much in few words.

R ANTE V.
RVBEA tinctorum, Mader.

Rubefacio, cere, to make read.

Rubefio, fieri, to be made read.

Rubellae, read grapes.

Rubellio, a fyshe called a rochette.

Rubellum uinum, clarette wine.

Rubeo, bear, to be read.

Ruber, bra, brum, read.

Rubeta, a tode.

Rubetum, a busshy close.

Rubeus, bea, beum, read.

Rubens, idem.

Rueba minor, goselynge wede or clyuers.

Rubesco, scere, to wax read.

Rubi, borum, a town in Campania.

Rubicon, conis, a river in Italy, which divides Galliam from the part of
Italy, now called Romandiola, in old time Flaminea.

Rubicundus, da, dum, ruddy.

Rubidus, da, dum, a swart read. also rough or course, as bread having much
branne.

Rubigino, are, to ruste.

Rubiginosus, a, um, rustye.

Rubigo, ginis, ruste.

Rubor, oris, redness.

Rubrica, read chalk, or ruddell, wherewith sheep are marked.

Rubriceta, rosette color.

Rubrus, a, um, read.

Rubricatus, ta, tum, colored with read, or ruddelyd, as sheep are.

Rubus, a bremble.

Rubus caninus, the wild Eglantyne bryar.

Ructo, are, to belke or break wynd upward.

Ructor, tari, idem.

Ructare crapulam, to sauoure of to much drink.

Ructiro, tare, to break wind often.

Ructuatio, idem quod ructus.

Ructus, belkynge or breakyng wynd upward.

Rudens, it is, a cabell of a ship.

Ruderarium, a raungynge syue.

Rudero, rare, to lay on old stones and rubbel. also to daube or lay on mortar.

Ruderatus, ta, tum, where much rubbish lies.

Rudetum, a place where lies much rubbyshe or rubbell. also land, which
has lain leye, and is newely put in tylthe.

Rudiae, diarum, an old town in Apulia, where the poet Ennius was borne.

Rudiarij, they which are dyscharged of sightynge with swords, as they which
were called Gladiatores, that openly faught, one with an another, to anymate the
Romans with sheddyng of their blood. They be also bodgers or amenders of
old garments, and seuiars, or makers of syues.

Rudicula, a pot stycke.

Rudimentum, the first teaching of chyldern.

Rudio, dire, to teach one, which is unlearned.

Rudis, a rod or yard which was given to sword players, when they came
to.lx. years old, in token that they were set at liberty. sometime liberty
from labor.

Rude donari, to be discharged of attendance, properly in wars.

Rudem accipere, has the same sygnification.

Rudis, de, rude, imperfect, new, unwrought, taught of late.

Rudis, ruderis, shardes or pieces of stones broken and shattered, tubbell or
rubbyshe of old houses.

Ruditas, rudeness, lack of learning or wit.

Rudo, rudi, rudere, to braye like an ass. It is sometime spoken of a man.
sometime of a woman.

Rufeo, and rufesco, scere, to be somewhat read.

Rufo, fare, to make read.

Rufuli, certain captayns made by the consule, who afterward were called
Rutuli.

Rufus, a, um, somewhat read.

Ruga, a wrynkle or playte.

Rugio, giui, gire, to roore.

Rugitus, a roorynge.

Rugo, gare, to be playted or wrynkled.

Rugo, xi, gere, to belke.

Rugosus, a, um, full of playtes or wrynkles.

Ruina, ruin, extreme decay.

Ruinosus, a, um, ruynouse, in decay.

Rulla, the staff, wherewith the plowghmanne cleanses his culter.

Ruma, was of the old writers called a teate, also it is the throat bolle.

Ruma, a goddess, whom the paynyms did suppose to be beneficial to women's
breasts, and to suckynge chylderne.

Rumen, the dew clap of a breaste, also a place in the belly, a panche.

Rumentum, a brastynge out, an aposteme that brasteth out of the flesh.

Rumigare, to chewe the cudde.

Rumigero, rare, to carry tidings.

Ruminatio, a chewyng of the cudde, as a beast does. also delyberation or
aduysement.

Ruminalis ficus, a fygge tree, under the which it is supposed that a wolf
gave suck to Romulus and Remus.

Rumino, are, and Ruminor, ari, to chewe the cud. Also to call eftesones to
remembrance.

Rumex, icis, sorrelle, also a weapon like to a spear.

Rumifero, are, and rumigero, rare, to bear or bring tidings.

Rumigerulus, a tellar of tidings.

Rumis, a teate.

Rumito, to bear tidings.

Rumo, are, to give the teate to a child.

Rumor, oris, tidings, a rumor, a bruyte.

Rumpi, porum, transomes.

Rumpo, rupi, pere, to break, to make weary.

Rumpere moras, to make haste.

Rumpere silentium, to keep no longer silence.

Rumpotinus, a bousshe which growethe in France, of whom Columella writes,
that no corn should be sown within twenty foot thereof.

Rumpotinetum, the place where such bushes do grow.

Rumusculus, a little rumor or brute.

Rumula, a little teate.

Runa, a weapon, sometime vsyd in France.

Runca, a saw wherewith timber is sawen.

Runcatio, weedynge.

Runcina, a whypsawe, wherewith timber is sawen, it is also a bushesythe or
bylle, to cut busshes.

Runcino, are, to saw timber.

Runco, care, to weed or pull up.

Runsor, oris, one of the names of Pluto called god of Hell.

Ruo, rui, ruere, to fall, to power out, to be deceived, to subuerte, to make
plain, to pluck up, to break a sonder, to throw down.

Ruere, is to overthrow, to run forth hedlynge. Quo moriture ruis maioraque
uiribus audes? Whyther runnest thou headlynge to be slain, and attemptest
things above thy puyssaunce? Also to lift up. Et ruit atram, ad coelum picea
crassus caligine nubem, And being thycke, it lyfted up to heaven a cloud, as
black as pytche. sometime it sygnyfieth to make a great noise. Ruit arduus
ether, The hight syrmamente rumbled, or made a great noise.

Ruit imbribus, it rayned soore.

Rupes, be hills, banks or rocks, so steep down, as no man may clymme
them.

Rupicapra, a wild goote.

Rupicias, for damnum dederis, thou shall pay or yield damages.

Ruptus, ta, tum, broken or brast, weryed, torn, or rent.

Ruralis, le, rusticall, or of the vyllage.

Rurestris, stre, of the country, not of the city or town.

Ruricola, a husband man.

Rurigena, borne in the country, out of a city or great town.

Ruro, rare, to do after the country facion.

Ruro, raris, rari, to dwell in the countreye, or out of the city.

Rursus, and Rursum, eftsoon or backewarde, on the other part.

Rus, ruris, the country, out of the city, where as husebandry is used and
exercysed.

Ruscum, read Bruscum.

Ruscinu^, Russilion or Perpignian in France.

Ruspor, ari, to search diligently. it is properly to shrape, as an hen
does, when she sekith for meat.

Russus, and Russeus, a, um, read.

Rustica, a bird like a partriche, but he has a longer byll.

Rusticanus, na, number, rrusticall, of the country or vyllage.

Rustice, rustically, vncourteysly, rudely.

Rusticane, idem.

Rusticarius, a, um, perteynynge to husbandry.

Rusticatim, for rustice, an aduerbe, churlyshly.

Rusticitas, tatis, carlyshenes, sometime fearfulness. Et si rusticitas non
uetat, ipsa rogat, And if that folyshe bashefulnes let her not, she makes
request.

Rusticor, caris, cari, to dwell in the countreye or exercise husbandry.

Rusticus, ca, cum, rusticall, vplandyshe, homely, without curtesy.

Rusticus, is also the proper name of a man.

Rutheni, people beyond Liuonia of whom the country is now called Russia,
there be also people in France about Toures so called.

Ruta, Rewe, called also herb grace. It is among the lawyers all that is
dygged out of the ground, as stone, cole, lead and other metal.

Ruta and caesa, Albeit Mutius does say, that in Rutis and caesis, are those
things, that be not fast in the ground, nor are any part of the building
or the covering of a house. Perchance we might name them moueables.

Rutabulum, a cool rake, to make clean an oven.

Rutaceus, a, um, of rewe.

Rutatus, ta, tum, made of Rewe.

Rutatio, and rutus, for ructatio, belkynge.

Rutellum, a little mattocke.

Rutilo, lare, to shine.

Ruto, tare, for ructo, to be^ke or break wind upward.

Rutor, idem.

Rutrum, a mattocke.

Rutum, idem.

Rutuba, trouble. Id postea uiderimus, nunc sumus in rutuba, We will afterward
se, now we be in trouble.

Rutuba, a river in Liguria, runnynge from the mountaygne called Apenninus.

Rutubatri, men that dygge with mattockes.

Rutuli, an ancient people in Italy, of whom Turnus was king, whom Aeneas
vaynquysshed.

Rutulus, la, lum, a bryghte red like to coals that be kyndled.

Rutupe, or Rutupiae, an haven in Kente called Sandwyche.

Rutupinum promontorium, a goore or elbow of land in England, lyenge into the
sea about Sandwyche.

S ANTE A.
SABA a country in the myddell of Arabia toward the east, environed about
with greatte rocks, wherein is a great wood of preciouse trees some of sinamom
and casia, some bringing forth frankincense and myrre. The length of that
wood is.xx. of their miles called Schoeni, which comprehends of Italyon
miles one hundred and fyfty. Plin. li. 12. Theophrastus li. 9. de hist. plant.
Solinus writes that the region brynging forth frankensence is from a town
there named Atramitae, viii. mansions which in deed conteyneth.CC^iiii. miles.
Mansio or Stathmos being of.xxviii Italyon miles. The chief city of that
Realm is called Sabota.

Sabaei, people of the realm of Saba.

Sabbath, in the plurell number, in the Hebrew tongue, signifies god of
hosts, or armies, or powers.

Sabbatarius, and Sabbataria, he or she that keeps the Sabbath day.

Sabath, a propre name, whereof comes Sabatheni, the name of a people.

Sabbatismus, a vacation after labors.

Sabbatizare, to keep sabbat day.

Sabbatum, was among the Jews accounted the seventh day, in the which they
fasted in remembrance of the seven days, in the which they were fatigate,
going fasting in the deserte of Arabia, or they came to the mount of Sinai.
Saint Augustine upon the psalms writes, saying, that Sabbatu^ is taken three
manner of ways, for the seventh day is called by that name, in the which
almighty god rested after his warke of syx days. Sabbatum is also eternal
quietness. Moreover Sabbatum is the conscience of a quiet mind advanced by
hope of the time to come, not being shaken or vexed with storms of things
present.

Sabe, in the tungue of Siria, is the month of February.

Sabelli, people, which dwell in the mountains between the Sabines and
Marsi, in Italy.

Sabim, among the Arrabians does signify god

Sabina, a weapon like a bore spear, it is also the herb called Sauyne.

Sabini, people in Italy, between Latini and Vmbry.

Sabiusa a gate at Rome, out of the which men went to the Sabines.

Sabora, a city of Araby.

Sabrina, a great river in England called Seuerne Ptholomeus calls it
Sabriana aestuarium.

Sabucus, an elder tree read after Sambucus.

Sabuletum, a gravel pytte.

Sabulum, great gravel.

Sabulosus, a, um, grauelly.

Saburra, lastage, or balese, wherewith ships are even poysed, to go vpryghte,
which is commonly of gravel.

Saburij, a kind of sacrifice.

Saburratus, loded with gravel or other like earth.

Saburro, rare, to balese a ship.

Sacal, a kind of amber found in Egypt.

Saccarius, he that bears a sack.

Saccarum, or Saccharum, sugar.

Saccaria, marchaundise of sackes or bags.

Saccellare, to apparayle or amend wynes put into sackes.

Sacciperium, a powche.

Sacconia, a clothe to wype a thing with, a napkyn, also a territory.

Sacculus, and Saccellus, a little sack.

Sacer mons, an hyl by Rome, an other by Gallatia, wherein gold is found.

Sacerdotalis, le, perteynynge to a priest.

Sacon, among the Indians, signifies a bryghte purple color.

Sacondion, a precious stone of a bryghte purple color.

Saccularius, a crafty deceyuour, which in selling of grain out of sackes,
will conueye away part. it is also a purse cutter.

Saccus a sack. Sacculus, a bag.

Sacellium, a purse.

Sacellum, a chapelle.

Sacer, cra, crum, holy: sommetyme cursed detestable.

Sacer ignis, a sickness, wherein is vehemente inflammation and bournynge of
the body. some do suppose it to be saynet Antonies six.

Sacer locus, a place consecrate or dedicate.

Sacer morbus, the falling syckenes.

Sacer mons, an hill dedycate to Jupiter iii miles from Rome beyond the river
called Anienis.

Sacerdos, dotis, a priest.

Sacerdotium, priesthode, sometime a benefice or spiritual promotion.

Sacra uia, a street in Rome, where peace was made between Romulus and Tacius,
and through the which the vanquishers passed with their triumph unto the
capitol.

Sacrare caput cum bonis, Among the Romans were old laws, that for a
certain offense it was lefull for any man which did mete with the offendour,
to slay him as a sacrifyce unto the infernal Iupyter, and his goods were
dedicate to the diuelles of hell, and this was called Sacrare caput cum bonis.

Sacramenta, is taken for men of war.

Sacramentum, an oath, among us christen men it signifies a holy sign, or a
sign of an holy thing, wherein is contained a divine mystery, and is called a
sacrament

Sacramentum, as Varro writes. li. 2. De lingua latina, was a gage in money
laid by the parties which contented together, so that he which recovered in
judgment should take again his gage. he that was condemned should lose his
gage, which was brought to the commune treasour, and this was named
Sacramentum.

Sacramento iusto contendere, to gage suite as is before written.

Sacramento rogati, Soldiers sworn not to depart until the wars were al
finished Sacro sancta potestas, was properly attrybuted to the authority of
the Tribunes, called Tribuni Plabis, it is now most convenient for the
authority of the Catholyke church.

Sacamento teneri, to be sworn.

Sacrarium, a sextrie or vestrie, wherein are kept things hallowed, and relikes.

Sacratae leges, laws, in the which it is enacted, that whoo so does offend
against them, is accursed.

Sacratio, a consecration.

Sacratius, more holy.

Sacrator, he that does consecrate.

Sacrificium, sacrifyce.

Sacrifico, care, to do sacrifyce, to consecrate, to ask forgyuenesse of god.

Sacrificulus, a priest.

Sacrilegium, theft, or taking away of things hallowed, called Sacrilege.

Sacrilegissimus, an errant thief in stelynge of things hallowed.

Sacrilegus, he that violently takes away or steals things hallowed, or
things unhallowed out of a holy place.

Sacrimum, must or new wine.

Sacriscrinius, he that keeps the kings letters or Records, concerning the
Crown, or books of great affairs.

Sacrium, a kind of aumber, which comes out of Scithia.

Sacro, crare, to dedicate or halowe.

Sacrosanctus, ta, tum, consecrate or hallowed, that which moughte not be
touched but reverently, or was sure from all injury.

Sacrum, any thing dedicate to god. Also sacrifice. sometime a temple or
church.

Paulus Iureconsultus. Sunt autem sacrilegi, qui publica sacra compilarint.
also sacra do signify holy words, also charms.

Sacrum promontorium, a great mountain or rock in the southweste part of
Spain, lyenge on the sea, called now, Capesaynet Vincent.

Saducaei, were men of a certain sect among the Jews. who held opinion
that the soul was mortal and that it dyed with the body, they were diverse in
manners and cruel to strangers.

Saeculum, is properlye the space of a hundred years: it is commonly taken for
a space of time, wherein one fascion of the world has continued.

Saepe, oftentimes. Saepenumero, saepiuscule, saepicule, idem.

Saepius, more often. Saepissime, very often.

Saeuio, uiui, ire, to be very angrye, to do valyauntly, to be cruel, or
exercise tyranny.

Saeue, cruelly.

Seuiuer, rudely. Magis cogito, saeuiter, blanditer ue alloquar, I think more,
where I may speak to him rudely, or gentylly.

Saeuitia, and saeuitudo, cruelty.

Saeuns, a, um, cruel, horrible. sometime angry valyant, mighty.

Saeuissima, hyems, a meruayllous cold winter

Saga, a wise or subtle woman, also a witch.

Sagaperium, a gum or rosyn, which runs out of a kyxe or tree, called
ferula.

Sagaris, a river.

Sagaria, the craft to make clokes to wear upon harneyse

Sagarius, a seller of such clokes.

Sagatus, apparayled in a soldiers cloak.

Sagax, acis, wytty, having the senses sharp

Sagaces canes, hounds or spaynelles.

Sagacitas, wyttynes or sharpness of wit.

Sagaciter, wyttyly.

Sagda, a grene stone, which the Caldes have made fast to their hands.

Sagena, a great net to take fyshe.

Sagimen, and Saginatio, nourishynge.

Saginarius, a, um, that which is franked or mad fat.

Sagina, meat, wherewith al thing is fatted sometime superfluous fat or
grease.

Saginarium, a place wherein any thing is franked or made fat.

Sagino, are, to make fat.

Sagio, ui, ire, to perceive quickly or sharply.

Sagitta, an arowe. also the top of a twygge or rod.

Sagittarius, an archer. it is also one of the.xii. signs among the sterres.

Sagitto, tare, to shoot.

Sagma, n pack saddell, or sumpter saddell. also an heap.

Sagmen, minis, grass, plucked up with the earth, which in the old time the
ambassadors of the Romans did, when they denounced wars to other people.

Sagona, A river in France called the Sone.

Sagum, a soldiers cloak.

Sagulum, a little cloak.

Sagacuculla, the hode of a cloak.

Saguntus, uel Saguntum, a City in Spain beyond the river of Iberus, about
one mile from the sea, the people thereof being in amity with the Romans
were of such faythfulnesse, that when Hanniball had long besieged them, and
brought them at the point to be famyshed, the chief of the City made great
fyres, and let cast into it their treasure and many of them entered in to the
fire and were wylfully burned. all the resydue fought and were slain, so that
none escaped. whereof came this proverb. Sagundina fames, applied to a great
and horrible famyne.

Sais, a city of Egypt, where is one of the entres into the river of Nilus,
the entrye or port is called Saiticum.

Sal, salis, salt, sometime it is put for wisdom myrthe. Sales, quick or
sharp sentences, iestinges. sometime it signifies the sea.

Salindus, in Dioscorides is of some men taken for sugar.

Sala, a river in Germany.

Salaces, water that ryseth out of a quycke spring.

Salacia, was called goddess of water.

Salacones, men that do live always in exceeding pleasures and do think that all
men do delight in that which lyketh their appetires.

Salamandra, a beast in figure like to a lysard full of spots, which being
in the fire, does extinete it, and is not burned.

Salamis, Salamis, mina, an Ilyeby Athenes.

Salaminius, a, um, of that isle.

Sal amoniacus, a kind of salt found under sand, which is like to alume,
and is medicynable, in dysslouynge and pourgynge of fleume.

Salanga, a very high Hill between greatte Brytayne and Irelande, now called
our ladies Hill.

Salapia, a town in Apulia.

Salapusius, may be called a merry jesting boy It was a name given to Caluus
an orator which being of a chyldes personage, used much jesting and
tauntynge meryly.

Salarium, wages given to servants.

Salarius, a salter, which sells all thing that is salt.

Salarius, a, um, perteynynge to salt.

Salaria um, an high way, by the which salt was carried to Rome.

Salax, acis, lecherouse.

Salebrae, places which are not plain.

Salebrosus, a, um, vnplayne, where a man can not go, except he do leap.

Salentinum, a country in Italy.

Salentini, a people in Italy.

Salgama, things condite or conserved, as pears, figs, grapes, and other
like.

Sali, a kind of birds, which be greatte breders: as partriches or hens, I
suppose them to be hethecockes.

Saliaris, re, perteynyng to the priests of Mars

Saliares coena, a banquet or supper made by the priests of Mars.

Saliares uirgines, maidens which were with the priests of Mars, and did
sacrifyce with the bysshoppes, wearynge on them cote armures, and bishops
myters on their heads

Salicastrum, a kind of wild vine, rounnyng upon wyllowe trees.

Salicetum, and salictum, a place where wyllowes grow.

Salientes, the cocks or pipes of cundytes, out of the which water spouteth.

Salignus, na, number, of wyllowe or wythy.

Salij, the priests of Mars in Rome, which daunced about the city bearing
targettes called Ancilia.

Salillum, a little salt seller.

Salina, a place where salt is made.

Salinum, idem.

Salinae, narum, a city in Sicile.

Salinator, the name of a noble man of Rome.

Salinacidus and salnacidus, a, um, that which is salt in taste.

Salio, iui, ire, to salt or powder.

Salio, iui, ij, ire, to leap.

Salitura, powdringe or saltynge.

Salitus, ta, tum, salted.

Saliuo, are, to lay salve.

Saliua, and saliuum, spettell.

Saliua, is also taken for juice, also for the wine called Chium.

Saliunca, an herb like to lauander called spike

Salisi, people in the mountains of Alps, confynes, to the Swycers, and the
people called Boij.

Saliuarius, he that lays salve.

Salix, icis, a wyllowe or wythy.

Salix amerina, in Dioscoride, is the tree called also Vitex and Agnus castus, a
kind of wyllowe, of some named parkleaues.

Salinaris herba, read Pyrerrum.

Salinacis, a fountayn in Caria, where a nymph finding Helmophroditus the
son of Mercurius and Venus naked, she imbracyng him desired of the gods
that of them two might be made one body and so it happened. Also the people of
Caria be sometime called Salmatij.

Salmaris, idem.

Salmacia, a pray gotten without labor.

Salmacidus, da, dum, that which sauoureth of salt.

Salmo, onis, a fyshe called Samonde.

Salmonius, the king of Elides, which taking foolyshely upon him, to have
divine honors done unto him, and would seem to cast lyghtenynges, like unto
Iupyter, being overthrown with lyghtnynge was cast into hell.

Sal nitrum, salt peter, which is put in to gunne powder.

Sallo, lere, to powder with salt.

Salo, a river called also Bibilis, wherewith iron is tempred, and made stronger.

Solomon, and Solomon, monis, is interpreted peasyble, the name of a king of
Jews, the son of king David, whoo exceded all men in wisdom and
knowelege, and never the less was by dotage on women brought to ydolatrie.

Salomonius, a, um, of Solomon.

Salon, a country of Bithinia, very commodiouse for the fedynge of cattle.

Salone, a city in Liburnia between Dalmatiam and Illiriam.

Salopia, a town and country in England called Shrewesbery.

Salpa, a fysshe which will not be sodden, except it be beaten as stockefyshe
is.

Salpiga, a kind of emotes or pysmeres.

Salsamentarius, he that sells sawee.

Salsamentarius, a, um, perteyninge to sauce.

Vas salsamentarium, a vesselle, wherinto sauce is put.

Salsamentum, sauce.

Salsedo, saltenesse.

Salsicortex, a tree, that bears maste, which nothing will eat, except only
swyne.

Salsilago, and salsugo, ginis, a salt lycour.

Salsura, meresauce or bryne.

Salsus, a, um, salt in taste.

Saltabundus, da, dum, that which leapeth or daunseth.

Saltatio, daunsynge.

Saltator, and saltatrix, a daunser.

Saltatorius, a, um, perteynynge to daunsynge.

Ludus saltatorius, a school of daunsynge.

Saltatrix, and saltatricula, a daunsynge wenche.

Saltatus, tus, daunsynge.

Saltem, at the least way.

Saltiae, people ioynynge to the sea called Pontus Euxinus.

Saltim, uel saltuatim, by leapes.

Saltito, tare, to daunse, to leap often.

Salto, tare, to daunse.

Saltuarius, a keeper of a wod, a wodwarde.

Saltuosus, a, um, full of woods.

Saltus, a thycke wodde, also a leap.

Saluator, toris, a savior, he that keeps or saves a thing from destruction
or loss.

Saluber, bris, bre, wholesome, hole.

Salubrior, ius, Saluberrimus, a, um, more wholesome, most wholesome.

Salubriter, holsomely.

Salubritas, health.

Salve, and Salueto, and saluete, god speed you, ye be welcome, sometime
contrary, farewell, God be with you.

Salueo, ere, to be saufe, or speed well, to be well at ease.

Salve. S. satis est mihi tuae salutis, nihil moror non salueo, God speed. S.
It suffyseth me that thou art in health: but in few words I am not well at
ease.

Saluia, an herb called sauge.

Saluiatum, a drenche for a horse or other beast.

Saluifico, care, to make safe, or to save.

Saluo, are, to save.

Saluebis a meo Cicerone, my son Cicero commends him unto you.

Satin salve? is not all thing well?

Salum, the sea.

Salus, lutis, health, sometime remedy.

Salutarius, the forefynger.

Salutatio, a salutation.

Salutator, toris, a saluter.

Salutatorium cubiculum, a chamber, where men do stand and abide to salute a
prince or noble man in authority, called now a chamber of presence.

Salutem, in the old time was used for saltem. Salutem dicere, to salute or to
have recommendation to any man.

Salutifer, ra, rum, wholesome.

Salutaris, re, idem.

Salutaris digitus, the forefynger.

Salutariter, in health.

Salutiger, he that brings recommendations from an other person.

Saluto, tare, to salute, as well at coming as at departing, also to honor.

Saluus, a, um, saulfe, hole, sound, without damage or harm.

Salua res est, the matter is come well to pass

Saluo capite, without danger of life.

Sam, for Eam, her.

Samara, an Hill in the east Oceane se, at the further end of the mountain
called Caucasus.

Samarobrinae, people in France, about Cambry.

Samaria, a country and city of Siria joining to Judea, which was the chief
City of the x tribes of Israel. who being taken prisoners by the king of
Syria and led away prisoners. thither were sent for them paynims to inhabit
that country, which were after called Samaritani, and they myxte the law of
Moses with ydolatry. The city was afterward called Sebasten.

Sambuca, an instrument of mysyke, now called doulcymers, an engyne of war,
wherewith fortresses were assaulted.

Sambucina, a womanne which plays on doulcimers.

Sambuceus, a, um, of Elder or alder tree.

Sambucus, an elder or alder tree.

Sambucistria, idem quod Sambucina.

Samia, vessels made in the Iyle of Samos,

Samius, a, um, of the isle of Samos: the old writers did use it for sharp,
and Samiare, to whet or make sharp.

Samnites, people of Samnium a country in Italy called now Aprutium.

Samium, a shell.

Samiolum, a little shell.

Samos, the name of two yles in the sea called Aegeum, one by Thraciam, and
therefore it is also called Samothracia, the other lies against Ephesus.

Sampsuchinus, na, um, of maioram.

Sampsuchus, and Sampsucum, an herb called Maioram.

Samsa, the stone of an olyue.

Samsychon, idem quod Sampsuchus.

Sanates, people dwelling about Rome.

Sancio, xi, cire, to consecrate, to make firm.

Sancire leges, is to constitute laws.

Sancus, one of the names of Hercules.

Sancte, firmly, holyly, devoutly.

Sanctificatio, halowynge.

Sanctifico, care, to halowe.

Sanctitas, holiness.

Sanctitudo, idem.

Sanctio, a law, a thing decreed and stablysshed.

Sanctus, ta, tum, holy, inviolable by a law, pure and clean, uncorrupted.
Vir sanctus, a blessed man.

Sanctimoniales, Nuns.

Sanctimonium, the profession of relygious persons.

Sanctimonia, and Sanctitas, holiness, perfection.

Sanctuarium, a pla^e consecrate or halowyd.

Sandalium, a slypper.

Sandalus, a spyce called saunders.

Sandaraca, a color found in mines of silver, or gold, yelowe ocker.

Sandaliotis, an Iyle called now Sardinia.

Sandaracinus, color made with yelowe ocker

Sandastros, and Sandaphorion, and Sandarison and Sandassites, a preciouse
stone, having in a bryghte color yelowe speckes, and is called also
Garamandita.

Sandyx, is a poulder made of Cerussa burned till it wax red, as Dioscor.
Galen, and Aetius do write. Other do say that it is made with Ceruse and red
chalk called Rubrica, myxte to gether, it was also called Siricon, or Syricon.

Sandicinus color, idem.

Sane, an aduerbe, which signifies ye, or certaynely, on gods name. Bellum
sane difficile gessit, he faught a very daungerouse battle.

Sane ut uis, be it as thou will.

Sane quam utile, surely very profitable.

Sane quidem, ye hardely Nempe ergo aper te uis, quae restant me loqui? D. Sane
quidem. But will thou than that I shall tell plainly all the rest? D. ye
hardely.

Sanesco, scere, to be or wax hole.

Sanga, a river in Portugal.

Sangaris, a river of Galatia, which running through Phrygia, falls into
Propontis, the sea.

Sanguen, guinis, and Sanguis, guinis, blood. also a tree, the bark whereof is
of the color of bloudde.

Sanguineus, a, um, full of blood, also cruel. sometime of sanguine or
blouddy color.

Sanguinolentus, idem.

Sanguiculum, the blood of a kyd or swyne. wherewith pouddynges are made.

Sanguino, are, to blede.

Sanguinaria, and Sanguinalis, an herb that stops bloudde. called also
Polygonon, knot grass.

Sanguinarius, cruel, bluddy.

Sanguinolentus, idem.

Sanguis, guinis, blood.

Sanguisuga, a worm, which is in standing waters, and does suck the blood
of men or beasts that come into it: it is also called Hirudo

Sanies, matter, corrupted blood.

Sanna, a scorn or mock.

Sannio, onis, a dysarde in a play or dysguysynge: also he which in
countenance, gesture, and manners is a fool.

Sanitas, tatis, health.

Saniter, like a hole man.

Sannaus, a river in Asia.

Sano, are, to heal.

Sansa, the stone of an olyue.

Sansucus, Maioram.

Sancsucinus, a, um, of maioram.

Santerna, soulder, wherewith gold is soudred

Santones, people of a country in France called Xantongue.

Santonicum, an herb called Lauander cotton

Santonum, Rochell in France.

Sanus, na, number, hole wholesome.

Sanitas, tatis, health.

Sapa, is new wine boiled to the third part of the measure, if it be to the
half deal it is named Defrutum, as Pliny writes. li. 14. And if there be
but one part consumed it is than called Caloenum, as Anto. Musa affirms.
Sapa is also called sometime Syreon, sometime Hepsema, and Hepseton, of Galenus
in Meth. and of Nonius Mellacum.

Saperda, a dunge hill.

Sapide, sauourely.

Sapidius, more sauourely.

Sapidus, da, dum, sauourly, well seasoned.

Sapiens, it is, wise.

Sapientia, the kunnyng of things divine and humayne, wisdom.

Sapio, pui, pere, to taste or savor, to feel, to be wise, to have a right
opinion.

Sapio rem, I know what I have to do.

Sapiunt male, they be ill aduysed.

Sapit hic pleno pectore, he is meruaylouse wise.

Sapit plus, he has more wit.

Sapit satis, he is wise inoughe.

Sapis multum ad genium, thou knoweste how to make good chere.

Sapo, ponis, Soap.

Saponaria, read Struthio.

Sapor, oris, a savor, a taste.

Sapphiratus, a Saphyr full of spots.

Sapphirinus, na, um, of a Sapphire.

Sapphirus, a stone called a Saphyre.

Sappho, a woman of the isle of Lesbos, a great poetresse, who made versis
called Lyrica, at the last she was taken with the love of a yo^g man called
Phao, who runnynge away from her, she not susteynynge the anguishe of love
threw her selue down from an Hill in to the sea.

Sappinus, the lower part of a fyrre tree, which is without knottes.

Saprum, a drink made with salt and the fruit called Sorba, which helps
men that have the colyke.

Sapros, vynewed.

Sapsa, of old writers was used for ipsa.

Sarcasmos, a manner of jesting or scoffing bytyngely.

Sarcimen, a seame.

Sarcina, a trusse or pack, or fardell. sometime it is taken for an
unprofitable burden.

Sarcinas colligere, is properly of men of war, when they remove or depart
from their camp.

Sarcinas, atis, for sarcina.

Sarcinaria iumenta, pachorses.

Sarcinatrix, tricis, a shepster, or seamester.

Sarcinae, all stuff that is closed or shut up in coffers.

Sarcino, are, to lade. sometime to sow.

Sarcinator, a botcher of garments.

Sarcio, ciui, cire, to make hole again, to amend a thing decayed or
appayred, to make amends.

Sarcion, a stone of carnation color.

Sarcito, pay the damages or costs.

Sarcte, hole.

Sartum tectum. idem.

Sarcocilla, a gum of a tree in Persia, like to the poulder of incense,
somewhat red and bitter, sum is white of color which is much better than
red.

Sarcophagus, a sepulcher.

Sarculo, are, to rake.

Sarculum, a rake.

Sarda, a red stone, wherein seals ar graven.

Sardanapalus, a king of Assiria, monstrous in all kinds of lecherye, and
therefore was slain of one of his lords as he satte spynnynge among harlottes.

Sardinia, an isle in the sea called Ligusticum, by Geane, not passing.vii.
miles from Corsica.

Sardis, a city in Lidia.

Sardo, for intelligo, I understand.

Sardoa, an herb like to smallage, which grows in Sardinia, whereof if a man
eat, he shall grenne and make countenance of laughing, and so dye.

Sardonius risus, a grennyng or laughyng with out cause, a long laughter.

Sardonycharus, having apparayle garnished with the stone called Sardonix.

Sardonychus, idem quod Sardonyx.

Sardus, and Sardinensis, and Sardous, a, um, of Sardinia.

Sardonyx, onychis, a stone of the color of a man's nail.

Sarepta, a town in Siria, where Hely the prophet was borne.

Sargacae, people in the North part of the world, ioynyng to the great mere
of Meotis

Sargus, a fyshe being in the sea of Egypt.

Sari, an herb, growing in waters having an hard rote, and wounden,
necessary for smythes.

Sarissa, a long spear.

Saronicus, a boosome of the sea against Isthmus.

Sarmatia, all that great country, wherein is contained Russia, Liuonia, and
Tartaria, and the North and cast part of Polonia.

Sarmata, a man of that country.

Sarmenta, twigs or shroude of trees cut of.

Sarmentitius, tia, um, made of twigs or small boughs.

Sarnus, a river in Campania.

Sarpa, a vine cut of, shradde.

Sarpedon, the king of Lisia, which came to the aid of the Troyans against the
Greeks.

Sarpo, pere, to cleanse or make clean.

Sarra, an I Will called sometime Tyrus: also the wife of Abraham.

Sarra, a City in Phoenicia called also Tyrus,

Sarranus, na, number, of that city.

Sarraballa, plurali numero, a word of Caldey, signifienge breches.

Sarraca, the name of two cities, whereof the one is in Media, the other in
Felici Arabia, or the rich Arrabie.

Sarracum, a certain carre, wherein wood or stones be carried.

Sarranae uestes, garments of purple.

Sarrastes, people in Campania.

Sarrio, rire, to wede corn.

Sarritor, and sartor, toris, a weder of corn.

Sarritio, Sarritura, and sartura, wedynge of corn.

Sarsina, an old city in Italy, where Plautus the writer of comedies was
borne.

Sarta tecta, houses letten to certain persons to keep them always repaired
sufficiently, for a certain sum of money.

Sarta tecta locare, to set out houses at a price certain to be repaired.

Sarta tecta exigere, to charge a man with reparations.

Sartago, ginis, a fryenge pan.

Sarte, hole.

Sarticum, an entry into the river of Nilus.

Sartor, and sarritor, an harower or weder of corn.

Sartum tectum habere, to keep hole and sound or uncorrupted or hurt.

Sartutillus, the bealye of a swyne stuffed with meal.

Sas, old writers used for suas.

Saso, an isle five miles from the city of Brundusium in the realm of Naples.

Sason, a river.

Sat, for satis, enough. Quantum sat est, as much as is sufficient. Sat habet,
it is sufficient Sat scio, I know well enough.

Satagitae, people in the country now called Tartarye.

Satago, gi, gere, to be dilygent, to do with speed, to be busy about a thing.

Satanas, is interpreted an aduersarye, by the which name the dyuell was
called, because that he was adversary to Christ. also what so ever is contrary
to peace, is called Satanas

Satarchae, people in Scithia, which excluded from them the use of gold and
silver.

Satellis, litis, one retained to guard a man's person. also a catchepoll or
bailiff, that does attache men.

Satellitium, a guard, the office of such a person or offycer.

Saterona, a beast, which does live, sometime in water, sometime on land.

Satias, sacierie, fullness or weariness in much using of a thing.
sommetyme it sygnifieth abundance. Hi saltibus occupatis, externorum agros
inuasere, frumentique ex inopia graui, satias facta, After that they had gotten
the woods or forrestes, they invaded the lands of them that were borderers,
and from scarsitie of corn, they happened to have their fylle or abundance.

Satiabilis, le, that which may be easylye satisfied.

Saties, for satietas.

Satietas, tatis, a sacietie or fullness.

Rerum omnium satietas, tedyousenesse of all things.

Satin, for satisne, Satin sana^es? Art thou not well at ease?

Satin saluae? Be all things well?

Satio, tionis, the act of sowyng of corn.

Satio, tiare, to saciate or fylle, which has relation not only to the body
and senses, but also to the mind.

Satis, enough, as much as does need, sufficient

Satis acceptio, a covenant, whereby a man is bounden, and sureties with him.

Satisaccipere, to take joint sureties.

Satis iam uerboru^ est, thou have said enough.

Satis habere, to be content. Satis habeas, nihil me etiam tecum de tui fratris
iniuria conqueri, Be content, that I have not also laid to your charge, the
wrong that your brother has done me.

Satisdatio, and satisdatum, dati, the surety or bond, whereby men are bounden
for an other, for perfourmance of covenant, or the couenaunter, and sureties
with him.

Satisdator, he that is bounden for performance of covenant.

Satisdo, dare, to put in sureties for perfourmance of couena^tes. also to be
bounden with sureties for perfourming of couenantes.

Satisfacio, cere, to satisfy, to excuse, to content.

Satisfactio, satisfaction.

Satispraestatio, idem.

Satispraesto, tare, idem quod satis dare, to find surety.

Satis superque, enough and to much.

Satius, the comparatiue degree of satis, it signyfieth better.

Satiuus, a, um, that may be sown, or is sown.

Satnois, a river of Phrigia.

Sator, toris, he that sows corn.

Satrapa, among the Persians were as dukes and earls be here.

Satrapia, a prouynce, Duchy, or county.

Satullo, are, idem quod saturare, to saciate or fylle superfluousely.

Satum, is a measure of the hebrews which receives of wine.xxxiii.li.
and.iiii. ounces. of oil xxx.li. of honey.l. li. it is of our measure
standerde.ii. galons and a quarte, and being a measure of dry things, it is
our pecke, and the.iiii. part of a pecke.

Satur, turis, full fed, sometime aboundaunt or plentuouse.

Satureia, an herb called Sauery.

Saturio, onis, he that has eaten enough and to much.

Saturitas, fertility or plentuousnes, also abundance in excess.

Saturnalia, five days assigned to Saturn in December, wherein men used to
feast one an other, and to send mutual presents.

Saturnalitium, pertaining to the ceremonies of Saturnus.

Saturnia, was the name of a town. also high places were called Saturnia.

Saturnius, a, um, of Saturnus.

Saturninian, were sheritykes, which affyrmed, that only.vii. angels made the
world against the conscience of god the father.

Saturninus, a mountain at Rome, which was afterward called Tarpeius.

Saturnus, one of the seven planettes. also a god of the paynyms, son of
Coelus and Vesta, and father of Iupyter.

Saturo, are, to saturate or fill with any thing superfluousely, much
commonly in eating.

Saturum, and Satyrum, a city of Calabria, not far from Tarentum.

Satus, ta, tum, sown or begotten.

Satus, tus, the sowynge, also sede.

Satyra, a poesy rebukynge vices sharply, not regarding the persons.

Satyricus, and satyrus, a maker of such matters

Satyria, a crow.

Satyriacum, an image of Priapus.

Satyriasis, a sycknesse, whereby the member of a man stands always without
appetite or dilectation.

Satyrica, was a comedye, wherein Satyrs were brought in.

Satyrice, an aduerbe, which signifies sharply and with reproach.

Satyrus, a beast having the heed of a man and the body of a got.

Satyrion, an herb, having leaves like a lyly, but smaller, a knappe with many
small purple flowers, and a root like the genytoures of a man.

Saucio, are, to wound.

Saucius, a, um, wounded, sometime weary.

Savior, aris, ari, to kiss swetely.

Saura, a lysarde, which lies in hedges.

Saurites, a stoone, which is found in the bealye of a grene lysarde.

Sauromatae, people called also Sarmatae, Russes, Tartariens, Moscouites. etc.

Saxatilis, le, stonye. Pisces saxatili, fyshes bred among stones.

Saxetum, a rocky place.

Saxeus, a, um, stony, or of a stone.

Saxiphagon, or Saxiphages, in greek, or Saxifraga, in latin, Dioscorides and
Plinius do call it also Empetron, which in deed is the herb called Sampiere,
used for a sauce, and in salades, and therefore is boiled and kept in bryne.
Anton. Musa denies, that Saxifraga and Empetron be oone. Ruellius describes
Saxifragon with little branches growing on stones, having small stalks, not
unlike to Epithymus, but that they are black and short, and has leaves like
to maydenheare, but that they be greatter, or to Polypodi, on the top busshy,
but out of order, having neither flower nor seed, and a superfluouse root,
he also says, that it is found in old buyldynges, in the joints of the
stones. In an other place he names that kind of maydenheare, which is called
Adiantum Saxifragon. Our Saxifrage I need not to descriue, it is so commonly
known, and grows in such abundance, which is not like to any of the other,
nor yet to that which in France (as Ruellius writes) is called Saxifragia
mayor, which he affyrmeth to be Sefeli massiliense, nor to that which he
supposes to be a kind of Napi.

Saxonia, Saxony.

Saxones, the people.

Saxosus, a, um, full of great stones or rocks.

Saxulum, a little rock.

Saxum, a rock. sometime a stone.

Saxum uoluere, to turn the stone, A proverb applied to them that be
fatigate or weried with contynuall and unprofitable labors.

Saxumferratum, a city in Italy.

S ANTE C.
SCabellu^, or scabile, a footstool, or low settle.

Scaber, bra, brum, rustye, roughe, sometime fylthy.

Scabies, scabiei, a scabbe.

Scabiosa, an herb. read Psora.

Scabiosus, a, um, scabbed.

Scabo, by, bear, to rub or scratche.

Scabredo, dinis, a roughness of the skin, as when it does wrynkle.

Scabrae, roughly, not plain, or smothe.

Scabrities, and scabritia, rustynes, fylthynesse, roughness.

Scabro, onis, a wourme, which is engendered of the carrayne of a dead horse.

Scaea, an haven at Troy.

Scaei, people in Thracia.

Scaena, a place, which serves only for enterludes or comedyes to be playde
in, which was in the form of half a cerkle. it is also where trees or
bushes, are cut and laid over the head, in such form as men may under
them walk or sytte in the shadow. It is also where a vice or offense is
openly detected, in such wise as men do cry out, or wonder at it.

Scaenaticus, uel scaenatilis, for a player in comedies or enterludes.

Scaenicula, a diminutiue of scaena.

Scaenicus, ca, cum, pertaining to Enterludes.

Scaenicus, a player in enterludes.

Scaenitae, people of Arabye, which dwell always in tents, covered with the
hears of gootes, among whom if a swyne or hog be brought, it dies.

Scaenoma, a tente also a bag.

Scaenopegia, the feast of the tabernacles, where in the Jews did set up
tabernacles or tents in similitude of them, wherein they dwelled when they
came out of Egypt.

Scaeua, the left hand. also he that uses the left hand for the right.

Scaeuus, a, um, ill. sometime it signifies good. as Scaeuum omen, good luck
or chance.

Scala, and scalae, scalarum, a ladder. also a pair of stayres.

Scalmus, a little piece of wood, whereunto shypmen do bind their oores, to
row the more easyly.

Scalpellum, a penknyfe.

Scalpo, psi, pere, to scratche. alsoo to grave in metal.

Scalptura, and scalpellum, an instrument, wherewith any thing is scraped or
rubbed, alsoo a surgeons instrument, wherewith he takes corrupt flesh from
the bones. It is alsoo a grauynge iron.

Scalptor, toris, a grauer.

Scalptura, grauynge in metal.

Scalpturatum, pauement made with stones, of diverse colors, joined together.

Scalpturio, riui, rire, to scrape as a cock does, or other fowls.

Scalpurio, rire, to scrape as a hen does.

Scamander, dr^, a river which diuydeth Europa from Asia. it was also the name
of one of the sons of Hector, callid also Astyanax.

Scamandria, a town by the haven of Ilium, not far from Troy.

Scamnum, a benche or form. alsoo a step or grice, whereby a man gothe
up into a ^yg^ ^edde. Also a balke vutylled between two forowes.

Scamonea, an herb, the juice whereof is used in medicine to purge choler
vehemently. Albe it that it is venomous, and leueth wars matter behind, than
it does expel.

Scandalides, a kind of dates.

Scandalum, occasyon to sin, given by an another to him that synneth.

Scandinauia, an isle in the north occean sea, the quantity whereof was never
found.

Scandix, dicis, an herb like to cheruyll, but it is sweeter, and has a white
flower, and a little root.

Scando, di, dear, to clymme.

Scandulaca, an herb, which rounneth upon corn, as yuye does on trees.

Scandulae, shyngle, which be tyles of wodde, wherewith diverse churches be
covered.

Scandulum contectum, a house covered with shyngle or wodden tyles.

Scansile, that which may be clymmed or gone upon.

Scansio, a clymmynge up.

Scapha, a boat made of a hole tree, or a ship boot.

Scaphiarius, a boteman.

Scaphium, a basyn or vessel to receive vryne or ordure.

Scapilium, the space between the shoulders.

Scaprum, a knyfe, wherewith vynes and other like things are cut.

Scaptensula, a place in Macedonia, where silver was dygged.

Scaptia, an old city in Italy, whereof came.

Scaptia tribus.

Scapulae, the hinder part of the shulders.

Scapularis, a boy or wenche, which is often beaten about the shulders.

Scapularis uestis, a garmente, which covers only the shulders.

Scapus, after Ruellius is a stalk, which ryseth bolte vpryght. some do add
to, having a knoppe, wherein seeds are contained, as a popy, some do so name
the husk of a grape.

Scarabaeus, a fly with a black shelle or husk called a bytell, which
bredeth in cow shardes, and is black also there is a kind of them which has
horns like to an heart.

Scarabaeus aquilam, a proverb applied to such as endeavor them self to do
displesure to those that be more puyssant than they are.

Scarificatio, launcynge.

Scarifico, care, to lance or open a soore, that the matter corrupted may
issue.

Scarus, a fyshe, which does chewe like a beast, some men do suppose it to be a
gylte head, or Goldenye.

Scatebrae, the bollynge or rysynge up of water out of a spring or sourges of
water.

Scateo, tere, to run or brast out, as water does out of a narowe or strayte
place.

Scaturigo, ginis, and scaturies, brastynge out of water of other thing in
like manner.

Scaturio, ire, to rounne out or abroad, alsoo to spring or grow abroode, as
sum herbs done.

Scaturitio, a runnynge as water does.

Scauri, they which have their toes swollen, or their ankley crooked, that they
may not go fast, it was also an honorable house of the Romans.

Scazon, it is, is a kind of meter.

Scelerate, myscheuousely.

Scelerator, oris, he that polluteth or defyleth.

Sceleratus, he unto whom a myscheuous deed is done. sometime it sygnifieth him
that does an ill deed.

Sceleratus campus, a field at Rome, where the nuns of Vesta were buried
quycke, if they were found to live incontynently.

Scelerose, vngracyousely, myscheuousely.

Sceleste, idem.

Scelero, rare, to pollute.

Scelerosus, a, um, he that has done an ungracious or myscheuouse deed.

Scelerosus, full of ungraciousness.

Scelestus, ta, tum, ungracious, full of unhappiness, myscheuous, vengeable.

Scelus, sceleris, a myscheuous deed. also an ungracious person.

Scena, a pauyllion or haule. also a scaffolde.

Scenographia, is an adumbration or light description of the front and sides of
a house, where the lines does answer to the compass and center of every
part.

Scenoma, a pauyllion, a sack.

Sceparnon, a covering.

Scepsis, a city in Phrigia.

Sceptici, were a sect of philosophers, which affyrmed nothing, the chief of
that sect was Pirrhus and Herillus.

Sceptrum, a pryncis scepter.

Scheda, a leaf of paper, a scrowe.

Schedia, a thing like to a bridge with trees pynned to gyther, whereon
things are carried in the water, in the steed of a barge, as it may be seen on
diverse great rivers in high Germany.

Schedion, any thing suddenly made, and without much labor.

Schedula, a little scrowe or leaf of paper.

Schema, atis, and schematum, a figure, also an ornament, specially in speech.
sommetyme a garment.

Schesis, where a multitude of words are brought in together vnioyned, as,
Nubila, nix, grando, procellae, flumina, ue^ti, Clouds, snow, hayle, shoures,
flouddes, wyndes.

Schilschi, among the Jews, was a weight of four ounces.

Schinos, the tree out of the which rounneth Mastyx, read Lentiscus.

Schisma, atis, a division, specially in the church

Schiston, the milk that remains after that the milk is sodden, which is
called well courdes.

Schoenobates, he that gothe on a cord.

Scoeniculae, harlottes, which dress them selves with slynkynge oyntmentes.

Schoenitae, people, which do dwell in pauyllyons.

Schoenoplocos, a roper.

Schoenos, is that which is callid Iuncus odoratus, Celsus calls it Iuncus
rotundus, the apothecaries calls it Squinantum.

Schoenus, nuntis, a river by Athenes, also an other in Arcadia, and also a
tree called Lentiscus

Schoenus, a space of ground, contaynyng three score furlonges, which is seven
miles, and a half.

Schola, a school. Also a place in a bayn, where men did abide, whiles other
were bayned, like wise in a porche, wherein men tarried for aunsweres. Scholae,
are taken for dysputations between the master and his scholars.

Scholaris, are, pertaynyng to schools.

Scholasticus, a scholar.

Scholasticus, ca, cum, scholasticall.

Scholium, a short or compendyouse exposition.

Scibilis, le, that which may be easily known.

Scibo, for sciam, I shall know.

Sciens feci, I did it wetyngly.

Scienter, idem.

Scienter feci, I did it counnyngly.

Scientia, counnynge.

Scilicet, as who says. It is much, surely, moreover. Sommetyme it implies
a negatyue.

Id populus curat scilicet, Ye the people cares much therefore, as who says,
they care nothing for it.

Scilicet equidem istuc factum ignoscam, That is well said, ye I will pardon
the anon.

Scilicet expectemus illud quin quennium, Ye, it is best that we tarry yet
until the five years be passed, as who moughte say, I will not tarry so long.

Scilicet grauiorem dolorem tibi patrui tui mors attulit, quam C. Graccho
frattis, May that be true, that the death of thine uncle grieved the more,
than grieved Graccho^ the death of his brother.

Scilicet ita res est, Trewelye it is as I tell you.

Non uides? Videam obsecro, quem? hunc scilicet, See thou not? See I pray
the, whom? him I tell the.

Scilliticus, a, um, and Scillites, of Scilla.

Scincus, a kind of small cockodryls in the river of Nilus.

Scindo, scidi, scindere, to cut.

Scindere sententiam, to diuyde his opynion.

Scinpodium, a little couche or benche.

Scintilla, a spark,

Scintillo, are to sparkle.

Scio, sciui, scire, to know.

Scire fidibus, to be perfyte in playenge on instruments.

Scire sciscereque, to ordeyne and inacte, as it is in our parlyament.

Scire omnes linguas, to speak all languages

Scit fidibus, he can play on the harp.

Latin uel graece scire, he understands greek or latyne.

Sciens non faciam, I will not do it wyttyngly.

Scio uti foro, I know what I have to do. also I can accomodate my self to
other men's manners, and to the condytions of the time and place present.

Sciolus, he that knows somewhat.

Sciomantia, a part of nygromancye wrought by shadows.

Sciopodes, people, which lyenge vpryght, do shadow them selves with their
feet, al be it every one manne has but one leg, and yet be they wonderful
swyfte.

Sciotericon, a dyalle set upon a wall, to know by the son what is a
clock.

Scipiadae, and Scipionidae, they which were of the progenye of Scypions, the
noble captains of Romans.

Scipio, the surname of diverse noble Romans, of the which three were the
most excellent personnages of their time, as well in marciall prowess, as
also in other most notable virtues. The one called Scipio Nasica, son of
Gneius Scipio, who had been both Consule and tryumphed, and being a very
young manne, was deemed of all the people of Rome to be the best manne in that
City. The other two were brethren sons of Publius Scipio. The one of them
for subdewynge Asia, was callid Scipio Asiaticus, the other for vaynquysshynge
Hannyballe, and the people of Aphryca was named Scypio Aphricanus. This Publius
Cornelius Scipio, from his chyldehoode was of a wonderful towardness, for
being but.xvii. years old in a great battle by Pauia in Lumbardy, he reskued
his father being enuironned with enemies, and in danger to be slain. Also
after the dyscomfyture at Cannas, where the more part of the flower of chyualry
was slain. Wherefore the resydue of the young men concluded to have forsaken
Italy. This Scipio drew out his sword, and compelled them to swear, that
they should not leave the city but defend it. After that his father and
uncle were slain, all men fearing to be captayns in so dangerous wars, he
stepte forth with a noble courage, proferynge him self to take that charge in
hand, whereunto the senate and people consented, he being than but.xxii. years
old, they beholding in his personage and vysage a beaultye incomparable, his
countenance merye and gentylle, and to be in his gesture and pase a wonderful
majesty, which was had in such admiration, throughout all the world, that
after he had driven Hanniball out of Affrik, subdued the city of Carthage, and
constrained the great king Antiochus to desire peace of the Romans, the wars
being cessed. me^ came out of al countries to Rome only to see him and honor
him, as one excedyng the state of mortalytie, whereby he styred such envy
toward him, that he was accused for detaynyng of certain treasure, which
should have been brought into the commune treasorye, but he with a noble and
valiant courage, came before the people, and remembrynge what he had done for
the weal publyke, required them to go with him unto the capytole, to give
thanks to god for his vyctorye, and so departed all the people following him,
and leauyng the Judges alone. But not withstandyng he so greuousely took the
ingratitude of the senate and people, that he abandoned all commune affairs,
and went out of the city of Rome to a manor place, which he had at
Linternum, and there ended his life, when he had lived.liiii. years, a notable
remembrance to them that do trust on fortune or favor of people.

Scipio, onis, is also a staff to walk with.

Scironia saxa, rocks in the sea by Athenes.

Scirpea, a dounge pot or colne made with rods.

Scirpicula, a little hook, wherewith rousshes, or any thing is cut of in
byndynge of things.

Scirpita, houped vessels.

Scirpo, are, to bind

Scirpus, a russhe, or an osyar.

Nodum in scirpo quaerere, To seek for a knotte in a rushe, is a proverb,
whereby is signyfied, to seek to dilygently for a thing that may not be found,
or to make dout of a thing which is plain.

Scirpeus, a, um, of russhes.

Scirpiculum, a baskette.

Scirrus, or scirron, is an hardness grown in in the flesh within the
skin, or in some other part within the body.

Scirophorion, the month of May.

Scirrhosis, a disease in the eyes coming of a long inflammation, flesh
growing in them somewhat blewe.

Scirta, is a kind of oynyons, growyng in winter, called scalyons.

Sciscitor, taris, tari, and Scisco, sciscere, to demand. Also sciscere, is
to ordeyn or inact, to inquyre.

Sciscito, give thou sentence or judgment, give thy voice or consent in
election.

Scisco, sciui, sciscere, to know. Also to decerne or give sentence.

Scissilis, le, that which may be cut.

Scissio, scissura, and scissus, us, a cut.

Scita, ordynaunces made by the people.

Scitamenta, pleasant meats.

Site, cunnyngly, craftily.

Scitor, aris, ari, to demand or inquyre.

Scitum, a decree, or statute.

Scitus, ta, tum, wise or wyttye, alsoo proper or feate.

Scytae, people in the north part of Asia, which were cruel and hard to be
vanquyshed, they be now called Russyans, Moscouytes, and Tartaryens.

Sciurus, a squyrrell.

Scius, he that knows a thing.

Scleriasis, a swellynge of the eye lyddes, with pain and redness.

Sclerophthalmia, where the eye lyddes been hard, and wax heavy with ache.

Sclopus, a sown, which is made with pouffyng of the chekes.

Scobina, an instrument, wherewith any thing is shaven sometime the shauyng
self.

Scobino, are, to wound, to shave of.

Scobs, scobis, that which comes of the shauynge or boorynge of wood or
metralle: alsoo gryt of stoones, wherewith mettalle is scoured.

Scoletia, a kind of ruste or canker.

Scolopendria, an herb called also Asplenon, it grows on flynt walls, where
the sun comes never or seldom, and has leaves like Polypodium, somewhat
yelowe by the ground and roughe, and above green, having neither staulke,
flower, nor seed. It is not Hartis toungue, which is communely called
Scolopendria, but it is that, which the apothecaries do call Cetrac, read
before in Hemionitis, and Phillitis.

Scolopendria, or Scolopendra, is also a little worm with many legs,
wherewith he goth like to a barge with many ores.

Scolymos, the flower of a thystell.

Scolymus, a thystell now called Arkechoke, of some men is taken for the
thystell, which beasts do eat, called cowethystell.

Scombrus, a fysshe, a certain kind of Tuny.

Scomma, matis, a skoffe, or sentence spoken in myrthe, which sowneth
otherwise than is meant of him that speaks.

Scopa, a broume or besome to swepe houses.

Scopa regia, an herb called Mylfoyle.

Scopae, the croppes of herbs or trees.

Scoparius, and scoparia, he or she that doothe sweep.

Scopei, men of little stature.

Scopae, dyssolute men without wit or counsel.

Scopas dissipare, to say or do a thing without any purpose or reason.

Scopo, pare, to swepe.

Scopelon, an high place, where men stand to behold or espy.

Scopi, be grapes, after that the wine is pressed out.

Scopula, a brushe, such as payntours and pargettours do use.

Scopulosus, a, um, rocky, or full of rocks.

Scopus, and scopulus, an high rock, also it is a mark, whereat men do shote.
sometime it sygnifieth any thing, whereunto that which is spoken, has a
principal respect.

Scordion, has leaves like to germander, but much larger, and the stalk
four square, and has some part of the savor of garlike, which form
declares it to be neither ransoms nor yet saulce alone. Scordotis, idem.

Scoria, the refuse of metal tried out by fire. sometime it sygnifieth care
or grefe.

Scorodon, garlyke.

Scorpena, a fysshe which keeps her self to one make.

Scorpiones, crossebowes as well to shoot arrows as stones.

Scorpionarij, they which do shote in crossebowes.

Scorpites, a stone of the color of a scorpyon.

Scorpiuros, an herb, which has been supposed to be the herb called ruddes
or marygoldes, but the curiosity of late phisytions will not suffer marigoldes
to be so named, because some part of the color of the flower agrees not with
the old description, not withstanding the resydue of the form, propreties, and
virtues do not repugne, (as it has been proved) but that Scorpiuros, may be
marygouldes. For the colors of flowers in sundry cuntreis have been found
somewhat to vary, and likewise the quantity and fascion of the leaf, wherein
there is no doubt, but many be deceived with their superfluous curiosity in
the iudgyng of herbs.

Scrofularia, some thinks it to be the blind nettyll, other the herb called
of Dioscorides Chelidonium minus.

Scorpius, and scorpio, onis, a venymous worm called a scorpyon, which
stryketh with his tail, and never ceasseth to search, where he may have
occasion to stryke. Also a sign in the fyrmament. It is also a crossebow. some
men take it to be an arc bushe. Also a whyp, having plummettes of lead at the
ends of the cords. It is also an herb, which has seeds like to scorpyons
tail.

Scortea, that which is of lether, as Scortei nummi, lether money.

Scortes, the codde of a man or beast.

Scorteus, tea, teum, that which is made of skynnes.

Scortor, aris, ari, to haunte or company with harlottes.

Scortum, an harlotte or strumpette, it is alsoo the hyde of a beast.

Scotia, Scotland, the part of Britania from the river of Twede to Catanes.

Scoti, Scotts, or Scottyshemen, of whom sayncte Hierome writes in this
wise. Quid loquar de caeteris nationibus, quu^ ipse adulescentulus, in Gallia
uiderim Scotos, gentem Britannicam, humanis uesci carnibus: and quum per syluas
porcorum greges and armentorum, pecudumque reperiant, pastorum nates, and
foeminarum papillas solere abscindere, and has solas ciborum delitias
arbitrari? What shall I speak of other nations, sens that when I was a boy, I
saw in France, Scotts, a people of Brytayne, eat men's flesh, and when
they found in the forestes herdes of swyne, beasts, and cattalle, they would
cut of the buttockes of the boys, which kept them, and also the women's
pappes, and took that to be the most deyntie and delycate meat.

Scotos, in Greek, darkness: it is more aptely called in the northern tungue,
myrke.

Scotoma, and scotomia, dymnesse of sight.

Scranteum, a skin, wherein arowes are put: it may be called a sheafe.

Scraptia, a worm, which is founden in leaves. Also a vile and stynkyng
harlotte, a driuelyng queen.

Screabile, that which may be spette or retched out of the lungues or stomakes.

Screator, he that reaches or spytteth.

Screatus, tus, spettynge or retching to spitte.

Screo, are, to reach in spettynge.

Scriba, a Secretary, a notary, a scribe, a clerk of an offycer.

Scribello, lare, the old writers used for Scribo.

Scriblita, a delycate meat made of paste stuffed and wounden like a rope, I
think it to be such as fertes of Portyngal are.

Scribligo, ginis, an untrue form of speaking or writing called also
Soloecismus.

Scribo, scripsi, scribere, to write, also to make, sometime to paynte.

Scribere nummos alicui, to deliver money by exchange, or out of the bank.

Supplimentum legionibus scribere, to perform or make up the legions in the
number of soldiers.

Scrinarius, the keeper of secret letters.

Scriniolum, a casket or forsar.

Scrinium, a coffer or other like place, wherein iewelles or secret things are
kept, as evidences and records of judgments or inrollementes.

Scriptio, an inscription or any other writing.

Scriptor, toris, a writer.

Scriptorius, a, um, apt for writing.

Scriptum, that which is written.

Scriptura, writing. sometime style. also a recknynge of a baylyffe, which
byeth and sells cattle, or of him which ought to pay certain revenues,
for that which he has hired.

Scripturarius, he that writes things which be commonly done, or books of
recknynge for baylyffes and reues, a clerk.

Scrobs, scrobis, a dyche or furrowe.

Scrobulus, a little dyche or furrowe.

Scropha, a sow that has pigs.

Scrotum, the codde or skin, wherein be the stones of a man. Scrota, be also
little images made of paste, which are wont to be given to children.

Scrupulosus, a, um, scrupulouse or doubtful in light things. sometime it
sygnyfieth dyffuse or dyfficulte.

Scrupulosa res, a thing wherein there seems to be some dyfficultie.

Scrupulatim, by small pieces.

Scrupulus, a little sharp stone, which sometime happens to fall into a
man's show, and hurt his hele. It is also taken for much solicitude, also
for dyffycultie, or spyced conscience. also a poyse, which is the third part
of a dram: and than is it also written with y, as Scrypulus.

Scrupulum inijcere, to bring into a man's mind, doubt, carefulnes, or
thought.

Scrupulu^ eximere, to put away dout or care.

Scrupus, a little stone or piece of a stone.

Scrupeus, a, um, stonye.

Scruta, old garments, horseshoen, and such other baggage sold for
necessity. also little images made in paste, sold to the people.

Scrutarius, he that sells old stuff, or makes such images.

Scrutinium, a search.

Scrutor, aris, ari, to search.

Scrutellus, the belly of a swyne farced or stuffed.

Sculna, old writers used for sequester, an arbytrour.

Sculpo, psi, pere, to carue images in stone. some time to grave in metal.

Sculponeae, woollen sockes.

Sculponeatus, he that does wear woullen sockes.

Sculptile, that which is carved or graven.

Sculptor, a grauer, a caruer.

Sculptrix, a woman of that occupation.

Sculptura, ingrauynge or karuyng.

Scurra, a rayler, a scoffer. Scurrilitas, rallynge.

Scurrilis, le, pertaynyng to raylyng.

Scurriliter, in raylynge or skoffynge facion.

Scutarius, a bucklar maker, or a maker of tergates.

Scutarius, ria, rium, pertaining to shieldes or tergates.

Scutatus, armed with a shield or tergate.

Scutella, a saweer.

Scutigerulus, a custrell or page, which bears his masters shield or
bucklar.

Scutriscum, a diminutiue of scutra, or scuttula.

Scutuca, a skourge.

Scutula, a round figure, such as spynners or spyders do warke, also a
vessel, which contains.viii. ounces. also a staff, wherewith flax is
beaten.

Scutulatus, ta, tum, round and wrought in the form of a copwebbe.

Scutulata uestis, a garment of sylk, wherein be wrought figures like to round
copwebbes.

Scutulatus, is a color, I suppose wachet.

Scutulum, a little shield.

Scutum, a tergat or shield, a bucklar.

Scylace, a city in Grecia.

Scylla, a dangerouse rock in the sea by Sicile. Also a lady, daughter of
Nisus, king of Megarensis, which for love of Minois, her fathers ennemy, stale
a pourple hear from her fathers head, which caused him to be vanquyshed. But
she being forsaken of Minois, threw her self into the sea, and was
transfourmed unto a bird of her name. It is also a kind of fyshe in the river
of Liris in Campania. It is also an herb which has a rote like to an oynyon,
and is of the apothecaries called Squilla.

Scylliticus, a, um, of that herb.

Scyllaceum, a town in the furthermooste part of Italy, first builded and
inhabyted by men of Athenes.

Scylleta, places wherein is taken the fyshe called Scilla.

Scylleum, a promontorie or hill in the part of Grecia, now called Morea.

Scyllis, the name of a Greek, which swymmynge under water, did cut in sunder
the cables of the ships of the Persians.

Scyllus, Iuntis, a town in Achaia.

Scylutus, the name of a man, which having four score sons, when he dyed,
he called them before him, and delivered to eueriche of them a shefe of arrows,
comaundyng them to break the sheafes incontinente: which when they might not
do, he took out of the sheafes one arrowe after an other, and brake them all
lyghtely, declaryng thereby unto his sons, that if they continued and agreed
well together, they should be puyssaunte: and if they varied and were
disseuered, they should be feeble and shortly distroyed.

Scymnus, the whelpe of a lion.

Scynifes, bytynge gnattes.

Scyphus, a great cruse or judge.

Scyricum, a blonket color or light wachet.

Scytala, a little field mouse. some do suppose it to be an ermyne.

Scyrus, an isle in the sea called Aegeum, where Achilles was hid by his mother
in a woman's apparayle, to the intent that he should not go with the Greks
against Troy.

Scyron, a thief in the country of Attica, who would sit on a high rock, and
compel them that came by to wash his fete, or else to honor him. and when
they had so done, he threw them down into the sea. Finally he was slain
by Theseus, and it was surmysed, that his boones were turned into rocks,
which of him were named Scyronia, and they be between Atticam and Megarim,
where by the passage is hard.

Scyritae, people in India, which have no noses, but in the stead of a nose
they have two holes in their visage.

Scythia, is a great country, which stretches in to the East from the river
of Tanais, and has on the south part Sacos, and Sogdianos, people under the
king of Persia, and on the north part be countries unknown and deserte,
and is now under the dominion of the great Cane of Cataye.

Scitha, a man or woman of Scithia.

Scythicus, ca, cum, of Scithia.

Scython, a countreye now called Thracia in Greece.

S ANTE E.
SE is a pronowne, and signifies him or her.

Sebasta, uel Sebastapolis, a city in Siria called before Samaria.

Sebemytum, a city in Egypt.

Sebesten, is that fruit which Dioscorides calls Myxa.

Sebethos, a fountain at Naples, which serves the city, runnynge throughout
the cite.

Sebra, or Sebre minor, is as Antonius Musa says, our Esula, or Spourge.

Secale, a certain grain, which serves only to put away hunger.

Scedo, secessi, secedere, to go back, or to go out of company, to go away,
to go to play or sport from labor.

Secucul, is the herb called Eringion.

Secaniabin among the Arabianes is our Oxymell, among the Latins it is
called Acetum mulsum.

Secra, a kind of Ambregryse.

Secerno, secreui, secernere, to divide, or lay oone from an other, to lay or
put by it self.

Secespita, a cuttynge knyfe, wherewith the paynyms divided their sacrifice.

Scessus, us, and secessio, a departing, a vacation from business, a secret
place.

Secinium, a cake of bread cut in sacrifyce.

Secius, later. Nec eo secius, never the later.

Secludo, si, dear, to shut out.

Seclum, for seculum, the space of one hundred years.

Seclusa sacra, ceremonies, that be secretly used, to be had in the more
reverence.

Seco, cas, cui, care, to cut. Viam secare, to lead the way.

Secarius, a panyer to carry that which is cut.

Secare, is also to follow.

Secors, and socors, dis, hartlesse, apt to no purpose, profitable neither to
him self nor to any other.

Secordes agni, lambs late ened or fallen.

Secordia, and socordia, sluggardnes, unaptness, ^uskyshenes.

Secreta, things secret. A secretis, of the priuye counsel.

Secret, and secreto, priuyly.

Secta, a diverse consent in sundry wylfull opynions, a sect of philosophers,
a sect of heretykes.

Sectacula, the sequel.

Sectarius ueruex, the belle wether, that gothe before the flock.

Sectilis, le, that which may be cut.

Sectio, onis, a cuttynge, a dyuysyon, the partyng of a pray in taking of a
town.

Sectio, all that is taken in pray at the wynnyng and sackynge of a town.

Sectiuus, ua, uum, that is often cut.

Sectiuum porrum, vnsette lekes.

Sector, aris, ari, to follow, to run after one. Also to follow in manners or
form of speaking or living. Alsoo to hunte or chase a beast.

Sectores, buyers of forfayted goods Also they that do take profit by the
condempnation of other.

Sectura, a cuttyng, caves under earth, or mines.

Sectus, ta, tum, dyuyded.

Secubo, bare, to lie aparte.

Secula, a sithe, wherewith hey is mowen.

Seculum, some do suppose it to be the space of one hundred years, some of one
thousand years, other of thyrtye year. sometime it is taken for time. Seculum
sterile, a barayn time.

Secunda mensa, the last course, wherein comes fruit and conserues.

Secundae darum, the after birth.

Secundarius, a, um, of the second sort.

Secundo, the second time or place, alsoo eftesoones.

Secundo, are, to prosper or make prosperous.

Secundo lumine, the next day. Caesaris interdicta, si te secundo lumine hic
offendero, respuentur, If I find the here the next day, I will set little by
Cesars commandementes.

Secundus panis, brown breadde. Pasti siliquis, and pane secundo, Fed with
bean husks, and brown breadde.

Secundum, an aduerbe, sygnifieth nigh, or by.

Secundum aurem, by the ear. Also next after. Secundum patrem, next after my
father. sometime for. Secundum te litem do, I judge the matter for the. alsoo
in. Secundum quietem, in rest. also upon. Secundum ea, thereupon. Secundum
Platonem, After the saying of Plato. Secundum Pythagoram uiuo, I live like to
Pythagoras Secundum flumen, A long by the ryuers side.

Secundus, da, dum, second or next to the first. Also prosperous. Secunda
fortuna, Good or prosperous fortune. Res secundae, that which does follow our
desire or appetite, good fortune. Secundo flumine nauigat, He goth, or sayleth,
or roweth with the stream. Secundus uentus, a good wind. Secundum praesentem,
as if he were present. Et post edictum secundum praesentem iudicabitur, And
after the decree, judgment shall be given, as if he were present.

Secundo populo, with the peoples good will

Secundum eum fieri, to be done for his profit

Securis, an axe. sometime it is taken for an offycer, which has authority
to commyt men to the execution of death.

Secure, quyetely, surely, in saufegarde.

Securus, ra, rum, sure, quyete, without care, assured.

Securum reddere, to assure.

Securitas, quietness, lack of care, surety.

Secus, by, or nygh to.

Secus flumen, seruntur salices, nygh to the river, wyllowes are set. Also it
sygnifyeth otherwise, or other. Non dixi secus, ac sentiebam, I said none
otherwise tha^ I thought Quid diximus tibi secus quam uelles? What said we unto
the, other than thou would have us to say?

Sed, but. Sed autem, ye but.

Sedate, without trouble.

Sedatio, a mytigation.

Sedenim, all be it.

Sedentarius, a, um, that which is done sitting.

Sedeo, sedi, sedere, to sit, to be ydel, to content, to tarry or abide, to take
council.

Si sedet hoc animo, if it please you so to do.

Sedent niues, the snow abides.

Seeds, a seat or place to sytte on. also a mansion house. sometime a
sepulcher.

Sedicula, a settle. Sedile, idem.

Seditio, a sedition or discord among the people.

Seditionarius, a seditious person.

Sedo, are, to mitigate, to pacyfy, to assuage, to restrain, to extincte.

Seduc^, xi, cere, to lead aside, or lead away. sometime to deceive:

Seducere arrogantiam, to lay apart pride.

Seductilis, he which may be deceived.

Sedulo, in deed, diligently, without faynynge.

Sedulitas, diligence, with much care.

Sedulus, diligente, he that plainly without craft does a thing dilygently.

Sedum, an herb called syngrene or houseleke.

Seges, segetis, corn when it stands. sum time the ground falowed, and
redye to receive corn.

Segesta, a town in Italy.

Segestria, was the straw that was laid in a lyghter, wherein great men
were borne by their servants.

Segmenta, be certain lines ymagyned, by the which Cosmographers do divide the
world into porcions, which be called also Paralleli, whereby the distance of
places are founden.

Segmenta, the cuttynges of, of any thing. some time the parts of the world
divided by the son. also gardes, or other like things sowed to garments.

Segmentarius, he that makes clothe of gold

Segmentum, a piece cut of from any thing, be it metal or stone. It is also
a be or colar which is about womennes necks. Some do take it for the purfyll
of a woman's gown It may as well be taken for a guard or border about any
garment. Segmen, idem.

Segmentatus, ta, tum, may be said of any thing, which has borders or
trayles fynely wroughte, with smaule pieces fastened thereon, be it of metal or
timber.

Segmentatae uestes, guarded or pourfled garments.

Segnis, slow and dull wytted, barayne.

Segnitas pro segnitia, slouthfulnes.

Segniter, slowely.

Segnities, slownesse, dullness, baraynnesse.

Segodunum, Rodes in France.

Segodunum, is also a noble city in Almayne, now called Nurenberg.

Segobriga, a town in the part of Spain, which is now called Byskay.

Segrego, are, to sever or separate.

Segregare suspitiones, to put away suspicion.

Segregare sermonem to speak no words.

Si quis ibi est odiosus abeo domum, sermonem segrego, If any man be there,
whom I love not, I get me home, and speak never a word. Segrega sermonem,
taedet, Hold thy peace, I am weary, or it irketh me to here the.

Segullum, is a vain of earth in mines, which declares, that therein gold
may be found.

Segor, a city, which was preserved by the prayer of Loathe, when Sodoma was
dystroyed by the vengeance of god.

Segusiani or Segutiati, Bresse in France.

Segusium, the part of the Alps called mount Sion.

Seir, a mountain in the countreye of Edon, where Esau the brother of Jacob
the patriarche dwelled.

Seiugi and seiuges, a t^me of six horses.

Seiungo, xi, gere, to separate.

Selectio, a chesynge out.

Selectus, ta, tum, chosen among other, also chief among other.

Selecti Iudices, among the Romans were judges appointed of the state of
gentylmen, called ordo equestris.

Selenetes, a stone, wherein is a white, which decreaseth and increasethe, as
the moon does.

Seleucia, the principal city of Siria, which is xxx. furlonges from
Babylonia.

Seleucus, king of Siria, next after Alexander the great.

Selibra, half a pound.

Seligo, legi, seligere, to gather a part, or the chief things among many.

Selinus, a river.

Selinon, an herb called also Apium, whereof be diverse kinds, as
Hipposelinon, Petroselinon, Seek for them in their places.

Seliquastra, a stole to sytte on.

Sella curulis, a chair, whereon the chief officers of Rome sat in a
chariote, and were so carried, when they came from their houses. some do suppose
that it was called curulis, because the fete were crooked, the judgment thereof,
I remit to the reders.

Sellaria, places, wherein were fourmes and stoles for men to sytte on.

Sellularij, artificers, which wrought sittyng.

Semel, ones, also at one time, shortly, briefly, summarily.

Semele, the daughter of Cadmus, and mother to Bacchus.

Semen, seminis, sede, sometime settes of young trees, or nursegardeynes,
sometime the kind

Sementicus, ca, cum, that may be sown.

Sementis, the act of sowynge, sometime sede, sedetyme.

Sementa facere, to sow corn.

Sementinae feriae, holy days ordained to pray, that corn being sown,
might come forth and increace.

Semento, tare, to bring forth sede.

Semestris, tree, of six months.

Semesus, a, um, half eaten.

Semet, him self.

Semetra, half a measure.

Semianimis, half dead.

Semianimus, half quick.

Semicadium, half a barell.

Semicaecus, half blind.

Semicinctum, a ierkyn or short iackette.

Semicirculus, half a cirkle.

Semicoctus, ta, tum, half sodden.

Semicommestus, ta, tum, half eaten.

Semiconsumptus, ta, tum, half consumed or wasted.

Semideus, half a god.

Semidoctus, meanly learned.

Semifera animalia, beasts engendered between a wild beast and a tame, as
between a wulfe and a dog, or between a wyld bore and a tame swyne.

Semiferus, somewhat wild.

Semigro grare, to go to dwell in an other place.

Semihomo, half a man.

Semihora, an half hour.

Semilissula, and semilixula, a little cake made with meal, chese, and water.

Semimadidus, da, dum, half wete.

Semimares, they which are not perfyte men, as those, which are gelded.

Semimortuus, a, um, half dead.

Seminatio, sowynge.

Seminarium, a place from whense settes and pla^tes be translated or removed.
also a tree of the which settes are taken.

Seminex, necis, half slain.

Seminium, sede, also the gain of sede.

Semino, are, to sow.

Seminudus, da, dum, half naked.

Semiobolus, the xii. part of a greek dram

Semipes, pedis, half a foot.

Semipaganus, half an husbandeman, half a carle of the country.

Semipedalis, le, half a foot in quantity or heyghte.

Semipedaneus, a, um, idem.

Semiplageum, a little net.

Semiplenus, not full.

Semiplotia, were shows, which covered but half the foot, which the
Romans did wear on, when they went in huntyngge.

Semiquinarius, a, um, that which is half five in number.

Semiramis, midis, the wife of king Ninus, which made the city of Babylon,
and conquered many Countries.

Semirutus, partly decayed.

Semi, half.

Semisenex, uel semiseneus, half old.

Semisomnis, and semisomnus, half a sleep.

Semisopitus, he that is half sleapynge, half waking.

Semisoporatus, idem.

Semispathium, a short sword.

Semissis, half a cubite. It is also the half pound weyghte, or.vi. ounces.

Semissis homo, a vile person.

Semissis usura, the gain of six in a hundred.

Semita, a pathe, also a foot way.

Semitatus, ta, tum, divided in paths.

Semitogium, a short gown

Semitogatus, and semitogatulus, he that wears a short gown.

Semitritaeon, uel hemitritaeon, a fever which is a tercian and a half, and
of.xlviii. hours and vexes one.xxxvi. hours.

Semiuir, an imperfect man.

Semiuiuus, half a live.

Semiuncia, half an ounce.

Semuntialis, le, of half an ounce.

Semiustus, a, um, half burned.

Semimodius, half a busshell.

Semoueo, uere, to move or go away.

Semper, ever, always.

Semperlenitas, the accustomed gentylnesse or myldnesse.

Semperuiuum, an herb called Singrene.

Sempiterne, euerlastyngely.

Sempiternitas, the time everlasting.

Sempiternus, a, um, everlasting.

Sena, a city in Tuskane called Senes which is a hundred miles from Rome.
sometime it is written Senae, in the plurell number.

Senaculum, a councyll house. Also a little Senate.

Senarius, a, um, that which is of the number of six. Senarij uersus, and
senarioli, verses having six fete, properlye Iambici, or Trochaici.

Senator, toris, a Senator.

Senatorius, a, um, perteynynge to Senators

Senatus, us, a senate or councyll.

Senatusconsultum, an act of council, or an ordinance made by the senate.

Senecio, onis, an herb, which grows on walls, and tiles, and is hoar in
summer, and has read stalks, called grounswell.

Senectus, senecta, senium, age.

Seneo, and senesco, scere, to be old.

Senex, senis, an old man or woman.

Senio, onis, a syce, or number of six marked in the dyse.

Seni, nae, na, six.

Sennaar, the field, where the tower of Babylon was builded.

Senogallia, a city in Italy.

Senones, people in France.

Sensa, the senses, or those things which we do mean.

Sensibilis, le, that which may be felt.

Sensiculi, the diminutiue of sensa.

Sensificus, ca, cum, that which causes feelynge.

Sensilis, le, that may be felt.

Sensim, little and little.

Sensus, us, sense, or feeling, or perceiving.

Senta, was called Fauna, or Bona dea, the good goddess.

Sententia, sentence, judgment, opinion, or council spoken or written
concerning the life of man.

Sententiam dicere, to show his opinion.

Sententiam facere, to give sentence or judgment.

Sententiola, a little or short sentence.

Senticetum, a place full of briars.

Sentina, the pumpe of a ship, a place where al fylthe is received.

Sentinatia, a country in Italy.

Sentino, are, to avoid peril: also to pumpe up water out of a ship.

Sentinum, a town in Italy called now Saxoferratum.

Sentio, sensi, sentire, to perceive, to understand to feel, to judge, to
suppose, to know.

Sentio tecum, I am of thine opinion.

Sentis, a bryar or bremble.

Senticosus, a, um, sharp as a bryer.

Sentus, heary, roughe.

Senum, the syxte.

Senumdenum, the syxtenth.

Seorsum, a part, also namely, or specially.

Omnibus gratiam habeo, and seorsum tibi praeterea Demea, I thank you all, but
namely the^ Demea.

Seorsum a te sentio, I am of an another opinion than thou art.

Seoisus, idem.

Separatio, separation.

Separatus, ta, tum, separate or divided from an other thing.

Separo rare, to put apart, or depart one from an another.

Separatim, aparte.

Sepedes, emotes.

Sepelio, sepeliui, lire, to bury.

Sepes, sepis an hedge

Sepia, a fyshe called a Cuttell.

Sepimentum, an enclosure

Sepio, sepiui, sepire, to hedge or enclose.

Sepius, piuntis, and Sipus, puntis, and Sipontum, a city in the realm of
Naples.

Seplasiarius, a maker of soote oyntmentes.

Seplasium, uel seplasia, a shop, where sweet oyntmentes are sold. It was a
street in the city of Capua, wherein were diverse delicate oyntmentes.

Sepono, posui, ponere, to put or lay aparte.

Seps, a venomous worm, of whose stroke or bytynge the flesh rotteth.

Septa, the general name of all places enclosed.

Septangulus, a figure, having four corners

Septem, the number of seven.

September, bris, the viii. month.

Septemdecim, seuentene.

Septempedalis, le, of seven feet.

Septimus, ma, mum, the seuenthe.

Septenus, na, number, idem.

Septemuir, an officer, having equal authority with seven other.

Septempeda, a place in Italy called Sayncte Seuerine.

Septennis, of seven years.

Septentrio, the north cost.

Septentriones, the seven sterres, which are seen by Charles wayne, or Vrsa
mayor.

Septemuiratus, the office, wherein be seven ioyntely.

Septennium, the space of seven years.

Septicollis, by that name Rome was called. by cause of the seven hills,
which were in it, Palatinus, Quirinalis, Auentinus, Coelius, Viminalis,
Exquilium, and Ianiculum.

Septicus, ca, cum, putrifactife or corrosife.

Septies, seven times.

Septifariam, seu^n manner of facions or ways

Septifarius, a, um, seven diverse.

Septima^rus, was a holyday kept the day following the syxt Idus of every
monthe.

Septimana, a wicke.

Septimontium, a place having seven hills.

Sepringeni, and septingenti, seven hundred.

Septingenties, seven hundred times.

Septingentenus, and septingentesimus, the seventh hundred.

Septingentuplus, seven hundred fold.

Septuagenarius, three score and ten years old.

Septuagies, three score and ten times.

Septuaginta, three score and ten.

Septuose, darkely.

Septum transuersum, the maydrefe, which deuydeth the stomach from the lower
bowelles.

Septunx, uncis, a poyse of seven ounces.

Septus, ta, tum, enclosed.

Sepulchrum, a sepulcher or tomb.

Sepultura, sepulture or burienge.

Sepultus, ta, tum, buried or hyd. also like as it were dead.

Sepum, talowe.

Sepatius, a, um, as it were of talowe.

Sequana, a river in France called Sein.

Sequani, Burgonions of high Burgoyne.

Sequa^que, for seorsu^ quanque, every woman apart.

Sequax, acis, that which follows.

Sequela, the act of following, sequel.

Sequester, tris, tree, indifferent to both parts.

Sequester, he, with whom money is left. also a solicitour in a matter.

Sequestres, were they which at the election of officers received money to make
friends and solicit the people to give their voices.

Sequestro, are, to lay or set a thing indifferentely, or in the keeping of
an indyfferente person.

Sequi lites, to sue at the law.

Sequor, eris, sequi, to follow to go after.

Sera, a lock.

Serapis, idis, a god of the Egiptians.

Serenitas, fayrenesse of wether drythe.

Serenissimus, is a term appropried now adays to kings only, and is
usurped for most famous, or most renoumed.

Sereno, are, to make fair and clear.

Serenus, a, um, fair, clear, without clouds.

Seres, a people in Asia, having great plentye of sylke.

Sericae uestes, sylken garments.

Seresco, scere, to be fair and dry. also to be turned into whay.

Seria, erneste words, and grave or sad.

Seria, an erthen vessel, which is long.

Sericarius, a weauer of sylke.

Sericatus, apparayled in sylke, or he that wears a garment of sylke.

Sericeus, a, um, of sylke.

Sericum, sylke.

Sericus, ca, cum, of sylke.

Series, order.

Serilla, botes or ships calked with towe.

Seriola, a diminutiue of seria.

Serio, in erneste.

Seris, is the general name of all Cichory and endive. read Intybus.

Seriphus, an isle by Grecia in the sea called Aegeum.

Serius, a, um, ernest, grave of importance.

Sermo, monis, a speech, a form of speking: sometime an oration, also
communication.

Sermocinor, aris, ari, to talk, to commune.

Sero, are, to shut or lock.

Sero, seui, serere, satum, to sow, to plant, to engender.

Sero, an aduerbe, signifies late, to late, after the time that it ought to
be, Also in the evening.

Seropta, a city in Phoenicia.

Serotinus, a, um, that which is in the euennynge. sometime late, or
latewarde. Serotini fructus, lateward fruits.

Serpentaria, an herb called dragons.

Serpens, pentis, a serpente.

Serperasta, a swathynge or swadlynge bond.

Serpillum, an herb which grows on old walls, about wells or pondes, and
in some places it smells like time, and in some places like to sauery, some
do take it for the common sauery.

Serpo, psi, pere, to crepe.

Serpula, of old writers was used for serpens a serpent.

Serra, a saw.

Serra praeliari, is to fight in battle, some time marchynge forward,
sometime reculynge, as a saw gothe, when it is drawn.

Serrata, an herb which is called Germander

Serratula, Betayne.

Serratus, ta, tum, like a saw, also sawed.

Serro, are, to saw.

Serrula, a little saw.

Sertor, he that sows seeds, or sets herbs.

Sertum, a garlande of flowers.

Sertus, ta, tum, set with flowers, as in a garlande.

Sertula compana, an herb called Melylote.

Seruo, are, to keep, to preserus, to possede, or dwell in a place.

Seruare fidem, to keep towche, to be faythfulle.

Seruare de caelo, to awayte what wether shall come. to observe tokens or
signs in the heaven or fyrmament.

Omnia integra principi seruare, to reserve the hole matter unto the prince.

Modum seruare, to keep a mean.

Seruator, toris, he that preserves or delyuereth one from harm.

Seruaueris, take good head what thou doste.

Seruilis, le, perteynynge to service.

Bellum servile, war, which the servants of the Romans made again their
lords.

Seruiliter, like a bondsman or slave.

Seruio, uiui, uire, to serve.

Seruire auribus, to flatter.

Seruire alicui rei, to intend upon one thing.

Aetati seruire, to accommodare him self to the age of one.

Petitioni seruire, to do nothing else but to attend to satisfy his desire.

Scoenae seruire, to do according as the time requires.

Romori seruire, to go about to get a great name.

Valitudini seruire, to provide for his health.

Seruitium, service.

Seruitia, bondemen.

Seruitus, bondage.

Serum, the last part of the day, the euenlide. It is also whay of milk.

Serus, a, um, late, sometime great.

Sera arbor, a tree which brings forth leaves very late.

Serum lumen, almost night.

Serae frondes, leaves which do fall very late.

Sera omnia, all full of sorrow or heaviness.

Serum bellum, great war.

Seruus, a servant, properly which is compelled to serve, as bondmen or
apprentyses done

Seruum poecus, is a proverb applied to him which in speaking or writing,
dare not digress from an other man's steps or form of writing.

Sesama, and sesamum, a white grain, which grows in Inde, whereof oil is
made which is called oleum Sesaminum.

Sescuntialis, le, of an ounce and a half.

Sescunx, cuncis, an ounce and a half.

Sescuplum, the hole and the half part.

Seselis, an herb called also Siler.

Sesqui, as much and half as much, joined to an other word, signifies
half as much more.

Sesquialtera, so much and half so much, a proportion in musyke.

Sesquihora, an hour and an half.

Sesquilibra, a pound and a half.

Sesquimensis, a month and half.

Sesquimodus, a busshell and a half.

Sesquiopera, one journey in tyllage and a half.

Sesquipes, a foot and a half.

Sesquipedalia uerba, great and stout words, as some noble men do speak to
their inferiors when they are displeased.

Sesquiplex, idem quod Sesquialia.

Sessio, a sitting.

Sestans, and sexstans, that which is also called obolus, the syxte part of a
dram.

Sestertius, seu sestertius nummus, was a silver coin of the Romans, whereof
Denarius contained four so that when.vii. grotes english made an ounce, than
was Sestertius our english penny, and it was called Sestertius, as it were
Semitertius, for it contained ii. and a half of the brason coin called As,
and therefore it is written with this figure US. which signifies.ii. li. and
di. Sestertium in the neu^re gender, signifies a thousand Sestertij.

Seta, among the ancient writers was taken for sylke.

Setae, brystell hears.

Setia, a city in Campania.

Setigerum, a beast which has bristels.

Setinum uinum, wine made about the City of Setia.

Setim, a tree, like to white thorn, which does never rotte: whereof was much
of the timber in the temple of Solomon.

Setosus, sa, sum, full of brystelles.

Setuosus, a, um, old writers used for obscurus, dark.

Setuose, darkely.

Seu, for sieve, either, or.

Severe, sharply, cruelly.

Seueriter, idem.

Seueritas, tatis, gravity, constantnesse, properly in ministringe justice.

Seueritudo, idem.

Seuerus, ra, rum, grieve, constant, cruel, sharp dangerous to meddel with.

Seuoco, care, to call aparte or away, to call aside from other.

Seuosus, a, um, like to talowe.

Seuo, are, to make candels of talowe.

Seuum, talowe of beasts.

Sex, six in number.

Sexageni dies, three score days.

Sexagies, three score times.

Sexangulus, having six corners.

Sexcenus, six hundred.

Sexcenti, idem.

Sexcentoplagus, he that receives a hundred strypes.

Sexcuplus, a, um, six double, or six times so much.

Sexennis, of six years old.

Sexies, six times.

Sextans, it is, the six part of a pound.

Sextarius, is a measure whereby all other measures may be made for it
conteyneth two measures called Heminie, and vi. Sextarij, do make one Congium,
and.viii. Congij do make Amphoram. xx. Amphorae, oone Culeum. Notwithstanding
there is Sextarius Romanus, and Sextarius atticus. Romanus conteyneth the
weight of oil.xviii. ounces: of wine.xx ounces. of honey.xxx. ounces. Atticus
receives the wayght of oil. xv ounces, of wine a pound.iii. ounces.v.
dra^mas and one scruple, of honey two pound and one ounce.

Sextilis, is the monthe now called Auguste.

Sextula, the syxte part of an ounce, which is a dram and a scruple.

Sextus, ta, tum, the syxte.

Sextum Consul, the syxte time Consul.

Sexus, us, a kind. sexus uirilis, the male kind, sexus muliebris, the woman
kind.

S ANTE I.
SI, if although, I would god.

Si dijs placet, If god will, or on goddis name: a word spoken either in
dysdaine or in mockage, for any thing not well done.

Etiam latini, si dijs placet, hoc biennio, magistri dicendi extiterunt* yea
and also the latins, on goddis name, have been these two years masters of
eloquence.

Quinetiam, si dijs placet, nephas aiunt, consulem plebeium fie^^, They say
also, on gods name, that it is unlawful for a communes to be made consul.

Si sapis, if thou be wise.

Siambis, an isle in the Brytyshe occean sea, on the north part.

Sibatis, an old town.xii. miles from Rome. also a city in Calabria.
sometime it is taken for delycate and wanton living.

Sibariticus, ca, cum, wanton or delycate.

Sibi, to him.

Sibilo, are, to whystell.

Sibilus, a whistelynge.

Sibylla, was a general name to all women which had the spirit of prophecy.
of them as Varro and Lactantius do write were ten, the first called
Persica, the second Libyca, the third Delphica, the fourth Cumaea, the
fyfthe, Erythrea, the syxt Samia, the seventh Cumana, the eight Hellespontia,
the nynth Phrigia, the tenthe Tyburtina, every one of these (as Lactantius
says) wrate of the incarnation of Christ.

Sibus, a sharp wytted fellow.

Sic, so, in likewise, accordyngely, so lyghtlye. Mirabar hoc, si sic, abiret,
I would have meruayled, if that it should have passed to lightly Sic ago, so am
I wont to do. Sic sum, such a one am I.

Sica, a short sword,

Sicambri, the people of Nassaw, and Hessen in Germany.

Sicani, people of Sicile.

Sicania, the isle of Sicile.

Sicarius, a murderer.

Sicaneus, a, um, dry of nature.

Siccesco, scere, to dry.

Siccine, of that fascion, in such facion.

Siccine tu illam? Siccine nos habes Iudibrio omnes? Will thou handell her of
that fascion? Will thou in such fascion much us all.

Siccitas, and Siccitudo, drythe.

Sicco, care, to dry or be dried.

Siccus, ca, cum, dry, wythered.

Sicera, all manner of drink made of corn or fruits.

Sicileo, cilui, cilire, to cut again that which was not well cut before,
properly grass in a medowe.

Sicilia, a noble I Will, first called Trinacria, afterward Sicania, and at the
last Sicilia, It is in form three cornerd, and thereof had the name of
Trinacria, the one corner called Pachynus, exte^deth toward that part of Greece
which was called Peloponesus, now Morea. the second corner called Pelorus,
lies toward Italy, the third called Lilybaeus, is extended toward Affricam,
of the which Pelorus excedeth in the temperaunce of the earth, for with no
weate there may be any mire, nor by any drythe duste. This isle conteyneth in
circuit as Solinus writes three thousand furlonge, which is of Italion
miles. CCC.lxxv. as Diodorus Siculus writes four thousand three hundred
and.lx. miles. But Plinius says that the said three corners be distant from
Pelorus to Pachinu^ by land.Clxvi. miles. from thense to Lilybaeu^.CC. miles.
from thense to Pelorum.Clxx. miles, and says also that Agrippa affirmed it to
be in circute.DCxviii. miles. which do not agree with Solinus nor Diodorus,
which may happen to be by the diversity of furlonges. read thereof in Stadiu^.
The fertility of this isle in all grayn, beaultie of meadows, delicateness of
waters cold and hot, mountains and caves myraculouse, and other things there
exceeding notable, many autours have written and woundred at does Greeks and
Latins.

Siciliences, people dwelling in Sicile, which were borne else where.

Sicilis, lidis, of Sicile.

Sicilides Musae, the Musis of Sicile.

Sicilisso, are, to speak the language of Sicile.

Siciliqua, uel Sicilicus, a poyse or weight waiinge two drammes: and is the
fourth part of an ounce.

Sicilites, the head of a iauelyn.

Siclus, called also Tetradragmum, and Stater argenteus, is as well a coin as
a weyghte, being half an ounce in poyse.

Sicinnium, a kind of daunsynge, wherein they that daunced did sing, as they do
in Christmas, when they sing carolles: and as maidens do now use to do in the
streets.

Sicubi, wheresoever.

Siculi, men of Sicile.

Siculum mare, the sea by Sicile.

Sicunde, of any place.

Sicut and Sicuti, as, like as.

Sicyonia, an isle in the sea of Aegeum.

Sideratio, a sickness, which in such wise takes some part of a man's
body, that it so daynely becomes dry, so that he feleth it not, women do
call it taking, or benu^ming.

Sideratus, he that is taken in any member or part of his body, that he can
not feel it or stere it, the homely people calls benumbed

Siderites, an herb, which grows on tyles and old walls.

Sidereus, a, um, of the sterres.

Sideror, ari, to be blasted, or taken, that a man may not stere or move his
members.

Sido, dis, sedi, sidere, to settyll.

Sidon, a city in Phoenicia, upon the sea side, so called for the plenty of
fyshe there being taken. There was glass first made.

Sidonius, a, um, of that city.

Sidus, a number of sterres gathered, which do make a sign or celestial
figure: sometime it is taken for one sterre.

Sifilare, to whystell.

Sifilator, oris, a whystler.

Sigaeum, a great mountayn in the sea by Troy.

Sigillaria opera, warkes wherein were set small images.

Sigillatim, one after an other.

Sigillo, are, to seal, sometime to close or shut.

Sigillum, a little image.

Sigillum Salomonis, an herb. Read Corrigiola.

Sigma, it is, a little table.

Signaculum, a seal.

Signatorius anulus, a signet.

Signatus, ta, tum, notable.

Signa infesta, Standards and baners advanced in battle, in marchynge
against ennemies.

Signa coelestia, the twelve signs, by the which the son and other planets
do pass.

Signia, a city in Campania.

Signifer, he that bears standarde or baner in a field. it is sometime taken
for the cerkle in the firmament called also Zodiacus, wherein ben the.xii.
signs.

Significo, care, to sygnifye or give knowledge. Signinum opus, a warke made
with shelles and mortar, or tyles and mortar.

Signo, are, to make a sign, to sign or seal, to signify or show by a
sign or token, to write

Signum, a sign, token, or mark, a miracle.

Signa dare militibus, to cause the trumpets to blow, that the soldiers may
prepare them to battle or to assemble them selves to gether.

Signa, be also images of metal, stone, or wod standards in war or baners.

Silanius, an high hill in Irelande.

Sil, silis, certain earth yelowe of color found in the mines of gold or
silver.

Sillago, an herb which Brunfelsius suppoposeth to be the common crow foot.

Silatum, brekefaste.

Sila, an helmet.

Silenta loca, quiet places, wherein is no noise.

Silentium, silence, quietness.

Silenus, the foster father of Bacchus.

Sileo, lui, lere, to keep silence, to speak nothing.

Siler, a kind of wythy growing in water: it is also a river in the realm of
Naples.

Silesco, scere, to be in silence, or quiet.

Silex, silicis, a flynte stone.

Silicatus, ta, tum, made with flynte stones.

Silicernius, and Silicernium, a certain pudding eaten only at the time of
funeralles, some do take it for a feast or dinner made at the funeralles or
termente of a man or woman.

Senex silicernius, is named of Terence for an old Cryppell, ready to have
such a dyuer made for him.

Siliceus, a, um, of a flynte stone.

Silitia, sieve Silicula, an herb called Fengreke.

Silugo, liginis, a kind of wheat having an vpryghte stalk, and the corn
very white, and thereof is made the fynest bread and most pryncipall, as
Galenus writes, De alimentis. li. 26. It was also called Olyra, of some Typha.

Siliqua, the husk or codde of any thing. also a certain fruit in Italy,
which is in length of a man's finger, and broad, and somewhat hoked, the wait
of six of them made the poyse called Scrupulus, a scruple, whereof three do
make a dram. It is now called a Characte, and is used among fyners of gold
and silver, and also coyners in the fynynge and alayinge thereof.

Siliqua, is sometime taken for foenugraecum.

Siliqua aegiptia, is Cassia fistula.

Siliquastrum, an herb.

Siliquor, quaris, quari, to grow in husk or rod.

Silura, a country in the more Britayne.

Silo, onis, he which has great brows.

Silosontis chlamis, is spoken in a proverb of him, which bosteth him self of
rich garments.

Silus, a camoised nose, or a nose which is turned upward.

Silphion, an herb, whereof comes the gum called Beuicyn.

Silurus, a fyshe called a sturgeon.

Simiolus. a little ape.

Simia, and Simius, an ape.

Simila, fine meal of corn.

Similago, ginis, idem.

Simillimus, a, um, most like.

Similitas, likeness.

Similiter, likewise, also.

Similis, le, like.

Simileis habent labra lactucas, a proverb applied to them, which being of like
ill conditions, be matched together, as a lewd servant with an ill master, an
unruly people to a neglygent governor, a shrewde wife to a froward husband.
etc. Like master like man Like will to like.

Similitudo, dinis, likeness.

Similo, are, to be like.

Simitu, pro simul, together.

Simois, oentos, a river by Troy.

Simonia, Symony.

Simonides, a Poet of Greece, borne in the i will called Coea, who was the first
that invented the verses called Lyrici, and was excellent in provoking of
tears, and in that kind of writing there was in him a wonderful grace. It is
written that Pausanias king of Lacedaemonians, at a banquet desired instantly of
him, that he would thanne speak some thing notable, and that sauoured of
wisdom* Simonides thereat smylinge, Remember said he, that thou art a man.
Pausani as took that scornefullye, and esteemed it nothing. Afterward
Pausanias being put in prison in Chalcioeco, and there being famished er that
he dyed. He remembered the saying of Simonides, and with a loud and lamentable
voice said. O my friend of Coeus, thy words were of a great importance, but I
for mad pride esteemed them nothing. This little historye is not unworthy to
be had in remembrance.

Simplariae, simple things or of little value.

Simplares, they which do wear hostynge harneyse.

Simplex, plicis, that is not double, sincere or plain, without deceypte, of
one sort, vnmyxte.

Simplicitas, playnenesse.

Simpliciter, plainly.

Simplicitus, for simpliciter.

Simplus, a, um, sengle in number, one only.

Simpulum, a chalyce or cup of earth, wherewith they sacrifyced in the old
time before that gold and silver were in great estimation. It is of Varro
taken for a cruete with a pype, out of the which wine came dropping by little
and lyttel.

Simpuuium, a vessel of tree.

Simul, together with other, moreover, also.

Simul ac, simul atque, as soon as, incontinent as.

Simulachrum, an image of a man or woman.

Simulo, are, to endeavor, to be like to one, also to feign.

Simultas, atis, privy dysplesure or hatred with dyssemblynge countenance.

Simulatio, fantasy, also dyssimulation.

Simulator, he that dyssembleth.

Simulter, for similiter.

Simulto, tare, to be at varyance with one, to hate one priuyly.

Simus, a, um, flat.

Sin, or else, if not, but if.

Sina, or Sinai, a mountain in the deserte of Araby, called also Oreb. it is
of Solinus callid Casius. Justinius callyth it Synaeus, on that hylle god
appeared to Moses, and delivered to him the tables of the law, read hereof
abundantly in the old testament.

Sinapi, and sinapis, senuye seed, whereof mustarde is made.

Sinapium, mustarde.

Sinapodes, people in Affrike, which do go as they crepte.

Sinarum Regio, a countraye beyond the line equinoctial.

Sinciput, the foreparte of the head.

Sindo, donis, a fine lynnen clothe.

Sine, without.

Sine ut ueniat, let him come.

Sine fraud mea, my right saved.

Singillatim, to every one, or of every one, one after an another.

Singularis, re, syngular, excellent, one without any mo.

Singulariter, syngularly, only.

Singulatim, every thing by it self.

Singultio, tire, to yexe.

Singultiens, he that has the yexe.

Singultiens gallina, a clockynge hen.

Singultus, tus, yexynge.

Singulus, a, um, eueryche.

Sinistra, the lefthande.

Sinister, stra, strum, pertaining to the left hand. sometime it sygnifieth
contrary, unprosperous, or unhappy.

Sino, sini, sinere, to suffer.

Sinope, pes, a city in the countray of Pontus.

Sinopis, pidis, a red stone, commonly called Sinoper.

Sinistre, unhappily, unfortunately.

Sinistrorsum, on the left hand.

Sinuessa, a city in Campania.

Sinuo, are, to turn or wind in the form of a serpent, making holowe
bosoms or forowes. it is also applied to garments that are pleyghted or
gathered up. also to streams of ryuers, which do in rounnynge make diverse
tournynges. also to banks, which have holowe crekes or bosoms.

Sinuosus, a, um, that which has many tournynges and wyndynges.

Sinus, us, a bosom. also the tournynges or holownesse of water banks.
sometime the holownesse of eyes. sometime a sail. also a cup for wine, also
nets, sometime a sail, when the wind fylleth it.

Sinus urbis, the myddell of a city.

In sinu habere, to have secretly in his heart.

In sinu gaudere, to be merry or glad, without showing it openly.

Soluto sinu, with all lyberalitie.

Sion, an herb growing in the water, having leaves like Alysanders, but
somewhat less and soote in smelling.

Siparium, a courtayne.

Siphones, the pypes of a cundyte.

Siphnus, an isle in the sea of Aegeum, wherein was found sometime plenty of gold
and silver.

Sipus, sipuntis, or Sipontum, a city in Apulia, by the mountain called
Garganus.

Sipontinus, of that city.

Siqua, for si aliqua, if any.

Siquide, for because, also if.

Siquis, quae, quod, if any.

Sir, a city in Illiria, or Slauony.

Siremps, for similis res ipsa.

Siren, and Sirena, a mermayden.

Sirenes, were three daughters of Achelous and Calli^pe, which dwelled in an isle
between Italy and Sicile, who with their sweet synging drew such unto them, as
passed that sea, and than they slew them. As it happened to Ulysses to sail
that way, he stopped the ears of all his company, to the intent they should
not hear the songs of Sirenes, and caused him self to be bound to the mast
of a ship, and so escaped. Syrenes, sorowed so much, that they were
dysapoynted, that they threw them self into the sea, whom poets feigned to be
meremaydens.

Sireus, a sterre in the myddel of the fyrmament unto the which when the son
comes, the ferue^tnes of heat is doubled, whereby the bodies of me become
syck with heates. this sterre is also called Canicula, and the days wherein it
appears be called Caniculares, which do begin the.vi. day of July.

Siri, pyttes, wherein corn was laid to be preserved.

Siriasis, a syckenesse of trees, where about the time of the Canycular days by
the excedyng heat of the Sun, the trees be burnt, and do sterue. it is
alsoo a syckenesse in the heads of chylderne, procedyng of the inflammations of
the brain.

Sirius, a sterre, which ryseth the.viii. Calendes of June

Sirpea, mattes, or other things made of russhes.

Sirpices, were instruments made with teethe like to a saw, which being
drawn with oxen, plucked up by the roots flagges and great wedes, which
grew in meadows.

Sirpiculae falces, hooks, wherewith vynes are cut.

Sirpiculum, a little baskette.

Sirpo, are, to bind or wind with russhes or osyars, or other like thing.

Sirpus, a russhe. Nodum in sirpo quaeris, thou fyndest dyfficultie or doubt,
where there is none. Sirpi, be also warkes or verses, which be very hard to
be understand.

Sirrus, a cave under ground, in the which men kept wheat.

Sisacthea, ae, a rayenge syue.

Sisachthea, a law of the Athenienses made by Solon, for the mitigation of
dettes or money owed.

Sisamum, a manner of pulse or corn. alsoo it is that which the apothecaryes
do call Sesamum.

Sisara, after Varro is a tree, whereof the bees do gather lyquyde honye.
Plinius callyth it Sisarum, it is supposed to be that, which Dioscorides
callyth Ericem, not much unlike to Tamarix, the Athenienses (as Plyny writes)
calls it Tetradicem.

Siser, a delycate to be eaten, which some men do suppose to be yelowe
carettes.

Sisymbrium, an herb, whereof be two kinds, the one is called Sisymbrium
alone, which is also called Thymbrea, in english water mynte, the other is
called Sisymbrium Cardamine, which in english is watercresses.

Sisto, sistere, to make to tarry or stand stylle, to retain or keep back, to
appear, as a man does being sued in the law.

Sistas te, appear thou.

Ore sistere. Eminor, interminorque, ne quis mihi obstiterit obuiam, nam qui
obstiterit ore sistet, I thretten, and I menace, that no man let me of my way,
for who so ever lets me, shall kiss the ground.

Sistere nadimonium, to bring in surctie.

Sistrum, an Instrumente like a horn, which was used in battaylle, in the
stead of a trumpette.

Sisyphus, was a greatte thief, which was slain by Theseus, of whom it is
feigned, that in hell he tourneth a stoone up to a greatte hylle, but when it
is at the top, it fallethe down again, and renewethe his labor.

Sitanius panis, bread of new wheat.

Sitarchia, a bag, or gardeuyandes, wherein meat is put.

Sithonia, a country in Macedonia upon the sea side.

Siticen, he that did blow in a trumpet when men were buried.

Sitio, tire, to thyrst or be a thyrste.

Sitiens, he that is a thyrste.

Situlus barbatus, a little skyllette.

Sitella, a little pot, wherinto lottes were put.

Sitibundus, a, um, very thyrsty.

Siticulosus, he that is always a thyrst.

Sitis, thyrst, or desire to drink.

Situla, and sitella, a little coffer, wherein lottes were put, at the
choosing of officers, also a bucket to draw water.

Situs, ta, tum, put or set.

Situs, tus, fylthynesse gathered of moisture, by lack of klensynge. also of
sluttyshenes, also the setting or standing of a place, which is now called
the syte or sytuation of a manner or countray.

S ANTE M.
SMaragdus, a precious stone called an Emeraude.

Smegma, soap, and all other thing that does put away spots or uncleanness.

Smigticus, ca, cum, the ef^icacy of clensyng,

Smilax, acis, a tree, which has leaves like an yuye, with bearyes, and a
white flower, and smells like a lylly, and runs up upon trees. Ouidius
fayneth to be a wenche, which dyenge for the love of a young manne called
Crocus, was transfourmed into the said herb.

Smyntheus, one of the names of Apollo.

Smyrna, a city of Ionia in the less Asia, which was supposed of some to be
the country of Homerus.

Smyrnium, an herb which Eritius Cordus supposes to be the commune Angelica.
Manardus epist. li. xii. epist iiii. interprets it to be Olus atrum, in
english Alysander. Ruellius affirms it to be that herb, which in France
is called Leneche, I suppose in english Louage. which says most truly, I
refer to the reader.

S ANTE O.
SOANA, a river of Asia.

Soanes, people of Asia, dwelling about the extreme part of the mountain
called Cauca^us.

Soboles, issue or succession of children.

Sobolescere, to increace people.

Sobrie, sobrely, aduysedly, prudently.

Sobrini, systers children.

Sobrius, a, um, sobre, well aduysed.

Soccus, and socculus, a socke, which womenne and players in comedies only
ware.

Socer, cri, the wives father.

Sociale bellum, that war which is made with confederates or alies.

Socienus, a companyon or fellow.

Societas, tatis, felowshyppe.

Socio, are, to join or confederate.

Sociare sermonem, to have familyar communication with one.

Socius, a fellow or companyon. also Socij, be confederates, they which in all
counsayles and acts do particypate one with an other. Look for Comites, and
Sodales, in their places.

Socors, for secors, luskyshe, apt to no goodness.

Socordia, for secordia, luskyshenes, sometime it signifies ydelnesse.

Socrates, an excellent philosopher son of Sophroniscus the mason, and
Phaneretae a mydwyfe, who being first studyouse in naturalle philosophye,
fynallye gave him self to moral philosophy, teaching openly veatue, and so
dylygently ensewed it in his living, and in dysputynge was so sharp and
assured against them that were called Sophistae, that Apollo, the questyon
being demanded who was the wysest man living, he answered Socrates, he was
master to Plato, Xenophon, Xenocrates, and other the greattest philosophers at
that time living. besides his excellencye in virtue and knowledge, he was of a
rare and meruaylous nature. For he moughte sustain heat, cold, labor,
hunger, and thyrste, above any man of that time, as Alcibiades declares in
Plato. He affyrmed, that there was always with him a spyryte or spirytuall
power called Daemonium, the which as often as he was meuyd to do any thing
not conuenyent or necessary, that spyryte towched him and did prohybyte him
to do it. Under sharp and merry tauntes, in the form of argument called
induction, he caused men to perceive their ignorance, where before they
thought them selves to be wise. Fynallye being enuyed of them, which than
did bear chyefe rule in Athenes, he was accused of Anytus Melyssus the poet
and Lycon the orator, that he spoke against their goddis, and corrupted their
chylderne with perverse doctrine, but he contemnyng death, would suffer no man
to speak for him, and so drinking poison with a ioyouse countenance, and
say^nge to Anytus, I bring the good luck, dyed incontinent. But soon after
the people were so soory for his death, that of his accusers sum they slew,
and some exyled, and did set up openly the image of Socrates made of
copper. He was before the Incarnation of Christ.CCClxvii. years.

Socraticus, he that follows the doctrine of Socrates.

Socrus, my wives mother.

Sodales, they that keep company together at meals or passetyme. They be
alsoo they, whyrhe be of oone fraternytie or company^ or guylde.

Sodalitas, tatis, a fraternytie or brotherhoode. Alsoo a company incorporate
of any mysterye or craft, generally all felowshyppes privately assemblyng
among the people.

Sodalitium, idem.

Sodes, if thou dare.

Sodoma, orum, and Sodomum, a city in Judea, which for sin done against
nature, was by almyghtye god consumed by celestyall fire.

Sodomito, tare, to commyt or use the sin of Sodoma, against nature.

Sogdiana, a country in Asia, extendyng to the north part of Scithia.

Sol, solis, the son.

Soles, sygnifieth sometime the day, sometime the beams of the son.

Soles longi, long days.

Sole nouo, at the son rysyng.

Solamen, minis, solace.

Solanum, an herb called myghtshade.

Solanum soporiferum, an herb called dwale.

Solaris, re, of the sun.

Solarium, a place where by the sun, hours are known. Also a solar of a
house. also a pencyon paid to the prince, to live out of commune business.

Solati, they which be diseased or sick by the heat of the sun.

Solatium, solace or comfort.

Soldum, for solidum.

Solea, a shoe, called a galage or paten, which has nothing on the fete,
but only lachettes. Also a fyshe called a soole. also a groundsoyle, whereon
stands the wall of a house. It is also a shoe, wherewith horses and oxen be
shodde.

Solearius, a paten maker.

Soleatus, ta, tum, shodde.

Solemn, accustomyd.

Solemnia, feasts or holy days.

Solemni^er, solemnly.

Solennis, ne, annual or yearly, that which is done every year.

Soleo, solitus sum, uel solui, solere, to be wont.

Solere, to keep company.

Soliferu^, a weapon al of iron to cast in battle.

Solet, it was wont, or the use has been.

Solens, for ut soleo, Ego abscessi solens paulum ab illis, I went a little
from them, as I was wont.

Solers, it is, wytty.

Solerter, wyttyly, cunnyngly, craftily.

Solertia, sharpness or quyckenesse of wit, craftynesse or subtylitie in
practysynge, or wyttynesse.

Solicito, tare, to show both hope and fear. alsoo to inquiete or make
soory, to solycite or procure by means. sommetyme to labor the earth.

Solicitudo, dinis, care.

Solicitus, ta, tum, careful.

Solidago mayor, wall wort.

Solidarij, they which do selle in gross.

Solid, holle, perfytely.

Solidesco, scere, to close together, as a wound does, when it heals.

Solidipes, that has fete hole without toes.

Soliditas, massiuenes.

Solido, dare, to make fyrme, to consolydate.

Solidurij, were men of war in France, in the time of Julius Caesar, which
being ones retained with any people or captain, were so addicted unto them,
that in their quarrels they would dye, or if vyctory inclyned on the other part,
they would slay them selves.

Solidus, da, dum, holle, contynuall, not holow, not broken or cut, massy.

Solidus, was among the Romans dyuersly taken sometime for a coygne of
brass, contaynyng.xii. small coygnes. sometime it was taken for dragma in
silver, as primo Esdrae, cap. 8. and secundo eiusdem cap. vii. in Paralypo.
cap. 29. Sum were of the valor of dragma, as in the time of Alexander the
emperor.

Solidus aureus, was in the time of the same emperor two dragmas of goulde,
after in the time of Iustinianus.vi. of them made one ounce, they being the
weyghte of ours old nobles.

Solifuga, he that keeps him out of the son, or flees from the heat of the
son.

Solipunga, a fly, which in the heat of the son prycketh most sharply.

Soliloquus, he that talks being alone.

Soliloquium, communication, which a man being alone, has with god in
contemplation.

Solinunt, for solent, they are wont.

Solitarius, solytary, alone, without company.

Solitas, solytarynesse.

Solitaurilia, an offryng of three things of sundry kinds, as a bulle, a
ram, and a boore.

Solito, tare, to be wont often.

Solitudo, desert, where no man dwells.

Solitudo puerorum, when they have neither father nor mother.

Solitus sum, I was wont.

Soliuagus, he that wandreth alone.

Solium, a place of astate, where a king sits, it is also a great vessel,
which serves to diverse uses, as to translate lykour from one to an other, to
wash lynnen clothes, and for men and women to be bathed in. It sygnifieth also
a coffyn, where dcade bodies are put.

Soloecismns, a vice in speaking, wherein the true congruitie and right speech
is perverted.

Solo, all, in the oske tungue.

Solon, a noble man of Athenes, which by his mother lynially descended from
Codrus the last king of Athenes, he was a man of excellent wit, and called
one of the seven wise men of Greece And was in such authority in that city,
that he made and gave to them laws, which were never repelled, not with
standing when Pisistratus his kynnesman went about to change the form of
that commune weal, which was popular into a monarchy, he wyllyngly went in
exyle, and so dyed. read of him in Croesus. wha^ he was writing of his laws.
Anacharsis the philosopher said, that Solons laws should be like to
copwebbes, that lyttel flies should be fast tied with them, but great flies
should make holes and break through them.

Solor, aris, ari, to recreate, to comfort, to solace to make pastyme.

Solox, course wolle, or locks.

Solsequium, an herb, which has been long taken for marygouldes. But
Ruellius now does deny it, not withstandyng I am not so scrupulous, but that
I am content with the old opynion. The description of Heliotropium, not much
abhorryng it, as me seems.

Solstitialis herba, an herb, which does bear flowers only at the time, when
the son is at the highest, or as some men suppose but one day.

Solstitialis uita, a life which dureth but a little space.

Solsti alis morbus, a syckenesse which kylleth men shortly.

Solstitialis aegritudo, is of some men taken for the burning fever, which
happens about the canycular days, of exceeding heat of the air.

Solstitium, the stay of the son, when he can not be either higher or lower,
which is twyse in the year, that is in winter, the eight calendes of Ianuarye,
and is called Solstitium hyemale, and in Summer the eyghte Calendes of Iulye,
and is called Solstitium aestiuale.

Soluendo non est, he is not able to pay.

Solum, the soil or ground, generally it sygnifeth all thing which does
susteyn or bear any other thing on it. it is also the sole of the foot. also
the soole of a shoe.

Natale solum, a man's natural country.

Solum uertere, to make bankroute, to forsake his own country.

Soluo, ui, uere, to louse, to pay, to recompense, to put away, to deliver, to
resolve or melte.

Soluere fidem, to break promise.

Soluere uenas, to open the veins.

Soluere uotum, to perform an auowe.

Aluum soluere, to make one laske.

Soluere uita, to slay one.

Soluere ebritatem, to make one sobre.

Soluere legibus, to dyspence with oone, to give him a placarde.

Obsidione soluere, to raise the siege.

Fidem soluere, to break promise or says.

Soluere morem, to break a custom.

Morbo solutus, dead.

Soluere, to make satisfaction.

Solummodo, only.

Solute, wantonly, incontinently.

Solutilis, le, that which will be soon loused or undone.

Solus, alone, one only, solytary.

Solutus, ta, tum, loused or louse, also paid.

Solutus risus, a great laughter.

Solymae, plur. the city of Jerusalem, an other city in Cilicia.

Somniator, a dreamer.

Somnorinum, a dream.

Somniculose, dreamyngly.

Somniculosus, sleapy, a sluggarde.

Somniculous, a, um, that which causes one to sleep.

Somnifer, feri, that which induces or brings sleep.

Somnificus, idem.

Somnio, somniare, to dream.

Somnolentus, disposed to sleep.

Somnus, sleep.

Sonchos, an herb, which Cordus takes for Cicerbita, which is our
sowthystel. But Hieronymus Tragus takes it to be the iaggyd letuse, which
comes up in the beginning of the year.

Sonere, to sound or make a sound.

Sonito, to sound often.

Sonipes, pedis, a light or swyft horse.

Sonitus, tus, a sound.

Soniuit, for sonuit.

Sono, are, to sound or make a noise.

Sonor, oris, a great sound or noise.

Sonore, shyll or loud.

Sonoritas, a shyllenesse or loudenesse.

Sonorus, nora, norum, loud, or making a great sownde.

Sons, it is, gylty.

Sonticus, ca, cum, noyfull.

Sonticus morbus, in the Pandectes of the cyuyle law, is taken of Cassius and
Venuleius for any contynuall syckenesse, whereby one is let to do his
necessary business* and there ffore in the time of war, they which were in
that manner syck, were dyscharged of their oaths. Sextus and other
Interpretoures of the twelve Tables, took it for a vehemente and very great
syckenesse.

Sontica causa, was expowned in Neuio, for a just and laufull cause.

Sonus, all that may be herd.

Sophaci, people of Africa.

Sophia, wisdom.

Sophistice, ces, the part of logyke, which is captious and subtle.

Sophisma, Sophismatis, a craftye and dysceytefulle sentence, an Oracyon or
inuencyon, which seems to be true, when it is false.

Sophista, and sophistes, a dyssembler of wisdom, a deceyuer under an
eloquent or crafty speaking, he that professes phylosophye for lucre or
vaynglory.

Sophocles, a writer of Tragedies.

Sophron, in Greek, is Temperaunce in English, whereby carnal appetites and
lusts be refrayned.

Sophos, aut sophus, a wise man.

Sopio, piui, pire, and sopior, to set at rest, to bring asleape.

Sopitus, brought asleape, or to rest, or into a sown with a sudden stroke.

Ignis sopitus, fire covered with ashes, or other thing that it show not.

Sopor, oris, dead sleep.

Soporifer, soporiferi, and soporiferu^, that brings sleep.

Soporo, rare, to bring or induce sleep.

Soporatus, fast asleape.

Sora, an hylle in Italy.

Soracte, an hylle twenty miles from Rome.

Sorbeo, bui, bear, and Sorbo, psi, bear, to suppe as one suppeth potage.

Sorbere animo, to put away care or sorrow.

Odia sorbere, to sustain displeasure patiently.

Sorbiciuncula, a thynne brothe.

Sorbitio, onis, suppynge.

Sorbities, idem.

Sorbillo, lare, to syppe.

Sorbillum, potage or other lyquyde meats ordained to suppe, which women be
wont to call a little souppynge, when they do exhort a sick manne to
eat, when sometime it were better, that he should eat nothing.

Sorbum, an harryshe pear.

Sorbus, a tree which is long, and has a strait stem, and a thyn bark,
somewhat fatty, and first yelow, afterward whytish, a leaf like to a laurel,
but that it is thynner and less, and creuid by the edges, which hangs by a
long stalk* also white flowers in a cluster, and beteth fruit, which is in
the form of an egg, and in a cluster. I suppose that there be none of them
in England, and therefore to my knowledge it lacks an english name, In
french it is called Cormier.

Sorbum, the fruit of Sorbus, which has no stones, and they which do grow
in woddes, have a more sauoure than those which be in gardeynes. in France it
is called Corme.

Sordeo, and sordesco, dui, dear, to be foul or vnkleanly.

Sordes, fylthe or uncleanness, the swepynges of houses and canelles. sometime
vylenes.

Sordesco, scere, to be unclean or sluttyshe.

Sordidatus, vyly apparaylled for heaviness of mind.

Sordide, vnkleanly, sluttyshly.

Sordidior, dius, vncleanlyer.

Sordidissime, most uncleanly.

Sordidissimus, ma, mum, vncleanlyest.

Sordido, dare, to make foul.

Sordidus, da, dum, fylthy, unclean, sluttyshe.

Sorditudo, fylthynes, sluttyshnes.

Sorex, ricis, a ratte, or a field mouse.

Sorech, the Jews do call vynes, which contynually do bring forth most
pleasant and dylectable fruit.

Soriantes, sworn brethren.

Soriceus, a, um, of a ratte.

Soricinus, a, um, of a mouse.

Soriculata uestis, a garment of changeable sylke*

Sorita, a subtle and captious form of arguyng.

Soritae, people which are diuyded from Inde by the river called Arabis.

Sorilla, ships which are calked or stopped with hemp or flax.

Sororiari, is properlye of maidens breasts, when they begin to be imbosed.

Soror, ris, a sister.

Sororiae, maidens pappes.

Sororiantes ma^mulae, maidens pappes round and hard, set out to the show.

Sororius, my systers husband.

Sorracus, a coffer or basket, wherein are carried the instruments or apparaile
seruyng for comedies or enterludes.

Sors, sortis, chance, lotte, portion in inherytaunce, the holle sum in a
commune bank or sto ke, wherein many have part. it is also the princypall
sum of money borrowed. it is also destiny, judgment.

Sorts, were also the aunsweres of ydols.

Sorticula, the scrowe, wherein the lotte is written.

Sortilegi, be they which do tell men's destenies by taking of lottes or
verses of holy scripture.

Sortilegium, dyuination by lottes.

Sortior, tiris, tiri, and sortio, tire, to make lottes, to take or have any
thing by lotte or chance Also to dispose or order.

Sortire prouinciam, to receive the rule of a countray by lottes. It is usurped
to have authority by election.

Sortito, an Aduerbe, sygnyfyenge by lotte or chance.

Sortitus, ta, tum, taken by lotte. also changyng to have a thing.

Sospes, hole or saufe. also he that gives health.

Sospitalis, le, cause of health.

Sospito, tare, to keep in health.

Sos, old writers used for eos.

Sosia, a man's name.

Sostratus, a man's name.

Sotadicum carmen, meter having.vii. feet.

Soticena, one of the names of Juno.

Soter, a saluyour.

S ANTE P.
SPadicus, ca, cum, of skarlet color.

Spadix, dicis, a date with the branch plucked from the palm tree. it is
alsoo skarlet color. it is sometime, taken for the color of an horse, called
a bright bay.

Spado, donis, a geldynge be it man or beast.

Spadonia, a kind of laurel.

Sparganon, the root of an herb called Cynquefoyle.

Spargapises, the son of Chomiris, the queen of Massagetes.

Spargo, si, gere, to scatter or cast abroad.

Spargere bellum, to make war in sundry parts of a country.

Sparta, the chief city of Lacedemonia, it was also called Lacedaemon and
Theramne.

Spartacus, was a famous sword player, which gathered an host of slaves, and
made battle against the Romans, and was vanquyshed by Crassus.

Spartam nactus, es, hanc orna, a proverb, sygnifyenge the astate or office,
which thou haste, order or apply it well.

Spartarium, a place where brom grows.

Sparteum, a money bag.

Sparteus, a, um, of broume.

Spartiata, and Spartanus, na, number, of Sparta.

Spartum, and spartus, a bushe called brom.

Spara, be called caltroppes, sown in time of battle, to wound the fete of
men and horses.

Sparum, a little darte.

Sparus, a clubbe.

Spasmus, a syknes of the synewes and muskles callid also Conuulsio, it happens
sometime of ^epletion, sometime of inanicion or lack of nourishment. sometime of
grief, as in the prickyng of a synewe: otherwhile of cold, as by very cold
air or cold water. it is named in english the crampe.

Spastici, out of the which any thing is pluckid*

Spatha, a two handed or bastard sword it is also an instrument of the
kytchen, to turn meat that is fried.

Spathalion, an ornament pertaining to women. it is also a branche of palm
with dates hanging on it.

Spaticus, vexed with an ill spirit.

Spatiator, a wanderer.

Spatiosus, a, um, large, spacious.

Spatiose, and spatiosius, largely, more large.

Spatior, aris, ari, to walk.

Spatium, a space as well in time, as in place.

Specere, among old writers was taken for Inspicere, to look in.

Specialis, le, special, peculyar, propre.

Speciatim, specially, peculyarly, proprely.

Species, ei, a figure, or image* a form, kind, beauty, favor. It is
defyned by Logyciens, to be that, which is said of many things varienge in
nombre: as Homo, which is spoken of Plato, Socrates, Cicero, which do not
vary in figure, but in noumbre. some time species, do sygnyfye spyces also it
is appearance* also a sight or thing seen.

Per speciem legationis in Asiam ablegatus est, Under the color of ambassade,
he was banyshed into Asia*

In speciem esse, to be to the honor.

Specifice, partycularly.

Specificus, ca, cum, partycular.

Specillum, a small Instrumente, wherewith surgeons do search the depenesse of
wounds and soores. Alsoo to annoynte soore eyes. It is also a spectakle to
look with. also an ear pycker.

Specimen, speciminis, an example, a proof, also beaultie.

Specimen aedere, to show a proof of a man's counnynge.

Speciosus, a, um, beautyfull.

Spectabilis, le, worthy to be seen.

Spectaculum, a thing to be seen or looked on. Sommetyme the self beholdynge.
alsoo the place, from whense men do behold things.

Spectamen, a sign or token. Spectamen bono seruo, id est qui rem herilem
procurat, uidet, collocat, It is a token of a good servant that is to say,
which attends about his masters business, and does survey all thing, and
set it in order.

Spectatores, beholders, triers of money.

Spectatus, ta, tum, approved.

Specto, tare, to behold, to approve, to tend to some conclusion, to compare.

Qua spectat Affrica^, on the side toward Affrik

Spectatio, a trial or proof of money.

Spectrum, an image or figure in a man's ymagynation.

Specula, an high hill or tower, whereon things be espied far of. also
little hope, a dymynutiue of spes.

Specularia, spectakles.

Specularis, re, any thing, whereby a man may see the better.

Speculatio, a beholdynge.

Speculator, an espyall in wars.

Speculor, aris, ari, to see far, to consider, to espy, to search out.

Speculum, a lookynge glass.

Specus, cus, and specoris, a den.

Spelta, read Zea.

Speluncha, idem. Spelaeum, idem.

Spepondi, for spopondi, I have promised.

Sperchius, a river of Thessalia.

Speres, old writers used for spes, hope.

Sperma, spermatis, sede, most commonly used for the natural humor, whereof
all living things be engendered and fourmed.

Sperno, spreui, spernere, to despise.

Spero, rare, to hope.

Sperata uirgo, a maiden asked in marriage.

Spes, spei, hope.

Spem abijcere, to despair.

Spem alere, to continue in hope.

Spem fallere, to dysapoynt one.

Speutici panes, loves of bread made in haste.

Speusippus, a noble philosopher cousyne to Plato.

Sphaeca, a waspe.

Sphaera, a figure in all parts equally round, a spear.

Sphaericus, ca, cum, in the form of a sphere.

Sphaeristerium, a round place in a bayn, where men are exercysed, a tenyse
play.

Sphaeromachia, playenge at tennyse.

Sphennida, a ball made of lether or cloth, greater than a tennyse balle.

Sphragide, a stone which printeth perfitly.

Sphinx, gis, a monster, which had the head and hands of a maiden, the body
of a dog, wings like a bird, naylles like a lion, a tail like a dragon,
the voice of a man, which purposed to men subtyl questions. it is also a
beast like an ape, but more roughe, and with a longer tail, I suppose it to
be a monkay or babyon.

Sphondilium, a joint or knotte of the bakbone, xii. of them do make the chyne,
and the five resydue do make the loins.

Spica, and spicus, the ear of corn. also a spyce called Spikenarde.

Spica mantica, an ear of corn, having no bearde.

Spica Nardi, a spyce called spykenarde.

Spica celtica, an herb called Spyke, like to Lauander.

Spicatus, ta, tum, ^ared, or in care as corn is.

Spiceus, cea, ceum, that which has ears like to corn.

Spicifera, the surname of Ceres called goddess of corn.

Spicilegium, glemynge of corn.

Spicilegium facere, to gleme.

Spicio, cire, to shote out in ear.

Spiculatores, they which be called of the kings guard* Some men do take
Spiculator, to be a hangeman, or other person, which puts men to death by
execution of the laws.

Spiculo, culare, to make any thing sharp at the point.

Spiculum, a ^arte. alsoo an arrowe, it is more properly an arrowhead.

Spilumenes, a sluttyshe drabbe.

Spina, a thorn. also the backbone.

Spina Aegyptia, is of Joan. Agricola supposed to be that, which of some
apothecaries, is called Sucalia, or Bedegnar. alsoo that it is the tree whereof
comes the fruit called Acacia.

Spineus, a, um, of thorn.

Spineoli, a wild fruit, called Sloes.

Spinosus, a, um, full of thorns.

Spinther, a pynne. also a tache, sommetyme a bracelette.

Spinturnix, a bird, which was wont to come to the aulters, and carry away a
burning cole which was taken for an unlucky bird.

Spinus, a plumme tree, or damsyn tree.

Spio, onis, idem quod Nimpha.

Spirabilis, le, lively, or that whereby we live.

Spiritabile, idem.

Spiraculum, and spiramentum, out of the which the air or breath passes.

Spirarchus, a captayn in the forewarde.

Spirae, things which do turn and wind in diverse cerkles like a trendell,
or an adder lyenge round. Alsoo spira is an ornament of a woman's head, alsoo
the tournynge of cables or ropes, when they be wound up. also the band or
lace wherewith a cappe or hat is made fast under a man's chynne. also the base of
a pyllar. also a cake made like a trendell. also a multitude of people.

Spirillum, a gotes berde.

Spirituale, and spiritale, idem quod spiritus.

Spiritus, spirit, brethe, wind.

Angustus spiritus, a short brethe.

Ducere spiritum, to fetch breath, also to live.

Communi spiritu frui, to live.

Extremu^ spiritum alicuius excipere, to kiss one when he is dyinge.

Patriae reddere spiritum, to die for his cu^trey.

Spiritum trahere, to live.

Vno spiritu, at one brethe.

Spiritus, is sometime courage or commforte.

Spiro, spirare, to blow as wind does, to send forth odoure.

Spisse, an aduerbe signifyenge thycke, sometime slow.

Spissigradior, gradi, to go thycke, or make many feet.

Spissigradus, he that goes thycke.

Spissitas, thickenesse.

Spisso, are, to make thycke.

Splssus, a, um, thick, slow.

Spissum uerbum, a long word.

Spissum opus, a warke long in doing, or which requires long time.

Spissus tactus, when one feels a thing massiue.

Spissitudo, thyckenesse.

Spithame, called also Dodrans, is the measure between the thumb and the lyttel
finger they both being stretched forth, and conteyneth ix. inches, or.xii.
fingers bread.

Splen, splenis, the spleen.

Splendeo, dui, dear, to shine.

Splendesco, scere, to shine often.

Splendide, an aduerb signifieng clear or bright also rychely, honorably.

Splendidus, da, dum, bryghte, clear. Also he which uses to have his house
rychelye decked with abundance of all things, is called Splendidus contrary to
Sordidus and auarus.

Splendour, oris, light, brightness, sometime honor or nobleness in living.

Spleneticus, he that is sick in the spleen.

Splenium, a plaster of cloth or lether made to lay to the body of him which
is sick.

Spoletum, a city in Italy.

Spolerini, people of the city Spoletum.

Spolio, are, to rob or dyspoyle.

Spolior, ari, to be robbed.

Spoliarius, ria, um, that which receives spoil or things taken by robbery.

Sponda, the side of a bed.

Spondeo, spopondi, spondere, to promise.

Spondeus, a foot in meter of.ii. long syllables

Spondylus, a wherue, which is a round thing of stone or wodde, or lead, put
on a spyndel, to make it run round. It is also a white hard thing in an
oyster, which is covered with the fyshe.

Spondium, that which comes of lead like to soute, which is above vessels
of brass, that do hang over the fire.

Spongia, a sponge, or that wherewith any thing is wyped.

Spongiare, to wype clean a sponge.

Spongioli, mousherons.

Spongiosus, a, um, light, and full of holes like a sponge.

Spongites, a stone like a sponge.

Sponsa, a woman despoused or affyaunced.

Sponsalis, le, perteynynge to spousage.

Sponsalia, the spousage, or betrothynge of a man and woman, before that they
be wedded.

Sponsio, onis, a promise, a bargayne.

Sponsus, us, idem.

Sponso, sare, to affyaunce or betrothe.

Sponsor, oris, he that promyseth or bargayneth Sometime a suertie, which
undertakes an other man's act.

Sponius, sa, sum, promised.

Sponte, naturally, willingely, of his fre will.

Spontalis, le, voluntarily.

Spontaneus, ea, eum, that which does, or is done wyllyngly, naturally,
without co^straint or help.

Spopondi, I have promised.

Sporades, yles in the sea called Aegeum.

Sporta, and sportula, a basket or maunde, sometime money or meat distributed
by princes unto the people.

Sportula, and sportella, a little gift or alms, also lyuery of court,
called bowge of court was called Sportule.

Spretus, refused.

Spuma, the foam or froth of any thing liquide.

Spumeus, a, um, fomy or frothy.

Spumo, are, to foam or gather unto foam.

Spumosus, a, um, that whereof comes a foam.

Spuo, spui, spuere, to spytte.

Spurce, uncleanly, fylthyly.

Spurcidicus, ca, cum, that which speaks dishonestly, or uncleanly.

Spurcificus, ca, cum, that makes things un clean or fylthy.

Spurcitia, and spurcities, uncleanness.

Spurco, care, to defyle or make unclean.

Spurcus, ca, cum, unclean, filthy, vnpure, stynkinge, blouddy.

Spurcum uinum, wine myngled with water.

Spurij uersus, verses feigned, the authore being false named or unknown.

Spurius, a bastard, also it was the surname of diverse Romans.

Sputo, tare, to spytte.

Sputor, tari, to be spytte on.

Sputum, spyttell.

S ANTE Q.
SQualla, old writers used for squalida.

Squalleo, lui, lere, to be filthy, sluttisshe, soyled or stained with some
unclean thing*

Squallent arua, the fields are full of wedes.

Squallide, ill fauouredly.

Squallidae res, things unpleasant.

Squallidus, da, dum, sluttyshe, fylthy, causyng one to abhor the sight
thereof sometime it sygnifieth spotted also carrayn lean.

Squallidus ager, ground out of tylthe. also shynynge.

Squallor, loris, sluttyshnes, fylthynes.

Squalido, dinis, and squalliditas, the same.

Squalus, a fysshe.

Squama, the skale of a fyshe.

Squamatim, in the facion of shales.

Squammosus, skaly.

Squatina, a soole fysshe with a roughe skin, wherewith fletchers do make
their arrows smoothe.

Squarosus, a, um, rough and sharp, like to a thing which is skaly.

Squilla, a fyshe called a shrympe. also an herb, read Scylla.

Squinitij, people in Italye called Sabelli and Samnites.

S ANTE T.
ST, a voice of him that commands silence, as we say in english, hushed,
when we would have one to hold his peace.

Stabilimentum, that which keeps a thing steadfast.

Stabilio, liui, lire, to make steadfast or stable.

Stabilis, le, stable or steadfast.

Stabulariae mulieres, women, which keep vyttaylynge howses, for to refresshe
wayfarynge men.

Stabularius, an inholder. Also he that has the charge of the house, where
cattall is kept.

Stabulari damas aut ceruos, falowe dear or read dear to be lodged or
harborowed.

Stabulo, bulare, to stand as cattalle does in a stable.

Stabulatio, standing or lyenge of cattle, alsoo harbourynge or lodging of
dear.

Stabulum, an ynne, where men do lodge or bait. also it is the general name of
the place, where cattle do abide, when they come from their pasture. also a
stable wherein horses or mules are kept.

Stactis, and stacte, is that which is called commonly Storax liquida.

Stacteus, a, um, gummy.

Stadiodromos, the place ordained to run in.

Stadiodromus, he that rounneth in a course of runnynge.

Stadium, a place, wherein runnyng is exercysed, as well of men as of horses.

Stadium, is alsoo a quantytie or measure of ground, whereof (as Censorinus
writes) were three sorts, the one was of Italye and that contained.DCxxv.
fete which is.Cxxv pasis. The second was called Olympicum. and that was of.DC.
fete, that is Cxx. pasis. the third was called Pythicum, which contained a
thousand feet, which is two hundred pasis, which peradventure was for gotten
of Plinius and Solinus, when they wrate the description of Sicilia, which
makes the variaunce between them and Diodorus Siculus. Of the Stadia called
Italica or of Italy.viii. do make an Italion mile, containing a thousand
pase, every pase being five fete, we have none other name to give it but a
furlonge.

Stagma, an oyntemente.

Stagno, are, properly of water is to stand and not to flow.

Stagnum, a standing water, a poole, also a certain metal called tynne.

Staloginum, a thing to hang at ones ear, as Egyptians have.

Sta men, cloth, when it is in the lome or frame, also it is a threde.

Stanneus, a, um, of tynne.

Stannum, metal called tynne.

Stapedes, styroppes.

Staphyle, a vine.

Staphylus, he that did first myngle water with wine.

Staphis, a kind of vynes, which has a black stem and straight, and has a
fruit more like to a lyttel bladder, than to a grape, which be grene, within
the which is a kernel three cornered.

Staphilinus, wild parsenepe.

Staphis agria, Stafsagre.

Stata sacrificia, sacrifyce customably done at certain days of an old
ordinance.

Statae matris simulachrum, an image, which was set up by the people in
every street at Rome.

Status, ta, tum, fyrme or stable. also ordained or decreed.

Statarius, a, um, ordinary.

Stater, teris, a certain coygne which was in value four drammes, or four
grotes.viii. to an ounce.

Statera, a beam to way without the balances.

Staticulum, a certain wanton meuyng in dansynge, sometime a little carte.

Stati dies, days ordinary, days in bank, for apparaunce, or for the
parties to plede.

Statilinus, was called a private god, which men supposed to be always with
them.

Statina, an isle.

Staticulum, a little image.

Statiuncula, idem, or a little resting place.

Statius, a noble poet.

Statim, anon, constantly, continually.

Statio, onis, a place, where either men of war or ships do abide or
rest for a certain time.

Stationalis, le, that which stands fast or abides.

Stationarii milites, souldyours, which are assygned to abide still in one
place, or to keep a town or fortress, or the marches of a countreye.

Statiua, and statiuum, a certain place fortyfyed, where men of war lay at
the siege of a fortress.

Stator, toris, a servant, which is always redye attendynge about an
officer, to be at commandment. wherefore in that word be included
purseuauntes, posts, sergeauntes, baylyffes, and catchepols. also Jupiter was
called Jupiter stator of Romulus, because he supposed that he made the Romans
to tarry when they fled, the Samnites pursuynge them.

Statua, an image of metal, yuorye, stone, or timber.

Statuaria, the craft of grauynge or yettyng of images.

Statuarius, he that carueth or yetteth images.

Statuarius, a, um, perteynynge to images.

Statuere ex aequo and bono, to judge or determyne, according to equity,
less than the rigor of the law would require.

Statuere pretium, to set a price on things vendible.

Statumen, minis, that which is set up to sustain, or bear a thing, a
proppe.

Statumino, are, to proppe up, to underset, to make sure.

Statuo, tui, tuere, to ordeyne, to determyne, to judge or esteem to set fast,
to stable a thing to dedicate, to beat one thing to an other.

Sublimen illum, arriperem, and caput primu^ in terram statuerem, ut cerebro
dispergam uiam, I would lift him on high, and beat his head to the ground,
that I might scatter his brain abroad in the high way.

Apud animum statuere, to determine in his mind.

Exemplum statuere in aliquo, to punish one in such wise that other may take
ensaumple thereby.

Statuere in aliquem exemplum, idem.

Statuere in aliquem, to make an ordinance against one.

Mercedem statuere, to assign to one what wages he shall have.

Modum statuere, to appoynte a rule.

Statuere quanti hoc putetis, and quam multo redemisse. Think you, what it is
worth, and how much it cost.

Statuam statuere alicui, to set up ones image

Statura, the stature of a man.

Staturus, a, um, the participle future of sto, stas, stare, to stand.

Status, tus, state, it is among orators and lawyers the case, which rises
in contention, wherein the matter rests, which must be replied unto, and
either be denied, confessed, or trauersed: of Tullie it is called Constitutio
causae.

Status, stata, statum, fyrme. Stati dies, days appointed.

Stati redditus, rentes certain.

Steatoma, a gatherynge of grease or fat in some place against nature.

Stechades, three little isle by Marsiles.

Stega, a cabyn of a ship. also a cote or cotage.

Stegnae febres, fevers in the which a man may have neither siege, nor
urine, nor sweat nor none other euacuation.

Stelae, little pyllars.

Stella, a sterre, also a sterrcfyshe, also the name of a poet.

Stella crinita, a blasynge sterre.

Stellatus, ta, tum, full of sterres.

Stellatura, was an extortion of Capitaynes in taking from the soldiers the
portions of vyttayle appointed unto the^ by the emperor

Stellio, a beast like a lysarde, having on his back spots like sterres.

Stellionatus crimen, a dysceypte in dyssemblynge a thing, to take profytte of
an other iniustely.

Stellis, a kind of byrdlyme made in Euboea.

Stello, are, to shine or glysten like sterres, or be made like sterres.

Stemma, matis, a garland of flowers, also the stock or bloudde of a gentle
house. sometime the degrees in kynrede. also an inscription graven in a stone.

Stemo, was sister to Medusa.

Stenoboea, the wife of Pretus king of Ephyry, which loved Bellorophon, that
vanquished the monster called Chimaera.

Sentor, toris, was a man, which had a voice as loud as.xx. men.

Stephanoma, every herb that serves for garlandes.

Stephanoplocus, a maker of garlandes.

Stephanus, in greek is a crown.

Stercoratio, dungynge.

Stercorarius, ria, um, perteynynge to dounge or mucke.

Stercoratus, ta, tum, dounged or mucked, or compassed.

Stercoro, are, to dunge or compass.

Stercus, stercoris, dunge, mucke, compass.

Stercutius, the surname of Saturnus, because he first found and used dunging
of ground.

Steresis, privation.

Sterila, old writers used for sterilis.

Sterilesco, rilescere, to be barrayne or wax barrayne.

Sterilia, for sterilitas.

Sterilis, le, barrayne.

Sterilis amator, a lover which lacks money.

Sterilitas, barraynes, sterilitie.

Steriliter, barraynely.

Sternax, nacis, a stering or ploungynge horse.

Sterno, straui, sternere, to throw down, to spread, to cover, to lay the
table, to make plain or smothe, to lie down to rest.

Sternere lectum, to make a bead ready.

Sternunt se somno, They laid them down to sleep.

Sternuto, tare, to snese often.

Sternuo, nuere, to snese.

Sternutamentum, snesynge.

Sternutatio, idem.

Sterquilinium, a dungehyll or myxen.

Sterogonia, a kind of Frankyncense called communely Olibanum, or in latyne,
Thus masculus.

Sterto, tui, tere, to route when one sleapeth.

Stesichorites, is the noumber of eight in dyse. so called of the sepulcher of
Stesichorus the poet, which was made in figure like to eyghte dyse.

Stesichorus, a famous poet, of whom it is written, that when he was an
infaunt in his cradell, a Nyghtyngale satte on his mouth, and did singe,
signifienge that he should be the sweteste poet, that ever was before him.
Also he ^ounde first singinge of sounges in a daunse.

Stibadium, a chair or couche made of herbs wound together: some do call it
an herber or summer parler.

Stibium, a white stone found in silver mines which stops the runnynge of
eyes, and does make them seem very fair.

Stibon, idem quod Antimonium.

Stichos, a verse or an order in a thing.

Stigo, are, to prick forth.

Stigma, matis, a mark made with fire, or with a hot iron. Sometime it
signifies infamy and reproach objected openly.

Stigmatici, persons infamed.

Stilla, a drop.

Stilbo was a philosopher. Vide stilpo.

Stilbon, the sterre of Mercuri.

Stillicidium, the droppynge of a house.

Stillo, are, to drop.

Stilpo, a philosopher borne in the city of Megara in Greece, which his
counireye being bourned, and his wife and children lost in the fire, escaped,
and departing alone, when the king Demetrius asked of him, if he had lost any
thing, he answered, I have lost nothing, for all that is mine I carry with me
meaning thereby, that virtue, which is only the proper goods of a wise man,
and may not be taken from him, he took a way with him.

Stilpones, dwarfes.

Stimulo, are, to prick.

Stimulatio, a prickinge or feruente mouinge to do a thing.

Stimulator, he that pricketh.

Stimuleus, a, um, that which is done with pryckynge.

Stimulus, a good, wherewith oxen are driven.

Stingo, and stinguo, guere, to put out light.

Stipa, for stupa, towe.

Stiparius, a, um, perteynynge to stoppynge or beatynge hard together.

Stipatores, they which do frayte a ship, or lay in such fardelles or
burdeynes as are to be carried. Also they which be of the kings guard, always
about his person.

Stipatus, enuyroned with men, to be defended as princes are with their guard.

Stipendialis, le, perteyninge to wages.

Stipendiarius, a, um, which pays tribute, of some called contributary, to
the finding of an army, or defense of a country.

Stipendiatus, he that takes wages.

Stipendiosus, he that has been oftentimes hired or retained in wars.

Confectis stipendijs, when the time of their seruise was out.

Stipendior, diari, to be hired or retained in wars.

Stipendijs duobus, two the first years.

Stipendium, wages properly given to souldyours, also subsidy paid to princis.

Stipendia facere, to serve in wars, as a souldioure.

Stipes, pitis, a stake, also a stick.

Stipo, are, to stop chynkes or clyftes, properly in ships or botes, with
towe and pitche. also to enuirone to the intent to defend one.

Stips, uel stipis, pis, wages to men hired: also money given to beggars.

Stipem confert, it brings in gayn.

Stipem pergere, to sow money among the people, to give a largess.

Stiptica medicamenta, medicines that do bind or restrain.

Stipula, holme, erige, or straw, apt to thatch houses, it is of some taken
for the husk that closes in the straw.

Stipulatus, tus, and stipulatio, a bargayn or promise, or obligation to pay
money, or to perform a thing, which is required.

Stipulor, aris, ari, to make a bargayne, to promise effectually that which he
is required to do. It has both the active and passive sygnification Stipulor
abs te, I require of the or I am required of the.

Stiria, an ysikle or drop of yse.

Stiria, A country ioynynge to Austria and Carinthia in the este part of
Germanye, full of mountains sauinge a littell part bordryng on Hungary, the
people be rude, and the women have so great throtes by the corruption of the
water and air, that not only their speech is let thereby, but (as some do
write) when they give suck to their children, some be feign to cast the
bags which do hang under their chynne, over their shulders. there is in that
country plenty of iron and silver if the negligence of people did not let the
finding thereof.

Stiricidium, and stillicidium, the droppynge of a house.

Stirpices, weders in gardeynes.

Stirpitus, up by the rote.

Stirpo, are, to pull up by the rote.

Stirps, stirpis, in the feminine gender signifies a stock in kinrede, being
the masculine gender it signyfyeth the stem of a tree or herb.

Stitisse uadimonium, to have brought forth suertie or pledges.

Stiua, is that in a ploughe, which the ploughe man holds, when he does ear,
the plough tail.

Stlata, a broad ship or bote, called an hulke.

Stlembus, slow and heavy.

Stlatarium, any thing that is borne on the sea.

Stlatarius, a maker of hulkes or botes.

Stlitem, old writers used for litem, variance.

Stlitibus iudicandis, for litibus iudicandis.

Stlopus, a sown made with the mouth, when the chekes are blown.

Stlotium, for lotium.

Sto, steti, stare, to stand, to endure or abide.

Stare promisso, to abide by his promise. To be full. Stat ager sentibus, the
field is full of brembles. Iam puluere coelum stare uident, Now saw they the
sky full of duste. To bose out. Hic corpus solidum inuenies, hic stare
papillas Pictor marmoreo, Here in this marble stone shalt thou find painted,
the body found, and the pappes imbosed. Also to be immouable or always
certain. Sic stat sententia, so the sentence abides immouable, or is
determined. Also Stat, my mind is. Stat confer manum Aeneae, my mind is to
fight with Aeneas Stat, is set. Omnis in Ascanio, chari stat cura parentis,
All the care of the tender loving father was set on Ascanius. Also stare, to
cost, Neque ipse hoc periculum ignoro, expertus no^ leui documento, quanti
steterit mihi, quod semel imperata no^ feci, Nor I am ignorant of that danger,
having experience of no light warning, how much it cost me, that I did not
those things, that I was commanded.

Promissis stare, to abide by his promise.

Stare firmum, to stand fast.

Stat per me, per te, per illum, when I or any other is the cause, that a
thing is not done. Si poterit fieri, ut ne pater per me stetisse credat, quo
minus hae fierent nuptiae, uo lo, I would if it may be, that my father should
think, that it was not long of me, that this marriage took none effect.

Stat a me, he is of mine opinion.

Stat apud te fides parum, Thou art of a small credence.

In acie stare, to be in the field during the battle.

Statur, I stand here.

Stoecades, four Isles in the french sea against Languedocke.

Stoecas, cados, an herb and flower commonly called Sticados.

Stoecas Arabica, commonly called of apothecaries Sticades Arabica, the one and
the other preserves clothes from mothes if it be laid among them.

Stoici, a sect of philosophers, which affyrmed that no grief might happen
to a wise man and that felicity was only in virtue.

Stola, a woman's gown. It was also a long garment, which the princes of
Persia did use, and was the only garment of honor, as we do call such
apparayle a robe.

Stolatus, he that wears such a robe, also it may be called honorable.

Stolide, folyshely, lewdely.

Stoliditas, folyshenesse, lewdenes.

Stolidius, more folyshely.

Stolidus, da, dum, foolyshe, lewd of conditions, odiouse.

Stolones, branches which do spring out of the stemmes or rotes of trees.

Stomachichus, he that is sick in his stomach.

Stomachor, aris, ari, to have indignation, to be vexed in mind.

Stomachose, angerly, hatefully, disdainously.

Stomachosus, disdaynous.

Stomachus, is the pipe whereby meat gothe down. It is also that which is
called Ventriculus, whereunto we have none other name but the stomach. sometime
it signifies indignation, vehement wrath, hatrede, and abhorrynge of a thing
that lyketh not us, some time facility, or gentylnesse.

Stomatichus, he that has a sore in his mouth.

Storax, racis, a sweet incense or gum, which is also called styrax, whereof
be two kinds, the one is called Storax calamita, the other is called storax
liquida.

Storea, any thing that is spread on the ground it is also a matte.

Strabo, he that looks a squynt, or gogle cied.

Strages, a slaughter of men, or a discomfiture.

Stragulum, every ouermoste garmente. also a counterpoynte or couerled.

Stramen, minis, straw, litter.

Stramentum, idem.

Stramentitius, a, um, that which is made of straw.

Stramineus, a, um, of straw.

Strangulo, are, to strangle.

Stranguria, dyfficultie to pysse.

Stratagema, a polycie or wise cou^cil in wars.

Strategus, a general captain of an army.

Stratia, an host or army.

Stratiotes, a man of war. also an herb, which Io. Agricola says is our
mylfoyle or yarowe.

Stratioticus, ca, cum, warlyke, perteynyng to wars.

Stratius, idem. also the name of one of the sons of Nestor.

Stratumino, are, to paue.

Strator, toris, he that helps his master to horseback. yeman of the
stirope.

Stratum, any thing that is strawed also a bed.

Strata, all that is laid on the bed. also a horse harneyse, a street or
caulsay, paued with stone.

Strebula, in the old tungue of Vmbri was a piece of the flesh that was
offered in sacrifice.

Strena, a new years gift, or present.

Strenue, valyantly, quickly, boldly.

Strenuitas, tatis, actiuitie.

Strenuus, a, um, valiant, prompt actife, bold.

Strepito, tare, to make a noise often.

Strepitus, tus, a noise made with the hands or fete.

Strepo, pui, pere, to make a great noise, properly in goinge or clappynge of
hands, some time generally.

Strepsiceroti, certain beasts in Affrike, having crooked horns.

Stria, a rabat or small furrowe made in stone or timber, chamferynge.

Striata, be also creuises or small lines, which are seen in herbs.

Stribligo, ginis, a viciouse form in speaking where the words agree not,
and the parts of speech be out of order.

Striblita, bread made like to ropes or cords wounden.

Stricte, straightly.

Strictim, shortly towched one after an other.

Strictim refer, to report much in few words.

Strictim attondere, to clyppe all at once.

Strictior, tius, more straight.

Strictissimus, a, um, most strait.

Strictiuella, a foul ill favored harlot.

Strictiuae, olives gathered with man's hand.

Stricturae, sparks which do issue from metal when it is taken out of the
fire, and beaten with hammers.

Strideo, dui, dear, and strido, dis, dear, to crashe or make a noise like to
cords, when they be drawn.

Stridon, a town in Dalmatia, where saint Hierome was borne.

Striga, a rewe of things when they be laid in length. Also a ridge of
land, whereof comes strigatus ager.

Striges, shrycheoules, also women which are supposed to come by night into
houses, and suck the bloudde of chylderne, some call them hegges.

Strigia, wide garments made of lether used in wars.

Strigil, gilis, an horsecombe, also a thing wherewith wrastlers bound their
bodies, when they had wrastled. also a certain vessel.

Strigiles, were rubbing combs made of sweet wod, wherewith in India the men
were rubbed for an exercise. Also kerchifes, wherewith wrastlers after their
labors wyped their bodies. also certain vessels, also pieces of fine gold
found in mines, vnmyxte with any other matter. also little fyshes most
commonly taken in winter time.

Strigilecula, a diminutiue of strigil.

Strigillo, are, to strain hard.

Strigium, a spaynyshe garment.

Strigmenta, fylthynesse, which comes from a man's body, when he is
washed, also the corruption of oil.

Strigo, gonis, a well pight man, or well compacte or strong.

Strigosus, a, um, cartayn lean, it is properly spoken of horses or routher
beasts.

Strimon, onis, a river in Thracia.

Stringo, xi, gere, to strain or wringe. also to stryke, to make thynne in
cuttynge, to gather to shave, to wound. Stringere ensem, to draw a sword.

Strio, striare, to make rabattes in stone or timber. also to make furrows. It
is properlye when beasts in earynge at the end of a furrowe tourneth to make
a new furrowe. some do call it, to wind.

Striare, is also to plant or to polyshe.

Stritare, to abide or tarry with an ill will, or with much pain.

Stritauum, old writers used for Tritauo, my grandfathers grandefather.

Stritomellus, a sparrowe, which haunteth the sea cost.

Strix, strigis, a shriche oule, a wytch that changes the favor of chylderne.

Striges, gross herbs or wortes.

Strobilum, a pyne apple. sometime the kernels or fruit.

Strobus, a tree, whereof perfumes were made. myxt with the wine of dates, which
perfume was sweet, but it made the head heavy, all be it without any pain.

Stroma, it is, tapesry.

Strombon, a kind of Labdanum.

Strombus, a shell fish of the sea, which has a king, whom they follow. It
was thought sometime that he which had seen that fyshe should have good luck
in his affairs.

Strongyle, and Strongylos, an isle in the sea, called Aegeum, now called Axos,
sometime it was called Dia.

Stropha, subtlety in arguinge.

Strophas, a whirlynge or sodeyne turninge.

Strophades, two Isles in the grekishe sea.

Strophia, garlandes, which priests were wo^t to wear.

Strophiolum, a little garlarde.

Strophos, freatynge in the bowelles.

Strophium, a maidens neckerchefe or lynnen partlette.

Structilis, le, made of many pieces, or of diverse things.

Structiles columnae, pyllars made of diverse pieces.

Structor, toris, a caruer of meat at a table.

Structura, building setting of things in good order.

Strues, a pile of wodde. also a cake.

Struices, an ordinance of many things together.

Strufectarij, they which did carry cakes to the temple to be offered, as they
do now carry the holy lofe on the sunday.

Struferarij, they which did sacrifice at the trees that were burned with
lyghtnyng.

Strufetani, they which brought meal to be offered.

Struma, a swellynge within the throat, which is gathered matter and bloudde.
some think it to be that, which is called the kings evil.

Strumosus, he that has the kings iuyll.

Struo, struxi, struere, to set in order.

Ageres struere, to make rawseyes.

Fercula luxuriose struere, to make sumptuouse feasts.

Mendatium struere, to forge a lie or leasing.

Oratione^ solutam struere, to write in proof.

Verba struere, to set his words in order.

Strumum, a medicine or plaster for the kings yuell.

Strupearia, holidays among the people called falisci, at the which day,
the people do go with garlandes on their heads.

Struppum, is a like holydaye among the people called Tusculani.

Struppi, were little wrethes made of leaves put on the heads of images in
the temples, as now superstitious foles do set on images heads in the churches.

Strutheus, the privy member of a man.

Struthia, a certain kind of quynces.

Struthiocamelus, an ostriche.

Struthio, idem.

Struthion, an herb and rote called of Apothecaries Condisi.

Struthopus, a round foot like a sparowe.

Struthopedes, they which have little round feet.

Strychius, an herb, which makes him mad that eats of it.

Strychium bibit, a proverb signifyeng the man is mad.

Strychnon, an herb called Nyghtshade. read Solanum, and Solatrum.

Studeo, dui, dear, to study, or to apply the mind, or care for a thing, to
endeavor, to favor, to desire.

Studuit Catilinae, he favored Catiline.

Studiosus, studiouse, diligent, constant, addict or fervently disposed. also
favoring a another.

Studiose, studiously, desprousely.

Studium, study, sometime exercise, will, or appetite, desire, diligence,
favor, love.

Scinditur incertum studia in contraria uulgus, The unsteadfast people was
diuyded in diverse opinions.

Stultitia, folly, it is known by four things, or if he has not in
remembrance that he should have, or if he has, he does not retayn it, or does
not follow good council, or does approve ill council or affections.

Stultior moricho, he that neglects his own business at home, and applies
other men's abroad. It is also a proverb touching them which do things, that
cause them to be laughed to scorn.

Stultior Choroebo, a proverb applied to foles, which will assaye to do a
thing that is above their wit or learning: for Choroebus, was a fellow, that
assayed to number the wawes of the sea, when he him self could not tell any
number above five.

Stulte, folyshely.

Stultiloquentia, and stultiloquium, a foolysshe babblynge.

Stultiloquus, he that talks or speaks foolyshely.

Stultior, stultius, more folyshe.

Stultissimus, ma, mum, most folyshely.

Stultius, more folyshely.

Stultorum feriae, was a time in the month of February, that fools kept
holy, fools. holyedaye.

Stultus, he that does a thing vnabuisedly or without discretion.

Stupa, towe, the course part of flax.

Stuparius malleus, the hammer, wherewith calkers do beat towe in to shyps or
boots.

Stupefactus, astonyed.

Stupefio, I am astonyed or abashed.

Stupeo, and stupesco, pui, pere, to be astonyed or dismayde sometime to
marvel at.

Stupefacio, cere, to make astoned, or to cause to marvel or be abashed.

Stupentia, uel stupida membra, the members which have lost all their sense
or felinge.

Stupiditas, an abashemente.

Stupidus, dismayed, abashed. also he that feleth nothing, or lacks his
senses.

Stupor, poris, abashement, the sudden privation of sense or feeling.

Stupre, dishonestly, shamefully.

Stupro, are, to commytte aduoultrie or rape or to defloure a virgin.

Stuprum, auoutrie, or defloration of a virgin.

Stura, an isle again the mouth of Tyber.

Styga, a fenne in Egypt not far from the city of Memphis.

Stygeus, ea, um, perteynynge to Styx, the great fenne, which is feigned of
poets to be by the field called Elysius, which the paynyms did suppose to be
a place of pleasure, wherein rested the souls of good men.

Stylobata, a trough of timber, wherein water runs, or is conuayed into a
cesterne.

Stylus, a style, which is quality of words in speaking, sometime hard,
sometime easy, sometime in a mean, also an elegant form or order in writing
or speaking.

Stymphalus, a river in Arcadia.

Stymphalide, a coppe of feathers, which stands on the head of a bird, as
of a lark, an heron, a peacocke, and other.

Stipticus, ca, cum, that which stops or binds, or straineth, if it be
eaten or drounken. Also that which in tastyng seems to strain the tunge, as
a quince or red wine.

Styrax, racis, a soote gum called storax, whereof be two kinds, the one is
called storax calamita, the other storax liquida, which is Stacte.

Styx, sygnifieth sorrow or heaviness, poets do feign, that it is a fenne,
which is in hell.

S ANTE V.
SVada, called in greek Pitho, was called the goddess of eloquence or
dylectable speech.

Suadela, persuasion, fair speech.

Suadeo, si, dear, to speak fair, to entreat with fair words, to endeavor,
to induce a man into our opinyon, or to believe us.

Suadibilis, le, that which may be persuaded.

Suasibilis, idem.

Suanernicum, a kind of amber, which is ye low, whereof beads be made, and
is called Laumbre.

Suapte, of his own nature.

Suarius, a swyne herd.

Suasibiliter, an aduerbe signifienge, in manner to persuade.

Suasio, an exhortation, a mocion or persuasio^.

Suasor, soris, he that does exhort.

Suasum, every color that may turn into an other color.

Suauiatio, a sweet kissing.

Suauiator, he that kysseth swetely.

Suauiloquium, a sweet speech.

Suauiloquus, he that speaks swetely.

Suasorius, a, um, that wherewith a man is or may be persuaded.

Suatim, like a sow.

Suauior, aris, ari, and suauio, to kiss swetelye, or for joy.

Suauis, suaue, sweet in taste, soote in odor or smell, in a man it
signifies gentle or courtayse.

Suauitas, and suauitudo, sweetness.

Suauiter, swetely.

Suauium sumere, to kiss.

Suauium facere, idem.

Suauium, and sauium, sweet heart.

Sub, under, by, or about. Sub lucem, by day light. sub idem tempus, in the
same time, or about the same time. Sub horam pugnae, about the time of the
battle. Sub eas autem redditae sunt, For they were delivered after them. Sub
sarcinis, with the trusses or carriage.

Sub uesperum, in the twye light. Subuesperum Caesar portas claudi, militesque
ex oppido exire iussit, In the twye light Caesar commanded the gates to be
shut, and the men of war to depart out of the city.

Sub Alexandro, in the time of Alexander.

Sub aduentu, or aduentum, at the time, or at the point of his arriuayle, or
coming.

Sub exitu uitae, at his death.

Sub manu, at hand.

Sub oculis, in his presence.

Sub urbe, hard by the city.

Sub lucem, at the break of day.

Sub finem, at the end.

Posts sub ipsos, before the posts.

Subacidus, cida, cidum, somewhat cygre or sour.

Subacidulus, a, um, a little sour.

Subactus, ta, tum, constrained, subdewed, driven under, kneaded or wrought
with hands as dowe is, labored, exercised.

Subaeratus, ta, tum, that which is brass with in, and other metal without.

Subaero, rare, to myngle with brass.

Subagito, tare, to solycite. Subagito blandis, and benedicis uerbis, I
solicyted with fair and well spoken words. it is also to company with a woman
carnally.

Subalaris, subalare, that which is under the wings.

Subalpini, people under the Mountains called Alps, called Peemountaynes.

Subalternatio, a succession by turn.

Subalterno, nare, to succeed by turn.

Subaquaneus, a, um, and subaqueus, a, um, that which lies under the water.

Subaquilus, la, lum, broune of color.

Subare, is spoken of women, which are as filthy as swyne in the act of
lechery.

Subire, idem.

Subareo, and subaresco, rescere, to be or wax somewhat dry.

Subasper, somewhat sharp.

Subaudio, dire, to here or perceive a little.

Subausculto, tare, to harken a little.

Subbasilicanus, he that walks under the place where iugementes are practiced.

Subbibo, bibere, to drink a little.

Subblandior, diri, to flatter.

Subcalidus, da, dum, somewhat hot, warm

Subcernicula, a fine bulter, wherewith the flower is severed from the branne.

Subcerniculum, a rangynge sieue.

Subcingulum, a bracynge gyrdell.

Subcineritius, a, um, roasted or baken under the ashes, or axen.

Subcisiua tempora, times borrowed or spared from serious busynes.

Subcisiua opera, warkes done at times stolen from ordinary business or labors
necessary.

Subcollo, lare, to lay a thing on ones neck.

Subcrispus, he that has a curled head.

Subcustos, an under keeper.

Subcutancus, a, um, that which is within the skin, between the skin and
the flesh.

Subdelego, gare, to commytte to an other any matter, which is committed unto
us, by the king or prince.

Subdialia, places to walk in without any covering.

Subdialis, le, abroad in the air, without the house.

Sub dio, that is not in a house, or under a covering.

Subdititius, ia, ium, which is not properly his or hers, whose it is feigned
to be. Partus subdititius, a birth feigned of an other man's child. Libri
subdititij, books with false tytles or counterfayte auctours.

Subditiuus, a counterfayte child.

Subditus, a subject.

Subditus, ta, tum, idem quod subdititius. alsoo put in the place of an another.

Subditus iudex, a judge which is set in the place of a judge departed.

Sub diu, in the day time.

Subdo, didi, dear, to put under, to add, to put in the place of an another, to
put in daungier or ieoperdy.

Subdere in locum alterius, to remove one, and put an other in his place.

Calcaria subdere, to thruste to the spur.

Puerum subdere, to change a child, which children be commonly called
changelynges.

Subdere spiritus, to give one courage, or to make one proud or stately.

Subdolus, he that deceives craftily, cautelous

Subdole, craftyly, cautelousely.

Subdubie, somewhat doubtefully.

Subdubitanter, idem.

Subdubito, tare, I doubt somewhat.

Subdubius, somewhat in doubt.

Subdubitatio, a little doubt.

Subduco, xi, cere, to take away, to remove, to lift up, or draw up, to goo
or steal away priuyly, to put under, to pull back, to draw back, to
deceive, to steal.

Etiam nunc me subducere istis dictis postulas? And yet now wylt thou go about
with these words to deceive me?

Proximo magnum poculum ille bibit, caput ponit, cum dormiscit, ei subduco
anulum, At the last he drank a great draught, and laid down his head,
whiles he slept, I stale his ring from him.

Tempus est subducere hinc me, It is time to get me hense.

Lac agnis subducere, to weane lambs.

Cibum subducere, to keep one from meat or to take ones meat away from him.

Subducere copias in collem, to bring the host up to the hylle.

Naues subducere, to draw ships to land.

Aliquem subducere, to deceive one.

Subductum o^^ibus uentis aedificium, The house is set for all manner of
wyndes.

Subducere rations, to examine the charges with the alowances in account.

Subducere summam, to make a reckenynge, or to cast the sum in account or
reckenynge.

Subductio, a drawing up of a ship out of the water, deduction or allowance.

Subdulcis, ce, somewhat sweet.

Subduro, rare, to make somewhat hard.

Subduror, subdurari, to be made sommewhat hard.

Subeo, iui, ire, to enter, to suffer or sustain, to enterprise, to goo under
or in, to take Also to succeed, to resyste, to clymme or mount up. Also to
take charge of any thing. alsoo to grow or spring up, to comme to
remembrance, to put under, to succeed or come in a place, to answer or
resyste.

Qui retinendi officij causa, cruciatus subierit ultro, He that will for the
accomplyshement of his duty suffer torments wyllyngly.

Quis enim curae tuae molem sponte subeat? Who would wyllyngly take on him the
great weight of thy charge?

Sera poenitentia subijt Regem, Late repentance came to the kings
remembrance.

Aeneas subijt inucronem, ipsumque, morando sustinuit, Aeneas put under his
sword, and taryenge lyfted him up.

In quarum locum subierunt inquilinae, impietas, perfidia, impudicitia, In
whose place succeeded new inhabitants, contempt of virtue, dysloyaltie, lechery.

Poteris ne orationem eius subire? Moughtest not thou make answer to his
oration?

Hemi excelcitas, sex millibus passuum subitur, The heyghte of the mountaygne
of Hemus is clymmed or mounted in six thowsande paces.

Tectum subire, to enter or comme into the house.

Subire ad montes, to go from the valey up to the hylle.

Vultum alicuius subire, to come before one.

Spes animum subibat, I or he trusted or hoped.

Subeunt morbi, sycknes does come.

Subire aliquid, to take charge of any thing.

Conditiones pacis subire, to accord unto peace.

Deditionem subire, to render up a garryson besyeged.

Fortunam subire, to abide the adventure, or put all in a hasarde.

Labores subire, to take pain.

Per uices subire, now one, and than an other, by turn.

Cruciatus subire, to suffer or endure tourmentes.

Aleam subire, to put him self in danger.

Subire crimen, to sustain blame.

Incommoda subire, to be indamaged.

Subire infamiam, to be dishonored.

Iudicium alicuius subire, to abide the judgment of one.

Nomen exulis subire, to be a banyshed man.

Subire poenam, to be punyshed.

Supplicia subire, idem.

Tela subire, to receive strokes.

Verbera subire, to be beaten.

Ne subeant herbae, that the weeds ouergrowe not.

Cogitationi nostrae nunquam subijt, it never came in our thought.

Subit antiquitatem mirari, it comes to my remembrance to wonder at men of
the old time.

Subit recordatio, I remember well.

Subit cogitatio, I have beth^^ght me.

Subit animum. I do remember*

Calamitatem subire, to have a great loss.

Subire mortem, to receive death.

Periculum subire, to put him self in ieoperdy.

Sermonem subire, to cause hym-selfe to be spoken of.

Tempestates subire, to putit him self in danger.

Turpitudinem subire, to run in selaunder.

Subire uim, to put him self in ieoperdye to be slain.

Subeunt in hac reputatione, now comes to remembrance, etc.

Subijt regem uere cundia, the king was asshamed etc.

Fallendus est iudex and uarijs artibus subeundus, The Judge must be won by
pratye means that he may not perceive.

Suber, cork.

Subeth, is a barbarous word, pertaining to physyke, and sygnifieth a deep
stepe, not natural, procedynge of gross vapors, engendered of fleume, being
in the pryncypal members, resolved, and ascendynge into the forparte of the
head, and causynge oppylations in the celles of the brain.

Subsibulum, was a white ornamente, four square, and long, which the nuns,
called Vestales ware on their heads, when they did sacrifyce.

Subhasto, tare, to selle any thing in time of wars that was praised. Hasta,
a yerde, which was delivered to him that was appointed to self any thing
taken in wars.

Subiaceo, cere, to lie under also to be subject.

Subiacto, tare, and subiecto, to cast up, as corn when it is fanned.

Subices, subjects.

Subiecto, tare, to cast under often.

Subiector, toris, a forger of testamentes, or he that brings forth one
testament for an other.

Subicito, tare, to company often with a woman.

Subiculum flagri, a beatynge stock.

Subigo, egi, igere, to constrayn, to subdewe, to drive under, to whet, to
beat or stamp, some time to ear or tylle truly, to dig, to meddle with a
woman, sometime to lift up.

Subijcio, ieci, ij cere, to put under, to make subject, sommetyme to cast
up, to rehearse. Simeministi quod olim dictum est, subijce, If thou do
remember, what was ones spoken, rehearse it.

Oua gallinis subijcere, to set eggs under a hen to be hatched.

Spem subijcere, to put one in comfort.

Aliquid oculis subijcere, to make a thing so plain as a man may perceive it
as well as if he did see it.

Exemplum subijcere, to put an exaumple.

Subijcere, to bring to remembrance, to make answer.

Subijcere ferro terram, to tylle land.

Subijcere oculis, to report a thing, as if a man saw it.

Subijcere sensibus, to purpose a thing euydentyle.

Crimini subijci, to put in fault.

Faces inuidiae subijcere, to bring one into hatrede.

Testamentum subijcere, to bring forth a false testament.

Vis subiecta uoci, the sygnification and importance of a word.

In equum subiecit, he set him on horse back.

Subinde, moreover, forthwith or anon, oftentimes. Subin, idem.

Subingerere arietem, to deliver a sheep to be killed for him that does
sacryfyce.

Subinnanis, ne, somewhat vaynglorious.

Subito, suddenly.

Subitaneus, and subitarius, a, um, and subitus, ta, tum, sudden.

Subiugalis, le, used to the yoke.

Subiugis, ge, a beast used to draw in an yoke.

Subiugo, gare, to make subject.

Sub iugum mitti, to be subdued. It was properly when a battle was
vanquyshed, the vanquyshers caused three spears to be set up like a galowes,
and constrained them that were vanquyshed to go underneath it, in token that
they were subdued, which was the greattest reproach that might be divised.

Subiungo, gere, to add or join to.

Sublabor, beris, lapsus sum, labi, to slyp away.

Sublabro, brare, to put into the mouth.

Sublate, haultly.

Sublatior, tius, higher.

Sublatus, ta, tum, lifted up, mounted, advanced

Sublego, are, to substitute.

Sublego, legi, legere, to steal. also to chese an another into the place of
him that is dead.

In locum demortui sublegere, idem.

Sublegere sermonem, Clam nostrum hunc illae sublegerunt sermonem, Priuylye
they harkened, and bare away all that we co^muned.

Sublegere, to pass over in reading quyckly, to steal a thing that is
hid, to gather eftsoon.

Sublestus, ta, tum, feeble, faint, light, of nod force or value.

Subleuo, are, to help, or aid, to defend, to lift up, to sustain.

Sublica, a proppe, a shore, a post, or other like thing, to sustain or keep
a thing up, pyle driven into the ground for buyldyng or other like purpose.

Sublicius, a bridge at Rome.

Subligaculum, a nether coyfe or breche.

Subligar, garis, idem.

Subligo, gare, to vnderbynde.

Sublime, on high.

Sublimis, me, high, that which is above us.

Sublimitas, heyght.

Sublimiter, hyghly, on heyght.

Sublimo, mare, to set on high.

Sublino, liniui, nire, to annoynte or touch, to paynte or stayne.

Os sublinire, to deceive.

Sublinitio, the first color that is laid or dyed. also staynynge with colors.

Sublitio, onis, the ground color, whereon the perfyte color is laid, in
clothe dyed, it is called grasynge.

Subluceo, cere, to shine somewhat, or to give a little light.

Sublucide, somewhat light.

Sublucidus, da, dum, idem.

Subluco, care, to vndershreade boughs, that the light may come under the tree.

Sublucanum tempus, the spring of day.

Subluere, to vnderwasshe, as water, which runs low under a bank or
hille, and washes the foot thereof. Also to wasshe somewhat clean.

Sublustris, tree, that has some light.

Subluuies, a disease of cattelle, which is betwyxte the cleys of their feet.

Sub manu habere, to have at hand.

Sub manu esse, to be at hand or ready.

Sub manu, after hand, forthewith.

Sub manus, easily, handsomely. Bono animo es, negotium omne iam succedit sub
manus Be of good chere, all the matter is come to pass handsomely. Lepide hoc
succedit submanus negotium, This matter comes well and easily to pass.

Sub merum, almost pure.

Subminia, a womans garment, I suppose a kirtel.

Subministro, are, to do service under oone, to give or deliver any thing that
is asked for.

Subministrator, he that serves under an other man, he that delyuereth any
thing that is called for.

Submissim, and submisse, softely, proprely in speaking. also humbly.

Submissus,a, um, humble.

Submitto, tere, to send priuyly or by stealth.

Submittere, to send or bring in the mean time. Also to put or set under
proprely, as a calfe, a lamb, or a fool, is set under the damme to suck.

Submittere se, to humble him self.

Submittere capillum, to let hear to grow.

Pretium sdbmittere, to inhaunce theprice.

Submoneo, nere, to warn one priuyly.

Submordeo, dear, to byte softely, or privily.

Submoueo, uere, to remove or carye a thing far of also to drive out of a
place also to dyscharge a man of his office.

Subnecto, tere, to bind to, or hang to. alsoo to subscribe.

Subnego, gare, to deny somewhat.

Subneruo, are, to cut synewes.

Subnexio, a byndynge or hanging to.

Subniger, gra, grum, somewhat black.

Subnitor, nixus, niti, to lean against a thing, to be sustained up.

Subnodo, are, to make a knot under a thing.

Subnoto, tare, to note or mark.

Subo, are to brymme as a boore does when he gets pigs.

Suboffendo, dear, to offend sommewhat, or a little.

Suboleo, lere, to savor or smell a little.

Subopto, tare, to desire a little.

Subordior, dire, to begin.

Suborno, nare, to praise or honor. alsoo to suborne or bring in a false
witness or messanger, or feign one person for an another, to deceive with.

Suborior, riris, riri, to begin to spring or arise as the sun^^ does, to
praise or honor oone with words also to deceive privily.

Suppedito, tare, to be sufficient to serve, not to lack any thing, to bring
sufficiently.

Suppudeo, dear, to be somewhat ashamed.

Subremigo, are, to row under.

Subrepo, psi, pere, to steal away or rounne away pryuily.

Subrepere animo, to enter suddenly or priuyly into the mind.

Subreptio, theft, or a false suggestion.

Subreptitiae literae, letters stolen out by a falls suggestyon.

Subreptitius, a, um, stolen, or falsely come by.

Subrideo, risi, dear,, to smyle or laugh priuyly.

Subripeo, to steal, to take away secretly. sometime to lift up hastily.

Subrisio, and subrisus, a smiling.

Subrogo, gare, to substitute or subrogate, to make a deputy in an office, to
put in an another man's room.

Subrufus, a, u^, and subrubeus, a, u^ somewhat red.

Subrumi, lambs that do suck.

Subrumor, ari, to be suckeled, or put to suck, as calves, lambs. etc.

Subruo, ere, to enter with force, or priuyly by little and little also to
dygge the earth.

Subsano, are, to skorne or mock.

Subsannatio, a mock with bendynge the brows, and snuffynge up of the nose.

Subsannator, to mocker.

Subsarcinis, with trusses or burdeyns.

Subscribo, scripsi, scribere, to write under, to subscrybe, to favor a
mattier, to assygne a cause why, to affirm.

Subscriptores, they which in causes judicial do favor the part of the
accuser or plaintiff.

Subscudes, the utter table, whereunto other tables are fastened.

Subsco, care, to cut under or cut a little.

Subsellia, benches, which were under higher seats, they were also benches,
on the which Judges did sytte.

Subsentio, sensi, sentire, to perceive somewhat.

Subsequor, queris, sequi, to follow forthwith.

Subsero, serere, to sow or set under a thing.

Subseruio, uire, to serve, to accord, or agree.

Subsessae, scoutwatches, whereby hoostes of men are intrapped as they pass.

Subsideo, sedi, subsedere, to sytte under, to lay in away for one.

Subsidium, aid in an extreme point.

Subsido, dear, to fall down, to auale.

Subsigno, nare, to subscribe or write under.

Subsilio, liui, lire, and subsulto, sultare, to leap a little.

Subsilles, little plates belonging to sacrifice.

Subsimus, he that has a camoyse nose.

Subsipere, to savor somewhat.

Subsisiuum, that which follows or is next.

Subsisto, stiti, sistere, to resyste, to abide, to be by him self.

Subsolanus, the east wynd.

Subsono, are, to sown a little, to make a little noise.

Subsortitio, a deputation, when one makes an another his deputy.

Subsortitus, a substitute.

Substantia, substance, alsoo matter. sometime goods, which is also commonly
called substance

Substerno, straui, sternere, to straw or lay under any thing, as russhes,
carpettes, and flowers.

Substillum, a ryme or falling myste, or a droppynge before and after rain,
it is also a syknes, when a man may not pysse well.

Substituo, tui, tuere, to substytute in the place of an another.

Substo, stiti, are, to sustayn or abide constantly.

Substratus, a, um, strawed under, or laid under.

Substresto, pere, to make a little noise.

Substringo, xi, gere, to shrynke underneath.

Substruo, truere, to vnderpynne a house

Substructio, vnderpynnyng or groundynge of a house.

Substupeo, and substupesco, scere, to be sommewhat dysmayde.

Substupidus, somewhat dysmayde or abashed.

Subsulto, tare, to ioumpe.

Subsultim, by iumpes.

Subsuo, suere, to sow underneath.

Subsum, subesse, to be under, or within.

Subtal, the holownes of the foot. also the palm of the hand.

Subtegmen, minis, the threede, which in weauynge is called the woufe.

Subtegulanea, places under the eueis of houses

Subtendo, tendere, to purpose or diuyse any thing, to deceive an other
manne, or to lay any thing in a man's way for the same purpose.

Subtento, tare, to espy.

Subtepeo, pere, to be somewhat warm.

Subtepidus, da, dum, somewhat warm.

Subter, under.

Subterraneus, nea, neum, that which is under the ground.

Subtercludo, dear, to shut under.

Subterduco, cere, to withdraw, to escape away.

Subterfluo, xi, fluere, to rounne or flow under a thing, as water under a
bridge.

Subterfugio, gere, to escape.

Subtergredior, di, to go underneath.

Subtero, riui, terere, to broyse, or wear.

Subticeo, cui, cere, to answer nothing to that which is spoken.

Subticesco, scere, idem.

Subtondeo, dear, to clyppe under.

Subtraho, xi, trahere, to take away, to steal.

Subtrahere se, to draw unto quyetnes.

Subtrahere famae, to withdraw from brute.

Subtrahere inuidiae, to eschew envy.

Subtristis, ste, somewhat heavy or sorry.

Subturpis, pe, somewhat foul, in part foul or dyshoneste, the matter or
thing dyshoneste, covered with clean words.

Subucula, a shyrte also a cake.

Subueho, uexi, uehere, to bear.

Subuecto, tare, to bear or carry often.

Subuenio, ueni, uenire, to help.

Subuerbusta, meat burned on the spytte.

Subuerto, tere, to turn up so down. alsoo to distroy, to subvert.

Subuerso, sare, to subuerte often.

Subueteribus, was a place in Rome.

Subula, an awlle, that cordyners do use for a bodkynne.

Subulcus, a swyneherde.

Subulo, an heart having horns without rynes, called as I suppose, a
spyttarde.

Subuolo, lare, to flee away.

Suburbanum, a manor or farm without the walls of a city.

Suburbia, the suburbs of a city or town.

Suburrana regio, the street in Rome where the brothell houses were.

Subuulturius, a, um, that which apprehends men like as rauynes do carrayne.

Succedaneus, a, um, that which succedeth.

Succedo, cessi, cedere, to succeed.

Muris succedere, to approach unto the walls

Succedere, to enter. Et nostris succeed penatibus hospes, And enter thou my
friend into my house. Also to goo under a thing. also to speed well, to be at
a good point.

Hac non, successit, alia aggrediamur uia, This way it speedeth not, let us
goo to an another way.

Succendo, dear, to inflame, to bourne.

Succenseo, ui, ere, to be angry for a good cause.

Succento, tonis, was a certain garment, which only hoores did wear.

Succento, tare, to sing a base.

Succentor, toris, he that syngeth a base.

Succenturiatus, he that made up the number of the bend of men that lacked.

Succenturio, are, to make up the number of a hundred souldyours, or of that
company, that was called Centuria.

Succerda, swynes dunge.

Succemo, creui, cernere, to raunge meal in a sieue.

Successio, succession.

Successor, soris, a successor.

Successore^ dare, to depose a man of his office.

Successus, a, um, that which prosperousely happens, or spedeth well.

Successus, us, success, be it good or ill.

Succida, woulle unwashed.

Succidaneae hostiae, beasts for sacrifice, which were killed in the second
place, or next to the first.

Succidaneus, a, um, that which follows the first.

Succidia, a pyece or flyche of bakon salted. also larde.

Succido, cidi, cidere, to fell or cut down, also to fall under.

Succiduus, a, um, that which does succeed or follow. also low, ready to fall
down.

Succidus, da, dum, moist, or full of iuyse.

Succingo, xi, gere, to gyrde. Also to enuyronne or compass. Frustra se
terrore succinxerit, qui septus charitate non fuerit, armis. n. arma
irritantur, In vain shall he enuyron himself with terriblenesse, which is
not wallyd about with the love of his country. For with vyolence, vyolence is
styred.

Succingulum, a swordegyrdell.

Succino, cinere, to make a soft noise, to sing a base or tenor.

Succincta oration, a compendyouse or short Oracyon.

Succincte, compendiousely.

Succinctorium, a short iackette or ierkyn.

Succinctus, ta, tum, gyrte.

Succinum, aumbre, whereof some beade stones are made.

Succinus, na, number, of aumbre.

Succisiuum tempus, time of leisure, vacant from business.

Succlamo, are, to cry softely.

Succollo, are, to put under the neck or shoulders, to bear a thing.

Succortrila, a small voice and a shrylle.

Succresco, scere, to grow under, or low, or a little and little.

Succubo, bare, to lie under.

Succubonium, idem quod succuba, she that lies under.

Succubi, dyuelles, which in the form of women, do company with men.

Succulentus, ta, tum, full of iuyse.

Succiplenus, idem.

Succumbo, cubui, cumbere, to be subdued, to be joined to, to fall down under
an heuye burdeyne, to fail for feebleness.

Succurro, ere, to help, to come to remembrance

Suctus, tus, suckynge.

Succus, cus, cui, the suckynge of milk.

Succus, juice or humor, which the body receives of meat and drink. also
generallye all manner of iuyse.

Succussarius, and succussor, a trottynge horse.

Succuso, nis, idem.

Succussatio, succussura, and succussatura, the trottynge or shaking of a
horse.

Succusso, are, to shake as a horse does when he trotteth also a trotte.

Succutio, cussi, tere, to shake a thing.

Succula, a sow pygge, alsoo a certain inner garment. also a certain company
of sterres, called the.vii sterres, which do appear the xii. calendes of
June, and be called Succulae and Hiades.

Sudarium, a napkynne.

Sudes, a certain spear, which is burned at the end.

Sudo, dare, to sweat, to labor soore, to have much to do.

Sudor, doris, sweat.

Sudum, the clear part of the fyrmamente between clouds. Also the clear
fyrmament with out clouds.

Suefacio, suefio, fieri, to be wont.

Suere aliquid capiti, to get a shrewde turn.

Metuo lenonem, ne quid suo suat capiti, I am aferde of the bawd, lest he get
a shrewde turn,

Suesco, sueui, suescere, to be wont.

Sueui, a people in high Germany.

Sueuia, the chief country of Germany in fertility holsomnes and beautyfull
personages, it has on the east Bauiere, on the west Halsate, and the river of
Rhene, on the south the mountains of Alps: on the north Frankelande. It was
sometime called Alemania, whereof all Germany was called Almayn, in Duche it is
now called Swaue.

Suffarcinatus, ta, tum, laded, trussed.

Suffarcino, nare, to laade or bourdeyne, to trusse up.

Suffarraneus, he that caryeth meal or flower to any place to selle in little
quantity.

Suffectus, is he, which an offycer being dead, or removed, is set in his
place.

Suffes, was among the Carthaginenses, as the Consule was at Rome.

Suffibulum, was an artyre, which the nuns of Vesta did wear on their
heads, when they did sacrifyce.

Suffero, sufferre, to sustain, to put under, to suffer.

Sufficio, feci, ficere, to suffyse, to endure, to mynyster, to substitute, to
stayne.

Sufficit, it suffyseth.

Suffimentum, perfume, or fumigation.

Suffio, fiui, fire, to perfume.

Suffiscus, the codde of a ram, which was made for a purse to conteyne money.

Suffitio, and suffitus, tus a perfume or fumigatio^

Suffitor, toris, he that blows the fire.

Suffitus, ta, tum, perfumed.

Sufflamen, that wherewith a whele is retained or stopped of his course.

Sufflatio, a blowynge.

Sufflator, oris, he that blows.

Sufflatus, ta, tum, blown.

Sufflo, are, to blow.

Suffocatio, a stranglynge.

Suffocator, he that strangleth.

Suffoco, care, to stop the breath, to strangle.

Suffodio, fossi, dear, to dygge under.

Suffossus equus, a stumblynge horse.

Suffragatio, a declaration of a consent or favor.

Suffragator, toris, a supporter or maynteyner.

Suffragium, the voice of people assemblyd in gyuing their consent. also help
or succor, also a wrecke in the sea.

Suffragines, the joints of the hinder leg of a beast, called the howx,
sometime it does sygnifie the pasternes, they be also the young sprynges of
vynes.

Suffraginosi equi, horses, which have the peynes or scratches.

Suffragor, garis, gari, to bear favor.

Suffrutex, ticis, that thing which grows, having the form mean between
an herb, and that which is Frutex.

Suffulcio, cij, cire, to proppe up.

Suffulcior, cire, to be propped up or underset.

Suffundatum, vnderlayde.

Suffundo, dear, to cast down, or power lykour on a thing, to cast abroad.

Suffundo, dare, to build or set upon a foundation.

Suffuror, rari, to steal pryuyly.

Suffusio, a web in the eye.

Suffusus, a, um, sprynkled, indewed.

Suggero, gessi, gerere, to mynyster or give a thing, to send forth things,
whereof are plenty.

Suggerere sumptus, to allow expenses.

Suggestus, uel suggestum, a pulpytte or high place, out of the which
orators or capytaines made propositions unto the people.

Suggrundia, the euys of a house, which desendeth the walls from rain.

Suggrundaria, buryals of young infantes.

Suggrundatio, the eueysynge of a house.

Suggillo, lare, to make a black spotte in the skin with beatynge. It is
alsoo to skorne, to detracte, or infame, to reprove, to condemn.

Suggillatio, is a mark in the vysage, black or blewe, made by sum stroke:
a mock, a detraction, an infamation behind oone, a condemnation.

Suggillatus, spotted, mocked, detracted, infamed, condemned.

Sugo, and sugeo, suxi, sugere, to souke.

Suinus, a, um, and suillus, a, um, of a sow.

Sulcatim, in furrows.

Sulco, care, to falowe.

Sulcus, cus, a furrowe. Serere tertio quarto quinto sulco, To sow in the
third, the fourth the fyfthe falowe. Sommetyme it is put for a dyche. Alsoo any
manner of cuttynge of the earth. proprely it sygnifyeth any thing that is long
and sharp edged. Bisulum animal, A beast that has the feet cloven with two
talons.

Sulla, was a cruel tyrant of the Romanyns called also Sylla.

Sulmo, monis, a town in the country of Peligna, where Ouidius the poet was
borne.

Sulmonensis, a man or woman of the city of Sulmo.

Sulphuraria, a place where brymstone is boiled

Sulphur, phuris, brymstone.

Sulphureus, ea, eum, of brymstone.

Sulphuratus, ta, tum, dressed with brymstone.

Sultanus, a sowdane, which was the name of a king of Egypt and Siria.

Sumach, in the Arabyke tungue is that which Dioscorides calls Rhus. it is
alsoo called Ros syriacus. Manardus lib. i. epist. 4.

Sumanus, he that always takes.

Sum, I am, es, thou art, est, he is.

Su^ Amphytrionis, I am Amphitrio^s servant Sunt mihi bis septe^ praestanti
corpore nymphae, I have fouretene maidens of excellent beaultie.

Sum in mora illi, I make him to tarry.

Sum in moetu, I am aferde.

Sum in noxia, I am put in the blame.

Sum, old writers used for eum, him.

Sit uestra benignitas ad audiendum? Pleases you to here?

Sunt septem dies, it is seven days agone.

Sumanalia, a great cake made like a whele, such as is made at bridales and
church goinges.

Sumen, minis, is made of the pappes of a sow, cut from her the day after that
she has varowed, and powdered with salt.

Sumo, sumpsi, sumere, to take upon oone, to take generally, to hyre, to
consume, to borow. also to spend or bestow on one.

Quod enim peruentum, quo sumpta nauis est, non domini nauis est, sed
nauigantium, Until they comme to the place whyther the ship was hired, the
ship is not the owners but theyrs, which are passagers.

In mala uxore atque inimico, si quid sumas, sumptus est, On a shrewd wife, and
an enemy, what so ever thou bestowest, is wast.

Sumere aquame puteo, to draw water out of the well.

Sumere confidentia^, to trust, to take courage.

Sumere mutuum, to borowe.

Sumere obsequium animo, to rejoice, to take comfort.

Sumere operam frustra, to labor in vain.

Sumere optionem, to choose.

Sumere personam, to counterfayt an other.

Sumere supplicium, to punyshe.

Summa, is a collection of things or words. also the princypall point of a
matter, the conclusyon of a thing.

Summa aetas, the later age.

Su^mates, the chief persons of a realm or city.

Summatim, and summate, compendiousely by every part of the matter,
summarily. Ad summum duo, two at the most.

Sum, excellently, chyefly.

Summenianae uxores, hores kept in the stead of wives.

Summenium, a place where baudry was kept without the walls of a town.

Summissi, murmurers.

Summissim, and summisse, softly, not loud.

Summissus, a, um, base, low.

Summitas, heyght, or hyghenes.

Summitudo, dinis, the heyght of a thing.

Summitto, misi, mittere, to convey in priuyly, also to suffer to grow.

Summittere barbam, to let the bearde grow, to let to depart.

Summoenius, nia, nium, that which is under the walls.

Summo, are, to make highest.

Summus, a, um, highest, extreme, greattest, or very commendable, excellent.

Summum, at the most.

Summo iure agere, to take the rygour or extremity of the law in suite.

Summum fastigium imponere, to fynyshe a thing perfitly, to bring a matter to a
point,

Summam manum addere, idem significat.

Sumptifacio, cere, to spend.

Sumpti, for sumptus, plurali numero.

Sumptuarius, a, um, that which does pertayn to expenses.

Sumptuariae leges, laws made for restraynyng of outrageous expenses.

Sumptuose, sumptuousely, chargeably.

Sumptuosus, a, um, sumptuouse.

Sumptus, ta, tum, taken, or chosen.

Sumptus, tus, expense.

Sunium, a promontory or elbowe of the country of Attica.

Suo, sui, suere, to sow, to join or make fast together.

Suopte ingenio, of his own propre wit.

Sup, for super, above.

Supellectilis, le, and supellex, householde stuff, all things mouable within
the house.

Supellecticarius, a bondeman or slave, which is accounted for chatell.

Super, and supra, upon, above.

Super Garamantas and Indos proferet imperium, He shall advance his empire
beyond the Garamantians and Indians.

Super coenam, at supper.

Super haec, moreover.

Super Euclionis filia^, of Euclions daughter.

Super Priamo, super Hectore, of Priamus, of Hector. Hac super te scriba^ ad te
Rhegio, Of that matter I write unto you from Regiu^. Super, for propter. Nec
super ipse sua molitur laud laborem, Nor he takes the pain for his praise.

Super, for ualde. His accensa super, with those words she being kendlyd or
styred.

Superaddo, dear, to put or add to.

Superbe, prowdely. Superbiter, idem.

Superbia, pride.

Superbio, ire, to be proud.

Superbiloquens, and superbiloquus, he that speaks proudely, or hautely.

Superbiloquentia, proud or haute words.

Superbos, old writers used for mortuos, dead, because of the pomp, which was
at the buryenge. Faciam ego hodie te superbum, nisi hinc abis, I will kill the,
if thou get the not hense.

Superbus, proud, sometime magnifyke or noble, also high, ornate, or
garnysshed, rich, wicked.

Superbum bellum, unjust or unhappy war.

Supercido, dear, to fall on.

Superciliosus, sour in countenance.

Supercilium, the ouerbrowe. sometime it sygnifyeth pride, gravity. It is also
the haunce, which is over the door.

Supercilium attollere, to be stately or proud.

Supercilium ponere, to lay aparte pride or stately countenance.

Supercresco, scere, to ouergrowe.

Supercubo, bare, to lie over.

Superduco, cere, to put or lay on.

Superedo, dear, to eat after a thing.

Superessit, for supererit, shall live, or be left on live. Superest, he
lives, or is on live.

Superest, there is plenty or more tha^ enough. Alijs quia defit, quod amant,
aegre est, tibi quia superest, dolet, Some because they lack the thing that
they love, be dyscontent, and thou art soory that thou haste more thanne thou
nedest.

Superesse, to be the rest or resydue. Porro ausculta quod superest fallatiae,
But yet hear what was the resydewe of that craft or desceyte. To defend or
plead for one. Cunctari se, ne si superesset, eriperet legibus reum, He would
tarry, lest if he came and spoke for him, he should deliver an offender.

Superexto, tare, to remain over.

Superficiarius, he that has a house of his own builded on an other man's
ground, and pays therefore a quyte rent.

Superficiariae aedes, howses builded on the land of an another man than
builded them.

Superficies, the ouermost part of any thing.

Superfoetatio, one conception of a child after an another.

Superfluo, fluxi, fluere, to abound, or be superfluouse.

Superflue, superfluousely. Superfluo, idem.

Superfluus, a, um, superfluous.

Superforaneus, a, um, idem.

Superfundo, dear, to power upon.

Supergredior, gredi, to go above.

Supera, for supra.

Superiacio, ieci, iacere, to cast on, or lay on.

Superijcio, ieci, ijcere, to cast upon, to lay upon.

Superi, they which ben in heaven.

Superincido, dear, to fall on.

Superior, higher.

Superior aetas, the time or age passed.

Superlachrimo, to weep or drop upon.

Supermeo, are, to go over, or slyppe over.

Supernato, natare, to swymme over.

Supernati, they which have the hinder part of the thyghes next the buttockes
cut away.

Superne, a high, above.

Supernia, the inward part and hindermost part of the thyghes next the
buttockes cut of.

Supernus, na, number, high or over. Superna regio, the high country.

Supernumerarius, that which is in surplusage above the true number.

Supero, rare, to go over. Also to vanquyshe or overcome. also to ouerlyue.
sometime to kill. Quod superat, which is more, or is left in a surplusage.

Superpondium, ouerweyght, that which is added to the just weight.

Supersedeo, dear, to omyt or leave to do a thing Supersedeas hoc labor
itineris, take not the pain to come now, or forbear the peyn taking in this
journey.

Supersede istis rebus, let these things alone

Supersede istis uerbis, let these wordis pass, hold thy tungue.

Supersedi scribere, I forbear to write, I left unwritten.

Superstes, stitis, he that ouerlyueth or remains alive after that other be
dead, also alive sometime present. Old writers called Superstites, witnesses.

Superstes, he that is saufe. Deos quaeso, ut sis superstes, I beseech god save
you, long might you live. also present. Superstitem utrunque monui, ne inuisi
abeant, I aduysed them both, that they should not depart with displeasure.

Superstitio, a superfluous or vain relygion or devotion, an honoring of that
which ought not to be honored, a vayn reverence or fear toward that thing,
wherein is no efficacye or power, but by the illusyon of the dyuell, as
dyuination by the crieng or flyeng of birds, observation of times, and
dreams, and other like vanities.

Superstitiosi, they which be tymorous without cause, fearing that God is
dyspleased, where there is none offense done. They were at the first so
called, because they contynually prayed and offered to the goddis, to preserve
their chylderne, that they might over live them. Finally every indiscreet or
unreasonable devotion or religion, may be called superstytion.

Superstito, stitare, to make hoole or recover from death.

Supersto, stare, to stand upon.

Superstruo, struxi, struere, to build on.

Supersum, superesse, to abound, to remain, vanquyshe, to be superfluous, to
endure.

Superuacaneus, a, um, superfluous.

Superuacuus, a, um, not necessary.

Superuagnea auis, was of the dyuynoures or southsayers called that bird,
which cried from the top of any thing.

Superuenio, nire, to come unlooked for, to come upon or after an other thing.

Superuiuo, uixi, uiuere, to recover from peril of death, or when a man
seems to be dead.

Superus, a, um, the highest or ouermoste.

Superum mare, the sea, which is called Mare Hadriaticum, wherein stands the
city of Venyce.

Supinus, na, number, upright, the bealy upward sometime it signifies on an hill
or high place* also ydell.

Supina aure audire, to give a dull ear.

Suppar, almost even.

Supparasitor, taris, tari, to follow or flater for a man's dinner.

Supparium, a clothe or curtayne hanged up where enterludes were playde.

Supparus, uel supparum, a smock. it is also a topsayle of a ship.

Suppedaneum, a footstool.

Suppedito, tare, to subdue, to minister sufficiently, also to oppress to
endure.

Ac stomachonon queo labori suppeditare, My stomach will not let me endure
the labor. Also to furnyshe expenses, to give as much as a man would have.
Nam si illi pergam, suppeditare sumptibus Menedeme, mihi illaec uero ad rastros
res redit, Surely Menedemus, if I would give him as much as he would spend,
that thing would bring me to the point to rake for my living.

Suppeditare, to subdue or tread under.

Nunc uideo, in iudicio mecum contendere non uis, ubi suppeditari turpissimum,
supperare pulcherrimum est, Now I perceive thou will not contend with me
before judges, where it were a great shame to be subdued, and very much
honesty to have the better.

Suppetiae, and suppetias, aid or succors.

Suppetias ire, to go to the succor or aid of one.

Suppetias uenire, to come to succor.

Suppetias occurrit, he came forthwith to the succors.

Suppeto, tij, tere, to ask privily or craftily.

Suppetit, it is in a redynesse.

Suppetior, ari, to succor or aid.

Suppetunt dictis, data, aut facta. Non suppetunt dictis data, He perfourmeth
not that that he promised. Vtinam quae dicis dictis facta suppetant, would god
thou would do as thou say, or would god thy deeds did agree with thy words.

Suppetit lucrum, there is gain sufficient.

Res ita suppetit, the matter so requires.

Suppetias mihi, Bring to me succoures, aid me.

Suppetias adueni, come and help me.

Suppetias far, to aid or succor.

Suppilo, are, to steal vnderhande or craftily.

Supplanto, tare, to put under the foot, to over throw, to supplante or
deceive, in preventing one to his hynderance or damage, to vnderplante or set
a tree or vine.

Supplaudo, si, dear, to rejoice privily.

Supplementum, that which supplieth or makes up that which lacks in
quantitye or number.

Suppleo, plere, to make up that which lacks, to make even.

Supplex, plicis, he that desires any thing knelynge or prostrate.

Supplicatio, a prayer, a request.

Supplicassis pro supplicaueris.

Supplicans, it is, he that desires a thing.

Suppliciter, humbly knelynge.

Supplicium, pain, tourment, or erecution of death. sometime supplicia, are
prayers.

Supplitia pendere, to be put to execution.

Supplico, care, to beseech humbly.

Supplimentum, a making up of a number, which lacks or is minished.

Supplodo, si, dear, to stamp or make noise with the fete. also to reiecte or
cast away.

Supplosio, a stampynge or noise made with the feet.

Suppono, sui, nere, to put under, to put into the place of an other, to set
a false or feigned thing in the place of that which is the very true thing.

Supportare, to bring or carry privily.

Suppositio, the putting or setting of a feigned or false thing in the place
of the thing self, as one child for an other.

Suppostrix, she that commits that falsehod.

Suppositus partus, when the child of one womanne is laid with an other
woman, which is not the very mother, as though she had borne it.

Suppraedes, countersuerties, they which are bounden to the sureties, to save
the^ harmles

Suppressus, a, um, drowned, beaten under.

Victi Persi in naues confugerunt, ex quibus multae suppressae, multae captae.
The Persians fled unto their ships, whereof many were drowned, and many
taken. Also hyd or conceled.

Supprimo, pressi, primere, to keep down, to keep secret, to keep in silence.

Supprimere iter, to stay or omyt a journey.

Suppromo, psi, mere, to draw out drink.

Suppromus, a butlar. Bono cella suppromo credita, The seller or buttrie was
committed to a good butlar.

Suppudet, I am half ashamed, thou art half ashamed, or he is half ashamed.

Suppurantia, and suppuratio, matterynge of a soore.

Suppuratorius, a, um, that which perteyneth to impostumes, or to make a sore
to matter.

Suppuro, rare, to matter or be an impostume

Suppuratio, an impostume or sore that has matter.

Supra, above, or over.

Supra quam, for supra id quod.

Supreme, highest of all, or above all.

Supremus, a, um, the highest or greatteste of all other.

Supus, old writers used for supinus.

Sura, the caufe of the leg. sometime the hole shanke or leg from the kne
down.

Surculaceus, and surcularis, re, that which brings forth young settes or
sprynges of trces.

Surculus, a young set or slyppe, a nursegarden, also a slyp of a trec or young
graffe.

Surcus, a stake.

Surculosus, a, um, full of slyppes.

Surdaster, he that is somewhae deaf and can not here.

Surde, deafely.

Surdeo, dui, dear, to be deaf.

Surdesco, scere, to wax deaf or be deaf.

Surditas, deafness.

Surdo, dare, to make deaf.

Surdus, da, dum, deaf, also that which has no savor.

Surrentum, a town in Campania.

Surrentinus, na, number, of that town.

Surregit, old writers used for surgit, whereof comes surrectio, a rysynge.

Surrepo, pere, to crepe under.

Surreptitius, a, um, that which is done by stelthe that none other man
knows it.

Surgo, surrexi, surgere, to rise, also to grow or spring.

Surrigo, xi, gere, to lift up.

Surrigere aures, to lay his ear to a thing to harken.

Surripio, pui, pere, to steal or take away privily, also to lift up on hye,
to preuente.

Surripere operam, Clanculum abij a legione, operam hanc surripui tibi, I
departed priuyly from the host, this time have I borrowed to do you pleasure.

Surripere se, to stele his away. Vt surripuistite mihi dudum de foro? O, how
dyddeste thou steal away from me late out of the market?

Surpiculus, a basket or hamper.

Surrogo, gare, to substitute, or put in an another man's place.

Surrogatio, a substitution.

Sursum, above. Sursum uersum, upward.

Sursum deorsum, up and down.

Sus, for sursum.

Suscio, scire, for scio, scire, to know.

Suscipio, pere, to take.

Suscipere liberos, to get children on a woman

Suscipere fidem, to promise. Quas parts impleturum te, secundum susceptam
fidem confido, Which part I trust thou will perform, according to the
promise that thou made.

Consilium suscipere, to enterprise.

Poenam dignam sceleri suscipere, to be punished according to his merits,

Simultates suscipere, to hate one privily.

Vota suscipere, to make a vow.

Suscito, tare, to awake one out of his sleep, to call one to his warke.

Sus, suis, a sow.

Sus Mineruam, a proverb applied unto him, which presumes to teach or
correct one, of whom he rather ought to be taught or corrected.

Suillus, la, lum, of a sow.

Susque deque fero, and susque deque habeo, I force not I recke not, I care not.

Susae, arum, a great city in Persia.

Suscitabulum, a provocation or sterynge.

Suscito, tare, to stir or provoke.

Suspecto, tare, to behold above, sometime to se benethe, or to look down.

Suspendeo, dear, to be hanged over or an hye. also to appear a little.

Suspendiosus, he that is hanged.

Suspensus, he that douteth to speak or do.

Suspensus, a, um, hanged up.

Suspensa manu, timerously, doubtefully.

Suspenso gradu, Haec ubi ego audiui, ad fores, suspe^so gradu, placide ire
perrexi, when I hard those words, I went to the door fair and softely.

Suspendium, hanging. Suspensio idem.

Suspendo, dear, to hang up, to be doubteful or sorowefull. Suspensus animo,
having doubt, or being adrad.

Suspicio, spexi, spicere, to look up, also to honor, to answer.

Suspicans, he that has suspicion, suspectinge.

Suspicor, cari, to have suspicion, to suspec, also to suppose.

Suspectus, ta, tum, suspected.

Suspicio, onis, suspicion.

Suspiciosus, suspeciouse.

Suspiratus, tus, a^yghe.

Suspirium, idem.

Suspiriosus, short wynded, or he which fetches his brethe paynefully.

Suspiro, are, to sighe. also to desire fervently.

Sussilio, lire, for subfilio.

Sustendere insidias, to lay watch.

Sustentaculum, that which susteyneth or bears up a thing.

Sustento, tare, to sustain or bear up, to aid or help.

Sustineo, nui, nere, to hold up, to suffer, to forbear, to feed, to
refrain.

Sustollo, tuli, tollere, to lift up.

Sustollere animos, to be proud, or to have an high courage.

Sustollere aes alienum, to pay dettes.

Sustollere puerum, to bring up a child.

Sustulit, is properly of the father, as peperir, is of the mother.

Sustuli, I have had, I have brought up, I have lift up.

Susurrario, a whysterynge.

Susurro, are, to whyster.

Susurro, ronis, a whysterer. also he which with false and secret report
makes dissension between men.

Susurrus, and susurrium, a whysterynge, or soft murmuringe, or such noise as
trees do make with the wind, or a river when it runs, or birds when they
chatter.

Sutatis, a seamster or shepster.

Sutela, a subtlety or crafty warkynge.

Suterna, shewemakers craft.

Sutilis, le, that which is sown.

Suitor, toris, a showemaker.

Sutorius, a, um, perteynyng to a shoemaker.

Sutorium atramentum, soutars bleche.

Sutrina, a showemakers shop.

Sutura, a seame.

Suturnium, an ewer or lauour.

Suum, his own, his proper goods.

Suus, a, um, his or hers. But how this word shall be most aptely and
conuenientely used, read Valla or Calepines vocabularie. For it is more
abundantly and properly declared of them, than can be expressed in english.

S ANTE Y.
SYADES, sterres called also Hyades, seven in number.

Syagros, a wild bore.

Sybaris, a city in Grecia.

Sybarita, a man of that city.

Sybaritica mensa, a proverb applied to feasts and bankettes, which do
excede in delycatenesse.

Sybaritici libelli, wanton books.

Sybaritici ludi, plays which ar wanton and rostely.

Sybariticum carmen, a verse or poem containing wanton matter.

Syboti, people in the north part of the world

Sycaminus, a mulbery tree.

Sychaeus, a man's name.

Sycion, he that first found garlandes.

Sycomorus, a great tree like a fyg tree, which has abundaunce of milk, whose
fruit comes not out of the tops of the bowghes, as fygges do, but out of
the same boughs, and sweet like to a wild fygge: the graynes thereof be less
than the graynes of fygges, and they be never ripe, except they be scraped
with an instrument of iron.

Sycophanta, he that falsely accuses an innocent. also a bearer of tales, or a
complayner.

Sycophantia, a false accusation, deceyte.

Sycophantias struere, to deuyse, or invent falsehode.

Sycophantor, tari, idem.

Sycophantisso, are, idem.

Sycophantiose, deceytefully by craft.

Sycon, old writers called a fygge.

Sycosis, a disease in the fundement, which makes a warte like to a fygge.

Sycosis, where within the eye lydde grows a little warte or other like
thing.

Sydera, the plurell number of sydus.

Syderatio, a spyce of the falling evil in men, but in trees it is taken for
blastynge.

Sydiae, the rindes of pomegranades.

Sydus, syderis, a sterre.

Syene, a city in the confynes of Egypt and Ethiope.

Sygeum, a promontorye of Troy.

Syla, a mountain in Lucania, and a wod in it

Sylla, a great tyraunte of Rome, which was of an insatiable cruelty.

Syllaba, a syllable.

Syllabatim, by syllables.

Syllabicus, ca, cum, perteynynge to syllables.

Syllanion, a famous maker of images, which was never taught.

Syllepsis, a figure, where the plurell number and the synguler are joined
together, as, Socijs and rege recepto.

Syllogismus, a perfyte argument, which has a necessary conclusion.

Sylphium, read Laserpitium.

Sylua, a wood or place ouergrowen with wodes, also any matter hastily written
without study.

Syluanus, was called god of woods.

Syluaticus, ca, cum, perteynynge to woods.

Syluecula, and syluula, a lyttel foreste or wodde.

Syluesco, scere, to wax or grow into woods or bushes.

Syluester, syluestris, tree, of wodde or foreste, woddy, wild.

Syluicola, he that dwells in a foreste or wod.

Syluius, a man's name which was borne in a foreste.

Syma, a city in Asia.

Symbolum, a collation. also a token given by one to an other upon certain
appoyntmentes, generally a sign or mark to know a thing by.

Symbolus, a signet or seal, or a sign manuell

Symbulus, a wise and good counsaylour.

Symmachia, aid in battle, or leage made among men of sundry countries, to
fight against the other part.

Symmachus, a man's name.

Symmetria, is a convenient agremente of the members or parts of any thing,
aunswerynge in every part separate unto the proportion of the hole figure, as
in the arm the hand the leg the finger and the foot, and other members
having respect to the hoole body, and semblably in all other things.

Sympathia, a mutual combination of things natural in the operation of their
powers and qualyties. as water in coldenesse does participate with earth, in
moisture with the air, the air with the fire in heat, with water in moisture.

Symphiton petraeum, an herb called Bugle.

Symphitum, read Consolida mayor.

Symphitum magnum, comfrey.

Symphonia, a consent in tunc, also armony.

Symphoniaca, or Symphonia, an herb, which as Apuleius says, is Henbane,
called Hyosciamus

Symphoniaci serui, were they which in the ship played on drounslades and
fyfes to stir the soldiers to fight more aigrelye.

Symphonio, are, to agree or accord in one.

Symphonesis, colysion of vowelles.

Sympinatice, womenne addicte to ceremonies or devotion.

Sympinium, a cup serving for wine in sacrifice.

Symplator, a friend of him that is married which accompanies him to feasts.

Symplega, warkes, in the which wrastlers, and they which contend in
fighting, are beholden.

Symplegades, two yles in the grekysh sea.

Symplegma, an imbracynge together.

Sympo^iastes, he that makes a feast or ba^ket

Symposium, a banquet, or assembly at drynking

Sympotria, a woman which keeps company at drinking.

Symnista, a secretarye, or oone of the pryuye council.

Sympsalma, a concord in singing.

Symptoma, it is, a greek word used among physicians, for lack of a latin
word convenient for the thing, which it signifies, it is a certain affecte
following sycknesse like as cause does proceed or is before sickness it is a
sensible grief joined with the sickness.

Sympudearia, funeralles or plays, wherein plays were made.

Synada, a city in Asia.

Synaeresis, a contraction of two words as Bigae, for brjugae.

Synagoga, a congregation, specially of jews

Synalephe, a collision of vowelles.

Synanche, a sickness in the throat, called the squynce, of Barbarouse men,
squinantia.

Sincere, purely, incorruptly.

Syncerus, a, um, sincere, pure, uncorrupted simple without dissimulation.

Synchronos, of one time.

Synciput, syncipitis, the foreparte of the head also a swines head sowsed.

Syncopa, or Syncope, a figure, where a letter or syllable is taken away, as
compostus for compositus. it is also a soundynge for debilitie of the vital
spirites^

Synecdoche, a figure, where part is used for the hole, or the hole for part.

Syndicus, an advocate.

Syndipnium, a suppynge to gether.

Synechon, continent.

Synephites, a stoone, which is called also Leucongra.

Syngrapha, syngraphus, and syngraphum, the writing or deed, made or sygned
with the hand of him that makes a bargayne or couenaunte.

Synochitides, a stone wherewith nigromancers do call up diuelles.

Synodus, an assemblye of men, or general council.

Synonimum, which in diverse words sygnifieth on thing, as Ensis, Gladius,
both do signify a sword. Occidit, interfecit, necauit, do signify, he killed.

Synopis, sinoper or red lead.

Synstratiotes, companions together in war.

Syntagma, a treatise, an ordinance.

Syntaxis, order in construction. it is also a tribute or sum of money to be
distributed into sundry companies. it is also a volume gathered of diverse
warkes. Erasmus uses it for the sacrament of the aultare. quod recte aut
apposite alij uiderint.

Syntexis, lack, or weakness, which happens by long sickness.

Synteresis, the pure part of conscience.

Synthema, a token given to soldiers.

Synthesis, a short cote or ierkyn, also a vessel made of many vessels.

Syntomon, for circumcisum.

Sypharium, a curtayne hanged before mynstrelles when they sing.

Syphax, was the king of Numidia.

Syracusae, a city in Sicile, now called Sarragosa, in the old time of a
meruaylouse renoume in strength and riches. moreover it is situate that all
the day long the sun is never out of syghte, by no cloud that keuereth it,

Syracusius, and syracusanus, of that city.

Syria, a great realm in Asia, which has on the east the river of
Euphrates, on the west the myddell sea, and the realm of Egypt, on the north
Cilicia and Cappadocia, on the southe Arabia.

Syria, called also Assyria, a great country in the East, having on the
North, part of Armenia, on the west Mesopotamia^, on the southe Susianam, on
the este Mediam. it also conteyneth Phoeniciam. Palestinam, and Babyloniam.

Syriacum, a kind of sweet radishe.

Syriacus, ca, cum, of Syria.

Syriasis, an inflammation in the parts about the brain and the pannicles,
which happens to infantes.

Syrictae, people which receive their meat in oten redes.

Syricum, a color myxte with sinoper and ruddel

Syrium, wine boiled to the third part.

Syrinx, a pype or recorder.

Syris, corn kept in holes in the ground, and covered with chafe.

Syrisca, a woman of Syria.

Syrissus, a, um, of Siria.

Syrma, it is, the train of a womannes gown.

Syrnia, a shriche oule.

Syrophoenix, the sea cost of Syria.

Syrtes, quycke sands or shelpes in the water made by the dryfte of sand or
gravel.

Syrtites, a little stone found in the bladder of a wulfe.

Syrupus, a syrup.

Syrus, a man of Siria, also an Island belonging to Greece.

Syssitia, feasts, and companyes assembled at feasts.

Sysimbrium, I suppose to be horesmynte.

Sysimbrium cardamine, water cresses.

Syzigiae, synewes, which do come from the brain to the eyes, so that he,
which comes from the lift side, gothe to the right eye, and that which
comes from the right side gothe to the lift eye, so that the synewes do
cross each other.

T ANTE A.
TABANVS, a fly, which has four wings, and byteth a man or best that the
blood follows.

Tabefacio, ere, to corrupt.

Tabella, a little table.

Tabellarius, a caryer of letters, an auditour.

Tabellio, lionis, a scriuener that writes commune instruments and deeds.

Taberna, every vile habitation, also a shop or tavern, where wares be sold,
and al thing that is vendible, as wine, oil, or any other thing.

Taberna meritoria, an ynne.

Tabernaria fabula, a comedy or e^terlude, wherein are base personages, and no
persons of dygnitie or state.

Tabernaculum, a pauyllion or halle.

Tabernarius, he that sells any manner of wares. also a tauerner.

Tabes, bis, corruption in the body. alsoo extreme leanness, by a long
consumynge sickness. It is also matter and corrupt bloudde myxte together.
also the impostume of the lunges, procedinge of humors descendyng from the
head into the stomach, and so wondynge and corruptynge the lounges.

Tabesco, bui, scere, to languishe or consume, to be extremely lean, to be
corrupted.

Tabidus, da, dum, corrupted, consumed.

Tabificabilis, le, that which may be corrupted, or fall into a consumption.

Tabificus, ca, cum, that which makes o one corrupted, or consumes the body.

Tablinu^, was a winter parlour, wherein were painted tables and books of
stories.

Tabo, a consumption, wastyng, or putrefaction of things.

Tabor, a mountain in the countreye of Galilea, where Christ was
transfigurate.

Tabula, a table, in the plurell number tabulae, does signify a testamente, or
any commune instrument or writing Also tabula, is a table to play on with
dise or chesse men.

Tabulae nouae, were wha^ detters were not constrained to pay their dettes,
that they did owe, and the old obligations were dissolved and new were to be
made for that which should newely be borrowed.

Tabularia, are places, where evidences and writings be laid.

Tabularium, a cheste, in the which euydences and records are put.

Tabulata, walls made of square stones, as if they were burded They be also
the boughs of trees and bushes, which do grow straight forth and not not
upward.

Tabulatus, ta, tum, made of bourdes.

Tabulo, are, to make a thing with bourdes, or to join bourdes together.

Tabulatio, a ioynynge or closing of bourdes together.

Taburnus, an hill in Campania, wherein do grow many olyue trees.

Tace, egomet conueniam iam ipsum, Let alone, I my self will common now with
him.

Tacenda, those things which are not to be spoken.

Taceo, cui, cere, to keep silence, to be in rest, to be quiet, to be sure.

Taciturnitas, tatis, silence.

Tacitus, he that holds his peace, and is secret.

Tacito pede, softely, by stelthe.

Tacitum est, not a word is spoken of it.

Tacitus, citius audies, be still, thou shalt here the sooner.

Tacit, with out speaking one word.

Tactus, tus, feelynge.

Tactus fulmine, burned or blasted with lyghtnynge.

Taedet, it weryeth me, it yrketh me, I am weary of it.

Taedium, werynes, or heaviness of mind.

Taedulus, an old dotarde, of whom all men are weary.

Taenarus, a dark place at the foot of the hill called Malea, by the city of
sparta, which was supposed to be an entry into hell.

Taenia, the edge of a fyllette. also a womannes fyllet, or that which now
they call rolls, properly it is a kerchefe, which maidens do wear on their
heads. Also a white stoone, which in the water shows long like a kerchiefe.
It is also a village between Micenas and Corinthum.

Taenon, a city in Laconia, an other in Arcadia

Tagasta, a city in Affrike.

Tagax, acis, a felon, which happens on a manns finger.

Tages, was he, which taught first the Thuscanes the craft of divination,
called Aruspicium.

Tago, gere, old writers used for tango.

Tagrus, an Hill in Portyngale, where as it is written, that mares do conceive
of the wind.

Tagus, a river in Spain, which diuydethe Castile from Portugal, wherein
has been found gravel of gold.

Taigete, is the name of one of the seven sterres which so appiereth, as it
may scantelye be perceived, which sterre is also called Maia, and Electra.

Talaria, were shows, which Mercurius did wear, whereon were set whynges.

Talaris, re, that which comes down to the ancley, as Toga talaris, a long
gown, to the ancley.

Talarius, ria, rium, perteynynge to dyse, as Lex talaria, a law against dyse
plaienge.

Talassio, was a song contryned in certain verses, sungen at weddynges. It
was also a certain exclamation or erie used at maryages, the beginning whereof
began, when Romulus and the Romans rauysshed the maidens of the Sabines,
among whom was one of excellent beauitie, whom when many of the Sabines would
have rescued, they which carried her toward Romulus, to the intent that she
should not be taken from them, cried Talassio, which was the name of a noble
prince of the Sabines, as if they would have brought her to him, and by that
mean they escaped, and brought her to Romulus. and afterward they used at
marriages to cry Talassio.

Talea, a stock set in the earth, whereon men do graffe. also a truncheon, a
staff, a byllet.

Talentum, was accounted sommetyme for a poyse or weight, and thereof were
sundry sorts. one was called Atticum minus, or Commune, which contained.lx.
pounds of Athenes weight called Minae, or Mnae, which is of Troy weygh.lxii.
pound, and a half An other was called Talentum atticum maius, which
conteyneth.lxxx. Mnas, of troy weyghte.lxxxiii.li. and four ounces. And that
was also called Euboicu^. An other was called Talentum Haebraicum, which
contained an hundred Mnas, which is of Troy weyghte.C.iiii.li. and two ounces.
An other was Talentum Syrum, which was but of xv. Mnas, of troy weight.xv.
pound.vii. ounces and a half. Diodorus writes, that the commune Talent was
but.xl.li. and names three sorts, The one called Ptholom aicum, which
conteyneth.CC.lxxii.li. The second containing.C.xxv.li. The third a hundred
pound. Talentum was also acco^ted in valuation. Atticum minus uel commune, to
the value of.lx. Minae, which of our money accomptynge an hundred grotes to
every Mina, to an hundred pound sterlynge. every pound being of three score
grotes. not withstanding the just value of Talentum, is more or less after
the fynesse, baseness or weight of the english grote. Talenrum atticum maius,
was accounted to lxxx. Minas, which of our sterlynge money
is.C.xxxiii.li.vi.s.viii. pens. Talentum Haebrai cum sanctuarij, contained an
hundred Mnas Hebraicas, whereof every one was.lx. Sicli, every Siclus,
being.iiii. sterlynge grotes, so that Talentum was of our money
sterlynge.CCCC.li. Talentum Haebraicum uulgare, was half so much, videlicet.
CC. li.

Talia, the blade of an onyon or chiboll.

Talio, onis, an equal pain in recompense of a hurt, as for the cuttynge of
a man's hand, to lose a hand, or for puttinge out of an eye, to lose an eye.

Talior, ari, to be cut: it is properly spoken of wodde, which we now call
talling of wood.

Talipedo, dare, to go on the pasternes.

Talis, tale, such.

Taliter, in such wise.

Talitrum, a fylyppe given with ones finger or nail.

Talpa, a molle or want.

Talpa caecior, blynder than a molle, a proverb applied to them, which lack
judgment in things that are plain.

Talum reponere, to refourme that, which was negligently done, with more
diligence.

Talus, the ancle above the foot. It is also the pastern bone of a beast, Also
a dye or dice.

Tam, as well, also, as, so. Tam bonus, as good

Tam sum amicus republicae, quam qui maxim, I am so frendely, or as much
friend to the public weal, as he that is most.

Tama, when with much travail the blood comes down to the leg, and
causes it to swell.

Tam magis, for tanto magis.

Tamerindi, a fruit growing in India, the tree whereof is like to a palm or
date tree, the fruit sower, like grene damsyns, which is medicynable in
asswagynge the heat of cholere.

Tamaritae, people in Asia, not sarre from the sea called Caspium.

Tamarix, ricis, a tree vulgarly called Tamariscus, read Myrice, some call it
whitbeame.

Tamen, not withstanding. also yet. Tamen a malicia non discedis, yet will
thou not depart from thy malice? sometime it signifies forthwith, at the last,
so that. Quod potero, faciam, tamen ut pietatem colam, I will do that I may: so
that not withstandyng I omytte not my duty to my father.

Tamesis, the noble river of Tamyse in England.

Tametsi, albeit, always.

Taminea Vua, Dioscor. li. 4. says that it is the herb which is called
Bryonia nigra, Cornelius Celsus. li. 3. says, it is that which of the greeks
is called Stauis agria, which is thought to be false, for Plinius. li. 26. ca.
i. supposes, that it is the wyld vine called Labrusca, the same is affyrmed by
Ruellius.

Tam ne, old writers used for eousque, until that.

Tanager, a river in Lucania, between Campania and Calabria.

Tanagra, a town in Perside.

Tanais, a greatte river in the north part of the world, which divides
Europa from Asia.

Tanaquil, was wife to Tarquinius Priscus the king of Romans.

Tanaus, was king of Siria.

Tandem, at the last, sometime at the leastway also uneath, not withstanding.

Tandiu, so long.

Tango, tetigi, gere, to touch, to meue, to understand, or perceive, to come
to to deceive.

Tangere ulcus, to rub on the galde place, to speak to one of a thing, which
greueth him to here of.

Tetigit aures meas, It came to mine cares.

Tanis, the principal city of Egypt, where Moses did show meruayles.

Tanos, a stone of the kind of Emeralde grene and black.

Tanquam, as it were, like.

Tantalides, the progeny of Tantalus.

Tantali horti, a proverb signifieng good things to be at hand, which not
withstanding a man may not use.

Tantalus, the son of Jupiter and Plota, was king of Phrygia. of whom the
poets do write that because he discovered the counsel of the gods, he is
in hell tourmented in this wise. He stands by a fair river, having before
him a tree laded with pleasant apples, and yet he is always thursty and
hungry, for as often as he stoupeth to drink. he holds up his hands to
gather the appuls, but both the water and the tree do withdraw them so from
him, that he can not touch them.

Tanti, for so much. This word does perteine to byenge and selling.

Tantidem, at that price.

Tanti aestimo, tantifacio, tanti pendo, I set so much by, or I so much
esteem it.

Tantillus, la, lum, and tantulus, a, um, the dyminutiue of tantus.

Tantisper, so long.

Tantopere, so much, so vehemently.

Tantum, only.

Tantum non, almost.

Tantum sat habes? art thou content?

Tantummodo, all only.

Tantundem periculum, so great daungier.

Tanto, an aduerbe, signifienge so much, as tanto magis, so much more, tanto
peior, so much worse.

Tantum abest, it is so far from, or so much unlike.

Tantundem, even so much.

Tantumnum, also, ye also.

Tantus, ta, tum, such, sometime so much, or so great.

Taos, a stone of the color of a peacoke.

Tapetia, hangynges of houses, or clothes wherewith pauementes are covered.

Tapetum, tapes, tapis, tapesrye, or clothes wherein are wrought diverse
pictures, with thredes of sundry colors.

Taphiae, and taphus, an ^e by Grecia, where dwelled the people called Telebois.

Taphius, a city in Egypt, the people whereof were called Taphnii.

Taphos, in greek, is a sepulcher or tumbe.

Tapinosis, a figure, whereby a great thing is basely described.

Taposiris, a city in Egipte.

Taprobane^, an isle in the Indian sea, and was of some old writers supposed to
be in the contrary part of the world against us, and therefore they called
it an other world. It lies in the point between east and west, the
quantity thereof is dyuerselye described by sundry authors. For Strabo writes
that it is in length viii. thousand furlonge, which is a.M. miles. Plinius,
Martianus, and Solinus, do affirm it to be in length vii. M. furlonge,
which is.viii.C.lxxv. miles, in breadeth.v. M. furlonge, which is.DC.xxv.
miles. part of it extends beyond the equinoctial line, more south, and
has on the northest, the less Inde, it is now called Samotra, and is under
the subjection of the great Came, and is governed by four kings in an
exquisite form of justice: not withstandyng that the people be idolatours.
They hunt Tigers Olyphantes and Pantheres, of the which there is great
plentye. also there be founden carbuncles saphires isrinctes topaces rubies and
granates, in great numbers. There grows cinamome, cauell, benioyme, and other
sweet trees in great abundance, and they have money of gold silver and
brass, of the same weight and value, that the ancient coin of the Romans
were. There is also founden plenty of great and orient perles.

Tapsus barba^us, an herb, read Phlomos and Verbascus.

Tapsus, an isle by Sicile not far from Siracuse.

Tapulla, a law made for feasts.

Tapyri, people in Parthia, which use to give their wives in marriage to other
men, after that they have had four or five children by them.

Taraconia, a country called now Aragon.

Taracon, the chief city thereof.

Tarandrus, a beast in body like to a great ox having a head like to a
heart, and horns full of branches, the hear roughe, of the color of a
bear, I suppose it to be a rain dear.

Tarandulus, the beast called a Buffe, which is like an ox, but that he has
a berde like a got.

Tarantula, a kind of the beasts called Stelliones, like to a lysarde, of
whose bytynge no man dies, only it stonyeth him that is bytten.

Taras, the son of Neptunus, who builded Tarentum.

Taraxacon, an herb called Sousistell. read Cicerbita and Sonchus,

Taraxis, when the eyes do bolne out much, and be read.

Tarbeli, the city of Tarbes in Gascoyne.

Tarchesius, was a myscheuouse king of the people called Albani.

Tarchon, a duke in Hethruria, which was also a great diuinour or southsayer.

Tardatio, a tarienge.

Tarde, slow, late.

Tardigradus, that which has a slow pase, or gothe slowely.

Tardiloquentia, a slow speech.

Tardiloquus, he that draws his speech in length.

Tardior, slower.

Tardissimus, most slow, or slowest.

Tarditas, and tarditudo, and tardicies, slownesse

Tardius, more slowely.

Tardiuscule, somewhat slowely.

Tardiusculus, somewhat slow.

Tardo, dare, to tarry, to beslowe.

Tardus, slow, rude, sometime well during. also thycke or gross.

Tarentinus, a, um, of the City of Tarento in Calabria.

Tarentum, a noble city in Calabria, called Taranto.

Tarmes, a wourme, which eats flesh, a magotte.

Tarpeius, an hill at Rome.

Tarquinus superbus, was the last king of Romans, which was expelled out of
Rome for his pride and cruelty.

Taracina, a town in Campania called also Anxur.

Tarsus, the chief city in Cilicia, where saynct Paul was borne.

Tarsis, a region in India, it is sometime taken for Carthage.

Tartaria, is a country of incomparable greatness, it boundeth on the west
upon Russia, and extends into the east, after the description of the last
Card, above.MDC. duch miles, which is of Italion miles.vi. thousand and.iiii.
hundred miles and more, the breadth from the southe into the north is more
uncertain, it marches on the south upon Persiam and Indiam. the north is
much part desert for the coldenesse and barennesse thereof. The people have no
cities or towns, or else very few, but they lie in pauillions, and under
their carts, which they do remeue into sundry parts, as the time of the
year does require, dryuyng their cattle with them, of whom they do eat the
flesh much part raw, and do drink the milk and blood of them. The people
be fierce and cruel, and therewith vile and beastly in their living. They be
all under the subjection of the great Chaam, yet have they many puissaunt
pryncis, which do use a wonderfulle obedyence toward their emperor. They
believe in one god, creator of all things, but they be not chrystened. They are
so populouse hardy and fierce, that the great kings, which do march upon
them, have much to do to resyste them, as the great king of Russi, and the
king of Persia Sophias. Also one of their princes took in plain battayl
Pazaietes the great Turk, whom being bounden with chains and gyues of gold,
and enclosed in a cage of iron, he carried about with him until he dyed, and in
that battle there were slain two hundred thousand Turks the captain of
the Tartariens was named Tamberlane. Their emperor Chaam besides Tartariam
has also subject unto him the less Inde, and all the royalmes and yles in the
east and southeaste part of the world and he names him self in his style,
the son of god, read more in Chaam. Much of Tartaria was that countray
which was sometime called Scythia.

Tartareus, ea, eum, of hell.

Tartarum, the lees of wine.

Tartarus, the depest place in hell. it is alsoo a Tartaryan.

Tartarinus, rina, rinum, old writers used for horrible or terrible.

Tartesij, people in Iberia, among whom be cattes of exceeding greatness.

Tartessus, a city in the vttermooste part of Spain, on the sea side by
Gades, now called Cales, where Columella the most eloque^t and perfyt husband
was borne. it was called also Gadir and Cartheia.

Tascaneum, a white clay or marle.

Tasimenes, seu tasmenes, one of the sons of duke Nestor.

Tata, dady, which children call their father.

Tatae, a wanton word, wherewith one answers to an another.

Tateus, a kind of salt, which comes out of Phrigia, and is medicinable for
the eyes.

Taua, Tynmouth in England.

Taura, a barrayne cow.

Tatianus, a man's name. Tatius, a man's name.

Taurarij, people in Scithia.

Tauria, a scourge made of netes lether.

Taurica Chersonesus, a countray in the north part of Europa.

Taurici, people of cruelle manners that offered strangers in sacrifice to
Diana.

Taurilia, were plays made in the honor of internal goddis.

Taurinus, na, number, of a bulle.

Taurius, one of the goddis of the sea.

Taurominium, a mountain in Sicile, so called for the plenty of neat, which
fed thereon. also there was by it a city of the same name.

Taurominitanus, na, number, of the city of Tauminium.

Tauroscythae, people of Scithia, dwelling by the mountain called Taurus.

Taurus, a bulle, sometime a strong ox. It is also one of the xii. celestyall
signs.

Taurus, a great and famous mountain, which begins at the Indian sea, and
rysyng into the north, passes by Asia unto the fenne or mere called Maeotis,
and bordereth upon a great number of royalmes. also the hill called Caucasus is
part thereof.

Tautologia, a figure where oone thing is twyse spoken.

Tax, the sound of a stroke with a whyp.

Taxa, a kind of bays or laurel, wherewith herbars are made.

Taxatio, a setting of a tax or subsydy.

Taxatores, they which do rebuke one another.

Taxim, softely, scantly touched.

Taxis, old writers used for tetigeris, thou shall touch.

Taxilli, small dyse.

Taxo, nis, a gray or brocke, or badger.

Taxo, are, to touch often. alsoo to tax or cesse a thing at a certain
value. also to reprove one an another.

Taxus, a tree like to fyrre, which bears bearyes, wherein is mortal poison.
It is also the tree called yew.

Taygetus, a hill, under the which is set the cities of Sparta and Amycle.

T ANTE E.
TEARVS, a river of Thracia, at the head whereof Darius king of Persia, when he
went into Scithia, pyght his pauillions, and there abode three days. And
delytyng at the most pleasant water of that river, he set in the same place
a pyllar graven with letters of greek, declarynge his being there, with
commendation of the water.

Techna, a craft, also a wyle or subtle mean.

Techines, were they, which also were called Corybantes, and were feigned to be
the sons of Minerua and Sol.

Technicus, ca, cum, artificial, inuentine.

Technides, a crafts man.

Technophyon, a setting forth of craft.

Tector, toris, a pargettour.

Tectorius, a, um, pertaining to coueryng.

Tectorium, the playstrynge or pargettynge of a house. Tectorium opus,
pargettynge or plastrynge warke.

Tectum, the roufe of a house. sommetyme all the house.

Tectosagae, Tholose in France.

Tectosages, Languedocke in France.

Tecum, with the.

Tecum oro and quaeso, I pray and beseech the.

Tecum sentio, I am of thine opinyon.

Teda, a tree out of the which issues a lykour more thynne than pytche,
improperly it is taken for all wod, which being dressed withro sen or wax, will
burn bright like to a torche.

Taedulus, of whom all men be wearye. sometime it sygnifyeth him, which is
wearye of some thing.

Tegaeum, a city in Archadia.

Tegaeates, men of that city.

Teges, gitis, a course blankette or couerlydde, which lies on poor men's
beds. It is alsoo a matte.

Tegericula, the diminutiue of teges.

Tegillum, a little covering.

Tegmen, and tegimen, and tegmentum, a covering or cover.

Tego, texi, tegere, to cover, to hyde, to defend or keep.

Tegula, a tyle.

Tegulum, a covering.

Te^um, a city in Paphlaconia, where Anacreon the poet was borne.

Tela, the clothe, which is spoken as well of sylke as of lynnen clothe or
woollen.

Telam exordiri, to begin any business.

Tellanae, a certain kind of fygges.

Telamones, images, which do bear up pyllars or posts.

Teleboae, people in Greece.

Telegonus, the son of Ulysses by Circe the wytche, who following his father
into Ithacam, slew him vnwetyngly.

Telemachus, the son of Ulysses and Penelope.

Telephion, an herb which Leonicenus supposes to be that, which the Arabians
do call Cali, but Ant. Musa supposes it to be rather a kind of Anthyllis,
but where Dioscorides does describe it to have a stalk, and leaves like to
purslan, every leaf having like two wings.vii. or.viii. branches, coming
from one rote full of blue leaves, which are thycke and tender, and has
flowers yelow or white. and therefore Ruellius supposes it to be that herb,
which some do name Fabam inuersam some Crassulam minorem.

Telephus, the son of Hercules, which was nouryshed with an hynde.

Telepnium, an herb in Aetolia called Orpyn.

Telina, a certain garment.

Telo, lonis, is an instrument for war, which is in this wise, a great post
and high is set fast, than over it comes a long beam, which runs on a
pyn, so that the one end having more poise than the other, causes the
lyghter end to rise. With such bear brewers in London do draw up water.

Telonarius, and relo, lonis, a collectour or gatherer of tributes. Teloniu^,
the place where taskes or tributes ar paid.

Telos, in greek is an end, honor, a legyon, a tribute or pe^cion, it is also
the name of an i will, where the ointment called telina is made.

Telpussa, a city in Arcadia.

Tellus, li, a man's name whom the wise Solon judged to be more fortunate than
the rich king Cresus.

Tellus, luris, the earth.

Telum, all thing which may be thrown or cast with the hand, be it stone,
wod, or iron, it is also the general name of all that, wherewith a man does
fight, called weapon. sometime it is taken for a sword.

Telyphonon, idem quod Aconitum.

Temerarius, a, um, more hardye than need, or wisdom requires, foolchardye.
sometime dredefull, or to be dradde.

Temeritas, tatis, and temeritudo, folehardines.

Temere, unadvisedly, foolysshely, aduenturousely. sometime it sygnifieth
almost. alsoo without cause.

Temerius, more foolyshe, or unadvisedly.

Temero, rare, to vyolate.

Temetum, wine.

Temulentus, ta, tum, drunk of wine.

Temulentia, drunkenness.

Temno, tempsi, temnere, to set little by.

Temo, monis, the beam, which contains the yoke.

Tempe, a place in Thessalia wonderful pleasant, having trees and meadows
meruaylous delectable, where in birds of diverse kinds, do sing contynually
with excellent melody. Thereof all pleasant woods have the name of Tempe.

Temperamentum, a moderation.

Temperanter, temperatly.

Temperantia, temperance, which is a firm and moderate governance of reason
against sensuality and other vicious affections of the mind Temperantior,
temperantius, more temperate.

Temperatura, a temperance or moderation in the mynglynge of things together.

Temperies, temperatenes, proprely in heat or cold. sometime it is usurped
for temperamentum, and for temperantia.

Temperior, oris, more tymely.

Tempero, are, to temper or moderate in order or measure.

Temperamus stylum, calamum, appetitum, when we keep in our writing a mean
form, or do eat no more than is needful.

Temperare alicui, to spare oone, or forbear him.

Temperare animis, to moderate affections, to refrain the doing of a thing

Caedibus temperare, to refrain from manslaughter.

Victoriae temperare, to be never the prowder for his victory.

Tempsa, a city in the countraye called now Calabria.

Tepestas, tatis, sygnyfieth sometime the same time, sometime tempeste,
sometime wether, sometime a fair wether.

Tempestiuus, ua, uum, that which is done in conuenyent time.

Tempestiuitas, tatis, season or time conuenyent, opportunity.

Tempestiue, in season or time convenient.

Tempestum, old writers used for tempestiuu^.

Tempestuosum, tempestuous or stormy.

Templum, a temple or church. sometime it sygnifyeth heaven. also the
principal became of a house. also a sepulcher.

Temporalis, le, that which dureth until a certain time.

Temporaneus, a, um, that which is done suddenly, and at a time.

Temporary, temporanie, and temporaliter, until a time.

Temporarius, ria, rium, that which dureth or contynueth for a time also that
which pertayneth to time.

Temporius, an aduerbe sygnifieth in time, or by time.

Tempus, poris, time, alsoo the state of time. sometime the temples of the head.

Tenacia, and tenacitas, hardenes in sparynge of expenses, nygardshyp,
perseueraunce, retaynynge, or keeping

Tenatior, and tenacissimus, the comparatiue and superlatiue degree of tenax.

Tenacissimae memoriae, of most sure remembrance.

Tenaciter, fastely, surely.

Tenasmus, and tenesmus, a desire to go often to the stool, and may do
nothing, with a burning, and sometime a blouddy syege.

Tenax, nacis, that which holds fast, as glewe, sometime sparynge or
nygarde, to much constant, hard to be moved.

Tendicula, a net or snare to take birds or beasts.

Tendines, or tendones, the great synewes or edrdes of the body.

Tendo, tetendi, tendere, to extend or stretche, to lay a snare, to dwell, to
go. also to lift up, to pretend, to pytche pauylyons. also to assay, to hold
up.

Paruumque patri tendebat Iulum, He held up little Iulus unto his father. also
to prepare, to go toward a place.

Tendere alicui insidias, to lie in awayte to hurt one.

Tendere plagas, to pytche hayes or nets.

Tendere ad aluora, to assaye to clymme higher.

Tendere aduersus, to repugne.

Tendunt in diuersum sententiae, the opynyons be repugnant one to an another.

Tendutes, old writers called them, which had great tethe.

Tenebrae, the lack of light, darkness.

Tenebresco, scere, to be dark.

Tenebricor, aris, ari, to make dark.

Tenebricosus, a, um, that makes dark.

Tenebriones, liars and crafty knaves. Alsoo they which will not be seen
abroode by day time.

Tenebrosus, a, um, dark.

Tenedos, an isle in the sea called Aegeum, between Mitelene and Hellespontum,
not far from Troy.

Tenedia bipennis, aut securis, a quycke or sharp axe. A proverb applied to
Judges, which be hastye and cruelle in their sentences.

Tenellus, a, um, tender.

Teneo, tenui, tenere, to hold, to apprehende, to possede, to hold or keep
in, to cover, to understand, to keep back, to perform.

Tenes quid dicam? understand what I say.

Tene tibi, take thou that.

Per duas noctes ac diem unum tenuit, It dured two days and one night.

Verecundia teneri, to be ashamed.

Tenere se loco, not to depart out of that place.

Argumentis and testibus teneri, to be vanquished both with reasons and
witnesses.

Tenere consilium, to do by council. Praecipe, ut teneat consilia nostra, Give
him advise that he may do by our counsel.

Tene, tene, tarry, tarry. Redi, quo fugis nunc? tene, tene, Turn again,
whyther runnest thou now? tarry, tarry.

Ten^re consensum, to agree or consent unto other.

Tenet me amor, love meueth me much.

Tenere insaniam. Sed hoc primum expurgare tibi uolo, me insaniam neque tenere,
neque mi esse ullum morbum, nisi quod seruio, But first I will declare my self
unto the, that I am neither out of my wit, nor have any speknes, but that I
am bond.

Tenere ius, to know the law.

Tenere legem, to be under a law.

Tenere memoria, to remember.

Tenere medium, to keep a mean.

Tenere modum, to keep a measure.

Tenere se, to take heed of him self.

Tenere aliquem mendatij, to take one with a lie.

Tene tibi, take it as thine own.

Tenere causam, to vanquysshe or recover against one in a matter.

Teneri desyderio, to desire much or ferue^tly

Teneri ludo, to take pleasure in game.

Teneri furti, to be gyltie of felony.

Tenera aetas, youth.

Teneris annis, young years.

Teneor, neris, neri, to be bounden, to be beholden to one.

Tener, ra, rum, tender, mercyfulle, alsoo a geldyd man.

Tenerasco, scere, to be tender or merciful.

Teneritas, and tenerrtudo, tenderness.

Tenere, and teneriter, tenderly, louyngly.

Tenni, old writers used for tenui.

Tenitae, were called goddesses of lottes.

Tenontes, the great and strong synewes, which do keep the neck vpryght.
also a brood synewe, which goth from the hamme down to the heel.

Tenor, noris, an order, a contynuaunce of a thing.

Tenos, an isle in the greek sea, one of them, which is called Cyclades.

Tenta, stretched.

Tentamentum, temptation.

Tentigo, tiginis, a styffenes.

Tentipellium, a shoe with an iron soole, whereon the over lether is stretched.

Tento, tare, to attempt, to assay or prove, to tempte one to do evil.

Morbo tentari, to be vexed with sickness.

Caput tentare, to trouble the head.

Tentorium, a tent or pauylyon.

Tentum, a man's privy member.

Tentyra, a city in Egypt.

Tentyri, uel tynteritae, a venymous beast in an isle on the river of Nilus,
whose voice the ^ockodryll does fear.

Tenue, and tenuiter, poorly, symply.

Tenunculus, la, lum, very simple, or little in estymation.

Tenuis, nue, little or simple in estymation, small in quantity, poor,
thynne, lean.

Tenui filo, with a small threede, applied to style in writing, which is not
elegaunte, but plain.

Tenuitas, tatis, smallenesse, poverty.

Tenuiter, scantely, poorly, barely.

Tenuo, are, to make small, to make lean, or feeble.

Tenus, ni, a snare. Being an Aduerbe, hit sygnyfyeth unto. Tenus urbem
tendit, It extends unto the city, or no further thanne the city.

Tenus, a preposition, sygnifieth nyghnesse, or until a thing.

Titulo tenus, in a title oonely, or in words without effect.

Tepifacio, cere, to make warm.

Tepefio, fieri, to be warm.

Tepeo, and tepesco, tepui, pescere, to be warm or hot.

Tepidarium, a vessel, wherein water is made temperate. also a chamber,
wherinto men do go out of a bayne.

Tepidus, da, dum, mean between hot and cold, warm. Also koolid from
heat. sometime noysull or unprofitable.

Tephrites, a stoone, which has the figure of a new moon, in color
black, or asshe color.

Tepidior, colder.

Tepidissimus, a, um, most warm.

Tepidulus, tepidula, tepidulum, a dyminutiue of tepidus.

Tepocon, a form of writing downwarde.

Tepor, oris, and tepiditas, tatis, warmthe, or warmenesse.

Ter, thryse.

Terapne, a country in Lacedemonia, where the fair Helene was borne. alsoo an
Island now called Corsica.

Terebinthus, a tree, the wood whereof is blak and hard like box, out of
this tree rounneth a gum, called communely Turpentyne. All be it the common
Turpentyne is not it, but an another, which is as clear as glass, and is a
soueraygne medicine to cleanse the stomach of putrified humors.

Terebinthina rhesina, the right turpentyne.

Tereniabin, is Manna, which comes out of Arabia.

Ternarius, and ternus, terna, number, the third innumbre.

Terdenus, na, number, the thyrtenthe.

Terebellum, a wymble or percer.

Terebratio, a booryng with a wymble.

Terebrae, sieve terebrum, an augour, wherewith holes are bored.

Terebro, brare, to bore or make an hole.

Teredo, dinis, a litell worm that eats wod.

Terentius, the most eloquent writer of commedyes.

Terentianus, of Terence.

Terentum, a place in the field by Rome, called Campus Martius, wherein was an
altar of Pluto and Proserpine.

Teres, teretis, long and round, like a tree or a pyllar.

Teretrum, an instrument, wherewith a thing is made round.

Tergemini, three children borne at one burden

Tergestes, a city in Italy.

Tergestum, a town in Slauony now called Trieste.

Terginus, na, number, that which is made of a beasts hyde.

Tergiuersatio, a nonsuite in the law, when the pleyntife gives over his
suite.

Tergiuersor, aris, ari, to turn back, to deny, in the law it sygnifieth to
be nonsuite.

Tergo, and tergeo, tersi, tergere, to wype or make clean.

Tergum, the back of man or beast, or of any other thing. sometime it
signifies a hyde of a beast.

Terga dare, to rune away, proprely in battle.

Tergus, tergoris, a hyde of a beast.

Terma, matis, the extremity, the end of a thing, also the sole of the foot.

Termentarium, a lynnen clothe, wherewith the body is covered.

Termentum, for detrimentum.

Terms, a branch plucked of a tree with the fruit on it. also a worm,
which eats flesh.

Termile, a mountaygne in Lycia, called also Chimaera.

Ter milies, three thousand times.

Termillum, a pot for wine, which was always set on the table, that every man
might take as much wine as he would.

Terminalia, was a certain holy day, at the later end of the year.

Terminalis lapis, a mere stone, laid or pyghte at the end of sundry men's
lands.

Termino, nare, to end or fynyshe.

Terminus, a sign, which declares one man's land from an other, or one
country or territory from an another. also it signyfieth the buttynge.

Terminus deus, was an ydolle, which was supposed to have preeminence over the
bounds of land, whose temple had ever an hole in the roufe, for as much as
they thought it to be unlawful that bounds of land should be covered or
hid.

Termo, onis, old writers used for terminus.

Ternarius numerus, the number of three.

Ternus, na, number, the third.

Ternundenum, the thyrtenthe.

Tero, triui, terere, to rub, to break or broise.

Terere iter, to go his way.

Terere tempus, to consume time.

Terere otium, to live ydelly.

Terpander, dri, an old musician, which added.vii. strings to the harp.

Terpsichore, one of the nine muses.

Terra, earth. sometime all the world, alsoo a prouynce, a territory, a
country, land.

Terraceus, a, um, of earth.

Terraneola, a bird like to a lark, which we call a buntyng.

Terrefacio, facere, to make aferde.

Terraefilius, he that is come up of naught, and no man knows his kynrede.

Terraemotus, erthequake.

Terrenum, a field.

Terrenus, na, number, on earth, or living on earth, erthely.

Terreo, rui, rere, to make aferde.

Terrestris, tree, erthely.

Terreus, rea, reum, of earth. Vas terreum, a vessel of earth.

Terribilis, bile, terrible, that which is to be feared.

Terricola, he that dwells in the land.

Terricrepus, he that rebukes one terribly.

Terriculamentum, a fear, or a fearful thing.

Terrificus, ca, cum, terryble, or that which in duceth fear.

Terrigena, begotten on the earth.

Terriones, ploughmen.

Terripauium, and terripudium, for tripudium, daunsynge.

Territo, tare, to make aferde.

Territorium, the fyeldes or counteaye lyenge within the iurysdiction and
bounds of a city, a territory.

Terror, roris, fear.

Tersus, sa, sum, clean, pure.

Tersus dies, of old writers was taken for a fair day.

Tertiata uerba, words not perfytly pronounced, as when one is in fear or
dread of him to whom he speaks, he tremblyng in speech uneath pronounces the
third word that he would say.

Tertiarum, is a myxt metal, wherein are two parts of lead, and one of tynne.

Tertio, are, to do a thing the third time, or to make the third tylthe in
earynge.

Tertio Consul, where two have been Consules before him. Tertium Consul, he
that has been thryse consul. So that Tertio signifies the third in order and
place, two going before. Tertium sygnifieth the time, where twyse gothe before.
The like is of Secundo, quarto, and other numbres.

Tertio pedato, at the third return or coming again.

Tertius, a, um, the third.

Tertius decimus, the thyrtenthe.

Tertullianus, was a great learned man of Carthage, the son of a capytayne of
the Romans, was in his time a very excellent man in wit and learning, and
wrate many noble warkes in defense of chrystendome, but being in his myddel
age made a priest, vexed with sundry wrongs and dyspleasures, by the envy of
the clergy of Rome, he as it were enforced at the last fell into the heresye
of Montanus, which heresye he did interlace with his books which he wrate.
And lived until he came to extreme age. He flourished about the year of our
lord.CCx. years. Saint Cyprian when he lysted to read the warkes of
Tertulliane, he would bydde his servant bring to him his master.

Teruncium, a poyse or coin of three o^nces.

Tesca, a place where mistical ceremonies were exercysed.

Tesqua, places hard or difficile to come up to, where the Romans did
practice their dyuinations by flieng of birds called auguria.

Tessellatus, ta, tum, that which is wroughte with small pieces of stone,
wodde, or bone, as in playenge tables or counterbourdes.

Tessella, a graffe.

Tessera, that which is in every part square as a dye. also it is a dye,
moreover a watchword or privy token given to soldiers also a token given to
people to receive corn of the kings alms. also a tail, whereon is scored or
marked the number of things received, which is also called Tesserula.

Tesseradecas, fouretene.

Tesserarius, he that gives the watcheworde.

Tesserulae, little pauynge tyles.

Tesso, tessi, tessere, to dispoyle or pull of a garment or harneys by vyolence.

Testa, a sharde of a pot or tyle. also an erthen pot. also all manner of
shell fyshe.

Testaceus, a, um, that which has a shell.

Testeus, idem.

Testaceum flagellum, a proverb applied to sodayn alteration of things, or of
banishment unlooked for.

Testamentarius, a forger of testamentes.

Testamentarius, ria, rium, pertaining to testamentes.

Testamentum, a testament.

Testatim, in pieces or shardes.

Testatio, and testimonium, witness.

Testator, toris, he that makes a testament.

Testatus, he that is dead, and has made a will also openly known of all men
or proved.

Testiculor, aris, ari, to put the male to the female. Testillor, idem.

Testiculus, of a known sygnification.

Testificatio, a wyenes bearing.

Testificator, and testificatrix, he or she that bears witness.

Testificor, caris, cari, ^o bear witness.

Testimonium, and testatio, witness borne of a thing done.

Testis, he that bears witness.

Sine test dolere, to be sorowfulle without semblaunt.

Testes, be also a man's genytours.

Testor, aris, ari, to bear witness, to call to witness, to pray god.

Testu, old writers used for testa.

Testuaceum, that which is boiled in an earthen pot.

Testudinatum tectum, a roufe, which is holow in four parts, vaulted.

Testudo, dinis, a snayl. also an engyn of war to beat down walls, which
was made of bourdes, and covered with lether, or other things, which would
not bourne. Within it was a piece of timber, that had a great hoke of iron at
the end, which piece might be plucked back, and put forth with the
strength of men, and therewith pluck stones out of the walls of towns
besyeged. It is also the roufe or vaulte of a house.

Testus, stus, is a pan, wherein tartes, and other like things of paste are
baken.

Tetanicus morbus, idem quod Tetanos.

Tetanothra, a medycine, wherewith the face of a man or woman is made smothe
without wrynkles.

Tetanos, when the synites are styffe, so that a man can not bow some part of
his body.

Tetarmorion, the fourth part of the zodiake cirkle, wherein are the.xii.
signs. It is alsoo that, which astronomers do call the quadrate aspect of
planettes.

Te te, thy self.

Teter, tetra, tetrum, foul, stynkyng, cruel.

Teterrimus, a, um, most foul or stynkynge, or cruel.

Teterrime, most abhomynably.

Tethys, the wife of Neptunus, called goddess of the sea. sometime it is taken
for the sea.

Tetinierit, for tenuerit.

Tetinus, for tenus.

Tettigoniae, little grassehoppes.

Tettigometrae, the mother of grassehoppes.

Tetracinus, a coygne, which was in valewe four dragmas, or old poyse
grotes, of.viii. to an ounce.

Tetracolon, a sentence having.iiii. members.

Tetradoron, of four handbredthe.

Tetragonus, a, um, a thing having fore corners.

Tetragrammaton, the name of god, which the Jews do call Ineffabile, that is
to say, unspeakable.

Tetragrammaton, in greek, sygnifieth of four letters.

Tetrametrum, a kind of meter, having but four feet.

Tetrarcha, the rule of the fourth part of a royalme.

Tetrasyllabum, of four syllables, as Im pe ra tor.

Tetr^, sharply, cruelly, wyckedly.

Tetrices, water, wherewith gardeynes are watered.

Tetricus, a sour fellow, and always unpleasant.

Tetrinno, are, to swymme like a ducke.

Tetritudo, cruelty or sharpenes.

Tetrius, more sharp or cruel.

Tetro, trare, to make foul, to pollute, to make bitter.

Tetulit, for tulit.

Teucer, and Teucrus, the name of a king of Troyanes. alsoo of the son of
Telamone the valyant greek.

Teucer, Teucra, crum, idem quod Troianus, of Troy.

Teucrium, an herb, which Anto. Musa, supposethe to be that which is called
Pimpinella.

Teumesus, a little hylle in Boeotia.

Teumesus leo, a lion, which Hercules did slay when he was a child, and of
his skin made him a cote.

Teurion, the herb which is also called tripoliu^.

Teuta, a queen of Illiria, which lived ever chaste, and vanquished many noble
capitaynes, and diverse hosts of the Romans.

Teutates, was in old time among the french men taken for Mercurius.

Teuthania, a piece of the country of Troy.

Teutones, people now called Almaynes.

Texo, texui, texere, to weaue a wind threde. Alsoo to make, to build, to
write, to gather, to ornate.

Texta, an hearelace, wherewith the hear is bounden up.

Textilis, le, that which is weaued or wounden.

Textim, an aduerbe, sygnifyenge in weauyng or wyndyng up.

Textor, toris, and textrix, tricis, he or she that weaueth or wyndeth.

Textrina, and textrinum, the place where things be weaued or wounden. also
the craft of weauynge.

Textrix, and textricula, a woman which works in a frame or stool.

Textura, the weauynge.

Textus, and textum, the text.

T ANTE H.
THalamus, a chaumber where the housbande and the wife do lie together.

Thalasicus, chamblette.

Thalassio, uide Talassio.

Thalassus bonorum, a proverb applied to them that promise great things, as
a man would say, a world, a countray of welthe. In Cambrydgeshyre the
vulgarword is, a mind of good.

Thalassomeli, is a lykour made of honye, salt water, and rain water, and is
put into a vessel rased with pytche.

Thales, a philosopher, which was one of the seven wise men of Grecia.

Thalestris, was a queen of Amasones, which came to king Alexander with three
hundrede women with her, to the intent to have issue by him and his men: and
when she perceived, that she and her ladies were sped, they departed home
again.

Thal^a, one of the graces, which the ancient poets did suppose to be oone
of the daughters of Jupiter, and gyuers of dilectable speech, and pleasant
pronunciation.

Thallia, the pyllynge of an oynyon or garlike.

Thamyras, was he which first playde on a harp, without singing thereto.

Thamnos, in latyne arbustum.

Thanatos, mors in latin.

Thapsus, an isle by Sicile.

Thapsia, an herb like to fenell, and has a yelowe flower, and a flat
round sede.

Tharia, pyckelle, wherein fysshe is salted and kept.

Tharsos, a city in Cilicia.

Thasia, an almonde.

Thasia, nux, called also graeca.

Thasij, men of the isle called Thasus in Egypt

Thasium, a certain wine, which is in Egypt.

Tha^^a, in greek is a marvel or miracle.

Theatralis, le, and theatricus, ca, cum, that which pertayneth to theatrum.

Theatridium, a diminutiue of theatrum.

Theatrum, a place made half round, wherein the people assembled to behold
plays and sundry exercyses. sometime it sygnifieth the multitude that
beholds.

Thebae, aru^, Theba, bae, and Thebe, bes, the name of cities, whereof one was
in Egypt, builded by Busirides, an other in Boeotia, builded by Cadmus, an
another in Cilicia, where Andromaches, the wife of Hector was borne.

Thebaice, and thebaides, dates of the best sort.

Thebais, idis, and idos, a countray of Egypt. It is also the name of a book
made by Statius the poet.

Thebanus, na, number, a man of Thebes.

Theca, a case, a shethe or scaberde, a box.

Theleboae, people of an isle called Capreae, which lies against Naples.

Theleboij, idem.

Thelephus, a king, which camme in the aid of the Troyanes, and was slain
by Achilles.

Theligonium, an herb, which has bearies like to an olyue.

Thelphusa, a city in Arcadia.

Thelphussium, uel Thelphossion, a city in Boeotia, where Pyndarus praised
Bacchus

Thelypteris, sheferne, or the female fern.

Thema, matis, a thing purposed to be dysputed or reasoned, it is also a
figure, wherein astronomers do write the state of heaven, in placynge or
setting the planettes in such signs and degrees, as they be in at the time
of a man's nativity, or when any thing shall happen that they search for.

Thembinacha, a countray called also Nemia.

Themes, an old town in the isle of Cypres, where brass was first found?

Themis, one of the systers of Iupyter, she was called the goddess, which
commanded men to ask that which was lefulle. There was an other woman called
Themis, which was called also Carmentis, it was sometime taken for fas, lefull.

Themiscyra, a city in Capadocia, afterward called Caesaria.

Themisones, people by Licia.

Themistius, a philosopher which wrate commentaries on Aristotle's warkes.

Themistocles, a noble capytayn of the Athenienses, which being expellyd out
of his country, and commen to Xerxes king of Persia, was sent by him with a
great army against the Athenienses, but when he perceived his country in
peril to be dystroyed, he drank poison, and chase rather to dye, than either
to be unfaithful to Xerxes, or else to dystroye his country, although it were
unkind toward him.

Thensa, a hallowed carte or charyot.

Theocritus, a poet of Grecia, which wrate Bucolica, or the contention of
herdmen.

Theologia, dyuinitie.

Theomenia, the wrath of god.

Theonino dente rodere, to rebuke a man shamefully.

Theophrastus, a noble philosopher, and of excellent eoquence.

Theos, in greek is god.

Theotocos, the mother of god.

Theorema, speculation.

Theoria, speculation, understanding.

Theopolis, the chief city of Syria, called also Antiochia.

Thera, a city by Athenes.

Theramnum, a city in Thessalia.

Theriace, ces seu theriaca, tryakle.

Thereotrophion, a place where wild beasts are kept, as a forest or park.

Therioma, a soore of the privy members, whereby all the parts theraboute, are
corrupted, and thereof issues black and stynkynge humor.

Theristrum, a thynne veil, which the women of Palestina did wear.

Thermae, are bathes of hot water.

Thermefacio, cere, to chaufe or make one hot with outrageous eating and
drinking of hot things.

Thermopolium, a place where meats and drynkes were sold, wherewith men
were made hot or warm in cold wether.

Thermodoon, a river in Cappadotia.

Thermodonticus, ca, cum, pertaining to that river.

Thermopoto, tare, to drink hot or warm drink.

Thermopylae, a mountain, which passes through Greece, having a narowe
entrye or passage, where two thousand Lacedemonyans, with their capytayne
Leonidas, faught against five hundred and.xxviii. thousand Persyans, and
resysted them two days, until the said Lacedemoniens were all slain.

Therpsichore, one of the muses.

Thersites, was a prince that camme with the Greeks to the siege of Troy,
which in person and condytions was of all other most defourmed.

Thesaurizo, are, to gather treasure.

Thesaurus, and thesaurum, treasure.

Theseus, son of Egeus king of Athenes, a strong man and valyant, and the
companyon of Hercules, and in famous acts next unto him, which was much
defaced by brekynge his faith, which he had promised to Ariadne the daughter
of Minois king of Creta, whom he left in a deserte isle calyd Naxus, for the
which as Vergyle writes, he is perpetually tourmented on a wheel in hell.

Thesiphon, it is, a city in Parthia, not far from Seleucia, the great city of
Assyria.

Thesis, a clause in writing or speaking, which contains a sentence.

Thesmophoria, the ceremonies of Ceres the goddess of grain.

Thesmophoros, was a name of Ceres.

Thespia, a fre town in Boeotia.

Thespis, a town in Boeotia by the hill called Helicon.

Thespiades, the Muses.

Thessalia, a region in Greece called also Aemonia, sometime Pandora, sometime
Pyrrhea, of some Pelasgia, of Homere Argopelasgicon, it is environed about with
four great and famous hills, on the cast the mountains of Pelion and Ossa,
on the north with Olimpus, on the west with Pindus, on the south with Othrys,
it marches on Macedoniam on the este. The people were valiant men on
horseback, and invincible in battle as Polybras writes, but very unjust of
their promise. The women there being wonderfulle wytches, tranfourmed men into
the figure of beasts.

Thessalicus, ca, cum, of Thessalia.

Thessalonica, a city in Macedonia.

Thetis, tidis, the mother of Achylles.

Theucitis, a rushe growyng in Nabachia, which has the taste of sharpewyne.

Theositas, for sodalitas.

Theutones, and theutonici, people in Germany called Duchemen.

Thirromachus, one of the sons of Hercules by Megara.

Thi^sias, he that is burste or broken in his stoones.

Thideus, was the name of the father of Diomedes.

Thyestes, the son of Pelops, and Hippodamia, who aspyring to the kyngedome
of Mycenae, committed auoutry with the wife of his elder brother Atreus, who
therefore slew the chylderne of Thyestes, and causing them to be roasted, made
his brother to eat them unawares.

Thieum, for succinum, aumbre.

Thita praefigere, for condemnare.

Thymelici, players of enterludes. hereby would the place be corrected in the
digestes. (...) de his qui notantur infamia, where for Temelici would be put
Thymelici, they be also common dauncers.

Thoa, one of the nymphs.

Thoas, the name of two kings, one of Taurica, the other of Lemnos.

Thoes, be wulfes in Ethiope, Arrianus does call them tygres in India.

Tholos, a scochen or small tergate, also the sildynge of a house, or a round
house.

Thomices, lyches of hemp, wherewith halters are made, they be also little
bo^sters, which men do wear when they carry burdens, for fretynge of their
necks and shulders with cords or ropes.

Thon, nis, he that first brought physike in the fourm of a sciens, among the
Egiptians

Thoota, the daughter of Phorcus, on whom Neptunus gate Polyphemus.

Thoracatus, he that wears curettes or brest^ plates.

Thorax, racis, is properly the hole bulk of a man from the neck to the
myddell, it is also curettes or breast plates. some time it signifies a tower.

Thous, a duke of Troy.

Thracia, a Region in Eurupa ioynynge unto Macedonia^ and Mysia^, and has on
the north the river called Donow, on the east the sea called Pontus, on the
southe the sea called Aegeu^, therein is the city of Constantinople.

Thraceas, uel thrassias, a northwest wind.

Thrasimedes, the son of Nestor.

Thrasomenus, a river in Italy nyghe to Perusia.

Thrax acis, a man of Thracia.

Threces, idem quod gladiatores.

Threnodia, a mourning song.

Threnos, a lamentacion, which was used at buryenge.

Thressa, a woman of Thracia.

Throni, be one of the.ix. orders of angels.

Thronus, the seat or chair of an emperor or king.

Thrulla, a truell, which masons, tilers, and pargettours do use for layenge
of mortar.

Thrullisso, are, to lay on mortar.

Thryallis, an herb called Rosecampyne.

Thryps, a mowthe.

Thule, an isle beyond Scotland.

Thunnus, a fyshe called Tuny.

Thuribulum, a sensar.

Thuringia, Thuryn in France.

Thurini, a people in Italye.

Thuriferus, ra, rum, that which bears Frankynsence.

Thurifico, to make a perfume, or to sense.

Thurius, a, um, of incense.

Thus, thuris, frankyncense.

Thuscana, a city in Italye.

Tusculani, a people by Rome.

Tusculanum, a place not fer from Rome, where Tullius, Cato, Varro, and diverse
other noble Senators of Rome had manor places.

Thusculum, a diminutiue of thus, Also a city Latium.

Thyas, a woman which offers sacrifice to Bacchus.

Thyasus, a dance dedicate to Bacchus.

Thyella, a storm.

Thymbra, an herb called sauery.

Thymele, les, a woman, which first taught daunsynge in open places.

Thymelici, may be called daunsers of Morisdaunces.

Thymiama, matis, a sweet perfume.

Thymus, an herb called time.

Thymum, a wart, which is as great as a bean

Thynnus, a fyshe called Tuny.

Thyridion, a wycket or little door.

Thyrsus, the stalk of lettyse and of other herbs, which may be eaten.
sum do take it for a spear with a sharp head, which had boughs and leaves
of yuy wrapped about them: such spears did Bacchus and his flock of
drunken harlottes, bear in their hands. Lucretius the poet takes thyrsum
for fury of an ardent mocion. some do name it to be a long steme and
streyghte, such as is of a ^esyll, or such as do grow in fennes having
black knappes and round.

T ANTE I.
TIARA, an ornament, which the women of Persia did wear on their heads,
which was round, and covered only the hinder part of their heads. princis
and pristes used also to wear it.

Tiatura, a city in the countray of Misia.

Tibareni, people in Scithia, being in Asia.

Tiberias, a city in Galilea.

Tiberis, a river called Tiber in Italy which coming from the mountain
called Apen ninus, divides Ethruriam from Vmbria.

Tibia, the leg, properly the shanke or shyn bone it is also an instrument
called a shalme.

Tibialis, le, perteynynge to shalmes.

Tibiale, lis, pluraliter tibialia, leg harneys, called greaues.

Tibicen, and tibicina, he or she that blows a trumpette or shalme.

Tibicen, is also any thing, whereby is sustained, as a shore or proppe.

Tibi, to the.

Tibicis, a river in Scythia.

Tibin, a baskette or coffyn made of wyckers or bull russhes, or bark of a
tree: such oone was Moses put in to by the daughter of Pharao.

Tibilustria, were days when men went with trumpettes, as it were in
procession about their lambs.

Tibini, tunes made with shalmes.

Tiburtes, people in Italy nyghe to Rome.

Ticinum a city in Lumbardye now called Pauia.

Tigillus, a rafter.

Tignarius faber, a Carpenter that makes a house of timber.

Tignus, and tignum, a rafter of a house, which bears the roufe. ^t is also
generally all the timber, which serves to a house.

Tigrane, a river in the country of Media.

Tigranes, the proper name of a king of Media of the greatter Armeny.

Tigris, a beast of a wonderful swyftnes, it is also one of the four ryuers,
which comes out of Paradise, called Gion, it passethe through Armeniam and
Mediam.

Tigurini, people of Germanye, which do inhabyte the fourth part of Heluetia,
or Swizerlande.

Tile, an isle beyond Scotland, called also Thule.

Tilia, a tree, which some do suppose to be birche, not withstanding our
byrche does not bear fruit as great as a bean, round and long, and like to
yuy beries in the which are seeds like to Arage sede, as Theophrastus writes.

Tilium, a city in the weste part of Sardinia, on the sea side.

Tilos, an isle in the Indian sea, wherein is plenty of perle, and trees of
diverse fruits, and the leaves of trees there growing do never fall, also
wolle grows on trees there, which do bear gourdes of the gretnes of
quinces, and being ripe do open, in the which do appiere the wolle, whereof
are made fine and preciouse clothes. About that place does begin the
mountain of Caucasus, which does pass through a great part of the world.

Timalos, an herb and flower growing in waters, called commonly of
apothecaryes Nenufer.

Timaeus, a noble philosopher of Pythagoras sect.

Timanus, a river in Italy besides Aquilia.

Timens, he that fears for a time.

Timidus, he that always fears, called tymorouse.

Timeo, mui, mere, to fear or dread.

Timeo te, I fear the as mine ennemy, lest thou shalt do me harm.

Timeo tibi, I am aferde of the as my friend lest thou should have any harm.

Timeo mihi abs te, I am afraid that thou will do me harm.

Timeo furem pomis, I am afraid that one will steal mine appulles.

Timeo moriatur, I am aferde that he will dye.

Timidee, fearfully.

Timiditas, fear.

Timiopolae, ingrossers or regraters of markets, which do bye much corn or
vyttayls together, to make it scarce and dear.

Timor, moris, and timos, fear of some evil coming.

Timotheus, was the name of a noble capitayn of the Athenienses; who for the
good fortune that he had in battle, was painted lienge a sleep, and having
by him a net pitched, wherein fortune was taken. Also a cunning musician,
which used to take of his scholars which had learned before, double salarie,
that he took of other, which never learned, saying that he took with them
double labors, that is to say, to make them to forget that which they had
learned before, and than to teach them perfytely.

Tin, old writers used for Eum.

Tina, and tinia, a great bolle, which being full of wine, every man might
drink thereof as much as he lysted.

Tinctor, toris, a dyer.

Tinctilis, le, that which is dyed.

Tinctura, dyenge.

Tinea, a mothe, they be also worms in the bealy, also worms bredynge in be
stalles.

Tineosus, a, um, full of mothes.

Tinge, a promontorie or elbowe of Africa.

Tingitana, a part of Mauritania or Barbaria against Spain.

Tingo, xi, gere, to deep a thing into lycour to dye colors.

Tinnio, nire, to ring or make a sound as metal does, sometime as in a
man's ear.

Tinnimentum, a ryngyng in the ear of a man

Tinnunculus, a bird, which makes a sharp ryngynge noise, and is of the
kind of hawks, and in some place does bread in houses which with his voice
dryueth away other hawks, and therefore the birds of him are kept in erthen
pottes covered with clay, and hanged up in douehouses, which causes culuers
meruaylously to love their house.

Tinnulus, la, lum, sharp in sound, as that which is made by beatynge on
metal.

Tintinaculus, he that beats with rods, a transgressour of a law.

Tintinabulum, a little bell.

Tintino, nare, to ringe like a bell.

Tiphernum, a town in Italy.

Tiphis, an excellent carpenter, the which found first the mean to govern a
ship. it is also a rother.

Tipula, a worm, which runs on the water as other worms do on the land,
and has six feet.

Tiresias, a poet of Thebes, who finding twoadders inge^dring together and
striking the^ with a staff, he forthwith was turned into the form of a woman.
A leven years after he like wise finding two serpents together he also struck
them, and became eftsoon a man. Iupyter and Juno contendynge to gether,
whether the man or the woman was more prone unto lechery, they chase Tiresium
arbytre, which had experience in both kinds, whoo gave sentence on Jupiters
part, wherewith Juno being angry took his syghte from him. but Jupiter to
comfort him in his blyndenesse gave to him that part of divinity to know all that was done or should happen, by reason whereof he was had in great honor,
and his aunsweres were esteemed equal to them of Apollo.

Tirius, a River in Grecia: also the countreye where Hercules was borne in
Peloponesso, now called Morea.

Tirinthius, was a surname of Hercules.

Tirinthis, a famous old city in Grecia.

It Is, for tui, the genitive case of tu.

Tisiphone, one of the furies of Hell, which was supposed to tourment
homicides, or sleers of men.

Titanis, titanidos, the daughter of Titan called also Latona. it is taken also
for the moon.

Titan, and Titanus, was the brother of Saturn and is taken for the son.

Tithymalus, an herb called spourge whereof be.vii. sorts, all having milk
sharp and bytynge. read in Cataputia, and Lathyris, and Ricinum.

Titillo, are, to ticle, to provoke or meue pleasauntely.

Titio, onis, a fyrebrande or wod, which has been in the fire.

Titiuillitium, signifies nothing.

Titubantia, stammerynge.

Titubo, are, to stacker in speaking or goinge, as a man being drunk or
sick.

Titubanter, stameringly.

Titulotenus, no further than his title.

Titulus, the title or inscription of a warke or act. sometime dignity, also
a monument or other remembrance.

Titus, the name of a man.

Titus Liuius, the most excellent hystorien or writer of stories, in whom
was the fountain of the milk of pure eloquence.

Titonus, the son of Laomedon king of Troy whom Aurora took to her
husebande, and therefore she is of the poets called Titoni a coniux.

Tityus, the son of the Earth, whom poets feigned to be slain by Apollo,
because he would have rauysshed Latona his Sister. And therefore lies in hell,
having an Egle always eating his liver. And it is also said that his body
was in length nine furlong. Witness Tibulle, which was a Poet, and also a
greatte lover, and therefore could not lie.

Tlepolemus, was the king of the Rhoodes, which came to the battle of Troy
with nine ships.

T ANTE M.
TMolus, a mountain in Lidia, whereon did grow great plenty of saffron and
vynes. it is also a little bushe, which bears flowers of saffron color.

T ANTE O.
TOdi, little birds, I suppose it be the bird, which is called a titmouse.

Toga, the common garment of men and women, called a gown. And because the
Romans specially did wear that garment in the time of peace, toga was taken
for peace as arma was for war.

Toga praetexta, a garmente which the Romans did were before that they were
of the age of xvi years. Afterward it was worn of them, which were in
authority.

Toga polymita, a garment made with thredes of sundry colors, as motley or
bauldekyn.

To gata Comoedia, a commedye or interlude, wherein the manners of the Romans
were expressed.

Togata Gallia, the Countraye now called Lumbardye.

Toga candida, was a garmente, which they did wear, that sued for any great
office in the city of Rome.

Togati, apparayled in gowns.

Togatus, he that wears a gown.

Tolerantia, sufferaunce.

Toleranter, pacientely.

Toliapis, the I Will of Tenet by Kente.

Tolles, a waxynge kernel.

Tolleno, nonis, that wherein any thing is put or laid to be drawn up.
sometime a bucket wherewith water is drawn up.

Tollenon, an engine to draw up water which has a great poyse at the one end.

Tolero, rare, to suffer, to endure, to bear, to live poorly, or nyghely.

Tolerare uitam, to live, or to maynteyne his life.

Tolerabilis, rabile, that which may suffer or bear.

Tollo, sustuli, seu tetuli, tollere, to lift up to set up, to take away,
to nourishe, to defer or prolonge, to have a child by a woman.

Tollere clamorem, to cry out.

Tollere cristas, to set up the crest, applied or them that be proud or
arrogant, and do stretche up their brows with a disdaynefull countenance.

Toll digitum, hold up thy finger, confess thy self vanquished.

Tollere gradum, to set forth, or to march forth.

Toll hanc patinam, take away this dyshe.

Verum, quod erit natum tollito, what so ever is borne, put it to nourishynge.

Omnes tollo ex hoc die in alium diem, I put them all of from one day to an
other.

Tollere minas, to thretten or menace.

Animos tollere, to be proud.

Cachinnum tollere, to laugh out of measure

In coelum tollere, to praise excedyngly.

Tolosa, a city in Guyen, called Tolouse.

Tolutarius, and tolutaris equus, an aumblynge horse.

Tolutiloquentia, a swyfte or fast speech.

Tolutim, an amblynge pace.

Tolutim loqui, to speak fast one word after an other.

Tomaculae, Tomacula, and Tomacla, a certain sort of pouddynges, properly
swynes pouddynges.

Tomentum, floxe, which is shor^e of woollen clothe, also locks clypped of
white wolle.

Tomices, hempen cords, also colers, which are put on carthorses, for
hurtynge of their necks.

Tomos, is taken for a volume where diverse warkes of oone author be severed in
to sundry parts. Also a city in the countreye of Pontus.

Tomyris, was a noble queen of Massagetis in Scithia, against whom when Cirus
the great king of Persia came, and had slain her son, she pitchyng a fyld
against him, and of purpose having great plenty of vyttayles in her pauilions,
after a little skyrmyshe she and her host fled. And when Cirus had a while
followed the chase, and blown to the retraicte, he came to her camp, and
fynding great plenty of vyttayle, he and his people did so much fylle them
selfs therewith, that falling a sleep, they were all taken by the queen, and
slain, and she causynge a great vessel to be filled with the blood of Cirus,
and the Pertians, did cast his head therinto, saying, Bloudde thou have
thyrsted, and now drink thereof thy fill.

Tonarion, a certain shaulm with a soft sound, on the which in the old time
some orators used to have, to play by them, when they pleaded, that by the
tunes of the shaulme, theoratour moughte moderate and order his pronunciation.

Tondeo, totondi, tondere, to clyp or sheare.

Tonesco, tonui, tonescere, to thunder.

Tongri, the duchy of Brabant.

Tonimus, for tonamus.

Tonitrus, and tonitru, and tonitruum, thunder.

Tonitus, idem.

Tonitruo, are, to thunder.

Tono, nare, to thunder, to make a great sound or noise, to speak loud.

Tonsae, sheep, which be shorn or clypped. also ores of botes or ships.

Tonsilis, le, that which is shorn or clypped.

Tonsilla, a post, having the one end armed with iron, which is pitched
into the earth, to the end that ships or botes may be tied thereat.

Tonsillae plurali, a disease within the chekes, and mouth like to great
kernelles.

Tonsi montes, hills without woddes.

Tonsor, and ronstrix, tricis, he or she which clippeth or sheareth.

Tonsorius, a, um, perteynynge to clyppynge.

Tonstrix, tricis, a woman barbar.

Tonstricula, idem.

Tonstrina, a place where they do use to clyp, or a barbers shop.

Tonsus, a, um, shorn or clypped.

Tonus, a tune or accente. also the space or dystaunce, which is between the
earth and the moon.

Toparcha, he that has the governance and charge of one only country.

Toparchia, the rule of one country.

Topazion, and topazius, a preciouse stone of the color of gold.

Tophus, a kind of stone, which is sone resolved in to sand

Topiarium, a warke made of trees, bushes briers, or herbs, for pleasure, and
contained places to sytte or walk in, as it is used now with box, eglantine,
iacymine, and other like trees or thorns, that be flexible, or will be wounden.

Topiarius, he that makes such warkes.

Topiaria, the warke.

Topica, warkes in that part of logike, which declares the places, out of the
which arguments may be invented, that most properly perteyneth to orators.

Topographia, the description of a place, as of a country or city.

Topper, the old writers used for sone, shortly, or quickly.

Toral, and ^oralium, in plurali numero, toralia, every thing that lies on a
bed, as sheets, blankettes, and couerliddes. In the old time it were certain
flowers and sweet herbs wounden together in ropes, and hanged before the
place, where men did lie. Like as now they use in London at Mydsommer to hang
before their doors.

Torcular, aris, and torculare, and torculum, a press for wine, sider, or
vertiuyce.

Torcularius, a, um, belonginge to a press.

Toreuma, matis, and tereumatum, warke imbored in metal or stone.

Toreutis, a grauer.

Toreutice, ces, the craft of grauynge.

Tormen, minis, frettynge or tourmente in the bealy and guts.

Tormina, idem.

Tormentum, tourmente, or an engyn to tourmente men, generally all ordinance
perteynynge to war.

Torminosus, he that has tourmentes or frettynge in his guts.

Tornacum, a town called Tornay.

Tornatilis, le, that which is turned with a whele.

Torniamen, may be now taken for a tournayment or iustes.

Torno, are, to torn or warke with a whele, as tournours done.

Tornus, the instrument or wheel.

Torpedo, dinis, slouthefulnesse. also a fysshe, which in the taking makes
the hands of them that do draw, to be astonyed or dead for the time.

Torpeo, and torpesco, pui, torpere* uel torpescere, to be astonyed, or slow.

Torpor, poris, a debilitation or feblinge of mind, an unaptness to do any
thing.

Torporo, rare, to astonie, or make astonyed.

Torquatus, a ringe dove, or stock dove. it is he also that wears a colar or
chain.

Torqueo, torsi, quere, to wind in, to whirle about like a whiele, to sustain
or bear up, to tourment, to spynne.

Torquere telum, to throw a darte or iauelyn, that he run round.

Torquere saxa, to turn great stones.

Oculum torquere, to look a side.

Torques, a colar, chain, or bye of gold or silver, such as is worn by
knights or esquyers about their necks.

Torrefacio, cere, to broyle or roast at the fire or by the heat of the son.

Torrens, it is, a stream, that comes down of hills, which is caused by
much raygne or snow. Torrens, a participle, signifiethe flowynge with a great
swepe. Torrentior, more flowynge with a greatter violence.

Torreo, rui, rere, idem quod ^orrefacio.

Torresco, re, to be broiled or roasted, or dried.

Torridae zonae, ar two girdels imagined in the fyrmament on every side of the
equinoctial line, under which gyrdels the people which inhabit there, are
burned with the seruente heat of the son, because the son abides longeste
in those.ii. places. and are also named

Tropicus cancri, and tropicus Capricorni.

Torridus, da, dum, dried or burned.

Tortilis, le, that which is bente or bowed.

Torris, a stick of fire.

Tortiuum uinum, wine of the last press.

Torto, tare, to tourment vehemently,

Tortor, toris, a tourmentoure, or he that casts a stone with a slynge.

Tortum, an engine, to throw great sons with

Tortuosus, a, um, wounden or turned many ways.

Tortus, ta, tum, crooked.

Torue, toruum, torua, toruiter, properly in beholdynge sowerly or grymly.

Toruinus, an apparayle of a woman's head.

Torus, a bed. it was sometime made with herbs wounden together.

Tori, the brawnes of the arms and legs, or the flesh myxte with sinews.

Torosus, a, um, mighty or strong in brawnes of the legs and arms.

Torsio, onis, Theodorus Gaza, and Longolius supposed to be a sturgion. Paulus
Iouius is of a contrary opinyon.

Torulus, a little bed.

Torue, sturdily in look.

Toruitas, tatis, sturdines.

Toruus, ua, uum, cruel and sturdy in lokinge.

Tostus, ta, tum, tosted or roasted.

Totidem, verily so many, even as many.

Tot, as many. Toties, so many times.

Totus, ta, tum, all the hole, every whit.

Toxicum, venym or poison.

T ANTE R.
TRbales, a certain tourment.

Trabalis, le, perteynynge to a beam.

Trabalis clauus, an iron pin or great nail wherewith beams are mode fast to
the rafters.

Trabea, a kyrtell worn by kings under their mantelles of astate.

Trabica nauis, a ship made with great bemes.

Trabs, and trabes, a beam of a house.

Trachale, the over part of a fyshe called Murex, of whom purple color is
made.

Trachea, the weson or pype of the lunges.

Trachelum, the myddell part of the sail of a ship.

Trachelus, the chine of a man or beast, from the head to the haunche.

Trachida, trachina, and trachurus, I suppose is a banstikle.

Trachinia, a kind of roses, not perfytely red, like to them, that we call
french roses.

Traconia, a roughnes within the eye lyddes.

Traconitis, a country in Syria ioynynge to Arabia.

Tractabilis, treatable, that may be entreated

Tractare, to handell.

Tractim, on length, a long time or space.

Tracto, tare, to entreat. Haec art tractabat uirum. She handled the man
craftelye, or of that sort. also to use or exercise, to order or govern.

Tractare rations, to meddell with reckeninges, to be accomptable.

Tractorium, a wyndlas to draw up heavy things.

Tractus, us, a space* a country.

Trado, didi, dear, to deliver, also to teach, to commytte in trust to an
other man.

Mores opibus tradere, to set more by his richesse than by his honor.

Per manus tradere, to leave it from one to an other.

Prouinciam tradere, to give in charge.

Memoriae tradere, to put in writynge.

Traditio, a tradition.

Traduco, duxi, ducere, to bring from oone place to an other, to bring over,
to translate out of one language into an other. sometime to dishonor.

Traducere tempus, to pass the time, to bring up or nourishe.

Traduces, vynes or trees translated from place to place.

Tragacantha, a thing like to a gum which vulgarly they call Dragaganthum.

Tragelaphus, a beast in part like a heart, in part like a got.

Tragemata, that which are commonly called bankettynge dyshes.

Tragice, cruelly, in the manner of a tragedy.

Tragicum tueri, to look grymly.

Tragicus, a writer of tragedyes.

Tragoedia, a tragedy, which is an interlude, wherein the personages do
represent some hystory or fable lamentable, for the cruelty and mysery therein
expressed.

Tragoedus, he that exercyseth some part in a tragedye.

Tragonis, sieve Tragion, a tree growing in Candye, like to Iunyper, the juice
whereof is like to milk, and waxethe thycke like gum.

Tragum, is like a tyzan made of weate, it is also a fyshers net called a
dragge.

Tragonia, an herb now called Taragon, late seen in this realm, which has
a taste like gynger, which herb laid to the left side, consumes the spleen.

Tragopa, a bird in Ethiopia, greatter than an egle, and has on his head
horns like a got.

Tragopogus, a fyshe called a barbell.

Tragoriganon, an herb which I suppose is called Peniroyal, growing wild.

Tragula, a iauelyn with a barbyd head.

Tragurium, an i will in the sea called Hadriaticu^.

Tragulam inijcere, to practice deceyte.

Traha, a dray or sled drawn without wheles.

Trahax, acis, a covetous person, the which draws all things unto him.

Traho, traxi, trahere, to draw, to lead, to defer, to delay, to extend,
to remove, to prolonge, to tarry, to live.

Atque egomet me adeo cum illis una ibidem traho, And I my self tarried as
long with them. Et uos ut tutam tranquillamque fortunam traheretis, mea
perfeci uigilantia, And by my vygilancye I brought to pass, that ye should
live in a sure and quiet prosperity.

Trahere diem, noctem, tempus, to pass the day, the night or the time.

Rubiginem trahere, to wax rusty.

Pallorem trahere, to be pale.

In diuersum trahere, to bring in doubt.

Trahere in religionem, to make conscience of a thing.

Traijcio, ieci, ijcere, to lead over, to carye over, to bring over, to srike
through.

Traiectitia pecunia, money carried over the sea.

Traiectus, tus, a passage. Traiectio, idem.

Trallis, a city in Lidia, an other in Phrigia.

Trallianus, a man of that city.

Tralucidus, da, dum, clear, that a man may look through.

Trama, un under garmente.

Trames, mitis, a cross way.

Trano, nare, to swymme over.

Tranato, tare, idem.

Tranquille, softly without noise.

Tranquillitas, tranquillity, rest, quietness.

Tranquillo, lare, to make quiet.

Tranquillus, la, lum, quiet, in rest, peasyble.

Tranquillum est, it is fair wether.

Tranquillus locus, a good place to rest in, a place of quietness.

Trans, over, from one place to an other.

Transactio, an agreement upon communicatio^

Transactus, ta, tum, passed, long agone, acheued.

Transalpina Gallia, France on his side, the mountains.

Transalpinus, a, um, over the mountains of Alps.

Transcendo, dear, to go over, to excede.

Trascindo, scidi, scindere, to cut on sonder.

Transcribo, scripsi, scribere, to write out a copy. sometime to translate, to
give or deliver, also the transposition of a possession from one to an other.

Turn tot incassum fusos patiere labores.

Et tua Dardaneis transcribi sceptra colonis Wylt thou Turnus suffer thy
labors to be lost, and thy realm to be given to the inhabytauntes of Troy?

Transcurro, rere, to run forth.

Transcurrit aestas, the summer is passed.

Transcursus, us, a course.

In transcursu, In passing forth.

Transenna, a loupe to look out at, also a wyndowe, or casemente. also a rope
stretched out a snare or trappe.

Transeo, siui, sire, to go forth, to pass over, to pass.

Transire domum, to go home.

Transeunter, passing by or over.

Transfero, tuli, far, to carry or bring from one place to an other, to
translate from oone language to an other, or from ones possession to an others.

Translatus, ta, tum, the participle.

Transfigo, xi, gere, to thruste through.

Transfuga, he that departs from his own people or capytayne unto the part
of the enemies, or of them that are suspected in time of truce.

Transfodio, dear, to dygge through.

Transfossus, a, um, dug or stricken through

Transfiguro, rare, to transfourme, to turn in to an other figure.

Transfretatio, a passage over the sea.

Transfreto, tare, to pass over the sea.

Transfugio, gere, to flee from place to place.

Transfugere ad hosts, is to go and yield him to the contrary part.

Transfugium, an yeldynge to ennemies.

Transfulgeo, gere, to shine through.

Transfundo, fudi, fundere, to pour out of one vessel into an other, also to
translate from one to an other.

Libentius omnes meas lauds (si modo sint aliquae meae lauds) ad te
transfuderim. I have more wyllyngly turned my praise (if I have any praise)
unto you.

Transgredior, deris, di, to pass or go over or beyond, to excede, to
transgress a law or commandment.

Transgressio, is a figure of retoryke, where a man leaves the princypall
matter, and enters into an other thing, and after retourneth to his matter.
We commonly call it, a digression.

Transgressus, us, a passing over the sea.

Transigere uitam, to pass his or their life.

Transigo, egi, igere, to drive forth, to treat a matter, to agree or
condescende, or come to a point: as happens between men, which do contend
for somewhat, to perform.

Transilio, siliui, and silij, ire, to leap over.

Transiluania, a country beyond Hungarye, whereof the people were sometime
called Getae

Transitio, a passinge over, a going forth.

Transitus, idem.

Transitorius, a, um, that which shortly passes.

Translatio, a translation, or bringing from one place to an other.

Translego, gere, to read over.

Transluceo, cere, to shine through.

Transmarinus, na, number, that which comes from beyond the sea.

Tranimigratio, a departing or goinge from one place to dwell in an other.

Transmigro, grare, to go further, to dwell further of, to transpose my
dwelling.

Transmissio, a goinge or sendynge further or over.

Transmitto, misi, mittere, to send from one place to an other, to go or
run quickly, to send shortly or quickly to pass over a water

Transmittere mare, to pass over the sea.

Transmittere tempus, to pass the time.

Transmittere discrimen, to escape a danger.

Tectu^ lapide transmittere, to throw a stone on the house.

Bellum transmittere, to commyt the charge of a battle to one.

Transmitere literas, where paper soketh in ink, that the letters may be
perceived on the other side.

Te^pus transmittere, to pass forth the time.

Transmoueo, ere, to remove from one place to an other.

Transnato, are, to swym over.

Transnomino, nare, to change his name.

Transpadanus, a, um, on this side the river called Padus, in Italy.

Transpareo, rere, to be seen through a thing.

Transpicio, spexi, spicere, to look through.

Transquietus, ta, tum, in quiet or rest from henseforthe.

Transtra, transoms which do go ouerwharte a house, also the seats, whereon
they do sit, which do row in a ship or bote.

Transtyberinus, na, um, that which is or dwells beyond the river of Tiber.

Transuado, are, and transuador, ari, to wade over a shalowe place of a river.

Transueo, uexi, uehere, to carry over.

Transuerbero, are, to strike through.

Transuersus, a, um, ouerthwarte, not straight or direct.

Transuersum agere, to turn hastily away from the purpose which a man went
about.

Transuersum unguem non discedere, not to go a nail breadth from it. A proverb
signifienge a little distaunce.

Transuersum digitum, idem.

Transuerto, cere, to turn awrye, or out of the right facion or way.

Transuideo, dear, to se through a clear thing.

Transulto, tare, to leap over.

Transumptum, that which is written out of a record, and approved under the
kings seal, or the signynge of a judge. In the common law they call it an
exemplification. some do also call it a transumpte.

Transumptio, a figure called also Metalepsis, whereby one signifycation is
gathered of anther: as of Nox atra, a black night, is gathered Nox
tenebricosa, a dark night.

Transuolo, are, to flee over, or leap over, or to go or run beyond a place.

Transumo, sumpsi, sumere, to take of or from an other, to remeue from one to
an other

Transuo, ere, to sow through.

Trapetes, petum, a myl wherein oil is made

Trapeza, a table, whereon an exchaunger does tell money.

Trapezita, an exchaunger or banker.

Trapezus, zuntis, a City in the countreye of Pontus.

Trapezuntius, a man of that city.

Trapit, old writers used for Vertit.

Trasibulus, was duke of Athenes which delivered the city from the.xxx.
tirantes.

Trasimenus, a river by Perusium in Italye where Hanniball slew Flaminium the
consul of Rome, and.xxiii. M. Romayne, and took six thousand prisoners.

Trastou, a certain rosine or gum, the best of that which is called
Gummihamoniacu^.

Traulius, he that speaks with great difficulte

Trebia, a river in Italy by Placentia.

Trebellicum uinum, seu Trebulanum uinum, wine growing about the river of
Trebia, in Lumbardye, the Italyons do call it Trebiana.

Trebula, an old town nygh to Rome.

Trebulani, men of that town.

Trecae, trecarum, a city in Champaigne.

Treceni, three hundred.

Trecenti, and trecentum, idem.

Trecentenus, na, number, the three hundredth.

Trecentesimus, ma, mum, idem.

Trecenties, three hundred times.

Tredecim, thyrtene.

Tremebundus, he that trembles much.

Tremefacio, feci, facere, to make to tremble or quake.

Tremisco, scere, to tremble.

Tremo, ere, to quake as one does in a fever. also to fear.

Tremulus, he that quaketh for fear.

Tremor, oris, quakynge, also fear.

Trepidatio, trembling, fear.

Trepidanter, fearfully, trembling.

Trepido, dare, to fear, to make haste.

Trepidus, da, dum, fearful, also he that does a thing hastily.

Trepondo, three pound weight.

Tres, three. Tressis, three pound.

Treua, a city in Almayne called Hamburgh.

Treueris, a city in Germany called Tryre.

Treueri, people called Treues.

Triambi, were three which spoke together in a tragedy.

Triangularis, re, having.iii. corners.

Triangulus, la, lum, three cornerde.

Triarchus, a master of a ship with.iii. tops.

Triarij. souldyors that be set always in the rerewarde, which were the
strongest men, they faught standing, bowing their knies, as they would rather die
than remeue from their placis.

Triatrus, a festival day kept after the third Idus of every month.

Tribaces, they which be worn with strypes.

Triballi, people of a countray beyond Hungary now called Seruia.

Triboci, people of the country of Alsate.

Tribrachus, a foot in meter of.iii. short siilables

Tribula, and tribulu^, a fiayle, or other like thing wherewith corn is
threshed.

Tribulis, a kynnesman that comes of the same stock that I do.

Tribulor, aris, ari, to be troubled with heaviness of mind.

Tribulus, a bremble.

Tribunal, the place where a Judge sytteth in judgment.

Tribunatus, the office or dygnitie of a tribune.

Tribunus, was an offycer among the Romans, having chyefe iurysdyction
among the communes. Also a Capytayne in wars, having authority over
soldiers, to view and se that they were well armed and exercysed.

Tribunitius, a, um, pertaynyng to the tribunes.

Tribuo, buere, to give, sometime to set much by. Also to favor.

Tribus, bus, a part of the people, somttyme divided into three parts. It
seems that it was sometime taken for a family or particular jurisdiction among
the people, and thereof comes tribulis. And therefore the partition of the
people of Israel were into.xii. Tribus. Hereof be sundry opinyons. Read
Calepine.

Tributarius, he that pays tribute.

Tributim, by sundry famylyes or parts of the people.

Tributum, trybute.

Tricae, feathers in the fete of chykens and pygeons, which do let them to go,
and therefore al things which do let a man ar called Tricae. Vide extrico and
intrico.

Tricaptum, a garment, which was so fine, that it seemed to be made of small
hears.

Tricenus, na, number, comes of triginta, thyrty. it is sometime taken for
tricentenum.

Tricentuplus, a, um, three hundred fold.

Triceps, cipitis, having three heedes.

Tricerberus, a great hell hounde.

Trichiae, be fyshes called Sardynes.

Trichila, a vessel having three lauers, out of the which water is poured.

Trichomanes, an herb called Maydenheare, which grows by wells and
sprynges, and is a little herb, in facion like to a fern, the leaf thereof
being turned as it were the bak side forward, and is narowe the branches
whereon the leaves be, do glisten, and be very small, brown in color, and
bitter in taste, it is of a good temperance between hot and cold. Read Adianton.

Triclinarius, the servant which does seruein the parlour.

Triclinarius, a, um, pertaynyng to the parlour or dynynge chaumber.

Triclinarium, idem quod triclinium.

Triclinium, a parlour to sup in, wherein were three tables and three beds. For
in the old time they used to lie, when they did eat.

Trcolon, having three members.

Tricones, men having sour countenaunces, and that be never or seldom seen
to laugh also pykers of quarrels.

Tricongius, was one which drank or he rested three mesures of wine, called
Congij, which as I suppose, was three galons and a pynt of our wine measure.
Wherefore Tiberius the Emperor promoted him to honor, and at the last made him
Consul of Rome.

Tricornium, that which has three horns.

Tricubitalis, le, of three cubytes in measure.

Tricubitus, ta, tum, idem.

Tricus, a stone, which although it be black, yet shows he at the rote
black, in the myddell sanguyne, at the top white.

Tridacna, an oyster so great, that a man must make of him three morsels.

Tridens, it is, every instrument, tole, or weapon having three teethe.

Tridentum, a city in Italy, called Trent.

Triduanus, a, um, of three days continuance.

Triduum, the space of three days.

Triennalis, le, of three years.

Triennium, the space of three years.

Triennis, ne, three years old.

Triens, it is, a coin which is the third part of a pound, it is also a cup
contaynyng that poise.

Trientalis herba, an herb which has leaves as great as the coin called
triens.

Triental, a vessel contaynyng the third part of that measure, which was named
Sextarium.

Trierarchus, the capytayn of a ship, which is called trieris.

Trieris, a great ship, which has in it three orders of seats for the
rowers.

Trietericus, ca, cum, for triennalis, that which happens to be done every
third year.

Trieteris, the space of three years.

Trifariam, in three parts or.iii. manner of ways.

Trifarius, a, um, of the same signification.

Trifaux, faucis, having three chekes.

Trifax, and triforu^, a weapon of.iii cubits long.

Trifer, ra, ru^, that which brings fruit thrice.

Triferus, ra, rum, idem.

Trifera, is a medycine and other delycate spyces, to expulse easyly corrupt
humors.

Trifidus, da, dum, dyuided into three parts.

Trifinium, the buttyng of three fields, which join together.

Trifolium, may be taken for the general name of all herbs having three
leaves. All be it there is one herb called so proprely.

Trifur, furis, more than a thief, three times wars than a thief. Semblablye
tri, joined with any thing, signifies more.

Triga, a carte drawn with three horses.

Trigarium, a certain course with such cartis.

Trigamus, he which has or has had three wives.

Trigarius, a place by campu^ Martiu^, at Rome.

Trigemini, three children at one birth.

Trigeminus, na, number, idem quod Tres, three.

Trigemmis, a plant or slyp, having three joints, and three buddes.

Trigesimus, ma, mum, the thirtieth.

Trigesies, thyrty times.

Triginta, thyrty.

Trigla, a fyshe, I suppose it be a soore mullet, such as ar taken in
Deuonshyre and in Cornwall.

Trigles, a stone, which is of the color of a soore Mullette.

Trigo, gare, to bind or to draw a thing close together.

Trigon, gonis, a balle, also a turtyl. also a fish called a thornebacke.

Trigonalis, le, that which is three cornerde, having three lines.

Trigonia, the third age.

Trigonus, na, number, three cornerde.

Trilinguis, he that speaks three languages.

Trilix, licis, a garmente with three diverse thredes.

Trimatus, tus, the time of three years.

Trimembris, bre, having three members.

Trimestris, stre, of three months.

Trimetrum, a verse of three feet.

Trimma, a wine made with spyces, as that which is called ypocras.

Trimorion, is named of.iii. signs in heaven, which contain.lxxxx. degrees
or porcions. Wherefore Trimorion, is in calculation of natiuities from the time
of the birth or conception, the lxxx. and tenth part or degree.

Trimus, ma, mum, of three years.

Trimulus, the diminutiue of Trimus.

Trimyxos, a lamp or candelstycke, bearing three lyghtes.

Trinacris, and trinacria, the country of Sicile.

Trinepos, potis, he which is three dyscentes lyneall from my chyldes child.

Trineptis, a woman in like degree of bloudde as trinepos, potis.

Trinitas, trinity, the number of three.

Trinoxius, a, um, three nyghtes.

Trinundinum, the third fair or markette, which was wont to be proclaimed,
to the intent that it should be the better remembered.

Trinus, na, number, three.

Trioboli homo, and triobolaris, a man worth three half pens, of little value.

Triobolus, three half pens, or worth three half pence.

Triones, plough oxen. also they be seven sterrep being in the north.

Triophthalmus, a little stone, having in him the figure of three eyes.

Triorchis, a kind of hawks, having three stones.

Triparcus, a great nygarde.

Tripartior, tiri, to diuyde into three parts.

Tripartito, an Aduerbe, sygnyfyenge in three parts.

Tripartitus, ta, tum, dyuyded in three parts.

Tripedaneus, a, um, having three feet.

Tripes, pedis, with three feet.

Trifolium, three leaued grass.

Triphillon, idem.

Triplaris, thryse as much.

Triplex, plicis, three fold, treble, a table with three leaves.

Triplicitas, treble.

Tripliciter, three fold.

Triplico, are, to do or fold a thing.iii. times.

Triplium, a vessel like a basket.

Triplus, a, um, treble.

Tripolis, a cuntray in Africa, an other in Syria, the third in Phenicia.

Tripolium, an herb, whereof the root is of some men supposed to be Turbit.

Tripondium, three pound weight.

Tripontium, a town in Vmbria in Italy, so called because it has three
brydges.

Triptolemus, a man which found the use of grain in the country of Athenes.

Tripudium, daunsynge.

Tripus, podis, every thing that has three fete.

Tripodes, were also tables in the temple of Apollo, of gold.

Triquetra, a figure three cornerde. It was also a name of the isle of Sicile.

Triquetrus, tra, trum, having three corners.

Triremis, a galeye, having three orders of oores.

Tris, three, or thryse.

Trismegistus, the name of Mercurius, in latin Ter maximus.

Tristegum, a chaumber in the third storye or floor of a house.

Tristimonia, heaviness or sorrow.

Trissis, three pound weight.

Tristis, is also taken for doctus. Iudex tristis and integer, A judge well
learned, and of a good conscience.

Tristis, against his will, not well content.

Tristitia, sorrow, or heaviness.

Tristis, sorrowful, heuye, also cruelle, of much gravity, bitter, more
dyffycile or hard, sometime angry.

Tristo, tare, to make heavy or sorrowful.

Trisulcus, ca, cum, having three edges.

Trisulcum telu^, a wepon having three edges.

Trisyllabus, ba, bum, having three syllables.

Tritauia, my great grandfathers mother.

Tritauus, my great grandfathers father.

Tritheles, an herb which has thryse in the year flowers.

Triticeus, a, um, of wheat.

Triticum, wheat.

Trito, tare, to break or beat small.

Triton, one called god of the sea, the son of Neptunus, it is also a river
in Aphrica.

Tritonia, the name of Minerua.

Trituro, rare, to threshe corn.

Tritura, threshynge.

Trituratio, idem.

Tritus, ta, tum, worn.

Triuenefica, a great sorceresse.

Triueri, Trier in Almayne, which now is under a bishop.

Triuia, a name of Diana.

Triuialis, le, commune, or of small estimation used or taught in high ways,
also rude, not elegant.

Triuialis lingua, a homely form of speech.

Triuialiter, communely, in the vulgar or homely facyon.

Triuium, where ways do meet. also a place where commune recourse of people
is.

Trium literarum homo, was spoken in scorn of him, that would seem to be a
gentylman, where he was none, which word was made by this occasyon, that among
the old Romans, gentle men used to write their names with three letters,
as, Q, F, M, for Quintus Fabius Maximus. Also this proverb was spoken of them,
which were thieves, because that Fur, contained but three letters.

Triumphalis, le, belongyng to triumphs.

Triumphalis uir, he that has triumphed.

Triumphator, he that triumphs or has triumphed for vanquyshyng his enmyes.

Triumphatus, ta, tum, of the which one has tryumphed.

Triumphatus, tus, a triumph.

Triumphatio, idem.

Triumpho, phare, to tryumphe, to rejoice excedyngly.

Triumphus, a triumph, which is a solemn pomp or ceremony, where a prince, a
consul, or principal capytayne of an army, has had vyctory of the ennemies of
his country, and therefore is brought home and received with all reioycynge and
honor that may be diuysed of the people. The order and form thereof ye may se
in Titus Liuius, Apianus, and Julius Capitolinus.

Triumuir, one of them, which is in any office, whereof be three in like
authority.

Triumuiralis, le, pertaynyng to an office or authority, wherein be three
persons.

Triumuiratus, is an office in the publyque weal, wherein three men have equal
iuris diction together. it is also the office or authority of Triumuir.

Triuncis, and triuncium, three ounce weight.

Trixalis, a worm like to that which is callid Locusta, but he has no wings.

Trixago, ginis, an herb called Germander, read Chamaedris.

Troas, adis, the city of Troy, and the country about it called the less
Phrigia.

Trochaeus, a foot in meter, which is of two long syllables, and one short.

Trochilos, a little bird, which is called king of birds.

Trochiscus, a little wheel. alsoo Trochisci, be of physytians called,
little balls, flatte^ at both ends, which be made of sundry poulders.

Trochum, a certain stool or chair, which will be turned about.

Trochus, a top, wherewith chyldern do play.

Troclea, and trochalea, a poley, wherein the cord runs, whereby any thing
is drawn up, it is also the gyn, which is called a crane.

Troezene^, a city in the part of Greece, celled Peloponesus. It is also a
countraye in the less Asia.

Troglodytae, people in the furthest part of Africa, beyond Aethiopiam,
which dwell in caves, and do eat the flesh of serpents.

Troia, the city of Troy. also the cuntray wherein Troy stood.

Troianus, na, number, of Troy.

Troianus ludus, was a play of chylderne on horseback.

Troicus, ca, cum, for Troianus.

Troiugena, idem.

Troius, a, um, of Troy.

Tropeus, he that does a shrewde turn, and runs away when he has done.

Trophaeum, was a mark or token of timber or stone, set in the place, where
enemies were vanquyshed or put to flight, sometime it is taken for vyctory.

Tropice, fyguratiuely.

Tropice, ces, a kind of bulle russhes, the seed whereof will make one to
sleep.

Tropicus, ca, cum, fyguratiue.

Tropei uenti, wyndes, which do come from the sea.

Tropologia, a fyguratiue speaking.

Tropus, a figure, a manner or fascyon, an alteration of a word or sentence
from his proper sygnification.

Tros, troos aut trois, a Troyan. also the name of a king of Troyans, son of
Ericthonius.

Trossulum, a city in Italy.

Trossulus, in the old time was taken for a horsman or man of arms. It is also
a person delycate, well fed, or fleshy.

Troximi, grapes to be eaten.

Trua, idem quod trulla.

Trucido, dare, to slay cruelly.

Trucidatrix, she that kylleth one.

Truciter, cruelly.

Truculente, idem.

Trucitas, cruelty.

Truculentia, idem.

Truculentius, more cruelly.

Truculentissime, most cruelly.

Truculentitas, idem quod truculentia.

Truculentus, cruelle in countenaunces or menaces.

Trudo, trusi, trudere, to thraste out with vyolence.

Truella, a vessel wherewith water is thrown into the synke.

Trulissare, to parget.

Trulla, wherein meat is put when it is roste or sodden, called a trey. It is
also a pyssepot, of some it is taken for a great cup, broad, and deep,
such as great masers were wont to be.

Trulla, a trewel, wherewith masons tylers and pargettours do lay mortar.

Trulleum, a bolle.

Truncatio, a cuttyng in pieces.

Truncatus, ta, tum, cut in pieces.

Truncator, and truncatrix, he or she that cutteth in pieces.

Trunco, are, to cut of.

Truncus, a piece cut of from the resydue specially of a tree.

Truncus, a, um, cut of.

Truo, onis, a bird called alsoo Onacratalus, and is like to a swanne.

Trusatilis, le, that which may be turned and driven about with a man's hand.

Trusatiles molae, a querne, such as malte is ground in, or mustarde is made
in, and is turned with ones hand.

Trutina, a wayenge bala^nce. sometime it is taken for judgment.

Trutino, nare, to way or examyne.

Trux, trcis, cruel, horrible.

T ANTE V.
TV, tui, it is, tibi, thou, of the, to the.

Tuatim, after thy facion or custom.

Tuba ductilis, a brason trumpet.

Tuba, a trumpette.

Tuber, beris, a puff growyng on the ground, like a musheron or sponge* It is
alsoo generally every swellynge in a man's body or vysage. It is alsoo in a
tree like to a greatte knotte.

Tubercula, a little swellyng or pushe.

Tubero, are, to swelle.

Tubicen, cinis, a trumpettour.

Tubulus, a little pype, wherein water runs from a spring. it is also a
riede.

Tuburcinor, aris, ari, to eat hastily.

Tubus, and tubulus, a pype, wherein water is conuayed to a cundyte. It was also
a thing, wherewith they made walls hot, before there were chymneys.

Tucetum, a meat made with chopped flesh like to a gygot or allow.

Tudertum, a city in Italy.

Tudicula, a ladell, a pryntyng iron, wherewith vessel is marked.

Tudiculo, tudiculare, to steer, to prynte a mark.

Tuditantes, they that travail in business.

Tuditanus, the name of a man, so callid because he had a head as bygge as a
bytell.

Tuditis, a mallette.

Tudito, tare, to labor for advantage.

Tuesis, the river called Twede, which dyuideth England from Scotland. it is
also the town called Berwyke.

Tuor, cris, eri, to defend, also Tueor, tueris, to see.

Tugurium, a house of husbandry.

Tuguriolum, a cotage.

Tuipse, thou thy self.

Tulisurgium, Bruneswyke, a city in Almayn.

Tulit, he brought.

Tullij, some suppose them to be ryuers, some flowynges of blood out of
sundry members or joints.

Tullianum, a doungeon within the commune prison of Rome.

Tullius, read in Cicero.

Tum, than, when he goth before cum, it signifies as well.

Tumba, a holowe place in the ground, a sepulcher.

Tumdemum, finally.

Tumefacio, feci, to make to swelle.

Tumeo, and tumesco, scere, to swelle.

Tumet, thou thy self,

Tumidus, da, dum, swollen.

Tumor, ris, swellynge.

Tumulo, are, to make the ground holowe, to burye.

Tumulor, ari, to be buried.

Tumultuarie, in haaste, without much aduysement.

Tumultuarij milites, were men of war, which in the time of a sudden
rebellyon, or other sudden danger, were taken without any musters or other
election.

Tumultuarius, a, um, that which is done without aduysement or in haste.

Tumultuo, are, to make rumor.

Tumultuose, troublousely, or without study.

Tumultuosus, sa, sum, troublous, or making rumor.

Tumultus, tus, a rumor, a comotion of people

Tumulus, a little hylle or barowe, sometime a tomb.

Tunc. than.

Tunc temporis, at that time.

Tundo, tutudi, tundere, to smite, to braye or beat as in a mortar.

Tunetu^, a city in Africa called now Tunyse.

Tungo, gere, old writers used for Nosco, nosce, to know.

Tunica, a iackette.

Tunica pallia propior, my iacket is nerer than my gown, A proverb applied
where we will sygnify that all friends are not to be like esteemed or made of.

Tunici, an herb, which some do suppose to be that which brings forth
gylofers.

Tunico, care, to put on a iackette.

Tunicatus, he that wears a iacket.

Tuopte ingenio, of thine own wit.

Tuor, eri, to behold, all be it that word is not in use.

Tura^ius, a street at Rome.

Turbatio, trouble.

Turba, a multitude or asse^bly of people. Quid illaec turba est? numnam ego
perij? What a multitude is yonder? am not I undone for ever? Also it sygnifieth
trouble. Propter eam haec turba atque abitio euenit, For her sake is all this
trouble or dyssencion.

Turbasis, sterche.

Turbella, a little trouble.

Turbide, troublousely.

Turbidus, troublous, not clear.

Turbinatus, ta, tum, round and sharp, like a top.

Turbino, nare, to make sharp at the end.

Turbistum, is a thing myxt with the lykour, wherewith woulle is dyed, which
makes the dye to synke into the woulle, whereby the color is made perfyte.

Turbit, is a thing much used now a days to purge fleume, and yet be men
uncertain whatte very Turbit is. Actuarius says, that it is the rote of
Pityusa. Manardus affyrmeth, that Turbit whereof Mesue makes mention is the
second kind of Tithymalus, called of Dioscoribes Myrsinites, but that Turbit
whereof Serapio makes mention, is thought of some men to be Tripolium, after
the description of Dioscorides.

Turbo, bare, to trouble, to stere.

Turbo, binis, a boystouse wind, which does blow down trees and howses.
also a top, wherewith children do play. It is generally all thing, which is
round and broad above and sharp beneth.

Turbulentia, trouble.

Turbulentus, troublous, angrye, fulle of contention.

Turcae, people called Turks, which inhabyted the countray joined to the sea
called Caspium, and the hylle called Caucasus, some of them were accounted
among the people of Scithia, of whom Pomponius Mela makes mencyon. Which
about.DCC. and xxv years passed, wandryng about as vagabunde robbers wasted and
destroyed diverse countrayes, but afterward by the valiant prowess of
chrystyan princis in the time of Godfray de Boloigne, and after, their
puissaunce was abated. But afterward in the year of our lord.MCCC. one
Othomanus the tenthe from Solymanus, which now is the great tyrant of the
Turks, a ploughemans son, valyant and subtylle of wit, gatherynge a great
army of vagabundes, wan a great country in Asia the less, and so
successively, every one sense has increased their domynion, having now under
their subietion, all Asiam the less, Syriam, Mediam, Mesopotamiam, Aegyptum,
Greciam, Illiriam, eueryche of these contaynynge many great and famous
royalmes. Besides Hungary and the isle of the Rhodes, and many other yles
sometime chrystened. They do now call Turchiam, proprely that which was named
Asia minor, and sum do name it Natoliam.

Turdetania, a countray now callid Granado.

Turdetani, and turduli, people of that countray.

Turdus, is a kind of birds of the which Aristotle says, that there be three
sorts, one is of the greatness of a pie, and is called in greek Ixiboron, or
Ixiophagon, as it were an eater of misselden. An other is less, about the
quantity of a thrush, and is in greek called Trichas, the third is very
little, and in greek is called Tyla, as Athenaeus writes. Plinius says,
that Turdus is in summer sommewhat read, and in Winter waxes black. also
that in summer his neck is of a diverse color, in winter of one color and
that he makes his nest with claye on the top of a tree, some do suppose
that it is the bird, which is called an ousell or black bird. Turdus is also
a fyshe called in greek Cichle, living among stones and rocks, and is less
than a foot in length and has.iiii. fynnes besides the hyndermoste fynne, and
is in figure like to a tenche, in color russette, and having on his bealye
spots of pourple and white.

Turgeo, ere, and turgesco, scere, to be swollen.

Turgidilus, la, lum, somewhat swollen or bolned out.

Turiones, the tendrelles of trees.

Turma, a company of souldyours, contaynyng xxxii. horsemen.

Turmatim, in order of battle.

Turonica, Tours in France.

Turpis, pe, foul, dysshoneste, cruelle. Alsoo greatte.

Turpiter, shamefully, dyshonestly.

Turpissime, most shamefully or dishonestly.

Turpitudo, dyshonestye, vyllanye, deformity. sometime rebuke.

Turpo, pare, to defyle, dishoneste, or bring out of good fashyon.

Turreus, rea, reum, like a tower.

Turrifico, care, to cense.

Turris, a tower, or any thing made like to it.

Turricula, a little town. also a box, out of the which dyce are thrown.

Turriger, that which bears a tower, as an Elephant.

Turritus, ta, tum, high, also towred, or fulle of towers. also the name of the
ydolle, which was called mother of goddis.

Turtur, turis, a bird called a turtell. It is also a fyshe called Trigon.

Turundae, pellettes of breadde or paste, wherewith capo^s or other fowls are
crammed. Also a tente, which surgeons do put into a wound.

Tus, turis, frankyncense, it is also written with h, as thus.

Tuscia, a country in Italye, wherein be the cities of Florence, Seen, Luca,
and Pise.

Tusculum, a little piece of Frankincense. also a city by Rome set on an hill.

Tusculanus, na, number, of that city.

Tusculanum, was the terrytory about Tusculum, where dwelled Cicero, Varro, and
diverse other noble men.

Tuscus, ca, cum, of the country of Tuscia.

Tussedo, dinis, the cowgh.

Tussicula, a little cowghe.

Tussilago, ginis, an herb, which puts away the cough. sum men suppose
it to be coltes foot, called of the Apothecaries Vngula caballina.

Tussio, siui, sire, to cowghe.

Tussis, the cowghe.

Tutanus, was supposed to be a god, which had the custody of men.

Tute, thou thy self.

Tutela, the wardshyp or custody of infantes.

Tutelaris diuus, the saint whom we do take for our special advocate to god

Tutelina, was called a goddess, under whose custody was corn, which was in
barnes or rykes.

Tutia, is called of the greeks Pompholyx, the thycker part thereof is Spodium.

Tutissime, most sure.

Tutius, more sure.

Tuto, without peril.

Tuto, tare, to defend.

Tutor, taris, tari, idem.

Tutor, a garden, he that has the ward of an infant.

Tutorius, a, um, pertaynyng to a gardeyn.

Tutulus, a top of the hear wounden with a purple lace on the crown of a
woman's head which was only worn of her that was wife to the great priest at
Rome, called Flamen Dialis.

Tutus, ta, tum, sure, defended from peril, out of danger.

Tuus, a, um, thine.

T ANTE Y.
TYber, a great river, which is by Rome

Tyberinus, of Tyber.

Tyberius, the name of an Emperor of Rome.

Tybur, and tyburtum, a city by Rome.

Tyburtinus, na, number, of the city of Tyburtu^.

Tyburs, burtis, and tyburtis, hoc tyburte, of Tyber.

Tydeus, the father of Diomedes the noble capytayne, whom Venus did wound at
the battle of Troy.

Tyle, called also Thule, an isle within one days journey of the frosen sea.

Tylus, a worm, which lies under stoones and tiles, which have lien long on
the ground and is somewhat black and skalyd, and has many legs, which
being touched, closes him self round as a pease, and is most commonly called
a cheselyppe.

Tymbra, a great field in the country of Troy through which the river of
Timber rounneth into the river of Scamander.

Tymoetes one of the sons of king Priamus

Tymolus, idem quod Tmolus.

Tympanista, he that plays on a drumslade or tymbrell.

Tympanistria, a womanne that plays on a tymbrell.

Tympanites, a kind of dropsye, wherein the bealy swells great, a tympanye,
whereof wind is the chief occasion.

Tympanizo, to play on a tymbrell, tabour, or drumslade.

Tympanotriba, idem quod tympanista.

Tympanum, a tymbrel, a tabour, or drumslade. Seruius calls it a covered
charyot or cart, other do suppose it to be the struck of a carte wheel. I
suppose that it may be taken for that, which is called the corse of a charyot
or horselytter, made with bayles or bourdes joined, which is not much from
the opynion of Seruius.

Tympanum, is also a great whele, wherein men do go and draw up water. it is
also a platter, which serves for meat.

Tymphei, people in Etholia, which is in Grecia.

Tyndarus, the father of the fair Helene, for whom Troy was distroyed, and
also of Castor and Pollux.

Typha, grows in fennes, with a long and smothe stalk, having on the
top, a flower, which flies away like the flower of thistel.

Typha Caerealis, is a kind of corn like to our rye, by the description of
Theophrastus, and I suppose it is that, which with us is called rye.

Typhon, and typhos, was a great gyaunt, the son of Tytan. It is alsoo a
great puyssaunt wind.

Typhonae, be certain impressions in the air like globes of fire or darts.

Typhis, was a carpentar, which first did find the way to govern a ship.

Typus, a figure, an exaumple or a form, a lykenes or shadow of a thing.

Tyrannice, cruelly, tyrannousely.

Tyrannicus, ca, cum, of a tyrant.

Tyrannis, nidis, a cruel or vyolent rule or governance for a private
commodity, and not for a publyke weal.

Tyrannicida, he that sleeth a tyrant.

Tyrannicidum, the killing of a tyrant.

Tyrannus, a tyrant.

Tyranthina, a garment of purple color.

Tyranthinus color, purple color.

Tyrius, a, um, of the isle called Tyrus. Also vyolette or purple color.

Tyro, ronis, a young sowldiour or man of arms. Also he that first enters
into the experience of any science, art, or exercise.

Tyroniacus, ca, cum, of a young soldier or lerner.

Tyrocinium, the first exercise in any thing.

Tyros, a city in Phenicia. alsoo an isle, where the color of purple was first
founden.

Tyrunculus, a very young souldyour or young lerner.

Tyrotarichus, a sauce made with chese.

Tyrrheni, the people of Thuscane.

Tyrsis, the circuit without the walls of a town, wherein men may walk
for their solace.

V ANTE A.
VACCA, a cow. also ^ a city in Numidia.

Vacanter, at good leisure.

Vaccinus, na, number, of a cow.

Vacerra, mad, without wit, percloses or rayles, made of timber, within
the which some thing is enclosed.

Vacillo, are, to move inconstantly, to wagge or wave, to be unstable, or
unsure.

Vacinium, the flower, which is also called Hyacinthus, and has long leaves,
a round root, a stalk of a spanne long and more, having on it many purple
flowers, wherewith in some places they do dye purple.

Vacillatio, a waggynge or wauerynge and inconstant meuyng.

Vacillantes literae, letters written crokedly, or out of order.

Vacillans testis, a witness, which inconstantly does varye in report or
deposition.

Vacat, it serves to no purpose, it is superfluouse. Also it sygnifieth I am
at good leisure, or without business. sometime it sygnifyeth to care or force.
Et cui esse deserto uacat, And who cares to be well spoken or eloquent.

Vacatio, vacation, or time when a man is out of his common business.

Vaco, care, to apply wit or study. Vaco sapientiae, I apply my study to
wisdom.

Vaco rei diuinae, I apply my wit to goddis service. also to be empty or void.
Fac uacent aedes, Cause the house to be voyded. Vacat occupatione, He is
without occupation or ydell. sometime it sygnifyeth to be superfluous or
unprofitable.

Quantum temporis uacabit ab officio publico, During the time that I shall be
at leisure.

Nullum tempus ei uacabat a cogitando, he never ceased to think.

Vacare ab omni administratione rerum, to meddell with nothing.

Vacabam culpa, I was nothing gylty.

Si uacat, if ye be at leisure.

A metu uacare, to be out of fear.

Populo uacare, to take no head or regard what the people says.

Vacat mihi esse diserto, I have so little to do in other things that I
have leysoure to speak.

Vacuefacio, cere, to empty or avoid.

Vacuo, are, idem.

Vacuus, a, u^, void, empty, or without a thing.

Vacuae aures, Date mihi uacuas aures, dum eloquor, Give your ears only to me,
while I speak, or here nothing else.

Vacuus animus, a mind without care or solycitude.

Animo uacuo, at leisure.

Vacuus equus, a spare horse, which has no man on him.

Vacuus a periculo, out of danger.

Vacuus a re aliqua, delivered of any thing.

Vacuna, was called a goddess, unto whom husbandmen after that harueste was
clean done, did sacryfice, as to the goddess of quietenesse after labor.

Vacuitas, emptynesse.

Vadimonium, surety to appyere at a day assygned.

Vadimonio obstrictus, let to bail or mainprise, when a man is bounden to
appyere at a day assigned by a justice.

Vadimonium obire, to appear at the day assygned.

Vadimonium deserere, to make defaulte at the day, and not to appiere.

Vadimonium missum facere, to discharge recognysance or suerties that were
bounden.

Vadimonium differ, to give a longer day of apparaunce.

Vadis, and uas, uadis, he that undertakes for an other.

Vadium, suertie.

Vado, dear, to go forth, also to find suertie.

Vado, dare, to wade.

Vador, aris, ari, to find suerties.

Vadosus, a, um, full of fordes or shalow places.

Vadum, and uadus, a fourde or shalowe place in a water, where men and beasts
may go over

Vaeh, an interiection, wherewith we do curse.

Vafellus, he that is somewhat crafty.

Vafer, fra, flum, subtle, crafty, sly.

Vaframentum, subtlety or craft, slynesse.

Vafrae, craftily, fynely indeceyuynge.

Vagabundus, a wanderer about.

Vadigabar, an hebrewe word, which in Latin is Numeri, oone of the five
books of Moses.

Vageni, a people dwelling among the mountains called Alps.

Vagina, a shethe or scaberde.

Vaginula, a little shethe.

Vagio, gire, to cry as a child.

Vagitus, tus, the cryenge of a child.

Vago, gare, for uagor, to wander.

Vagor, aris, ari, idem.

Vagus, ga, gum, wandering, and abidynge in no place.

Vah, an interiection, wherewith we wonder at a thing, also of reioysinge.

Vaha, an interiection of reioysyng or laughing

Valde, very much.

Valdius, for ualidius.

Vale, farewell.

Valentia, the first name of Rome. also a city in Spain.

Valens, puissaunt, hole, strong.

Valentia, puissance, ability.

Valentior, ualentius, more puissaunt or strong.

Valentissimus, most puissaunt or strong.

Valentulus, somewhat strong.

Valeo, lui, lere, to be able, to be hole, also to be worth, to be strong or
puissant, to may do or be of force or power. Neque tam imperita ut quid amor
ualeat ne sciam. I am not such a fool, but I know what love may do, or of
what power love is.

Male ualeo, I fare isle, I am ill at ease.

Valere ab oculis, to be hole of the disease in his eyes.

Valere a pecunia, to have money inoughe.

Non tantum ualet, he is not of such puissaunce.

Valuit authoritas, his authority was great

Valet amicis, he has many friends.

Corpore ualere, to be strong.

Cursu ualere, to run well.

Valere gratia apud Senatu^, to be in favor with the Senators.

Valere opibus, to be rich.

Valere stomacho, to have a good stomach.

Valere uiribus, to have much strength.

Valere apud aliquem, to do much with one.

Valet in id, it is good therefore.

Valet sestertijs uicenis, it is worth.xx. pense.

Valere a morbo, to be recovered from syckenes.

Valeat, fare well he, I care not for him. Imo habeat, ualeat, uiuat cum illa,
well let him wedde her, I care not for him, much good do it him with her, or
let him have her, god be with him, let him make merry with her. Si deus talis
est, ut nulla gratia, nulla hominum charitate teneatur, ualeat. If god be such
one, that he has neither favor nor love to mankind, I care not for him,
Valiant, qui inter nos dissidium uolunt, They that will have us at variaunce
let them get them hense, or god be with them.

Valeriana, an herb called Valerian, read in Phu.

Valesco, scere, idem quod ualeo.

Valeria, the sister of Messala, wife to a noble man called Seruius, who being
dead when she was asked, why she did not mary again, she answered, that she
always ly^ed by Seruius her husband, it is also a countreye by Hungary, now
called Stiria.

Valerius, a man's name.

Valesius, for Valerius.

Valetudinarium, a place where men do lie, when they be sick.

Valgium, an instrument to make flores smoth.

Valgulatio, a question in rebuke of one.

Valgustus, a crooked staff.

Valgus, he that has his legs bowed inward narowe at the knees.

Valetudinarius, a, um, now and than sick, oftentimes sick.

Valitudo, and ualetudo, dinis some time signyfyeth sickness, sometime health.

Valetudini operam dare, to have regard to his life.

Longa and pertinax ualetudo, a long and continual sickness.

Valide, valiantly, myghtily, puissantly.

Validus, da, dum, valyant, mighty.

Validior, ualidius, more mighty.

Validissimus, most mighty.

Validitas, tatis, might.

Vallecula, a little valey.

Vallaris, re, pertaynyng to a trenche in a field.

Vallaris corona, a garlande given to him which first entered into the trenche
of the enemies camp.

Vallescit, old writers used for perierit, he is lost or peryshed.

Vallis, a valey or dale.

Vallo, are, to enclose, to fortifye.

Vallonia, was called the goddess of valeys.

Vallum, and uallus, a trenche, which is made in a field to defend an host,
within the which pauyllions are pytched. also a post, whereunto vynes are
bound.

Valli, are pales made sharp above.

Valor, oris, value or price.

Valuae, doors which be shut on two partis.

Valuulus, the codde of a bean or pease, or other like thing.

Vanans, old writers used for fallens, deceyuynge.

Vandalia, a countraye in the north part of the world.

Vane, v^^^nly, foolyshely, lyengly.

Vane^^, scere, to vanyshe, to be brought vn^^ ^ought.

Vangiones, people in Germany of a city called Worms.

Vanidicus, a liar or tellar of foolyshe tales.

Vaniloquus, idem.

Vaniloquidorus, idem.

Vaniloquentia, vain speech.

Vanitas, tatis, vanity, lyghtnes, lesyng, folly.

Vanitudo, vanytie.

Vanno, are, to vanne corn.

Vannus, a vanne.

Vanus, a, um, void or empty. alsoo foolysshe or enuyous, a maker of lies, not
lykely.

Vapor, oris, and uapos, a vapor or hot brethe issuyng out of a thing.

Vaporarium, a place made hot to sytte in, in the winter time.

Vaporo, rare, to heat or make warm a place

Vappa, wine, which has lost his verdure. it is sometime taken for a man, in
whom is no wit or perfyte reason*

Vapo, onis, a beast that flees.

Vapularis, he that is beaten.

Vapulo, lare, to be beaten.

Variabilis, le, varyable.

Varar, Dunbar in Scotland.

Variantia, uarietas, and uariatio, variety, dyuersitie in things.

Varices, and uarice, uariculae, are veins, which do swelle excedyngly.

Varicosus, he that has such veins swollen.

Varicor, aut uarico, to transgress, to pass over a thing neglygently.

Varicus, an Aduerbe, which sygnyfyeth strydynge.

Varae manus, crooked hands.

Vari, spots in the face.

Vary, dyuersely.

Variae, for Pantherae, beasts of diverse colors.

Variegatus, a, um, painted or garnysshed with sundry colors.

Varius, a fyshe called a troute.

Vario, are, to make diverse.

Variolae, measyls.

Varius, a, um, diverse, unlike, inconstaunt, varyable.

Varolus, a deuourer. also a pycker.

Varro, ronis, was a noble Romayne, of all other most excellently learned.

Varus, whose legs are crooked inward.

Varus, a river, which dyuydeth that part of France, that is called
Narbonensis from Italy. Also it was the name of a poet.

Vas, uadis, a suretye that undertakes for annother man. also a pledge.

Vas, uasis, a vesselle.

Vasa conclamare, to cry, to trusse up caryage and bagguage, as when an army
does remove.

Vascones, people in the part of Spain called Taraconensis.

Vascularius, a potter.

Vascularius, a goldesmythe, the which makes plate.

Vasculum, and Vascillum, a small vessel.

Vastatio, destruction.

Vasterna, a horselytter, or any thing borne by two horses.

Vastescant, old writers used inhorrescant.

Vasto, are, to waste or destroy.

Vastus, a, um, great, huge, sometime desolate.

Vastitas, tatis, uastitudo, and uastities, greatness also destruction.

Vasum, a vessel.

Vates, a prophet, a poet.

Vatesco, scere, to be distroyed, to be dried up, to be forsaken.

Vaticanus collis, a hill in Rome, where now is the church of sayncte Peter.

Vaticinor, aris, ari, to prophecy or tell what shall happen, to coniecte.

Vaticinium, a prophecy, a conjecture.

Vaticinatio, idem.

Vatidicum, for propheticum, that which is spoken in a prophecy.

Vatius, idem quod valgus, he that has crooked legs outward.

Vatrax, and uarricosus, he that has ill legs, from the knee downewarde.

V ANTE B.
VBER, and huber, a womannes breast. uide Huber.

Vbi, where, in what place. sometime when, after. Vbiloci, idem.

Vbij, people in Germany dwelling in Colain and the parts adioynynge.

Vbique, in all places, every where, in all.

Vbique gentium, in all countries.

Vbique, loci, in every place.

Vbilibet, where ye will.

Vbicunque, in every place, Vbicubi, idem.

V ANTE D.
VDVS, da, dum, moist.

Vuidus, da, dum, moist inward.

V ANTE E.
VE, idem quod Vaeh, also it is put for uel; or que.

Vecors, dis, mad, or troubled in spirit

Vecordia, madness or trouble of mind.

Vectabulum, wherein any thing is carried.

Vecticularia uita, to have much to day and no thing to morrow, sodaynely
rich, and as sodaynely poor.

Vectigal, a tribute, a pention, a rent, a yearly reuenewe.

Vectigalis, le, by whom or whereof tribute, pencion, or rent. is paid.

Vectis, a bar. also a lever, wherewith things be lift, or borne by men. It
is also the name of an isle of England called the isle of Wyghte.

Vecto, are, to carry. Vectito, idem.

Vectatio, carriage.

Vector, toris, he that is carried, sometime he that caryeth.

Vectorius, a, um, apt to carry.

Vectura, carriage, also the hyre or money given for carriage.

Vedra, the river of Were in Wales.

Vegeo, gere, to be in health.

Veget, for uegetat.

Vegetius, a noble man that wrate of marciall doctrine.

Vegeto, uegetare, to recreate, to quicken, to conserve.

Vegetus, ta, tum, hole, strong in health quick

Vegrandis, great and ill fourmed.

Vehea, for via.

Vediouis, and veiouis, was called a god which had no power to do good, but
only harm.

Veheare, old writers used for uehere.

Vehemens, it is, vehemente, great, vrgente, fyers, sharp.

Vehementia, vehemence, might.

Vehementer, vehemently, sharply, myghtely.

Vehementior, tius, more vehement or sharp.

Vehementissimus, ma, mum, most vehement or sharp.

Vehes, a carte or wayne.

Vehia, in the old Tuscane ^unge was a carte.

Veiatura, for Vectura, carriage.

Vehicularius, a carter.

Vehicularis equus, a cartehorse.

Vehiculum, a general name to all things, which serves for carriage.

Veho, uexi, uehere, to carry.

Veios, a city in Hetruria.

Veientes, people with whom the Romans had long time wars.

Veientanus, na, number, of the city of Veios.

Veli, the people of Veios.

Vel, or sometime also, chiefly, namely, at the least.

Velabrum, a place in Rome. It may be alsoo called a tente, which crafts men
do set up, where they have no howses, to be instead of their shoppes.

Velamen, minis, a covering.

Velaria, clothes wherewith tents ar made, also the same tents.

Velatura, a frayte.

Velatus, ta, tum, apparayled.

Velanni, Velay in Fraunte.

Veles, uelitis, a soldier that wears light harneyse.

Velia, a fenne in Italye, in the countreye of Calabria.

Velifico, care, to sail.

Velina, a street in Rome, by the hill called Mons Palatinus.

Velis equisque, by sea and by land.

Velitaris pugna, battle done by them that are light harneysed.

Velitatim, by leapes or skyppes.

Velitor, aris, ari, and uelito, uelitare, to strive, to brawle.

Velitatio, brawling.

Velitrae, plurali numero, a city in Italy.xx. miles from Rome.

Veliuolus, a, um, that which gothe with a sail, or is occupied with sails.

Vella, old writers used for uilla.

Vellaturam facere, to live by carriage from one town to an other.

Vellicatim, by pluckes.

Vellico, care, to pynche, sometime to rebuke, to byte, to rent.

Vello lere, to pluck up, or pull a thing.

Vellus, velleris, a flyse.

Velo, lare, to cover or hyde, to bind, to apparayle.

Velocitas, swyftnesse.

Velocior, velocius, swyfter.

Velocissimus, ma, mum, swyftest.

Velocissime, most swyftly.

Velociter, swyftly.

Velox, locis, swyfte.

Velum, a sail, a curtayne or a veil.

Velut, ueluti, as, like as.

Vena, a vein.

Venabulum, a hunting staff.

Venalitiarius, he that sells slaves.

Venalis, le, that which is set to sale.

Venalitium, a place where any thing is sold.

Venalitius, he that sells.

Venaphrum, a city in Campania.

Venaria, an isle, wherein be many veins of metal.

Venaticus, ca, cum, perteynynge to hunting.

Venaticus canis, a hounde.

Venatorius, a, um, idem.

Venator, a hunter.

Venatrix, a woman hunter.

Venatura, idem quod uenatio.

Venatus, tus, hunting. Venatio, idem.

Vendax, acis, he that gladly sells.

Vendibilis, le, easy and ready to be sold.

Vendicatio, a claim.

Vendico, care, to vendicate, to claim.

Venditarius, a, um, ready to be sold.

Venditatio, an auaunt.

Venditio, a saale.

Vendito, tare, to sell often, to auaunt.

Vendo, didi, dear, to selle.

Veneficium, the act and craft of poysonynge.

Veneficus, and uenefica, a maker of poison, a vser of sorcery.

Venenariae mulieres, womenne that do sell poison.

Venenatus, ta, tum, poisoned.

Veneno, nare, to poison.

Venenosus, a, um, that has poison.

Venenum, poison, it is the general name of all that does alter the nature or
color of that thing, wherewith it is myxte.

Veneo, niui, nire, to be sold.

Venerabilis, worthy to be honored.

Venerabundus, he that does worship any thing.

Venerandus, idem.

Veneranter, reuerentely.

Veneratus, ta, tum, humbly prayed unto* some time reverend.

Veneror, aris, ari, to honor.

Veneratio, honor, reverence.

Venereus, a man disposed to lechery.

Venetiae, arum, the city of Venyce.

Veneti, Vanes in Brytayne. Also the people of Venyce.

Venetus, ta, tum, of Venyce. Also the color of light blewe or blunket.

Venia, pardon, forgyuenesse. Tua uenia, by your license.

Venibo, ancient writers used for ueniam.

Venio, nire, to come, to spring.

Venire in mentem, to come to remembrance.

Venit in mentem, it comes to my mind.

Venitur ad me, they came to me.

Venila, for unda, water in a river.

Venor, aris, ari, to hunte, to get a thing craftelye.

Venta, an haven in England called Bristowe

Ventanea, things that seem to be daungerus and yet therein is no danger.

Venture, tris, the bealy or panche. sometime it is taken for the stomach.

Ventilabrum, a fan or flabelle, wherewith wind is made.

Ventilatio, a fannynge or wynnowynge.

Ventilator, a vanner or wynnower of corn.

Ventilo, are, to gather wind, to vanne or winowe corn, to turn out of one
hand in to an other.

Ventito, tare, to come often.

Ventosus, a, um, wyndy, also light.

Ventositas, wyndynesse.

Ventulus, a little wind.

Vento uiuere, to live by the wind. A proverb applied to them, which have no
substance to live on.

Ventus, wind.

Ventus operam dat, the wind blows a good cool.

Ventus popularis, vayneglory.

Ventrale, a stomacher.

Ventriosus, a gorbealy.

Ventriculus, the stomach.

Venum ire, to be sold.

Venundo, dare, to sell.

Venundatio, byenge and selling.

Venus, ueneris, called goddess of love, sometime lechery, also carnal
appetite, also beauty, by which a man is stired to love.

Venustas, tatis, beauty, properly of women. sometime a dilectable
pronuntiation of speech

Venuste, properly, pleasauntly, amiably.

Venustulus, a, um, somewhat fair.

Venustus, ta, tum, fair dilectable.

Venusto, are, to ornate or make beautiful.

Veprecula, a little bramble.

Vepres, briars.

Vepretum, a place full of briers.

Ver, ueris, the spring of the year.

Veratrum, an herb called also Helleborus.

Verax, acis, he or she that says truth.

Veracitas, tatis, truth in speech.

Verbascum, an herb whereof be.ii. kinds, of which one is supposed to be
Molin or long worte, the other is supposed to be that which is called
primrose, some do think it to be rose campin.

Verbena, and uerbenaca, an herb called veruin sometime Verbenae, are all
leaves sodeynely plucked up, to garnyshe howses or churches or to make
garlandes.

Verber, a small long stick or yard.

Verberaljs, worthy to be beaten.

Verberatio, Verberatus, tus, a beatynge

Verbereus, a, um, worthy to be beaten.

Verbero, rare, to beat, to punyshe.

Verberare cogitationis conuicio, to blame or rebuke one in his mind.

Verbero, ronis, a person worthy punyshement the reproach of all servants.

Verberito, tare, to beat often often.

Verbigero, rare, for uerba facere, to talk.

Verbenarius, was oone of the ambassadors sent fro the Romans unto their
ennemies, which ware on his head a garland of veruin

Verbose, an aduerbe, signifienge with many words.

Verbositas, much talking or speaking.

Verbosus, full of words.

Verbulum, a little word.

Verbum, a word, also a sentence comprised in one word, a proverb.

Verba ad rem confer, to do as he says.

Verba mortuo dare, to speak to a dead manne, a proverb when a man loses
his labor.

Verba dare, to deceive.

Verbi causa, as by example.

Verbi gratia, idem.

Verba istaec sunt, these are but words.

Verbis meis salutem dicito, salute him in my name.

Vercellae, was a city in Liguria, nyghe to the mountains called Alps.

Vere, truly.

Verecundanter, and uere cunditer, shamefastely

Verecundia, shamefastenesse.

Verecunde, shamefastly.

Verecundor, aris, ari, to be ashamed.

Verecundus, da, dum, shamefaste.

Veredarius, a messanger that rydeth by post.

Veredus, a light horse, a hunting nagge, or swyfte geldynge.

Verenda, places in a man and woman, which without shame may not be named.

Verendus, da, dum, to be feared or dradde.

Vereor, reris, reri, to fear as the child does the father. Timere, to fear,
as the slave or boy does his mal^^^

Vereor dicere, I dare not tell.

Vereor abs ^e, I am aferde of the, lest thou will do me displeasure.

Vergiliae, the.vii. sterres, called also Pleiades.

Vergo, uersi, aut uerxi, gere, to declyne or bow down.

Veridicentia, truth in speaking a true tale.

Veridicus, ca, cum, he or she that tells truth.

Verifico, care, to verify as lawyers do say, to auerre.

Veriloquentia, idem quod ueridicentia,

Veriloquus, and ueriloquax, he that speaks truth.

Verisimile, lykely.

Verisimiliter, idem.

Verisimilis, le, like to be true.

Verisimilitudo, lykelyhode.

Veritanus ager, a feld divided among the people, so that every man may have a
portion.

Veritas, truth.

Vermiculatim, an aduerbe, sygnifyenge in small pieces.

Vermiculus, a little worm.

Veriuerbium, a true tale.

Vermiculor, aris, ari, to be full of vermyne, or worms.

Vermiculata opera, warkes which are of small pieces of diverse colors, wherein
ar set out sundry pictures, like as we se in spruse tables or counters.

Vermina, prickinges in the body, that it seems worms were cut a sonder.

Vermino, nare, to have worms.

Verminatio, the disease of the wourmes, properly in cattle.

Verminosus, a, um, full of worms, or that wherein worms are.

Vermis, a worm. also it is a fyshe in the river of Ganges, which is in
length.lx. cubytes, and is blewe in color, which has such strength, that
when Oliphantes come to the water and do drink, he will take one of the^ by
the nose, and pluck him in to him.

Verna, a bondeman or bondewoman, borne in the house of the lord, of his
bondeman and bondewoman.

Vernaculus, la, lum, all that takes beginning in our own country, as
Vernacula lingua, the country language, the common speech peculiar or proper to
country or house.

Vernaculi, be also men of ill manners and language, which use to slatter or to
speak in rebuke.

Venacula putatio, cuttynge of vynes in the spring of the year.

Vernalis, le, perteynynge to the spring of the year, also servile.

Vernaliter, lewdely, flatteryngly.

Vernatio, the old skin of an adder. it is sometime taken for age.

Vernilis, le, servile.

Vernilitas, flattery.

Vernilitus, old writers used for a flatterer.

Verniliter, flattery.

Verno, are, to spring as herbs done, also to sing as birds done.

Vernula, a diminutiue of uerna.

Vernus, a, um, lusty, fresh, as the spring time.

Vero, truly, verily. sometime it does affirm that which follows. also but
yet.

Vero, is also a river in Byskay.

Vero, are, to say truth.

Veromanditi, Vermandors in France.

Ver^na, a noble city in Italy in the countreye called Marchia Taruisina, not
far from the mountains, where Catullus the poet and Plinius were borne.

Verones, people dwelling nyghe to the river of Vero.

Veronensis, and Veronius, a man of Verona.

Verpus, pa, pum, that which has no skin It is also the myddell finger.

Verpi be also Jews.

Verra, an altar at Rome, whereat they prayed that children should not be wrong
borne.

Verres, a hog vngelded, a tame boore, as aper may be called a wild bore.

Verricula, old writers used for articulus.

Verriculum, a net called a dragge.

Verrinco, care, to turn or change a thing unto better.

Verrinus, a, um, of a bore.

Verruca, an hyllocke or knappe on a hill. also a warte.

Verrucaria herba, wartworte.

Verrucosus, he that has wartes.

Verrucula, a little warte.

Verrunca, old writers took for a high place.

Versatilia, things that are turned or wounden one about an other, as two
cords or two sticks wounden together, also pyllers made of the same fascion.

Versatilis, le, that which tourneth or may be turned.

Versicolor, oris, chaungeable, or that which changes color, also of sundry
colors.

Versicolorius, a, um, any thing turned out of his natural color, also that
which is of diverse colors myxte to gether.

Versiculus, a little verse.

Versipellis, a crafty person that will turn often as he lysteth.

Verso, are, to turn.

Versat animum cupido regni, He thinks and diuiseth how to be king.

Animum muliebrem uersare in omnes parts, to tempte the woman by all manner of
ways.

Authors uersare, to read often good authors.

Dolos uersare, to deuyse how to begile one.

Versare in cord, to think.

Oues uersare, to pasture sheep.

Versare diu quid far recusent, to think long what they will refuse to
sustain.

Versare testes, to examine witness in diverse manners of ways.

Versor, ari, to haunte, to be often times in a place, to be occupied in a
thing or matter.

Mihi ante oculos dies noctesque uersaris, I think upon you day and night.

Versatur circa res omnes, he medleth with every thing.

In acie uersari, to be in the battle.

In discrimine uersari, to be in danger.

In munere suo uersari, to be busy in his office

In re aliqua uersari, to traite of some matter.

Inter manus uersari, to be often times handled.

Versoria, the needell in a ship, to know the costs.

Versura, a tournynge. it is also when a man boroweth of one to pay his
dettes to an other, and to borowe in such wise is Versuram facere.

Versura, is also the coin or corner of a house or wall, whereat men do
turn. it is also when the horses or oxen do turn in a carte or ploughe.

Versuram soluere, is to change creditours, as to borowe of one man to pay an
other. some do read Versura soluere.i. uersura facta aes alienum soluere.

Versus, sa, sum, turned.

Versus, us, a verse. sommetyme an order. also a ^onge, toward.

Versute, craftily.

Versutus, mutable, often tournyng, wyly expert.

Versutia, wylynesse.

Versutiloquus, a crafty speaker.

Vertagus, a hounde, which will hunt by him self.

Vertebrae, places in the body, where the bones do not meet, but are knytte to
gether in such wise with senewes, that they may turn the more lightly.

Verto, ti, tere, to turn, to draw, to translate or interpret out of one
tungue into an other, to consider.

Vertere terga, to run away, to fle inbattaile.

Vertere solum, to go from one country into an other to dwell.

Vertere, for versuram facere.

Vertere stultitiae, to repute folly in a thing.

Vertere uitio, to put the blame in one.

Quis erit, uitio qui id non uertat tibi? Who is it that will not put the blame
in the?

Agrum uertere, to till the ground.

Been tibi uertat, god speed you well.

Dij been uertant, I pray god turn it to good.

In crimen uertere, to blame a thing.

In discrimine uerti, to be in danger.

In fugam uertere, to put to plyght.

In rem suam uertere, to turn it to his profytte.

In relligionem uertere, to be scrupulouse.

Male uertit res paecuaria mihi, I am an ylle merchant of cattle, or I am
unlucky in byenge of cattle.

Vertex, and vortex, ticis, a whyrlewynde. also a whirlepoole in a water, also
the crown or top of the head also the top of every thing.

Vertibulum, idem quod uertebra.

Vertibula, a fyshe called also vrtica.

Verticulum, a wherue, which is a round thing set on a spyndell, to cause it to
turn.

Verticillum, a little wherue.

Vertigo, ginis, a sickness of the head, wherein it seems to a man, that he
sees things tournynge.

Vertigus, a whirlsnge about.

Vertius, a man of great strength.

Vertunalia, the solemnity of Vertunus, which was kept in October.

Vertunus, was called the god of byenge and selling, it is sometime taken for
the year.

Veru, a spytte or broche.

Veruetius, a, um, like a sheep.

Veruecinus, a, um, of a wether.

Vernat, for circundat, it compasses.

Verutum, a casting darte with a string.

Veruactum, the summer tylthe.

Veruina, a long darte or iauelyn.

Veruculum, an instrument of goldsmithes like a little broche.

Veruex, uecis, a wether sheep.

Verus, ra, rum, true, substancial, uncorrupted, good, just, profitable.

Veritas, tatis, truth.

Verum, an aduerbe, signifies truly, also but

Verumtamen, yet not withstanding.

Vesanus, a, um, cruel, furious, wood.

Vesania, fury, woodnesse.

Vescor, sceris, sci, to eat, to use. Actius used it to see.

Vescus, ca, cum, every thing that may be eaten, also little or lean.

Vesca, browse, leaves, whereon beasts do feed in winter.

Vessones, Champaine in France.

Vesculus, a, um, very lean.

Vesicaria, an herb, which apothecaries do call Alkakengi.

Vesica, a bladder.

Vespae, they which do bury dead corsis.

Vespa, a waspe.

Vesper, the evening, or euentyde, also the evening sterre.

Vesper, ra, rum, of the evening.

Vesperi, an aduerbe, signifienge late, at the end of the day.

Vespero, rare, to be evening.

Vesperasco, scere, idem.

Vesperna, old writers used for coena, supper.

Vespertilio, onis, a reremouse or back.

Vespertinus, na, number, that which is done in the evening.

Vesperugo, ginis, idem quod uesper.

Vespices, places thycke of bushes.

Vespillo, onis, he that caryeth dead men to be buried.

Vesta, the daughter of Saturnus, which for her chastity was honored for a
goddess, sometime it is taken for pure fire.

Vestales, were virgins, which mynystred to Vesta, which were chosen between
the age of.vi. years and ten years, and.xxx. year they remained virgins,
afterward it was leful for them to marye.

Vester, tra, trum, your.

Vestiarium, a warderobe, wherein garments are laid.

Vestiarius, the yoman of the robes, or he that keeps the warderobe.

Vestibulum, a void place without the door where men do tarry whiles they do
knock and until the door be opened.

Vesticeps, cipis, a young man, which begins to have a berde.

Vestigabundus, he that seeks much.

Vestigator, he that seeks for a thing.

Vestigium, the prynte of a man's foot in the ground. It is taken also for a
sign or token of any thing that is done.

Vestigo, gare, to seek.

Vestimenta, a vesture or garment.

Vestini, people in Italye.

Vestio, iui, ire, to apparel, to adorn, to keuer.

Vestiplica, a maiden which lays up her maystresse garments.

Vestis, a vesture, a garment, sometime it is put for a berde.

Vestispicus, and uestispica, he or she which keeps their masters or
maistres apparayle.

Vestissimus, a, um, best apparayled, best clad.

Vestitus, ta, tum, apparayled.

Vestitus, tus, apparayle.

Vestrapte, and vestropte, of your own.

Vestras, tratis, yours.

Vesulus, a mountain in Ligurta by Alps, at the rote whereof the river called
Padus, or Po spryngeth out.

Vesuuius, or Veseuus, an hill in Campania, four miles from the city of
Naples, whereon grows plenty of vynes and olyues, but the top thereof is
barayne, by reason of fire which sometime rises out of the earth. it is also
called Vesulus.

Veter, old. Veterior, ueterius, elder.

Veterrimus, ma, mum, eldeste.

Veteramentarius, a coblar or botcher.

Veteraneus, a, um, ancient.

Veteranus, sommetyme signifies old. Alsoo he that had served a hole year
in the city. sometime he that has long continued in wars, an old soldier.

Veterator, oris, ueteratrix, a crafty begiler.

Veteres, men of old time passed.

Veterina, beasts which do serve for burdeyn as horses, mulettes, and asses.

Ve, uide in Veh, Ve uobis, out upon you, sorrow come to you.

Veterinarius, he that lets to hyre horses or mules.

Veterinarius medicus, a horseleche, or ferror.

Veterinarius, a, um, belonging to horses and mules.

Veternus, sleep without waking, also sloth or sluggyshenes, also to much
sleep.

Veternosus, he that slepeth to much, sluggish, slothful also he that has
the dropsy.

Veteresco, and ueterasco, scere, to be old.

Vetero, rare, to make old.

Veto, tare, Veto, tere, to prohibit.

Vetonica, an herb called Betayne.

Vetulonia, a place in Tuscia, called also Viter bium. Veterbo.

Vetulus, la, lum, a diminutiue of uetus.

Vetus, teris, old, ancient.

Vetustas, age.

Vetuste, agedly.

Vetustesco, scere, to be old, to be the warse for age.

Veteresco, scere, to be the better for age.

Vetustus, ta, tum, old.

Veuina, a long darte.

Vexillarrius, and uexillifer, the baner bearer.

Vexillum, a baner.

Vexo, are, to vex or trouble.

Vexabundus, he that troubles or vexes other

Vexatio, vexation

Vexator and uexatrix, he or she that vexith other

V ANTE I.
VIA, a way, a journey, the manner, or mean custom.

Via militaris, the broad high way, for horsemen and fotemen.

Viam munire, to make or repair a way.

Viatica coena, banquet given to a man at his departing.

Viaticor, aris, ari, to prepare vytayles necessary for journey.

Viaticum, necessaries for journey, be it in vittayle or other thing,
preparation for journey.

Viator, toris, a trauayler by the way, a way farynge man, which warns men
to assemble to counsel, and serves officers, to call men unto them.

Viatorius, a, um, perteyninge to the way.

Viatoria uasa, vessels which do serve for iourneye.

Vibex, bicis, a spotte remaining in the skyn, after beatynge.

Vibratio, a brandyshynge.

Vibrissae, hears in a man's nose.

Vibrisso, are, to quauer in singynge.

Vibro, brare, to shake a thing, or to make a thing to shake or quauer.

Viburnum, the spring which comes out of the rote of a tree.

Vicani, men of the village.

Vicarius, a, um, that which is in the steed or place of an other. Also the
servant of him, which is a servant.

Vicariam operam impendere, to execute an other man's office.

Vicatim, in villages or streets, also street by street, or vyllage by village.

Vicem, uice, plurali, uices, uicibus, time and times.

Per multas uices, multis uicibus, many times.

Vnica uice, ones. sometime it signifies pains. also peril, sometime place.
or stead.

Fungar uice cotis, I will use it in the steed of a whetstone.

Vicenarius, a, um, the twentieth.

Vicentia, a city in Venetia, between Verona and Padua.

Vicenus, a, um, twenty.

Vicia, a certain grain, which like to a vine runs upon the stalks of
herbs, which do grow hye.

Viciarium, the sowynge of such grain.

Vicies, twenty times.

Vicinia, the neyghbourhede, which corruptly we call vicinetum.

Vicinitas, tatis, nyghnesse. sometime the multitude of neighbors.

Vicinus, a neighbor.

Vicissatim, by times, by tournes.

Vicissim, by turn, now one, now an other, sometime it signifies on the
other part. sometime semblably.

Vicissitas, idem quod vicissitudo.

Vicissitudo, dinis, the turn, now one, now an other.

Victima, the beast that is killed in sacrifyce.

Victimarius, the mynyster, which serves to the sacrifice. Also he which
bought the sacrifice to sell it.

Victito, tare, to live by eating certain meat.

Victor, toris, he that vanquysheth.

Victoria, victory.

Victoriatus, a certain coin, wherein was the image of victory.

Victoriosus, accustomed to have victory.

Victrix, plurali victricia, perteining to victory.

Victrix, a woman that vanquisheth.

Victurus, the participle of the future tense, as well of Viuo, as of Vinco.

Victus, tus, and uictuis, sustinance or fedynge. Also a kind or form of
living.

Victus, ta, tum, vanquyshed.

Vicus, a street in a town. also a vyllage.

Viculus, a little street or village.

Videlicet, as who says. sometime it signyfyeth surely.

Video, di, dear, to se. it is sometime applied to other senses, as Vide qualis
est sonus, Here what a noise it is. Vide quid oleat, Smell whereof it sauoureth.
Vide quam durum sit, Feel how hard it is. Also it signifies to take heed or
consider, to provide. Vide tibi, provide for thy self. Tu uideris, look
thereto, well, take good head, for I care not for it.

Videro, I will provide.

Videor, I remember me well.

Videre uideor, me thinks I see.

Videtur mihi, me seems.

Viden for Vides ne^ do thou not see?

Vidua, a wydowe.

Viduertas, calamity or misery.

Viduitas, wydowhedde, lack of things necessary.

Vidulum, wherein any thing is kept.

Viduo, d^are, to dyuyde or take away, to leave alone.

Viduus, a, um, divided alone.

Vienna, a City in Austria, an other in Dolpheny.

Vieo, ere, to bend, to bind.

Vietor, toris, a couper, which with howpes byndeth vessels.

Vietus, ta, tum, soft, weak, bendynge.

Vietus, a howpe, or struck of a carte.

Vigeo, gui, gere, to live, to be strong, to thryue in growing.

Vigesimae, as decimae.

Vigesimarium aurum, idem.

Vigesimus, ma, mum, the twentieth.

Vigil, lis, watchful, vigilante. also a watchman

Vigilans, it is, vigilant, watchefulle, diligente, circumspecte.

Vigilanter, watchefully, diligently, vigylantly, circumspectly.

Vigilantia, vigilanci, diligence.

Vigiliae, watches, as well by day as by night. sometime the men which do
watch.

Vigilo, are, to wake, or watch, to be vygylant, or very diligente. also to
here diligently also to take pain. Vigilare, decet hominem qui uult sua
tempori conficere officia, a man must take pain, that will finyshe his
busynes in time convenient.

Vigisonus, a broke by the city of Padua.

Viginti, twenty.

Vigor, goris, strength, force.

Vigorosus, a, um, strong, firm.

Vilis, le, vile, of no value. also good chepe, of little price.

Vileo, and uilesco, scere, to be vile, or of small or none estimation of price.

Vilitas, good chepe, contrary to derthe.

Viliter, an aduerbe, signifienge cheap.

Vilito, tare, to make cheap.

Villa, a manor out of a city or town. also a vyllage.

Villanus, a man of the village.

Villaris, re, and Villaticus, ca, cum, perteyning to the village.

Villico, and uillicor, aris, ari, to be occupied about husebandrye, to have
the rule of husebandrye.

Villicatio, occupation about husebandry. Also the rule of husebandry under the
owner.

Villicus, and uillico, a bailiffe of husebandry.

Villula, a little village.

Villum, small wine.

Villus, hear.

Vimen, minis, rods, which will wind lightly, whereof baskettes are made.

Vimineus, a, um, wyckers, wyndinge rods or osyars.

Viminalis, le, apt to wind.

Viminalis collis, a little hill at Rome.

Vinacea, kernelles of grapes.

Undo, are, to rise in wawes.

Vndosum mare, a troublous sea, and fulle of wawes.

Vndulata uestis, chamlet, or a garment wrought as it were with ryuers.

Vndula, a little wawe.

Vnguentum, and ungentum, a sweet ointment. it is usurped for every ointment.

Vngues, muskyls.

Vngo, unxi, ungere, to annoint.

Vnguen, nis, oyntement, or any thing that is facry.

Vnguentaria, the craft to make oyntmentes.

Vnguentarius, a maker of sweet oyntmentes.

Vngues arrodere, to gnaw on his nails, Aprouerbe applied to them, which are
in a study, how they may alter such things as they do repent them of.

Vnguicula, a little soft nail. A teneris unguiculis, from his tender youth
or infancy.

Vnguis, a nail of the fyngars or toes. it is alsoo a disease which at
length covers all the eye with flesh in the corner of the eye. It is in an
horse taken of Hierocles for an haw in the eye.

Vnguis, in a rose is the white and thycke part of the flower, next the top
of the stalk.

Vngula, a howfe of a horse, or other beast.

Omnibus ungulis, with all might and power

Vngulatus, he that has foul great nails.

Vngulum, of old writers was taken for a ring.

Vngularius, a great nail and ragged.

Vngustus, a crooked staff, or such as commonly men do call a croke,
wherewith they draw to them any thing.

Vnicalamum frumentum, wheat, which has but one read growyng out of the root.

Vnicallis, an herb which has but oone stalk without any branches.

Vnice, only.

Vnicolor, oris, of one color.

Vnicornis, Vnicornius, and Vnicorniu^, a beast called an unicorn.

Vnicuba, a woman which lies or companieth but with one man.

Vnicus, ca, cum, one alone.

Vnigenitus, one child without mo.

Vn^^gae uineae, vynes in the which upon the proppes being set up, sundry
rayles are laid on the one side.

Vnio, iui, ire, to join together.

Vnio, onis, concord. sometime a perle.

Vnioculus, he that has but one eye.

Vnipes, pedis, having but one foot.

Vnitas, tatis, unity.

Vnitio, a ioynyng together.

Vnitus, ta, tum, joined together in one.

Vniuersalis, le, universal.

Vniuersipotens, he that has power over all.

Vniuersipotentia, power over all.

Vniuersitas, university or generalite.

Vniuersus, a, um, universal, sometime it sygnifieth all, or the hole.

Vniuira, a woman having but one husband.

Vniuocum, that which sygnyfieth but oone thing.

Vniuoce, of the same sygnification.

Vnose, old writers used for simul, together.

Vnni, Hungariens.

Vnquam, any time.

Vnus, na, number, one, also alone.

Vnus and alter, both, now one, now an other.

Vnusquilibet, Vnusquisque, Vnaqueque, Vnumquodque, eueryche.

Vnis aedibus, in the same house.

Vno animo, of one accord.

Vnus quiuis, who so ever thou will.

Vni sex dies, six days contynuall.

Vno ictu, at one stroke.

Vno uerbo, at one word.

Vnum, one thing.

Vnus ex multis, Vnus ex omnibus, one alone, only.

V ANTE O.
VOberca, a town by Bilbo in Spain.

Vocabulum, the denomination of any thing.

Vocalis, le, loud. also that which has a voice also a vowell.

Vocalitas, a tune or sound of a voice.

Vocatio, a calling.

Vocator, a caller.

Vociferatio, a crienge out.

Vociferator, he that cries out.

Vociferor, aris, ari, to cry out, to cry loud.

Vocifero, idem.

Vocito, to call often.

Voco, care, to call, to bydde, to ask.

Me ad Democritum uocas, thou do allege Democritus, and woldeste have me to
believe him.

Ad calculos uocare, to call one to account.

Ad exemplar alterius uocare, to exhort one to follow the example of an other
man.

In discrimen uocare, to put in danger.

In ius uel in iuditium uocare, to accuse one openly: to bring an action
against one.

Voconia, a kind of pears.

Vocula, a little voice, sometime obloquy.

Voculatio, an accent in speech.

Vola, the mids of the hand or the foot. it is taken for the soole of the
foot.

Volaticus, ca, cum, that which flies or goth away suddenly, flyttynge.

Volatilis, le, that which can fly.

Volatus, and uolatura, a flight.

Volema, a great pear, a wardyn.

Volens, willing.

Volenter, wyllyngely.

Volentia, will.

Voliba, a town in Cornewayle called Bodmyn.

Volito, tare, to fly often.

Volo, are, to fly, to rounne or goo quyckely, or fast.

Volo, uis, uolui, uelle, to will.

Volo tuam gratiam, I desire your favor.

Volo te, I would speak with the.

Volones, were bondemen at Rome, which in the wars of Carthage, when there
lacked Romans, offered them selves to fight for their masters, and because
they did it wyllyngly without constraynt or called, therefore they were called
Volones.

Volsella, an instrument to pluck hears from the body or face.

Volua, for uulua.

Volubilis, le, that which is easyly turned.

Volubilis, is an herb, which rounneth up by trees, having read
branches, and the leaves bytynge and blysterynge the tungue.

Volucer, cri, swyfte, light.

Volucra, a beast, which eats the tender vynes.

Volucres, birds, fowls.

Volucrior, more swyfte.

Volucris, cre, all things that does fly.

Volucrum, the after birth in a woman.

Volumen, minis, a book. sometime part of a book, called a volume.

Voluntarius, a, um, voluntary, wyllyng.

Voluntas, tatis, will.

Voluo, uere, to wrappe, to turn.

Voluox, and uoluola, idem quod Conuoluolus, a little wourme with many legs,
which eats the leaves of vynes, and of other trees.

Volup, for uoluptas.

Volupe, delectable.

Volupia, and Voluptia, goddess of voluptie or delectation.

Voluptabilis, le, that which rejoices.

Voluptaria loca, places of pleasure.

Voluptas, tatis, an inordynate reioycyng or delectation in things worldly or
carnal.

Voluptatem magnam nuncias, thou telleste me good tidings.

Spero f^^e nobis hanc coniunctionem uoluptati, I trust that this alyaunce
shall be to our comfort.

Voluptatem eius capio, I take great pleasure in him.

Voluptuarius, and uoluptarius, he that is given to carnal delectation.

Voluptuosus, a, um, voluptuouse, insatiable in carnal pleasure or delectation.

Voluta, that which karuers and paynters do call drapery and cylery, wrought
like cloth or leaves turned diverse ways.

Volutabrum, a place where swyne do walowe.

Volutabundus, walowyng, tournyng, tossyng in the mind.

Volutatim, an aduerbe sygnifyenge, eftsoons tossynge in the mind.

Voluto, tare, to turn lyenge, to walowe, to reuolue and toss in the mind.

Vomer, meris, the culter of a plowgh.

Vomica, a rotten impostume, whereout rounneth matter.

Vomitus, vomyte.

Vomitio, idem.

Vomo, mui, mere, to vomyte or parbreake.

Vopiscus, where two children are conceived, and one of them is abort, he that
comes to perfyte birth is called Vopiscus. It was also the name of oone that
wrate the lives of emperors.

Vopte, for Vosipsi.

Voraciter, like a glutton.

Vorago, ginis, a swolowe or gulf.

Voro, rare, to swolowe down meat ere it be chewed. also to eat gredyly.

Vorax, racis, a glutton.

Voracitas, gluttony.

Vorsura, for uersura.

Vorsura^ soluere, a proverb applied to them that so dyscharge them selves of
one business, that they enter into an other more peynfull or dangerous.

Vortex, for uertex.

Vortumnalia, a solemn feast to the god Vortumnus.

Vos, you.

Votiuus, ua, uum, that which is vowed. also desired.

Votiua uerba, uotiuae praeces, words and prayers, wherein we desire somewhat.

Votum, a vow, sometime a desire.

Votiuae aures, ears which desire to hear.

Votium, old writers used for uetitum.

Voto, and uotito, to make auowe.

Voti compos, he that has that which he desired.

Voueo, ui, uere, to vow, or make a vow.

Vox, uocis, a voice.

Voce assa, with the voice only of a man without any instrument of musyke.

V ANTE P.
Vpupa, a lapwynk or black plouer.

Z ANTE E.
ZEa, a kind of wheat.

Zelo, are, and zelor, lari, for aemulari.

Zelor, aris, ri, to be angry, or to have zele

Zelotes, for aemulator, he that has envy at one, or assayeth to follow an
other in living.

Zelotypia, ialowsye.

Zelotypus, ialowse.

Zelus, sometime envy, sometime love, sometime emulation.

Zenobia, a queen of Siria, which in greek and latyne was very well learned,
and was al so valiant in arms.

Zephyrus, the weste wind.

Zeros, a kind of crystal, which has spots white and black.

Zeta, and Zetacula, a littell chamber for one bed and two stoles, joined to an
other chamber, with courtaines, so that the courtaines being drawn, it made
but one chaumber. and having windows on three parts thereof to receive in the
heat of the son.

Zenith, is a word belonging to cosmography and signifies a point in the
firmament directely over the crown of a man's head where so ever he be.

Zereth, an hebrewe measure which is an handbrede.

Zeugma, a figure, whereby many sentences ar joined together with one verb, as,
Neque is es Catlina, ut te, aut pudor a turpitudine, aur metus a periculo, aut
ratio a furore reuocarit, Ne thou art such a man Catilyne, as either
shamefastness can withdraw from dishonestie, or fear from danger, or
reason from vengeable anger.

Zeusis, an excellent paynter, which so painted a boy caryeng grapes, that
byrdis came to the table and pecked on the grapes, wenyng that they had been very
grapes, which Zeusis beholdynge, was with him self angrye, and said. If I had
made the boy as well as I have done the grapes, the birds durst not have
come so nyghe to the grapes.

Zeus, a fyshe taken about Calis in Spain, which is black, but he is very
delycate.

Z ANTE I.
ZIgena, a fyshe of the sea.

Zigari, people, which we do call Egiptians, that wander about in every realm
and be horrible thieves.

Zigarum, the country from whense the said people do come.

Zizania, cockle w^^che grows in corn.

Zinziber, gynger.

Z ANTE O.
ZOdiacus, a cercle (...) heaven, wherein (...) the.xii. signs.

Zographia, the pyctur^^ of beasts.

Zoilus, was a poet, which enu^^ Homerus, and therefore the enuiers of well
^^^ned men are called Zoili.

Zoelicum, certain flax, that commet^^ (...) of Spain, whereof threde is made
for n^tt^ to take birds.

Zomos, gruell.

Zona, a gyrdell.

Zonatim, in compass about.

Zopissa, pitche taken from ships which being tempred with wax and salt,
is of more efficacy than other pitche.

Zopyron, an herb, which some do suppose to be Pulyol mountain.

Zopyrus, was a man, which by phisnomye knew every man's conditions. And
when in beholding Socrates he judged him to be unthrifty, and therefore was
scorned of many men. Socrates answered, Zopyrus is not deceived, for in deed I
had been such one as he says, if I had not by philosophy subdued nature. Also
Zopirus was a noble Persian, servant to Darius, which when the city of
Babylon rebelled against king Darius, and that he had made long war* and
could not subdue them, unawares to any man, did cut of his own nose, and
wounded him self, and fled to Babylon, saying, the king had so disfygured
him, because that he persuaded him to have peace with the Babylonians, which
they herynge, made him their chief capitain. Than by lyttel and lyttel
declaring to them the strength of the king, and how they might not indudure
long against him at the last he caused them to submit them selves to the
king, and to receive him into the city. Wherefore Darius was wont to say,
that he had leauer have one Zopyrus than twenty Babylons.

Zoroanda, a river, which the great water of Tigris makes on the one side of
the mountain Taurus.

Zoroastes, the first fynder of Magike.

Z ANTE V.
Zura, bearies of white thorn.

Z ANTE Y.
Zygia, a pipe, wherein men did play at weddynges.

Zythus, drink made with barley sodden. It may be taken for ale or biere.

FINIS DICTIONARII.
LVCRECIA ROMANA

THOMAS BERTHELETVS



LONDINI IN OFFICINA THOMAE BERTHELETI TYPIS IMPRES. CVM PRIVILEGIO AD
IMPRIMENDVM SOLVM. ANNO M.D.XLII.

Circle divided into four quarters with geometrical alphabetical markings.


