THE Castle of Health, Corrected, and in some places Augmented by the first
Author thereof, Sir Thomas Elyot Knight.

AND NOW NEVVLIE perused and printed in the Year of our Lord. 1595.

BY WISDOM PEACE BY PEACE PLENTY.



AT LONDON Printed by the Widow Orwin, and are to be sold by Matthew Lownes.

THE PROHEME OF SIR THOMAS ELIOT KNIGHT, INTO his book called the Castle of
Health.
GAlen the most excellent Physician feared, that in writing a compendious
doctrine for the curing of sickness, he should lose all his labor, for as much
as no man almost did endeavor himself to the finding of truth, but that all
men did so much esteem riches, possessions, authority, and pleasures, that
they supposed them, which were studious in any part of Sapience, to be mad or
distract of their wits, for as much as they deemed the chief Sapience, which
is in knowledge of things belonging as well to God as to man, to have no being.
Since this noble writer found that lack in his time, when there flourished in
sundry Countries a great multitude of men, excellent in all kinds of learning,
as it does yet appear by some of their works, why should I be grieved with
reproaches, wherewith some of my Country do recompense me, for my labors
taken without hope of temporal reward, only for the fervent affection, which I
have ever borne toward the public weal of my Country? A worthy matter,
says one, Sir Thomas Elyot is become a Physician, and writes in Physic,
which beseems not a Knight, he might have been much better occupied. Truly
if they will call him a Physician, which is studious about the weal of his
Country, I voutchsafe they so name me, for during my life, I will in that
affection always continue. And why, I pray you, should men have in disdain or
small reputation the science of Physic? Which being well understood, truly
experienced, and discreetly ordered, does conserve health, without the which
all pleasures be painful, riches unprofitable, company annoyance, strength
turned to feeblenes, beauty to lothsomnesse, senses are dispersed; eloquence
interrupted, remembrance confounded, which has been considered of wise men,
not only of the private estate, but also of Emperors, Kings, and other great
Princes, who for the universal necessity, and incomparable vtility, which they
perceived to be in that science of Physic, they did not only advance and
honor it with special privileges, but also diverse and many of them were
therein right studious, in so much as Iuba the King of Mauritanie and Lybia,
found out the virtuous qualities of the herb called Euforbium Gentius King of
Illyria, found the virtues of Gentia^. The herb Lysimachia took his name of
King Lysimachus* Mithridates the great King of Pontus, found first the virtues
of Scordion, and also invented the famous medicine against poison, called
Mithridate. Arthemisia Queen of Carta found the virtues of Mother wort, which
in latin bears her name, whereby her noble renoume has longer continued,
then by the making of the famous Monument over her dead husband, called
Mausoleum, although it were reckoned among the wonderful works of the world,
and yet her name with the said herb still abides, whiles the said Monument a
thousand years passed, was utterly dissolved.

It seems, that Physic in this Realm has been well esteemed, since the
whole study of Sale^ne, at the request of a King of England, wrote and set
forth a compendious and profitable treatise, called the Governance of Health,
in latin Regimen Sanitatis: And I trust in almighty God, that our sovereign
Lord the Kings Majesty, who daily prepares to stablish among us true and
vnco^^upted doctrines, will shortly examine also this part of study, in such
wise, as things apt for medicines, growing in this Realm, by* conference with
most noble authors may be so known, that we shall have less need of things
brought out of far Countries by the cor(...)on whereof, innumerable people
have perished, without blame to be given to (...) hisitions, saving only, that
some of them be not diligent enough in beholding (...) drugges or ingredients,
at all times dispensed and tried.

Besides the said Kings whom I have rehearsed, other honorable personages have
written in this most excellent doctrine, and not only of the speculatiue part,
but also of the practice thereof, whose works do yet remain unto their glory
immortal, as Auicenna, Auenzoar, Rasis, Cornclius Celsus, Sorani^s, and which
I should have first named Machaon, and Podal^rius noble Dukes in Grecia, which
came to the siege of Troy, and brought with them xxx. great ships with men of
war. This well considered, I take it for no shame to study that Science, or
to set forth any books of the same, being thereto provoked by the most noble
and virtuous example of my most noble Master. King Henry the viij. whose health
I heartely pray God as long to preserve as GOD has constituted man's life to
contin(...): for his highness has not disdayned to be the chief author and
setter forth of an introduction into Grammar, for the children of his loving
subjects, whereby having good masters, they shall most easily and in short time
apprehend the understanding and form of speaking true and eloquent latin. O
royal heart, full of very nobility. O noble breast, setting forth virtuous
doctrine, and laudable study.

But yet one thing much greeueth me, that notwithstanding I have ever honored
and specially favored the reverend College of approved Physicians, yet some
of them hearing me spoken of have said in derision, that although I were
pretily seen in historics, yet being not learned in Physic, I have put in my
book diverse errors, in presuming to write of herbs and medicines. First as
concerning histories, as I have planted them in my works, being well
understood, they be not so light of importance, as they do esteem them, but
may more su^ely cure men's affections then diverse Physicians do eure maladies.
Nor when I wrote first this book, I was not all ignorant in physic. For
before that I was twenty years old, a worshipful Physician, and one of the
most renoumed at that time in England, perceiving me by nature inclined to
knowledge, read unto me the works of Galen, of temperaments, natural
faculties, the introduction of Iohannicius, with some of the Aphorisms of
Hipocrates, And afterward by mine own study, I read over in order the more
part of the works of Hipocrates, Galen, Oribasius, Pa^lus Celsus, Alexander
Trallianus, Celsus, Plimus, the one and the other, with Dioscorides. Nor did I
omit to read the long Canons of A^icen^^, the commentaries of Aucrrois, the
practices of Isake, Haliabhas, Rasis, Mesue and also of the more part of them
which were their aggregators and followers. And although I have never been at
Mountpellier, Pad^a, nor Sale^ne, yet have I found some thing in Physic,
whereby I have taken no little profit concerning mine own health. Moreover I
wot not why Physicians should be angry with me, since I wrote and did set forth
the Castle of Health for their commodity, that the uncertain tokens of
vrines, and other excrements should not deceive them, but that by the true
information of the sick man, by me instructed, they might be the more sure to
prepare medicines convenient for the diseases.

Also to the intent that men observing a good order in diet, and preventing the
great causes of sickness, they should of those maladies the sooner be cured. But
if Physicians be angry, that I have written Physic in English, let them
remember that the Greeks wrote in Greek, the Romans in Latin, Auicenna and
the other in Arabike, which were their own proper and maternall tongues. And
if they had been as much attached with envy and couetise, as some now seem to
be, they would have devised some particular language with a strange cipher or
form of letters, wherein they would have written their science, which
language or letters no man should have known, that had not professed and
practiced Physic: but those although they were Paynims and Jews, yet in this
part of charity they far surmounted us Christians, they that would not have so
necessary a knowledge as Physic is, to be hid from them which would be
studious about it.

Finally God is my ^^dge, I writ neither for glory, rewa^^le, nor promotion,
only I desire men to deem well mine intent, since I dare assure them, that all
that I have written in this book, I have gathered of most principal writers
in Physic. Which being thoroughly studied, and remembered, shall be profitable
(I doubt not) unto the reader, and nothing noyous to honest Physicians, that
do measure their study, with moderate living and christian charity.

A Table of the special things, which are contained in this Book.
A
ANnexed to things natural. Fol. 2. 36. Ages. 16. 59 Air. 2. 18 Apples. 30
Almonds. 32 Anyse seed. 36 Ale. 54 Abstinence. 83 Affects of the mind. 95
Autumn. 38
B
Blood. 12 Beetes. 35 Birds. 44 Brain exceeding in heat. 5 Brain exceeding
in cold. 6 Brain moist. ibidem. Brain dry. ibidem. Brain hot and moist.
ibidem. Brain hot and dry. 7 Brain cold and moist. ibidem. Brain cold and
dry. ibidem. Brain sick. 129 Breast sick. ibidem. Beef, 42 Beans. 37.
Breakefast. 64 Bloudsuckers. 94 Bourage. 39 Bread. 41 Black bird. 45 Bustard.
ibidem. Bittour, ibidem. Brain of beasts. 47 Butter. 48 Beer. 54 By what
tokens one may know whether the stomach and head be hot or cold. 121
C
COnsiderations of things belonging to health. 1 Complexions of man. 3
Choberike body. 4 Choler. 13 Choler natural. 14 Choler (...)nnaturall.
ibidem, Color. 17 Color of inward causes. ibidem. Color of outward causes.
ibidem. Color of vrines. 130 Color of hair. 17 Causes whereby the air is
corrupted. 18 Custom. 24 Commodity happening by moderate use of the qualities
of meat. 26 Cucumbers. 28 Cheries. 30 Chestnuts. 32 Capers. 33 Colewortes and
cabages. 34 Cycory. ibidem. Cheruile. 35 Carretes. 38 Considerations in
abstinence. 83 Cloves. 41 Conny. 43 Capons, hens, and chickens. 44 Crane. 45
Cheese. 48 Cider. 54 Confortatlues of the heart. 103 Children. 102 Counsels
against ingratitude. 100 Chances of fortune. 102 Crudity. 112 Concoction.
ibidem.
D
DIstemperature happening by excess of sundry qualities of meats. 26 Dear
red and falow. 43 Dates. 28 Ducke. 45 Diversity of meats. 65 Digestiues of
choler. 89 Digestiues of fleame. 90 Diet concerning sundry times of the year.
59 Dominion of sundry complexions. 104 Diet of sanguine persons. 107 Diet of
cholerike persons. ibidem. Diet of fleumaticke persons. 109 Diet of
melancholic persons. 110 Diet of them which be ready to fall into sickness.
126 Diet in time of pestilence. 137 Drink between meals. 64 Drink at
meals. 69 Digested. 82 Death of children. 102
E
Elements. 2 Earth. ibidem. Endive. 35 Eggs. 48 Exercise. 72. and 75
Euacuation. 81 Excrementes. 82
F
FLeumaticke body. 4 Fire. 2 Fleame. 13 Fleame natural. ibidem. Fleame
unnatural. ibidem. Fruits. 27 Figs. 29 Fenell. 36 Fylberdes. 32 Flesh. 42
Fesant. 44 Feet of beasts. 47 Fish. 48 Fricasics or rubbings. 73
G
GEnitories hot. 11 Genitories cold. ibidem. Genitories moist. ibidem.
Genitories dry. ibidem. Genitories hot and moist. ibidem. Genitories hot and
dry. ibidem. Genitories cold and moist. 12 Genitories cold and dry. ibidem.
Gourdes. 27 Grapes. 29 Garlike. 38 Ginger. 41 Goose. 45 Gysar of birds. 46
Gluttonic. 67 Gestation. 77
H
Heart ^oat distempered. 7 Heart cold distempered. 8 Heart moist distempered.
ibidem. Heart dry distempered. ibidem. Heart hot and moist. ibidem. Heart hot and
dry. ibidem. Heart cold and moist. 9 Heart cold and dry. ibidem. Heart sick. 129
Humors. 12 Humor superfluous. 82 Herbs used in potage or to eat. 33 Hare. 43
Hearon. 45 Heart of beasts. 46 Head of beasts. 47 Hasyll nuttes. 32 Honey. 55
Hemeroides or pyles. 95 Heaviness or sorrow. 98
I
ISope. 39 Joy. 103 Ire. 96
K
KIdde. 43
L
Liver in heat distempered. 9 Liver cold distempered, ibidem. Liver moist
distempered. ibidem. Liver dry distempered. ibidem. Liver sick. 129 Lettise.
33 Leekes. 38 Lamb. 42 Lark. 44 Lyuers of birds and beasts. 46 Lunges of
beasts. ibidem. Letting of blood. 91 Leaches or blood succkers. 94 Loss of
goods. 102 Lack of promotion. ibidem. Lassitude. 123. and 125
M
Melancholic body. 5 Melancholy. 14 Melancholy natural. ibidem. Melancholy
unnatural. ibidem. Members isntrumental. 15 Meat and drink. 19 Meats
making good juice. ibidem. Meats making ill juice. 20. Meats making thick
juice. ibid. 21. Meats making choler. 20 M(...)king fleume. ibidem.
(...)gendring melancholy. ibid. Meats hurting the teeth. 21 Meats hurting the
eyes. ibidem. Meats making opilations. 22 Meats windy. ibidem. Melons. 27
Medlars. 31 Mallows. 35 Mutton. 42 Moderation in dies. 62 Meaies. 63 M^ces. 41
Members of birds. 46 Mylt or spleen. ibidem. Marowe. 47 Milk. 52
N
NVtmegges. 41 Nauewes. 37
O
Official members. 75 Operations. 16 Olyues. 32 Orenges. 33 Onions. 38 Order
in eating and drinking. 68 Oppilations what they are. 61 Obstruction or
rupture. ibidem. Old men. 61 Ordure. 82
P
Principal members. 14 Parts similaries. 14 Powers natural. 15 Powers
spiritual, ibidem. Powers animal. 16 Pepons. 27 Peaches. 30 Pears. 31
Pourslane. 35 Parseley. 36 Purgers of choler. 89 Purgers of fleume. 90 Purgers
of melancholy. ibidem. Precebtes of Diocles. 133 Pomegranates. 31 Prunes. 32
Peason. 37 Parsneppes. 38 Peniroyall. 40 Pepper. ibidem. Partridge. 44 Plouer.
45 Pigeons. ibidem. Particular commodities of every purgation, 87 Peculiar
remedies of every humor. 106 Purgations by siege. 86. and 87.
Q
QVantie of meat. 22 Quality of meat. 22. 23. 24 Quinces. 30 Quails. 44
R
RAisons. 29 Rapes. 37 Radish. 38 Rokat. 39 Rosemarie. 40 Replerian. 80 Rheumes
and remedies therefore. 116
S
SAnguine body. 3 Stomach hot. 10 Stomach cold. ibidem. Stomach moist.
ibidem. Stomach dry. ibidem. Spirit natural. 15 Spirit vital. ibidem.
Spirit animal. 16 Stones of beasts. 47 Sorell. 36 Sage. 39 Stomach in the
which meat is corrupted. 130 Stomach sick. 129 Sleep and watch. 70 Sauery.
39 Saffron. 41 Swines flesh. 42 Sparrowes. 45 Shouelar. ibidem. Supper. 63
Sugar. 56 Syrope acetose. 126 Springtime. 57 Summer. 58 Scarifying. 93
Sicknesses appropried to sundry seasons and ages. 126 Significations of
sickness. 128 Substance of vrines. 131 Spices. 40
T
THings natural. 1 Things not natural. ibidem 18 Things against nature. (...)
Things good for the head. 21 Things good for the heart. ibidem. Things good for
the liver. 22 Things good for the lunges. ibidem. Things good for the eyes.
ibidem. Things good for the stomach. ibid. Temperature of meats. 25
Turneppes. 37 Time. 39 Towncresses. 40 Trypes. 46 Tongue of beasts. 47 Time.
57. and 58 Times in the day concerning meals 63 Times appropried to every
humor 105
V
VEale. 43 Venison. ibidem. Vdder. 47 Vociferation. 78 Vomit. 84 Vrines. 130
Virtue of meats. 136
W
WYndes. 18 Wal^^^s. 31 Woodcockes. 45 Water. (...) VVynter. (...) Wine. 51
VVhay. 55
Y
Young man. 60
Thus ends the Table.
The first Book of the Castle of Health.
TO the conservation of the body of mankind, within the limitation of health,
(which as Galen says) is the state of the body, wherein we be neither grieved
with pain, nor let from doing our necessary business, does belong the
diligent consideration of three sorts of things, that is to say:

Things natural. Things not natural, and Things against nature.
Things natural be 7. in number.

Elements. Complexions. Humors. Members. Powers. Operations. Spirits.
These be necessary to the being of health, according to the order of their
kind, and be always in the natural body.

Things not natural be 6 in number.

Air. Meats and drink. Sleep and watch. Moving and rest. Emptines and
repletion. Affects of the mind.
Things against nature be three.

Sickness. Cause of sickness. Accident which follows sickness.
Annexed to things natural.

Age, Color, Figure, and diversity of kinds.

The elements be those original things unmixed and vncompound, of whose
temperance and mixture, all other things having corporal substance, be
com^act. Of them be four, that is to say:

Earth. Water. Air. Fire.
Earth is the most gross and ponderous element, and of her proper nature is
cold and dry.

Water is more subtle and light then earth, but in respect of Air and fire,
it is gross and heavy, and of her proper nature is cold and moist.

Air is more light and subtle than the other two, and being not altered with
any exterior cause, is properly hot and moist.

Fire is absolutely light and clear, and is the clarifier of other elements,
if they be vitiat or out of their natural temperance, and is properly hot
and dry.

This is to be remembered, that none of the said elements be commonly seen or
felt of mortal men, as they are in their original being: but they which by
our senses be perceived, be corrupted with mutual mixture, and be rather
earthly, waterie, airie, and fiery, than absolutely earth, water, air, and
fire.

Of the complexion of man. CAP. 2.
COmplerion is a combination of two diverse qualities of the four elements in
one body, as hot and dry of the fire, hot and moist of the air, cold and
moist of the water, cold and dry of the earth. But although all these
complexions be assembled in every body of man and woman, yet the body takes
his denomination of those qualities which abound in him, more than in the
other, as hereafter ensues.

The body, where heat and moisture have soueraintie, is called Sanguine,
wherein the air has pre-eminence, and it is perceived and known by these
signs, which do follow.

Sanguine. Carnosttie or fleshinesse. The veins and arteries large. Hair
plenty and red. The visage white and ruddie. Sleep much. Dreams of bloody
things, or things pleasant. Pulse great and full. Digestion perfect. Angry
shortly. Siege, urine, and sweat abundant. Falling shortly into bleeding. The
urine red and gross.

Where cold with moisture prevails, that body is called fleumatike, wherein
water has pre-eminence, and is perceived by these signs following.

Fleumatike. Fatnes quauing and soft. Ueines narrow. Hair much and plain.
Color white. Sleep superfluous, Dreams of things waterie or fish. Slownesse.
Dullness in learning. Cowardice. Pulse slow and little. Digestion weak.
Spettle white, abundant, and thick urine gross, white and pale.

Choleric, is hate and dry, in whom the fire has pre-eminence, and is
discerned by these signs following.

Cholerike. Leannes of body. Costifenesse. Hair black or dark, aburne,
curled. Uisage and skin red as fire, or salowe. Hot things noyfull to him.
Little sleep. Dreams of fire, fighting, or anger. Wit sharp and quick.
Hardy, and fighting. Pulse swift and strong. Urine high colored and clear.
Uoyce sharp.

Melancholic is cold and dry, over whom the earth has dominion, and is
perceived by these signs following.

Melancholic. Leannes with hardness of skin. Hair plain and thin. Color
duskish, or white with leannes. Much watch. Dreams fearful. Stiff in
opinions. Digestion slow and ill. Timorous and fearful. Anger long fretting.
Pulse little. Seldom laughing. Urine waterie and thin.

BEsides the said complexions of all the whole body, there be the particular
members complexion, wherein if there be any distemperance, it brings
sickness or grief into the member: wherefore to know the distemperature,
these signs following would be considered. Foreseen that it be remembered,
that some distemperatures be simple, and some be compound. They which be
simple, be in simple qualities, as in heat, cold, moist, or dry.

They which be compound, are in compound or mixed qualities, as heat and
moisture: heat and drith: cold and moist: cold and dry. But now first will we
speak of the simple complexions of every principal member, beginning at the
brain.

The brain exceeding in heat, has The head and visage very red and hot. The
hair growing fast, black and curled. The veins in the eyes apparent.
Superfluous matter in the nosethrils, eyes, and ears. The head much annoyed we
hot meats, drinks, and savors. Sleep short and not sound.

The brain exceeding in cold, has Much superfluity running out of ye nose,
mouth, ears and eyes. Hair straight and fine, growing slowly and flaxen. The
head disposed by small occasion to poses and murres. It is soon annoyed with
cold. It is cold in touching. Ueines of the eyes not seen. Sleepie somewhat.

Moist in excess, has Hairs plain. Seldom or never balde. Wit dull. Much
superfluities. Sleep much and deep.

The brain dry, has No superfluities running. Wits good and ready.
Watchful. Hairs black, hard, and fast growing. Bald shortly.

Complexions compounded.
Brain hot and moist distempered, has The head aching and heavy. Full of
superfluities in the nose. The Southern wind grievous. The Northern wind
wholesome. Sleep deep, but unquiet, with often waknings, and strange
dreams. The senses and wit imperfect.

Brain hot and dry distempered, has None abundance of superfluity which
may be expelled. Senses perfect. Much watch. Sooner bald then other. Much hair
in childhoode, and black or brown and curled. The head hot and ruddie.

Brain cold and moist distempered, has The sense and wit dull. Much sleep.
The head soon replenished with superfluous moisture. Distillations and poses,
or murres. Not shortly balde. Soon hurt with cold.

Brain cold and dry distempered, has The head cold in feeling, and without
color. The veins not appearing. Soon hurt with cold. Often disgraced. Wit
perfect in childhood, but in age dull. Aged shortly and balde.


Of the Heart.
The heart hot distempered, has Much blowing and pu^^ing. Pulse swift and
busy. Hardiness and manhood. Much promptness, actiuitie, and quickness in
doing of things. Fury and boldness. The breast hairie toward the left side.
The breast broad and the head little. The body hot, except the liver do let
it.

The heart cold diste^pered, has The pulse very little. The breath little and
slow. The breast narrow. The body al cold, except ye liver do inflame it*
Fearefulnes. Scrupulositie and much care. Curiosity. Slownesse in acts. The
breast clean without hairs.

The heart moist diste^pered, has The pulse soft. Soon angry, and soon
pacified. The body al moist, except the liver disposes contrary.

The heart dry distempered, has The pulse hard. Not lightly angry, but being
angry, not soon pacified. The body dry except the liver does dispose
contrary.

The heart hot and moist, has The breast and stomach hairie. Promptnes in
acts. Soon angry. Fiercenes, but not so much as in hot and dry. Pulse soft,
swift and busy. Breath or wind according, shortly falls into diseases
caused of putrifactio^.

The heart hot and dry. The heart pulse great and swift. The breath or wind
according. The breast and stomach all hairie. Quick in his doings. Boldness and
hardness. Swift, and hasty in moving. Soon stirred to anger, and tyrannous in
manners. The breast broad, and all the body hot and dry.

The heart cold and moist, has The pulse soft. Fearful and timorous. Slow.
The breast clean without hair. Not hastily angry, nor retaining anger. The
breast narrow. All the body cold and moist.

The heart cold and dry, has The pulse hard and little. The wind moderate.
Seldom angry, but when it happens it dureth long. The breast clean without
hair and little. All the body cold and dry.


Of the Liver.
The liver in heat distempered, has The veins great. The blood more hot then
temperate. The belly hairie. All the body hot exceeding temperate.

The liver cold distempered, has The veins great. Abundance of fleame. The
blood cold. All the body cold in feeling. The belly without hair.

The liver moist diste^pered, has The veins soft. Much blood and thin. All
the body moist in feeling, except the heart disposes it contrary.

The liver dry distempered, has The veins hard. The blood little and thick.
All the body dry.


The complerions compound may be discerned by the said simple qualities. And
here is to be noted, that the heat of the heart may vanquish the cold of the
liver. For heat is in the heart, as in the fountain or spring: and in the
liver, as in the river.

Of the stomach.
The stomach hot distempered. He digesteth well, especially hard meats, and
that will not be shortly altered. Light meats and soon altered, be therein
corrupted. The appetite little and slow. He delights in meats and drinks
which be hot: for every natural complexion delights in his semblable.

The stomach cold distempered. He has good appetite. He digesteth ill and
slowly, specially gross meats and hard. Cold meats do wax sour, being in
him undigested. He delights in meats and drinks which be cold, and yet in
them he is indamaged.

The stomach moist distempered. He thirsts but seldom, yet he desires to
drink, with superfluous drink he is hurt. He delights in moist meats.

The stomach dry distempered. He is soon thirsty. Content with a little
drink. Diseased with much drink. He delights in dry meats.


It is to be noted, that the dispositions of the stomach natural, do desire
that which is of like qualities. The dispositions unnatural, do desire things
of contrary qualities.

Also not the stomach only causes a man to thirst, or not thirst, but also
the liver, the lungs, and the heart.

Of the genitories or stones of generation.
The genitories hot distempered, have Great appetite to the act of generation.
Ingendring men children. Hair soon grown about the members.

The genitories cold distempered, have Small appetite to the act of generation.
Ingendring women children. Slow growth of hair about the members.

The genitories moist distempered, have Seed abundant, but thin and watrie.
The genitories dry distempered, have Seed little, but meetly thick in
substance.
Genitories hot and moist, have Less appetite to lechery than in the^ which
be hot and dry. More puissance to do it, and without less damage. Hurt by
abstaining from it. Less hairines than in hot and dry.

The genitories hot and dry, have The seed thick. Much fruitfulnes of
generation. Great appetite and readiness to the act. Hair about the members
soon grown. Swiftnes in speeding of the act. Soon there with satisfied.
Damage by using thereof.

The genitories cold and moist, have The seed waterie and thin. Little desire
to the act, but more puissance then in them which be cold and dry. Little
hair or none about the members.

The genitories cold and dry, have Hairs none or few. Little appetite or
none to lechery. Little puissance to do it. Ingendring more females than men
children. That little seed is thicker than in cold and moist.


Of Humors.
IN the body of man be four principal humors, which continuing in the
proportion, that nature has li(...)ted, the body is free from all sickness.
Contrariwise, by the increase or diminutio^ of any of them in quantity or
quality, over or under their natural assignement, unequal temperature
comes into the body, which sickness follows more or less according to
the lapse or decay of the temperatures of the said humors, which be these
following.

Blood, Fleume, Choler, Melancholy.
Blood has pre-eminence over all other humors in susteining of all living
creatures, for it has more co^formitie with the original cause of living, by
reason of temperatnes in heat and moisture, also nourishes more the body,
and restores that which is decayed, being the very treasure of life, by loss
whereof death immediately follows. The distemperature of blood happens by
one of the other three humors, by the inordinate or superfluous mixture of
them.

Of Fleume.
Fleume is of two sorts. Natural, and unnatural.
Natural fleume is a humor cold and moist, white and sweet, or without
taste, engendered by insufficient decoction in the second digestion of the
waterie or raw parts of the matter decoct, called Chilus, by the last
digestion made apt to be converted into blood. In this humor water has
dominion most principal.

Fleume unnatural is that which is mixed with other humors, or is altered in
his quality: and thereof is eight sundry kinds.

Fleume. Watrie, which is found in spettle of great drinkers, of them which
digest it. Slimy or raw. Glasie like to white glass, thick. Uiscous like
bird-lime and heavy. Plaistrie which is very gross, and as it were chalkie,
such is found in the joints of them which have the gowte. Salt that is mingled
with choler. Sower mixed with melancholy, that comes of corrupt digestion.
Harsh, thick and gross, which is seldom found, which tastes like green
crabs or slowes. Stiptick or binding is not so gross nor cold, as harsh, and
has the taste like to green red wine, or other like straining ye tongue.

Choler does participate with natural heat as long as it is in good
temperance. And thereof is also two kinds. Natural, and unnatural.

Choler natural. Natural choler is the foam of blood, the color whereof is
red and clear, or more like to an orange color, and it is hot and dry,
wherein the fire has dominion: and is light and sharp, and is engendered of
the most subtle part of matter decoct or boiled in the stomach, whose
beginning is in ye liver.
Unnatural choler is that which is mixed or corrupted with other humors,
whereof be four kinds.

Citrine or yellow choler, which is the mixture of natural choler, and watrie
fleume: and therefore has less heat then other choler.

Yolkie like the yelks of eggs, which is of the mixture of (...) conge(...)d,
and ^^oler natural, and is yet less hot then the other.

Green like unto leekes, whose beginning is rather of the stomach then of the
liver.

Green like to green canker of metal, and burns like venime, and is of
exceeding (...)stion of choler or fleume, and by those two (...)ds nature is
mortified.

Melancholy or black choler in divided into two kinds.
Natural, which is the dregs of pure blood, and is known by the blacknes
when it issues either downward or upward, and is verily cold or dry.
Unnatural, which pr(...)death of the adustion of cholerike mixture, and is
hoter and lighter, having in it violence to kill, with a dangerous disposition.
Of the Members.
There be (...) of members: that is to say,
The brain. The liver. The heart. The stones of generation.
Official members. Synewes which do serve to the brain. Arteries or pulses,
which do serve to the heart. Ueines which do serve to the liver. Uessels
spermaticke, wherein man's seed lies, which do serve to the stones.

Parts called Similares, for being divided, they remain in themselves like as
they were. Bones. Gristell. Cales betwixt the uttermost skin and the flesh.
Muscules or fillets. Fat flesh.

Members isntrumental. The stomach. The raines. The bowels. All the great
synewes.

These of their virtue do appetite meat and alter it.

Of powers. Animal. Spiritual. Natural.

Natural power. Which do minister. To whom is ministered.

Which does minister. Appetiteth. Retains. Digesteth. Expels.

To whom is ministered. Ingendreth. Nourishes. Feeds.

Power spiritual. Working, which dilateth the heart and arteries, and
eftsoons streineth them. Wrought, which is stirred by an exterior cause to
work, whereof comes anger, indignation, subtlety and care.

Power animal That which ordains, decerneth and composeth. That moves by
voluntary motion. That which is called sensible, whereof do proceed the five
wits.

Of that which ordains do proceed Imagination in the forehead. Reason in
the brain. Remembrance in the noddle.

Operations, Appetite by heat and drith. Digestion by heat and moisture.
Retaining by cold and drith. Expulsion by cold and moist.

Spirit is an ayrie substance, subtle, stirring the powers of the body, to
perform their operations, which is divided into

Natural, which takes his beginning of the liver, and by the veins which
have no pulse, spreads into the whole body. Uitall, which proceeds from
the heart, and by the arteries or pulses is sent into the whole body. Animal,
which is engendered in the brain, and is sent by the synewes throughout the
body, and makes sense or feeling.
Annexed to things natural.
Ages, be 4. Adolescentie to 25. years, hot and moist, in the which time the
body grows. Iuuentute unto 40. years, hot and dry, wherein the body is
in perfect growth. Senectute unto 60. years, cold and dry, wherein the body
begins to decrease.


Age decrepite until the next time of life, accidently moist, but naturally
cold and dry, wherein the powers and strength of the body be more and more
minished.

Color.
Of inward causes. Of outward causes.
Colors of inward causes. Of equality of humors, as he that is red and
white. Of inequality of humors, whereof do proceed black, salowe, pale, or
white only. Black Red Salow
do betoken dominion of heat.
White, cold fleume. Pale, cold melancholy. Red, abundance of blood. Salow,
choler citrine. Black, melancholy or choler adust.

Color of outward causes. Of cold or heat, as English men be white, Moors
be black. Of things accidental, as of fear, of anger, of sorrow, or other
like motions.

Color of hair. Black, either of abundance of choler inflamed, or of much
incending or adustion of blood. Red hair of much heat, not adust. Gray hairs
of abundance of melancholy. White hairs of the lack of natural heat, and by
occasion of fleume putrified.

All the residue concerning things natural contained in the Introduction of
Ioannitius, and in the little craft of Galen, I purposely pass over for this
time, for as much as it does require a reader having some knowledge in
philosophy natural, or else, it is hard and tedious to be understood. Moreover,
this which I have written in this first table, shall be sufficient to the
conservation of health, I mean with that which now follows in the other
tables.

The second Table.
THings not natural be so called, because they be no portion of a natural
body, as they be, which be called natural things, but yet by the temperance
of them, the body being in health, so consists: by the distemperance of
them, sickness is induced, and the body dissolved.

The first of things not natural, is air, which is properly of it self, or
of some material cause or occasion good or ill.

That which is of it self good, has pure vapors and is odoriferous.

Also it is of it self, swift in alteration from hot and cold, wherein the
body is not much provoked to sweat for heat, ne too chill for vehemency of
cold.

Air among al things not natural is chiefly to be observed, for as much as it
does enclose us, and also enter into our bodies, specially the most notable
member, which is the heart, and we cannot be separated one hour from it, for ye
necessity of breathing and fetching of wind.

The causes whereby the air is corrupted be specially sour.

Influence of sundry stars. Great standing waters never refreshed. Carraine
lying long above ground. Much people in small room lying uncleanly and
sluttishly.
Wind bringing wholesome air. North which prolongeth life, by expulsing ill
vapors. East is temperate and lusty.

Wind bringing ill air. South corrupts and makes ill vapors. West is very
mutable, which nature does hate.

Meats and drinks.
In meat and drink we must consider six things.
Substance. Quantity. Quality. Custom. Time. Order.
Substance, some is good, which makes good juice and good blood: some is ill,
and ingendreth ill juice and ill blood.

Meats and drinks making good juice.
Bread of pure flower, of good wheat somewhat uened, well baked, not too old,
nor too stale. Eggs of Fesants, Hens, Partriches, new laid, leapotched,
mean between rere and hard. Milk new milked drunk fasting, wherein is Sugar
or the leaves of mints. Fesants, Partriches or Chickens. Capons or Hens,
Birds of the fields. Fish of stony rivers, Ueale sucking. Porke young, Beef
not passing three years old. Pigeons, Uenison of red Dear. Pease pottage with
mints, Feet of swine or calves. Figs ripe, Bourage, Raisons.
before meals.
Languedebeefe, Parsley, Mints. Rice with Almond milk. Lettice, Cicorie,
Grapes. Wines good moderatly taken, well fined. Ale and Beer six days old,
clean brewed and not strong. Mirth with gladness. The liver and brains of
Hens and Chickens, and young Geese.
Meats and drinks making ^ll juice.
Old beef, Old mutton, Geese old, Swan old. Duckes of the (...)ell, Inwards of
beasts. Black puddings. The heart, liver, and kidneies of all beasts. The
brains and marow of the back bone. Wood culuers, Shelfish, except Creuise de
eau dulce. Cheese hard, Apples and pears much used. Figs and grapes notripe.
All raw herbs, except Lettice, Borage and Cicorie. Onions, Garlike, Leekes,
Immoderatly used, specially in choleric stomachs.
Wine mustie and sour. Fear, sorrow, and pensiuenes.
Meats ingendring choler.
Garlike, Onions, Roket, ^ersis, Leekes, Mustard. Pepper, Honey, Wine much
drunken, Sweet meats.
Meats ingendring fleume.
All slimie and cleaving meats, Cheese new. All fish, specially in a
fleumatike stomach. Inwards of beasts, Lambs flesh. The stnew parts of flesh,
Skins, Brains, Lungs. Rapes, Cucumbers, Repletion, Lack of exercise.
Meats ingendring Melancholy.
Beef, Goats flesh, Hares flesh, Boares flesh. Salt flesh, Salt fish,
Coleworts. All pulse, except white peason, Brown bread course. Thick wine,
Black wine, Old cheese, Old flesh. Great fishes of the sea.
Meats making thick juice.
Rye bread mustie, Bread without leaven, Cake bread. Sea fish great, Shell
fish, Beef the kidneis. The liver of a swine, The stones of beasts. Milk much
sodden, Rapes, All round roots. Cucumbers, Sweet wine, Deep red wine,
Garlike, Mustard, Origanum, Hysope, Basil, Fenell, Cheese, Eggs fried or
hard, Chestnuts, Nauewes. Figs green, Apples not ripe, Pepper, Roket.
Leekes, Onions, much used.
Meats which do hurt the teeth.
Uery hot meats, Nuts, Sweet meats and drinks. Radish roots, Hard meats,
Milk, Bitter meats. Much vomit, Leekes, Fish fat, Limons, Coleworts.
Things hurtful to the eyes.
Drunkenness, Lechery, Must, All pulse. Sweet wines and thick wines,
Hempseede. Uery salt meats, Garlike, Onions, Coleworts. Radish, Reading after
supper immediately.
Making great opilations.
Thick milk, All sweet things. Rye bread, Sweet wines.
Meats inflating or windy.
Beans, Lupines, Cicer, Mill, Cucumbers. All juice of herbs, Figs dry,
Rapes, Nauewes raw. Milk, Honey not well clarified, Must.
Things good for the head.
Cubebes, Galingale, Lignum aloes, Marioram. Baulme mints, Gladen, Nutmegges,
Musk. Rosemary, Roses, Pyony, Hysope, Spike, Camomill. Mellilete, Rue,
Frankincense.
Things good for the heart.
Cinamom, Saffron, Coral, Cloves, Lignum aloes, Pearls, Macis, Baulme mints,
Myrabolanes, Musk, Nutmegs, Rosemary. The bone of the heart of the red Dear.
Marioram, Buglosse, Bourage, Setwall.
Things good for the Liver.
Wormwood, Withwind, Agrimonie, Saffron. Cloves, Endive, Liuerwort, Cicorie,
Plaintaine. Dragons, Raisons great, Saunders, Fenell. Uiolets, Rose water,
Lettice.
Things good for the Lungs.
Elicampane, Hysope, Scabiose, Licorise, Raisons, Maidenhaire, Penidies,
Almonds, Dates, Pistaces.
Things good for the eyes.
Eyebright, Fenell, Ueruaine, Roses, Celendine. Agrimony, Cloves, Cold water.
Things good for the stomach.
Myrabolanes, Nutmegs, Organum, Pistaces. Quinces, Olibanum, Wormwood, Saffron,
Coral. Agrimony, Fumetorie, Galingale, Cloves. Lignum aloes, Mastix, Mint,
Spodium. The innermost skin of a Hens gysar. Coriander prepared.
The second Book of the Castle of Health.
Of quantity. CAP. 1.
THe quantity of meat must be portioned after the substance and quality
thereof, and according to the complexion of him that eats.

First it ought to be remembered, that meats hot and moist which are qualities
of the blood, are soon turned into blood, and therefore much nourishes the
body. Some meats do nourish but little, having little conformity with blood
in their qualities. Of them which do nourish: some are more gross, some
lighter in digestion. The gross meat ingendreth gross blood, but where it is
well concoct in the stomach and well digested, it makes the flesh more firm,
and the official members more strong then fine meats. Wherefore of men which
use much labor or exercise, also of them which have very cholerike stomachs
here in England, gross meats may be eaten in a great quantity: and in a
cholerike stomach, beef is better digested then a chickens leg, for as much
as in a hot stomach fine meats be shortly adust and corrupted. Contrariwise,
in a cold or fleumatike stomach gross meat abides long vudigested, and
makes putrified matter: light meats therefore to such a stomach be more apt
and convenient.

The temperate body is best nourished with a little quantity of gross
meats, but of temperate meats in substance and quality they may safely eat
a good quantity: foreseen always that they eat without gourmandise, or leave
without appetite. And here it would be remembered, that the cholerike stomach
does not desire so much as he may digest: the melancholy stomach may not
digest so much as he desires: for cold makes appetite, but natural heat
concocteth or boyleth. Notwithstanding, unnatural or supernatural heat
destroys appetite and corrupts digestion, as it appears in fevers.
Moreover, fruits and herbs, specially raw, would be eaten in a small
quantity, although the person be very cholerike, for as much as they do
engender thin watrie blood apt to receive putrification, which although it be
not shortly perceived of him that uses it, at length they feel it by sundry
diseases which are long in coming, and shortly sleieth, or be hardly escaped.
Finally, excess of meats is to be abhorred. For as it is said in the book
called Ecclesiasticus: In much meat shall be sickness, and inordinate appetite
shall approach unto choler. Semblably the quantity of drink would be
moderated, that it exceed not, nor be equal unto the quantity of meat,
specially wine which moderatly taken, aydeth nature, and comfort her: and as
the said author of Ecclesiasticus says: Wine is a rejoicing to the soul and
body. And Theogines says, in Galens work: A large draught of wine is ill, a
moderate draught is not evil, but commodious and profitable.

Of quality of meats. CAP. 2.
Quality is the complexio^, that is to say, it is the state thereof, as hot,
cold, moist, or dry. And some meats be in winter cold in act, and in virtue
hot.

And it would be considered, that every complexion te^perate and intemperate,
is co^serued in his state, by that which is like thereto in form and degree.
But that which exceeds much in distemperance, must be reduced to his
temperance, by that which is contrary to him in form or quality, but like in
degree moderatly used. By form is understood grossenes, finenes, thicknes, or
thinnes, by degree, as the first, the second, the third, the fourth in heat,
cold, moisture, or drith.

Of custom.
Custom in feeding is not to be contemned, or little regarded: for those
meats, to the which a man has been of long time accustomed, though they be
not of substance commendable, yet do they sometime less harm then better
meats, whereunto a man is not used. Also the meats and drinks, which do much
delight him that eats, are to be preferred before that which is better, but
more unsavory. But if ye custom be so pernicious, that it needs must be
left, then would it be withdrawn by little and little in time of health, and
not of sickness. For if it should be withdrawn in time of sickness, nature
should sustain treble detriment, first by the grief induced by sickness:
secondly, by receiving of medicines: thirdly, by forbearing the thing wherein
she delights.

Of the temperature of meats to be received. CAP. 4.
TO keep the body in good temper, to them whose natural complexion is moist,
ought to be given meats that be moist in virtue, or power: contrariwise to
them, whose natural complexion is dry, ought to be given meats dry in
virtue, or power. To bodies intemperate, such meats or drinks, which be in
power contrary to the distemperance, but the degrees are always to be
considered as well of the temperance of the body, as of the meats. For where
the meats do much exceed in degree the temperature of the body, they annoy
the body in causing distemperance. As hot wines, pepper, garlike, onyons, and
Salt, be noyfall to them which be cholerike, because they be in the highest
degree of heat and drith above the just temperance of man's body in that
complexion. And yet be they oftentimes wholesome to them which be fleumatike.
Contrariwise, cold water, cold herbs, and cold fruits moderatly used, be
wholesome to cholerike bodies, by putting away the heat, exceeding the
natural temperature, and to them which be fleumatike they be unwholesome,
and do bring into them distemperance of cold and moist.

What distemperance happens by the excess of sundry qualities in meats and
drinks. CAP. 5.
Meats. Cold, do congeale and mortify. Moist, do putrify and hasten age.
Dry, sucketh up natural moisture. Clanmie, stops the issue of vapors and
urine, and ingendreth rough fleume and grauel. Fat and oily swimmeth long in ye
stomach, and brings in lothsomnes. Bitter, does not nourish. Salt, do fret
much the stomach. Harrish, like the taste of wild fruits, do constipate and
restrain. Sweet chaseth the blood, and causes opilations or stoppings of the
pores and conduites of the body. Sower cools nature, and hasteneth age.

What commodity happens by the moderate use of the said quality of meats
and drinks. CAP. 6.
Meats. Cold asswageth the burning of choler. Moist, humecteth that which is
dried. Dry, consumes superfluous moisture. Cla^my, thicketh yt which is subtle
and pearcing. Bitter, cleanses and wipeth off, also mollifieth and expels
fleume. Salt, relenteth fleume clammy, and dries it. Fat and unctuous,
nourishes and makes soluble. Stiptike or rough on the tongue, binds and
comfort appetite. Sweet does cleanse, dissolve, and nourish.

Of fruits. CAP. 7.
FOrasmuch as before that tillage^ of corn was invented, and that devouring of
flesh and fish was of mankind used, men undoubtedly lived by fruits, and
nature was there with contented and satisfied, but by change of the diet of our
progenitors, there is caused to be in our bodies such alteration, from the
nature which was in man at the beginning, that now all fruits generally are
noyfull to man, and do engender ill humors, and be often times the cause of
putrified fevers, if they be much and continually eaten. Notwithstanding, unto
them which have abundance of choler, they be sometime convenient to repress
the fieume which proceeds of choler. And some fruits which be stiptike or
binding in taste, eaten before meals, do bind the belly, but eaten after
meals, they be rather laxatiue. Now shall it be expedient to write of some
fruits particularly, declaring their noyfull qualities in appearing of nature,
and how they may be used with least detriment.

Of Gourds.
GOurds raw be unpleasant in eating, ill for the stomach, Galen de ^imen. 2.
and almost never digested, therefore he that must needs eat them, must boil
them, roast them, or fry them, every way they be without savor or taste, and
of their proper nature they give to the body cold and moist nourishment, and
that very little: but by reason of the slipperines of their substance, and
because al meats which be moist of their nature, be not binding, they lightly
pass forth by the belly. And being well ordered, they will be meetly concoct,
if corruption in ye stomach do not prevent them: they be cold and moist in
the second degree.

Of Melons and Pepons.
MElons and Pepons be almost of one kind, but that the Melon is round like an
Apple, and the innermost part thereof, where the seeds are contained, is used
to be eaten. The Pepon is much greater, and somewhat long, and the inner part
thereof is not to be eaten. They both are very cold and moist, and do make ill
juice in the body, if they be not well digested, but the Pepon much more then
the Melon, they do least hurt, if they be eaten before meals. Albeit if they
do find in the stomach fleume, they be turned into fleume: if they find
choler, they be turned into choler. Not withstanding, there is in them the
virtue to cleanse and to provoke urine: they be cold and moist in the second
degree.

Cucumbers.
CUcumbers do not exceed so much in moisture as Galen de alimen. 2.
Melons, and therefore they be not so soon corrupted in the stomach. But in
some stomachs, being moderatly used, they do digest well: but if they be
abundantly eaten, or much used, they engender cold and thick humors in the
veins, which never or seldom is turned into good blood, and sometime brings
in fevers. Also they abate carnal lust. The seeds as well thereof, as of
Melons and Gourds, being dried and made clean from the husks, are very
medicinable against sicknesses proceeding of heat, also the difficulty or let
in pissing: they be cold and moist in the second degree.

Dates.
BE hard to digest, therefore being much eaten and not well digested, they
annoy the head, and cause gnawing in the stomach, and makes gross juice, and
sometime cause obstructions, or stoppings in the liver and spleen. And where
there is infla^mation or hardness in the body they are unwholesome, but being
well digested and temperatly used, they nourish and make the flesh firm, and
also binds the belly: old Dates be hot and dry in the first degree: new
gathered are hot and moist in the first degree.

Of Figs.
Figs eaten do shortly pass out of the stomach, and are soon distributed
into all the parts of the body, and have the power to cleanse specially
gravel, being in the raines of the back: but they make no substantial
nourishment, but rather somewhat loose and windy, but by their quick passage,
the wind is soon dissolved. Therefore if they be ripe, they do least harm
of any fruits, or almost none. Dry figs and old, are more hot and moist
than new gathered, but being much eaten they make ill blood and juice, and as
some do suppose, do engender Lice: and also annoyeth the liver and the
spleen, if they be inflamed: but having the power to attenuate or make humors
current, they make the body soluble, and do cleanse the raines. Also being
eaten before dinner with ginger or pepper, or powder of Time, or Peniryall:
they profit much to them which have opilations or hard congealed matter in the
inner parts of the body, or have distillations or rewmes falling into the
breast and stomach. New figs are hot and moist, old figs are hot in the
first degree, and dry in the second.

Of Grapes, and Raysons.
GRapes do not nourish so much as figs, but being ripe, they make not much
ill juice in the body: albeit newly gathered they trouble the belly, and
fills the stomach with wind, therefore if they be hanged up a while, ere
they be eaten they are the less noyfull. Sweet grapes, are hottest, and do
loose somewhat, and make a man thirsty. Sour grapes are cold, and do also
loose, but they are hard of digestion; and yet they do not nourish. They which
are in taste bitter or harrish, be like to them that are sour. Raysons do
make the stomach firm and strong, and do provoke appetite, and do comfort
weak bodies: being eaten before meals, they be hot in the first degree, and
moist in the second.

Of Cheries.
CHeries if they be sweet, the do soon slip down into the stomach, but if
they be sour or sharp, they be more wholesome, and do loose: if they be eaten
fresh and newly gathered, they be cold and moist in the first degree.

Of Peaches.
PEaches do less harm, and do make better juice in the body, for they are
not so soon corrupted being eaten: of the juice of them may be made a syrup
very wholesome against the distemperance of choler, whereof proceeds a
stinking breath, they be cold in the first degree, and moist in the second.

Of Apples.
AL apples eaten soon after yt they be gathered, are cold, hard to digest, and
do make ill and corrupted blood, but being well kept until the next winter,
or the year following, eaten after meals, they are right wholesome, and do
con^rme the stomach, and make good digestion, specially if they be roasted or
baked, most properly in a choleric stomach: they are best preserved in honey,
so the one touch not an other. The rough tasted apples are wholesome, where the
stomach is weak by distemperance of heat or much moisture. The bitter
apples, where the grief is increased. The sour apples, where the matter is
congealed or made thick with heat: in distemperature of heat and dries by
drinking much wine, they have been found commodious being eaten at night going
to bed, without drinking to them: they be cold and moist in the first degree.

Of Quinces.
QUinces be cold and dry: eaten before meals they bind and restrain the
stomach, that it may not digest well the meat, except that they be roasted or
sodden, the core taken out and mixed with honey clarified, or sugar, then they
cause good appetite, and preserves the head from drunkenness: taken after
meat, it closes and draws the stomach together, and helps il digestion,
and mollifieth the belly, if it be aboundantlytaken, they be cold in the first
degree, and dry in the beginning of the second.

Of Pomegranates.
POmegranates be of good juice, and profitable to the stomach, specially they
which are sweet: but in a hot fever, they that are sour be more expedient
and wholesome, for than the sweet does incende heat, and puff up the stomach.

Of Pears.
Pears are much of the nature of apples, but they are heavier: but taken after
meals roasted or baken, they are not unwholesome, and do restrain and knit the
stomach being ripe: they be cold and moist in the first degree.

Medlars.
MEdlars are cold and dry, and constrictiue or straining the stomach, and
therefore they may be eaten after meals, as a medicine, but not used as
meat, for they engender melancholy: they be cold and dry in the second
degree.

Walnuttes.
WAlnuttes, if they be blaunched, are supposed to be good for the stomach, and
somewhat loosing the belly: mixte with Sugar, they do nourish temperately. Of
two dry nuts, as many figs, and xx. leaves of rue, with a grain of salt, is
made a medicine whereof if one do eat fasting, nothing which is venomous may
that day hurt him, and it also preserves against the (...), and this is the
very right Mithridate, they (...) in the second degree, after some opinion^
hot(...) degree, dry in the second.

Fiberd and hasell nuttes.
THey be more strong in substance, the(...), whereof they are not so easily or
soon dig(...)so they do inflate the stomach, and cause headache, but they
engender fat. And if they be roasted, the(...) to restrain rewmes. Also eaten
with pepper, the^ (...) against torments of the belly, and the stopping of
(...) They be hot and dry in the first degree.

Of Almondes.
THey do extenuate and cleanse without any binding, wherefore they purge the
breast and lungs, specially bitter Almondes, also they do mollify the belly,
provoke sleep, and causes to piss well, 5, or 6. of them eaten before meat
keep a man from being drunk: they be hot and moist in the first degree.

Of Chestnuttes.
THey being roasted under the embers, or hot ashes, do nourish the body
strongly, and eaten with honey fasting, do help a man of the cough.

Of Prunes.
OF the garden and ripe, do dispose a man to the stool, but they do bring no
manner of nourishment. To this fruit like as to figs this property
remains, that being dried they do profit: the Damask prune rather binds
then loses, and is more commodious unto the stomach, they be cold and moist
in the third degree.

Olives.
COndite in salt licoure, taken at the beginning of a meal, does corroborate
the stomach, stirs appetite and loses the belly being eaten with vinegar.
They which be ripe are temperately hot, they which be green are cold and dry.

Of Capers.
THey nourish nothing after that they be salted: but yet they make the belly
loose, and purges fleume, which is therein contained. Also stirs appetite
to meat and opens the obstructions, or stopping of the liver and spleen,
being eaten with oximel, before any other meat: they be hot and dry in the
second degree.

Orenges.
THe rindes taken in a little quantity do comfort the stomach wherein it
digesteth, specially condite with sugar, and taken fasting in small quantity.
The juice of Orenges having a tossed of bread put into it, with a little powder
of mints, sugar, and a little cinamome makes a very good sauce to provoke
appetite. The juice eaten with sugar in a hot fever, is not to be
discommended. The rynde is hot in the first degree, and dry in the second,
the juice of them is cold in the second degree, and dry in the first.

Herbs used in potage, or to eat. CAP. 8.
GEnerally all herbs raw, and not s^dden, d^^ingender cold and watery juice,
if they be eaten customably or in abundance, albeit some herbs are more
comestible, and less harm unto nature, and moderarely used, makes merely
good blood.

Lettice.
AMong al hear bs none has so good juice as lettice, for some men do suppose
that it makes abundance of blood, albeit not very pure or perfect: it does set
a hot appetite: and eaten in the evening it provoke sleep: albeit, it
neither does loose, nor bind the belly of his own property. It increases
milk in a woman's breast, but it abateth carnal appetite, and much using
thereof hurts the eyesight. It is cold and moi^^ temperately.

Colewortes and Cabages.
BEfore that avarice caused Merchants to fetch out of the East and South
parts of the world, the traffic of spice, and sundry drugges to content
the insatiable nesse of wanton appetites: Colewortes for the virtues supposed
to be in them were of such estimation, that they were judged to be a
sufficient medicine against all diseases, as it may appear in the book of
wise Caro wherein he writes of husbandry. But now I will no modre remember,
than shall be required, in that which shall used as meat, and not pure
Medicine. The juice thereof has virtue to purge: The whole leaves being half
sodden, and the water powered out, and they being put e^^soones into hot water,
and sodden until they be tender, so eaten they do bind the belly. Some do
suppose if they be eaten raw with vinegar before meat, it shall preserve the
stomach from surfeiting, and the head from drunkenness ^albeit, much using of
them dulleth the sight, except the eyes be very moist. Finally, the juice that
it makes in the body, is not so comme^dable, as that which is engendered of
lettice. It is hot in the first degree, and dry in the second.

Cycory or Suckory.
IT is like in operation to Lettise, and tempereth choler wonderfully, and
therefore in all choleric fevers, the decoction of this herb, or the water
thereof stilled, is right expedient. Semblably the herb and root boiled with
flesh that is fresh, being eaten, keeps the stomach and head in very good
temper. I suppose that Southistle and Denidelion be of like qualities, but not
so convenient to be used of them which are hole, because they are wild of
nature and more bitter, and therefore causes fastidiousnesse or lothsomenesse
of the stomach. It is cold and dry in the second degree.

Endive and Scariole.
Be much like in their operations to Cicory, but they are more convenient to
medicine then to meat. Albeit Scariole called white Endive, having the tops
of the leaves turned in, and laid in the earth, at the latter end of summer,
and covered, becomes white and cryspe, like to the great stalks of Cabage
lettice, which are in winter taken up and eaten. And to them that have hot
stomachs and dry, they be right wholesome, but being too much used or in very
great quantity, they engender the humor which makes the collicke: they be
cold and moist in the first degree.

Mallows.
ARe not cold in operation, but rather somewhat warm, Galen de alimen. 2.
and have in them a slipperines. Wherefore being boiled and moderatly eaten with
oil and vinegar, they make ^eetly good concoction in the stomach, and causes
the superfluous matter therein easily to pass, and cleanses the belly. It is
hot and moist in the first degree.

White beetes.
ARe also abstersive and loses the belly, but much eaten annoieth the
stomach, but they are right good against obstructions or stopping of the
liver, if they be eaten with vinegar or mustard, like wise it helps ye
spleen. It is cold in the first degree, and moist in the second.

Purslaine.
Does mitigate the great heat in all the in ward parts of the body, semblably
of the head and eyes, also it represseth the rage of Uenus, but if it be
preserved in salt or brine, it heateth and purges the stomach. It is cold in
the third degree, and moist in the second.

Charuayle.
It is very profitable unto the stomach, but it may not sustain very much
boiling, eaten with vinegar, it provoke appetite, and also urine. The decoction
thereof drunk with wine cleanses the bladder.

Sorrel.
Being sodden it loses the belly. In a time of pestilence, if one being
fasting, do chewe some of the leaves, and suck down the juice, it
meruallously preserves from infections, as a new practiser called Gualnerius
does write. And I my self have proved it in my household.

The seeds thereof brayed and drunk with wine and water, is the collicke and
fretting of the guts: it stops (...), and helps the stomach annoyed with
rep(...). It is told in the third degree and dry in the second.

Parsley.
Is very convenient to the stomach, and comfort appetite, and (...) the
breath sweet, the seeds and root makes vr(...) well, and breaks the stone,
dissolueth winds: the (...) boiled in water, and thereof (...)ell being made,
it dissolueth fleume, and makes good digestion. It is hot and dry in the third
degree.

Fenell.
Being eaten the seed or root makes abundance of milk, likewise drunk with
P^^sane or ale. The seed some what restrayneth flux, provoke to piss, and
mitigateth frettings of the stomach and guts, specially Galen simplici. de
medicamen. lib. aca. 7.
the decoction of the root, if the matter, causing fretting, be cold, but if
it be of a hot cause, the use thereof is dangerous for infla^mation or
exulceration of the raines or bladder. It is hot in the third degree, and dry
in the first.

A^yseseede.
Makes sweet breath, provoke urine, and drives down things cleaning to
the raynes or bladder, stirs up courage, and causes abundance of milk. It
is hot and dry in the third degree.

Beans.
They make wind, howsoever they be ordered: the substance which they do make
is spungie, and not firm, albeit they be abstersive, or cleansing the body,
they tarry long ere they be digested, and make gross juice in the body: but
if onyons be sodden with them, they be less noyfull.

Peason.
Are much of the nature of Beans, but they be less windy, and passes
faster out of the body: they be also abstersive, or cleansing, specially
white peason, and they also cause m^^tly good nourishing, the husks taken
away. And the broth wherein they be sodden, cleanses right well the raines and
bladder.

Rape roots, and Nauewes. CAP. 9.
THe juice made by them is very gross, and therefore being much eaten, if they
be not perfectly (...) in the stomach, they do make crude or raw (...) in
the ^eines. Also if they be not well boiled, they cause winds, and annoy the
stomach, and make sometime (...)gs: if they be well boiled first in clean
water* and that being cast away, the second time with fat flesh, they (...)rish
much, and do neither loose nor bind the belly. But Nauewes do not nourish so
much as Rapes, but they be even as windy.

Turnep^.
Being well boiled in water, and after with fat flesh, nourishes much,
augmenteth the seed of man, provoke carnal lust. Eaten raw, they stir up
appetite to eat, being temperatly used, and be convenient unto the^ which have
putrified matter in their breasts or lungs, causing them to ^astly: but being
much and often eaten, they make raw juice and windsnes.

Parsneps and Carrets.
They do nourish with better juice then ye other roots, Ga^. simp. medica.
lib. 7.
specially Carrets, which are hot and dry, and expels wind.
Notwithstanding, much used they engender ill juice, but Carrets less then
Parsneps, the one and the other expels urine.

Radish roots.
Have the virtue to extenuate or make thin and also to warm. Also they cause
to break wind, and to piss. Being eaten before meals, they let the meat that
it may not descend: but being eaten last, they make good digestion and loses
the belly, though Galenus write contrary. For I among diverse other, by
experience have proved it. Notwithstanding, they be un wholesome for them that
have continually the gowt or pain in the joints.

Garlike.
It does extenuate and cut-grosse humors, and slimie, dissolueth gross
winds, and heateth all the body: also opens the places which are stopped
generally where it is well digested in the stomach: it is wholesome to diverse
purposes, specially in the body, wherein is gross matter, or much cold
enclosed, if it be sodden until it loses his (...)esse, it some what
nourishes, and yet loses his (...) (...)te gross humors* being sodde(...)
(...), it profits much against distillations from the head into the stomach.

Onyons.
Do also extenuate, but the long onyons more then the round, the red more then
the white, the dry more the^ they which be (...) also raw more then sodden,
they stir appetite to meat, and put away lothsomnes, and loose the belly,
they quicken sight, and being eaten in great abundance with meat, they cause
one to sleep soundly.

Leekes.
Be of ill juice, and do make (...)us dreams, but they do extenuate and
clensethe body, and also make it soluble, and provoke urine. Moreover, it
causes one to spit out easily the fleume which is in the breast.

Sage.
It heateth, and some what binds, and therewith provoke urine, the decoction
of the leaves and branches being drunk. Also it stops bleeding of wounds,
being laid unto them. Moreover, it has been proved that women, which have been
long time without children, and have drunk ten ounces of the juice of Sage,
with a grain of salt, a quarter of an hour before that they have companied
with their husbands, have conceived at that time. It is hot and dry in the
third degree, the using thereof is good against palsies.

Hysope.
Does heat and extenuate, whereby it digesteth slimie fleume: being prepared
with figs, it purges fleume downward, with honey and water, upward: boiled
in vinegar it helps the toothach, if the teeth be washed there with. It is
hot and dry in the third degree.

Bourage.
Comfort the heart and makes one merry, eaten raw before meals, or laid
in wine that is drunk. Also it mollifieth the belly and prepares to the
stool. It is hot and moist in the middle of the first degree.

Sauery.
Purges fleume, helps digestio^, makes quick fight, provoke urine, and
stirs carnal appetite. It is hot and dry in the third degree.

Roket.
Heateth much, and increases the seed of man, provoke courage, helps
digestion, and somewhat loses. It is hot and moist in the second degree.

Time.
Dissolueth winds, breaks the stone, expels urine, and cease frettings.
It is hot and dry in the third degree.

Peniroyall.
Does extenuate, heat, and deroit, it reformeth the stomach oppressed with
steume, it does recomfort the faint spirit, it expels melancholy by siege,
and is medicinable against many diseases. It is hot and dry in the third
degree.

Towncresses.
Paulus discommendeth, saying, that it resists concecsion, and hurts the
stomach, and makes it juice in the body: taken as medicine, it helps many
diseases. It is hot and dry in the third degree.

Rosemary.
Has the virtue to heat, and therefore it insolueth humors congealed with
cold: it helps against palsres, falling sickness, old diseases of the breast,
torments or fretting, it provoke brine and sweat: it helps the cough, taken
with pepper and honey: it puts away tootach, the root being chewed, or the
juice thereof put into the tooth being burned, the fume thereof resists the
pestilence: the rind thereof sodden or burned, the fume received at the mouth,
stops the re^^e which falls out of the head into the cheeks or throat,
which I my self have proved the green leaves ^rused, do stop the Hemer^oides,
if they be laid unto them. That hear^ is hot and dry in the third degree.

Spices growing out of this realm used in meat and drink. CAP. 10.
Pepper.
BLackepepper is hottest, and most dry, whitepepper is next, long pepper is
most temperate. The general property of all kinds of pepper is to heat the
body, but as Galen says, it pe^reeth downward, and does not spread into the
veins, it helps dige^sSpan^pulseth urine, and it helps against the
diseases of the breast, proceeding of cold. It is hot in the first degree, and
dry in the second.

Ginger.
Heateth the stomach, and helps digestion, but it heateth not so soon as
pepper: but afterward the heat remains longer, and causes the mouth to be
moist. Being green or well confectioned in sirupe, it comfort much the
stomach and head, and quickens remembrance, if it be taken in the morning
fasting. It is hot in the second degree, and dry in the first.

Saffron.
Somewhat binds, heateth and comfort the stomach, and the heart
specially, and makes good digestion, being eaten or dronken in a small
quantity. It is hot in the second degree, and dry in the first.

Cloves.
Have virtue to comfort the sinews, also to consume and dissolve superfluous
humors. They be hot and dry in the third degree: sodden with milk, it
comfort the debilitie of nature.

Maces.
Dioscorides comme^deth to be dronk against spitting of blood, and bloody
fluxes, and excessive laxes. Paulus Aegineta adds to it, that it helps ye
col^ke. They be hot in the 2. degree, and dry in the 3. degree. (...) to the
stomach very commodious, taken in a little quantity.

Nutmegges.
With their sweet odor comfort and dissolve, and sometime comfort the power
of the sight, and also the brain in cold diseases, and is hot and dry in the
second degree.

Of Bread. CAP. 11.
BRead of fine flower of wheat, having no leaven, is slow of digestion, and
makes flimie humors, but it nourishes much: if it be leauened, it digesteth
sooner.

Bread having much branne, fills the belly with excrements, and nourishes
little or nothing, but shortly descends from the stomach. The mean between
both, sufficiently leauened, well molded, and moderatly baked, is the most
wholesome to every age. The greatest loaves do nourish most fast, for as much
as the fire has not exhausted the moisture of them. Hot bread slowly passes.
Barley bread cleanses the body, and does not nourish so much as wheat, and
makes cold juice in the body.

Of Flesh. CAP. 12.
Beef of England to Englishmen, which are in health, brings strong
nourishing: but it makes gross blood, and ingendreth melancholy: but being of
young Oxen, not exceeding the age of four year, to them which have cholerike
stomachs, it is more convenient then chickens, and other like fine meats.

Swines flesh.
Above all kinds of flesh in nourishing the body, Galen most commends Porke,
not being of an old Swine, and that it be well digested of him that eats it.
For it makes best juice, it is most convenient for young persons, and them
which have sustained much labor, and there with are fatigate, and become
weak. Young pigs are not co(...)fiended, before that they be one month old,
for they do breed much superfluous humors.

Lamb.
Is very moist and fle^^atike, wherefore it is not convenient for aged men,
except that it be very dry roasted, nor yet for them which have in their
stomachs much fleume.

Mutton.
Galen does not commend it, notwithstanding experience Galen de ali. men. 2.
proves here in this Realm, that if it be young, it is a right temperate
meat, and makes good juice: and therefore it is used more then any other
meat in all diseases. And yet it is not like good in all places, nor the
sheep which bears finest wool, is not the sweetest in eating, nor the most
tender. But I have found in some countries Mutton, which in whitenes,
tenderness, and sweetness of the flesh, might be well nigh compared to Kid, and
in digestion have proved as wholesome.

Kid and Veale.
Of Galen is commended next unto Porke: but some men do suppose, that in
health and sickness they be much better then porke, the juice of the^ both
being more pure. And here it is to be noted, that of all beasts, which be dry
Hippo. de ratione victus. lib. 2. cap. 19. Plin. 28.
of their nature, the youngest be most wholesome: of them that are moist, the
eldest are least hurtful.

Hare, and Cony.
Makes gross blood, it dries and stops, but yet it provoke a man to
piss. Cony makes better and more pure nourishment, and is sooner digested
then Hare. It is well proved, that there is no meat more wholesome, or that
more clean firmly, and temperatly nourishes then Rabbets.

Dear red and fallowe.
Hypocrates affirms, that the flesh of Hearts and Hinds to be ill juice, hard
of digestion and dry, but yet moves urine. Of fallow dear, he nor any other
old writer does speak of, as I remember. I suppose, because there be not in
all the world, so many as be in England, where they consume a good part of the
best pasture in the Realm, and are in nothing profitable, saving that of the
skins of them is made better leather then is of Calves, the hu^ting of them
being not so pleasant, as the hu^ting of other venery or vermin, the flesh
much more unwholesome and unpleasant then of a red Dear, ingendring melancholy,
and making many fearful dreams, and disposes the body to a fever, if it
be much eaten: notwithstanding the fat thereof (as some learned men have
supposed) is better to be digested then the lean.

Of Birds.
The flesh of all birds is much lighter, than the flesh of beasts, in
comparison most especially of those fowls which trust most to their woings,
and do breed in high countries.

Capons, Hens and Chickens.
The Capon is above all other fowls praised: for as much as it is easily
digested, and makes little ordure, and much good nourishment. It is commodious
to the breast and stomach. Hens in winter are almost equal unto the Capon,
but they do not make so strong nourishment. Auicen says, if they be roasted in
the belly of a Kid or Lamb, they will be the better. Chickens in summer,
specially if they be cockrels, are very convenient for a weak stomach, and
nourishes a little. The flesh of a Cock is hard of digestion, but the broth
wherein it is boiled, loses the belly: and having sodde^ in it Coleworts,
Polipodium, or Cartamus, it purges ill humors, and is medicinable against
gowtes, ioynt-ach, and fevers, which come by courses.

Fesaut.
Exceeds all fowls in sweetnessed and wholesomnes, and is equal to a Capon
in nourishing: but he is somewhat drier, and is of some men put in comparison,
mean between a Hen and a Partrich.

Partrich.
Of all fowls is most soonest digested, and has in him much nutriment,
comfort the brain, and makes seed of generation, and reuiueth lust, which
is abated.

Quails.
Although they be of some men commended, yet experience proves them to
increase melancholy, and are of small nourishing.

Larkes.
Be as well the flesh as the broth very wholesome: eaten roasted, they do much
help against the colicke, as Dioscorides says.

A Plouer.
Is slow of digestion, nourishes little, increases melancholy.

Black birds or ousyls.
Among wildfoule have the chief praise, for lightness of digestion, and that
they make good nourishment, and little ordure.

Sparrowes.
Be hard to digest, and are very hot, and stirs up Venus, and specially the
brains of them.

Woodcockes.
Are of a good te^perance, and meetly light in digestion.

Pygeons.
Be easily digested, and are very wholesome to them, which are fleumaticke, and
pure melancholy.

Goose.
Is hard of digestion, but being young and fat, the wings be easy to digest in
a whole stomach, and nourishes competently.

Ducke.
Is hotter then goose, and hard to digest, and makes worse juice, saving the
brawnes on the breast bone, and the neck, is better then the remnant.

Crane and Bustarde.
Crane is hard of digestion, and makes ill juice, but being hanged up long in
the air he is the less unwholesome. Bustard being fat, and kept without meat
a day or two before yt he be killed, to expulse his ordure, and then drawn and
hanged as the Crane is, being roasted or bake^, is a good meat, and nourishes
well, if he be well digested.

Hearon, Byttour, Shouelar.
Being young and fat, be lightlier digested then the Crane, and the Bittour
sooner then the Hearon. And the Shouelar sooner then any of them, but all those
fowls must be eaten with much Ginger or Pepper, and have good old wine drunk
after them, and so shall they be more easily digested, and the juice coming of
them be ye less noiful.

The parts and members of birds and beasts. CAP. 13.
THe wings, brawnes, and neck of geese, capons, hens, fesant, partrich, and
small birds being fat, are better then the legs in digestion, and lighter in
nourishment. Of wildfoule and pigeons, being fat, the legs are better then
the wings, the brawnes of ducke, teale and wigeon except, which is better to
digest then the residue.

The gysard or stomach.
Of a goose or hen, being fat with bran and milk, being well sodden or made in
powder, is good for the stomach, in makingit strong to digest, and nourishes
compete^tly.

The liver.
Of a capon, hen, fesaunt, or goose being made fat with milk mixed with their
meat is not only easy to digest, but also makes good juice, and nourishes
excellently. But the livers of beasts be ill to digest, passes slowly and
makes gross blood, but it is strong in nourishing.

The inward of beasts, as tripes and chitterlings.
The flesh of them is more hard to digest: and therefore although they be well
digested, yet make they not juice naturally sanguine or clean, but raw juice,
and cold, and it requires a long time to be converted into blood.

The lunges or lights.
Are more easy to digest then the liver, and less nourishes, but the
nourishment that it makes, is fleumaticke. Albeit the lunges of a fox, is
medicinable for them, which have sickness of the lunges.

The Spleen or Mylt.
Is of ill juice, for it is the chamber of melancholy.

The heart.
Is of hard flesh, and therefore is not soon digested, nor passes shortly, but
where it is well digested, the juice that it makes is not to be dispraysed.

The brain.
Is fleumaticke, of gross juice, slow in digesting, noyous to the stomach,
but where it is well digested, it nourishes much.

Marow.
Is more delectable then the brain, it is ill for the stomach, but where it
is well digested, it nourishes much.

The stones and Vdders.
Being well digested, do nourish much, but ye stones are hotter with their
moistnes, the vdders cold and fleumatick: they both do increase seed of
generation, but the blood made of the vdder, is better then that which comes
of the stones, except it be of calves and lambs. Also the stones of cocks,
makes commendable nourishment.

The head.
The flesh thereof nourishes much, and augmenteth seed, but it is slow of
digestion, and noyeth the stomach, but to them which use much exercise, it is
commendable.

Tongue.
Is of a spungy and sanguine substance, but the kernels and gristle which are
in the roots, if they be well digested they make good nourishment, if they
be not well digested they make fleume.

The feet.
Being well boiled and tender, in a hole stomach digesteth well and makes
good juice and passes forth easily. Galen commends the feet of swine, but I
have proved, that the feet of a young bullock tenderly sodden and laid in
sowse two days or three, and eaten cold in the evening, have brought a
choleric stomach into a good digestion and sleep: and therewith has also
expulsed salt fleume and choler: and this have I found in my self by often
experience, always foreseen that it may be eaten before any other meat
without drinking immediately after it.

Of fish generally. CAP. 14.
THe best fish after the opinion of Galen, is that which swimmeth in a pure
sea, and is tossed and lift up with winds and sourges. The more calm that the
water is, the worse is the fish.

They which are in muddie waters, do make much fleume and ordure, taken in
fennes and ditches be worst, being in rivers and swift, be sometime
commendable: Albeit generally all kinds of fish makes more thinner blood than
flesh, so that it does much nourish, and it does the sooner pass over by
vapors: to a hot choleric stomach, or in fevers, sometime they be
wholesome, being new, fresh, and not very hard in substance or slimy, hard fish
is hard of digestion: but the nourishment thereof is more firm, then that
which is soft: those which have much gross humors in them, are best powdered.

Of Butter. CAP. 15.
BUtter is also nourishing, and profits in them which have humors
superfluous, in the breast or lunges, and lacks riping and clensing of them,
specially if it be eaten with sugar or honey. If it be well salted, it heateth
and cleanses the more.

Of Cheese. CAP. 16.
CHeese by the whole sentence of al ancient writers, lets digestion, and is
an enemy unto the stomach. Also it ingendreth ill humors, and breeds the
stone: the these which does least harm is soft cheese reasonably salted,
which some men do suppose, nourishes much.

Of Eggs. CAP. 17.
Eggs of Fesants, hens, and partriches, he of all other meats most
agreeable unto nature, specially if they be new laid: if they be reere, they
do cleanse the throat and the breast. If they be hard, they be slow in
digestion: but being once digested, they do nourish much. Mean between reere
and hard, they digest conveniently, and nourish quickly. Eggs well poched, are
better then roasted. If they be fried hard, they be of ill nourishment, and do
make stinking fumes in the stomach, and do corrupt other meats, with whom
they be mingled.

They be most wholesome, when they be poched, and most unwholesome, when they be
fried. Dioscorides says. If they besu(...)d warm, before any other meat,
they do heal the grietes of the bladder and raynes made with gravel. Also
sorenes of the cheeks and throat, and spitting of blood: and they be good
against catarres or stilling out of the head into the stomach.

Of drinks, and first of water.
Undoubtedly water has pre-eminence above all other licours, not only because
it is an element, that is to say, a pure matter, whereof al other licours have
their original substance, but also for as much as it was the very natural and
first drink to all manner of creatures.

Wherefore the saying of Pindarus the Poet was ever well allowed, which says,
water is best. And one thing is to be well considered, that from the creation
of the world, until the universal deluge or flood, during which time men lived
8. or 9. hundred years, there was none other drink used nor known, but water.
Also the true followers of Pythagoras doctrine, drank onley water, and yet
lived, as Appollonius, and other: and in the searching out of secret and
mystical things, their wits excelled. Moreover we have seen men and women of
great age, and strong of body, which never or very seldom drank other drink
then pure water. As by example in Cornwall, although that the country be in a
very cold quarter, which proves that if men from their infancy were
accustomed to none other drink but to water only moderatly used, it should be
sufficient to keep natural moisture, and to cause the meat that is eaten, to
pierce and descend into the places of digestion, which are the purposes that
drink serves for.

But now to the qualities of water after the sentence of ancient philosophers
and physicians. The rain water after the opinion of most men, if it be
received pure and clean, is most subtle and penetratiue, of any other waters:
the next is that, which issues out of a spring in the east, and passes
swiftly among great stones or rocks: the third is of a clean river, which
runs on great hard stones or peples. There he diverse means to try out
which is the best water* for yt which is lightest in poise or weight, is best.
Also that whereof comes least skim or froth when it does boil, also that
which will soonest be hot: Moreover dip linen clothes into sundry waters and
after lay them to dry, and that which is soonest dry, the water wherein it
was dipped is most subtle. After a great surfeit, specially taken with
superfluous eating of banqueting meats, cold water dronken is a general
remedy. Hyppo. affirms yt in sharp and fervent diseases, none other remedy
is to be required then water. And Galen will not that children should be let
from drinking of De ratione victus in morb. acutis. lib. 3.
water, but that when they seele themselves very hot after meals, and do
desire to drink water, specially of a clean fountain they should be suffered,
also Hippo says: in such sickness whereas thou fear, lest the head should be
vehemently grieved, or the mind perished, there must thou give either water or
white wine allaied with much water. Not withstanding there be in water causes
of diverse diseases, as of swelling of the spleen and the liver, it also
flitteth and swimmeth, and it is long or it pierces, in as much as it is cold
and slow in decoction, it loses not the belly nor provoke urine. Also in
this it is vicious, that of his proper nature it makes no ordure. Finally
always respect must be had to the person that drinks it, for to yongmen and
them that be hot of complexion, it does less harm, and sometime it
profits, but to them that are feeble, old, fleumaticke, melancholy, it is
not convenient.

Of Wine. CAP. 19.
PLato the wisest of all Philosophers, does affirm, that wine moderately
drunk, nourishes and comfort as well all the body as the spirits of man.
And therefore God did ordain it for mankind, as a remedy against the
incommodities of age, that thereby they should seem to return unto youth and
forget heaviness. Undoubtedly wine heateth, and moysteth the body, which
qualities chiefly conserueth nature. And Galen of all wines commends that
which is yellow and clear, saying: that it is the hottest, and white wine
least hot.

And the color mean between both, of semblable temperature. The yellow wine
which is the proper color of very hot wines, to old men does bring these
commodities. First it heateth all their members, also it purges by urine the
watrie substance of the blood. Moreover, the wines which be pale or yellow, and
full of substance do increase blood, and nourishe the body, but for the more
part, old men have need of such wines which do provoke urine: for as much
as in them do abound watrie excrementes, or superfluities, and they which do
tarry long in the belly be not apt for aged men. Black or deep red wines and
thick, do bind and congeale that which they do find in the body, and
although some of them do not long abide in the belly, yet they move not urine,
but rather withdraws: but yet they do harm to old men, for as much as they
do stop the conduites of the spleen, the liver and the raines: also gross
wines be best for them which desire to be fat, but it makes opilations: old
wine and clear is better for them that be fleumatick. Galen also prohibiteth
children to drink any wine, for as Galen de tuen* sani. lib. 1.
much as they be of a hot and moist te^perature, and so is wine: and therefore
it heateth and moisteth too much their bodies, and fills their heads with
vapors. Moreover he would, that young men should drink little wine, for it
shall make them prone to fury, and leachery, and that part of the soul which
is called rationable, it shall make troublous and dull: not withstanding yet it
is sometime profitable to mitigate or expel ordure made of choler or
mela^choly. Also it profits against drith, which happens in the substance
of the body, either by too much labor, or by ye proper temperature of age: for
wine moisteth and nourishes that, which is too dry, also mitigateth and
dissolueth the sharpnes of choler, and purges it also by urine and sweat.
Finally as Theognes says, much drinking of wineis ill, but moderate drinking
of wine is not only not ill, but also commodious and profitable, which
sentence is confirmed by Jesus Syrac, in the book named Ecclesiasticus,
saying: Wine moderately drunk rejoices both the body and soul. Wherefore to
conclude this chapter, there is neither meat nor drink, in the use whereof
ought to be a more discreet moderation, then in wine, considering that being
good and drunk in due time and measure, it not only conserueth natural and
radical moisture, whereby life indureth, but also it helps the principal
members which belong to digestion, to do their office: on the other part being
ill or corrupt, or taken out of order and measure, it does contrary to all the
premises, besides that it transformeth a man or woman, making the^ beastly.
More of the qualittes of wine shall be touched hereafter in the order of diet.

Of Milk. CAP. 20.
Milk is compact of three substances, cream, whay, and cruddes. The most
excellent milk is of a woman, the milk of a cow is thickest, the milk of a
camel is most subtle, the milk of a goat is between cow milk and camel
milk. Ewes milk is between cow milk and asses milk. Also the milk of beasts
feeding in large pastures, and out of Fennes and Marshes, is better then of
them which be fed in little closes or in watrie grounds. In spring time milk
is most subtle, and milk of young beasts is bolsomer then of old. To
children, old men, and to them which be oppressed with mela^choly, or have the
flesh consumed with a fever, thick milk is convenient. And generally to al
them which do not feel the milk rise in their stomachs after that they have
eaten it, and in those persons it does easily purge that, which is in ye belly
superfluous. And afterward it enters into the veins and brings good
nourishment: whosoever has an appetite to eat or drink milk, to the intent
that it shall not arise or obrayd in the stomach, let him put into a vessel,
out of the which he will receive it, a few leaves of mint, sugar, or pure
honey, and into the vessel cause the beast to be milked, and so drink it
warm from the vdder, or else let him do as Paulus Aegineta teaches, that is
to say, boil first the milk with an east fire, and sees it after in hotter
fire, and skim it clean, and with a sponge dipped in cold water, take the
clean away, which would be burned to the vessel, then put into the milk salt
and sugar, Orbasitus, de conuictione cibornm lib. 3.
and stir it often. Moreover, milk taken to purge melonchaly, would be
drunk in the morning abundantly, new milked, as is before written. And he that
drinks, should abstain from meat and exercise until the milk be digested,
and have some what purged the belly. For which labor it becomes sour: and
therefore it requires rest and watch, or to walk very softly. Finally, where
men and women be used from their childhood, for the more part, to milk, and to
eat none or little other meat but milk and butter, they appear to be of
good complexion and fashion of body, and not so much vexed with sickness as
they which drink wine or ale: not withstanding, much use of milk in men
sanguine or cholerike, does engender the stone.

Of Ale, Beer, Cider, and Whay. CAP. 21.
I Can neither hear nor read, that Ale is made and used for a common drink
in any other country then England, Scotland, Ireland, and Pole. The Latin
word Ceruisia is indifferent as well to Ale as to Beer. If the corn be good,
the water wholesome and clean, and the Ale or Beer well and perfectly brewed
and cleansed, and by the space of six days and more, settled and defecate, it
must needs be a necessary and convenient drink as well in sickness as in
health: considering the barley corn, whereof it is made, is commended and used
in medicine in all parts of the world, and accounted to be of a singular
efficacy in reducing the body into good temper, specially which is in
distemperature of heat. For what ancient Physician is there that in his works
commends not Ptisane? which is none other but pure barley brayd in a mortar,
and sodden in water, the same thing is small and clean ale or beer, saving
that perchance the drying of the malt is cause of more drith to be in the ale
then in Ptisane. And the hops in Beer makes it colder in operation. But to
say as I think, I suppose that neither Ale nor Beer is to be compared to
Wine, considering that in them do lack the heat and moisture which is in
Wine. For that being moderately used, is most like to the natural heat and
moisture of man's body. And also the licour of Ale or Beer being more gross,
do engender more gross vapors and corrupt humors then Wine does, being dronk
in like excess of quantity.

As for Cider may not be good in any condition, considering as I said, that al
fruits do engender ill humors, and do cool too much natural heat: but to
them which have abundance of red choler, moderately used, it somewhat profits
in mitigation of excessive heat. But who that will diligently mark in the
countries where Cider is used for a common drink, the men and women have the
color of their visage palled, and the skin of the visage riueled, although
that they be young.

Whay, if it be left of the butter, being well ordered, and not drunk until
it have a thick curd of milk over it, like to a hat, is a right temperate
drink, for as much as by the vnctuositie of the butter, whereof the whay
retains some portion, it is both moist and nourishing, and cleanses the
breast, and by the subtilnes of it self, it descends soon from the stomach,
and is shortly digested. Also by reason of the affinity which it has with
milk, it is co^uertible into blood and flesh, specially in those persons which
do inhabit in the North parts, in whom natural heat is conglutinate, and
therefore is of more puissance and virtue in the office of concoction. Also
custom from childhood, does eleuate the power of meats and drinks in their
disposition, notwithstanding that the 4. humors, sanguine, choler, fleume, and
melancholy, must also be considered, as it shall appear in diverse places
hereafter.

Of Honey. CAP. 22.
Honey as well in meat as in drink, is of incomparable efficacy: for it not
only cleanses, alters, and nourishes, but also it long time preserves that
uncorrupted, which is put into it, in so much, as Pliny says: such is the
Plin. lib. 22.
nature of honey, yt it suffers not the bodies to putrify: and he affirms
that he did see an Hippocentaure, which is a beast half a man and half a
horse, brought in honey to Claudius the Emperor, out of Egypt to Rome. And he
tells also of Pollio Romulus, who was above a hundred years old, of whom
Augustus the Emperor demanded by what means he lived so long, and retained
still the vigor or liuelines of body and mind. Pollio answered, that he did
it inward with Meade, which is drink made with honey and water: outward, with
oil. Which saying agrees with the sentence of Democritus the great
Philosopher, who being demanded, how a man might live long in health: he
answered. If he wet him within with honey, without with oil. The same
Philosopher when he was an hundred years old and nine, prolonged his life
certain days with the euaporation of honey, as Aristoxinus writes. Of this
excellent matter, most wonderfully wrought and gathered by a little Be, as
well of the pure dew of heaven as of the most subtle humor of sweet and
virtuous herbs and flowers, be made licours commodious to mankind, as Meade,
Metheglin, and Oximel. Meade which is made with one part of honey, and four
times so much of pure water, and boiled until no skim do remain, is much
commended of Galen, drunk in summer for preserving of health. Lib. 4. de
tuenda sanitate.


The same author always commends the using of honey, either raw eaten with
fine bread somewhat leauened, or sodden, and received as drink. Also Meade
perfectly made, cleanses the breast and lungs, causes a man to spit easily and
piss abundantly, and purges the belly moderatly. Metheglin, which is most
used in Wales, by reason of hot herbs boiled with honey, is hotter then Meade,
and more comfort a cold stomach, if it be perfectly made, and not new or
very ^^ale. Oximel, is where to one part of vinegar is put double so much of
honey, four times as much of water, and the^ being boiled unto the thirdpart,
and clean skimmed with a feather, is used to be taken where in the stomach is
much fleume or matter undigested, so that it be not red choler. Look the use
thereof in Alexandro Tralliano. Many other good qualities of honey I omit to
write of, until some other occasion shall happen to remember them
particularly, where they shall seem to be profitable.

Sugar. CAP. 23.
OF Sugar I do find none ancient author of Greeks and Latins to write by
name, but only Paulus Aegineta, who says in this wise, after that he has
treated of honey. Moreover, sugar which they call honey, that is brought to us
from Arabia, called Felix, is not so sweet as our honey, but is equal in
virtue, and does not annoy the stomach, nor causes thirst. These be the words
of Paulus. It is now in daily experience, that sugar is a thing very temperat
and nourishing, and where there is choler in the stomach, or that the stomach
abhors honey, it may be used for honey in all things, wherein honey is
required to be. With sugar and vinegar is made syrup acetose.

Of time. CAP. 24.
IN the consideration of time, for taking of meats and Wint^r.
drinks, it is to be remembered, that in Winter meats ought to be taken in
great abundance, and of a more gross substance then in Summer, for as much as
the exterior air which compasses the body being cold, causes the heat to
withdraw into the inner parts, where being enclosed and gathered nigh together
in the stomach and intrailes, it is of more force to boil and digest that
which is received into it. Also meats roasted are then better then sodden, and
flesh and fish powdered, is then better then in Summer: herbs be not then
commendable, specially raw, neither fruits, except Quinces roasted or baked:
drink should be then taken in little quantity. Moreover, wines shall need no
water or very little, and that to cholerike persons: red wines, and they which
be thick and sweet, may be then most surely taken of the^ which have no
opilations or ye stone: always remember that in winter ^^eume increases by
reason of rain and moystures of the season, also the length of nights and much
rest. And therefore Gal in comment. in apho. z. lib. 3.
in that time cholerike persons are best at ease, semblably are young me^, but
to old men winter is an enemy. It begins the 8. day of November, and
endures until the 8. day of February.

The Spring time does participate the first part with Spring time.
Winter, the latter part with Summer. Wherefore if the first part be cold, then
shall the diet be according to Hippocra. de natura humana.
Winter. If the end be hot, then shall the diet be of Summer. If both parts be
temperate, then should there be also a temperance in diet: always considering
that fleume yet remains, and blood then increases. And meat would be less
in quantity then in Winter, and drink Galen com. aph. 18. lib. 1.
somewhat more.

Spring time begins the 8. of February, and continues Summer.
unto the 8. day of May. In Summer the inward heat is but little, and the
stomach does not digest so strongly nor quickly, as in winter: wherefore in ye
season, eating often, and a little at once, is most convenient. And Damascenus
says, that fasting in summer dries the body, makes the color salow,
ingendreth melancholy, and hurts the sight: also boiled meat, bread steeped
in white broth, with sodden lettise or cicorie, are then good to be Hippo. de
humoribus.
used: also variety in meats, but not at one meal: potages made with cold
herbs, drink in more abundance, wine alaid with water to hot complexions
much, to cold natures less. In this season blood increases, and toward the
end thereof, choler. And therefore they which be cold of nature and moist, are
then best at ease, hot natures and dry worst. Moreover* children and very young
men in Galen in comment in apho.
the beginning of summer, are holest, old folk in ye latter end, and in
Harvest. Summer begins the 8. day of May, and continues until the 8. day
of August. Autumn begins the 8. day of August, and ends the 8. day of
November, that season of the year is variable, and the air changeable, by
occasion whereof happen sundry sicknesses, blood decreaseth, and melancholy
abounds: wherefore all summer fruits would then be eschewed, for as much as
they make ill juice and winds in ye body. In this time meat would be more
abundant the in summer, but somewhat drier: drink must be less in quantity:
but less mixed with water. This time is dangerous to al ages, al natures, and
al countries, but ye natures hot and moist be least in damage.

Diet concerning sundry times of the year, written by the old Physician
Diocles, to King Antigonus.
FRom the 12. day of December, at the which time the day is at the shortest
until the 9. day of March, which do continue 90. days, rheumes and moystures
do increase, then meats and drinks naturally very hot, would be moderatly
used. Also to drink abundantly Wine without alay, or with little water, and to
use hilaritie: the company of a woman is not unwholesome to the body.

From the ninth day of March, at which time in Equinoctium vexnum unto the 25.
day of April, sweet fleume and blood do increase: therefore use thou things
having much juice and sharp, exercise the body diligently, then may ye use
safely the company of a woman.

From the 20. day of April, to the 14. day of June, choler increases, then
use all things that are sweet, and do make the belly soluble, forbear
carnal company with women.

From the 14. day of June, at which time ye day is at ye longest, unto the 12.
day of September, does melancholy rain, forbear carnal company, or use it
moderatly.

From the 12. day of September, unto the 17. day of October, do abound fleume
and thin humors, then would all fluxes and distillations be prohibited, then
all sharp meats and drinks and of good juice, are to be used, and carnal
occupations should then be eschewed.

From the 17. day of October, to the 12. day of December, increases gross
fleume, use therefore all bitter meats, sweet wines, fat meat, and much
exercise.

Of Ages. CAP. 25.
CHildren would be nourished with meats and drinks, Children.
which are moderatly hot and moist, notwithstanding Galen does prohibit them
use of Wine, because it Galen de tuen. ^anit. lib. 1.
moystneth and heateth too much the body, and fills the heads of them, which
are hot and moist, with vapors. Also he permits them in hot weather to
drink clear water of the fountain. A child growing fast in his members
toward a man, so that he seems well fed in the body, is then to be feared of
fulness of humors, and if it be Orba^itus, de ^ute simp. lib. 1
perceived that he is replete, then must be withdrawn and minished some part
of that nutrime^t, and according unto his age, some euacuation would be
devised, otherwhile by exercise, walking up and down fasting, and before that
they eat any meat, let them exercise themselves with their own labors, and
do their own accustomed business, and eat the meats whereunto they be
most used, so that it be such that may not hurt them. And thus need they not to
know of Physicians, but by experience and diligent search by their stool,
their nurses shall perceive what digesteth well, and what does not. But if it
appear that by excessive feeding, the belly of the child is fuller and greater
the^ it was wont to be, and that which passes by the belly is corrupted, or
his sweat stinketh, these things known, if they eat strong meats, give them
not one kind of meat, but diverse, that the novelty of the meat may help,
that they may go the more easily to the stool. For if any have an
unreasonable appetite, he is sooner recovered, if he be purged by a boil or
impostume, comen forth and broken, before that the meat be corrupted, and
after that let him eat fine meats, and being once whole, return by little and
little to his old custom.

Young men, exceeding the age of 14. years, shall eat meat more gross of
substance, colder and moyster, also Young men.
Salades of cold herbs, and to drink seldom Wine, except it be alayd with
water. Albeit, all these things must be tempered according to their
complexions, exercise, and quietness in living, whereof ye shall read in their
proper places hereafter.

Old men, in whom natural heat and strength seems Old men.
to decay, should use always meats, which are of quality hot and moist, and
there withal easy to be digested, and abstain utterly from all meats and
drinks which will engender thick juice and slymy, semblably from wine, which
is thick, sweet, and dark red wines, and rather use them which will make
thin humors, and will purge well the blood by urine, therefore white or
yellowe wines, and perchance french claret wines, are for them very
commendable. Also wine prepared with Paul. A Eginer. lib. 1. cap. 23.
pure honey clarified, wherein roots of parsley, or fenell be steeped,
specially if they suspect any thing of the stone, or gout. And if they more
desire to cleanse their raines and bladder, then it is good to use small white
wine, as racked renish wine, or other like to it. And sometime to steep over
night therein a parsley root flit and somewhat bruised, and a little licorice.
Finally, let them beware of all meats that will stop the pores, and make
obstructions Opilations, what they are.
or opilations, that is to say, with clammy matter stop the places where the
natural humors are wrought and digested, the which meats I have before set in
a table. But if it chance then to eat any such meat in abundance, let them
take shortly such things, as do resist Opilations, or resolve them. As white
pepper, bruised and mixed with their meats or drinks, garlike also or onyons, if
they abhor them not. Always remember that aged men should eat often, and but
little at every time, for it fares by them, as it does by a lamp, the light
whereof is almost extinct, which by pouring in of oil little and little is long
kept burning: and with much oil poured in at once, it is clean put out. Also
they must forbear all things which do engender melancholy, whereof ye shall
read in the table before: and bread clean without eauen, is not then
unwholesome.

Moderation in dier, having respect to the strength or weakness of the person
CAP. 26.
NOw here it must be considered, that although I have written a general diet
for every age, yet nevertheless it must be remembered, that some children and
young men, either by debilitie of nature, or by some accidental cause, as
sickness or much study, happen to gather humors fleumaticke or melancholy in
the places of digestion, so that concoction or digestion is as weak in them, as
in those which are aged.

Semblably some old men find nature so beneficial unto them, that their
stomachs and livers are more strong to digest then the said young men: some
perchance have much choler remaining in them. In these cases the said young
men must use the diet of old men, or nigh unto it, until the discrasie be
removed, having always respect to their universal complexions, as they which
are naturally choleric to use hot things in a more temperance, then they
which be fleumaticke or melanch^licke by nature. The same observation shall be
to old men, saving that age of his own property is cold and dry, therefore
the old man that is choleric, shall have more regard to moisture in meats
then the young man being of the same complexion. Foreseen always that where
nature is offended or grieved, she is cured by that, which is Hippoc. aphor.
Galen in comment.
contrary to that, which offends or grieueth, as cold by heat, heat by
cold, drith by moisture, moisture by drith. In that whereby nature should be
nourished in a whole and temperate body, things must be taken which are like to
the man's nature in quality and degree. As where one has his body in a good
temper, things of the same temperance does nourish him: but where he is out of
temper, in heat, cold, moisture or dryth, temperate meats or drinks nothing
do profit him. For being out of the mean and perfect temperature, nature
requires to be thereto reduced by contraries, remembering not only, that
contraries are remedy unto their contraries, but also in every contrary,
consideration must be had of the proportion in quantity.

Times in the day concerning meals. CAP. 27.
BEsides the times of the year, and ages, there be also other times of eating
and drinking to be remembered, as the sundry times in the day, which we call
meals, which are in number and distance, according to the temperature of the
country and person. As where the country is cold, and the person lusty, and
of a strong nature, there may more meals be used, or the less distance of
time between them. Contrariwise in contrary countries and personages, the
cause is before rehearsed, where I have spoken of the diet of the times of the
year, notwithstanding, here must be also consideration of exercise and rest,
which do augment or aspyre the natural disposition of bodies, as shall be
more declared hereafter in the chapter of exercise. But concerning the general
usage of countries, and admitting the bodies to the perfect state of health, I
suppose that in England young men, until they come to the age of xl. years,
may well eat three meals in one day, as at breakefast, dinner, and supper, so
that between breakefast and dinner, be the space of 4. hours, at the least
between dinner and supper 6. hours, and the breakfast less then the dinner,
and the dinner moderate, that is to say, less then sacietie of fulness of
belly, and the drink thereunto measurable, according to the drines or
moistnes of the meat. For much abundance of drink at meal, drowneth the
meat eaten, and not only lets convenient concoction in the stomach, but
also causes it to pass farther then nature requires, and therefore ingendreth
much fleum, and consequently rewmes, and crudenes in the veins, debility and
slippernes of the stomach continue flux, and many other inconveniences to
the body and members. But to return to meals, I think breakfasts necessary
in this realm, as well for the causes before rehearsed, as also for Breakefast.
as much as choler being fervent in the stomach, sends up fumosities into
the brain, and causes headache, and sometime becomes adult, and smauldreth
in the stomach, whereby happens perilous sickness, and sometime sudden death,
if the heat enclosed in the stomach have not other convenient matter to work
on: this daily experience proves, and natural reason confirms, therefore
men and women not aged, having their stomachs clean without putrified matter,
sleeping moderatly and soundly in the night, and feeling themselves light in
the morning and sweet breathed, let them on Gods name break their fast,
choleric men with gross meat, men of other complexion with lighter meat,
foreseen that they labor some what before, semblably their dinner and supper,
as I have before written, so that they sleep not incontinent after their
meals: and here I will not recite the sentences of authors, which had never
experience of English men's natures, or of the just temperature of this realm
of England, only this connsaile of Hippocrates shall be sufficient. We ought
to grant somewhat to time, Hippo. hor. 18. lib. 1 Gal. de tuenda sanitate.
to age, and to custom: notwithstanding where great warmenes or dryth greeueth
the body, there ought the dinner to be less, and the longer distance between
dinner, and supper. Also much rest, except a little soft walking, that by an
upright moving, the meat being stirred may descend. This is always to be
remembered, that where one feels himself full and grieved with his dinner, or
the savor of his meat by eructation ascends, or that his stomach is weak by
late sickness or much study, then it is most convenient to abstain from supper,
and rather provoke himself to sleep much, then to eat or drink any thing.
Also to drink between meals is not laudable, except very great thirst
constrains: for it interrupteth the office of the stomach in concoction, and
causes the meat to pass faster then it should do, and the drink being
cold, it rebukes natural heat that is working, and the meat remaining
raw, it corrupts digestion and makes crudenesse in the veins. Wherefore he
that is thirsty, let him consider the occasion. If it be of salt fleume, let
him walk fair and softly and only wash his mouth and his throat with barley
water, or small ale, or lie down and sleep a little, and so the thirst will
pass away or at the least be well assuaged.

If it happen by extreme heat of the air, or by a pure choler, or eating of
hot Spices, let him drink a little Julep made with clean water and sugar, or a
little small beer or ale, so that he drink not a great glut, but in a little
quantity, let it still down softly into his stomach as he sits, and then let
him move suddenly. If ye thirst be in yt evening by eating too much, and
drinking of wine, then after the opinion of the most learned physicians, and as
I my self have often experienced the best remedy is, if there be no fever, to
drink a good draught of cold water immediately, or else if it be not painful
for him to vomit, to provoke him thereto with a little warm water, and after
to wash his mouth with vinegar and water, and sleep long and soundly if he can.

And if in the morning he feel any fumosities rising, then to drink Julep of
violets, or for lack thereof a good draught of very small ale, or beer
somewhat warmed, without eating any thing after it.

Of diversities of meats eaten, whereby health is appayred. CAP. 28.
NOw let this be a general rule, that sundry meats, being diverse in
substance and quality, eaten all at one meal, is the greatest enemy to
health that may be, and that ingendreth most sicknesses, for some meats being
gross and hard to digest, some fine and easy to digest, do require diverse
operations of nature, and diverse temperatures of the stomach, that is to say,
much heat and temperate heat, which may not be together at one time.

Therefore when the fine meat is sufficiently boiled in the stomach, the
gross meat is raw, so both iuyces, the one good and perfect, the other gross
and crude, at one time digested, and sent into the veins and body, needs
must health decay, and sicknesses be engendered. Likewise in diverse meats
being of diverse qualities, as where some are hot and moist, some cold and
moist, some hot and dry, some cold and dry, according thereunto shall the juice
be diverse which they make in the body. And like as between the said qualities
is contrariety, so thereby shall be in the body an unequal temperature, for
as much as it is not possible for a man to esteem so just a proportion, of the
qualities of that which he receives, that the one shall not exceed the other
in quantity.

Wherefore of the said unequal mixture, needs must ensue corruption and
consequently sickness, and therefore to a hole man, it were better to feed at one
meal competently on very gross meat only, so that it be sweet, and his
nature do not abhor it, then on diverse fine meats of sundry substance and
qualities. I have known and seen old men and old women which eating only
beef, baken, cheese, and curdes, have continued in good health, whom I have
proved, that when they have eaten sundry fine meats at one meal, have soon
after felt themselves grieved with frettings, and headache, and after that they
have been hole again, there has been given to them one kind of light
meat, they have done as well therewith as they were wont to do with gross meats,
when they eat it alone, which proves to be true that which I have rehearsed.
And it is good reason, for after the general opinion of Philosophers and
Physicians, the nature of mankind is best content with things most simple and
vnmixte, all things tending to unity, wherein is the only perfection. Also
it is a general rule of physic, that where a sickness may be cured with
simples, that is to say, with one only thing that is medicinable, there should
the Physician give no compound medicine mixte with many things.

These things considered, it may seem to all men that have reason, what abuse
is here in this realm in the continual gourmandise and dailye feeding on
sundry meats at one meal, the spirit of gluttony triumphing among us, in his
glorious chariot called welfare, driving us from him, as his prisoners into his
dungeon of surfeit, where we are tormented with catars, fevers, gouts,
pluresies, fretting of the guts, and many other sicknesses, and finally put
to death by them, oftentimes in youth, or in the most pleasant time of our
life, when we would most gladly live, for the remedy whereof how many times
have there been devised ordinances, and acts of counsel, although
perchance bodily health was not the chief occasion thereof, but rather
provision against vain and sumptuous expenses of the mean people. For the
nobility was exempted and had liberty to abide still in the dungeon if they
would, and to live less while then other men. But when, where, and how long
were the said good devises put in due execution, for all that, that thereof
should succeed double profit, that is to say, health of body, and increase of
substance, by eschewing of superfluous expe^ces in sundry dishes. Alas how long
will men fantasy laws and good ordinances, and never determine them. Fantasy
proceeds of wit, determination of wisdom, wit is in the devising and
speaking, but wisdom is in the perfourmance, which rests only in
execution. Here have I almost forgotten, that my purpose was to write of the
order of diet, and not of laws: but the fervent love that I have to the
public weal of my country, constrained me to digress some what from my
matter, but now will I proceed forth to write of order which in taking of
meats and drinks is not the least part of diet.

Of order of receiving of meats, and drink. CAP. 29.
Herbs as well sodden as vnsodden, also fruits which do mollify and loose
the belly, ought to be eaten before any other meat, except that sometime for
the repressing of fumosities rising in the head by much drinking of wine, raw
lettice, or a cold apple, or the juice of Orenges or Lymons, may be taken
after meals in a little quantity.

Moreover all breathes, milk, reere eggs and meats which are purposely taken
to make the belly soluble, would first be eaten. Al fruits and other meats
that are stiptike or binding, would be eaten last after all other. Fruits
confectionate specially with honey, are not to be eaten with other meats.
But here is to be diligently noted, that where the stomach is choleric and
strong, gross meats would be first eaten, where the stomach is cold or
weak, there would fine meats be first eaten: for in a hot stomach fine
meats are burned, while the gross meat is digesting. Contrariwise in a cold
stomach, the little heat is suffocate with gross meat, and the fine meats
left raw, for lack of concoction, where if the fine meat be first taken
moderately, it stirs up and comfort natural heat, and makes it more
able to concoct gross meats, if they be eaten afterward, so that it be but
in small quantity, notwithstanding, as I lately affirmed one manner of meat is
most sure to every complexion, foreseen that it be always most commonly in
conformity of qualities with the person ye eats. Moreover take heed that
slipper meats be not first eaten, least it draw with it too hastily other
meats, ere they be digested, nor yt stiptike or restraining meats, be taken
at the beginning, as Quinces, Pears, and Medlers, lest they may let other
meats that they descend not into the bottom of the stomach where they should
be digested, notwithstanding the confection made with the juice of Quinces,
called Diacitonites, taken two hours before dinner or supper, is commended of
Galen and other for restoring appetite and making good concoction. Also
concerning drink at meals, it would not be before that Drink at meals.
somewhat were eaten, and at the beginning the drink would be strongest, and
so toward the end more small, if it be ale or beer, and if it be wine more and
more alayd with water: and after the better opinion of Physicians, the drink
would rather be mixed with the meat by sundry little draughts, the^ with one
great draught at the end of the meal: for the mixture tempereth well the
meat without annoyance, a great draught with much drink drowneth the meat,
rebukes natural heat that then works in co^coction, and with his weight
drives down the meat too hastily. Hot wines and sweet, or confectioned with
spices, or very strong ale, or beer, are not convenient at meals: for the
meat is by them rather corrupted then digested, and they make hot and stinking
vapors ascend up to the brains. Albeit if the stomach be very windy, or so
cold and feeble, that it cannot concoct such a quantity of meat as is
required to the sufficient nourishment of the body of him that eats, or has
eaten raw herbs or fruits, whereby he feels some annoyance, then may he
drink incontinent after his meal, a little quantity of secke, or good Aqua
vitae, in small ale: but if he have much choler in his stomach, or a head full
of vapors, it were much better that he did neither drink the one nor the
other, but rather eat a little coliander seed prepared, or a piece of a
Quince roasted, or in Marmelade, and after rest to amend the lack of nature
with sleep, moderate exercise, and plasters providing for comforting of the
stomach. And here will I leave to write any more of the diet of eating and
drinking, saving that I would, that the readers should have in remembrance
these two counsels. First, that to an hole man, to practice a rule is not
convenient in diet, and that the diseases which do happen by too much
abstinence, are worse to be cured, then they which come by repletio^. And
Cornelius Celsus says, a man that is hole and well at ease, and at his
liberty, ought not to bind himself to rules or need a Physician: but yet
where the stomach is feeble, as is of more part of the citizens, and welnigh
all they that be studious in learning or weighty affairs, there ought to be
more circumspection, that the meat may be such as yt either in quality or
quantity, nature being but feeble, be not rebuked or too much oppressed.

Of sleep and watch. CAP. 30.
THe commodity of moderate sleep appears by this, that natural heat which
is occupied about that matter, whereof proceeds nourishment, is comforted in
the places of digestion, and so digestion is made better or more perfect by
sleep, the body fatter, the mind more quiet and clear, the humors
temperate, and by much watch all things happen contrary.

The moderation of sleep must be measured by health and sickness, by age, by
time, by emptines or fulness of the body, and by natural complexions. First to
a hole man, having no debilitie of nature, and digesting perfectly the meat
that he eats, a little sleep is sufficient: but to them which have weak
stomachs, and do digest slowly, it requires that sleep be much longer,
semblably temperance is required in youth and age: winter and summer, ye body
being full of ill humors, very little sleep is sufficient, except the humors
be crude or raw, for the^ is sleep necessary, which digesteth them better
then labor, semblably where the body is long empty, by long sickness, or
abstinence, sleep comfort nature as well in the principal members, as in all
the other. Also regard must be had to the complexion, for they that are hot and
do eat little and digest quickly, a little sleep serves, specially to
cholerike persons, for in them much sleep augmenteth heat, more then is
necessary, whereby hot fumes and inflammations are often engendered, and
sometime the natural choler is adust or putrified, as experience teaches.
Fleumatike persons are naturally inclined to sleep: and because they engender
much humors, they require more sleep then sanguine or cholerike. Persons
having natural melancholy, not proceeding of choler adust, do require very much
sleep, which in them comforts the powers animal, vital and natural, which
ye may find written in the tables preceding. Sleep would be taken not
immediately after meals, and before that yt meat is descended from the mouth of
the stomach. For thereby is engendered pains and noise in the belly, and
digestion corrupted, and the sleep by ill vapors ascending, made unquiet and
troublous. Moreover, immoderate sleep makes the body apt unto palsies,
apoplexies, falling sickness, rheumes and impostumes. Also it makes the wits
dull, and the body flow and unapt to honest exercise. Semblably immoderate
watch dries too much the body, and does debilitate the powers animal, lets
digestion, and makes the body apt to consumption. Wherefore in these two
things, as well as all other, a diligent temperance is to be used, the
moderation is best coniected (for it is hard perfectly to know it) by the
sensible lightness of the body, specially of the brain, the brows, and the
eyes, the passage down of the meat from the stomach, the will to make urine,
and to go to the stool: contrariwise, heaviness in the body and eyes, and
savor of the meat before eaten, signifies that the sleep was not
sufficient. They that are hole, must sleep first on the right side, because
the meat may approach to the liver, which is in the stomach as fire under the
pot, and by him is digested.

To them which have feeble digestion, it is good to sleep prostrate on their
bellies, or to have their bare hand on their stomachs. Lying upright on the
back it is to be utterly abhorred.

The commodity of exercise, and the time when it should be used. CAP. 31.
Every moving is not an exercise but only that which is vehement, the end
whereof is alteration of ye breath or wind of a man. Of exercise do proceed
two commodities, euacuation of excrements, and also good habit of the body:
for exercise being a vehement motion, thereof needs must ensue hardness of the
members, whereby labor shall the less grieve, and the body be the more
strong to labor. Also thereof comes augmentation of heat, whereby happens
the more attraction of things to be digested, also more quick alteration and
better nourishing. Moreover, that al and singular parts of the body, be
therewith somewhat humected. Whereby it happens, that things hard be
mollified, moist things are extenuate, and the pores of the body are more
opened. And by the violence of the breath or wind, the pores are cleansed, and
the filth in ye body naturally expelled. This thing is so necessary to the
preservation of health, that without it, no man may be long without sickness:
which is affirmed by Cornelius Celsus, saying, that sluggishnes dulleth the
body, labor does strengthen it: the first brings the incommodities of age
shortly, the last makes a man long time lusty. Notwithstanding, in exercise
ought to be four things diligently considered, that is to say: the time, the
things preceding, the quality, and quantity of exercise. First, as concerning
the time convenient for exercise, that it be, not when there is in the stomach
or bowels great quantity of meat, not sufficiently digested, or of humors,
crude, or raw, least thereby peril might ensue by conueiance of them into all the members, before those meats or humors be concoct or boiled sufficiently.
Galen says, that the time most convenient for exercise is, when both the first
and second digestion is complete, as well in the stomach, as in the veins,
and that the time approaches to eat eftsoons. For if ye do exercise sooner or
later, ye shall either fill the body with crude humors, or else augment yellowe
choler. The knowledge of this time is perceived by the color of the urine: for
that which resembles unto clear water, betokens that the juice which
comes from the stomach, is crude in the veins: that which is well colored,
not too high or bace, betokens that the second digestion is now perfect:
where the color is very high or red, it signifies that the concoction is more
then sufficient. Wherefore when the urine appears in a temperate color, not
red nor pale, but as it were gilt, then should exercise have his beginning.

Of Fricasies or rubbings preceding exercise. CAP. 32.
AS touching things preceding exercise, as much as it is to be feared, least by
vehement exercise any of the excrements of the belly or bladder, should hastily
be received into the habit of the body, by the violence of heat kindled by
exercise, also least some thing which is hole, be by heaviness of excrements or
violent motion, broken or pulled out of his place, or that the excrements by
violence of the breath, should stop the pores or conduites of the body, it
shall be necessary little and little, by chasing the body, first to mollify
the parts consolidate, and to extenuate or make thin humors, and to loose and
open the pores, and then shall ensue to him that exercises no peril of
obstruction or rupture. And to bring that to pass, it shall be expedient,
after that the body is cleansed, to rub the body with a course linen cloth,
first softly and easily, and after to increase more and more to a hard and
swift rubbing, until the flesh do swell, and be somewhat ruddie, and that not
only down right, but also overthwart and round. Some do use fricasies in this
form, in the morning after that they have bin at the stool, with their shirt
sleeves or bare hand, if their flesh be tender, they deo first softly, and
afterward faster rub their breast and sides downward, and overthwart, not
touching their stomach or belly, and after cause their servant semblably to
rub overthwart their shoulders and back, and beginning at their neck bone,
and not touching the raines of their back, except they do feel there much
cold and wind, and afterward their legs from the knees to the ankle: last,
their arms from the elbow, to the hand-wrest. And in this form of fricasie, I
my self have found an excellent commodity. Old men, or they which be very
dry in their bodies, if they put to some sweet oils, as Yrinum, Nardinum,
Chamelinum, or other like mixed with a little sweet oil of Roses, I suppose
they do well. I will not here speak of ointments, used in old time among the
Romans and Greeks, in fricasies or rubbings. For I suppose, that they were
never here used, and in the said places, they be also left, unless it be in
palsies, or apoplexies, or against the rigor which happens in fevers only.
I will remember the saying of Hippocrates: Fricasie has power to loose, to
bind, to increase flesh, and to minish it. For hard fricasies do bind or
consolidate: soft rubbing does loose or mollify, much do minish flesh, mean
rubbing does augment or increase it. He that will know more abundantly hereof,
let him read the book of Galen, of the preservation of health, called in
latin, Detuenda sanitate, translated most truly and eloquently out of Greek
into Latin, by Doctor Linac^e, late Physician of most worthy memory, to our
sovereign Lord King Henry the eight. The same matter is written more briefly
of Paulus Aegineta, Oribasius, Aetius, and some other late writers, but unto
Galen not to be compared.

The diversities of exercises. CAP. 33.
THe quality of exercise, is the diversity thereof, for as much as therein be
many differences in moving, and also some exercise moves more one part of ye
body, some an other. In difference of moving some is slow, or soft, some is
swift or fast, some is strong or violent, some be mixed with strength or
swiftnes. Strong or violent exercises be these, deluing, specially in tough
clay, and heavy, bearing or sustaining of heavy burdens, climbing or walking
against a steep upright hill, holding a rope, and climbing up thereby, hanging
by the hands on any thing above a man's reach, that his feet touch not the
ground, standing and holding up, and spreading the arms, with the hands fast
closed, and abiding so a long time. Also to hold the arms steadfast, causing
an other man to assay to pull them out, and notwithstanding he keeps his
arm steadfast, enforcing thereunto the sine was and muscules. Wrestling also
with the arms and legs: if the persons be equal in strength, it does
exercise the one and the other: if the one be stronger, then is it to the
weaker a more violent exercise. All these kinds of exercises, and other like
them, do augment strength, and therefore they serve only for young men, which
be inclined, or be apt to the wars. Swift exercise without violence is
running, playing with weapons, tenise, or throwing of the ball, trotting a
space of ground forward, and backward, going on the toes, and holding up the
hands. Also stirring up and down his arms, without plummets. Uehement
exercise is compound of violent exercise, and swift, when they are joined
together at one time, as daunsing of Galiardes, throwing of the ball, and
running after it. Football play may be in the number thereof, throwing of the
long Dart, and continuing it many times, running in harness, and other like:
the moderate exercise is long walking, or going a journey.

The parts of the body have sundry exercises appropried unto them, as running
and going is most proper for the legs: moving of the arms up and down, of
stretching them out, and playing with weapons, serves most for the arms and
shoulders, stooping and rising oftentimes, as lifting great waights, taking up
plummets, or other like poyses on the ends of the staves, and in likewise
lifting up in every hand a spear or morespike by the ends, specially crossing
the hands, and to lay them down again in their places: these do exercise the
back and loins. Of the bulk and lungs, the proper exercise is moving of the
breath in singing and crying. The entrails which be underneath the middreffe,
be exercised by blowing either by constraint, or playing on shaulmes or
sackbots, or other like instruments which do require much wind.

The muscules are best exercised with holding ye breath in a long time, so that
he which does exercise, has well digested his meat, and is not troubled with
much wind in his body. Finally, loud reading, counterfaite battle, Cel. 2.
tenise, or throwing the ball, running, walking, and to shooting, which in mine
opinion exceed all the other, do exercise the body commodiously. Always
remember, that the end of violent exercise is, difficulty in fetching of
breath. Of moderate exercise, alteration of breath only, or the beginning of
sweat.

Moreover in Winter, running and wrestling is convenient. In Summer, wrestling
a little, but not running. In very cold weather, much walking, in hot weather,
rest is more expedient. They which seem to have moist bodies, and live in
idleness, they have need of violent exercise. They which are lean and
cholerike must walk softly, and exercise themselves very temperatly. The
Plummets called of Galen Alteres, which are now much used with great men, being
of equal weight, and according to the strength of him that exercises, are
very good to be used fasting, a little before breakfast or dinner, holding in
every hand a plummet, and lifting them down with much violence, and so he may
make the exercise violent or moderate, after the poise of the plummets, heavier
or lighter, and with much or little laboring with the^.

Of gestation, that is to say, where one is carried, and is of an other thing
moved, and not of himself. CAP. 34.
THere is also an other kind of exercise, which is called Gestation, and is
mixed with moving and rest. For as much as the body sitting or lying seems to
rest, and notwithstanding it is moved by that which bears it, as lying in a
bed, hanging by cords or chains, or in a cradle, sitting in a chair which is
carried on men's shoulders with staves, as was the use of the ancient Romans, or
sitting in a boat or barge, which is rowed, ryding on a horse which aumbleth
very easily, or goes a very soft pace. The bed, cradle, and chair carried,
serves for the^ that are in long and continual sickness, or be lately
recovered of a fever. Also them which have the frenzy or li^harge, or have a
light tertiane fever, or a quotidiane. This exercise sweetly asswageth
troubles of the mind, and provoke sleep, as it appears in children, which
are rocked. Also it is convenient for them, which have the palsy, the stone,
or the gout. Gestation in a chariot or wagon, has in it a shaking of the body,
but some vehement, and some more sost, the soft serves in diseases of the
head, and where any matter runs down into the stomach and intrailes. But
the vehement shaking is to be used in the griefs of the breast and the
stomach.

Also in swelling of the body and legs, in dropsies, palsies, migrimes, and
scoto(...)ies, which is an imagination of darkness: being returned at the end
of his journey, he must sit up, and be easily moved. I have known says Aetius,
many persons in such wise cured, we out any other help. Navigations or rowing
nigh to the land in a calm water, is expedient for them that have dropsies,
lepries, palsies, called of the vulgar people takings and fransies: to be
carried on a rough water it is a violent exercise, and induces sundry
affections of the mind, sometime fear, sometime hope, now cowarde heart, now
hardines, one while pleasure, an other while displeasure. These exercises, if
they be well te^pered, they may put out of ye the body al long during
sicknesses: for yt which is mixed with rest and moving, if any thing else may,
it most excellently causes the body to be well nourished. Celsus does
prohibit Gestation, Celsus. 2.
where the body feels pain, and in the beginning of fevers, but when they
cease, he allows it. Riding moderatly and without grief, does corroborate
the spirit and body above other exercises, specially the stomach, it cleanses
the senses and makes them more quick. Albeit to the breast it is very noyful,
it ought to be remembered, that as well this, as all other kinds of exercise,
would be used in a whole country, and where the air is pure and uncorrupted.
Foreseen that he that will exercise, do go first to the stool, for the causes
rehearsed in the last chapter.

Of Vociferation. CAP. 15.
THe chief exercise of the breast and instruments of the voice, is
vociferation, which is singing, reading or crying, whereof is the property
that it purges natural heat, and makes it also subtle and stable, and
makes the members of the body substantial and strong, resisting diseases.
This exercise would be used of persons short winded, and them which cannot
fetch their breath, but holding their neck straight upright. Also of them
whose flesh is consumed, specially about the breast and shoulders. Also which
have had aposthumes broken in their breasts. Moreover of them that are hoarse
by the much moisture, and to them which have quartayn fevers, it is convenient:
It loses the humor that sticks in the breast, and dries up the moistnes of
the stomach, which properly the course of the quartaine is wont to bring with
them, it also profits them which have feeble stomachs, or do vomit
continually, or do break up sowrenes out of the stomach. It is good also for
griefs of the head. He that intends to attempt this exercise, after that he
has been at the stool, and softly rubbed the lower parts, and washed his
hands, let him speak with as bace a voice as he can, and walking, begin to
sing louder and louder, but still in a bace voice, and to take no heed of
sweet tunes or harmony. For that nothing does profit unto health of body,
but to enforce himself to sing great, for thereby much air drawn in by
fetching of breath, thrusts forth the breast and stomach, and opens and
inlargeth the pores. By high crying and loud reading, are expelled superfluous
humors. Therefore men and women having their bodies feeble, and their flesh
loose, and not firm, must read oftentimes loud, and in a bace voice,
extending out the windpipe, and other passages of the breath. But
notwithstanding this exercise is not used always and of all persons. For they in
whom is abundant of humors corrupted, or be much diseased with cruditie in
the stomach and veins, those do I counsel to abstain from the exercise of
the voice, least much corrupted juice or vapors, may thereby be into all the
body distributed.

And here I conclude to speak of exercises, which of them that desire to
remain long in health is most diligently, and as I might say, most
scrupulouslie to be observed.

The third Book of the Castle of Health.
Of Repletion. CAP. 1.
REpletion is a superfluous abundance of humors in the body: and that is in
two manner of wise, that is to say, in quantity and in quality: in quantity,
as where all the four humors are more in abundance, then be equal in
proportion to the body that contains them, or where one humor much exceeds
the remnant in quantity. In quality, as where the blood or other humor, is
hotter or colder, thicker or thinner, then is convenient unto the body.

First, where all the humors being superfluously increased, fills and
extends the receptories of the body, as the stomach, the veins, and the
bowels, and is most properly called fulness, in Greek Plethora, in Latin
Plenitudo.

The other is, where the body is infarsed either with choler, yellow or black,
or with fleume, or with watrie humors, and is properly called in Greek
Cacothimia, in Latin Vitiosus succus, in English it may be called corrupt
juice. I will not here write, the subtle and abundant definitions and
descriptions of Galen in his books de plenitudine, and in his commentaries upon
the aqhorismes of Hippocrates. For it shall here suffice, to show the
operations of repletion, good or ill, remitting them which be curious, and
desire a more ample declaration to the most excellent works of Galen, where he
may be satisfied, if he be not determined to repugne against reason.
Hippocrates says, where meat is received much above nature, that makes
sickness, Galen declaring that place Lib. 2. Aph. apho. 12. Vbi cibus praeter
natutam plus ingestus est, hic morbum facit.
says: more meat then accords with natures measure, is named repletion. And
afterward he expounded that word above nature, to signify too much and
superfluosly, as who says, where the meat is superfluously taken, it makes
sickness. For meat but a little exceeding temperance, Galen. in comment. loco
praedicto.
may not forth with make sickness, but may yet keep the body within the
latitude or bounds of health, for the meat that shall make sickness, must not a
little exceed the exquisite measure. The incommoditie which happens thereby
is, that moistnes is too much extended, and natural heat is debilitate. Also
natural heat resolves some what of the superfluous meat and drink. And of
that which is resolved of meat undigested, proceeds fumosity gross and
undigested, which ascending up into the head, and touching the rym wherein the
brain is wrapped, causes headache, trumbling of the members, duskishnesse of
the sight, and many other sicknesses, also by the sharpnes thereof, it pricheth
and annoyeth the sinews, which make sensibilitie, the roots of whom are in
the brain, and from thence passes through all the body. Finally the said
^^^mosity engendered of repletion, piercing the innermost part of the said
sinews called sensible, grievously annoyeth the power animal, there
consisting, by the occasion whereof, understanding and reason, as to the use of
them are let and troubled.

And also the tongue which is reasons expositour, is deprived of his office, as
it appears in them which are drunk, and them which have grievous pains in
their head, proceeding of repletions. Signs of repletion be these, loss of
appetite, delight in nothing, slothfulnes, dulnes of the wit and senses, more
sleep then was accustomed to be, cramps in the body, sterting or salcion of
the Oribasius euoriston. lib. 1.
members; fulness of the veins, and thicknes of the pulses, horror or
shroueling of the body mixte with heat. The remedies are abstinence and all
euacuation, whereof I will make mention in the next Chapter.

Of Euacuation. CAP. 2.
THe meats and drinks received into the body: if the stomach and liver do
their natural office, be altered by concoction and digestion in such wise,
that the best part thereof, goes into the nourishment of the body. The worst
being separate by the members official, from the residue, are made excrementes
in sundry forms and substances, which are like in quality to the natural
humor, which then reigns most in the body. These excrements be none other,
but matter superfluous, and unsavory, which by natural powers may not be
converted into flesh, but remaining in the body, corrupt the members, and
therefore nature abhorring them, desires to have them expelled. These
excrements be three in number, ordure, urine, humor superfluous. Moreover
there be two sorts of ordure, that is to say, one digested, which Ordure.
passes by siege, the other undigested, which is expelled Digested.
by vomit. Where I say digested, I mean that it is passed the stomach, and
turned unto an other figure. Likewise I call that undigested, which still
remains in the figure of meat.

Uryne is the watrie substance of the blood, like as Urine.
whay is of milk, which out of the meat that is altered, and concoct or
boiled in the stomach, is strayned in the veins called Misaraice, which
proceeds from the holow part of the liver, and sent by the raynes into the
bladder, passes by the instrument, the which is ordained as well to that
purpose, as for generation.

Humor superfluous is in three sorts, either mixed with any of the four
humors, called natural, or else it Humor superfluous.
is gathered into the brain, or it is between the skins and the flesh, or
lies among the sinews, Muscules or joints. Of humors some are more gross,
some are cold, subtle and hot, and are called vapors. Now for to expel the
said excrements, are 9. sundry kinds of euacuation, that is to say, abstinence,
vomit, purgatio^ by siege, letting of blood, scarifying called cupping,
sweating, provocation of urine, spitting, bleeding at the nose, or by
hemerodes. And in women their natural purgations. Of these euacuatio^s I will
briefly declare, with the commodities, which by the discreet use of them do
happen unto ye body.

Of abstinence. CAP. 3.
ABstinence is a forbearing to receive any meat or Cor. Cel. lib. 2. Hipp. 2.
aphor. lib. 7.
drink. For if it be but in part, it is rather then called temperance then
abstinence. It ought to be used only after repletion, as the proper remedy
therefore. And the^ if it be moderate, it consumes superfluities, and in
consuming them, it clarifieth the humors, makes the body Considerations in
abstinence.
fair colored, and not only keeps out sickness, but also where sickness is
entered, nothing more helps it if it be used in season. To them which have
very moist bodies hunger is right expedient, for it makes them more dry,
notwithstanding there ought to be considerations in the meat before eaten, in
the age of the person, in the time of the year, and in custom. First in the
meat before eaten, if it be much in excess, or very gross, or not much
exceeding, or light of digestion, and according thereunto would abstinence more
or less be proportioned. Concerning Aph. lib. 1. Gal. in comment.
age, Hippocrates says, old men may sustain fasting easily: next unto them,
men of middle age, young men may worse bear it, children worst of all,
specially they that be lusty, notwithstanding, here Galen corrects
Hippocrates saying: that he should have excepted men very old, who, as
experience declares, must eat often and little. As touching time, it must be
remembered that in winter and spring time, the stomachs be naturally very hot,
and sleep is long, and therefore in that time, meats would be more
abundant, and although much be eaten, it will be sooner digested. Wherefore
abstinence would not be the^ so much as in summer, albeit, to abstein much in
Summer, except it be after repletion, Damascene Damascenus apho.
says, it dries the body, it makes the color salow, it ingendreth
melancholy, and hurts the sight. Moreover custom may not be forgotten, for
they which be used from childhood, to eat sundry meals in the day, would
rather be reduced to fewer meals, and little meat, then to be compelled to
abstain utterly, to the intent that nature which is made by custom, be not
rebuked, and the power digestive thereby debilitate. And note well, that by too
much abstinence, the moisture of the body is withdrawe^: and consequently the
body dries, and wareth lean, natural heat, by withdrawing of moisture is
too much incended, and not finding humor to work in, turns his violence to
ye radical or substantial moisture of the body, and exhausting that humor,
brings the body into a consumption. Wherefore Hippocra. says, that too Apho
lib. 2.
scarce and exquisite an order in meat and drink, is for the more part more
dangerous then that which is more abou^dant. Contrariwise moderation in
abstinence according to the said consideration is to health a sure bulwark.

Of Vomit. CAP. 4.
THe meat or drink superfluous, or corrupted, in the stomach, is best
expelled by vomit, if it be not very grievous to him which is diseased. Also
the moderate use Aetius lib. 3.
of it purges fleume, lights the head, causes that the excess of meats or
drinks, shall not annoy or bring sickness. Moreover it amendeth the affectes
of the raynes, bladder and the fundament. It also helps against lepries,
cankers, goutes, dropsies, and also diverse sicknesses proceeding of the
stomach. For if any grief happens of the head, vomit is then vncommodious.
It is better in winter and how in Summer. Also good for them which are replete
or very choleric, if they have not well digested, but it is ill for them that
be lea^e, or have weak stomachs. And therefore where one feels bitter
vapors rising (...), with grief and weightines in the over parts of his
body, let him run forth to this remedy. It is also good for him that is heart
burned, and has much spit(...), or his stomach wambleth, and for him that
remoueth into sundry places. Yet I counsel, says Celsus, him that will be
in health, and would Cor. Cd. lib. (...).
not be so soon aged, that he use not this daily. And I my self have known
me^ which daily using it, have brought thereby their stomachs in such custom,
that whatsoever they did eat, they could long retain it, whereby they shorten
their lives. Wherefore it would not be used, but only where great surfeit, or
abundance of fleume do require it. He that will vomit after meat, let him
drink sundry drinks mixed together, and first of all, warm water: or if that
be too easy, let him mix there with salt, or honey. If he will vomit fasting,
let him drink water and honey sodden together, or Hysope with it, or eat of a
Radish root, and drink warm water upon it. Also water wherein Radish is
boiled, and afterward provoke himself to it. They that will have more violent
purgations, I remit to Physicians learned. But yet I do eftsoons warn them,
that therein they be circumspect, and do not much use it. Moreover, in
vomits, ye matter brought forth, would be considered, according to the rules of
Hippocrates, in his second book of prognostications, that is Hippo. praesag.
2. cap. 7.
to say, if it be mixed with fleume and choler, it is most profitable, if it be
not in very great quantity, or thick, the less mixture it has, the worse it
is. If it be green like to leeke blades thin or black, it is to be judged
ill. If it have all colors, it is extreme perilous. If it be leadie colored,
and sauoureth horrible, it signifies a short abolition, or dissolution of
nature. For as Galen affirms there in his comment, such manner of vomit
declares Galen de loci^ affectis lib. 1.
corruption with extincting of nature. Also every putrified and stinking savor
in vomit is ill. These things be right necessary to be looked for where one
does vomit without any difficulty: but to enforce one to vomit, which cannot,
is very odious and to be abhorred.

Of purgation by siege. CAP. 5.
IF the head be heavy, or the eyes dim, or if there be pain felt of the
colicke, or in the lower part of the belly, or in the hippes, or some cholerike
matter or fleume in the stomach. Also if the breath be hardly fetched, if the
belly of himself sends forth nothing, or if being costiue, one feels ill
savor or bitterness in his mouth, Cel. lib. 1. Actius lib. 3.
or that which he makes has an horrible savor, or if abstinence do not at
the first put away the fever, or if the strength of the body may not sustain
letting of blood, or else the time therefore convenient is past, or if one have
drunk much before his sickness, or if he which oftentimes unconstrained has
had great sieges, be suddenly stopped. In all these cases, and where it is
painful to vomit, and in gnawing or frettings of the stomach: finally, in all
repletions, where a man cannot or will not be let blood or vomit, it is
expedient to provoke siege by purgations, which are to be received by two
ways: upward at the fundament by suppositories or clisters: downward at the
mouth, by potions, electuaries, or pills. Suppositories are used where ye
patient is weak, and may not receive any other purgations. Sometime forasmuch
as the strait gut is stopped with excreme^ts, which are dry and hard:
sometime where there needs none other purgation, specially in burning fevers,
whereof the matter ascends into the head, the^ clisters may do harm, and by
the benefit of suppositories, excrements are brought forth without any
annoyance. And oftentimes it brings forth that which clisters may not.
Suppositories are made sometime with honey only, sodden, rolled on a board, and
made round, smaller at one end then at the other, and of the length and
greatness, according to the quantity of the body that takes it. Sometime
there is mixed with the honey, salt dried, or salt and pepper, or the powder of
such things as do either purge the humor which offends, or dissolueth gross
winds, or other matter: they be sometime made with rosme, pitch, wax, or
gummes: sometime of roots, or the leaves of green Mercury, very small bruised.
Also with figs or raisons, the stones taken out, or of white soap made in the
figure aforesaid, and being made in the form aforesaid, they must be put in
at the fundament to the great end, and the patient must keep it there the
space of half an hour or more.

Clisters are made of licour sometime simple, as water sodden, milk, oil, or
wine: sometime mixed, as water and oil together, or decoctions, as where herbs,
roots, fruits, feeds, or gu^mes, having property to make soft, dissolve,
draw forth, or expel matter that grieueth, be boiled, and the licour thereof
sometime warm, sometime hot, is received at the fundament into ye body, by a
little pipe of gold or silver, iuory, or wood, therefore ordained and called a
clister pipe. This is necessary where the stomach is weak, and may not
sustain working of medicines received at the mouth: also in fevers, collickes,
and other diseases in the bowels, grief in the raines of the back, or huckle
bone, dentosities in the belly, inflammation or exulceration in the guts or
bladder. It is a convenient and sure medicine, and least hurt does ensue of it.
The making and ordering thereof, I will omit to write in this place, partly
that I would not that Physicians should too much note in me presumption, partly
that another place may be more apt to that purpose.

The particular commodities of every purgation. CAP. 5.
IN potions, electuaries, and pills, ought to be much more observation, than
in clisters or suppositories, for as much as these do enter no further then
unto the gut where the ordure lies, and by that place only brings forth the
matter which causes disease. But the other entering in that way, that meats
and drinks do, comes into the stomach, and there is boiled, and sent into
the places of digestion, and afterward is mixed with the juice, whereof the
substance of the body is made, and expelling the adversary humors, somewhat
thereof doubtless remains in the body. Wherefore men have need to beware,
what medicines they receive, that in them be no venenositie, malice or
corruption, least for the expelling of a superfluous humor, which perchance
good diet or some broths made of good herbs, or the said euacuatio^, with
suppositorie or ^ister, might bring forth at leisure, by desiring of too
hasty remedy, they receive in medicine, that which shall engender a venomous
humor, and inevitable destruction into all the body. And therefore happy is
he which in sickness finds a discreet and well learned Phisitio^, and so
true Apothecary, that has always drugs uncorrupted, and whom the Physician may
surely trust to dispense his things truly.

But now to return to the said form of purgation, I will now set forth some
cou^sailes, concerning that matter which I have collected out of the chief
Authors of Physic. Bodies hot and moist, may easily sustain purgation by the
stool. They which be leanie or thin, having the members tender, may take
harm by purgations. To men that are cholerike, and them that eat little,
purgations are grievous. In young children and old men, it is dangerous to
loose much the belly. To them that are not wont to it, purgation is noyfull. He
that lives in a good order of diet, needs neither purgatio^ nor vomit. After
that the purgation has wrought, thirstines, and sound sleep, be signs that
the body is sufficiently purged. By daily (...) of medicines, Nature is
corrupted. When ye will purge any thing, make first the matter flowing and
soluble. Medicine to purge, ought not to be mingled with meats, but to be taken
4 hours at the least before meals, or three hours after meals, except
certain easy pills made to cleanse and comfort the stomach, which would be
taken at the beginning of supper, or after supper, a little before that one
goes to bed, making a light supper or none. After purgation taken, the patient
should rest, and not walk until the medicine has wrought, nor eat nor
drink in the mean space. These things have I remembered, because I have known
right good Physicians, to have forgotten to instruct thereof their patients.
Now will I set forth the table of such things which of their property do
digest, or purge superfluous humors particularly, which I have gathered out of
the books of Dioscorides, Galen, Paulus Aegineta, Oribasius and Aetius, and
other late writers: notwithstanding, I have not written all, for as much as
there be diverse things, whereunto we have not yet found any names in English.

Digestiues of choler.
Endive, Lettise, Cicorie, Scabiose, Maiden hair. Malowes, Mercury, The juice
of pomgranades. Purslane, Popie, Barberies, Roses. Uiolets the leaf and
flower, Sorell, Liuerwort. Sorell de boise, Whay clarified. The four great
cold seeds, that is to say, of Gourds, Cucumbers, Melons, and Citruls.
Psilium, Uineger, Saunders, Barley water, Prunes, Tamarinds.
Purgers of choler.
Wild hops, Wormwood, Centorie, Fumitorie. Whay of butter, Uidlets, Mercury,
Prunes. Juice of Roses, Eupatorie. Tamarinds half an ounce in a decoction.
Manna 6. drammes at the least, and so to 25. in the broth of a hen or capon.
Reubarbarum by it self from two drams unto four, infused or steeped in
licour, from four drams unto eight.
Digestiues of fleume.
Fenell, Persely the roots, Smallage, Capers, Laurel. Senuie, Puly, Marioram,
Peniroyall. Wild parsnep seed, Mint, Pimpernell, Horemint. Gladen, Agrimony,
Calamint, Nep, Betany, Sage. Radish, Mugwort, Juniper, Hysope, Pyony, Baulme.
Honey, Ginger, Souilla, Alstolochia, Cinamom. Pepper, Cumine.
Purgers of fleume.
Centory, Nettle, Agrimony, Alder. Polipodium of the oak. Mirabolani kebuly,
infused from half an ounce to an ounce, and two drams, in substance from two
drams to half an ounce. Agaricus, from a dram to two drams, infused from two
drams to five. Yreos, Maydenhaire, Sticados.
Purgers of melancholy.
The brath of Coleworts light boiled. Baulme mint, Sticados, Time. Seen boiled
in white wine, or in the broth of a hen. Lased sauery, Epithimus, Unwrought
silk, Organum. Calamint, Borage, Hearts tung, Quickbeme. Maidenhaire, With
wind, Pulial mountain. Honey, Sugar.
Melancholy for the thinnes and subtilnes of the humor, needs no digestive.

They that will take sharp purgations, or compound with diverse things, let
them take the counsel of an honest and perfect Physician, and not adventure
to mix things together, without knowing the temperance of them in degrees, and
that he can proportion them to the body that shall receive them in simples, as
they be written. And so he may use them without peril, against the humors
whereunto they serve.

Letting of blood. CAP. 6.
THe part of euacuation by letting of blood, is incision, or cutting of the
vein, whereby the blood, which is cause of sickness or grief to the hole body,
or any particular part thereof does most aptly pass.

The commodities whereof being in a moderate quantity, and in a due time taken,
be these that follow: it clarifieth the wit, and makes good memory, it
cleanses the bladder, it dries the brain, it warmeth the marow, being in ye
bones, it opens the hearing, it stops tears, or droppings of the eyes, it
takes away lothsomnes, and confirms the stomach, it nourishes that which
is proper to nature, and the contrary expels. It is thought that thereby
life is prolonged, and the matter making sickness, shortly consumed. Wherefore
letting of blood is not only expedient for them which are full of blood, or
have abundance of strength, but also for them, in whom without plenitude called
fulness, inflammations begin to be in their bodies, or by some outward stroke,
the blood being gathered within by collection thereof, do feel grief or
disease.

Also where there is much pain felt, or debilitie of some member, whereof is
supposed to be engendered some grievous disease. Moreover, they which use
excess of meats and drinks, may be cured by letting of blood. But those
which be temperate, keeping good diet, be helped without letting of blood: as
by fricasies, using of bathes, exercise, walking, and riding moderatly. Also
unctions with oils and ointments called Diaphoretice, which by euaporation,
do shortly euacuate the fulness. Albeit, if the fulness be of melancholy blood,
then always needs must be letting of blood. Abundance of melancholy blood is
known by these signs. There is felt within ye entrales, or within ye bulk of
a man or woman, a waightines with tension or thrusting outward, and all that
part which is above the navel, is more heavy then it was wont to be: also
much urine and fattie, the residence or bottom thick, troublous, inflammation
and much pain. These must be shortly let blood, and the melancholy humor
purged by siege. They which have crude or raw humors, must be warily let
blood, before that sickness engender, but having the fever in no wise.
Concerning letting of blood, these things following would be had in continual
remembrance, and be before Aetius lib. 3.
thought on. In the abundance of the blood, the quality and quantity, the
greatness of the sickness, and if it be present or looked for. Also the diet
preceding, the age and strength of the person, the natural form of his
body, the time of the year, the region or country, the present state of the
air, the disuse of accustomed exercise, the ceasing of euacuations used
before. In quality, consider of what humor the fulness proceeds. In
quantity, the abundance of that which is to be purged. In sickness, if it be
dangerous or tolerable: if ye sickness be present, it requires the more
diligence: if it be looked for, it may be the better proportioned. In diet,
the custom in eating and drinking, must be specially noted. In young men and
women letting of blood would be more liberal. In old men and young children, it
would be scarser: strong men must sustain bleeding, they which are feeble may
not endure it. Large bodies have greater vessels, then they which he little.
Lean men have more blood, corpulent men have more flesh. The time of the year
must be specially marked. For in the beginning of spring time it is best
letting of blood, as Oribasius says, and so does continue, after the opinion
of Arnold, unto ye 8. ^alends of June. Aetius affirms, that in winter, or in
a cold country, or where the person is of a very cold nature, ye veins should
not be opened. And Damascene says: They which in youth have used to be much
let blood, after they be threescore years old, their nature wareth cold, if
they were of a cold complexion, but that is to be understood, where they that
are in health, are often let blood. For in the lapse from health and in diverse
diseases, wherein the blood is corrupted, or where it ingendreth impostumes, or
resorteth to any place, where it ought not to be, or passes by any other
conduite then nature ordained, or where it is furious or inflamed, or by any
other means, breeds grievous diseases, in all these cases, it ought to be
practiced, yea sometime in aged persons, women with child, and young infants.
For in extreme necessity, it were better experience some remedy, then to do
nothing. All other things concerning this matter, pertain to the part
curatiue, which treats of healing of sickness, whereof I will not now speak,
but remit the readers to the counsel of discreet Physicians.

Of scarifying called boxing or cupping. CAP. 7.
FOr as much as it is not convenient to be let blood oftentimes in the year,
because much of the vital spirit passes forth with the blood, which being
exhaust, the body waxes cold, and natural operations become the more feeble
I therefore do counsel (sayt^ Galen) that the base parts of the body, as
the legs be scarified, which is the most sure remedy, as well in conseruing
health, as in repayring thereof being decayed. For it cures the eyne, being
annoyed with long distillations, it profits also the head and ouerpart of the
body against sundry diseases, in what member the blood is gathered, the body
being purged first by scarificatio^, the greef may be cured.

Also Oribasius affirms the same, and also adds thereto that it helps
squina^ces, or quinces in the throat, and dissolueth the costipations or
stoppinges made of all places, if the places be scarified, notwithstanding
application of boxes about the stomach in hot fevers, where reason is
troubled, are to be eschewed for fear of suffocation. Likewise put to the
head indiscreetly, it hurts both the head and the eyes. The late Authors do
affirm, that scarifying is in the steed of letting blood, wherefore age,
debilitie, or time of the year, or other like consideration, a man may not
sustain blood letting, and it brings forth the thin blood, which is next
to the skin.

Of blood suckers or leaches. CAP. 8.
THere is also an other form of euacuation, by worms found in waters, called
blood suckers or leaches, which being put into the body or member, do draw
out blood.

And their drawing is more convenient for fullness of blood then scarifying is,
for as much as they fetch blood more deeper, and is more of the substance of
blood, yet the opinion of some men is, that they do draw no blood but that
which is corrupted, and not proportionable unto our body. And therefore in
griefs which happen between the skin and the flesh of blood corrupted,
these are more convenient then scarifying. But therefore that they be put unto
any part of the body, they must be first kept all one day before, giving unto
them a little blood in fresh flesh. And then put them in clean water somewhat
warm, and with a spung wipe away the slime which is about them, and then lay
a little blood on the place grieved, and put them then to it, and lay on them a
spung, that when they be full, they may fall away, or if ye will sooner have
them off, put a horse hair between their mouths and the place, and draw them
away, or put to their mouths salt, or ashs, or vinegar, and forthwith they
shall fall, and then wash the place with a spu^g, and if there do issue much
blood, lay on the place the poulder of a spung, and pitch burned, or linen
cloth burned, or gauls burned, or the herb called Bursa pastoris bruised.
And this suffices concerning blood suckers.

Of Hemeroydes or piles. CAP. 9.
HEmeroides be veins in the fundament of whom do happen sundry passions,
sometime swelling without bleeding, sometime superfluous blood by the puissance
of nature is by them expelled, and then be they very convenient, for by the^ a
man shall escape many great sicknesses, which be engendered of corrupted blood,
or of melancholy. Semblably, if they be hastily stopped from the course
which they have been used to, thereby do increase the said sicknesses, which
by them were expelled, as dropsies, consumptions, madness, frensies, and
diverse diseases of the head, and other sicknesses: palenes of the visage,
grief in the raines of the back, and thighs. And if they flow too much, there
insueth feeblenes, learing of the body, alteration of color, great pains in
the lower parts of the body. And if the flux be vnmoderate, it ingendreth
mischievous diseases. Wherefore it would be diligently taken heed, that they
run in measure, or else to use some things moderately, which may restrain
them. Concerning other euacuations, I do purposely omit to write of them in
this place, for as much as in this realm it has bin accounted not honest, to
declare them in the vnlgar tongue, but only secretly.

Of effects of the mind. CAP. 10.
THe last of things called not natural, is not the least part to be
considered, the which is of affects and passions of the mind. For if they be
immoderate, they do not only annoy the body and shorte^ the life, but also
they do appayre, and sometime loose utterly a man's estimation. And that much
more is, they bring a man from the use of reason, and sometime in the
displeasure of Almighty God. Wherefore they do not only require the help of
Physic corporal, but also the connsaile of a man wise and well learned in
moral Philosophy.

Wherefore after I have recited what they be, I will briefly declare such
counsels as I have gathered. And as concerning remedy of physic, saving a
few simples, which do comfort the heart and spirits, the residue I will remit
to the counsel of Physicians, like as I have done in euacuation. Affects of
the mind whereby the body is annoyed, do bring in sickness be these, Ire or
wrath, heaviness or sorrow, gladiles or rejoicing.

Of Ire. CAP. 11.
IRe is kindled in the heart, inordinately chasing the spirits there, and then
is sent forth unto the members, and does superfluously heat them, and
disturbeth reason where the bodies be hot before, where natural heat is
feeble, the heat may not be dispersed unto the extreme parts, and then does
the extreme members, that is to say, which is far from the heart, remain
cold and trembling. Of this affect on comes sometime fevers, sometime
apoplexis, or privation of senses, trembling palseis, madness, frensies,
deformity of visage: and that worse is, outrageous swearing, blasphemy,
desire of vengeance, loss of charity, amity, credence, also forgetfulness of
benefit proceeding, and of obedience, duty and reverence. These also do
succeed, contention, chargeable suite, unquietness of mind, lack of appetite,
lack of sleep, feeble digestion, scorire, disdain, and hatred of other, with
peril of losing of all good reputation. These incommodities of Ire, perfectly
had in remembrance, and at the first motion thereof on them thought on, may
happen to bring in his fellows, and thereby the flame may be quenched, or let
him that is angry, even at the first, consider one of these things, that like
as he is a man, so is also the other, with whom he is angry, and therefore it
is as lawful for the other to be angry, as unto him, and if he so be, then
shall the anger be to him displeasant, and stir him more to be angry.
Wherefore it appears that ire is to him loathsome. If the other be patient,
then let him abhor that thing in himself, the lack whereof in the other
contenteth him, and asswageth his malice. Moreover let him before that occasion
of ire does happen, accustom himself to behold and mark well them that
beeangrie, with the success of that anger, and ruminate it in his mind a good
space after. And in that time, let him remember, how Christ, the son of God,
and God, who (as he himself said) might have had of God his father, if he
would have asked the^, legio^s of Angels, to have defended him, yea with less
then a wink, might have slain all his adversaries, yet he notwithstanding
rebuked, scorned, falsely accused, plucked hither, and thither, stripped,
bounden with halters, whipped, spitte on, buffeted, crowned with sharp thorn,
laded with a heavy piece of timber, his own proper tournement, halen and
driven forth like a calfe to the slaughter house, eftsoons beaten, and
overthrown, retched forth with ropes, arms and legs laid on the Cross, and
thereunto with long iron nails through the hands and feet nailed, with many
stroks of ha^mers, with many prickings, or ever the nails might pierce by his
tender and most blessed flesh and sinews, quite through the hard timber, up
to the heads of the nails: and all this being done for the offense of mankind,
and not his: yet with the men which did it, his most unkind countrymen, his
most unnatural kinsmen, whom he first made of nothing preserved by miracles,
delivered from perils, and cured of diseases, in all his vexation and trouble,
he was never seen or perceived angry. If one will say, that anger is natural,
let him also consider that in Christ's manhood were all natural powers. If he
will say, that ire is taken of courage, and in Christ it lacked not, whom both
angels and deuilles trembled and feared. The premises often reuolued, and born
in ye mind, I will not say, shall utterly extinct all motions of wrath which
is not possible, but it shall when it kindles lightly repress it, and let
that it shall not grow into flame. And in speaking here of wrath, I do not
mean that which good men have against vices: or wise and discreet governors
and masters, against the defaults or negligences of their subjects or servants,
used in rebuking them, or moderatly punishing them. For that is not properly
ire, but rather to be called displeasure, and is that whereof God speaks by
his Prophet David, saying, Be you angry and do not sin. And of that manner of
anger has bin diverse holy men, prophets and other. And it appeared in Christ,
when he drove out them which made their market in the holy temple of God, where
there ought to be nothing but prayer. And in likewise when he rebuked the
hypocrites. But if none of these things may come so shortly to his remembrance,
that is moved with anger, at the least, let him think on the lesson that
Appollodorus the Philosopher, taught to the Emperor Octanian, that before he
speak or do any thing in anger, he do recite in order, all the letters of
the A. B. C, and remove somewhat out of the place that he is in, and seek
occasion to be otherwise occupied. This shall for this time suffice, for the
remedies of ire: And he that will know more of this matter, let him read in
my work called the Governor, where I thereof do write more abundantly.

Of Dolor, or heaviness of the mind. CAP. 12.
THere is nothing more enemy to life, then sorrow, called also heaviness: for
it exhausteth both natural heat and moisture of the body, and does
extenuate, or make the body lean, dulleth the wit, and darkneth the spirits,
lets the use and judgment of reason, and oppresses memory. And Solomon
says: that sorrow dries up the hones. And also like as the moath in the
garment, and the worm Prou. 17. and 25. Eccle. 25. and 38.
in the tree, so does heaviness annoye the heart of a man. Also in the book
called Ecclesiasticus. Sorrow has killed many, and in it self is found no
commodity. Also by heaviness death is hastened, it hides virtue or strength,
and heaviness of heart boweth down the neck. This is so puissa^t an enemy to
nature, and bodily health, that to resist the malice and violence thereof, are
required remedies, as well of the wholesome counsayles found in holy Scripture,
and in the books of moral doctrine, as also of certain herbs, fruits, and
spices, having the property to expel melancholicke humors, and to comfort
and keep lively the spirits, which have their proper habitation in the heart of
man, and moderate nourishing of the natural heat and humor called radical,
which is the bace or foundation, whereupon the life of man stands, and that
failing, life falls into ruin, and the body is dissolved. Now first I will
declare some remedies against sorrowfulnes of heart, concerning necessary
counsel. Sometime this affect happens of ingratitude, either where for
benefit, or special love employed, one receives damage, or is abandoned in
his necessity, or is deceived of him whom he trusted, or finds him of whom
he has great expectation, forgetful or negligent in his commodity, or
perceives the person whom of long time he has loved, to be estra^ged from
him, or to have one of a later acquaintance in more estimation. This affection
nippeth the heart, yea of most wise men, for they love most heartily, not
provoked by carnal affection, but rather by good opinion, engendered by
similitude of honest studies, and virtuous manners, of long time mutually
experienced. And it is not only unto man grievous, but also unto God most
displeasant and odious, as it is abundantly declared in scripture. Wherefore
the person which feels himself touched with this affect, before that it
grows into a passion, and waxes a sickness, let him call to remembrance these
articles following, or at the least wise, some of them. For every each of them
may ease him, though perchance they cannot forthwith perfectly cure him.
Consider, that Co^forts against ingratitude. Appianus in varia historia.
the corruption of man's nature is not so much declared in any thing as in
ingratitude, whereby a man is made worse then diverse brute beasts. The little
Ant or Emot helps up his fellow, whom he seeeth overthrown with burden or
by other other occasion.

Also when Elephants do pass over any great water: the greatest and most
puissant of the^ divide themselves, and setting the weakest in the middle part,
go before trying the deepenes and perils, part come after, succouring the
weakest or least with their long noses, when they see them in danger. The same
beasts have been seen not only to bring men out of deserts, which have lost
their ways, but also renewing the displeasures done to them, which gave them
meat, as one that slew him, which had committed aduoutrie with his masters
wife.

The terrible Lions and Panthers have bin seen in their manner to render
thanks to their benefactors, yea and to abject their own bodies and lives for
their defense. The same we may daily behold in our own dogs.

Than in whom thou find the detestable vice of ingratitude, reputing him
among the worst fortes of creatures, think not that thou have lost a friend,
but think that thou art delivered from a monster of nature, that denoured thy
love, and that thou art now at liberty, and have won experience to choose
thee a better. But if this may not suffice, Seen. de benefi. 7.
then eftsoons consider that if thou look well on thy self, perchance thou
may find the fault whereof thou complaynest, within thine own bosom. Call to
thy remembrance if thou have always rendered unto every man condign thanks or
benefit, of whom thou have kindness received, or if thou have always remembered,
every one of them, that have done to thee any commodity or pleasure. Thou
shall well perceive, that what thing yt thou receiuedst in childhoode, thou
forgattest or did little esteem, when thou came to the state of a man.
And what thou did remember in youth, in age thou did little think on,
thy nurses Pap, her rockings, watchings, thou have not always remembered or
equally recompensed. The Schoolemasters study, his labor, his diligence in
like degree, thou have not requited. What greater friend have thou had of whom
thou could receive any greater benefits, the^ the nourishing and preserving
of thy life in thy most feeblenes, thine eruditio^, whereby thy nature was made
more excellent? Remembering this, leave to be angry or sorrowful, for so common
a vice: yet if it cease not to grieve thee, confer the ingratitude that does
vex thee, with that in gratitude which was showed by the Israelites, whom God
chose for his own people, delivered from seruage, showed for them wonders,
preserved them forty years in ye desert, destroyed for them kings, gave to
them the country which flowed with milk and honey, defended them against all
outward hostility, sent unto them such abundance of riches, that silver was in
Jerusalem, as stones in the street, and his tabernacle, and afterward his most
holy temple among them, which he did daily visit, with his divine majesty,
made their kings to reign gloriously, and spoke with their Prophets
familiarly, and corrected their errors most gently, and yet for all this, they
embracing the Paynimes Idolatry, they left so gracious and loving a Lord, and
living God, and to his great despite, gave divine honors to calves of brass,
and other monstrous Images, and at the last, put to most cruel death, the
only son of God, that had done so much for them. And if we Christian men do
look well on our selves, reuoluing the incomparable benefit, which we have
received by Christ's passion, and consider the circumstance of his most
excellent patience, and most seruent love toward us, with our forgetfulness,
and the daily breach of our promise, which we made at our Baptism, co^ferring
our mutual unkindness thereunto, there shall appear no ingratitude, that
should offend us. Finally for a conclusion, behold well about thee, and thou
shall all day find the children ingrate to their parents, and wives to their
husbands. And will thou look that thy benefit or vain expectation, should
make thee more free from ingratitude of thy friend, whom chance has sent thee,
then nature may the parents to their children, or the conjunction of bodies by
lawful marriage, take unkindness from the wives toward the husbands? The vice
therefore of ingratitude, being so common a chance, make no worldly friendship
so precious, that life or death therefore should be spent or consumed, I have
been the longer in this place, because I have had in this grief sufficient
experience.

If death of children because of thy heaviness, call to thy Death of children.
remembrance some children, of whom there is no little number, whose lives,
either for incorrigible vices, or unfortunate chances, have been more grievous
unto their parents, then the death of thy children ought to be unto thee:
considering that death is a discharger of all griefs and miseries, and to them
that dye well, the first entry into life everlasting.

The loss of goods or authority, do grieve none but fools, which do not
mark diligently, that like as neither Loss of goods.
the one nor the other does always happen to them that are worthy, so we have
in daily experience, that they fall from him suddenly, who in increasing or
keeping them, seems most busy. Oftentimes the repulse from promotion is
cause of discomfort. But then consider whether in the opinion Lack of
promotion.
of good men, thou art deemed worthy to have such advancement, or in thine
own expectation and fantasy. If good men so judge thee, thank thou God of
that felicity, and laugh at the blindness of them, that so have refused thee.
If it proceed of thine own folly, abhor al arrogancy, and enforce thy self
to be advanced in men's estimations, before thou can find thy self worthy
in thy proper opinion. All other chances of fortune esteem as nothing,
Channces of fortune.
and that long before they do happen. The often recording of misery, prepares
the mind to feel less adversity. And the contempt of fortune is sure
quietness, and must perfect felicity. This now shall suffice concerning
remedies of moral Philosophy. Now will I write somewhat touching counsel of
Physic, as in relieuing the body, which either by the said occasions, or by
the humor of melancholy is brought out of temper.

The first counsel is, that during the time of that passion, eschew to be
angry, studious, or solitary, and rejoice thee with melody, or else be always
in such company, as best may content thee.

Avoid all things that be noyous in sight, smelling and hearing, and embrace
all things that is delectable.

Flee darkness, much watch, and business of mind, much companying with women,
the use of things very hot and dry, often purgations, immoderate exercise,
thirst, much abstinence, dry winds and cold.

Abstain from daily eating of much old beef, or old mutton, hard cheese,
hares flesh, bores flesh, venison, salt fish, coleworts, beans, and peason,
very course bread, great fishes of the sea, as thurlepole, or porpise, and
stourgion, and other of like natures, wines red and thick, meats being very
salt or sour, old, burned, or fried, garlic, onions, and leekes.

Use meats which are temperatly hot, and therewith somewhat moist, boiled
rather then roasted, light of digestion, and ingendring blood clear and fine.
As milk hot from the vdder, or at the least new milked, even these, sweet
Ruen cheese, Almonds, the yolks of rear eggs, little birds of the bushes,
chickens and hens, white wine or claret, clear and fragrant. Sweet sauors in
winter hot, in summer cold, in the mean time temperate.

Comfortatiues of the heart hot.
Bourage the flower or leaf, Buglosse, Baulme mint. Elicampane, Cloves,
Cardamomum, Rosemary. Lignum aloes, Musk, Ambergrise, Saffron. The bone of the
Heart of a red dear. Mints, The rind of Citron, Bean, Cubebes, Basil.
Comfortatiues of the heart cold.
Uiolets, Pearls, Coral, The Unicornes horn. Old apples which be good,
Roses, Sarnders. The Oliphants tooth, Water lillies, Coriander prepared.
Comfortatiues temperate.
Jacinct, Sapphire, Emeraulds. Mirabolanes called Kebuli, Buglosse, Gold,
Silver.
Of Hope.
I Oye, or gladness of heart does prolong the life, it fatteth the body that
is lean with troubles, biting the humors to an equal temperance, and drawing
natural heat outward. But if it be sudden and fervent, it oftentimes slays,
for as much as it draws too suddenly and excessiuely natural heat outward.
And therefore diverse men and women have been seen to fall in a swoune, when
they have suddenly beheld the persons whom they fervently loved. A woman in
Rome hearing first that her son T. Liuius.
was slain in battle: after when he came to her, she seeing him alive,
embracing each other, she died in his arms. This well considered against such
inordinate gladness, the best preservative is to remember, that the extreme
parts of mundaine joy, is sorrow and heaviness: and that nothing of this world
may so much rejoice us, but occasion may cause it to be displeasant unto us.

The dominion of sundry complexions. CAP. 13.
IT seems to me not inconvenient, that I do declare as well the counsels
of ancient and approved authors, as also mine own opinion, gathered by
diligent marking in daily experience, concerning as well the necessary diet of
every complexion, age, and declination of health, as also the mean to resist
the discralies of the body, before sickness be therein confirmed, leaving the
residue unto the substantial learning, and circumspect practice of good
Phi^itions, which shall the more easily cure their patients, if their patients
do not disdain to bear away and follow my counsel.

And first it ought to be considered, that none of the four complexions; have
solely such dominion in any man or woman's body, that no part of any other
complexion is therewith mixed. For when we call a man sanguine, cholerike,
fleumatike, or melancholic, we do not mean yt he has blood only without
any of the other humors, or choler without blood, or fleume without blood or
melancholy or melancholy without blood or choler. And therefore the man which
is sanguine, the more that he draws unto age, whereby natural moisture
decays, the more is he cholerike, by reason that heat surmounting moisture,
needs must remain heat and drith. Semblably ye cholerike man, the more that
he waxes into age, the more natural heat in him is abated, and drith
surmounting natural moisture, he becomes melancholic: but some sanguine man
has in the proportion of temperatures, a greater mixture with choler then
another has. Likewise the cholerike or fleumatike man, with the humor of
sanguin or melancholy. And therefore late practisers of Physic are wont to call
men, according to the mixture of their complexions, as sanguine cholerike,
fleumatike sanguine, etc. Moreover, beside the natural complexions which man
receives in his generation, the humors whereof the same complexions do
consist, being augmented superfluously in the body or members by any of the
said things, called not natural, every of them do semblably augment the
complexion which is proper unto him, and brings unequal temperature unto the
body. And for these causes the sanguine or fleumatike man or woman, feeling any
discrasie by choler happened to them, by the said things called not natural,
they shall use the diet described hereafter to him which is naturally
cholerike. Semblably, the cholerike or melancholic man or woman having any
discrasie by fleume, to use the diet of him which is naturally fleumatike,
always remembering, that sanguine and fleumatike me^ have more respect unto
drith, cholerike and melancholy unto moisture, and that always as the
accidental complexion decaye^^, to resort by little and little to the diet
pertaining to his natural complexion.

The times appropried to every natural humor. CAP. 14.
BUt first it must be considered, that where the four humors be always in
man, and in some man commonly one humor is more abundant then another
naturally, that is to say, from his generation: The said humors have also
peculiar times assigned to every one of them, wherein each of them is in his
most power and force, as after insueth, after the description of Soranus.
Fleume has most puissance in winter, from the 8. Jous of November, unto the 8.
Idus of February, whereby are engendered Catarres, or rheumes, the vuula, the
cough, and the stitch. This humor is part in the head, part in the stomach.
It has dominion from the third hour of night, until the ninth hour of the
same night. Blood increases inspring time from the 8. Idus of February, unto
the 8. Idus of May, whereof are engendered fevers, and sweet humors, which do
shortly putrify: the power of this humor is about the heart, and has
dominion from the ninth hour of night, until the third hour of the morning.

Red choler has power in Summer, from the 8. Idus of May, until the 8. Idus
of August, whereby are engendered hot and sharp fevers: this humor is
specially in the liver, and has dominion from the third hour of the day,
until the ninth hour of the same day.

Yellow choler, whereof is engendered the fleume of the stomach, is nourished
in Autumn, which begins the 8. Idus of August, and during unto the 8. day
of November, makes shaking fevers and sharp: the black choler then
increases, and then follows thicknes of the blood in the veins. Black
choler or melancholy most raineth in the spleen, and it raineth from the ninth
hour of the day, until the third hour of night.

Peculiar remedies against the distemperance of every humor.
IF the distemperance be of blood, help it with things Soranus in art
medendi.
cold, sharp and dry: for blood is moist, hot, and sweet. If it be of red
choler, give things cold, moist, and sweet: for red choler is bitter and
fiery. If it be of black choler, give things hot, moist, and sweet: for
black choler is sharp and cold. If the disease be of salt fleume, give things
sweet, hot, and dry: thus says Soranus. Notwithstanding, where there is
abundance of cold fleume not mixed with choler, there things very sharp and hot
be most connenient, as tart vinegar with hot Roses, and seeds, or wines,
strong and rough honey being sodden in the one and the other: or where choler
is mixed with fleume, syrup acetose made with vinegar and sugar boiled,
sometime with herbs, roots, or seeds, which may dissolve fleume, and digest
it.

Diet of them which are of sanguine complexion. CAP. 15.
FOrasmuch as in the sanguine men, blood most raineth, which is soon
corrupted, it shall be necessary for them which are of that complexion, to be
circumspect in eating meat, that shortly will receive putrification, as the
more part of fruits, specially not being perfectly ripe: also meats that be of
ill juice, as flesh of beasts, too old or young, vdders of beasts, brains,
except of capons and chickens, marowe of the back bone, much use of Onyong,
Leekes, Garlike, much use of old figs, much use of raw herbs, and all
things wherein is excess of heat, cold, or moisture, meats that be stale,
fishes of fennes, or muddie waters, and too much sleep, as experience shows.

Diet of cholerike persons. CAP. 16.
TO them which be cholerike, being in their natural temperature, and having
not from their youth used the contrary, gross meats moderatly taken, be more
convenient then the meats that be fine, and better shall they digest a piece
of good beef, then a chickens leg. Choler of his property rather burning,
the^ well digesting meats of light substance: notwithstanding, some Gentlemen
which be nicely brought up in their infancy, may not so well sustain that
diet, as poor men, being the more part used to gross meats, wherefore their
diet must be in a temperance, as young beef, old veale, mutton, and venison
powdered, young geese, and such like, concerning their complexion with meats,
like thereunto in quality and degree, according to the counsel of
Hippocrates. And as he perceives choler to abound, so to enterlace meats
which be cold, in a moderate quantity, and to alay their wine more or less
with water, eschewing hot spices, hot wines, and excessive labor, whereby the
body may be much chased. Also he may eat oftener in the day the^ any other:
foreseen, that there be such distance between his meals, as the meat before
eaten be fully digested, which in some person is more, in some less, according
to the heat and strength of his stomach, noting always that the cholerike
person digesteth more meat then his appetite desires: the melancholic person
desires by false appetite more then his stomach may digest. And to a
cholerike person it is right dangerous, to use long abstinence: for choler
finding nothing in the stomach to conco^t, it fares then as where a little
pottage or milk, being in a vessel over a great fire, it is burned to the
vessel, and unsavory fumes and vapors do issue out thereof. Likewise in a
cholerike stomach by abstinence, these inconveniences do happen, humors
adust, consuming of natural moisture, fumosities and stinking vapors,
ascending up to the head, whereof is engendered dusking of the eyes, headaches,
hot and thin rheumes after every little surfeit, and many other
inco^ueniences. Wherefore, beside ye opinion of ye best learned me^, mine own
painful experience also moves me to exhort them, which be of this
complexion, to eschew much abstinence. And although they be studious, and use
little exercise, yet in the morning to eat somewhat in a little quantity, and
not to study immediately, but first to sit a while, and after to stand or walk
softly, which using these two years, I, and also other, that have long known
me, have perceived in my body a great alteration, that is to say, from ill
estate to better. Always remember, that if any other humor do abound in ye
cholerike person, as fleume, or mela^choly, then until that humor be
expelled, the diet must be correctiue of that humor, and therefore more hot and
fine, the^ the natural diet before rehearsed: but yet there would be always
respect had to the natural complexion, sometime offering the person to eat or
drink that, which nature working he fervently desires.

Diet of Fleumaticke persons. CAP. 17.
IT is to be remembered, that pure fleume is properly cold and moist, and
lacks taste. Salt fleume is mixte with choler, and therefore has not in him
so much cold or humiditie, as pure fleume has, and therefore it requires a
temperance in things hot and dry, whereby fleume is digested or expulsed. To
fleumaticke persons all meats are noyful, which are very cold, viscous or
slimie fat, or soon putrified, eating much and often, specially meats
ingendring fleume, which be remembered in the table preceding. All things be
good which are hot and dry, also meats and drinks which be sour: Onions
also and Garlike moderately used, be very commendable: in pure fleame not mixed
with choler, much using of salt, specially dried. Pepper gross beaten, and
eaten with meat, ought to be with all fleumaticke persons familiar, also
Ginger is right convenient, but not^o be so frequently used as pepper, for as
much as the nature of pepper is, that being eaten, it passes through the body,
heating and comforting the stomach, not entering into the veins, or annoying
the liver, which virtue is not in Ginger, Ginger condite the which we do call
green Ginger, specially condite with sugar, if it may be gotten, and also
Mirabolanes called ^ebuly condite in Judea, be most excellent remedies against
fleame, also the herbs, which are remembered before in the tables of digestiues
of fleame, and the roots of Parsley, Fenell, Preos, Elicampane, and carrotes
be very commendable. Exercise twice in a day, the stomach being almost
empty, so that sweat begin to appear, is very expedient, clensing of the
body from all filthiness with rubbing and wiping oftentimes, with washing,
specially the head and parts there about, moderate sweating, in hot bathes or
stoues, be to this complexion necessary, specially when they have eaten and
dronken excessiuely. The head and feet to be kept from cold, and to dwell
high and far from moors, and marshes, is a rule right necessary: also to
abstain from eating herbs and roots not boiled, and generally from all
meats which will not be easily digested.

The division of melancholy, and the diet of persons melancholicke. CAP. 18.
Melancholy is of two sorts, the one is called natural, which is only cold
and dry, the other is called adust or burned: natural melancholy is, as Galen
says, the residence or dregs of the blood: and therefore is colder and
thicker then the blood. Melancholy adust is in four kinds, either it is of
natural melancholy adust, or of the more pure part of the blood adust, or of
choler adust, or of salt fleum adust. But of al other that melancholy is worst,
which is engendered of choler, finally all adust melancholy annoieth the wit and
judgment of man: For when that humor is het, it makes men mad, and when it is
extinct, it makes men fools, forgetful and dull. The natural melancholy kept
in his temperance, profits much to true judgment of ye wit, but yet if it be
too thick, it darkneth the spirits, makes one timorous, and the wit dull: if
it be mixed with fleame, it mortifieth the blood with too much cold, wherefore
it may not be so little, that the blood and spirits in their feruentnesse, be
as it were unbridled, whereof do happen unstableness of wit, and slipper
remembrance, nor yet so much that by the weight thereof (for it is heavy
approaching night to the earth) that we seem to be always in sleep, and need
a spur to prick us forward. Wherefore it is right expedient to keep that
humor as thin as nature will suffer it, and not to have too much of it. But
now to the diet pertaining to them, whom this humor annoyeth. The knowledge
that melancholy raineth is oftentimes heaviness of mind, or fear without
cause, sleepines in the members, many cramps without repletion or emptines,
sudden fury, sudden incontinency of the tongue, much solicitude of light
things, we plainnes of the visage, and fearful dreams of terrible visions,
dreaming of darkness, deep pittes, death of friends, or acquaintance, and
of all things that is black. The meats convenient are they, which be
temperately in heat, but specially they that be moist meats soon digested, and
they rather boiled then roasted, temperatly mixed with spice, milk hot from the
vdder, or latemilked, is very convenient for that complexion, sweet almonds
blanched, and almond milk, the yolke of reere eggs, and finally all things
which engender pure blood, and all that is written in the chapter of age, all
these be ill for them: wine thick or troublous, specially red wine, meats
hard, dry, very salt, or sour, burned meat, fried meat, much beef, bears
flesh, beans, rocket, colewortes, mustard, radish, garlike, except there be
much wind in the body, for then it is very wholesome, onyons, leekes, finally all
things which heateth too much, kills too much, or dries too much, also
wrath, fear, compassion, sorrow, much study, or care, much idleness or rest,
all thing that is grievous to see, to smell or to hear, but most specially
darkness.

Moreover much drying of the body, either with long watch, or with much care
and tossing of the mind, or with much lechery, or much eating and drinking of
things that be hot and dry, or immoderate euacuation, labor, abstinence,
thirst, going in the air vntemperately hot, cold, or dry, all these
things do annoye them that be grieved with any melancholy. It is to be
diligently considered, that where melancholy happens of choler adust, there
meats which be hot in working would be wisely tempered, and drinking of hot
wines would be eschewed, semblably cautele would be in savors,
notwithstanding moderate use of small wines clear and well verdured, is herein
very commendable, the humor thereby being clarified, and the spirits cleansed,
but the abuse or excess thereof, does as much damage.

Also it is right expedient, to put into wine or ale, a gad of silver or gold,
glowing hot out of the fire, to temper hot meat with roses, violets, saunders,
rose water, borage, buglosse, baulme, called in Latin Melissa, or the water of
all three, dronken with good wine white or claret, or made in a iulep with
sugar, is wonderful holsom, chewing of lyc^rise, or rayson or corance, is
right expedient, but most of al other things, mirth, good company, gladness,
moderate exercise, with moderate feeding. And thus I leave to speak of dyets,
aptly belonging to the four complexions.

The fourth Book of the Castle of Health.
What cruditie is, and remedies therefore. CAP. 1.
I Will some what write of two discrasies of the body, which do happen by the
excess or lack of things called not natural, whereof I have spoken before:
the one is called cruditie, the other lassitude, which although they be words
made of Latin, having no apt english word therefore, yet by the definition
and more ample declaration of them, they shall be understood sufficiently, and
from henceforth used for english. But first it shall be necessary to consider,
that concoction is an alteration in the stomach Concoction what it is.
of meats and drinks, according to their qualities, whereby they are made like
to the substance of the body. Crudity is a vicious concoction of things
received, they not being Cruditie what it is. The cause of cruditie.
wholly or perfectly altered: the cause thereof is sometime the distemperature
of the stomach, sometime inflannnations, sometime matter congealed, or
impostumes in the stomach, other while ingurgitation of meat and drink: or
for the vicious quality of the same meats or drinks, or the receiving of
them out of order, or lack of exercise, or of convenient euacuation. Galen
says, that in cruditie or vicious concoction, it must be considered, as well if
the ^uke be utterly corrupted, and may not be sufficiently concoct, as also if
it be in the way of concoction: for if it be corrupted it must be expelled by
sweator urine, if it be half co^coct, then must such things be ministered, as
may help to profit concoction, having regard to the quality and temperance of
the juice, that is to say, whether it be thick or thin, fleumaticke or
choleric: which shall be perceived by the diet preceding, and also by other
things named not natural, for fleumaticke meats eaten in great quantity or
often, makes fleumaticke juice.

Likewise does lack of convenient exercise, too much rest or idleness, as
choleric meats, and dehement labors, do make choleric juice in summer, and
melancholic juice in Autumn, specially where labors be continual or long
during. Also where labor is with much sweat, there is the urine more gross:
where it is without sweat, there it is thinner. Moreover the color and
substance of the urine declares the temperance of the juice, which shall be
here after declared in the table vrines.

Semblably the color of the body declares the juice that is in it, for being
whiter then it was wont to be, it signifies abundance of fleume: being more
pale or yelow, it betokens excess of choler: if it be blacker, it signifies
melancholy, if the ill juice be much in quantity, and the blood little, the
ill juice would be digested, and expelled with such things as do serve for
that temperature, but if the blood be much, and the ill juice little in
quantity, there would the vain be opened, and after sufficient bleeding a
convenient purgation given, having regard as well of the quantity of the
juice, as of the kind thereof: in case that either for age or for timorousnes,
a man will not be let blood, then must he be purged by siege in more
abundance. But if he in whom is little good blood and much ill juice, and
feels a lattitude or weariness in all his body, he should neither he let
blood, nor receive purgation, nor yet labor or walk much: but abide in much
quiet, and assay to sleep much, and receive such meats, drinks and medicines,
which do extenuate or make thin, cut, and digest gross humors, without
vehement heat, whereof it is written in the table of digestiues: in the number
of whom is oximel, being well made, or Acetosus simplex, where the juice is
much choleric or melancholic. Semblably, capers with oil and vinegar be
praised of Galen. When there appears in the urine a residence light and
white, then wine white or claret moderately taken, helps to concoction,
makes a good juice, and provoke urine, then increase frications and exercise
by little and little, and then let him return to his natural diet. In whom is
abundance of raw juice, and outwardly feels a lassitude, to them Galen
counsayleth, the second or third day to give meat, wherein Jsope is boiled and
afterward to vomit.

The mean to escape cruditie, is to be diligent in observation of the counsels
before written concerning ye things called not natural, not much using meats
that be very hard to concoct, also fat meat, and meats long kept, also
corrupted, strinking, sweet fruits, and banqueting dishes, hasty feeding
witho^ good chewing, also much or very often drinking at meals, very much heat,
or very much cold, after meat.

Furthermore it must be considered, that all things which brings grief to
the body, is engendered either of too much abundance of juice, or of the
vicious quality thereof. He that is sick of abundance, the diet of him
wholly consists in reducing the juice to a convenient quantity. He that is
grieved with the vicious quality of the juices, his order rests in making
the juices equal in temperature. Moreover, where that which passes out of the
body, is less the^ that which is received into the body: there happens
sickness which comes of abundance, in the which case it ought to be
diligently foreseen, that there be observed a convenient mean of meats and
drinks, in respect of that which is expelled out of the body, which may be
done, if the quantity of each of them be wisely considered. And where
abundance is, there the quantity, or quality, or both be tempred.

Always remember that of crude juice be diverse kinds, some be cold and
fleumaticke, some be hot and choleric, other be more thin and watrie, some
of black choler, or melancholicke. They which do abound in any of them, must
abstain from such meats and drinks, which do engender such juice, as does
annoy them: those meats and drinks be declared in the tables preceding. Aetius
also would that Aetius sermon. 9.
he should drink a draught of cold water, affirming that thereby the stomach
being corroborate, drives out of him down into the belly, that which cleaves
fast to it. I my self using to drink fasting, very small beer or ale, when I
have been in that case, have found ease by it. Paulus Aegineta wills that at
the beginning, the legs and arms should be rubbed with a course linen cloth,
the legs downward to the feet, the arms to the tops of the fingers, and
when they be well chafed, then to rub the^ again with some oil, that does open
the pores and discuss the vapors as oil of Camomile, oil of a neat, and
other like, he praises much mulse, or the water of honey, specially if some
Isope be boiled in it. Galen and all other do agree, that in this case pepper
bruised and eaten with meat, is very expedient. And where there is much wind in
the stomach, then to eat all times of the day, of the medicine made of the
three kinds of pepper, time, annise seed, and honey clarified, which is called
Diatrion piperion, or that which is called Diaspoliticon, or Diapiganon, which
is made of Cummine, steeped one day and a night, or longer in tart vinegar, and
after fried or laid on a burning hot stone, and made in powder, also pepper
and rue dried somewhat, and made into powder al in equal portions, and mixed with
clarified honey, Galen adds thereto salt peter called in latin nitrum. The
confection made with the juice of quinces, and is called Diacidonion, is very
excellent. But it is to be diligently noted, that where cruditie is in a
choleric person, there would the said medicines be temperatly used, and the
said Diacidonio^ to have little or no spices in it. And for my part, being of a
choleric humor mixed with fleume, many years continually in cruditie. I
never found any thing better then fine Rewbar be chewed with raisons of corents,
which I took by the counsel of the worthiefull and well learned Physician,
master Doctor Augustine, who in his manners declares the gentleness of his
ancient blood, which medicine I do not leave to use daily fasting when I feel
some cruditie to begin. Also syrope acetose, that is to say, sugar sodden in
pure vinegar, and a little water, until it be thick as a syrup, is sometime
convenient, and that as well to choleric persons as unto fleumatick, and if
fleum be abundant, then with roots and seeds of fenel and parcely sodden with
it. Also in that case oximell, that is to say, honye and water sodden together
with the said roots and seeds, and a quantity of vinegar put thereto in the
boiling is very commendable. If the parient be very costiue, then ye medicine
of Galen called Hierapicra, from half an ounce to an ounce taken in water of
honey or ale, or taken in pills, the weight of a great, and a half, or two
groates, if the stuff be good, will purge the body sufficiently, without
making the body weaker. Also that medicine by clensing the stomach and body,
delivers a man and woman from any perilous sicknesses. If the humors in the
stomach be not putrified, but that it is grieved with abundance of falt
(...), I have found that milk new milked, wherein is put a quantity of good
honey or sugar, and three leaves of good spear mintes, and a little boiled, so
being drunk warm fasting, the quantity of a pint, and resting on it without
eating or drinking any other thing the space of 3. hours after, have
abundantly purged and comforted the stomach, but where there is no fleum but
only choler, it is not so wholesome, but rather hurts, making fumosities in
the head, whereof comnieth headache.

Of distillations called commonly rheumes, and of some remedies against them
right necessary. CAP. 2.
FOr as much as at this present time in this Realm of England, there is not
any one more annoyance to the health of man's body, then distillations from the
head called rheumes, I will not let to write some what of them, whereby men may
take benefit if they will, although some Physicians more considering their
market, then their duty to God and their country, will be never so much
offended with mine honest enterprise.

Distillation is a dropping down of a liquid matter out of the head, and
falling either into the mouth, or into the nosethrils, or into the eyes, and
sometime into the cheeks and ears: that which falls into the mouth is
received of the throat, into that part which is the instrument of the voice,
which at the first makes hoarsenes, and in process of time makes the voice
little, and uneath to be heard. And if the rheum be sharp, it raises the
inward skin of the throat, and sometime in does exulcerate the lungs. If it
does fall into the stomach, the rheum being a cold, it alters the body
into a cold distemperance: if he be hot, it makes a hot distemperature, and
does some what exulcerate in process of time, and at the beginning abateth
appetite, and makes feeble concoction. The cold rheum makes concoction slow,
and also cruditie, and ingendreth four fumes in the mouth. If it be corrupted,
it turns also nourishment unto corruption, which makes vpbrayding fumish or
sharp, or of some ill quality, which cannot be expressed: if the matter do
descend lower, it tormenteth the guts called ieiunium, and colon, and touches
other vessels from whence proceeds digestion: in this discrasie two things
are to be provided for: first to let that the rheum do not distill into the
said places: or if it has done, that it be shortly expelled from them. First,
to let that it shall not distill, it shall be necessary to eat some meat the
sooner in the morning, if there has not preceded repletion. Where the
temperature of all the body is cholerike, and the stomach is weak, the stomach
would be made strong with such things as of their property do comfort the
stomach: foreseen that they be moderatly cold and moist. And that which is
already fallen into the stomach, must be expelled with vomit or siege,
provoked with wormwood, steeped all one day and a night in a little small
white wine, or small ale or stale, which have virtue only to wipe away the
filth from the stomach: but if it be sucked deep into the filmes of the
stomach, then is it better to take the medicine called Hierapicra, either in
powder with drink warmed, or else in pills, to the number of ^iue or more, in the
morning six hours before any other meat or drink taken, afterward to
annoint the mouth of the stomach with oil of Masticke, or Nardinum temperatly
warm, always if a hot rheum do fall into a hot stomach, then meats and
drinks which be cold in virtue, would only be used, where the stomach is
distempered with heat, and the rheum distilleth into a cold head, there is
the discrasie hard to be cured. And they which be so affect or diseased, must
take such things as may dissolve the fleume, and cleanse the stomach without
heating thereof, of the which virtue we know Oximel to be of. If the stomach
and head be both distempered with cold, then must be used meats, drinks and
ointments, which only be hot, and utterly to forbear all that is cold. By
these distillations or rheumes, happens many other grienous diseases, besides
those whereof I have spoken, as in the head whirlings, called in Latin
Vertigines, sudden swoundings, falling sickness, poses, stinking of the nose,
called Polipus, sores in the mouth, toothach, pin and web in the eyes, dulnes
in hearing, squinces, fretting of the bowels, with flixes, shortness of breath,
grief in the heart, palsies, ach in the muscules and joints: wherefore it is
not be neglected. And I do much marvel that our Physicians do not more
studiously provide therefore remedies. I my self was by the space of four
years continually in this discrasie, and was counseled by diverse Physicians
to keep my head warm, and to use Diatrion piperion, and such other hot
things, as I have rehearsed: at the last, feeling my self very feeble, and
lacking appetite and sleep, as I happened to read the book of Galen, De
temperamentis, which treats De inequali temperatura, and afterward the sixth
book, De tuenda sanitate, I perceived that I had been long in an error.
Wherefore first I did throw away my quilted cap, and my other close bonets, and
only did lie in thin coyfe, which I have ever since used both winter and
summer, and ware a light bonet of velvet only, then made I Oximell after the
doctrine of Galen, saving that I boiled in vinegar roots of parsley and Fenell,
with Endive, Cicorie, and Betany, and after that I had taken it 3. days
continually, every day 3. spoonefuls in the morning warm: then took I of the
same Oximell, wherein I had infused and steeped one dram of Agarike, and
half a dram of fine Reubarbe, the space of three days and three nights,
which I received in the morning, eating no meat six hours after, and that but
a little broth of a boiled hen, whereof insued eight stools abundant of
choler and fleume: soon after I slept soundly, and had good appetite to eat.
After supper I would either eat a few Coriander seeds prepared, or swallow
down a little fine Mastix, and forbear wine, and drank only ale, and that
but little, stale and also warmed. And sometime in the morning would take a
perfume of Storax calamita, and now and then I would put into my nosethrilles
either a leaf of green Laurel, or Betany, or water of Marier^ bruised, which
caused the humor to distill by my nosethrils. And if I lacked Storax, I took
for a perfume the rindes of old Rosemary, and burned them, and held my mouth
over the fume, closing mine eyes: afterward to comfort my stomach and make it
strong, sometime I would eat with my meat a little white pepper gross
bruised, sometime Galens electuary made of the juice of Quinces, called
Diacidonion, sometime marmalade of quinces, or a quince roasted. And by this
diet, I thank almighty God, unto who^ only be given all glory, I was reduced
into a better state in my stomach and head, then I was sixteen years before,
as it may appear unto the^ which have long known me. And this have I not
written for vain glory, or of presumption, but to the intent that they which
have their bodies in like te^pexature as mine was, that is to say, being
cholerike of complexio^, and having rheumes falling out of a hot head, may if
they list assay mine experience, or in the steed of my said infusion, take
Hierapicra, with ale or water to purge them, whereof shall not ensue so much
peril, as of corrupted syrupes, and other confections called Magistrates, made
with old rottendrugs, though the Physicians be never so well learned. In bodies
of other temperature, I would not that mine experience should be practiced but
with discretion, tempering the medicine, as ye qualities of the stomach and
head do require, remembering always that hot rheumes be thin and subtle, cold
rheumes be for the most part thick. And that they which be thin, would be made
thick, that they pierce not so fast. And yt they which be thick, would be
made thin, that they may the sooner be purged. Finally, this dare I affirm,
that the rheumes, which of late time have been more frequent in this realm,
then they were wont to be forty years passed, have happened of none occasion
more she^ of banquetings after supper, and drinking much, specially wine a
little after sleep. Another thing is the keeping the head too hot or too long
covered, whereby the brain, which is naturally cold, is distempered with hot
vapors ascending from the stomach, those same vapors being let to euaporate,
or pass forth out of the head, and therefore be concreate or gathered into a
humor superfluous, which stilleth downestsoones out of the head into the places
before rehearsed. Yet now a days if a boy of 7. years of age, or a young man
of 20. years, have not two caps on his head, he and his friends will think
that he may not continue in health. And if the inner cap be not of velvet, or
(...), a feruing man fears to loose his credence. A Parson, Ui^ar, or parish
priest, by using their velvet caps imbrodred with laces, do make some men
think that they be ashamed of their crowns, that late token of the order of
Priesthood, the which notable abuse, I much marvel that the Bishops will
suffer, specially they which have had leisure to read the works of S.
Ciprian, S. Hierom, Chrisostomus, S. Ambrose, and sundry decrees made by the
old Fathers concerning the honest vesture of priests, which although it seem a
light matter to some men, yet it augme^teth or minisheth not a little in
priests the estimation of their conditions. Solomon confirming the same,
saying: The garment, the gate, and laughter of a man declares what he is. But
this matter will I leave to another place, where I intend to speak more
abunda^tly of it, if it be not the sooner amended. Now to conclude, as long as
the said occau^ons continue, so long men shall not be without rheumes, although
they were all perfect Physicians.

By what tokens one may know whether the stomach and head be hot or cold.
NOw to return to the remedies against the said annoyance, whereof happens
so many great sicknesses, I will be bold to write a little out of the works of
the most famous and expert Physicians. First, the cause of the rheum must be
digested, after expulsed, thirdly diuerted, that is to say, turned from the
eyes or throat into the nose, from whence it may be more easily purged.
Fourthly, it may be stopped that it shall not distill. In hot distillations the
head is very hot, in feeling the rheum being in the mouth, he is thin and
warm, the tongue or cheeks within blistered, the face sometime redder then it
is accustomed to be, sometime a burning within the nose. To them which have this
hot rheum, may be given the seed of white Popie, Diacodion made of the heads
of white Popie and rain water. Amylum with milk, if there be no fever,
penides, mallows, orage, gourdes, and spinach, boiled and eaten with oil of
Almonds, syrup of violets, nenuphar, or the wine of sweet pomegranates, the
water of a great Cucumber, boiled with a little sugar being drunk, does
mitigate choler, stops the rheum, and easily loses the belly: the seeds
of Millons brayed in a mortar with water, and strained with soft bread, having
sugar put to it, makes an excellent good meat against the hot rheumes:
plasters made of barley bruised, violets, popie and Camomill boiled in water,
wherein spunges or linen clothes be dipped, should be laid on the head, and
the genitories or legs therewith washed. If the sick man cannot sleep, then
the said parts with the belly and fundament shall be anointed with the oils
of Uiolets and Nenuphar, the savor of Camphar in Rosewater with violets, is
good in that case. Galen exhorts, and I have proved, that in a very hot
rheum, which has stilled fast, the pouring of cold water upon ones head, had
stinted the rheum. He that is therein diseased, must eschew going in the sun,
or to come nigh a great fire, or to stand, or be long covered, or to wear much
on his head, he must rest much, and provoke himself to sleep a night, but not
very long, and to lie on the one side on a hard bed, having his head high: also
rubbing of his legs before meals, is very wholesome. Cold rheumes be
perceived by coldness of the humor and head, with palenes of the visage, all
cold things increasing ye rheum. These things are good against it, the
detection of Cicer with honey and raisins, filberd nuttes tosted, and eaten
after meals: nothing is more wholesome then abstinence, specially in the
evening: they which have it, must beware of Northern winds, the Mooneshine by
night, washing in cold water, and to be long bareheaded. The seeds of Nigella
a little tosted, and put into a piece of thin Sarcenet, and smelled unto,
stops the rheumes.

Neefing in the beginning of rheum, is dispraised of Galen, but after that the
matter is digested, it is very wholesome: that may be made with leaves of
Laurel, or Betonie put into the nosethrils, the juice of Coleworts, the roots
of red Beetes, water of Marioram. A pretty medicine for that purpose proved.
The juice of young Beetes and Marioram, of each one ounce, good white wine
eight ounces, Saffron the weight of two pence, that being het and taken in the
mouth, shall be drawn up with breath to the place, whereby the distillations
falls out of the nose into the mouth. And if the rheum do distill into ye
cheeks and teeth, I have proved, that the juice of ground Juy, and that herb
which we call Mouse-eare, taken within a quill into the nosethrils, oftentimes
purges exceedingly the rheumes, and takes away the ach of the teeth.

Gargarising, if it be not discreetly used, may do more harm then good,
bring down much abundance of matter undigested: but taken in order with water,
honey and pepper, or with Hysope and figs boiled in white wine, and taken very
hot in a gargarise is right convenient.

For compassion which I have of them that be vexed with toothach caused of
rheumes, I will by the leave of Physicians, conclude this chapter with an
excellent medicine against the said passion, which is written of an honorable
Physician of late years, which medicine also makes the teeth fast which be
loose, and also stops the superfluous bleeding of the gummes, where with ye
breath is made unsavory. Take the rindes of Caper roots, the roots of
brambles, which do bear black berries, the flowers of Pomegrants called
balaustia, of every of them the weight of two ducats, Pelitorie of Spame one
ducket, seed of white Henbane, the rinds of Mandrage, of every of them one
ducket and a half, Spourge of the garden one handful, Alome of the rock two
ducats: boil al these in white wine or claret, which is very rough in taste,
and strain it therewith, and let the patient oftentimes wash his mouth. Albeit
I will counsel them which will take this medicine or any other, first to
purge the cause of the rheumes, as before is rehearsed, or in any other wise,
as they shall be counseled by well learned and discreet Physicians.

Of Lassitude. CAP. 3.
LAssitude is a disposition toward sickness, wherein a man feels a sorenes,
a swelling, or an inflammation. Sorenes happens of humors sharp and
gnawing, as after great exercise and labors, which lassitude happens Actius
lib. 3.
to them, whose bodies are full of ill juice and excrements. Also after
cruditie in the^ which are not exercised, or do abide long in the heat of the
sun. It may also be in the body wherein is good juice, if he be fatigate
with immoderate exercise. In them which do feel this lassitude, Galen detuen.
sanit. lib. 3.
the skin appears thick and rough, and there is felt a grief sometime in
the skin only, sometime also in the flesh, as it were of a sore. The cure
thereof is by much and pleasant rubbing with sweet oils, which have not the
virtue to restrain or close, and that with many hands, and afterward to
exercise moderatly, and to be bained in water sweet and temperate in heat:
also then must be given meats of good juice, pottage but seldom, wine is not
to be forbidden: for unto wine uneath any thing may be compared, that so well
digesteth crude humors: it also provoke sweat and urine, and makes one to
sleep soundly. But if this lassitude do abide the night and day following, or
waxes more and more, then if the patient be of good strength and young, and
has abundance of blood, let him be let blood, or provoke the hemerhoydes or
piles to bleed if they do appear. But if it proceed of the malice of any
humor without abundance of blood, then resort to purgations apt for the humor
that grieueth. The tokens whereof shall appear as well by the color of the
skin and diet preceding, as by urine, ordure, sweat, thirst, appetite, as it is
rehearsed before in the complexio^s. If the ill blood be little in quantity,
and the crude humors abundant, the^ shall he not be let blood, nor vehemently
purged, neither shall exercise or move himself, or be bained. For all exercise
carries humors throughout all the body, and stops the powers: wherefore
these manner of persons should be kept in rest, and such meats, drinks, and
medicines, should be given to them which should attenuate or dissolve the
grosnes of the humors without notable heat, as Oximell, barley water, and
mulse, if the patient abhor not honey. And forasmuch as in ye said persons
commonly there is abundance of wind about the stomach, therefore pepper,
specially long pepper or white is very convenient to be used, and the medicine
before written, called Diaspoliticum. When the humors are dissolved, then it
is good to drink white wine, or small claret wine moderately.

Lassitude extensiue. CAP. 4.
WHen one thinks that he does seele a swelling or boiling of the body, where
indeed there does not appear in sight or touching any smelling, that is called
lassitude extensiue, if it happens without exercise, or vehement moving: this
does happen of excessive multitude of humors, which do extend the muscules or
filles. In this no sorenes is felt, but only an heaviness with extention or
thrusting out of the body. And because that there is abundance of blood in the
body, best remedy is to be let blood about the elbow or ancle, after to be
purged, then to use soft frycasies with oils before rehearsed, afterward much
rest and temperate bathes, and meats lacking sharpenes and being abstersive.

Lassitude, with the feeling of inflammation. CAP. 5.
IF without any moving, the muscules and flesh arise upon the body as it
smells with great pains and exceeding heat, then soon after follows most
hottest fevers, except it be prevented by letting of blood, and that in
abundance, and almost to sowning: but it were more sure to be let blood twice
in one day, the first time without sowning, at the next time sowning is not to
be feared. If the grief be in the neck or head, the blood must be let of the
vein called Cephalea, or the shoulder vein. If it be in the bulk or
uppermost part of the body, then must the vein be cut, which is called
Basilica, or the innermost vein. If all the body be grieved, then cut the
vein which is called Mediana, or the middle vein. If a fever remain after
blood letting, then order him with the diet of them that have fevers, which ye
shall find written hereafter. If no fever remain, then use moderate fricasies
and little eating, and that of meats having good juice, increasing by little
and little to the natural diet.

Diet of them that are ready to fall into sickness. CAP. 6.
NOw to return eftsoons to speak of diet, it is to be remembered, that they
which are ready to fall into diseases, they are prepared thereunto either by
repletion or superfluous humors or else by cruditie, or malice of humors
which are in them. As touching the first, the general diet must be such, as
thereby the humors may be attenuate, and by convenient euacuation, brought to
a moderate quantity.

As for the second must be corrected with meats and drinks of contrary
qualities, having always respect to the age of the person, time of the year,
place of habitation, and most specially the universal complexion. For choler
offending in an old man, in winter time in a cold country, or the person being
of his natural complexion, fleumatick or melancholy, would not be so
abundantly expulsed or subdued, as if it be in one young and lusty, in the
hot summer, in the countries where the Sun fervently burns, or the person
of his proper nature is very choleric.

And in likewise contrary. Wherefore every man knowing his own natural
complexion, with the quality of the humor that offends, let him make
temperance his chief cook, and remembering that which I have before declared,
ordain to himself such diet, as may reform the offense with none or little
annoyance to his universal complexion. And if he can so do, he shall happily
escape, not only diverse sicknesses, but also the most pernicious danger,
proceeding of corrupted drugges or spyces, whereof some covetous apothecaries
do make medicines, maugre the heads of good and well learned Physicians.

Sickness most common to peculiar times of the year and ages. CAP. 7.
ALthough I do not intend to write of the cure of egritudes or sicknesses
confirmed, as well because it might be reputed in me a great presumption, as
also for as much as it were very perilous, to diuulgate that noble science to
common people, not learned in liberal sciences and Philosophy, which be
required to be sufficiently in a Physician. And moreover many books of
Hippocrates and Galen ought to be read, before that one do take upon him the
general cure of men's bodies, yet not withstanding I trust I may without any
note of arrogancy write, what discases do most happen in sundry times of the
year, and ages of men and women, with some significations, whereby the
discrasie or distemperature of the body is perceived, to the intent that the
Physician being far off, may be truly informed, considering that vrines far
carried do often deceive them, and likewise lack of the sight of the pacient,
and inquisition of things which do precede or follow the sickness. And with
this I trust none honest and charitable Physician will be offended, but rather
give to me thanks for my diligence, in the advancing of their estimation,
which by lack of perfect instruction has been appayred.

Sicknesses of spring time.
Diseases proceeding of melancholy, as madness, falling sickness, bleedings,
squinces, poses, hoarsenes, coughes, lepries, scabbes, ach in the joints.

Sicknesses of Summer.
Many of the said diseases, also fevers, continual hot fevers, fevers
tertiane, quartaine, vomites, flires, watering of eyes, pains of the ears,
blisters and sores of the mouth and sweatings.

Sicknesses of autumn.
Diverse of summer sicknesses, and opilations of the spleen, dropsies,
consumptions, stranguilions, costiuenes, ach in the huckle bones, shortness of
wind, fretting of the bowels, falling sickness, and melancholicke diseases.

Sicknesses of Winter.
Stiches and griefs in the sides, inflammation of the lungs, rheumes, coughes,
pains in the breast, sides, and loins, headache, and palsies.

Sicknesses happening to children.
When they be n(...) borne, there do happen to them sores in the mouth called
Aphte, vamiting, coughes, watching, fearfulness, inflammations of the navel,
moisture of the ears. When they breed teeth, itching of the gummes, fevers,
crampes, and laskes.

When they wax elder, then be they grieved with kernels, opennes of the mould
of the head, shortness of wind, the stone of the bladder, worms in the belly,
waters, swelling under the chin, and in England commonly purpilles, measiles,
and small pockes.

Sicknesses happening to young men from 14. years of age.
Fevers quotidiane, tertiane, quartaine, hot fevers, spitting or vomiting of
blood, pluresies, diseases of the sides, inflammation of the lunges, lethargies,
frenzy, hot sicknesses, choleric passions, costiuenes of vehement laskes.

Sicknesses of age.
Difficulty of breath, rheumes with coughes, stranguilion, and difficulty in
pissing, ach in the joints, diseases in the raines, swimmings in the head,
palsies, itching of all the body, lack of sleep, moisture in the eyes and
ears, dullness of sight, hardness of hearing, tissicknes or shortness of breath.

Although many of the said sicknesses do happen in every time and age, yet
because they be most frequented in the said times and ages, I have written them
to the intent that in the ages and times most inclined unto the^, such things
might be then eschewed, which are apt to engender the said diseases.

The general significations and tokens of sickness. CAP. 8.
IF the body be hotter, colder, moyster, dryer, leaner, fuller, the color more
pale or swart, the eyes more hollow than is accustomed to be, it signifies
that the body is disposed to sickness, or already sick. The brain sick.
Rauing. Forgetfulness. Fantasy. Humors coming from the roof of the mouth,
the eyes, the nose, or the ears. Watch. Sleep.

The heart sick. Difficulty of breath. Trembling of the heart. Beating of the
pulse. Fevers. Cold. Diversity of colors. Grief about the heart.

The liver sick. Lack or abundance of humors. The form of the body
altered. Palenes. Concoction. Digestion. Alteration of excrements accustomed.
Pain in the place of the liver. Swelling. Difficulty of breath.

The stomach sick. Concoction flow or quick. Appetite of moist or dry, dull or
quick. Separation of excrements moist, or hard with their colors. Yexing.
Belching. Uomiting with pain and difficulty of breath. Urine much or little
with the color and substra^ce too red, or too pale, too thick, or too thin.

The breast sick. Difficulty of breath. Cough. Spitting. Pain in the breast.



This have I written not to give judgment thereby, but only for the patient
to have in a readiness, to the intent that whatsoever he feels, or perceives
in every of the said things, thereof to instruct his Physician whereunto he may
adapt his counsel and remedies.

Of vrines. CAP. 9.
FOrasmuch as now a days the most common judgment in sickness is by vrines,
which being far carried, or much moved, or standing long, after that it is
made, the form thereof is so altered, that the Physician shall not perfectly
perceive the natural color nor contents, although it be never so well chafed
at the fire, as Actuarius and other great learned men do affirm. I will
therefore somewhat speak of vrines, not so much as a Physician knows, but as
much as is necessary to every man for to perceive the place and cause of his
grief, whereby he may the better instruct the Physician.

First in urine four things are to be considered, that is to say, the
substance, the color, the regions or parts of the urine, and the contents or
things therein contained.

Also forasmuch as in the body of man be four qualities, heat, cold,
moisture, and drith, two of them heat and cold, are causes of the color,
drith and moisture, are causes of the substance. Moreover in urine, being in a
vessel apt thereunto to be seen are three regions. The lowest regio^ in the
bottom of the vrinall, containing the spaces of two fingers or little more.
The middle region, from whence the lowest ended unto the circle. The highest
region is the circle. The highness of the color signifies heat: the pale,
black, or green, signifies cold. Also the grossenes or thicknes of the
urine, signifies moisture, the cleerenes or thinnes, signifies drith.

The colors of the vrines.
Color of bright gold. Color of gilt.
Perfect digestion.
Red as a red apple or cherrie. Base red, like to Bole armoniake, or Saffron
dry. Red glowing like fire.
Excess of digestion.
Color of a beasts liver. Color of dark red wine. Green like to celeworts.
Adustion of humors.
Leadie color. Black as ink. Black as horn.
Feeblenes or mortification of nature, except it be in purging of mela^choly.
White clear as water. Gray as a horn. White as whay. Color of a Camels
hair.
Lack of digestion.
Pale like to broth of flesh sodden.
The beginning of digestion.
Citrine color or yellowe. Subcitrine or paler.
The middle of digestion.
White and thin betokens melancholy to have dominion. White and thick,
signifies fleume. Red and thick, betokens sanguine. Read and thin
betokens choler to have the sovereignty.
The substance of the urine. CAP. 10.
AT the first pissing all vrines well nigh do appear thin, as long as they do
abide warm: for natural heat, during the time that it prevails, suffers
not that the licour, which is the substance of the urine, to congeale or be
thick for any occasion, but after that heat is gone, some vrines shortly,
sorne a longer time after wax thick. Likewise sometime some are pissed
thicker, and after wax clear, some remain still as they were made, some be
meetly thick as they were troubled, some very thick and gross. They that wax
clear, soon do gather that which is thick into the botome of ye vrinall, some
remain troubled, yt grossenes notwithstanding gathered in the bottom.
Semblably the diversity of thin or subtle vrines must be perceived, that is
to say, that some are very subtle, as water, some less subtle, some in a
mean between thick and thin.

Of things contained in the urine, some do descend down to the bottom, and
^ee called in a greek word Hypostasis, in english some call it the grounds,
some the residence, which if it be white, light rising up from the bottom of
the vrinall, like a pear, it signifies health, if it be of any other figure
or color, it betokens some annoyance. If like things be seen in the middle
of the vrinall, they be called sublations, if they approach unto the highest
region of the urine, they be named clouds, in latin Nebulae. The grounds or
residences not perfect, some is like little red vetches, and is called in
latin Orobea, some is like to bran of wheat ground, and severed from the
meal, and is called brannie residence, in latin Furfurea, some be like unto
plates having breadth and length without thickenesse, and may be named plat
residence, in latin Laminea, some is like to meal, wheat, or barley, and may
be named mealy residence, in latin Similacea.

There is also seen in the urine like to white hayres, some longer, some
shorter, sometime like to rags somewhat red. There is also seen in the
uttermost part of the urine, sometime a ^ome of froth, sometimes bells or bubbles,
sometime there swimmeth in the urine, a thing like a cobweb, otherwhile there
is about the circle, as it were the renting of cloth, sometime there is in like
urine the motes of the sun, sometime like the matter of a sore, otherwise
like the seed of a man, also grauel or sand. And in these things may be diverse
colors, some white, some red, some between both, some yelow, some gray, and
(...) black. All this must be diligently marked, and thereof separately to
advertise the physician, unto whom I refer the judgment of the sickness for the
cause before rehearsed, and for as(...) as the judgment of them is very subtle.

Semblably of ordure whether it be very thin or very thick, what other
matter issues out with it, what color it is of, the savor very great, little
or none if it were easily expulsed, or painefully, how often or how seldom.

Moreover of sweat what color it is of, and of what savor, if in tasting it
be salt, sour, bitter, or unsavory.

Also the vomit if it be of one color or many, if it do smell horribly, of what
humor it had most abundance, if it were fasting, or after meals, if it were
painful or easy.

Likewise spittle whether it be thick or thin, or mixed with blood, or matter
corrupt, accordingly of the humor issuing out at the nose, and if that be
blood, then whether it be red, watrie or black.

Moreover, it may not be forgotten, to advertise the Physician of the diet used
by the pacient, as well before the sickness, as in the time of the sickness, his
age, the strength of his body, his exercise and place, where he longest abode
in his youth, whether it were high or low, watrie or dry, hot or cold.

This I trust shall be sufficient to instruct a physician, he that desires to
know more particularly hereof, let him read the books of Hippocrates, Galen,
Cornelius Celsus, Actuarius, Paulus, and diverse other late writers, for this
little treatise may not receive it.

The precepts of the ancient physician Diocles to King Antigonus. CAP. 11.
WE will now divide the body of man into four parts, the head, the bulk
called in Latin Thorax, which contains the breast, the sides, the stomach
and intrailes. The belly, called in latin Venture, contains the paunch and
bowels. Also the bladder called in latin Vesica, in the which name, is also
contained the conduits by the which urine passes. When any disease approaches
to the head, these tokens do commonly precede, swimming in the head, headache,
heaviness of the brows, sounding in the ears, pricking in the temples, the
eyes in the morning do water or wax dim, the smelling is dull, the gummes do
swell. When thou feel such tokens, forthwith purge the head with somewhat,
not with vehement medicines, but taking Isope or organum, and the crops of them
boil with white or claret wine half a pint, and therewith gargarise your
mouth fasting, until the fleum be purged out of your head: this is the easiest
medicine in diseases of the head.

It is also very wholesome to gargarise the mouth and breast with honey water,
whereunto mustard is put and mingled, but first the head must be rubbed with a
warm cloth, that the fleum may easily come out of the head. And if these
tokens be neglected, these manner of sicknesses do follow soon after, bleared
eyes and humors letting the sight, cleftes in the ears, swellings in the
neck full of matter called the kings evil, corruption of the brains, poses
or rheumes, heaviness of the head, and toothache. When the bulk is like to
suffer any sickness, it is perceived by these tokens, all the body is in a
sweat, the spittle is either salt or bitter, or choleric, the sides and
shoulders do ache without any occasion, the pacient gapeth often, also there
does happen much waking, suffocations or lack of breath, thirst after sleep,
the mind is vexed with heaviness, also the breast and arms are very cold, and
the hands do tremble. Against these things, thie remedy may be provided. After
a modederate supper assay to vomit without any medicine, vomit is also
profitable, which meat does follow. He that in such wise will vomit, let him
eat hastily small radish roots, townkerses, roket, senuy, or purslaine, and
drink after it a great quantity of warm water, and provoke himself to vomit.
He that sets little by the said tokens, let him fear these sickenesses
following, the pluresie, the sickness of the lungs, melancholy or madness, sharp
fevers, the lethargy, inflammation with yexing. If any sickness be toward
the belly, they may be espied by these tokens, ye belly is first wrapped
together, and in it self is troubled, all meats and drinks do seem bitter
in taste, he feels heaviness in his kneees, a stifnes in his loins, and
wearines in all his body, without any occasion, a sleepines in his legs, with a
little fever: when thou feel these tokens, mollify the belly, not with
medicine, but with good order of diet, for it is best and most sure, to use
those things, whereof lightly may ensue none annoyance, in the number of them
are beetes boiled in water of honey, Garlic sodden, Malowes, Sorell,
Mercury, and all things condite in honey. All these do expel the ordure of
the belly: but if any of the said signs, do more and more increase, the
licour wherein the seed of Carthamus called also Cnicus is boiled, is a
pleasant sure medicine, small cole wortes boiled in a good quantity of water,
the licoure thereof in measure two pintes, saving the third part of a pint with
honey and salt being dronken, shall profit much. Cicer and the pulse called
in latin Eruum, in english (I suppose) chits in water, dru^k fasting has ye
same effect. To the^ which set little by ye said tokens, these diseases do
suddenly happen. Flux of the bellye, bloody flux, slippernes of the bowels,
pains in the guts, ach in the huckle bones, the fever tertian, the gout, the
apoplexy or palsley in the lims. Hemerhoydes, aching of joints. When the bladder
is toward any sickness, it is perceived by these tokens, fulness felt after
little meat, breaking wind downewarde and upward, palenesse of color in all
the body, heavy or troublous sleeps, the urine pale and passing forth
painefully, swelling about the coddes, and privy members. When these tokens
appear, the^ it is expedient to have remedy of odoriferous things, which do
expel urine, which shall be done without any peril, with the roots of
fenell and parcely steeped one or two days in good white wine, and to drink
thereof fasting every morning three ounces and two drams, with the water of
wild Carets or Elicampane, which of these is next at hand, every of them
have like effect. Also water wherein the peason called in latin Ciceres are
steeped, being drunk with wine is like commodious. He that neglects the
said tokens, let him look for these sicknesses following, the dropsy, the
greatness of the spleen, grief in the liver, ye stone, ach of back, or pains in
the raines, ye difficulty of urine, fulness of the belly. In all these things
that we have spoken of, we shall give to children mast easy medicines, to
men those that be stronger in working. This diet of Diocles, although at this
time it seems not most pleasant, nor according to the practice now used, yet
being tempred with that which I have before remembered, some thing may be found
in it, which being experienced, may be as commodious for the health of man's
body, as the diet which is more curious or pleasan^t.

Of them in whose stomach meat is corrupted. CAP. 12.
THey in whom customably meat is corrupted, let them before that they eat any
meat, assay to vomit, drinking sweet wine, abstain drinking sweet wine,
abstain from meats that engender botches, inflammations, and fumous
ructuations or vapors, and take such as nourish good juice, and choose them out
which do mollify the belly, and at sundry times take them. It is also good
to take temperatly that which loses the belly, as the medicine called Picra,
and to abstain from such things whereby ill juice is gathered, and do
engender sicknesses, hard to be cured or never, as gowtes, bone-ach, pain of
the raines, etc.

Of the virtue of meats. CAP. 13.
HE that is studious about the conservation of health, he needs to know the
virtue of meats. The meat which has ver^ue to extenuate, or make humors
subtle, it opens the pores, and brings forth that which is fast in the
flesh, it makes that which is clammy subtle, and does extenuateor relent that
which is fat, it brings forth that which abides long in the belly: but that
which is eaten, is a superfluity, watrie, and cholerike, and at length makes
melancholic blood: wherefore much using of them is prohibited, specially to
them that are cholerike, and only serves for them that are repleate with
fleume, crude or undigested humors, clammie or fat. The diet of fatting
things, does nourish abundantly, so that the stomach and liver do digest well,
meat of good juice makes good blood, but yet stops the liver and spleen.
These do they, which make fat humors only, as the pulse called Lenticula,
and they that are slimy like mallows: some do make hot humors and be also
slimie, as fishes with hard shells. Finally, the diet which does extenuate and
make lean, is more sure for keeping of health, then that which fatteth much.
Nourishing meats would be therefore moderatly used, when a man perceives
himself to have need thereof, it may be most surely used of them that be
exercised temperatly, and can sleep when they list. They that cannot sleep by
reason of exercise, let them eschew fatting meats, let none idle person attempt
to use them. In the preservation of health, sluggardie is the greatest
mischief. Like as temperate moving is good, so is the meat which between
thick and thin, unto man's health most convenient, which ingendreth blood,
according to the competent constitution of man's body, and therefore it is to
be chiefly used. Meat of ill juice is always noyfull, wherefore it ought to be
eschewed. Likewise the variety of meats is to be observed diligently, for it
is a great thing to couple well together things of contrary virtues: for if
they be not well digested, that which is received may bring displeasure.

A Diet preservative in the time of pestilence. CAP. 14.
THe bodies most apt to be infected, are specially sanguine, next cholerike,
then flengmatike, last melancholic: for in them the humor being cold and
dry, is most unapt to receive putrefaction, having also strait passages by
which the venim must pass. The diet convenient for that time, is to abstain
from meats inflaming and opening the pores: also from heat of the sun, from
too much heat or fire, or garments, from every hot herb, and much use of
tart things, except Onyons and Cicorie, or Radish with vinegar, for they do
resist against venim: from wine very fumish, exercise incontinent after meals,
from sweating, from all things that will cause opilation, and putrification:
from things hot and moist, where moisture has the dominion in a degree,
specially being not sufficiently boiled: also from milk, except it be in a
little quantity, and that with a little sugar. Fruits and herbs cold and
dry, and therewith sour or somewhat bitter, are not prohibited. If ye eat
figs, grapes, or sweet cherries, eat after them of an Orange with salt. If
ye eat things cold and moist, as Cucumbers, Melons, fish soft and fresh, or
Damsens, eat by and by after some Fenell and Orange with salt, drinking
therewith a draught of good wine. Beware of Mushromes, much Purslane, Gourds,
and all other things, which will soon putrify: notwithstanding, I will not
forbid eating of Lettise with a few Mints, or mixed with Cinamom. All things so
wre are commended as well in diet conseruatiue, as in that which is curatiue or
healthie, except where there is straitnes of the breast, or weakness of the
stomach, then ought they to be tempered with sugar, salt, Almond milk,
Cinamom, pepper, senell, saffren, eggs, and some thing that is fat and unctuous.
Capers are good to be used with vinegar. Cheese very fat and salt is not
commended, no more is Coleworts or any kind of pulse, except chittes, great
peason, rapes, nor spinach is good. Also there be forbidden roket and mustard,
much wine and eggs, except they be eaten with sorell sause, vinegar, or juice
of Orenges, parsley, and parsnips be good. New wines be noyfull, let the meat
be somewhat more then drink, but yet sustain not too much hunger, nor
thirst, beware of lechery, of clowdie weather and close, eschew much resort or
throng of people, winds coming from fens or moors, from sleep at noone, use
with your meat this powder, saunders red half an ounce, Cinamom 3. drams and
a half, saffron half a dram. After your meat eat a little of coriander seed
well prepared. In ye morning at a se^perate fire, kembe your head backward,
cleanse your body and head of all superstuities, use also moderate fricasies
with sweet perfumes and odours, wash oftentimes your face and hands with pure
vinegar mixed with rose water. In cold weather mix it with mints, Baulme, Rue,
or Myrtes, and sometimes with cloves: in hot summer with roses or violets.
Above all things use to make white wine, good white vinegar roset, water of
roses, in equal portions, put thereunto a little setwal, or of the rind of a
Cytron, and drink thereof a little, and oftentimes wash therewith your hands,
and visage. Medicines preservative against the pestilence, which be always most
ready, are these, a fig with rue, and a walnut eaten fasting, also triacle, or
mithridate, to old men a dram weight, to young half a dram, or a scruple
dissolved into vinegar and rose water, and in water of tormentill, scabiose, or
baulme, if the plague be in Summer: if it be in winter, put to the waters some
white wine. Also the pills called commonly Pillulae rasis (but in deed they
were invented by Rufus) are very excellent, specially if the aloe, which is in
it be washed, and thereunto added a little Bolus amenus and Terra sagillata.
And if the person be of hot complexion, a quantity of sorell seed, and red
coral, this confectionated with syrope of cytrons in cold complexions, or to
old men with white wine, use them every third day, one pill at a time, three
hours or four before dinner or supper. If ye take ^riacle or mythridate,
abstain from meat at the least six hours after. A piece of the root of a
settuall, borne in the mouth, preserves from infection. In like wise does
sorell chewed fasting, and the juice sucked down. To poor men, Marcilius was
wont to give a toste of bread steeped in vinegar, with a piece of an Onion, or
Rue. All things which be cordial, that is to say, which do in any wise
comfort the heart, do resist pestilence, vehement anger, or heaviness be very
pernicious.

Other more exquisite and costly preseruations, I purposely pass over, which
Marcilius and other physicians do write so abundantly, for as much I desire to
be in this work compendious. One thing I had almost forgotten, that there is
no better preservative, then so^^ie from the place corrupted betime and far
off, and to let none approach you, that has made their abode where the plague
is fervent. Moreover receive not into your house any stuff, that comes out
of a house wherein any person has bin infected. For it has been seen, that
such stuff lying in a coffer fast shut by the space of two years, after that
coffer has been opened, they which have stood nigh to it have been
infected, and some after have dyed. But here I always except the power of God,
which is wonderful, and also merciful, above man's reason, or counsel,
preserving or striking whom, when, and where it shall like his majesty: to
whom be glory and praise everlasting. Amen.

Thus make I an end of this treatise, desiring them that shall take profit
thereby, to defend it against envious disdain, on whom I have set the
adventure for the love that I bear to my country, requiring all honest
Physicians to remember, that the intent of my labor was, that me^ and women
reading this work, and observing the counsayles therein, should adapt thereby
their bodies to receive more sure remedy, by the medicines prepared by good
Physicians in dangerous sicknesses, they keeping good diet and enforming
diligently the same physicians of the manner of their affects, passions, and
sensible tokens. And so shall the noble and most necessary science of physic,
with the ministets thereof, escape the slander which they have of long time
sustained, and according to the precepte of the wise man be worthily honored,
for as much as the highest God did create the physician for man's necessity, and
of the earth created medicine, and the wise man shall not abhore it. Thus fare
ye well gentle readers, and forget me not with your good report, and pray to God
that I be never worse occupied.

FINIS.

