PASQVIL THE PLAIN.

LONDINI IN AEDIBVS THOMAE BERTHELETI. M. D. XXXIII.

Thomas Elyot knight to gentile reders.
SEns plainnes in speking is of wise men commen ded, and diverse do abhor
long prohemes of Rhetorike: I have set out this merry treatise / wherein
plainnes and flateri do come in trial / in such wise as none honest man will be
therewith offended. The personages, that do reasone, be of small reputation: For
Pasquillus, that speaks most, is an image of stone, sittinge in the city of
Rome openly: on whom ones in the year, it is leful to every man, to set in
verse or prose any tau^te that he will / again whom he lift, how great an
astate so ever he be. Not withstanding in this book he uses such a
temperaunce / that he notes not any particular person or Country. Gnatho was
brought in by writers of Comedies for such a seruante / as always affirmed,
what so ever was spoken of his master: but he was a Greek borne, and therefore
he sauorith some what of rethorike. Pasquille is an old Roman / but by long
sittinge in the street, and hering market men chat, he his become rude and
homely.

Harpocrates was the prelate of the temple of Isis and Serapis, which were
honorid for goddis in Egypt / whose image is made holding his finger at his
mouth, betokeninge silence. These three communed to gether, as it follows /
but where, I had forgoten to ask,. All be it because the matter is merrily
brought in, and therewith sauoreth somewhat of wisdom: I thought hit not
inconuenie^t to participate it with you that will not interpret it but
according to the best meaning, And in the redinge this littill treatise
distinctly, will consider diligently the state and condition of the parson that
speaks / with the order and conclusion of his hole reason. And if it seem to
you, that Pasquill says true, in declaringe how much ye do favor truth,
defend him ageynste venomous tunges and overthwart wittis, which does more
myschieffe, than Pasquillus babillinge.

Fare ye well.
Pasquillus. Gnato. Harpocrates. PASQVILL. IT is a wonder to se the world: Now
a days, the more strange the better lyked, therefore uneath a man may
know an honest man from a false harlotte. But peace / who is this gentylman
that stands here harkening? What I say mine old fellow Gnatho, I pray the
come forth, ye steal not so away. Perdye I know your old facyon / though
ye be now thus straungely disguysed.


GNATO. Who speaks to me: Pasquill? Saw thou not Harpocrates late? I seek
for him, he must come to my master.


PASQILL. I wot not whither thyneye sought for Harpocrates, but sure I am,
that thyn ere sought for Pasquillus. But I pray the turn about: thou haste
the strangest apparaise that ever I looked on: What have we here? A cappe full of
aglettes and bottons this long estrige fether does wonderly well / the tirfe
of the cappe turned down before like a pentise has a meruaylous good grace:
but this long gown with strayte sleues is a non sequitur, and hit shall let
you to flee, and than your feathers shall stand you in no stead, and so might
ye happen to be combred, if ye should come in to a stoure, where ye would shyft
for your self. God a vow what do thou with this long typpet? If it were
white as it is black, I would have said, thou came to challenge men at
wrastlynge, but I wene ye have walked latein the street, and pulled it from
some worshypfull doctor. What a gods name / have ye a book in your hand? A
good feloweshyp whereof is it? Let me se. Nouum testamentu^? What / thou
deceiuest ^^ / I had wend thou could have skilled of nothing but only of
flatery. But what is this in your bosom? An other book, or else a pair of
cards of valery salse head? Did I not say at the first / that it is a wonder
to se this world? Lo some will be in the bowelles of divinity er they know
what belongs to good humanity. Let se, what is here?

Troylus and Chreseyd? Lord what discord is between these two books? Yet a
great deal more is there in thyn aparayll. And yet most of all between the
book in thy hand and thy conditions. As god help me / as much as between
troth and leasing.


GNA. Well Pasquillus / thou will never leave thyn old custom in raylynge.
Yet haste thou wit enough to perceive what damage and hindrance thou have
thereby sustained: and more art thou lykely and with greater peril / if thou
have not good awayte / what, and to whom / and where thou spekest. I herd the
words that thou spakest while ere, whereof it I would be a reporter, it might
turn the to no littell displeasure: but I know that thou art a good fellow,
and would that all thing were well, though thy words be all crabbed.
Wherefore not withstanding that thou speak rebukefully to me, I take hit in
iape, ne will carye hense with me the presumtuous words that thou spakest. But
by mine advise leave now at the last thin indiscreet liberty in speech, wherein
thou use unprofitable tauntes and rebukes / I may well call them
unprofitable, whereby nothing that thou blamist / is of one jot amended, and
thou losest thereby preferment, which thyn excellent wit does require: and that
wors is / trauailest in study of mind to augmente thin own detriment, and
therein losist much time, that might be better employed.

I remember, that ones I asked a man, that was wise and very well learned, how
I might sonest come to promotion: he said. vsyng Aeschylus counsaylle /
which was a writar of tragedies: and I demanded, what it was? And he
answered, holding thy tongue where it behooves the. And spekyng in time that
which is convenient. And the same lesson Pasquillus if thou woldeste observe /
I doubt not, but that thou should find therein no little commodity.


PAS. Mary Gnato I will no more wonder at thy side gown: for thou art much
wysar than I supposed. I had wend all this while, that by nature only thou
had ben instructed to flatter, but by saint I one I se now, that thou
ioynest also thereto a shrewde wit, and preparest to the helpinge thereof as it
were a craft gathered of learning and scripture. Notwithstanding a good
fellowship / if thy taryenge shall not be greuouse or hurtful unto the (for I
know how expedient it is that thou be not long out of the sight of thy
master, if thou wylt be Gna tho alone) tell me how thou understand the said
sentence of Aeschylus tragedy: for I fear we two do understand him dyuersely,
and than thy counsel in respect to thy purpose shall little profit me.


GNA. Supposest thou so? In good faith and to me it seems so plain, that it
needs none expositor, but to the intent that my counsayll to the may take some
effect, in the little time that I may now tarry, I will as com pendiously as I
can show my conceit / in declaringe what I think / that Aeschylus mente by
the said sentence.

It behooves a man to hold his tunge, when he aforeseeth by any experience,
that the thing / which he would purpose or speak of to his superior / shall
neither be pleasantly herd nor thankefully taken. And in words opportunity
and time always do depend on the affection and appetite of him that hereth
them.

How say thou Pasquill, is it not so?


PASQVILL. So? No so mote I go. But one thing here me. I will not flatter the
Gnatho. If thou vnderstandeste no better the new testamtnt (which thou
cariest as solemnly with the, as thou shul dest read a prive lesson / Hem I
had almost told where openly) than thou do Aeschylus sentence / which as
if thou had been learned, thou toldest to me for a counsaylle, thy brethe
will be so hot shortly, that thou wylt make men aferde to come within twentye
foot of the.

And herke in thine ear. By my troth, I wene it be neither better nor warse.


GNATO. Will ye not leave your overthwart facion. I can no more. I se it is vain
to counsel a mad man to look to his profit. Fare well, I have somewhat else
to do / than to attend to thy pratynge.


PASQVILL. What be you angry for this? Look on the book in your hand: perdie
hit agrees not with your profession to be out of charity. But gentle Gnatho
tarry so long as I may show the how I understand the said sentence of
Aeschylus.


GNATO. Say on.


PASQVILL. Where two hosts be assembled, and in point to fight: if thou be
among them, though thou be a great astronomer / it behooves the to hold thy
tunge / and not to talk of conjunctions, and of the trine or quartil aspectes,
but to prepare the to bataylle. Where a good fellowship is set at dyce or at
cards, though thou be learned in geometry: hold thy tunge, and speak not of
proporcions or figures. Where men be set at a good soupper / and be busily
occupied in eating and drinking, though thou be depely seen in philosophy /
hold thy tongue and dispute not of temperaunce / or moderate diete. Where thou
art among a great company, at bankettinges or other recreations: though thou
be well learned in holy scripture, hold thy tongue, interpret not Paul's
epistels / for therein is no daliaunce.

When thou art sittynge in counsel about matters of weighty importance:
talk not than of pass time or daliaunce, but omitting affection or dreede,
speak than to the purpose.

Where thou seeste thy friend in a great presence hououred of all men, though
thou know in him notable vices, yet there hold thy tongue, and reproach him
not of them. Where thou see thy lord or master in the presence of many /
resolved in to fury or wantonness, though thou have all ready aduertisementes,
how he shall refrain it: yet hold thy tongue than / for troublynge that
presence.

On the other part. If before bataile joined, thou beholdest thy side the
weiker: and thine adversaries more puissaunt and stronger: speak than of
policy, whereby thou hopest to obtain the victory.

Before that thy friend syttethe down to dyce, if thou do perceive, that he
shall be ouermatched: discorage him betyme / or he repent him in poverty.

When thy friends be set down to souper / before the cups betwise filled:
reherce the peril and also dishonesti that happens by glotony.

When young men and women have appointed a bankette, than er the ouens be hete
/ and tables all covered / reherce hardely the sentences of saint Paul, or
saint Hierome, if thou be learned.

If thou be called to counsel / after thou haste either herd one raisonne
before the / or at the leest weye, in the balaunce of thine own raison
ponderid the question: spare not to show thine advise, and to speak truly /
remembering that god is not so far of, but that he can here the.

If thou know a vice in thy friend, which is of a few men suspected, er it
be talked of at the tavern, or of his enemy reproched / warn him of the
damage that may happen / if it be not amended.

When thou percciuest thy Master to be resolved in to wrath or affections
dishonest, Before wrath be incresed in to fury, and affection in to voluptuous
appetite. As opportunity serves the / reuere^tly and with tokens of love
toward him, speak such words as shall be convenient.

Oportunite consists in place or time / where and when the said affections or
passion of wrath be some dele mitigate and out of extremity. And words be
called conueniente, which have respect to the nature and state of the person,
unto whom they be spoken, and also to the detrimente / which might ensue by
the vice or lack that thou have espied, and it ought not to be as thou have
supposed. For oportunite and time for a counsayllour to speak / do not depend
of the affection and appetite of him that is counsayled: mary than counsaylle
were but a vain word, and every man would do as him lift.

For if he listed not to here any counsel, he should never be warned of his
own error, but by satietie and tediousness of his own vice, or by grace (if
he were worthi to have it)


GNA. Now by the faith I owe to god / I would not have thought / that thou
had ben so well raysoned. For men have always reputed the but for a babbler
and raylar.


PASQVILL. Ye what men? By god those / which ought most to have thanked me.
I say, herke in thine ear: Popes, emperors / kings / and cardinals. Thou
herest what I say. When they, by such as thou and Harpocrates be / were with
flatery and dissimulation brought in to the hate of god and the people, ones
in year / I gave the^ warning, neither for menaces, nor yet for beatynges, I
never cessed. Thou art remembered when pope Leo swear, that he would throw me
in to the river of Tyber. And that year I went to saint James on pilgremage /
which I auowed, if I escaped drowning. But in a unlucky hour was I a pylgreme:
for sens there have comen both to saint James at Co^postella, and to saint
Peter at Rome every year ten thousand pilgremes fewer, than there did a
thousand years before that time. And men say, that in other contreys diverse
monasteries be like to break hospitality, because their offringes be not the
third part so much as they were accustomed. For in deed now a days men's
devotion waxes even as cold / as the mounkes be in the quyer at midnyght.
that commodity had Rome by mine absence. And yet after mi pilgremage done, I
had for mi troth and plainness as much per done of god, as if I had bylded
one cloister in Rome / and an other in Parise / and put in to eueryche of them
an hundred friars co^uentuals. And yet were that a blessed deed, if the law
were not again incresing of valiant beggars. But to my purpose. If these men
that we spoke of / had wisely and coldly expended and tried my words, that
they called raylynge, many things might have been prevented / that were after
lamented.

Germany should not have kicked again her mother: Emperors and princis should
not have been in perpetual discord / and often times in peril, prelates have been laughed at, as di^^sardes: saynctes blasphemed, and miracles reproved for
iougglynges / laws and statutes contemned / and officers littell regarded.
What must needs follow / sens my breath fails me? I leave that to the Gnatho to
coniect, for thou art wise moughe to consider.


GNA. I know what thou meanest / but a felyshyp leave thy bourdinge and
currishe philosophy, sens it is neither profitable / pleasant, nor thankful.
Who would be so mad to drive about a myll, and is sure / that all the meal /
that he gryndeth / shall fall on the floor: sauinge a little mylduste / that
shall fly in to his eien, and put him to pain and perchance make him blind?
And thou studyest ot speak many good words, which be lost in the rushes: and
if any ill meaning may be pycked out, it is cast in thy nose to put the in
danger. Lose no more labor Pasquyll / but follow my counsaylle: and if
within two years thou be new painted and gylt / and have mo men wondryng at
the, than at any other image in Rome, by my truth I will stand in the rain
and son as long as thou haste done, and yet it were an vuresonable wager.


PAS. Go to let se what is thy counsel?


GN. Mary I will tell the. Thou haste a very sharp wit and a ready: wherefore
thou art mete for the world. And pity it were, that such a jewel should be
neglected.


PAS. And pity hit were, that such a flaterar as thou art / should long be
vnhanged. But pass on a goddis name.


GNA. I wist well, that in such as froward pice of tymbre I should lose much
labor: yet will I prove / if good counsaylle may warke any thing in the.
Now here Pasquill what I say. By thy long railinge, thy wit is well known.
Now turn the lefe. And wha^ thou herist any thing purposed by them / whom
thou have offendid, what so ever it be, affirm it to be well / and therewith
auaunce the wit and intent of the person that spoke it, which thou may do
excelle^tly well. For he that can despise spytefully, can if he list, praise
and commend also in comparably. And if thou canste not refrain from rebukinge
and tauntinge: practice thy natural fury and woodenesse again them that
repugne again the said purpose. And where thou dyddest wonder to see me have
in my hand the New testament / if thou woldist do the same, and now in thyn
age, lay apart the lesson of gentiles, called humanite, sens thou may have
good leysour / being not yet called to counsel / pyke out here and there
sentences out of holy scripture, to fournyshe thy reason with authority. I
make god auowe, thou shall be within three months able to confound the
greattest divine in all Italy. And when thy conversion and good opinion is
known, than shall thou be called fore. But than always remember how so ever
the tenor bell ryngeth, he ryngeth always in tune and though he jar somewhat
/ yet thou canste not here it / his soune is so great / and thine ears be so
little. And if other men find it, say that it is no fault, but a quauer in
music / and became the bell, if they had the wit to perceive it. I teach
the in parables, for this craft would not be opened to every man: for it
should not be for my profit: but thy subtle wit comprehends all that I
mean, thou art so acquainted with all our experience.


PAS. Now on my feith well said / I could not have founden a craftier knave to
learn of between this and Jerusalem. But comes here? He seems a reuere^de
personage, he is none of thy sort I trow?


GN. By god we be right cosens, I by the mother side, and he by the father. And
that caused me to speak so much as I do / and him so little, and yet is
there small diversity between our conditions.


PAS. What meaneste thou thereby?


GNA. For we both have one master. And when he spekethe / or doethe any
thing for his pleasure: I study with words to commend it. If my couseyn
stand by / he speaks littell or nothing / but formynge his visage in to a
gravity with silence / looks as if he affirmed all thing, that is spoken.


PAS. What is his name?


GN. Harpocrates.


PAS. That is a hard name by Jesus. But why holds he his finger at his mouth.


GNA. For he has espied me talking / and because he weneth, that I speak to
much, he makes a sign / that I should cesse: but I am glad, that I have
met with him. Cousin Harpocrates I have sought for you this two hours.


PAS. Why speaks he not?


GN. O that is his gravity to pause a while or he speak, he learned it when he
was student at Bonony.


HARPO. What is the matter Gnato?


GN. My master when he has dined, will sit in counsel about weighty causes.


HAR. And when I have dyned / I will give attendaunce.


PAS. Lo is it not as I fayde, a wonder to se this world?

In old time men used to occupy the morning in deep and subtle studies,
and in counsayles concerning the common weal, and other matters of great
importance. In like wise than to here controversies, and give judgments. And
if they had any causes of their own / than to treat of them. and that did
they not without a great consyderation. procedynge both of natural rayson,
and also counsel of phisike.

And after diner they refreshed their wits, either with instruments of
music, or with redynge or heringe some pleasant story, or beholdinge some
thing delectable and honest. And after their diner was digested / thanne
either they exercysed them selfs in riding / runnynge on foot / shoting, or
other like pastime / or went with their hawks to se a flight at the river, or
would se their grehoundes course the hare, or the dear: which they did as
well to recreate their wits / as also to get them good appetite. But lo
now all this is turned in to a new fascion, god help us, the world is
almost at an end: For after noone is turned to fore noone / virtue into vice,
vice into virtue / devotion into hypocrisy, and in some places men say /
faith is turned to herisye. Did I not now say well at the beginning. That it
is a wonder to see this world?


HAR. Hem Pasquillus.


PAS. Well, ye think as much as I speak for all your poynting and wynking.


HAR. But in silence is surety.


PAS. Perchance nay. If I perceived one at thy back with a sword drawn,
ready to strike the / would thou that I should hold my peace / or else tell
the?


HARPOCRAT. Nay, silence were than out of season.


PASQVILLVS. Now well fare you for your balde reason, a man may see what
wisdom there is in your compendiouse speaking / ye will season silence.
Marye I wene my lord should have a better cook of you thanne a counsayllour.
Not withstanding for your silence ye might be a confessor. But yet I doubt
me: for I remember Gnato what thou saydest while ere / that wha^ ye were
present both with your master, if thou commendest his sayenges or doings /
this man would approve it with silence and countenance, which might do more
harm / tha^ all thy flatcry / than what mischief might follow of his
damnable silence, if in secret time of confession, wherein confessors have
above all men most largest lyberte to blame and reprove / he should either
dissemble the vices that he knows in him, whom he has in confession / or
else forbear to declare to him the enormitie of such capytall sins as he
has confessed.


GN. By my troth thou art a busy fellow, do thou remember / what thou
saydest, when thou dydest epsy, that I had a book of the New Testament.


PASQ. What said I?


GNA. Mary this thou saydest / that some would be in the bowels of divinity or
they know what belongs to good humanite. Now thou take thy self by the
nose: for without having regard to whom thou spekest / thou presumest to teache
this worshypfull man what he shall do in confession.


PAS. It is well raysoned of you by sweet saint Ronyon: ye define teaching, as
well as he did season his silence. Did thou here me teach him, what he
should do? Nay and if thou have so much wit to remember / upon the words
that thou thy self spakest / I declared what inconvenience might happen by the
flaterynge silence of a confessor: wenest thou that I was never confessed? Yes
I have told a tale to a friar or this time, with a grote in my hand / and
have been assoyled forthwith without any further rehersall: where if a poor man
had told half so much, he should have been made equal to the devil / and
have been so chidde, that when he had gone from confession, he should have
hanged down the eres / as if he had been lerninge of prick song. All be it /
it is the custom of some of you, that be courtiars, wha^ ye can not defend
your matter with raison, to embrayed him that speaks with presumption, treson
/ misprison or such other like praty morselles / to stop him of talking.

But between two men full of words, truth shall never or late be espied:
wherefore I will no more Gna tho meddel with the, but from hens forth I will
speak to Harpocrates: for if he can persuade me, that his silence is better
than my babblynge. I will follow his doctrine rather than thyn / for I have
professed from my chyldehode never to speak in ernest to my master or friend /
contrary to that, that I think.


GNA. Ergo thou haste professed to stand still in the rain / and ones
perchance to be thrown in to Tyber, or broken in pieces.


PAS. And perchance if god never lied / I may be in the palaice merry / when
thou shalt sytte without on a ladder / and make all thy friends sorye.
Herdest thou never, that the world is round, and therefore it is ever
tournynge, now the wrong side upward, an other time the right, but let
this pass. I pray the Harpocrates teach me how thou do season thy
silence, do thou hit with salt or with spyces?


HARPOCRAT. Nay, with sugar, for I use little salt.


PAS. And that makes your counsayl more sweet than sauery.


HARPOCRA. Ye speak like a poticary.


PASQVILL. And I have known a wise poticarie done much more good, if he were
trusted, than a folyshe physician. But now to thy silence / that thou so much
praysest Harpocrates, Thou saydest that in silence was surety. And I asked, If
I perceived one at thy back with a sword drawn ready to strike the, whither
should I speak or keep silence? And thou answeredst, that silence was than out
of season.


HARPO. So said I.


PAS. I can the thank, thou abidest by thy word: although at this day / that
be accomted no polycie. But why saidest thou / that silence were than out of
seson?


HAR. For I might be sore hurt, or perchance killed / if I were not tha^
warned, mine enmy being so nygh me.


PASQ. Ye: I wiste well / that ye would not be slain, nor yet wounded, of ye
might have rome enough to ro^ne / or your long clothis did not let you. But I
put ease I knew, that your enmie were at your chamber door / or let it be
further, at Poytiers in France, who had auowed to slay you, and were in his
iournay toward you / but when or where he would strike you / I know not: should
I forth with warn you, or else keep silence until I saw his sword over your
heed redi to kyl you, that I might keep silence all way in seasone?


HAR. No that were no frendshyp but rather traison / to know me to be in such
peril, and to hyde hit from me, that there were no mean to escape, but only
by fortune.


PAS. What no less than trayson? Peace ye are yet no pope, and because ye be a
priest ye be exe^pted from being emperor or king.


HAR. Have thou any other term more propre, where a man consents to the
destruction of (...) ceyued by him / that I trusted, and drink poison in the
stead of wine: whereof I should either be deed / or fall in to such sickness
and brekinge out / that all men should abhor me.


PASQ. I would to god / that thou would affirm always truth to thy master /
as thou do now to me. But Harpocrates thou would not die / nor yet live
to be abhorred of al men: therein I can preise the. Now sens thou art a good
manne (as I suppose) and also learned, woldeste thou / that any warse thing
should happen to thy master / that trusts the / than thou would to thy
self?


HAR. No truly.


PAS. And if thou knew any danger toward him / as I have rehersedde / thou
ought as well to warn him of it, as I ought the.


HA. I can not deny that.


PAS. And also thou would.


HAR. Why, wherefore should I not?


PAS. For perauenture if your master mistrusteth him not / that has auowed
to kylle him / and accounted your tale for a fantasye / or if he favors him
much that ye know would poison him: he will suppose / that ye tell it him of
some suspicion or malice, and will lean a dese ear toward you. And tha^ he,
on whom ye complained / being advertised, shall omit that / which he
purposed, to prove you a liar. And than should ye both lose your thank of
your master and be called a detractour: and also have him, whom ye accused, and
all his bend, vigilant espialles to bring you in danger, is it not thus?


HAR. Ye sir by Jesus.


PAS. What if a another man, which loves your master no less than ye do,
gave him such warninge, and ye knew her to be true: but ye perceive / that
your master lists not to here of such matter / or perchance commends him
/ which is complained on: would ye also preyse him to support the trust that
your master has in him, or commend your master therein / for his constance
and litell mistrustinge?


HAR. Nay than were I worthy a hot mischiefing if I would help to bring so
my master unto his confusion.


PAS. What, would you hold your runge / and say nothing?


HAR. No but I would forbere for a time / and a wait diligentely, to see if
the perille would cesse, or might be by some occasion prevented, or by my
master other wise spied: but when it were imminent / thanne would I give
warninge.


PAS. Imminent, what call ye that?


HAR. When his ennemie is at his back with his sword drawn / ready to strike
him.


PAS. And what for poysonynge?


HAR. When I saw my friend have the cup in his hand and were ready to drink.


PAS. Now gate ye all this wit with so littell learning?

It is not for naught / that ye be a cou^saillour, sens ye have such a praty
feate in seasonyng. Of likelyhode ye be well seen in constellations, and do
know perfettly the subtle distinctions of times and momentes / ye would
forbear to warn your master at the beginning of daungier / and when he is
at the point to fall in to it, perchance or ye shall not be present, or else
not able or of powar to resist it: but teach me I pray you, what ye call
imminent, for hit is a word taken out of latin, and not commonly used.


HARP. Marye the thing that is imminent, is when it appears to be in the
instante to be done or to happen: and after some men's exposition, as hit
thretned to come.


PAS. It is well expouned and clerkly. Than if ye will divide the time into
instantes / because perchance ye be a good Duns man: ye France, as I said at
the first, if ye know, that he purposes to sle him: than it appears to you,
that the killinge of your master is in the instant to be done, and is thretned
to happen, ergo the perille is imminent, and ye are bound to give your friend
warninge.


HAR. Perchance I may know a thing, and yet it appears not to me / and
than your argument avails not an herryng. As I may know by other men's
telling, or by conjecture of a light suspicion.


PAS. Nay than shall we have much a do with you, if ye will compel me of every
word that I speak, to make definition. Though I have not so much lernyng as
you / I use always my words in their propre signification, and to serve to the
matter that I reason unto. I know a thing / which by a cause I consider
euidentely. And that which is only reported / I do here / but I know not:
but coniceture is by signs / resemblaunce, or likely hoode, which may be
false: and yet is hit not to be neglected, as it shall appear afterward. But
now return we to knowelege, which being certain, as I have defined hit, as
soon as thou know that one will kylle or poison thy master, the peril is
imminent: than by thyn own reason / thou ought to warn him: it not, thou
art by thin own sentence condemned of treason.


HAR. Thou say soore to me Pasquill. Not withstanding yet me scmethe: I
should not warn him so soon, for the dangers, which thou rehersiddest,
might happen unto me / if I lacked a thankful and secret herer / or else the
purpose were changed: but it were better to tarry, until it came to such
preparacion, that it moughte not be denied.


PAS. So might it be / if ye were partner of the conspiracy, for than (...)
happen to be made privy to(...) when / and the place, where (...) master
should stand in suc(...) die: but else ye might know (...) a thing purposed /
and ye be (...) of the time / when it should (...) cuted. Than if ye forbear to
(...) your master until the peril mough^ be more evident / and as ye say /
moughte not be denied: before that time it might be more than imminent, and in
the second instant, that is to say in the self doing / or to speak hit more
clenly, in execucion.


HAR. But than were I out of danger.


PAS. ye / that is all that he care for: yet moughte ye happen to be deceived,
and your silence instead of suertie turn you to trouble. For seldom is the
master in ieopardie, and the servants at liberty, specially they which be
next about him: Or if ye happen to escape enemis, if (...) perceived / that ye
knew (...)le / and would not discover (...)de perchance escape hard(...)er,
though ye had shaken (...)r long robes, and were (...)erkynne Yet if ye warned
(...) master at the beginning, (...)gh he took it not thankfully / yet (...)
you your duty / and can not lack reward of god, who loves truth / for your
fidelite. And though he, whom ye disapoynted, or his affinity / shall seek
how to be aucnged on you: either god will defend you, or if there fall to you
thereby any adversity / finally falschode long kept in / will braste out at
the last, and than shall repentance cause your simplicite to be had in renome
and perpetual memory: which part of honor to every honest man, passes
alother reward, that may be given in this life that is transitory. But
because we spoke while ere ^f coniement? Or do thou esteem the death of the
soul to be of less importance than the death of the body? What say thou?
that judgment belongs to thy faculte.


HAR. Indede there ye touch me.


PAS. Like wise, a knock on the heed / though it be to the scull / is not so
dangerous to be healed / as an yuell affection thrast in to thy masters
brains by false opinion. Nor a wipe over his face with a sword, shall not
blemmishe so much his visage / as vice shall deforme his soul and deface his
renome / whereby he is further known than by his phisonomy. Is there any poison
can make him to be so abhorred of man / as avarice, tyranny / or bestly living
shall cause him be hated of god and of man universally?


HAR. No in good faith, I think thou say truly.


PAS. Than co^ferre all this together, with that which we before raysoned /
and se where in any thing that thy master speaks or does / if there by any
of the perilles iminent / which I late rehearsed: whither it were better to
speak or keep silence, and in which of them were most surety. And consider
also, that between these two perilles, that I have rehearsed / is no little
diversity, besides that the one is much more than the other. For in the
bodilye peril / in the time of the stroke perchance your master would here
you / and thereby escape, or ye might defend him: but the other peril of
soul or mind, the longer that he continues therein / the more gladly he
receives the stroke, and the more he will disdain to be warned by you: and
than ye put your self in more danger of that / which we spoke of before:
but for all that neither in time of danger thou ought to leave thy master
vnwarned, which thou have all ready granted: nor yet when thy master is
stricken or poisoned, speech is unprofitable as thou have supposed.


HAR. Now prove you that? For if ye be a surgeon, ye know it must be your deeds
and not your wordis, that must help him.


PAS. Now it is well remembered ye shall have gods blessinge. I never herd a
more fool by my holy dome / does a surgeon all his cure with playsters and
instruments? sometime he speaks also / or if he be domme, one speaks for
him, and tells his pacient, what metes and drynkes be unwholesome, which be
leuitiues and helps his medicine. Also when he perceives him to be faynte or
discomforted, than with sweet words and fair promisis he reuiueth his
courage. If he be disobedient or riottouse / he rebukes him, and do aggrauate
the danger to make the sickness more grievous. The same is the office of a good
confessor, where he perceiuith man's soul to be wounded with viciouse
affections / syns that a confessoure serves for none other purpose / but to
cure man's soul of deedly sins, which be her mortalle diseases: but can he
do that without speaking? Also ye said / where might be no longer resistance
/ speech nothing auaylled: I wene ye said truer than ye were ware. For when
Gnatho with his flateri / and ye with your silence have ones rootid in your
masters heart false opinions, and vicious affectis, which is the poylon, that
we so much spoke of, though ye perceue the danger, and than sore repent you,
yet shall it perchance be impossible with speech to remove those opinions, and
cure those affectis, except ye loved to well your master, that for his health
ye would confess your own errors.


GNA. Nay goddis body, to might we get for our self a pair of tariars.


PAS. Well it were better tarry, than run to the dyuel with your master / or
that good renoume should run away from him. But tell me Harpocrates as thou
think, were not speech now expedient? or how might thy master be
otherwise curid? with silence trowist thou?


HAR It seems that silence should nothing profit / nor speech should any
thing auaille / if the opinions and affectes be so impressed / that they can
not be removed.


PAS. Yet again / if ye speak no wiseliar to your master / than ye do me / he
has of you a worshypful cou^sayloure, I demand of you remedy to cure wrong
opinions and vicious affectes: and ye answer me, that neither speech nor
silence is profitable. Like as if I had asked counsayl of a physician what
thing would hele me, of my sickness / and he would say / that giving to me
medicine or giuynge me none, should not avail me.


HARP. Spoke I not well / where I find no remedy?


PAS. No / and ye look wisely. For and if ye remember, I did not affirm
expressly / that it should be impossible to remove false oppinions or vicious
affectes, where they were impressed: but I joined thereto peradventure / and also
an exception, if ye that induced them / confessed not your own error. Than if
your confession moughte cure them, speech were than not unprofitable. And if
your own confession auaylid not, sens I affirmed not expressly, that the
said diseases were incurable: if neither silence / nor speech should be
profitable, what should than be the remedy?


HARPOCRAT. I make god a vow / I can not tell / except it were grace.


PAS. I herd the never speak so wisely. But yet supposest thou / that grace
will so lightly enter / where false opinion and viciouse affectes be so depely
imprinted / except they be first some what removed by good persuasion? onles
thou think, that every man shall be called of god, as saint Paul was / who
was elected. And yet now I remember me / at his conversion Christ spoke unto
him, and told him, that it was hard to spurn again the prick: where if
Christ had hold his peace, Saul which was thanne beaten down to the
ground / moughte have happened never to have been calledde sayncte Paul: but
if he had escaped, he would by likelihode have continued still in his error.


HAR. It is not for us Pasquill to inserche the impenetrable iugementes of god:
but the grace of god has happened far above men's expectation: and where
all other remedy lacked. For than the puissance of all mighty god is specially
proved.


PAS. But trustinge only therein to leave our own endeavor, I think it
presumption. And what endeavor may be in silence? Wherefore speech is not only
profitable but also of necessite must be used in healing the diseases / both
of the soul and also the body.


HAR. I can not deny that, if I say truly.


PAS. Than when is your silence in season?


HAR. I can not shortly tell / I am so abashed at thy froward reason.


PAS. Than will I help you to know your own virtue, wherein ye have such
delectatio^. I trow ye herd not, how I did expound the sentence of
Aeschylus, which Gnatho rehearsed to me for a counsel?


HAR. Yes that I did / for I stood all that while at the wyndowe herkenynge
of the.


PAS. Se how full the world is of such false images, that do here all, when
they seem to here nothing: as I trust to be saved / with such fellows hit is
perilous dealing. But yet that shall not cause Pasquill to leave his bablinge.
Now Harpocrates / bear away the said sentence with mine exposition / and use
it.


HAR. So I will, as much as pertayneth to silence.


PAS. Ye god a vow and also to speaking / or else all the counsel is not worth
three halfpens. Think ye to be a counsaylour / and speak not? What were the
Emper our the better, if instede of counsaylours he had set in his chamber the
images of Cato, Metellus, Lelius, Cicero, and such other persons, who lyuinge
/ far excelled in wit, experience / and lerninge, them, which be now
about him? be men that sytte and speak nothing, any better than they? No, but
rather much warse: for they serve for nothing, yet the images do that,
wherefore they be ordained / that is to say / bring to men's remembrance the
wisdom and virtue of them, whom they represented. But du^me cou^sailours do not
their office / wherefore they be called to counsayll / but by their silence they
cause many things to be brought to an unlucky conclusion.


HAR. And thou that art not called to counsel, art full of babbling.


PAS. But ones in a year: and wotist thou why that is?


HAR. Nay, tell me I pray the.


PAS. Mary if they that be called, would always play the partis of good
Counsaylours: And both spiritual and temporal governors would banysshe the
and Gnatho out of their Courts, except ye amend your conditions / I would
speak never a word, but sit as still as a stone, like as ye se me: But for as
much as it happens all contrary / and that things be so far out of frame,
that stones do grutche at it (remembrest thou not what a clatteryng they made
at the last wars in Italy?) and yet counsailours be spechelesse: I that am
set in the city of Rome, which is the heed of the world / ones in the year
shall here of the state of all pri^cis and regions. And because in the month of
May men be all set in pleasure / and than they take merili such words as be
spoken again them: thanne boldly I put forth my verdicte / and that openly.


HAR. There thou do folyshely: for thou should do more good, if thou
spakest privily.


PAS. Tusshe man, my playnnes is so well known, that I shall never come unto
privy chamber or galeri.


HAR. Sens thou profitest so lyttel, why art thou so busy?


PAS. To the intent that men shall perceive / that their vices / which they
think to be wonderful secret, be known to all men. And that I hope always,
that by much clamoure / and open repentance, when they see the thing not
succeed to their purpose / they will be ashamed.


HAR. Yet may thou happen to be deceived.


PAS. But they much more, when they know not who loves them truly.


GN. Harpocrates, it is time that we repair to the court / lest we be blamed.
And let us leave Pasquill with his pratery.


PAS. And I wyllcue you both with your slatery. Yet I trust in god to see the
day, that I will not set by the best of you both a butterflye. As greatte a
wonder have I seneer this time.


HARP. Fare well Pasquill, and think on silence.


PAS. Fare well Harpocrates / and think on thy conscience. I wene I might bie
as much of the costerde monger for two pence.

Now when these two fellows come to their master / they will tell all that
they have herd of me / it makith no matter. For I have said nothing / but by
the way of advertisement / without reprochynge of any one person, wherewith no
good man has cause to take any displeasure. And he that does / by that which
is spoken he is soon spied, to what part he leans, Judge what men list, my
thought shall be free. And god / who shall judge all men / knows / that I
desire all things to be in good point, on the condition that I moughte ever be
specheles / as it is my very nature to be. A dieu gentill herers, and say well
by Pasquill, when he is from you.


CVM PRIVILEGIO.

