A BRIEF OF THE ART OF RHETORIQVE.

Containing in substance all that ARISTOTLE has written in his Three Books of
that subject,

Except only what is not applicable to the English Tongue.

LONDON Printed by Tho. Cotes, for A(...) Crook, and are to be sold at the
(...) Bare in Paul's Church-y(...)

A BRIEF OF THE ART OF RHETORIQVE.
The first Book.
CHAP. I. That Rhetorique is an Art consisting not only in mooving the
passions of the Judge; but chiefly in Proofs. And that this Art is profitable.
WE see that all men naturally are able in some sort to accuse and excuse:
some by chance; but some by method. This method may be discovered: and to
discover method is all one with teaching an Art. If this Art consisted in
Criminations only, and the skill to stir up the Judges, to Anger, Envy,
Fear, Pity, or other affections; a Rhetorician in well ordered Commonwealths
and States, where it is forbidden to digress from the cause in hearing, could
have nothing at all to say. For all these perversions of the Judge are beside
the question. And that which the pleader is to show, and the Judge to give
sentence on, is this only: It Is so; or not so. The rest has been decided
already by the Lawmakers; who judging of universals, and future things, could
not be corrupted. Besides it is an absurd thing, for a man to make crooked the
ruler he means to use.

It consists therefore chiefly in Proofs; which are Inferences: and all
Inferences being Syllogismes, a Logician, if he would observe the difference
between a plain Syllogism and an Enthymeme, (which is a Rhetorical
Syllogism,) would make the best Rhetorician. For all Syllogismes, and
Inferences belong properly to Logic; Whether they infer truth, or
probability: and because without this Art it would often come to pass, that
evil men by the advantage of natural abilities, would carry an evil cause
against a good; it brings with it at least this profit, that making the
pleaders even in skill, it (...) merit of the cause. Besides ordinarily those
that are Judges, are neither patient, nor capabl^ of long Scientificall
proofs, dr^^^e from the Principles through many Syllogismes: and therefore had
need to be instructed by the Rhetorical, and shorter way. Lastly, it were
ridiculous, to be ashamed of being vanquished in exercises of the body; and not
to be ashamed of being inferior in the virtue of well expressing the mind.

CHAP. 2. The Definition of Rhetorique^
RHetorique, is that Faculty, by which we understand what will serve our
turn, concerning any subject, to win be(...)

Of those things that beget belief; some require not the help of Art; as
Witnesses, Evidences, and the like, which we invent not, but make use of; and
some require Art, and are invented by us.

The belief, that proceeds from our invention, comes partly from the
behavior of the spea,+ker; partly from the passions of the hearer: but
especially from the proofs of what we allege.

Proofs, are in Rhetorique, either Examples, or Enthymemes; as in Logic,
Inductions, or Syllogismes. For an Example is a short Induction, and an
Enthymeme a short Syllogism; out of which are left as superfluous, that which
is supposed to b^ necessarily understood by the hearer; to avoid prolixity, and
not to consume the time of public business needlessly.

CHAP. 3. Of the several kinds of Orations: and of the Principles of
Rhetorique.
IN all Orations, the Hearer does either hear only; or judge also.

If he hear only, that is one kind of Oration, and is called Demonstrative.

If he judge, he must judge either of that which is to come; or of that which
is past.

If of that which is to come, there is another kind of Oration, and is called
Deliberative.

If of that which is past; then it is a third kind of Oration, called Judicial.

So there are three kinds of Orations; Demonstrative, Judicial, Deliberative.

To which belong their proper times. To the Demonstrative, the Present. To the
Judicial, the Past, and to the Deliberative, the time to come.

And their proper O^^^^s. To the Deliberative, Exhortation and Dehortation. To
the Judicial, Accusation and Defense. And to the Demonstrative, Praising and
Dispraysing.

And their proper ends. To the Deliberative, to prove a thing Profitable, or
Unprofitable. To the Judicial, Just, or Unjust. To the Demonstrative,
Honorable, or Dishonorable.

The Principles of Rhetorique. out of which Enthymemes are to be drawn; are
the common opinions that men have concerning Profitable, and Unprofitable;
Just, and Unjust, Honorable and Dishonorable; which are the points in the
several kinds of Orations questionable. For as in Logic, where certain and
infallible knowledge is the scope of our proof, the Principles must be all
infallible truths: so in Rhetorique the Principles must be common opinions,
such as the Judge is already possessed with: because the end of Rhetorique is
victory; which consists in having gotten belief.

And because nothing is Profitable, Unprofitable, Just, Unjust, Honorable or
Dishonorable, but what has been done, or is to be done; and nothing is to be
done, that is not possible: and because there be degrees of Profitable,
Unprofitable, Just, Unjust, Honorable, and Dishonorable; an Orator must be
ready in other Principles; namely of what is done, and not done; possible and
not possible, to come, and not to come: and what is Greater, and what is
Lesser, both in general, and particularly applied to the thing in question; as
what is more and less generally, and what is more profitable, and less
profitable, etc. particularly.

CHAP. 4. Of the subject of Deliberatives; and the abilities that are required
of him, that will deliberate of business of State.
IN Deliberatives there are to be considered the subject, wherein; and the
ends, whereto the Orator exhorts, or from which he dehorteth.

The Subject is always something in our own power, the knowledge whereof
belongs not to Rhetorique, but for the most part to the Politiques; and may be
referred in a manner to these five heads.

1. Of levying of money. To which point he that will speak as he ought to do,
ought to know before hand the revenue of the state, how much it is, and wherein
it consists: and also how great are the necessary charges and expenses of the
same. This knowledge is gotten partly by a man's own experience, partly by
Relations, and accounts in writing. 2. Of Peace, and War. Concerning which
the Councellor or Deliberator, ought to know the strength of the Commonwealth;
how much it both now is, and hereafter may be; and wherein that power
consists. Which knowledge is gotten, partly by experience, and Relations at
home, and partly by the sight of Wars, and of their events abroad. 3. Of the
safeguard of the Country. Wherein he only is able to give council, that
knows the forms, and number, and places of the Garrisons. 4. Of Provision.
Wherein to speak well, it is necessary for a man to know, what is sufficient
to maintain the state; what Commodities they have at home growing; what they
must fetch in through need; and what they may carry out through abundance. 5.
Of making Laws. To which is necessary so much Political, or Civil
Philosophy, as to know what are the several kinds of Governements; and by
what means, either from without or from within, each of those kinds is
preserved, or destroyed. And this knowledge is gotten, partly by observing the
several governments, in times past by History; and partly by observing the
government of the times present, in several Nations by Travel.
So that to him that will speak in a Counsel of State, there is necessary
this; History, Sight of Wars, Travel, Knowledge of the revenue, expenses,
forces, havens, garrisons, wares, and provisions in the State he lives in; and
what is needful for that State, either to export, or import.

CHAP. 5. Of the ends which the Orator in Deliberatives propounds, whereby to
exhort, or dehort.
A An Orator in exhorting always propundeth Felicity, or some part of Felicity
to be attained by the actions he exhorts unto: and in Dehortation the
contrary.

By Felicity, is meant commonly, Prosperity with virtue, or a continual
content of the life with surety. And the parts of it are such things as we
call good, in body, mind, or fortune; such as these that follow.

1. Nobility, which to a state or nation is, to have been ancient inhabitants;
and to have had most anciently, and in most number, famous Generals in the
Wars, or men famous for such things as fall under emulation. And to a private
man, to have been descended lawfully of a family, which has yielded most
anciently and in most number, men known to the world for virtue, riches, or
any thing in general estimation. 2. Many and good Children. Which is also
public and private. Public, when there is much youth in the state endued
with virtue, (namely of the body, stature, beauty, strength, and dexterity: Of
the mind, valor, and temperance) Private, when a man has many such Children,
both Male and Female. The virtues commonly respected in Women, are of the body,
Beauty, and Stature; Of the mind Temperance and Houswiferie without
sordidnesse. 3. Riches. Which is, Money, Cattle, Lands, Houshould-stuffe; with
the power to dispose of them. 4. Glory. Which is, the reputation of Virtue, or
of the possession of such things, as all, or most men, or wise men desire. 5.
Honor. Which is the glory of benefitting, or being able to benefit others. To
benefit others, is to contribute somewhat, not easily had, to another man's
safety, or riches. The parts of Honor are, Sacrifices, Monuments, Rewards,
Dedication of places, Precedence, Sepulchers, Statues, public Pensions,
Adorations, Presents. 6. Health. Which is the being free from Diseases, with
strength to use the body. 7. Beauty. Which is to different Ages different. To
Youth, strength of Body, and sweetness of aspect. To full men, strength of
body fit for the wars, and Countenance sweet, with a mixture of Terror. To
old men, strength enough for necessary labors, with a Countenance not
displeasing. 8. Strength. Which is the ability to moove any thing at pleasure
of the Moover. To moove, is to pull, to put off, to lift, to thrust down, to
press together. 9. Stature. Which is then just, when a man in height,
breadth, and thicknes of body does so exceed the most, 'as nevertheless it be
no hinderance to the quickness of his motion. 10. Good old Age. Which is, that
which comes late, and with the least trouble. 11. Many and good Friends. Which
is, to have many that will do for his sake, that which they think will be for
his good. 12. Prosperity. Which is, to have all, or the most, or the greatest
of those goods which we attribute to Fortune. 13. Virtue. Which is then to be
defined, when we speak of Praise.
These are the grounds from whence we exhort.

Dehortation is from the contraries of these.

CHAP. 6. Of the Colors, or common opinions concerning Good and Evil.
IN Deliberatives, the Principles, or Elements from whence we draw our Proofs,
are common Opinions concerning Good and Evil. And these Principles are either
Absolute, or Comparative. And those that are Absolute, are either Disputable,
or Indisputable.

The Indisputable Principles are such as these.

Good, is That, which we love for it self.

And That^ for which we love ^omewhat else.

And That which all things desire.

And That to every man which his reason dictates.

And That, which when we have, we are well, or satisfied.

And That which satisfies.

And the Cause or Effect of any of These.

And That which preserves any of These.

And That which keeps off, or destroys the contrary of any of These.

Also to take the Good, and reject the Evil, is Good.

And to take the greater Good, rather then the less; and the lesser Evil,
rather then the greater.

Further, all Virtues are Good.

And Pleasure.

And all things Beautiful.

And Justice, Valor, Temperance, Magnanimity, Magnificence; and other like
habits.

And Health, Beauty, Strength, etc.

And ^ic^^^.

And Friends.

And Honor, and Glory.

And Ability to say or do: also Towardlines, Will, and the like.

And Whatsoever Art, or Science.

And Life.

And Whatsoever is Just.

The Disputable Principles are such as follow.

That is Good whose contrary is Evil.

And whose contrary is good for our Enemies.

And whose contrary our Enemies are glad of.

And of which there cannot be too much.

And upon which much labor and cost has been bestowed.

And That which many desire.

And That which is praised.

And That which even our Enem^es, and evil men praise.

And What good men prefer.

And What we do with advise.

And That which is Possible, is Good, (to undertake.)

And That which is Easy.

And That which depends on our own Will.

And That which is proper for us to do.

And What no man else can do.

And Whatsoever is Extraordinary.

And What is suitable.

And That which wants a little of being at an end.

And What we hope to master.

And What we are fit for.

And What evil men do not.

And What we love to do.

CHAP. 7. Of the Colors, or common Opinions concerning Good and Evil
comparatively.
THe Colors of Good comparatively depend partly upon the following Definitions
of Comparatives.

1. More, is so much, and somewhat besides. 2. Less, is that, which and
somewhat else, is so much. 3. Greater and more in number are said only
Comparatively to Less, and Fewer in number. 4. Great and Little, Many and Few,
are taken Comparatively to the Most of the same kind. So that Great and Many,
is that which exceeds; Little and Few, is that which is exceeded by the Most of
the same kind.
Partly from the precedent Definitions of Good absolutely.

Common Opinions concerning Good Comparatively then are These.

Greater Good is many, then fewer, or one of those Many.

And Greater is the kind, in which the greatest is greater then the greatest of
another kind. And greater is that Good then another, whose kind is greater then
another's kind.

And Greater is that from which another Good follows, then the Good which
follows.

And of two which exceed a third, Greater is that which exceeds it most.

And that which causes the greater Good.

And that which proceeds from a greater Good.

And Greater is that which is chosen for it self, then that which is chosen
from somewhat else.

And the end greater then that which is not the end.

And That whichlesse needs other things, then that which more.

And that which is independent, then that which is dependent of another.

And the Beginning, then not the Beginning.

[Seeing the Beginning is a greater Good, or Evil, then that which is not the
Beginning; and the End, then that which is not the End; One may argue from this
Color both ways, as Leodamas against Chabrias, would have the Actor more to
blame then the Advisor; and against Callistratus, the Advisor more then the
Actor.]

And the Cause then not the Cause.

And That which has a greater Beginning or Cause.

And the Beginning, or Cause of a greater Good, or Evil.

And That which is scarce, greater then that which is Plentiful; because
harder to get.

And That which is Plentiful, then that which is Scarce; because oftener is Use.

And That which is Easy, then that which is Hard.

And That whose Contrary is greater.

And That whose Want is greater.

And Virtue then not Virtue, a greater Good. Vice, then not Vice, a greater
Evil.

And greater Good, or Evil is That, the effects whereof are more Honorable, or
more Shameful.

And the effects of greater Virtues, or Vices.

And the Excess whereof is more tolerable, a greater Good.

And those things which may with more honor be desired.

And the Desire of better things.

And those things whereof the Knowledge is better.

And the Knowledge of better things.

And That which wise men prefer.

And That which is in better men.

And that which better men choose.

And That which is more, then that which is less delightful.

And That which is more, then that which is less Honorable.

And That which we would have for our selves and Friends, a greater Good; and
the contrary a greater Evil.

And that which is Lasting, then that which is not Lasting.

And That which is Firm, then that which is not Firm.

And what many desire, then what few.

And what the Adversary, or Judge confesses to be greater, is greater.

And Common then not Common.

And not Common then Common.

And what is more Laudable.

And That which is more Honored, a greater Good.

And That which is more Punished, a greater Evil.

And both Good and Evil divided then undivided, appear greater.

And Compounded, then simple appear greater.

And That which is done with Opportunity, Age, Place, Time, Means
disadvantageous, greater then otherwise.

And That which is natural, then that which is attained unto.

And the same part of that which is great, then of that which is less.

And That which is nearest to the end designed.

And That which is Good or Evil to ones self, then that which is simply so.

And Possible, then not Possible.

And That which comes toward the end of our Life.

And That which we do really, then that which we do for show.

And That which we would be, rather then what we would seem to be.

And That which is good for more purposes, is the greater Good.

And That which serves us in greater necessity.

And That which is joined with less trouble.

And That which is joined with more delight.

And Of the two, that which added to a third makes the whole the greater.

And That which having we are more sensible of.

And in every thing, That which we most esteem.

CHAP. 8. Of the several kinds of Governments.
BEcause Hortation and Dehortation concern the Commonwealth, and are drawn
from the Elements of Good and Evil; as we have spoken of them already in the
Abstract, so we must speak of them also in the concret; that is, of what is
Good, or Evil to each sort of Commonwealth in special.

The Government of a Commonwealth, is either Democracy, or Aristocracy, or
Oligarchy or Monarchy.

Democracy is that, wherein all men with equal right, are preferred to the
highest Magistracy by Lot.

Aristocracy is that, wherein the highest Magistrate is chosen out of those,
that had the best education, according to what the Laws prescribe for best.

Oligarchy, is that, where the highest Magistrate is chosen for wealth.

Monarchy is that, wherein one man has the government of all; which
Government, if he limit it by Law, is called Kingdom; if by his own will,
Tyrany.

The end of Democracy, or the Peoples government, is Liberty.

The end of Oligarchy, is the riches of those that govern.

The end of Aristocracy, is good Laws, and good ordering of the City.

The end of Monarchy, or Kings, is the safety of the People, and conservation
of his own authority.

Good therefore, in each sort of Government is that which conduces to these
their ends.

And because belief is not gotten only by proofs; but also from manners; the
manners of each sort of Commonwealth ought to be well understood by him that
undertaketh to persuade, or dissuade in matter of State. Their manners may be
known by their designs; and their designs by their ends; and their ends by
what we see them take pleasure in. But of this more accurately in the
Politiques.

CHAP. 9. Of the Colors of Honorable and Dishonorable.
IN a Demonstrative Oration, the subject whereof is Praise, or Dispraise; the
proofs are to be drawn from the Elements of Honorable, and Dishonorable.

In this place we anticipate the second way of getting belief; which is from
the manners of the Speaker. For Praise, whether it come in as the principal
business, or upon the by, depends still upon the same Principles. Which are
these.

Honorable, is that, which we love for it self, and is withal laudable.

And that Good, which pleases us only because it is Good.

And Virtue.

Virtue is the faculty of getting and preserving that which is Good; and the
faculy of doing many, and great things well.

The kinds of it are these.

1. Justice; which is a Virtue, whereby every man obtaines what by the Law is
his. 2. Fortitude; which is a Virtue by which a man carries himself honorably,
and according to the Laws, in time of danger. 3. Temperance; which is a
Virtue, whereby a man governes himself in matter of pleasure according to the
Law. 4. Liberality; which is a Virtue, by which we benefit others in matter of
money. 5. Magnanimity; which is a Virtue, by which a man is apt to do great
benefits. 6. Magnificence; which is a Virtue, by which a man is apt to be at
great cost. 7. Prudence; which is an Intellectual Virtue, by which a man is
able, to deliberate well concerning any Good leading to Felicity.
And Honorable, are the Causes, and Effects of things Honorable.

And the Works of Virtue.

And the signs of Virtue.

And those actions, the reward whereof is Honor.

And the reward whereof is rather Honor, than Money.

And that which we do not for our own sakes.

And what we do for our Countries good, neglecting our own.

And those things are Honorable, which good of themselves, are not so to the
Owner.

And those things which happen to the dead, rather then to the living.

And what we do for other men, especially for Benefactors.

And bestowing of Benefits.

And the contrary of those things we are ashamed of.

And those things which men strive for earnestly, but without fear of
Adversary.

And of the more Honorable, and better men, the V^rtues are more Honorable.

And more Honorable are the virtues that tend to other men's benefit, then those
which tend to ones own.

And Honorable are those things which are Just.

And Revenge is Honorable.

And Victory.

And Honor.

And Monuments.

And those things which happen not to the living

And things that excel.

And what none but we.

And Possessions we reap no profit by.

And those things which are had in honor particularly in several places.

And the signs of praise.

And to have nothing of the servile, mercenary, or Mechanicke.

And that which seems Honorable; Namely such as follow.

Vices confining upon Virtue.

And the extremes of Virtues.

And what the Auditors think Honorable.

And that which is in estimation.

And that which is done according to custom.

Besides, in a Demonstrative Oration, the Orator must show, that he whom he
prayseth, did what he prayseth unconstrainedly, and willingly.

And he does so, who does the same often.

Praise, is speech, declaring the magnitude of a Virtue, Action, or Work.

But to praise the Work from the Virtue of the Worker, is a circular Proof.

To Magnify, and to Praise, differ in themselves, as Felicity, and Virtue. For
Praise declares a man's Virtue; and Magnifying declares his Felicity.

Praise, is a kind of inverted Precept. For to say, Do it because it is Good,
is a Precept. But to say He is Good because he did it, is Praise.

An Orator in Praising must also use the forms of Amplification; such as these.

He was the first that did it.

The only man that did it.

The special man that did it.

He did it with disadvantage of Time.

He did it with little help.

He was the cause, that the Law ordained Rewards and Honors for such Actions.

Further, he that will praise a Man, must compare him with others; and his
actions with the actions of others; especially with such as are renowned.

And Amplification is more proper to a Demonstrative Oration, then to any
other. For here the Actions are confessed; and the Orators part is only this,
to contribute unto them Magnitude and L^ster.

CHAP. 10. Of Accusation and Defense, with the Definition of Injury.
IN a Judicial Oration, which consists in Accusation and Defense, the thing to
be prooved is, that Injury has been done: and the heads from whence the
proofs are to be drawn, are these three.

1. The causes that moove to Injury. 2. The Persons apt to do Injury. 3. The
Persons obnoxious, or apt to suffer Injury.
An Injury is a voluntary offending of another man contrary to the Law.

Voluntary is that which a man does with knowledge; and without compulsion.

The causes of Voluntary Actions are Intemperance, and a Vicious disposition
concerning things Disirable. As the Covetous man does against the Law out of an
intemperate desire of Money.

All Actions proceed either from the Doers disposition, or not.

Those that proceed not from the Doers disposition are such as he does by
Chance, by Compulsion, or by Natural necessity.

Those that proceed from the Doers disposition are such as he does by Custom,
or upon Premeditation, or in Anger, or out of Intemperance.

By Chance are said to be done those things, whereof neither the Cause, nor
the Scope, is evident, and which are done neither Orderly; nor always, nor
most commonly after the same manner.

By Nature are said to be done those things, the Causes whereof are in the
Doer; and are done orderly; and always, or for the most part after the same
manner.

By Compulsion are done those things, which are against the Appetite, and
Ordination of the Doer.

By Custom those Actions are said to be done the Cause whereof is this, that
the Doer has done them often.

Upon Premeditation are said to be done those things which are done for profit,
as the End, or the way to the End.

In Anger are said to be done those things which are done with a purpose of
Revenge.

Out of Intemperance are said to be done those things which are delightful.

In sum, every Voluntary Action tends either to Profit, or Pleasure.

The Colors of Profitable are already set down.

The Colors of that which is Pleasing follow next.

CHAP. 11. Of the Colors, or Common Opinions concerning Pleasure.
PLeasure is a sudden and sensible motion of the Soul, toward that which is
Natural.

Grief is the Contrary.

Pleasant therefore is that, which is the cause of such motion.

And to return to ones own Nature.

And Customs.

And those things that are not violent.

Unpleasant are those things, which proceed from Necessity, as Cares, Study,
Contentions. The contrary whereof, Ease, Remission from Labor and Care: also
Play, Rest, Sleep, are Pleasant.

Pleasant also is that, to which we have an appetite.

Also the Appetites themselves if they be sensual, as Thirst, Hunger, and
Lust.

Also those things to which we have an appetite upon persuasion and Reason.

And those things we remem^er, whether they pleased, or displeased, then, when
they were present.

And the things we hope for.

And Anger.

And to be in Love.

And Revenge.

And Victory. Therefore

Also Contentious Games; as Tables, Chesse, Dice, Tennis, etc.

And Hunting.

And Suites in Law.

And Honor and Reputation amongst men in Honor and Reputation.

And to Love.

And to be Beloved and Respected.

And to be Admired.

And to be Flattered.

And a Flatterer: (for he ^eemes both to love and Admire.)

And the same thing Often.

And Change, or Variety.

And What we return to afresh.

And to Learn.

And to Admire.

And to do Good.

And to receive Good.

And to help up again one that is fallen.

And to finish that which is unperfect.

And Imitation.

And Therefore the Art of Painting.

And the Art of Carving Images.

And the Art of Poetry.

And Pictures and Statues.

And other men's Dangers, so they be near.

And to have escaped hardly.

And things of a kind please one another.

And every one himself.

And ones own pleases him.

And to bear Sway.

And to be thought Wise.

And to dwell upon that which he is good at.

And ridiculous Actions, Sayings and Persons.

CHAP. 12. Presumptions of Injury drawn from the persons that do it: or
Common opinions concerning the aptitude of Persons to do Injury.
OF the causes which move to Injury, namely Profit and Pleasure, has been
already spoken Chap. 6.7.11.

It follows next to speak of the Persons, that are apt to do Injury.

The doers of Injury are.

Such as think they can do it.

And such as think to be undiscovered when they have done it.

And such as think though they be discovered, they shall not be called in
question for it.

And such as think though they be called in question for it, that their Mulct
will be less then the gain, which either themselves or their friends receive
by the Injury.

Able to do Injury are Such as are Eloquent. And such as are practiced in
business. And such as have skill in Process. And such as have many Friends.
And Rich men. And such as have Rich friends; or Rich servants; or Rich Partners.


Vndiscover'd when they have it, are.

Such as are not apt to commit the Crimes whereof they are accused: as Feeble
men, Slaughter: Poor and not Beautiful men, Adultery. And such as one would
think could not choose but be discovered. And such as do Injuries, whereof
there has been no Example. And such as have none, or many enemies. And such
as can easily conceal what they do. And such as have some body to transfer
the fault upon.
They that do Injury openly are, Such, whose friends have been injured. And
such as have the Judges for friends. And such as can escape their trial at
Law. And such as can put off their trial. And such as can corrupt the Judges.
And such as can avoid the payment of their fine: And such as can defer the
payment. And such as cannot pay at all. And such as by the Injury get
manifestly, much, and presently; when the fine is uncertain, little, and to
come. And such as get by the Injury, money; by the penalty, shame only. And
such on the contrary as get honor by the Injury, and suffer the mulct of money
only, or banishment, or the like. And such as have often escaped, or been
undiscovered. And such as have often attempted in vain. And such as consider
present pleasure, more than pain to come; and so intemperate men are apt to
do Injury. And such as consider pleasure to come, more then present pain:
and so Temperate men are apt to do Injury. And such as may seem to have done
it by Fortune, Nature, Necessity, or Custom; and by Error rather then by
Injustice. And such as have means to get pardon. And such as want Necessaries,
as Poor men: or Vnnecessaries, as Rich men. And such as are of very good, or
very bad Reputation.


CHAP. 13. Presumptions of Injury drawn from the Persons that suffer, and from
the matter of the Injury.
OF those that do Injury, and why they do it, it has been already spoken.

Now of the Persons that suffer, and of the Matter wherein they suffer, the
common Opinions are these.

Persons obnoxious to Injury are, Such as have the things that we want, either
as necessary, or as delightful. And such as are far from us. And such as are
at hand. And such as are unwary, and Credulous. And such as are Lazy. And such
as are Modest. And such as have swallowed many Injuries. And such as we have
injured often before. And such as never before. And such as are in our danger.
And such as are ill beloved generally. And such as are envied. And our Friends.
And our Enemies. And such as wanting friends, have no great ability either in
speech, or action. And such as shall be loosers by going to Law; as Strangers,
and Workmen. And such as have done the Injuries they suffer. And such as have
committed a crime, or would have done, or are about to do. And such as by
doing them an Injury we shall gratify our friends or superiors. And such,
whose friendship we have newly left, and accuse. And such as another would do
the Injury to, if we should not. And such as by injuring, we get greater
means of doing good.


The Matters, wherein men are obnoxious to Injury are, Those things wherein
all, or most men use to deal unjustly. And those things which are easily hid,
and put off into other hands, or altered. And those things which a man is
ashamed to have suffered. And those things wherein prosequution of Injury, may
be thought a love of contention.


CHAP. 14. Of those things which are necessary to be known for the Definition
of Just and Unjust.
When the fact is evident, the next inquiry is whether it be Just, or Unjust.

For the Definition of Just and unjust, we must know what Law is; that is, what
the Law of Nature, what the Law of Nations, what the Law Civil, what written
Law, and what unwritten Law is; and what Persons; that is, what a public
Person, or the City is; and what a private Person, or Citizen is.

Unjust in the opinion of all men, is that which is contrary to the Law of
Nature.

Unjust in the opinion of all men of those Nations which traffic and come
together, is that which is contrary to the Law common to those Nations.

Unjust only in one Commonwealth, is that which is contrary to the Law
Civil, or Law of that Commonwealth.

He that is accused to have done any thing against the Public, or a private
Person, is accused to do it either ignorantly, or unwillingly, or in anger, or
upon premeditation.

And because the defendant does many times confess the fact, but deny the
unjustice; as that he took, but did not steal; and did, but not adultery, it
is necessary to know the Definitions of Theft, Adultery, and all other crimes.

What facts are contrary to the written Laws, may be known by the Laws
themselves.

Besides written Laws, whatsoever is Just, proceeds from Equity, or Goodness.

From Goodness proceeds that, which we are praised, or honored for.

From Equity proceed those actions, which though the written Law command not,
yet being interpreted reasonably, and supplied, seems to require at our hands.

Actions of Equity are such as these.

Not too rigorously to punish Errors, Mischances, or Injuries. To pardon the
faults that adhere to Mankind. And not to consider the Law so much, as the
Lawmakers mind; and not the Words so much as the meaning of the Law. And not
to regard so much the Fact, as the intention of the Doer; nor part of the Fact,
but the Whole; nor what the Doer is, but what he has been always, or for the
most part. And to remember better the Good received, then the Ill. And to
endure injuries patiently. And to submit rather to the sentence of a Judge then
of the sword. And to the sentence of an Arbitrator, rather then of a Judge.
CHAP. 15. Of the Colors, or Common Opinions concerning Injuries,
comparatively.
COmmon Opinions concerning Injuries comparatively, are such as these.

Greater is the Injury which proceeds from greater Iniquity.

And from which proceeds greater damage.

And of which there is no revenge.

And for which there is no remedy.

And by occasion of which, he that has received the Injury, has done some
mischief to himself.

He does the greater Injury, that does it first, or alone, or with few.

And he that does it often.

Greater Injury is that, against which Laws and Penalties were first made.

And that which is more brutall, or more approaching to the actions of beasts.

And that which is done upon more premeditation.

And by which more Laws are broken.

And which is done in the place of execution.

And which is of greatest shame to him that receives the Injury.

And which is committed against well-deservers.

And which is committed against the unwritten Law, because good men should
observe the Law for Justice, and not for fear of punishment.

And which is committed against the written Law, because he that will do
Injury neglecting the penalty set down in the written Law, is much more likely
to transgress the unwritten Law, where there is no penalty at all.

CHAP. 16. Of Proofs Inartificiall.
OF Artificial Proofs we have already spoken.

Inartificiall Proofs, which we invent not; but make use of, are of five sorts.

1. Laws. And those are Civil, or written Law: the Law, or Custom of
Nations: and the universal Law of Nature. 2. Witnesses. And those are such as
concern Matter; and such as concern Manners. Also, they be ancient, or
present. 3. Evidences, or Writings. 4. Question, or Torture. 5. Oaths. And
those be either given; or taken; or both; or neither.
For Laws, we use them thus.

When the written Law makes against us, we appeal to the Law of Nature,
alleging, That to be greatest Justice, which is greatest Equity. That the
Law of Nature is immutable; the written Law mutable. That the written Law is
but seeming Justice; the Law of Nature very Justice. And Justice is among those
things which are, and not which seem to be. That the judge ought to discern
between true and adulterate Justice. That they are better men that obey
unwritten, then written Laws. That the Law against us does contradict some
other Law. And when the Law has a double interpretation, that that is the true
one, which makes for us. And that the cause of the Law being abolished, the Law
is no more of Validity.
But when the written Law makes for us, and Equity for the Adversary, we must
allege That a Man may use Equity, not as a liberty to judge against the Law;
but only as a security against being forsworn, when he knows not the Law.
That men seek not Equity because it is good simply, but because good for them.
That it is the same thing not to make, and not to use the Law. That as in other
Arts, and namely in Physic Fallacies are pernicious; so in a Commonwealth
it is pernicious to use pretexts against the Law. And that in Commonwealths
well instituted, to seem wiser then the Laws, is prohibited.

For Witnesses, we must use them thus.

When we have them not, we must stand for Presumptions, and say That in Equity
sentence ought to be given according to the most probability. That
Presumptions, are the testimony of the things themselves, and cannot be bribed.
That they cannot lie.
When we have witnesses, against him that has them not we must say That
Presumptions, if they be false, cannot be pun^shed. That if Presumptions were
enough, witnesses were superfluous.

For writings, when they favor us we must say, That writings are private and
particular Laws; and he that takes away the use of Evidences abolisheth the
Law. That since Contracts and Negotiations pass by writings, he that bars
their use, dissolves humane Society. Against them, if they favor the Adversary
we may say, That since Laws do not bind that are fraudulently made to pass,
much less writings. And that the Judge being to dispense justice, ought rather
to consider what is just, then what is in the Writing. That Writings may be
gotten by fraud or force; but Justice by neither. That the Writing is repugnant
to some Law, Civil, or Natural; or to justice; or to Honesty. That it is
repugnant to some other writing before, or after. That it crosses some
commodity of the Judge (which must not be said directly, but implied
cunningly.)



For the Torture, if the giving of it make for us, we must say, That it is the
only testimony that is certain. But if it make for the Adversary, we may
say, That men enforced by Torture speak as well that which is false, as that
which is true. That they who can endure, conceal the truth; and they who
cannot, say that which is false to be delivered from pain.



For Oaths; he that will not put his Adversary to his Oath, may allege, That
he makes no scruple to be forsworn. That by swearing he will carry the cause,
which not swearing he must lose. That he had rather trust his cause in the
hand of the Judge, then of the Adversary. He that refus^th to take the Oath,
may say. That the matter is not worth so much. That if he had been an evil
man, he had sworn, and carried his cause. That to try it by swearing for a
Religious man against an irreligious, is as hard a match, as to set a weak man
against a strong in Combat.
He that is willing to take the Oath may pretend That he had rather trust
himself, than his Adversary; and that it is equal dealing for an irreligious
man to give, and for a religious man to take the Oath. That it is his duty to
take the Oath, since he has required to have sworn Judges.
He that offers the Oath may pretend That he does piously to commit his cause
to the Gods. That he makes his Adversary himself Judge. That 'twere absurd for
him not to swear, that has required the Judges to be sworn. And of these are
to be compounded the Forms we are to use, when we would give, and not take
the Oath; or take, and not give; or both give, and take; or neither give, nor
take.
But if one have sworn contrary to a former Oath, he may pretend. That he was
forced. That he was deceived, and that neither of these is Perjury, since
Perjury is voluntary.
But if the Adversary do so, he may say That he that stands not to what he
has sworn, subverteth humane society. And (turning to the Judge) what reason
have we to require, that you should be sworn, that judge our cause^ when we
will not stand to that we swear our selves And so much for Proofs
inartificiall.



The second Book.
CHAP. I. The Introduction.
OF belief proceeding from our Invention, that part which consists in
proof, is already spoken of.

The other two parts follow: whereof one arises from the manners of the
speaker; the other from the passions of the Hearer.

The Principles, Colors, or Common Opinions, upon which a man's belief is
grounded concerning the manners of him that speaks, are to be had partly out
of that which has been said before concerning Virtue, Book 1. Chap. 9.
partly out of those things which shall be said by and by concerning the
Passions. For a man is believed either for his Prudence, or for his Probity,
which are Virtues; or for good will: of which among the Passions.

The Principles concerning belief, arising from the passion of the Hearer, are
to be gathered from that which shall now be said of the several Passions in
order.

In every one of which three things are to be considered.

1. First, how men are affected. 2. Secondly, Toward whom. 3. Thirdly, For
what.
CHAP. 2. Of Anger.
ANger is desire of revenge, joined with grief for that He, or some of his,
is, or seems to be neglected.

The object of Anger is always some particular, or individual thing.

In Anger there is also pleasure proceeding from the imagina^ion of revenge to
come.

To Neglect, is to esteem little, or nothing: and is of three kinds.

1. Contempt. 2. Crossing. 3. Contumely.
Contempt, is when a man thinks another of little worth in comparison to
himself.

Crossing, is the hinderance of another man's will without design to profit
himself.

Contumely, is the disgracing of another for his own pastime.

The common Opinions concerning Anger are therefore such as follow.

They are easily Angry that think they are neglected. That think they excel
others; as the Rich with the Poor, the Noble with the Obscure, etc. And such
as think they deserve well. And such as grieve to be hindered, opposed, or not
assisted. And therefore sick men, Poor men, Lovers, and generally all that
desire, and attain not, are Angry with those that standing by, are not moved
with their wants. And such as having expected good, find evil. Those that men
are Angry with, are Such as mock, deride, or jest at them. And such as show
any kind of Contumely toward them. And such as despise those things which we
spend most labor and study upon: and the more, by how much we seem the less
advanced therein. And our friends, rather then those that are not our friends.
And such as have honored us, if they continue not. And such as requite not our
courtesy. And such as follow contrary courses, if they be our inferiors. And
our friends, if they have said, or done us evil, or not good. And such as give
not ear to our entreaty. And such as are joyful, or calm in our distress.
And such as troubling us, are not themselves troubled. And such as willingly
hear or see our disgraces. And such as neglect us in the presence of our
Competitors; of those we admire, of those we would have admire us; of those we
reverence, and of those that reverence us. And such as should help us, and
neglect it. And such as are in jest, when we are in earnest. And such as forget
us, or our Names. An Orator therefore must so frame his, Judge or Auditor, by
his Oration; as to make him apt to Anger: and then make his Adversary appear
such, as men use to be Angry with all.

CHAP. 3. Of Reconciling, or Pacifying Anger.
REconciliation is the Appeasing of Anger.

Those, to whom men are easily reconciled, are Such, as have not offended out
of Neglect. And such as have done it against their will. And such as wish done
the contrary of what they have done. And such as have done as much to
themselves. And such as confess and repent. And such as are humbled. And such
as do seriously the same things, that they do seriously. And such as have
done them more good heretofore, then now hurt. And such as sue to them for any
thing. And such as are not insolent, nor mockers, nor slighters of others in
their own disposition. And generally such as are of a contrary disposition to
those, whom men are usually angry withal. And such as they fear, or
reverence. And such as reverence them. And such as have offended in their Anger.


Reconcilable are, Such as are contrarily affected to those whom we have said
before to be easily Angry. And such as play, laugh, make merry, prosper, live
in plenty, and in sum, all that have no cause of grief. And such as have
given their anger time.


Men lay down their Anger for these causes.

Because they have been revenged of another. Because they have gotten the
Victory. Because the Offender has suffered more, then they meant to inflict.
Because they think they suffer justly. And because they think the revenge
will not be felt, or not known, that the revenge was theirs, and for such an
injury. And because the Offender is dead. Who^oever therefore would assuage the
Anger of his Auditor, must make himself appear such, as men use to be
reconciled unto: and beget in his Auditor such opinions, as make him
reconcilable.
CHAP. 4. Of Love, and Friends.
TO Love, is to will well to another, for that others, not for ones own sake.

A Friend is he that loves, and he that is beloved.

Friends one to another, are they that mutually love ^^e another.

A Friend therefore is he, That rejoices at ^^^^hers Good. And that grieves at
his h^^t. And that wishes the same with ^s to a third, whether good, or hurt.
And that is ene^y or friend to the same man.


We love them, That have done good to us, or ours, ^specially if much, readily,
or in season. That are our Friends Friends. That are our Enemies Enemies. That
are Liberal. That are Valiant. That are Just. And that we would have love us.
And good Companions. And such as can abide Jests. And such as break Jests. And
such as praise us, especially for somewhat that we doubt of in our selves. And
such as are neat. And such as upbraid us not with our vices, or with their own
benefits. And such as quickly forget injuries. And such as least observe our
Errors. And such as are not of ill tongue. And those that are ignorant of our
Vices. And such as cross us not when we are busy, or angry. And such as are
officious toward us. And those that are like us. And such as follow the same
course or trade of life, where they impeach not one another. And such as labor
for the same thing, when both may be satisfied. And such as are not ashamed to
tell us freely their faults, so it be not in contempt of us, and the faults
such, as the world, rather then their own consciences condemns. And such as
are ashamed to tell us of their very faults. And such as we would have honor
us, and not envy, but imitate us. And such as we would do good to, except
with greater hurt to our selves. And such as continue their friendship to the
dead. And such as speak their mind. And such as are not terrible. And such as
we may rely on.


The several kinds of friendship, are Society, Familiarity, Consanguinity,
Affinity, etc.

The things that beget love are, The bestowing of Benefits. Gratis. The
bestowing of Benefits. Unasked. The bestowing of Benefits. Privately.


CHAP. 5. Of Enmity and Hatred.
THE Colors, or Common Opinions concerning Hatred are to be taken from the
contrary of those, which concern Love and Friendship.

Hatred differs from Anger

In this, that Anger regards only what is done to ones self; but Hatred not.

And in this, that Anger regards particulars only; the other universalls also.

And in this, that Anger is curable, Hatred not.

And in this, that Anger seeks the vexation, Hatred the damage of ones
Adversary.

That with Anger there is always joined Grief; with Hatred not always.

That Anger may at length be satiated, but Hatred never.

Hence it appears how the Judge, or Auditor may be made Friend, or Enemy to
us; and how our Adversary may be made appear Friend or Enemy to the Judge; and
how we may answer to our Adversary, that would make us appear Enemies to him.

CHAP. 6. Of Fear.
Fear is a trouble, or vexation of the mind, arising from the apprehension of
an evil at hand, which may hurt or destroy.

Danger is the nearenesse of the evil feared.

The things to be Feared are Such as have power to hurt. And the signs of will
to doe^ us hurt, as Anger and Hatred of powerful men. And Injustice joined
with power. And Valor provoked, joined with power. And the fear of powerful
men.


The men that are to be feared are, Such as know our faults. And such as can
do us injury. And such as think they are injured by us. And such as have done
us injury. And our Competitors in such things as cannot satisfy both. And such
as are feared by more powerful men then we are. And such as have destroyed
greater men then we are. And such as use to invade their inferiors.


And men not passionate, but dissemblers and crafty are more to be feared then
those that are hasty and free.

The things especially to be feared are Such, wherein if we err, the error
can not be repaired; at least not according to ours, but our Adversaries
pleasure. And such as admit either none, or not easy help. And such as being
done, or about to be done to others, make us pity them.


They that fear not are, Such as expect not evil; or not now; or not this; or
not from these. And therefore men fear little in prosperity. And men fear
little that think they have suffered already.


An Orator therefore that would put Fear in to the Auditor, must let him see
that he is ob^oxious; and that greater than he do suffer, and have suffered
from those, and at those times they least thought.

CHAP. 7. Of Assurance.
ASsurance is hope, arising from an imagination that the help is near, or the
evil a far off.

The things therefore that beget Assurance are, The remoteness of those things
that are to be feared, and the nearenesse of their contraries. And the facility
of great, or many helps or remedies. And neither to have done; nor received
Injury. And to have no Competitors, or not great ones; or if great ones, at
least friends; such as we have obliged, or are obliged to. And that the danger
is extended to more, or greater than us.


Assured, or Confident are They that have often escaped danger. And they to whom
most things have succeeded well. And they that see their equals, or inferiors
not afraid. And they that have wherewith to make themselves feared, as wealth,
strength, etc. And such as have done others no wrong. And such as think
themselves in good terms with God-Almighty. And such as think they will
speed well, that are gone before.


CHAP. 8. Of Shame.
SHame is a perturbation of the Mind arising from the apprehension of Evil,
past, present, or to come, to the prejudice of a Man's own, or his friends
reputation.

The things therefore which men are ashamed of are those Actions which proceed
from Vice, as To throw away ones arms; to run away, signs of Cowardlinesse.
To deny that which is committed to ones trust, a sign of Injustice. To have
lain with whom, where, and when we ought not, signs of Intemperance. To make
gain of small and base things; not to help with money whom, and how much we
ought; to receive help from meaner men; to ask money at use from such as one
thinks will borrow of him; to borrow of him that expects payment of somewhat
before lent; and to redemand what one has lent, of him that one thinks will
borrow more; and so to praise, as one may be thought to ask, signs of
Wretchedness. To praise one to his face; to praise his virtues too much, and
color his vices; signs of Flattery. To be unable to endure such labors, as
men endure, that are elder, tenderer, greater in quality, and of less strength
then he, signs of Effeminacy. To be beholden often to another; and to upbraid
those that are beholden to him, signs of Pusillanimity. To speak and promise
much of ones self; and to assume ^o ones self more then his due, signs of
Arrogance. To want those things which ones Equals, all, or most of them have
attained to, is also a thing to be ashamed of. And to su^fer things
ignominious, as to serve about another person; or to be employed in his base
actions.


In Actions of In^^mperance, whether willingly, or unwillingly committed, there
is shame: in Actions of Force; only when they are done unwillingly.

The men before whom we are ashamed, are such as we respect, namely, Those
that admire us. And those whom we desire should admire us. And those whom we
admire. Those that contend with ^s for honor. Those whose opinion we contemn
not.


And therefore men are most ashamed in the pre^ence Of Old and well bred men.
Of those we are always to live with. Of those that ^^e not guilty of the same
fault. Of th^se that do not easily pardon. And of those that are apt to
reveal our faults^ such as are ^^n injured, Ba^^biters, Scoff^rs, Comic
Poets. And of those before whom we have had always good success. And of those
who never asked any thing of us before And of such as desire our Friendship.
And of our familiars, that know none of our Crimes. And of such as will reveal
our faults to any of those that are named before.


But in the presence of such, whose judgment most men despise, men are not
ashamed.

Therefore we are ashamed also in the presence Of those whom we reverence, And
of those who are concerned in our own, or Ancestors, or Kinsfolks actions or
misfortunes, if they be shameful. And of their Rivalls. And of those that are
to live with them that know their disgrace.


The Common Opinions concerning Impudence are taken from the contrary of these.

CHAP. 9. Of Grace, or Favor.
GRace, is that Virtue, by which a man is said to do a good turn, or do
service to a man in need; not for his own, but for his cause to whom he does
it.

Great Grace is when the need is great; or when they are hard, or difficult
things that are conferr'd^ or when the time is seasonable, or when he that
conferr's the favor is the only, or first man that did it.

Need, is a desire joined with grief for the absence of the thing desired.

Grace therefore it is not, if it be not done to one that needs.

Whosoever therefore would prove that he has done a Grace, or Favor, must
show that he needed it to whom it was done.

Grace it is not

Which is done by Chance

Nor which is done by Necessity.

Nor which has been requi^ed.

Nor that which is done to ones Enemy.

Nor that which is a trifle.

Nor that which is naught, if the Giver know the fault.

And in this manner a man may go over the Praedicaments, and examine a
benefit, whether it be a Grace for being This, or for being so Much, or for
being Such, or for being Now, etc.

CHAP. 10. Of Pity, or Compassion.
Pity is a perturbation of the mind, arising from the apprehension of ^urt, or
trouble to another that does not deserve it, and which he thinks may happen to
himself or his.

And because it appertains to Pity to think that he, or his may fall into
the mi^ery he pitties in others, it follows that they be most compassionate

Who have passed through Misery.

And old Men.

And Weak men.

And Timorous men.

And learned men.

And such as have Parents, wife and children.

And such as think there be honest men.

And that they are less Compassionate

Who are in great despair.

Who are in great prosperity.

And they that are Angry, for they consider not.

And they that are very Confident; for they also consider not.

And they that are in the Act of contumely; for neither do these consider.

And they that are astonished with fear.

And they that think no man honest.

The things to be pitied are Such as grieve, and withal hurt. Such as
destroy. And Calamities of fortune, if they be great; as none, or few friends,
deformity, weakness, lamenesse, etc. And Evil that arrives where good is
expected. And after extreme Evil, a little Good. And through a man's life to
have no good offer it self, or being offered, not to have been able to enjoy
it.


Men to be pitied are Such as are known to us, unless they be so near to
us, as their hurt be our own. And such as be of our own years. Such as are
like us in manners. Such as are of the same, or like stock.


And our Equals in dignity.

Those that have lately suffered, or are shortly to suffer injury: and those
that have the marks of injury past.

And those that have the words or actions of them that be in present misery.

CHAP. II. Of Indignation.
OPposite in a manner to Pity in good men, is Indignation, which is grief for
the prosperity of a man unworthy.

With Indignation there is always joined a joy for the prosperity of a man
worthy, as Pity is always with contentment in the adversity of them, that
deserve it.

In wicked men the opposite of Pity is

Envy; as also the companion thereof, delight in the harm of others, which the
Greeks in one word have called (...). But of these in the next Chapter.

Men conceive Indignation against others, not for their virtues, as Justice,
etc. For these make men worthy; and in Indignation we think men unworthy.

But for those goods which men endued with virtue, and noble men, and hansome
men are worthy of.

And for newly gotten power and riches, rather than for ancient, and especially
if by these he has gotten other goods, as by Riches, Command. The reason why we
conceive greater Indignation against new then ancient Riches, is, that the
former seem to possess that which is none of theirs, but the ancient seem to
have but their own. For with common people, to have been so long, is to be so
by Right.

And for the bestowing of goods incongruously: as when the arms of the most
valiant Achilles, were bestowed upon the most eloquent Ulysses.

And for the comparison of the Inferior with the Superior; whether superior
in the same thing, as when one Valiant is compared with a more Valiant; or
whether absolutely Superior, as when a good Scholar is compared with a good
Man.

Apt to Indignation are, They that think themselves worthy of the greatest
goods, and do possess them. And They that are good. And they that are
ambitious. And such as think themselves deserve better what another
possesses, then he that has it.


Least apt to Indignation are Such as are of a poor, servile, and not
ambitious Nature. Who they are, that Rejoice, or Grieve not at the Adversity of
him that suffers worthily, and in what occasions, may be gathered from the
contrary of what has been already said. Whosoever therefore would turn away
the compassion of the Judge, he must make him apt to Indignation; and show that
his adversary is unworthy of the Good, and worthy of the Evil, which happens
to him.


CHAP. 12. Of Envy.
ENvy is grief, for the prosperity of such as our selves, arising not from any
hurt, that we, but from the good that they receive.

Such as our selves I call those, that are equal to us in blood, in age, in
abilities, in glory, or in means.

They are apt to Envy, That are within a little of the highest. And those that
are extraordinarily honored for some quality that is singular in them,
especially Wisdom or good Fortune. And such as would be thought Wise. And such
as catch at glory in every action.


And men of poor spirits: for every thing appears great to them.

The things which men envy in others are, Such as bring glory. And goods of
fortune. And such things as we desire for our selves. And things in the
possession whereof we ex^eed others, or they us a little.


Obnoxious to Envy are, Men of our own time, of our own Country, of our own
age, and competitors of our glory. And therefore, Those whom we strive with for
honor. And those that covet the same things that we do. And those that get
quickly, what we hardly obtain, or not at all. And those that attain unto,
or do the things that turn to our reproach, not being done by us. And those
that possess what we have possessed heretofore. So Old and decayed Men Envy
the young and lusty. And those that have bestowed little, are subject to be
envied by such, as have bestowed much upon the same thing.


From the contraries of these may be derived the Principles concerning Joy for
other men's hurt.

He therefore that would not have his Enemy prevail, when he craves pity, or
other favor; must dispose the Judge to Envy; and make his Adversary appear
such, as are above described, to be subject to the Envy of others.

CHAP. 13. Of Emulation.
EMulation is grief arising from that our Equals possess such goods as are
had in honor, and whereof we are capable, but have them not; not because they
have them, but because not we also.

No man therefore Emulates another in things whereof himself is not capable.

Apt to Emulate are, Such as esteem themselves worthy of more good then they
have. And Young and Magnanimous men. And such as already possess the goods for
which men are honored: for they measure their worth by their having. And those
that are esteemed worthy by others. And those whose ancestors, kindred,
familiars, Nation, City, have been eminent for some good, do Emulate others
for that good.


Objects of Emulation are, for things, Virtues. And things whereby we may
profit others. And things whereby we may please others.


For Persons, They that possess such things. And such as many desire to be
friends, or acquainted with, or like unto. And they whose praises fly abroad.


The contrary of Emulation is Contempt.

And they that Emulate such as have the goods before mentioned, Contemn such as
have them not: and thence it is, that men who live happily enough, unless they
have the goods which men honor, are nevertheless Contemned.

CHAP. 14. Of the Manners of Youth.
OF Passions we have already spoken. We are next to speak of Manners.

Ma^ners are distinguished by men's Passions, Habits, Ages, and Fortunes.

What kind of Manners proceed from Passions, and from Virtues and Vices, (which
are Habits,) has been already showed.

There remains to be spoken of the Manners, that are peculiar to several Ages
and Fortunes.

The Ages are Youth, Middle-Age, Old Age.

And first of Youth.

Young men are, Violent in their desires. Prompt to execute their desires.
Incontinent. Inconstant, easily forsaking what they desired before. Longing
mightily, and soon satisfied. Apt to Anger, and in their Anger Violent, and
ready to execute their Anger with their hands. Lovers of Honor, and of Victory
more then Money, as having not been yet in Want. Well-natured, as having not
been acquainted with much malice. Full of Hope, both because they have not yet
been often frustrated, and because they have by natural heat that disposition
that other Ages have by Wine; Youth being a kind of natural drunkenness.
Besides, Hope is of the time to come, whereof Youth has much, but of the time
past little. Credulous, because not yet often deceived. Easily deceived,
because full of Hope. Valiant, because apt to Anger, and full of Hope; whereof
this begets confidence, the other keeps off Fear. Bashful, because they
estimate the Honor of Actions by the precepts of the Law. Magnanimous, because
not yet dejected by the misfortunes of humane life. And lovers of Honor more
than of Profit, because they live more by Custom than by Reason, and by Reason
we acquire Profit, but Virtue by Custom. Lovers of their Friends and
Companions. Apt to err in the Excess, rather then the defect, contrary to
that precept of Chilon, Ne quid nimis; for they overdoe every thing: they Love
too much, and Hate too much, because thinking themselves wise, they are
obstinate in the opinion they have once delivered. Doers of Injury rather for
Contumely then for damage. Merciful, because measuring others by their own
Innocence, they think them better than they be, and therefore less to merit
what they suffer; which is a cause of Pity. And Lovers of Mirth, and by
consequence love to jest at others.


Jesting is witty Contumely.

CHAP. 15. Of the Manners of Old Men.
THe Manners of Old men are in a manner the contraries of those of Youth.

They determine nothing: they do every thing less vehemently then is fit:
they never say they know; but to every thing they say perhaps and peradventure;
which comes to pass from that having lived long, they have often mistaken and
been deceived.

They are peevish because they interpret every thing to the worst.

And suspicious through Incredulity, and Incredulous by reason of their
Experience.

They Love and Hate, as if they meant to continue in neither.

Are of poor spirits, as having been humbled by the chances of life.

And Covetous, as knowing how easy it is to lose, and hard to get.

And Timorous, as having been cooled by years.

And greedy of life: for good things seem greater by the want of them.

And Lovers of themselves out of Pusillanimity.

And seek Profit more than Honor, because they love themselves; and Profit is
among the goods that are not simply good, but good for ones self.

And without bashfulnesse, because they despise seeming.

And hope little; knowing by Experience that many times good Counsel has been
followed with ill event, and because also they be timorous.

and live by Memory rather than Hope; for Memory is of the time past, whereof
Old men have good store.

And are full of Talk, because they delight in their Memory.

And Vehement in their Anger; but not stout enough to execute it.

They have weak, or no desires, and thence seem Temperate.

They are slaves to Gain.

And live more by reason than Custom; because Reason leads to Profit, as
Custom to that which is Honorable.

And do Injury to indammage, and not in Contumely.

And are merciful by Compassion, or imagination of the same Evils in
themselves; which is a kind of Infirmity, and not Humanity, as in Young men,
proceeding from a good opinion of those that suffer Evil.

And full of complaint, as thinking themselves not far from evil, because of
their Infirmity.

Seeing then every man loves such men, and their discourses, which are most
agreeable to their own Manners; it is not hard to collect, how the Orator, and
his Oration may be made acceptable to the Hearer, whether Young, or Old.

CHAP. 16. Of the Manners of middle aged men.
THe Manners of Middle aged men, are hetweene those of Youth, and Old men: and
therefore,

They neither dare; nor fear too much: but both as is fit.

They neither believe all; nor reject all; but judge.

They seek not only what is Honorable, nor only what is Profitable; but both.

They are neither Covetous, nor Prodigal; but in the mean.

They are neither easily Angry; nor yet stupid: but between both.

They are Valiant, and with all Temperate.

And in general, whatsoever is divided in Youth, and Old men, is compounded in
Middle-age.

And whereof the Excess, or Defect is in Young or Old men; the Mediocrity is
in those of Middle age.

Middle age for the Body I call the time from thirty to five and thirty years:
for the Mind the nine and fortieth, or there abouts.

CHAP. 17. Of the Manners of the Nobility.
OF Manners that proceed from the several Ages we have already spoken.

We are next to speak of those that rise from several Fortunes.

The Manners of the Nobility are To be Ambitious. To undervalue their Ancestors
Equals. For the goods of Fortune seem the more precious for their Antiquity.
Nobility is the Virtue of a Stock. And Generosity, is not to degenerate from
the virtue of his Stock.


For as in Plants; so in the Races of Men, there is a certain progress; and
they grow better and better to a certain point; then change, viz. ^ubtle wits
into Madness; and stayed wits into Stupidity and Blockishnesse.

CHAP. 18. Of the Manners of the Rich.
RIch men are Contumelious and Proud. This they have from their Riches. For
seeing every thing may be had for Money, having Money, they think they have
all, that is good.

And Effeminate; because they have wherewithal to subminister to their Lust.

And Boafters of their Wealth: and speak in high terms foolishly. For men
willingly talk of what they love and admire; and think others affect the same
that they do: and the truth is all sorts of men submit to the Rich.

And think themselves worthy to command, having that, by which men attain
Command.

And in general they have the Manners of Fortunate Fools.

They do Injury with intention not to hurt, but to disgrace; and partly also
through Incontinence.

There is a difference between New and Ancient Riches: for they that are newly
come to Wealth have the same faults in a greater degree: for new Riches are a
kind of rudeness and apprentiship of Riches.

CHAP. 19. Of the Manners of Men in Power and of such as prosper.
THe Manners of Men in Power, are the same, or better then those of the Rich.

They have a greater sense of Honor then the Rich; and their Manners are more
Manly.

They are more Industrious then the Rich: for Power is sustained by Industry.

They are Grave, but without Austerenesse: for being in place conspicuous, they
carry themselves the more Modestly; and have a kind of gentle and comely
Gravity, which the Greeks call (...).

When they do Injuries, they do great ones.

The Manners of Men that prosper, are compounded of the Manners of the
Nobility, the Rich, and those that are in Power; for to some of these all
Prosperity appertains.

Prosperity in Children, and goods of the Body, make men desire to exceed
others in the goods of Fortune.

Men that Prosper have this ill, to be more proud, and Inconsiderate then
others.

And this good; that they worship God; trusting in him, for that they find
themselves to receive more good then proceeds from their own Industry.

The Mann^rs of Poor men, Obscure men, Men with out Power, and Men in
Adversity, may be collected from the Contrary of what has been said.

CHAP. 20. Common Places, or Principles concerning what May be Done, what Has
been Done, and what Shall be Done; or of Fact Possible, Past and Future. Also
of Great and Little.
We have hitherto set down such Principles as are peculiar to several
kinds of Orations.

Now we are to speak of such Places as are Common to them all as these,
Possible, Done, or Past, Future, Great, Small.

Possible is that The Contrary whereof is Possible. And the like whereof is
Possible. And then which some harder thing is Possible. And the beginning
whereof is Possible. And the end whereof is Possible. And the usual consequent
whereof is Possible. And whatsoever we desire. And the beginning whereof is in
the power of those, whom we can either compel or persuade. And part whereof is
Possible. And part of the Whole that is Possible. The the General if a
Particular. And a Particular if the General. And of Relatives if one the
other. And that, which without Art and Industry is Possible, is much more so
with Art and Industry. And that, which is Possible to Worse, Weaker and
Vnskilfuller, men, is much more so to Better, Stronger, and more Skillfull.


The Principles concerning Impossible are the Contraries of these

That Has been Done.

Then which a harder thing Has been Done.

And the Consequent whereof Has been Done.

And that, which being Possible he had a will to, and nothing hindered.

And that, which was Possible to him in his Anger.

And that, which he longed to Do.

And that, which was before upon the point of Doing.

And whose Antecedent Has been Done; or that, for which it uses to be Done.

And if that, for whose cause we do this, then This.

The Principles concerning Not done, are the Contraries of these.

That Shall be Done.

Which some man can, and means to Do.

And which some man can, and desires to Do.

And which is in the way, and upon the point to be Done.

And the Antecedents whereof are Past.

And the Motive whereof is past.

Of Great and Small, More and Less, see Chap. 7. Book 1.

CHAP. 21. Of Example, Similitude, and Fables.
OF the Principles both general, and special from whence Proofs are to be
drawn, has been already spoken.

Now follow the Proofs themselves, which are Examples, or Enthymemes.

An Example is either an Example properly so called (as some Action past:) or a
Similitude (which also is called a Parable:) or a Fable (which contains some
Action fained.)

An Example properly so called is this, Darius came not into Greece, till he
had first subdued Egypt. Xerxes also conquered Egypt first; then afterward
crossed the Hellespont. We ought therefore to hinder the King of Persia from
conquering Egypt.

A Similitude, or Parable, is such as follows. They who choose their
Magistrates by Lot, are like them that choose for their Champions those on whom
the Lot shall fall, rather then those, who have the greatest strength; and for
their Pilot, not him that has skill; but him whose name is drawn out of the
Vrne.

A Fable is in this manner. The Horse desiring to drive out the Stagge from
their common pasture, took a man to assist him; and having received into his
mouth a bridle, and a rider upon his back, obtained his intent, but became
subject to the Man. So you of Himaera, having (in hope to be revenged of yonr
Enemies) given unto Phalaris sovereign authority, that is to say, taken a
bridle into your mouths; if you shall also give him a guard to his person,
that is, let him get up upon your backs, you become his slaves presently past
recovery.

To find out Examples, that is, Actions done that may serve our purpose, is
therefore hard, because not in our power.

But to find Fables and Similitudes, is easier; because by conversing in
Philosophy a man may feign somewhat in nature like to the case in hand.

Examples, Similitudes and Fables, where Enthymemes are wanting, may serve us
in the beginning of an Oration for Inductions; otherwise are to be alleged
after Enthymemes for Testimonies.

CHAP. 22. Of a Sentence.
A Sentence is an universal Proposition concerning those things which are to
be desired or avoided, in the Actions, or Passions of common life. As

A wise man will not suffer his Children to be over-learned.

And is to an Enthymeme in Rhetorique as any Proposition is to a Syllogism in
Logic.

And therefore a Sentence, if the reason be rendered, becomes a Conclusion; and
both together make an Enthymeme.

As for Example.

To be overlearned, besides that it begets effeminacy, procures envy.
Therefore he that's wise will not suffer his Children to be overlearned.

Of Sentences there be four sorts.

For they either require Proofs, or not: that is, are manifest, or not.

Such as are manifest, are either so as soon as they are uttered; as

Health is a great Good. Or as soon as they are considered; as Men use to
hate, whom they have ^urt.

Such as are not manifest are either Conclusions of Enthymemes; as He that's
wise, will not suffer his Children, etc.

Or else are Enthymematicall; that is, have in themselves the force of an
Enthymeme; as Mortal men ought not to carry immortal anger.

A Sentence not Manifest ought to be either Inferred, or Confirmed.

Inferred thus.

It Is not good to be effeminately minded, nor to be envyed by ones fellow
Citizens. A wise man therefore will not have his Children overlearned.
Confirmed thus.

A wise man will not have his Children overlearned, Seeing too much learning
both softens a Man's mind, and procures him envy among his fellow Citizens. If
a reason be added to a manifest Sentence, let it be short.

Sentences become not every man; but only Old men, and such as be well versed
in business. For to hear a young man speak Sentences, is ridiculous; and to
hear an ignorant man speak Sentences is absurd.

Sentences generally received, when they are for our purpose, ought not to be
neglected, because they pass for truths. And yet they may be denied, when any
laudable custom, or humor may thereby be made appear in the Denier.

The commodities of Sentences are two.

One proceeding from the vanity of the Hearer, who takes for true universally
affirmed, that which he has found for true only in some particular; and
therefore a man ought to consider in every thing what opinion the Hearer holds.
Another is, that Sentences do discover the manners and disposition of the
speakers, so that if they be esteemed good Sentences he shall be esteemed a
good man; and if evil, an evil man.
Thus much of Sentences; what they be; of how many sorts; how to be used; whom
they become; and what is their profit.

CHAP. 23. Of the invention of Enthymemes.
SEeing an Enthymeme differs from a Logical Syllogism, in that it neither
concludes out of every thing, nor out of remote Principles; the Places of it,
from whence a man may argue ought to be certain, and determinate.

And because whosoever makes a Syllogism Rhetorical, or other, should know
all, or the most part of that which is in his question; as whosoever is to
advise the Athenians in the question, whether they are to make war or no,
must know what their revenues be; what, and what kind of power they have: and
he that will praise them, much know their acts at Salamis, Marathon, etc. it
will be necessary for a good speaker to have in readiness the choicest
particulars of whatsoever he foresees he may speak of

He that is to speak extempore, must comprehend in his speech as much as he
can of what is most proper in the matter in hand.

Proper I call those things which are least common to others; as, He that will
praise Achilles, is not to declare such things as are common both to him and
Diomedes; as that he was a Prince, and warred against the Trojans; but such
things as are proper only to Achilles; as that he killed Hector and Cygnus;
went to the war young, and voluntary.

Let this therefore be one general Place, From that which is Proper.

CHAP. 24. Of the Places of Enthymemes Ostensive.
FOrasmuch as Enthymemes either infer truly, or seem only so to do; and
they which do infer indeed, be either Ostensive; or such as bring a man to
some impossibility; we will first set down the Places of Enthymemes Ostensive.

An Ostensive Enthymeme is, wherein a man concludes the question from somewhat
granted.

That Enthymeme which brings a man to an impossibility is an Enthymeme wherein
from that which the Adversary maintains, we conclude that which is
manifestly impossible.

All Places have been already set down in a manner in the precedent
Propositions of Good, Evil, Just, Unjust, Honorable and Dishonorable: namely
they have been set down as applied to particular Subjects, or in Concrete.

Here they are to be set down in another manner; namely in the Abstract, or
Universal.

The first Place then let be from Contraries, which in the Concrete or
Particulars is exemplified thus. If Intemperance be hurtful, Temperance is
profitable: and if Intemperance be not hurtful; neither is Temperance
profitable.

Another Place may be from Cognomination or affinity of words: as in this
Particular. If what is Just be Good; then what is Justly is well: but Justly to
die is not well: therefore not all that is Just is Good.

A third from Relatives; as This man has Justly Done, therefor the other has
Justly suffered. But this Place sometimes deceives: for a man may suffer justly
yet not from him.

A fourth from Comparison, three ways.

From the Greater to the Less; as, He has stricken his father; and therefore
this man.

From the Less to the Greater: as, The Gods know not all things; much less
man.

From Equality: as, If Captains be not always the worse esteemed for losing a
victory; why should Sophisters?

Another from the Time: as, Philip to the Thebans: If I had required to pass
through your Country with my Army before I had aided you against the Phocaeans,
there is no doubt but you would have promised it me. It is absurd therefore to
deny it me now after I have trusted you.

A Sixth from what the Adversary says of himself: as, I phicrates asked
Aristophon, whether he would take a bribe to betray the Army: and he answering
no; What (says he) is it likely that Iphicrates would betray the Army; and
Aristophon not?

This Place would be ridiculous, where the Defendant were not in much more
estimation then the Accuser.

A seventh from the Definition; as that of Socrates; A Spirit is either God, or
the Creature of God: and therefore he denies not that there is a God, that
confesses there are Spirits.

An eighth from the distinction of an ambiguous word.

A ninth from Division: as, If all men do what they do for one of three
causes, whereof two are impossible; and the Accuser charge not the Defendant
with the third; it follows that he has not done it.

A tenth from Induction: as, at Athens, at Thebes, at Sparta, etc. and
therefore every where.

An eleventh from Authority, or precedent sentence, as that of Sappho that
Death is evil, for that the Gods have judged it so, in exempting themselves
from mortality.

A twelfth from the Consequence: as, It Is not good to be envied; Therefore
neither to be learned. It Is good to be wise; therefore also to be instructed.

A thirteenth from two contrary Consequences; as, It Is not good to be an
Orator, because if he speak the truth, he shall displease men: if he speak
falsely, he shall displease God.

Here is to be noted that sometimes this argument may be retorted: as thus, If
you speak truth you shall please God; if you speak untruth you shall please
men; therefore by all means be an Orator.

A foureteenth from the quality that men have to praise one thing, and approve
another: as, We ought not to war against the Athenians upon no precedent
injury; for all men discommend injustice. Again, We ought to war against the
Athenians; for otherwise our Liberty is at their mercy, that is, is no liberty:
but the preservation of liberty is a thing that all men will approve.

A fifteenth from Proportion: as, seeing we naturalize strangers for their
virtues, why should we not banish this stranger for his vices?

A sixteenth from the similitude of Consequents: as, He that denies the
immortality of the Gods, is no worse then he that has written the generation of
the Gods. For the same Consequence follows of both, that sometimes there are
none.

A seventeenth from that, that men change their mind: as, If when we were in
banishment, we fought to recover our ^ountry, why should we not sight now to
retain it?

An eighteenth from a feigned end: as, that Diomedes chose Ulysses to go with
him, not as more valliant then another; but as one that would partake less of
the glory.

A nineteenth from the Cause: as if he would infer he did it from this,
that he had Cause to do it.

A twentieth from that which is Incredible, but True: as, that Laws may need
a Law to mend them; as well as Fish bred in the salt water, may need salting.

CHAP. 25. Of the Places of Emthymemes that lead to Impossibility.
LEt the first Place be from inspection of Times, Actions, or Words, either of
the Adversary, or of the speaker, or Both. Of the Adversary; as, He says he
loves the People, and yet he was in the conspiracy of the Thirty. Of the
speaker; as, He says I am contentious; and yet I never began suit. Of Both;
as, He never conferred any thing to the benefit of the Commonwealth, whereas I
have ransomed diverse Citizens with my own money.

A second from showing the cause of that which seemed amiss, and serves for
men of good reputation that are accused; as, The Mother that was accused of
Incest for being seen embracing her Son, was absolved as soon as she made
appear; that she embraced him upon his arrival from far, by way of
Salutation.

A third, from rendering of the cause, as, Leodamas, to whom it was objected,
that he had under the thirty Tyrants, defaced the Inscription (which the People
had set up in a Pillar) of his Ignominy; answered, He had not done it; because
it would have been more to his commodity to let it stand; thereby to indeere
himself to the Tyrants, by the testimony of the Peoples hatred.

A fou^th from better Counsel; as, He might have done better for himself;
therefore he did not this. But this Place deceives, when the better Counsel
comes to mind after the Fact.

A fifth, from the Incompatibility of the things to be done; as, they that did
deliberate whether they should both mourn and sacrifice at the funeral of
Leucothea, were told, that if they thought her a Goddess, they ought not to
mourne^ and if they thought her a Mortal, they ought not to sacrifice.

A sixth (which is proper to Judicial Orations) from an Inference of Error;
as, if he did it not, he was not wise, therefore he did it.

Enthymemes that lead to Impossibility please more than Ostensive: for they
compare, and put contraries together, whereby they are the better set off, and
more conspicuous to the Auditor.

Of all Enthymemes, they be best, which we assent to as soon as hear. For
such consent pleases us; and makes us favorable to the speaker.

CHAP. 26. Of the Places of seeming Enthymemes.
OF seeming Enthymemes, one Place may be from the form of speaking; as when a
man has repeated diverse Sentences, he brings in his conclusion, as if it
followed necessarily, though it do not.

A second from an ambiguous word.

A third from that which is true divided to that which is false joined; as that
of Orestes, It was justice that I should revenge my Fathers death; and it was
justice my Mother should die for killing my Father, therefore I justly killed
my Mother. Or from that which is true joined to that which is false divided;
as; one cup of Wine, and one cup of Wine, are hurtful; therefore one cup of
Wine is hurtful.

A fourth from amplification of the Crime. For neither is the Defendant likely
to have committed the Crime he amplifies; nor does the Accuser seem, when he
is Passionate, to want ground for his Accusation.

A fifth from signs; as, when a man concludes the doing of the Fact from the
manner of his life.

A sixth from that which comes by Chance, as if from this that the Tyranny of
Hipparchus came to be overthrown from the love of Aristogeiton to Harmodius, a
man should conclude, that in a free Commonwealth loving of Boys were
profitable.

A seventh from the Consequence, as, Banishment is to be desired because a
banished man has choice of places to dwell in.

An eight from making that the cause which is not; as, In Demosthenes his
government, the war began; therefore Demosthenes governed well. With the
Peloponnesian war began the Plague, therefore Pericles that persuaded that
war, did ill.

A ninth from the omission of some Circumstance, as, Helen did what was
lawful, when she ran aw^y with Paris, because she had her Fathers consent to
choose her own Husband; which was true only during the time that she had not
chosen.

A tenth from that which is probable in some case, to that which is probable
simply; as, It Is probable he foresaw, that if he did it he should be
suspected; therefore it is probable he did it not.

From this Place one may inserre both ways, that he did it not. For if he be
not likely to do it, it may be thought he did it not: again, if he were
likely to do it, it may be thought he did it not, for this, that he knew he
should be suspected

Upon this Place was grounded the Art, which was so much detested in
Protagoras, of making the better cause seem the worse; and the worse the
better.

CHAP. 27. Of the ways to answer the Arguments of the Adversary.
AN Argument is answered by an opposite Syllogism, or by an Objection.

The Places of opposite Syllogismes, are the same with the Places of
Syllogismes, or Enthymemes: for a Rhetorical Syllogism is an Enthymeme.

The Places, of Objections are four.

From the same, as, To the Adversary that proves Love to be good by an
Enthymeme, may be objected, that no want is good, and yet love is want; or
particularly thus; The Love of Myrrhato her Father was not good.

The second from Contraries; as, if the Adversary say A good man does good to
his friends, an Objection might be made that then, an evil man will do also
evil to his friends.

From Similitude, as thus, if the Adversary say all men that are injured, do
hate those that have injured them, it may be Objected, that then, all men that
had received benefits should love their benefactors, that is to say, be
grateful.

The fourth from the authority of famous men; as when a man shall say, that
drunken men ought to be pardoned those acts they do in their drunkenness,
because they know not what they do, the Objection may be, that Pittacus was of
another mind, that appointed for such acts a double punishment; one for the
Act, another for the Drunkenness.

And forasmuch as all Enthymemes are drawn from Probability, or Example, or
from a Sign fallible, or from a sign infallible: an Enthymeme from
Probability, may be confuted Really, by showing that for the most part it falls
out otherwise: but Apparently or Sophistically, by showing only that it does
not fall out so always; whereupon the Judge thinks the Probability not
sufficient to ground his sentence upon.

[The Reason whereof is this. That the Judge, while he hears the fact prooved
Probable, conceives it as true. For the Understanding has no Object but Truth.
And therefore by and by, when he shall hear an Instance to the Contrary; and
thereby find that he had no necessity to think it true, presently changes his
opinion, and thinks it false, and consequently not so much as Probable. For
he cannot at one time think the same thing both Probable and False: and he
that says a thing is Probable, the meaning is, he thinks it True, but finds
not arguments enough to prove it.]

An Enthymeme from a fallible sign, is answered, by showing the sign to be
fallible.

An Enthymeme from an Example, is a^swered, as an Enthymeme from Probability;
Really, by showing more Examples to the contrary; Apparently, if he bring
Examples enough to make it seem not necessary.

If the Adversary have more Ex^mples then we, we must make appear, that they
are not applicable to the Case.

An Enthymeme from an infallible sign, if the Proposition be true, is
unanswerable.

CHAP. 28. Amplification and Extenuation are not Common Places. Enthymemes by
which Arguments are answered, are the same with those by which the matter in
question is proved, or disproved. Objections are not Enthymemes.
THe first, that Amplification and Extenuation are not Common Places, appears
by this, that Amplification, and Extenuation do prove a fact to be great, or
little; and are therefore Enthymemes, to be drawn from Common Places; and
therefore are not the Places themselves.

The second, that Enthymemes, by which Arguments are answered, are of the same
kind with those, by which the matter in question is proved, is manifest by
this, that these infer the opposite, of what was proved by the other.

The third, that an Objection is no Enthymeme, is apparent by this, that an
Objection is no more, but an Opin^on, ^xample, or other Instance, produced to
make appear, that the Adversaries Argument does not conclude.

Thus much of Examples, Sentences, Enthymemes, and generally of all things,
that belong to Argumentation; from what Places they may be drawn, or answered.

There remains Elocution, and Disposition to be spoken of in the next Book.

The third Book.
CHAP. I. Of the Original of Elocution and Pronuntiation.
THree things being necessary to an Oration, namely Proof, Elocution and
Disposition; we have done with the first, and shall speak of the other two in
that which follows.

As for Action, or Pronuntiation, so much as is necessary for an Orator may be
fetched out of the Book of the Art of Poetry, in which we have treated of the
Action of the Stage.

For Tragaedians were the first that invented such Action, and that but of
late; and it consists in governing well the Magnitude, Tone, and Measure of
the Voice; a thing less subject to Art, then is either Proof, or Elocution.

And yet there have been Rules delivered concerning it, as far forth as
serves for Poetry.

But Oratoricall Action has not been hitherto reduced to Art.

And Orators in the beginning, when they saw that the Poets in barren and
feigned Arguments, nevertheless attained great Reputation; supposing it had
proceeded from the choice, or connection of words, fell into a Style, by
imitation of them, approaching to Verse, and made choice of words.

But when the Poets changed their Style, and laid by all words that were not in
common use, the Orators did the same, and lighted at last upon words, and a
government of the Voice and Measure proper to themselves.

Seeing therefore Pronuntiation, or Action are in some degree necessary also
for an Orator, the Precepts thereof are to be fetched from the Art of Poetry.

[In the mean time this may be one general Rule. If the Words, Tone,
Greatness of the Voice, Gesture of the body and Countenance, seem to proceed
all from one Passion, then it is well pronounced: Otherwise not.

For when there appear more passions then one at once, the mind of the
speaker appears unnatural and distracted. Otherwise, as the mind of the
speaker, so the mind of the Hearer always.]

CHAP. 2. Of the choice of Words and Epithets.
THe virtues of a Word are two; the first, that it be perspicuous; the second,
that it be decent; that is, neither above, nor below the thing signified; or
neither too humble, nor too fine.

Perspicuous are all Words that be Proper.

Fine Words are those, that are borrowed or translated, from other
significations; of which in the Art of Poetry.

The reason why borrowed Words please is this. Men are affected with Words, as
they are with Men, admiring in both that which is foreign and new.

To make a Poem graceful, many things help; but few an Oration.

For to a Poet it suffices with what Words he can, to set out his Poem: but
an Orator must not only do that; but also seem not to do it: for else he
will be thought to speak unnaturally, and not as he thinks; and thereby be
the less believed; whereas Belief is the scope of his Oration.

The Words that an Orator ought to use are of three sorts. Proper; Such as are
Received, and Metaphors.

Words taken from foreign languages, Words compounded; and Words new-coyned
are seldom to be used.

Synonimaes belong to Poets, and Equivocall words to Sophisters.

An Orator, if he use Proper words and Received, and good Metaphors; shall
both make his Oration beautiful, and not seem to intend it; and shall speak
perspicuously. For in a Metaphor alone there is perspicuity, Nouity, and
Sweetness.

Concerning Metaphors the Rules are these.

1. He that will make the best of a thing, let him draw his Metaphor from
somewhat that is better. As for Example, let him call a Cr^me, as Error. On the
other side, when he would make the worst of it, let him draw his Metaphor from
somewhat worse, as, calling Error, Crime. 2. A Metaphor ought not to be so
far fetched, as that the Similitude may not easily appear. 3. A Metaphor
ought to be drawn from the noblest things, as the Poets do, that choose
rather to say Rosy-finger'd; then Red-finger'd Aurora.
In like manner the Rule of Epithets is,

That he that will adorn should use those of the better sort; and he that
will disgrace, should use those of the worse: as Simonides being to write an
Ode in honor of the victory gotten in a Course by certain Mules, being not
well paid, called them by their name [(...)] that signifies their propinquity
to Asses: but having received a greater reward, Styles them the sons of swift
footed Coursers.

CHAP. 3. Of the things that make an Oration Flat.
THe things that make an Oration flat, or insipide, are four.

1. Words Compounded; [and yet a Man may Compound a word, when the Composition
is necessary, for want of a simple word; and easy, and ^eldome used.] 2.
Foreign words. As for example, such as are newly derived from the Latin;
which though they were proper among them whose tongue it is, are foreign in
another Language: and yet these may be used, so it be moderately. 3. Long
impertinent, and often Epithets. 4. Metaphors, indecent, and obscure. Obscure
they are, when they are far fetched. Indecent when they are Ridiculous, as in
Comoedies; or too Grave, as in Tragaedies.
CHAP. 4. Of a Similitnde.
A Similitude differs from a Metaphor only by such Particles of Comparison, as
these, As; Even as; So; Even so, etc.

A Similitude therefore is a Metaphor dilated; and a Metaphor, is a Similitude
contracted into one Word.

A Similitude does well in an Oration, so it be not too frequent; for it is
Poetical.

An example of a Similitude, is this of Pericles; that said in his Oration;
that the Baeotians were like to so many Oaks in a Wood, that did nothing but
beat one another.

Of the Purity of Language.
Four things are necessary to make Language Pure.

1. The right rendering of those Particles which some antecedent Particle does
require: As to a Not only, a Not also; and then they are rendered right, when
they are not suspended too long. 2 The use of Proper Words, rather than
Circumlocutions, unless there be motive to make one do it of purpose. 3. That
there be nothing of double construction, unless there be cause to do it of
purpose. As the Prophets (of the Heathen) who speak in general terms, to the
end they may the better maintain the truth of their Prophecies; which is
easilier maintained in generals, than in particulars. For it is easier to
divine, whether a number be even or odd, then how many; and that a thing will
be, then when it will be. 4. Concordance of Gender, Number, and Person; as not
to say Him for Her; Man for Men; Has for Have.
In sum; a Man's Language ought to be easy for another to read, pronounce,
and point.

Besides, to diverse Antecedents, let diverse Relatives, or one Common to them
all, be Correspondent: as, He saw the Color; He heard the Sound; or he
perceived both Color and Sound: but by no means, He heard, or saw both.

Lastly, that which is to be interposed by Pare^thesis, let it be done quickly:
as, I purposed having spoken to him (to this, and this purpose) afterward to be
gone. For to put it off thus; I resolved after I had spoken to him, to be gone,
but the subject of my speech was to this and this purpose, is vicious.

CHAP. 6. Of the Amplitude and Tenuity of Language.
A Man shall add Amplitude, or Dignity to his language, by such means as
these.

1. By changing the Name with the Definition, as occasion shall serve. As, when
the name shall be Indecent, by using the Definition; or Contrary. 2 By
Metaphors. 3. By using the Plural Number for the Singular. 4. By Privative
Epithets.
CHAP. 7. Of the Convenien^e, or Decency of Elocution.
ELocutions is made Decent, 1. By speaking Feelingly; that is with such Passion
as is fit for the matter he is in; as Angerly in matter of Injury 2. By
speaking as becomes the Person of the Speaker; as for a Gentleman to speak
Eruditely. 3. By speaking Proportionably to the matter; as of great affairs to
speak in a high, and of meine in a low style. 4. By abstaining from
Compounded, and from Outlandish words; unless a man speak Passionately, and
have already moved, and as it were inebriated his Hearers. Or Ironically.


It conferres also to persuasion very much to use these ordinary forms of
speaking, All men know; It Is confessed by all; No man will deny, and the like.
For the Hearer consents, surprised with the fear to be esteemed the only
Ignorant man^

It Is good also having used a word that signifies more than the matter requires,
to abstain from the Pronuntiation and Countenance that to such a word belongs;
that the Disproportion between it and the matt^r may the less appear. And
when a man has said too much, it will show well to correct himself: For he
will get belief by seeming to consider what he says.

[But in this a man must have a care not to be too precise in showing of this
Consideration. For the ostentation of Carfulness is an argument oftentimes of
lying; as may be observed in such as tell particularities not easily observed,
when they would be thought to speak more precise truth then is required.]

CHAP. 8. Of two sorts of Styles.
THere be two sorts of Styles. The one continued or to be comprehended at
once; the other divided, or distinguished by Periods.

The first sort was in use with ancient Writers; but is now out of date.

An example of this Style is in the History of Herodotus; wherein there is no
Period till the end of the whole History.

In the other kind of Style, that is distinguished by Periods, a Period is such
a Part as is perfect in it self; and has such length, as may easily be
comprehended by the understanding.

This latter kind is pleasant; the former unpleasant, because this appears
finite, the other infinite: in this the Hearer has always somewhat set out,
and terminated to him; in the other he foresees no end, and has nothing
finished to him: this may easily be committed to memory, because of the measure
and cadence (which is the cause that verses be easily remembered;) the other not.

Every sentence ought to end with the Period, and nothing to be interposed.

A Period is either simple, or divided into Parts.

Simple is that which is Indivisible; as, I wonder you fear not their ends,
whose actions you imitate.

A Period divided, is that which not only has perfection and length convenient
for respiration, but also Parts. As, I wonder you are not afraid of their ends,
seeing you imitate their actions: where in these words, I wonder you are not
afraid of their ends, is one Colon, or Part; and in these, Seeing you imitate
their actions, another: and both together make the Period.

The Parts, or Members, and Periods of speech ought neither to be too long, nor
too short.

Too long, are they, which are produced beyond the expectation of the Hearer.

Too short, are they that end before he expects it.

Those that be too long, leave the Hearer behind, like him that walking, goes
beyond the usual end of the walk, and thereby outgoes him that walks with
him.

They that be too short, make the Hearer stumble; for when he looks far
before him, the end stoppes him before he be aware.

A Period that is divided into Parts, is either divided only; or has also an
opposition of the Parts one to another.

Divided only is such as this; This the Senate knows; the Consul sees; and
yet the man lives.

A Period with opposition of Parts, called also Antithesis, and the parts
Antitheta, is when contrary Parts are put together; or also joined by a third.

Contrary parts are put together, as here, The one has obtained glory, the
other Riches; both by my benefit.

Antitheta are therefore acceptable; because not only the Parts appear the
better for the opposition; but also for that they carry with them a certain
appearance of that kind of Enthymeme, which leads to impossibility.

Parts, or Members of a Period are said to be equal, when they have
altogether, or almost equal number of Syllables.

Parts or Members of a Period, are said to be like, when they begin, or end
alike: and the more Similitudes, and the greater equality there is of
Syllables, the more graceful is the Period.

CHAP. 9. Of those things that grace an Oration, and make it delightful.
FOrasmuch as there is nothing more delightful to a man, then to find that he
apprehends and learnes easily; it necessarily follows, that those Words are
most grateful to the Ear, that make a man seem to see before his eyes the
thing signified.

And therefore foreign Words are unpleasant, because Obscure; and Plain
Words, because too Manifest, making us learn nothing new: but Metaphors
please; for they beget in us by the Genus or by some common thing to that with
another, a kind of Science: as when an Old Man, is called Stubble; a man
suddenly learnes that he grows up, flourishes and withers like Grass,
being put in mind of it by the qualities common to Stubble, and to Old men.

That which a Metaphor does, a Similitude does the same; but with less grace,
because with more prolixity.

Such Enthymemes are the most graceful; which neither are presently very
Manifest, nor yet very hard to be understood; but are comprehended, while they
are uttering, or presently after, though not understood before.

The things that make a speech graceful, are these; Antitheta, Metaphors, and
Animation.

Of Antitheta, and Antithesis has been spoken in the precedent Chapter.

Of Metaphors the most graceful is that which is drawn from Proportion.

[ Aristotle (in the 12. Chapter of his Poetry) defines a Metaphor to be the
translation of a name from one signification to another; whereof he makes four
kinds, 1. From the General to the Particular. 2. From the Particular to the
General. 3. From one Particular to another. 4. From Proportion.]

A Metaphor from Proportion is such as this, A State without Youth, is a Year
without a Spring.

Animation is that expression which makes us seem to see the thing before our
eyes; as he that said, The Athenians powered out their City into Sicily,
meaning, they sent thither the greatest Army they could make; and this is the
greatest grace of an Oration.

If therefore in the same Sentence there concur both Metaphor, and this
Animation, and also Antithesis, it cannot choose but be very graceful.

That an Oration is graced by Metaphor, Animation and Antithesis, has been
said: but how it is graced, is to be said in the next Chapter.

CHAP. 10. In what manner an Oration is graced by the things aforesaid.
It Is graced by Animation, when the actions of living Creatures are attributed
to things without life; as when the Sword is said to devour.

Such Metaphors as these come into a Man's mind by the observation of things
that have similitude and proportion one to another. And the more unlike, and
unproportionable the things be otherwise, the more grace has the Metaphor.

A Metaphor without Animation, adds grace then, when the Hearer finds he
learnes somewhat by such use of the word.

Also Paradoxes are graceful, so men inwardly do believe them: for they have
in them somewhat like to those jests that are grounded upon the similitude of
words, which have usually one sense, and in the present another; and somewhat
like to those jests which are grounded upon the deceiving of a man's expectation.

And Paragrammes; that is, allusions of words are graceful, if they be well
placed; and in Periods not too long; and with Antithesis: for by these means
the ambiguity is taken away.

And the more of these; namely, Metaphor, Animation, Antithesis, Equality of
members a Period has, the more graceful it is.

Similitudes grace an Oration, when they contain also a Metaphor.

And Proverbes are graceful, because they are Metaphors or translations of
words from one species to another.

And Hyperboles, because they also are Metaphors: but they are youthful, and
bewray vehemence; and are used with most grace by them that be angry; and for
that cause are not comely in Old men.

CHAP. 11. Of the difference between the Style to be used in Writing, and the
Style to be used in Pleading.
THe Style that should be Read ought to be more exact and accurate.

But the Style of a Pleader ought to be suited to Action and Pronuntiation.

Orations of them that Plead, pass away with the Hearing.

But those that are Written men carry about them; and are considered at
Leisure; and consequently must endure to be sifted and examined.

Written Orations appear flat in Pleadi^g.

And Orations made for the Bar, when the Action is away, appear in Reading
insipide.

In Written Orations Repetition is justly condemned.

But in Pleadings, by the help of Action and by some change in the Pleader,
Repetition becomes Amplification.

In Written Orations Disjunctives do ill; as, I came, I found him, I asked him:
for they seem superfluous, and but one thing, because they are not
distinguished by Action.

But in Pleadings it is Amplification^ because that which is but one thing, is
made to seem many.

Of Pleadings that which is Judicial ought to be more accurate, then that
which is before the people.

And an Oration to the People ought to be more accommodate to Action, then a
Judicial.

And of Judicial Orations, that ought to be more accurate, which is uttered
to f^w Judges; and that ought to be more accommodate to Action, which is
uttered to Many. As in a Picture, the farther he stands off that beholds it,
the less need there is that the colors be fine: so in Orations, the farther
the Hearer stands off, the less need there is for his Oration to be Elegant.

Therefore Demonstrative Orations, are most proper for writing, the end whereof
is to be Read.

CHAP. 12. Of the Parts of an Oration, and their Order.
THe necessary Parts of an Oration are but two; Proposition, and Proof: which
are as it were the Problem, and Demonstration.

The Proposition is the explication, or opening of the Matter to be Proved.

And Proof is the Demonstration of the Matter Propounded.

To these necessary Parts, are sometimes added two other; the Proeme, and the
Epilogue, neither of which are any Proof.

So that in sum there be four Parts of an Oration; the Proeme, the
Proposition, or (as others call it) the Narration; the Proofs (which contain
Confirmation, Confutation, Amplification, and Diminution;) and the Epilogue.

CHAP. 13. Of the Proeme.
THe Proeme is the Beginning of an Oration, and as it were the preparing of the
way before one enter into it.

In some kinds of Orations it resembles the Prelude of Musicians, who first
Play what they list, and afterward the ^une they intended.

In other kinds it resembles the Prologue of a Play, that contains the
Argument.

Proemes of the first sort, are most proper for Demonstrative Orations; in
which a Man is free to foretell, or not, what Points he will insist upon; and
for the most part it is better not^ because when a man has not obliged himself
to a certain matter, Digression will seem Variety: but if he have engaged
himself, Variety will be accounted Digression.

In Demoustratives the matter of the Proeme consists in the Praise or
Dispraise of some Law or Custom, or in Exhortation, or Dehortation; or in
something that serves to incline the Hearer to the purpose

Proemes of the second kind are most proper for Judicial Orations. For as the
Prologue in a Dramatique, and the Exordium in an Epique Poem, sets first in
few words the Argument of the Poem: so in a Judicial Oration, the Orator
ought to exhibit a Model of his Oration, that the mind of the Hearer may not
be suspended, and for want of foresight err or wander.

Whatsoever else belongs to a Proeme, is drawn from one of these four. From
the Speaker. From the Adversary. From the Hearer, Or from the Matter.

From the speaker and Adversary are drawn into Proemes such Criminations and
Purgations as belong not to the cause.

To the Defendant it is necessary in the Proeme to answer to the accusations of
his Adversary; that those being cleared, he may have a more favorable entrance
to the rest of his Oration.

But to the Plaintiff it is better to cast his Criminations all into the
Epilogue, that the Judge may the more easily remember them.

From the Hearer and from the Matter are drawn into the Proeme such things, as
serve to make the Hearer favorable, or angry; attentive, or not attentive, as
need shall require.

And Hearers use to be attentive to Persons that are reputed good; to things
that are of great Consequence, or that concern themselves, or that are
strange, or that delight.

But to make the Hearer attentive, is not the part of the Proeme only, but of
any other part of the Oration, and rather of any other Part, then of the
Proeme. For the Hearer is every where more remiss then in the beginning. And
therefore wheresoever there is need, the Orator must make appear both the
probitie of his own person, and that the matter in hand is of great
consequence; or that it concerns the Hearer; or that it is new; or that it is
delightful.

He that will have the Hearer attentive to Him, but not to the Cause, must on
the other side make it seem that the matter is a trifle, without relation to
the Hearer, common, and tedious.

That the Hearer may be favorable to the Speaker, one of two things is
required; that he love him, or that he pity him.

In Demonstrative Orations, he that Praises, shall have the Hearer favorable,
if he think himself or his own manners, or course of life, or any thing he
loves, comprehended in the same Praise.

On the contrary, he that dispraises, shall be heard favorably, if the Hearer
find his enemies, or their courses, or any thing he hates involved in the same
dispraise.

The Proeme of a Deliberative Oration is taken from the same things, from which
are taken the Proemes of Judicial Orations. For the matter of a Delib^rative
Oration needs not that natural Pro^me, by which is shown what we are to
speak of; for that is already known: the Proeme in these, being made only for
the Speakers, or Adversaries sake; or to make the Matter appear great, or
little, as one would have it, and is therefore to be taken from the Persons of
the Plaintiff or Defendant; or from the Hearer, or from the Matter, as in
Orations Judicial.

CHAP. 14. Places of Crimination and Purgation.
1. ONe is from the remo^vall of ill opinion in the Hearer, imprinted in him by
the Adversary, or otherwise.

2. Another from this, That the thing done is not hurtful, or not to him, or
not so much, or not unjust, or not great, or not dishonorable.

3. A third from the Recompense; as, I did him harm, but withal I did him
honor.

4. A fourth from the Excuse; as, It was Error, Mischance, or Constraint.

5. A fifth from the Intention; as, One thing was done, another meant.

6. A sixth, from the Comprehension of the Accuser; as, What I have done, the
Accuser has done the same; or his, Father, Kinsman, or Friend.

7. From the Comprehension of those that are in Reputation; as, What I did,
such, and such have done the same, who nevertheless, are good men.

8. From Comparison with such as have been fasly accused, or wrongfully
suspected, and nevertheless found upright.

9. From Recrimination; as, The Accuser is a man if ill life, and therefore not
to be believed.

10. From that the Judgment belongs to another Place, or Time; as, I have
already answered, or am to answer elsewhere to this Matter.

11. From Crimination of the Crimination; as, It serves only to pervert
Judgment.

12. A twelfth, which is common both to Crimination and Purgation; and is taken
from some sign; as Teucer is not to be believed because his Mother was Priam's
sister. On the other side. Teucer is to be believed, because his Father was
Priam's enemy.

13. A thirteenth, proper to Crimination only, from Praise and Dispraise mixed;
as, To praise small things, and blame great ones; or to praise in many words,
and blame with effectual ones; or to p^aise many things that are good, and
then add one evil, but a great one.

14. A fourteenth, common both to Crimination and Purgation, is taken from the
interpretation of the fact: for he that purges himself interprets the fact
always in the best sense, and he that Criminates, always in the worst; as
when Ulysses said Dyomedes chose him for his companion, as the most able of the
Grecians, to aid him in his exploit: but his Adversary said, He chose him for
his cowardice, as the most unlikely to share with him in the Honor.

CHAP. 15. Of the Narration.
THe Narration is not always continued and of one Piece; but sometimes, as in
Demonstratives, interrupted, and dispersed through the whole Oration.

For there being in an a Narration something that falls not under Art; as namely
the Actions themselves, which the Orator inventeth not; he must therefore
bring in the Narration of them, where he best may. As for example, If being to
praise a Man, you would make a Narration of all his Acts immediately from the
beginning, and without interruption, you will find it necessary afterward to
repeat the same Acts again, while from some of them you praise his Valor,
and from others his Wisdom; whereby your Oration shall have less variety, and
shall less please.

It Is not necessary always that the Narration be short. The true measure of it
must be taken from the matter that is to be laid open.

In the Narration, as often as may be, it is good to insert somewhat commendable in
ones self, and blameable in ones Adversary: As I advised him, but he would
take no Counsel.

In Narrations, a man is to leave out whatsoever breeds compassion, or
indignation in the Hearer besides the purpose; as Ulysses in Homer, relating
his Travels to Alcinous, to move compassion in him, is so long in it, that it
consists of diverse books: but when he comes home, tells the same to his wife
in thirty Verses, leaving out what might make her sad.

The Narration ought also to be in such words as argue the Manners; that is,
some virtuous or vicious habit in him of whom we speak, although it be not
expressed; As, setting his arms a kenbold, he answered, etc. by which is
insinuated the Pride of him that so answered.

In an Oration a man does better to show his affection then his judgment: that
is, It Is better to say, I like this, then to say, This is better. For by the one
you would seem wise, by the other good. But favor follows Goodness; whereas
wisdom procures envy.

But if this Affection seem incredible, then either a reason must be rendered,
as did Antigone. For when she had said, She loved her brother better than her
Husband, or Children, she added, for husband and children I may have more; but
another brother I cannot, my ^arents being both dead. Or else a man must use
this form of speaking; I know this affection of mine seems strange to you,
but nevertheless it is such. For it is nor easily believed that any man has a
mind to do any thing that is not for his own good.

Besides in a Narration, not only the Actions themselves; but the Passions,
and signs that accompany them, are to be discovered.

And in his Narration a man should make himself and his Adversary be
considered for such, and such, as soon, and as covertly as he can.

A Narration may have need sometimes not to be in the beginning.

In Deliberative Orations; that is, wheresoever the question is of things to
come; a Narration, which is always of things past, has no place: and yet things
past may be recounted, that men may Deliberate better of the future: But that
is not as Narration, but Proof; for it is Example.

There may also be Narration in Deliberatives, in that part, where Crimination,
and Praise come in: But that part is not Deliberative, but Demonstrative.

CHAP. 16. Of Proof, or Confirmation, and Refutation.
Proofs are to be applied to some thing Controverted.

The Controversy in Judicial Orations is, Whether it has been done; whether
it has been Hurtful; whether the matter be so great, and whether it be lust,
or no.

In a question of Fact, one of the Parties of necessity is faulty (for
ignorance of the Fact is no excuse) and therefore the Fact is chiefly to be
insisted on.

In Demonstratives the Fact for the most part is supposed: but the Honor and
Profit of the Fact are to be Proved.

In Deliberatives the question is, Whether the thing be like to be, or likely
to be so Great; or whether it be Just; or whether it be Profitable.

Besides the application of the Proofs to the question, a man ought to
observe, whether his Adversary have lied in any point without the Cause. For
it is a figne he does the same in the Cause.

The Proofs themselves are either Examples or Enthymemes.

A Deliberative Oration, because it is of things to come, requires rather
Examples then Enthymemes.

But a Judicial Orations, being of things past, which have a necessity in
them, and may be concluded Syllogistically, requires rather Enthymemes.

Enthymemes ought not to come too thick together: for they hinder one another
force by confounding the Hearer.

Nor ought a man endeavor to porove every thing by Enthymeme lest like some
Philosophers, he collect what is known, from what is less known.

Nor ought a man to use Enthymemes when he would move the Hearer to some
affection: for seeing diverse motions do mutually destroy or weaken one
another, he will lose either the Enthymeme, or the affection that he would move.

For the same reason, a man ought not to use Enthymemes when he would express
Manners.

But whether he would move affection, or insinuate his Manners, he may with all
use Sentences.

A Deliberative Oration is more difficult then a Judicial, because it is of the
future, whereas a Judicial is of that which is past, and that consequently may
be known; and because it has Principles, namely the Law; and it is easier to
prove from Principles, then without.

Beesids, a Deliberative Oration wants those helps of turning to the
Adversary; of speaking of himself; of raising Passion.

He therefore that wants matter in a Deliberative Oration, let him bring in
some Person to praise, or dispraise.

And in Demonstratives he that has nothing to say in commendation or
discommendation of the principal Party, let him praise or dispraise somebody
else, as his Father, or kinsman, or the very virtues or vices themselves.

He that wants not Proofs, let him not only prove strongly, but also
insinuate his Manners: but he that has no Proof, let him nevertheless
insinuate his manners. For a good man is as acceptable, as an exact Oration.

Of Proofs, those that lead to an absurdity please better then those that are
direct or Ostensive; because from the comparison of Contraries, namely Truth
and Falsity, the force of the Syllogism does the better appear.

Confutation is also a part of Proof.

And he that speaks first, puts it after his own Proofs, unless the
Controversy contain many and different matters. And he that speaks last puts
it before.

For it is necessary to make way for his own Oration, by removing the Objections
of him that spoke before. For the mind abhorres both a Man and his Oration that
is damned before hand.

If a man desire his Manners should appear well, (lest speaking of himself he
become odious, or troublesome, or obnoxious to obtrectation; or speaking of
another, he seem contumelious, or Scurrilous) let him introduce another Person.

Last of all, lest he cloy his Hearer with Enthymemes, let him vary them
sometimes with Sentences; but such as have the same force. As here is an
Enthymeme. If it be then the best time to make peace when the best conditions
of peace may be had, then the time is now, while our Fortune is entire. And
this is a Sentence of equal force to it. Wise men make peace, while their
Fortune is entire.

CHAP. 17. Of Interrogations, Answers and lests.
THe times wherein it is fit to ask ones Adversary a question, are chiefly
four.

1. The first is, when of two Propositions that conclude an Absurdity, he has
already uttered one; and we would by Interrogation draw him to confess the
other. 2. The second, when of two Propositions that conclude an Absurdity, one
is manifest of it self, and the other likely to be fetched out by a question;
then the Interrogation will be seasonable; and the absurd Conclusion is
presently to be inferred, without adding that Proposition which is manifest. 3.
The third, when a man would make appear that his Adversary does contradict
himself. 4. The fourth, when a man would take from his Adversary such shifts
as these, In some sort it is so; In some sort it is not so.
Out of these Cases it is not fit to Interrogate. For he whose question
succeedes not is tho^ght vanquished.

To Equivocall questions, a man ought to Answer fully, and not to be too brief.

To Interrogations which we foresee tend to draw from us an Answer contrary to
our purpose, we must together with our Answer presently give an Answer to the
objection, which is employed in the question.

And where the question exacteth an Answer that concludes against us, we must
together with our Answer presently distinguish.

Jests are dissolved by serious and grave discourse: and grave discourse is
deluded by Jests.

The several kinds of Jests are set down in the Art of Poetry.

Whereof one kind is Ironia, and tends to please ones self.

The other is Scurrility, and tends to please others.

The latter of these has in it a kind of baseness: the former may become a man
of good breeding.

CHAP. 18. Of the Epilogue.
THe Epilogue must consist of one of these four things.

Either of inclining the Judge to favor his own, or disfavour the Adversaries
side. For then when all is said in the cause, is the best season to praise, or
dispraise the Parties.

Or of Amplification or Diminution. For when it appears what is good or evil,
then is the time to show how great, or how little that good, or evil is.

Or in mooving the Judge to Anger, Love or other Passion. For when it is manifest
of what kind, and how great the good or evil is, then it will be opportune to
excite the Judge.

Or of Repitition, that the Judge may remember what has been said.

Repetition consists in the matter, and the manner. For the Orator must show,
that he has performed what he promised in the beginning of his Oration, and
how: Namely by comparing his Arguments one by one with his Adversaries,
repeating them in the same order they were spoken.

FINIS.

