A PRESERVATIVE Against death

Londini^ AN.M.D.XLV.



THOMAS ELYOT KNIGHT TO HIS VVORshypfull friend, sir Edward North knight
chancellor of the court of the augmentacions of the revenues of the kings
croune, desires well to do.
THe little book which I sent to you at the beginning of lent last passed, a
small requital of your gentle benefits, I have caused now to be printed: as
well for a testimony of the herty love, which I do bear toward you, and
that being printed it may the lengar endure with you and others, as also that
my private gift may be beneficial to many men, which without disdain or
envy will oftentimes read it. I know well, some men will think, and say
also perchance, that I spend my wit vainly. for it is the office of
priests for to preach, and that it does not perteine to a knight, much
less to a sheriff, to write, specially of such holy mattiers. Also that in
writing to you, which are continually occupied about the kings majesty's
business, I lose all my labor: considering that beside the times of meal and
of sleep (which also be littell and scarce, as I well have perceived) there
remains with you none opportunity to read any books of english or latin.
Truly I confess, that priests ought to preach, and that it is their propre
office. And yet no christen man is excluded to give good counsel in that
which pertayneth to the laws and commandementes of almighty god. And he that
can do it, and will not (though he be no priest) I dout not but he shall make a
strait reknyng for hydynge his talent. A knight has received that honor not
only to defend with the sword Christis faith and his propre country,
against them, which impugneth the one or inuadeth the other: but also, and
that most chiefly, by the mean of his dignity (if that be employed where it
should be, and esteemed as it ought to be) he should more effectually with his
learning and wit assail vice and error, most pernicious ennemies to
christen men, having thereunto for his sword and spear his tunge and his
pen. And where for the more reverence due to the order of priesthode, it is
most congruent and sittyng, that preaching in commune assembles, be reserved
only to that ministracion, yet where a knight or other man, not being of a
lite estimacion, has lernyng joined with moderate discrecion, if he being
zelouse of virtue, and meued only by charity, would feign have other men to
remember their state and condition, and according to their duties, to love
god, and to fear his terrible sentence, what law or raison should let him,
with an humble spirit and uncorrupted intent, to set forth in writing or
print, that which shall be commodious to many men? And if he be a knight, or in
other authority (for the rareness of learning founden in such men) the
warke shall be much the better embraced, and of the moo men desired. Also for
as much as I am a sheriff, I think my self the more bounden to be thus
occupied. For sens it pertains to mine office, and also the laws of this
realm do compel me to punish transgressors: How much more is it my
duty, to do the best that I can, by all study and means to withdraw men
from transgressing the laws and commandments of god, which being
diligently and truly observed, the occasions of transgressyng of temporal
laws should be clearly excluded? Moreover as often as I do consider the
temporal punyshementes, and do abhor the sharpness of them, I do reuolue
in my mind, what horrible peynes are prepared for them, whom the son of
god shall condemn at his general judgment, to the which, temporal torments
being compared, do seem but a shadow: here begin I to fear, not for my
self only, but alsoo for other, which either in transgressing goddis laws,
or neglecting our duties do provoke his wrath daily by displesyng him.
Wherefore as well for mine own erudicion, as for the remembrance of other men, I
have gathered together out of holy scripture this little treatise: which often
times radde and kept in remembrance, shall be a preservative against death
everlasting. And as touching your opportunity in the receiuyng it, although
your ministraciou be necessary, yet remember the words, which our savior
Christ spoke unto Martha. What I mean thereby, by redyng and digestyng that
place, which is in the tenthe chapitre of Luke, ye shall easily perceive,
without an expositour. At the least way either by day or by night Martha shall
find opportunity to sit down by her sister, if not, she shall find but
little thank for all her good housewyfery. If Martha ministrynge unto Christ
temporally, had no more thank for her labor, what thank shall we look fore,
which alwaie be occupied about things that be worldly? thereby seeking only
our temporal commodity. But yet in our daily exercise we may oftentimes
join the two systers together, as well by secret thanks given to god for his
sundry benefittes, as by frequent meditacion of our last day. Whereunto we
shall find occasion, as often as we do here the bell ryng at the death or
terrement of any man, or here reported of pestilence or war, thynkyng them
than to be the trumpettes of death, which do call us to reknyng. And as
touching the readyng of this little work, if ye do read it in the mass
while, for lack of time more convenient, I dare undertake, god will be
therewith nothing offended: but ye being therewith stered the more devoutly to
serve him, he shall receive it of you as a good prayer, sens that meditacion
and prayer be but one thing in their nature. And yet meditacion is the more
constant. For in prayer the mind is oftentimes wandering, and thinks least on
that, which by the tunge is expressed. In this wise dooinge, ye shall not
lack opportunity to read over this book, which shall not seem long unto
such as I think that ye be, that is to say, in whom wit ouerfloweth not
grace, but gives place to her. Finally by readyng thereof I trust unto god we
both shall receive each comfort of other, as well in this present world, as
in the world to come: which is the perfection of amity, which many mo men
have written of, than have truly used as they should do. Thus I commit you
to god, whom I most hertily pray, to keep you alwaie in his favor long to
continue.

THe high God commands, the angel calls, the trumpet from heaven most
terribly sounds: Arise ye that be dead, and come to the judgment: Whither I
do eat or drink (says saint Hierom) or what so ever else that I do,
always this voice ryngeth in mine ears: Hieronymus super Matthew.
Arise ye that be dead, and come to the judgment. As often as the day of
judgment comes to my mind, my heart and all my whole body trembles and
quaketh. This is spoken by the blessed man Hierom, who not only in his
childhode and youth spente his time virtuously, but also being come to the
state of a man, excluded him self from all worldly business, and living to the
age of.lxxxx. years, was ever continually occupied in spiritual exercise.
Confer his life with our lives, and let us behold, if we ought any less
to remember this sound of the trumpette: Arise ye that be dead, and come to
the judgment. O good lord, how should men here that be dead, and lackyng
life? how can a man rise on his feet, and if he can not goo? how may he
than come to the judgment? yes well enough, if thou consyderest what thing
that death is. Truly death is none other thing, than the priuacion of
corporal sensis, with the departing of the soul from the body. For when we
here not, neither see, neither smell, nor taste, nor yet feel, than truly we
be in dyeuge, or else dead in deed. Christ calls oftentimes to us: Keep
(says he) the commandments: Matt. 19. Luc. 3.
Do works of repentance: watch and pray: Give in my name, and ye shall
receive an hundred times as much as ye give, and have life everlasting. Leat
us now consydre, if we do hear him: or if we would seem to here him. The
man that is deaf will make a countenance as he did hear: also he that is
purblynde will seem to see perfitely, because they would not have their
impediment known. And therefore both the one and the other may soon be
deceived. Sum there be, that will say, that they see a thing, when they
look not upon it: And that they hear one man speak, when they talk to an
other. We in deed do delight in things that be carnal and worldly. And yet
when men speak of things which be spiritual and heavenly, we with our
mouths do commend it, finally in our hertes we do nothing regard it. We
leat Christ speak what he lists, but yet we cease not to talk with his
ennemies, the devil, the flesh, and the world. Call ye that heryng? no
truly. To hear is proprely in latin Audire, which comprehends two acts,
that is to say, to hear and also to obey and do the thing that is heard:
And therefore when the latins would signify, that the soldiers or servants
did that which their master or captain commanded them, they used to say
in this wise: Fuerunt eius dicto audientes, They obeyed him and did as he bade
them. Deuteronomy. 6.
Here Israel (said Moses) Thou shall love thy lord god with all thy heart,
with all thy soul, and with all thy might. In that he said Hear, did he not
also beade them to love god, ye also them, which lived three thousand years
afterward, although they heard not him speak from the mountayn, nor yet saw
his majesty. Now leat us examine our selves, if we do here him. He will
have us to love him with all our heart, with all our soul, and with all our
might. Where all is, no part can be lackyng: consequently where any part
fails, there is not the whole, if I give all, than can I keep nothing. Where
one must have all, Io. 1. Iaco. 4.
there can be no parture. The world hates god, wherefore there is no frendshyp
nor agreement between them. God and richesse be so far at discord, that they
both can not have oone man to serve them, for needs must he hate the one,
whiles he loves the other. Thus says Truth, which never fayneth nor lies.
we would have richesse, great possessions, much rule and authority, we would
not have them, except that we loved them. No man is so mad, that he would
have the thing that he hates. All this is the world. for of the world it
comes, and to the world shall it be left. And therefore the love that we
bear toward it, we do wrongfully take from God, whoo oonely should have it.
Whereby we have lost the more part of our hearing. Yet may we hap eftsoons
to recover it, if we do receive the medicines that Christ does teach us,
that is to say, if we do works of repentance. those be they which the
wise man declares in the book named Ecclesiasticus, saying: Ecclesiastic. 17.
Be converted to the Lord, and forsake thy sins: Pray in the lords
presence, and ministre thine offenses: Return to the Lord, and leave thine
injustice: Abhor cursynge, and know rightousnesse and the iugementes of God:
Persevere and be constante in thy good purpose and prayer to almighty God. In
other medicine is, to watch and to pray. Matt. 26. Marc. 14. Luc. xxii.
Christ findyng his disciples sleaping, bade them wake and pray, lest they
might enter into temptacion. For he that is on sleep, lacks understanding
and reason, and all that while may discern nothing, his ennemies may kill
him ere he be ware: if any ill thing come to him, he does not perceive it.
Finally he neglects al thing, sleep only lyketh him, until pain
constreineth him to wake. But he that is perfitely wakyng, knows his enemy
ere he come to him, and by one mean or other auoydeth him, orels puts on
his armor and weapon, and manly resists him. If any other annoyaunce comes
toward him, he either repelleth it, or flees away from it.

The devil.
1. Pet. ^
THe dyuell, most greattest enemy unto man, like a roaring lion goth about
continually sekyng whom he may devour: He goes on the right hand, the left
hand, before and behind, and leaves no part of man vutasted to set on his
claws, and to hold him fast whiles he does devour him. When goth he on the
right hand? truly when he persuadeth the thing, which is good in deed, not to
be good: or to omit to do that thing, whereby thou should please almighty
god, and keep the from the peril of eternal damnacion. Prayer (says he) is
nothing but lyppe labor, or vain occupacion. Fasting is a consumer and
distroyer of nature. Aulmes deed keeps men and women in ydelnesse, which
trusting thervppon, care not to labor. Here unto he wresteth holy
scripture, and puts in thy brains false and counterfaite reasons. If thou
be thorough waked, thou shalt shortly epsy him, only by remembryng, that God
by his holy prophet, and Christ him self oftentimes beadeth us to pray.
And Christ taught us to pray: as the chief bulwark against temptacion. And
he him self prayed not only often, but also a great while together. does not
Christ say in the.xviii. chapter of Luke: Luc. xviii.
It is expedient to pray alwaie, and never to cesse. August. super psalm. 65.
The virtue of a pure and clean prayer (says saint Augustine) is great and
like a faithful messanger, he does his erande, and enters into the place,
where to, the flesh may not come. How much the devil lies (as he is alwaie
a liar, and the father of leasing) when he persuadeth fasting to be the
destroyer of nature, reason declares, if scripture lacks. For fasting
discretely used, preserves nature, which superfluous eating corrupts, and
brings in sycknesse, which only abstinence oftentimes cures. And like as
replecion oppresses the spirits, and makes gross and stynkyng vapors to
rise, whereby not only the wits be made dull, and reason is covered as it were
with a cloud: so by fasting and moderate abstinence, be made pure and sweet
vapors, whereof pure wit is engendered, the spirits being quickened, Marc. 9.
and raison set at her liberty. when the apostles could by no means expel a
devil that was dumb, and demanded of Christ the cause why, he answered: This
sort of deuilles in no wise issues out of a man but by prayer and fasting.
Here what the holy and great doctor saint Augustine says: Fasting purges
the mind, lyfteth up the wit, August in sermo. de ^eiunio.
subdueth the flesh to the spirit, brings contricion and humility into the
heart, puts away the myste of inordinate desires, quenches the fervent
heat of lechery, and stereth up the fair light of chastity. And almighty god
by the prophet Joel cries unto sinners: Ioelis. 2.
Return to me with all your whole heart in fasting, lamentacion, and weeping.
Be not these sufficient witnesses, joined also with natural rayson, enough to
prove, that fasting is good and not ylle. Than may thou perceive well, that
it is the devil, that persuadeth the, that fasting is nothing but a destroyer
of nature.

Now touching alms deed. we see oftentimes that some men and women in
trustyng to receive alms, do cesse from labor, living in a beastly
ydelnesse. yet alms, which is an act of compassion toward them, which
be in necessitee, done only for goddis sake, can not be ill. Psalm. 40.
Blessed is he (says the prophet) that considers the poor and nedy
person: In the soore and greuouse day our lord shall deliver him: Christ him
self says, Matt. 25.
that in the general judgment, when he shall sytte in the throne of his
majesty, he shall rehearse to them, which shall be on his right hand, how
they gave him meat and drink, how they lodged him, clothed him, and when he
was sick did visit him, when he was in prison, came and refreshed him. And
they demaundyng of him, when they did so: he shall make them this answer.
Uerily I say unto you, As long as ye did it to one of the poorest of these
my brethren, ye did it to me. Semblably he shall recite to them. which shall
be than on his left hand, that they did none of the said merciful acts
unto him. And they shall in like wise ask of him, when they saw him in such
condition, and did not extend their charity toward him. He shall say:
Truly how often so ever ye did it not to one of these poor men, neither ye
than did it to me. And than shall they go unto everlasting tourment: the good
men to the life, which shall never have end. It is therefore he, for whom
aulmes is given, and not the person, to whom it is given, that makes the act
thankful to god. And except it be done for goddis sake, it ought not to be
called alms deed, Ecclesi. 3.
but it is rather to be named a benefit. Water (says the wise man) does
extinguishe the hot burning fire: and alms deed does resist against
sin, Luc. 11.
and god is the beholder thereof, which renders the thank. Give ye alms
(says Christ) and all things shall be clean unto you. Alms deed (says
saint Augustine) pourgeth sin, August. in sermo. de diuite.
and makes intercession for us unto god. I have read (says saint Hierom)
and radde again, Hieron. ad Neporianum.
and over radde scripture: yet did I never see a pitiefull man dye an ill
death. If the person, which receives thine alms, will spend it ill, or
will therefore live ydelly: it shall nothing mynishe thy thank, so that thou
know it not, and dooest not willingely minystre unto him the occasion of ylle.
But if thou know, that thine alms will be an occasion of ydelnesse or
sin: if thou only therefore do withdraw it, to the intent thou will
better bestow it: thou losest not thy thank. but warning the person of his
ill living, and that therefore thou withdrawest thyn alms: thine alms still
continues. So alms deed never hurts the gyuer, nor is at any time ill: but
always retains her estimacion.

Remembrynge these things thou shall put of the devil, when he comes on thy
right hand. Yet than will he come on thy left hand, and there will he as
sharply assault the, as he did before: extollynge the things, which may be
noyous unto thy soul, and bring the out of the favor of god, so that he may
the more easily devour the.

First where he is not only subtle and crafty, but also (as saint Augustine
affirms) of his propre nature, Augus. de natura dae monum. Aug. retract. 2.
by the sense that he has of an ayry body, he does excede the sense of erthly
bodies. Moreover having a secret knowlage of men's disposicions, whereunto they
be chiefly inclined. According thereunto he presents to man or woman his two
fair sisters, the flesh and the world, to some both at ones, to some one,
some an other, as he perceyueth their natures most aptly disposed.

The flesh.
THe flesh with a pleasant countenance approaches and says unto man:
Wherefore take thou pain in labor or study, having much or sufficient to
live with? Lie down and sleep, or otherwise rest the, that thou make not
nature feeble and unable to live. We have but a time, leat us eat and drink,
for to morrow we die. If thou be lusty, and thy flesh full of courage: Esaiae.
22. 1. Cor. 15.
thou man, why take thou not a woman: or thou woman why take thou not a man
to quench thyn appetite? Perdie thou art neither of stock nor of stone, but
the chief of all creatures. Sapien. 2.
Wherefore sens al other creatures were made for the, why do thou not use
them? Behold I offer them to the: satisfy now thy self with them, in
taking thy pleasure. But take heed, and thou shall perceive her a harlot. Bate
of these spices, which I will rehearse, and blow in her face: and all her
painted beaultie will vanysshe away, and there shall only appiere a lothesome
visage. But first thou shall prove her a liar. for natural reason and
experience teaches us, that continual rest and lack of exercise, extincteth
natural heat, and lets digestion: much ingurgitacion of meats and
drynkes burdeyneth nature. And although for the time it stereth up lechery,
yet by lack of sufficient concoction, it not only makes the seade unapt to
generation, but also is the original cause of horrible sycknesse and hastenyng
of death. Ne we be ordained to live alwaie in idelnesse, sens for the
transgression of Adam, mankind was deputed to live in this world, to whom
almighty god gave this strait iniunction: Genes. 3.
In the sweatte of thy visage shall thou eat bread, until thou be turned
again into earth. And Job says: Man is borne to labor. And the saying of
Genesis saint Paul in the spirit of god does confirm, saying: These. 3. Ad
Cori. ep. c. 3. Lucae.
He that will not labor shall not eat. And in an other place: Every man shall
receive his wages after his labor. Also CHRIST'S says, The work man is
worthy his wages. It is therefore false, that nature is generally made feeble
by labor: for competent labor does supporte and nourishe nature. And also we
be of god commanded to labor. More over every man (as the philosophier says)
naturally desires to know. And knowlage without divine inspiracion, may not
be had without study. Wherefore it is not against nature to study. But what a
mischeuous persuasion is this, that we should eat and drink, for to morrow
we dye? If death be soon or certain, how much less should we eat and
drink, that we may have our minds clean, our wits quick, and our
remembrance more ready to prepare for our recknyng? that when the lord shall
say to us: Make a reckoning of your ministracion, we breathe not in his face,
the lothesome savor of wine or ale, or of stynkyng meat, not fully digested:
but the fragraunt and sweet odor of a clean conscience, like the odoriferous
baulme and cinamome, and the chosen out myrte that gives the savor of
sweetness. To know carnally a woman out of lefull matrimony, shall not so
much quench thy fleshly appetite, as it shall kendle the wrath of god toward
the. Hereof is abundant witness of scripture so well known, that it needs
not to be rehearsed. And because we be neither stocks nor stones, but the
chief of all other creatures, and made to the image and similitude of god: we
should therefore keep our bodies and souls pure and clean to reteyne still
that similitude, and use all other creatures only to the glory of his divine
majesty, and none otherwise to take pleasure in them, but as we may honestly
rejoice. And he also may therewith be pleased. Now blow thou on that peyncted
strumpette the Flesh, that tempts the: and thou shalt se nothing but a
mattier lothesome, corrupted and stynkynge, a mortal carrayne and bankette for
euettes, todes, serpents, and other vile wourmes: who being than asshamed to
behold the, will slide a way from the.

The world.
BUt yet the devil is ready with his other sister the world, who is much more
dangerous, and wars to be vanquished. for where the flesh is abated and
subdued oftentimes with many remedies, as fasting, watch, and other
correction: also by labor, much study, absence from women, age, syckenesse,
vexacion and trouble of mind: By none of these things only, may the
assaults of the world be sufficiently resysted and clearly expelled. She
comes against the with her pappes open, fulle of serpentyne poison: and with
her hands decked with ringes of gold and rich stones, the proffereth to
embrace the: And with a loud voice and a dilectable, the says: Prouer. 7.
Lo, I am come for to mete the, And now have I found the, I have decked my
bed with clothes of Aegypte, my bed have I made to smelle of myrre, aloes,
and cynamome, leat us lie together and take our pleasure. And therewith she
offers to the her pappes. But beware of them: the one of them is Avarice,
the other Ambicion. If thou suck much of them, they will make the drunk,
and take thy wits from the, and than will that false harlot take the away
with her, and lay the in her bed, where thou shall lie either in the soft
fether bed of Presumpcion, or the hard mattrasse of desperacion, having on
the, the kouerlyd of Aegypte, that is to say, the burden of sin: wherein thou
shalt sleep a dead sleep, which shall seem to the a smete sleep, richesse
and honor seeming so delectable until extreme sickness and death shall
attache the, and than shall thou perceive of how small estimacion they be of,
when thou would leave them both gladdely to escape those terrible
ministers. The pappe, called Avarice, is an inordinate desire and love of
worldly gooddes and possessions: the milk or rather poison therein contained
is error, which is the relinquishyng of the true pathe of justice. Mark well
what saint Paul says: 1. Tim. 6.
Having meat and sustenaunce for our bodies and clothyng, leat us hold us
therewith content. For they that desire to be rich, fall sodaynely into
temptacion, and into the trappe of the devil, also into many desires
unprofitable and noyfull: which do drown men in death and perdicion. The
root of all mischiues is Coueityse, which some men imbracyng, have erred from
the feithe, and enta^gled them selfs in many sorrows. But the world offering
to the this fair pappe, will in this wise provoke the to suck, when thou
(says she) shall behold other men having fair and well decked houses, and
about them great pastures and meadows, and other commodities, some great
flocks of sheep, or other cattle, some having plate, and other manner of
richesse, than thynkest thou in thyn heart: O what fortune has this man? if I
had the one half that he has, how meryly could I live? Beware now, take
heed, for thou art in ieopardie. Look upward, and thou shall perceive God
calls unto the from heaven: Man, thou shall not coueite thy neighbors
house. etc. Exodi. 27. Aug. de interpellatione. lob. Proverb.
Avarice says saint Augustine has no measure, it is never saciate in taking,
but more vehemently styrred: the more that it gets, the more it needs.
Beware therefore, and touch not that pappe: for it will cleue to the, like to
pitche, and pollute the. And although thou thynkest thou can moderate thine
appetite, and hold the content, when thou haste enough: yet for all that, when
thou haste the neple in thy mouth, thou shalt never be satisfied: Augus. de
uerbis dn^i
If thou will not believe me, yet believe the holy man and great doctor saint
Augustine, which in the sermon that he made of the words of our lord,
says in this wise: The couaitous desire of rich men is ever insatiable. It
always raueneth and never is satisfied. It does neither fear god, nor has man
in reverence. It spares not the father, it knows not the mother, it agrees
not with the brother, and with the friend he never keeps touch. He oppresses
the wydowe, on the fatherless child he enters, he reduces free men unto
servitude, and brings in false witness, thereby the goods of dead men are
unjustly possessed. Wherefore they shall surely die. What a madness is this of
men's souls, to lose the life, seek for perpetual death, to geat treasure,
and to lose heaven and joy everlasting? And saint Gregory confirms the
same, Greg. mo ralium. 15.
with a notable sentence. Coueityse (says he) is never quenched with the
things, which be desired. for like to the fire, after that it has consumed
the wood, which is laid in it, it is more increaced. And where the flame
seems to be kept in, there it appears soon after to braste out more
fervently. Now to prepare us to resist against this assault of the world,
let us first reuolue in our minds the fruits and commodities, which ar
thereby received. Of Avarice (says saint Augustine) spryngeth al mischief,
Augus. de liber. arb
and thereof the brembles or thorns of all sin are brought forth: A
detestable soil, wherein such mischief does grow: A barayne ground, that
has nothing but brembles, which shall rent thy soul with most horrible
torments. And as pleasant as this pappe seems to be, yet it brings also
in this world some incommodities, which is wounderfully well declared by
saint Gregory. Greg. mo ral. 20.
If the heart (says he) gapeth, desyring things worldly, it may in no manner
of wise be q^iete and out of vexacion. for either it desires that, which it
has not, to the intent it might have it: or else fears that, which it has,
lest he shall lose it. And where in adversity he hops of prosperity, in
prosperity he fears adversity. And so is he tossed hither and thither, as
if he weere among troublous waters, and is turned into many sundry facions
through the mutabilitie of things, chaungynge this way and that may. But if
the mind be ones fixed with a sure constantnesse in the feruente desire of the
heavenly cuntreie, it is the less vexed with trouble of things that be
worldly. Truly if men would alwaie have in remembrance this saying of Christ
in the gospel of Marc: Marc. 10.
It is more easy for a camel to pass thorough the eye of a nedle, than the
rich man or woman to enter into the kingdom of heaven: truly (I say) he
would rather fear to be rich, than to desire abundaunce of richesse. And the
wise man says: Eccles. 31.
He that loves gold, shall not be justified. But this is to be diligently
noted: All rich men be not excluded out of heaven, though they with more
difficulty may attayn to it, than the camel may pass through the eye of a
nedle. for it is possible, that God may make him such one as Solomon speaks
of, where he says: Ibidem.
Blessed is the rich man, that is found without wemme, and has not gone after
gold, nor put his trust in money and treasure. who is he (says the wise
man) and we will commend him? For in this life he has done wounders. And it
follows immediately after: who so is tried and found perfette in those
things, he shall be praised. He might offend, and has not offended: He might
have done ill, and has not done it: Therefore his good shall be stablished: And
the Congregation shall declare his good deeds. This is the rich man, which
shall go through the strait passage, whom god has disburdeyned of that thing,
which should be an impediment to him: But yet herest thou not, that he which
loves money, I mean the man that is coueitouse, is in any wise justified as
long as that affection remains. Abacuc. 2
Woe be to him (says the prophet Abacuc) that does multiply gooddes, which
be not his. Again he says: Woe be to him, which does gather unto his house
mischeuous avarice, to the intent his neste may be set in a veraie high place:
thynkyng that he shall thereby escape the power of an ill man. Here is woe and
woo again, beware the third woe, which is rehearsed by Esaias, saying: Woe be to
the, that do rob: that is to say, take by violence or craft other men's
goods. These three woes shall most lamentably by sungen of them, which being
in horrible darkness and fire, shall cry, Alas, alas, alas, what abundaunce
is there of darkness? Confer this with the pleasure of worldly gooddes and
possessions, which will thou or no, thou know not how shortly shall by
death or other wise be taken away from the. And consider therewith the
saying of our savior Christ: Make not your treasure (says he) in this
world, Matthew. 6.
where the mothe and the ruste do destroy it, and thieves do pick it
away, and do steal it. Prepare you a treasure in heaven, where neither ruste
nor mothe may eat or consume it: nor thieves dygge for it, nor steal it. Now
mark well, that here be two treasures, which been also distinct in their
nature and qualities. The one is sure, and may not be corrupted: the other
unsure, and sone is perished. The one treasure Christ byddeth us to gather:
the other in general words he does prohibit us to lay up: the one
purchases for us joy and life everlasting, the other death and pain without
ceassynge. CHRIST said to the young man, which from his infancy had kept
the commandments: If thou will be perfect, go sell all that thou have, and
give it to poor men, and than come and follow me. He alsoo called saint
Matthew, sittyng in the custom house, about the emperors revenues, and bade
him to follow him. Luc. 16.
The rich man, which was every day apparailed in purple, and fared very
sumptuously, at the last died, and was buried in hell: yet we read not, that
he did any other thing ill, but for as much as he delyted in things
superfluous: it was afterward said to his soul, lying in horrible peynes:
Son content the, thou receyuedst in thy life things that were pleasant. He
received it, but because he gave not therefore thanks unto God, and disposed
not his goods in warkes of charity, he finally received a terrible sentence,
Content the with peynes. O m^^cyfull Jesus, is richesse so perilous? Be rich
men good lord in thy sight so displeasant? Hear now how he answers.
Luc. 6.
Woe be to you rich men, for ye have here your consolacion. These words be
wonderful terrible. Jacob. 5.
And thereof saint James speaks to such men in this wise: Go to ye rich
men, weep and houle on your wretchedness, which shall come on you, your
richesse is corrupted, your clothes be mothe eaten: your gold and silver is
cankred, the ruste of them shall be your witness, and like the fire shall
eat your flesh. How like ye this sentence? add thereunto the saying of
Solomon: Prouer. 11
Richesse in the day of vengeance shall nothing avail the. This mundane
richesse, this cankered and mothe eaten richesse: but the true richesse, which
(as saint Bernard says) be the virtues, Bernard sermon. 4.
which thy conscience brings with her, that thou may ever be rich, that
richesse shall boldly speak for the, and make all the court of heaven to be
thy friends, and also to have a mercyfulle judge. But lest these terrible
sentences against riches and rich men, may cause you to think, that I
generally disprayse and condemn all them that be rich, I will brefely
declare, that I do not so.

The philosophier puts richesse among things, which be indifferent to
good and to ylle. Wherefore he that has richesse, having for him self no more
than is necessary for his living, and disposes the residu where as most need
is, Hiero. in ep ad Saluiam.
he that so has it, shall take no blame for the having, if he come justly by
them, for the mysvsynge he shall make a strait rekenyng. For as saint Ambrose
says: Ambrosius super Lucam.
Leat rich men learn, that the offense is not in the gooddes, but in persons
that do not well use them. for richesse to ill men is an impediment, but
unto good men an aid unto virtue. And Christ him self bids us to make
friends in heaven with our richesse, which he names the Idol of iniquity.
But for as much as couaitise for the more part brings in richesse, Aug. ser.
29.
and abundaunce brings in detestable sins, pride, cruelty, envy, lechery,
and gluttony, with neglecting of the commandments of god: therefore holy
scripture does justly reprove it. Saint Augustine (in mine opinion) most
excellentely writes, where he says: The syknes of richesse is pride, it is a
noble courage, that is nothing touched with this syckenesse, where there is
abundance of richesse: yet is it a more noble heart that subduyng his own
richesse, does also contemn it. Therefore that rich man is noble, which
thinks not him self noble, because he is rich. Have these things alwaie in
remembrance: and either ye shall not seek much for richesse, or at the least
way, although ye have it, estemyng it to the purpose, wherefore it is
ordained, ye shall keep you from the said pappe, which the world does
offer you.

But she is furthwith ready to proffre the pap of Ambicion, which is semblably
an inordinate desire of worldly promocion. I call that an inordinate desire,
wherein is not had respect of order, as they which desire and labor to have
rule or authority, they being without virtue: and do it rather for their
own estimacion and glory, than to augment any thing to the glory of god, or
for the public weal of their cuntreie, or to be more able to do deeds of
charity. for the which causes only, authorities and great dignities were
first begun. The world I say proffreth to us the pap of Ambicion. suck
hereof (says she) And thou shall know how to attain to the favor and
estimacion of men that be worldly. Thou shalt have the pleasant eloquence of
assentacion and flattery, to praise that which does best please them: and to
dispraise that, which does myslyke them: to affirm that to be in them,
that never approached them: to speak fair unto them, and think shrewdly of
them: to use that thing that they seem to delight in. And not that way
only, but also how to find opportunity to give pleasures for the optayning
thy purpose. Than shall men have the in reverence, and be aferde to displease
the: than what thou will require, no man will deny the: many men shall behold
the, many shall follow the. Happy shall he be reputed, which shall seem to be
familiare with the, or much in thy company. Thou shalt be able to advance
thy kynnesfolke and friends to authoritee, and keep him alwaie back, which
does not like the. Thou shalt thereby come to great possessions, goodly
manours, well decked houses, to have many tall men about the, and to live
pleasauntly.

This persuasion of the world is wonderful vehement. wherefore few men, and
that with much difficulty, may well escape it. For it is a vile courage,
that is not attached with Avarice. A gentle heart for the more part coueyteth
honor, which is supposed to be in authoritee: but in deed it may be in
nothing, but in virtue only. For honor is nothing but honestee, although
it has been usurped for the estimacion, that is in authoritee. And so is it
taken of Aristotle, to be the reward of Virtue. But Chrysostomus says:
Ueraie honor is the Virtue of the mind, Uerie honor.
which is neither given by emperors, nor gotten by flaterers, nor boughte
with substance. In that nothing is countrefaite, nothing is feigned, nothing
may be hid. Al be it for this purpose that we go about, let us take honor
according to the commune opinion, which comprehends in that word Honor,
authoritee, dignitee, estimacion, and fame: what is it else but wordly vanitee?
It is some time fresshe in the morning, like a flower in spring time: and (as
we have seen in experience) by night it is faded and comen to nothing. Behold
what fruit comes of it, and thou shalt not be much desirous to have it: But
that shall thou learn of a much more wisar man than I am or shall be, who
also had thereof more experience, and could better declare it than any man
living. Cicer pro L. Flacco.
Tullie in an oracion cries out in this wise:

O the miserable conditions people, which be under governance, among whom
diligence is full of secret displeasures, negligence full of reproaches, where
sharpness is dangerous, gentylnesse unthankful, communicacion deceitful,
all men's cou^tenaunces familiare, many men's minds discontented, conspiracies
secret, flatterynges apparent, whiles great officers be coming, they attend
on them, when they be present, they be ready to serve them, when they depart
from their offices, they clean do forsake them.

I suppose no man will think, that Tully lies, we have seen the same matier
so often times proved. And at this present time may be made the like
exclamacion. Wherefore such honor may be well called a vanitee or fantasy, take
which ye list. Yet let us seek out more of the fruit that proceeds thereof.
who attayneth to honor without labor of body or mind, or both for the more
part? who remains in honor free from the one or the other? Who departs
from honor without death, or herty sorrow, much warse than death? Before
that honor is had, what thing is spared to have it? when honor is had, what
thing is undone to reteyne it? It is not necessary to write al things,
which might be declared. Finally for as much as they, which be advanced to
honor, ought by their example and dignitee, to instruct or compel other to
live in the order of justice. If they omit it, or do it negligently: like as
they be puissaunt, so shall their torments be mighty, as it is spoken of the
holy ghost, by the mouth of the wise man. Perchance hope of life may cause
us to pass light of this lesson. But if we consider daiely, how many men we
have known, being of years lusty strong and courageous, aboundynge in the
gifts of nature and fortune, how sodaynely above men's expectacion and also
their own, have been attached with death, either natural or violente, that is
to say, being either slain or put to execucion by laws. Remembryng also,
that death is indifferente to every estate, as well the highest as the lowest:
saving that it is more peynefull and troublouse to them, which be in
authoritee, when they consider, that they can not take their authority with
them: But being in the pytte, the poor cartar or coblar, which perchance
was laid there before him, shall than be fellow and equal with him: but the
coblar or carters soul in much better condition, when they come both to
their rekenyng. They shall say: Thou did call us, good lord, unto a poor
living, wherewith we held us contented. The great man shall say: I couayted,
and had, good lord, much honor and substance, wherewith I might never be
satisfied. They shall say: we thank the good lord, we had no more to care
for, but our self, our wives, and our children, and all we have kept thy
commandments. But he shall say: I had wife and children also, and more over
a great number under my rule and authoritee: but neither I nor they did
truly our duty. They shall speak boldly with comfort: he trembling and
quakyng al in disco^forte. On them shall all the blessed company of heaven
smyle, and reioysynge say with one voice: Psalm. 119
Blessed are they, which be undefiled in their viage, which do walk in the
law of our lord. Psalm. 94.
Com your wai, let us to gyther rejoice and be glad in our lord. Let us merrily
sing unto god, who has preserved us. But upon the great man shall they cast
a disdeignefull countenance, and say one to an other: Psalm. 52.
Lo, this is the man, that took not God for his strength, but trusted in the
multitude of his great substance, and made him self strong in his
wickedness. And than shall they turn their heads from him, and look toward
god, to hear his judgments. O with how sweet a voice, with how pleasant a
countenance shall he beade the poor carter and coblar come into that heavenly
company, where they shall live ever in light incomprehensible, and in
pleasures unspeakable? O with how angry and displeasant a countenance, with
how terrible and grievous a voice shall he beade the great man, go with the
devil and his angels into perpetual darkness and peynes inestimable?

Compare these things to gither, and than take if thou will both breasts in
thy hands, that the world does offer the, and souke thy bealy full of the
indignacion of god. Yet shall not men think, that in the disprayse of
Ambicion, I seem to have al worldly dignitees in much detestacion. For I know
well, that almighty God from the beginning ordained Authoritee, as a thing in
earth representyng his Maiestee. And as he says by the holy ghost, in the
book called wisdom: Authoritee is given of our lord and power of him that
is highest. Sapien. 6.
And Christ submitted him self to the powers of the world. ad To. 13. Greg.
in Job. 35.
Semblably saint Paul commands the same unto all men. More over saint
Gregory says, that temporal authoritee is of great estimacion, and with God
has his reward for his good ministracion and governance. And veraily I do
suppose, that no man may gear more thank of god, than he, which truly and
virtuously comes to authoritee, and does ministre it charitably and
incorruptly. For by him Justice is nourished, necessitee is relieved, and the
public weal maynteyned, true religion stablished, vice repressed, and Virtue
increaced: which without Authoritee may not be brought unto pass. Wherefore
he that for those causes only is content to be in authority, displeases not
god. And he that for his virtue only is called to honor, he it is that is
called of God, like as Aaron was called. ^^ Heb. 5.
And perseueryng therein, and ministryng for the weal of his countray, and not
for his propre commodity: he needs not to fear the terrible sound of the
trumpette, although he hears it with the ears of his soul: but being armed
with feithe, puttyng his trust in gods word, shall prepare him to receive
his noble master with joy, who shall for the well employing of his treasure,
say unto him: Matthew. 25. Luc. 19.
Well mote thou fare good and feithfull servant, sens in a few things thou
haste ben so trusty, I shall therefore set the in Authoritee over a great many
things: enter into the joy that thy Lord has prepared. Yet leat not every
man, which is in authoritee flatter him self with this declaracion: but
having (as I have said often times) in his ears the sown of the trumpette:
than forth with examine him self, how he has atteyned authoritee, which
way he entered, by the fore door, the back door, or the wyndow, that he be
not called a thief, but a true shepeherde, that he go right in his garments,
lest it be said unto him: My friend, how came thou in not having upon the
thy weddyng apparayle? Matthew. 22.
If he came in by gieuyng great gifts or by flattery, or to the intent only
to gather great substance: than may he be well assured, that he came not in at
the fore door, nor can not show his face for a true shepeherde. If he appear
before Christ laded with possessions and richesse, being not withstandyng
naked of virtue and of benefittes employed on the public weal of his
countray, he has on a wrong garment. And than shall he here the king say to
his officers: when ye have bound his hands and his feet, throw him into
extreme darkness: there shall be waylynges, and gnashyng of teeth. He
therefore ought to be aferde of the trumpet. And put away his mouth from the
pappe of the world, and taking quyekely a draught of repentance, to vomit
up the milk of Ambicion, whereof he has souked. Also with contricion,
confession, and satisfaction, which three do make an wholesome electuarie, to
cleanse the veins of the soul, of that venomous juice of damnable sin,
which the said milk has in him engendered. But now if he does refuse this
pappe of Ambicion, and puts from him this flatteryng world, as I will
counsel him: Than will she transform her self into an other figure, and
show her self like a personage pyned for hunger, with a ragged garment all
stynking: How lykest thou me? will she say. I am named Penury. If thou look
not better to thy thrifte, thou shall shortly come to my service. See thou
not how many charges be now in the world? And if thy substance decaie, thou
losest foorthewith thy friends: and finally no man shall greatly esteem the.
Know thou not, that such one and such one, were but late poor men, much
inferiors unto the? And they by their industry be come to promocion, thou
shall se them be taken above the, and to be had in more estimacion. Thou
haste as much wit as any of them has, and also better acqueyntance than
they had: apply therefore thy wit to worldly policye, and acqueynte the
with dissimulacion and flatery, pleasant children which can do well their
message. Leat private advantage be chief about the. Away with Simplicitee and
Scrupulositee, leat them in no wise come nygh the, nor look not upon them.
Leat Malapertnesse be thine Huishar, he will get the a place where so ever thou
come. And thus shall thou shortly come unto wealth and authority. And if thou will not do thus, thou shall to late repent the in poverty.

O cursed and vengeable serpente, how wylily and craftily she lays in wait
for to take us. But let us wype clean the eyes of our conscience, and see by
the light of holy scripture, and we shall plainly perceive her devises, and
escape from her hooks. The prophet king David spoke this in spirit: Psalm. 37.
I have been young, and now am I old: and yet I never saw the just man
forsaken, nor them that came of him beggyng their breadde. Truly he that
feeds the birds of the air, and lilies of the field, will not see us that
are made to his likeness lack that which is necessary unto our living, if we
put our trust holly in him. Psalm. 37.
Better is a little unto the just man (says the prophet) than the excedyng
great richesse of sinners. Pro. 15.
Better is a little (says Solomon) with the fear of god, than great and
insatiable treasours. Mat^^^^
Blessed be they that are poor in spirit (says Christ) for to them
belongs the kyngedome of heaven. Man's wit was given to him to glorify god,
and to learn to know god, and to keep his commandments. The earth is the
Lords, Psalm. 23.
and all thing that is therein contained, the circuit of the world, and al
creatures that do inhabit therein. what so ever he will, he does in heaven,
in earth, in the sea, and in the deep botomlesse places. His wisdom and
bounty exceeds all praises. For neither angel nor man is sufficient to tell
them. wherefore he knows me that am his own handy work, and the depenesse
of my heart: he looks unto it. he knows the metal that I am made of, and
whereunto it is most aptly disposed, either to his glory, or to my perpetual
confusion. He is most merciful. For his mercies be without noumbre. wherefore
if I love him, and serve him with a true feithe: he will undoubtedly give me
that thing, which to him shall seem most expedient for me, either richesse or
poverty. Semblably will he do, if I break his commandementes, and do not my
duty, he will send me richesse and great authority, that by the mysordryng
of them, I shall accumulate the ire of god in the day of his vengeance.
wherefore I will not envy them that be prosperous. for if they be just men,
and do ministre faithfully, I will rejoice that virtue has the reward that
is due unto her, and hope that thereby virtue shall increase by their
mynistracion: Psalm. 37.
if they be ill men, I will consider that they shall soon wither like unto hey,
and shall shortly fall down like the green herb (as the prophet writes.)
And I will not dissemble nor flatter, consyderyng that it is inexcusable before
god, who is all truth, and hates lyinge. Exodus 23. Prouer. 7.
ye shall not (says he) lie, nor any of you deceive his neighbor. Six
things there be, which our lord hates, and the seventh his heart detesteth.
A proud countenance, A lying tungue, Hands shedyng innocents blood, An
heart imagenynge mischeuous deuyses, swift feet runnyng to do an ill deed,
him that inuenteth and brings forth lies: and such one as sows variaunce
between brethren or friends. I remember, that, saint Augustine does say:
Who so ever for fear of any n^a^ in authority hydeth the truth, provoke
the wrath of God to fall on him. For as much as he dredeth man more than he
fears God. De conflictu uitiorsi and uirt.
The same holy man says: Neither with crafty leasing, nor plain
communicacion one ought to deceyne any man. For thereby he kylleth his soul.
Flatery and Assentacion, which is only the mainteynance of a false opinion or
sentence, they be the messagers of gyle or deceit which God utterly hates:
The gylefull word God shall abhor, says the prophet. Orige. super ep. ad
To. Gyle.
Gyle (as Origene says) is where a man speaks one thing with his tongue, and
in his heart thinks an other thing. Flaterie. Assentacion.
Flatery and Assentacion in the judgment of God, is wars than the sweorde of
the murderer. For first the flaterer kylleth his soul that he flatereth, if
he receive the stroke willyngly: and in killing him, he kylleth him self.
Therefore will I not flater, and sustain the indignacion of God for richesse or
honor, which be like unto shadows, during no longer than favor or
princes does shine, and often times not so long, death preventing our
purposes, who brings our bodies naked to the earth, to be gnawen with
woormes, and our souls also naked before the presence of God, who shall judge
every man after his warkes. wherefore I will couayte neither richesse nor
poverty: but to that, which God shall send me, I will apply my wit only
to exercise the one or the other unto his glory.

Although the devil be herewith confounded, yet some time he will not so
cease, but returns again in a more terrible figure, like a great gyaunte
with an horrible visage, and as if he had a great clubbe in his hand, and with
a proud voice he speaks in this wise. Presumest thou ingnorant fool, to
atteyne to the kingdom of heaven by thy warkes? Thynkest thou that alms deed,
fasting, or prayer, or that foolishenesse, which thou call Virtue, have
power to bring the to any other estate than God has ordained the? According
as he has predestinate the, so shalt thou be: He never changes his purpose:
his judgment is constaunte, like as his knowlage is from the beginning. If he
has ordained the to be saved, do all thing that thine appetite lykethe the,
and thou shalt be clean in his sight. If he has predestinate the to be
damned: take all the peynes that thou canste imagine, and all shall not help
the.

A sore assault, and an horrible ennemie. werfore we need to call unto god
for better help than our wit can provide us. well, God is ready for them,
that in perfette feith call or knock, as he him self promised. Psalm. 74.
O God maynteine thine own cause, remember how the fool does blaspheme the
daiely. Turn not thy face from me: for I am troubled, but quickly hear me
good lord. foolish is he that will seek for thy mysteries, or will ask of
the, why thou dooest this thing or that thing. I am the vessel that thou thy
self made, do with me as it shall like thy divine maiestee: yet shall I
not cease to put my trust in thy word, not that I will compel the to save
me: but that I believe, that thou have all ready saved me by thine only son
Jesus Christ, according unto his saiynge. He that believes (says he) has
life everlasting. Also He that hears my word, and believes him that has
sent me, Joan. c. 3. Joan. 5.
has life everlasting, and comes not unto judgment, but shall pass from
death unto life. 1. Joan. 5.
Every man (says saint John) that believes, that Jesus is Christ, he is
borne of God, I therefore firmly and steadfastly beleuynge good Lord, that I
am borne of the: and thou will not suffer that, which is borne of the, for the
perish. More over, like as thou art all good, and the chief of all goodness,
so loueste thou all that is good, and hateste all that is ill. wherefore who so
ever is borne of the, does the semblable: and by that it is known, who is of
the, which does good warkes, not presumynge to have thereby the kingdom of
heaven, but that by the dooynge he warkes of our father, our father may know
us, that we be his own sons: ad To. S.
whom he has predestinate and also called: and being called, has also
justified: and being justified, has also magnified, making us the inheritours
of the kingdom of heaven. And although the carter dryueth the horse to go
faster or slower, as it lyketh him, yet he never dryueth them out of the right
way: So does our lord meue us to go faster or slower in his paths, as it
lyketh him to dispose his grace. But yet from the beginning that he ordained
mankind, Ecclesiastic. 15.
he left him in the power of his own counsel, which is his Free will. Al
be it of his infinite mercy, where it pleases him to show it, if we draw
out of the true pathe, with his whippe of grace, he some time easily, some time
sharply, with trouble, sickness, or poverty assaieth to turn us into the
right way. He never dryueth us out thereof: but aideth reason, which in our
Free will is some time corrupted. wherefore I fear not his predestinacion in
me, sens I seek not to know such things as be above that I can reach, lest
I be oppressed with his maiestee. But I fear his wrath, which I have
deserved. And yet will I not cease to trust in his mercy.

Thus may we fortify our selfs against this horrible geaunt. But than some
time will he enforce him to strike us with his great and heavy clubbe, which is
wilful opinion: wherewith if he happen to hitte us, he strikes out the eyes of
our soul, and makes it blind in the understanding of scripture: or takes
away our sauoure and taste, that the hearing or reading thereof becomes
unpleasant unto us. But against that stroke leat us in this wise prepare us.
First leat us hear or read with an humble spirit, excludyng all arrogance.
Ecclesiastic. 3.
How great so ever thou be (says the wise man) humble thy self in all
thing: and thou shalt find favor in the sight of god. Like as wilful
opinion comes of presumpcion, or to much curiositee: so is it best resisted
by humilitee and simplicitee, which be their contraries. Solomon says: Pro.
11.
The Simplicitee of the just men shall condute them: that is to say, shall
lead them the right way. I take Simplicitee here, not for the lack of
discrecion, but for the pureness of the mind, without mixture of fraud or
worldly policy. And therefore saint Augustine says: Augu. super Io. hom. 2
Thou art simple, if thou dooest not wrappe thy self in the world, but
vnwrappest thy self. By vnwrappynge thy self from the world, thou art
simple: by wrappyng thy self in it, needs shall thou be double. Humbly
therefore and simply read and hear holy scripture, not presumyng, that thou
understand every thing that thou do read, which to other seems dark:
but often times, if thou may, consulte with them, which be syncerely
exercised therein, or with the books of most aunciente and catholic doctors.
Or if thou may not easily or shortly come by the one or the other, cease to
be curiouse, and commit all to god, until it shall like him, by some means
to reuele it unto the. Beware, draw not the understanding of scripture to
thine affection: but slake thine affection before thou appliest thy wit to
make exposicion. And alwaie think, that if any place of scripture seems to
favor any carnal or worldely affection, or withdraws the from charitee,
think than surely, that thou do misvnderstande it, remembrynge what saint
Paul says: ad Timo. ep. 2. ca. 3.
All scripture given by the inspiracion of God, is profitable to teach or
reprove, to correct and instruct in justice, that the man of God may be
perfette, prepared and ready to do all good warkes. More over we shall make
scripture pleasant unto us, by often reading or hearing thereof: so that we
do understand it, by the means which I before have declared. If we do
not understand it, we shall think it very unsavory. If we would apply it
unto our phantasy or private commoditee, and than think that we do
understand it: we than be stricken with the clubbe of wilful opinion, and our
taste and sauoure is altered unto a false taste and a false smell. And the
dilectacion that we than have in hearing or reading, is the more to our
perpetual confusion, the truethe of the scripture of God being witness
against us. wherefore seus saint Peter in his secounde epistle says, 2. Pet.
3.
that Paul according to the wisdom given unto him, has written of things,
among the which are many things hard to be understand, which they that be
unlearned and not constaunt, do pervert, as they do the residue of scripture,
unto their own perdicion. This was spoken of the prince of the apostles, which
is a sufficient testimony, that there be sundry places in scripture, which
do require both learning and a constaunt feithto be well understand. And that
the^ which do lack both the one and the other, do often times pervert
it. wherefore lord God, give unto us an humble spirit with simplicity, a good
instructour, and a constaunte feithe, whereby we may be directed to enter
boldly into thy tabernacle, which is holy Scripture, wherein rests thy
divine maiestee. without those leaders we ought reuerendly and fearfully to
approach, 2. Reg. 6.
lest we be stricken as Ozah was for setting his hand to the ark of God,
presumynge on the power of our propre wits.

Thus may we resist the assaults of our old subtle ennemie, so that
neither on the right, nor on the left hand, nor coming before us, he shall
have any great advantage to slay us. Than sometime like a false thief he will
privily come behind us, and ere we be ware, join him self with our natural
passions, Fear and wrath, and so vehemently stereth them, that if we do
not prevent it by wisdom, they shall expulse from us both justice and
reason. Beware (says he) what thou dooest or say in that mattier: take
(...)ede that thou losest not thy friend. Such one is in authoritee, he may
do the a shrewde turn: thou were better have him thy friend than thine
ennemie. Beware what thou say, truth is not alwaie to be told: those
words be vaynely bestowed, which do not profitte the hearer, but hurts
the speaker. It were better be spechelesse, than to give counsel thankelesse.

Leat us prevent this false persuader, First with devout prayer unto almighty
God, saying the words of the wise man: Give me (good Lord) wisdom, which
stands by thy Throne: Sapien. 9.
send her from thy holy kingdom of heaven, and from the throne of thy
maiestee, that she may be with me, and travail with me, to the intent I may
know, what unto the may be acceptable. I am willing, good Lord, to do my
duty. My duty is to do justice, which is more accepted of God, Prouer. 4
than to offer sacrifice. wisdom tells me, that They which observe
justice, Sapien. 6.
shall justly be judged: and they that do learn things which be just, shall
find what to answer. The trumpet sounds in mine ear, and byddeth me to
come. I wot not how little leysoure I shall have, to prepare for mine answer.
If I have done wrong, or omitted to ministre justice, for fear of displeasyng
my friend, or one in authoritee, which be mortal as I am: how shall I find
out an answer, sens I have not justice by me to teach me. Shall I say, that
I was aferde to do justice, or to speak truethe for fear of losing my
friend, or displeasynge my better? Nay nay, that answer will not be judged
sufficient: and thereupon shall I be shortly condemned. Luc. 10.
Was it not told me from mine infancy, that I should love my lord God with all mine heart, with all my soul, with all my might, and with all my mind: and
my neighbor as my self? I must love god above all men, and more than my
self. Christ says: Matthew. 10.
He that loves his father and mother more than me, is not worthy of me. And
he that loves son or daughter more than me, is not worthy of me.
Theophilactus, Theophilactus.
in expoundyng this place, says: Behold, that we must hate our parents and
children, when they will pluck us away from Christ. And what worldly love is
to be compared to the love that a man ought to have to those persons, whom to
love nature has ordained, and god has commanded? Wherefore every friend is
inferior to them. And than no friendeshippe may pluck us from CHRIST. He
that plucketh us from truth, justice, and charitee, plucketh us from Christ.
More over, whom should we fear more than god? Does not he say to us in his
gospel? Be not ye aferde of them that do kill the body, Luc. 12.
and after that they have no more that they can do. I will show you whom ye
shall fear. Fear ye him, who after he has slain, he has power to throw
into everlasting fire. Truly I beade you be aferde of him. And it follows in
the same place: He that denies me before men, shall be denied before the
angels of God. He that denies truth, that is to say speaks against
truth, speaks not he against Christ? which is truth it self? who shall
excuse him, where truth, that is Christ, shall be both his accusat and
judge? O lord god, if I do justice, I lose my friend, which death may take
from me: but I win the, good lord, which haste vaynquisshed death, and
shall eu^^ live with the. If I do not justice, ^^please my friend, which
both time and occasion may alter: but I make the mine ennemie, whom if I did
keep would never forsake me. If my christian brother does ill, and I do
not tell him, I do not observe the rules of charitee, which is god: Joan. 4.
and he that dwells in it, dwells in God, and God in him. For I do not
love my brother as my self, if I do know him disposed to do that thing,
which I would not do, and is ill: and will not dissuade him, or exhort him
to do that thing, which I my self would do, and is good. Do not thou
think (says saint Augustine) that thou love thy servant, Augu. super
epist. 10.
when thou dooest not correct him: Or do than love thy child, when thou
geuest him not discipline: or than love thy neighbor, when thou dooest not
rebuke him. This is not charitee, but slothfulness. Leat thy charitee be
feruente to amend and correct. If the manners be good, delight in them: but if
they be ill, spare not to amend them. wherefore saint John be adeth us: (...)
My children (says he) leate us not love with word and tongue, but with
deed and truth. Pro. 27.
Better is the woundynges of him that does love (says Solomon) than the
sweet kysses of him that does flater. Sens it is so, set a porter, good
lord, Psalm. 140.
at my mouth, and a door of circumstaunce unto my lyppes. Never take the
word of truethe from my mouth. Psalm. 118.
For I have alwaie hoped in thy judgments. Psalm. 117.
Our lord is my helper. I shall not fear, what man shall do to me. But now
what have we to say unto wrath, which is mixed with the bloudde in our
bodies, and lies therein priuyly wrapped like a spark of wild fire, hid
under ashes, until some mattier be mynistred, that offends our minds, than
brasteth it out, with a violent flame, and sets the house on a fire, burning
the pillars of raison, and down falls the rouse of charity, and is
therewith consumed. Wrath (says Salamon) has no mercy, Prove. 27
nor the brastyng out furye. And who may suffer the violence of the spirit,
which is excedingly meued? But two means there be for to resist it. One by
the often remembrance of her and her contrary before she inuadeth. He that
somty^^ beholds a person, which is vehemently angry, how his face changes,
how his lyppes trembles, his mouth perchance fometh, and his voice is
altered, his words disordred, his wits dispersed, his reasone subverted, a
man in nature, a brute beast in figure, a devil in conjecture: leat him have
this form in remembrance, and consider his nature transformed. As soon as we
be provoked to wrath, leat us immediately think, that they which behold
us, will detest the same thing in us, that we abhorred before in an other. If
we be subjects, or servants, we should refrain anger for our obedience,
remembering that saint Paul says: Ephesians. 6.
Servants be obedient to your carnal masters with fear and dread in
simplicity of your hearts, as unto Christ. If we be masters or rulers, leat us
consider, what our exaumple shall be to them that be under us, if it shall be
ill, we sustain double bourdeyne, theyrs and our own. Of such importance is
wrath, that where it is feruente, both reason and justice be drowned. Jacob.
1.
The wrath of a man (says saint James) doethe not exercise the justice of
God. And therefore it has been thought of some wise men, that it is not
expedient to put in authoritee men, which of their nature are excedyngly angry
for every occasion, lest they being stered with their natural fiersenesse,
and provoked by their own wilful appetites, like to wild beasts, in their
rage do bring things out of order, and punish the innocent with the
offendour, and do other things, whereof they to late do repent them. whereof
the world is full in daiely experience. Seneca de ira. lib. 3.
An other mean (which Seneke does call the chief remedy) is the deferryng
of wrath: that first the feruentnes may be abated, and the dark myste, which
anoyeth the mind, may either fall, or not be so thick. It is a good doctrine
to us, though we be christen men, the lesson that Appollodorus the philosophier
left to the emperor Augustus. When any occasion happens (says he) which
may provoke the to anger: before that thou dooest or say any thing,
remember to reherce all the letters in the greek alphabete: In remembering this
lesson, and following it, Augusius ever after refrained his anger, whereunto
before he was of his nature disposed.

why should we disdayn to do that, which so great an emperor did? unto
whom in greatness of rule never any other might be compared? Or by cause we be
christen men, in the stead of the.xxiiii. letters of greek, we may rehearse
distinctly the Pater noster, either in latin or english. where in we shall
have this advantage, that in the reciting these words, Forgive us our
trespasses, as we forgive them that do trespass against us: We shall be much
more stirred to remitte our displeasure, or at the least way to forbear to be
than angry. Finally the forbearing shall make the anger more moderate. The
inclinacion to wrath may be well tempred by the remembrance of patience, how
beaultyfull she is, and how well beloved, not of man only, but also of god.
The pacient person looks long young, indueth well his meat, and is seldom
grieved with sickness. for cholere is not stered, which being in a rage,
brings most terryble fevers, and other diseases more peinfull than death.
The pacient man every man preiseth, and worthily. for he is like unto Christ,
whose whole life was the true pattern of patience. The angry man, all men do
dispraise, though they say nothing: for he resembles the devil, which is
ever raging, and is the fountain of anger. Patience in scripture is in all
places extolled, desired, and wisshed. contrary wise impacience abhorred.
Jacob. 1.
Blessed is he (says saint James) that suffers temptacion. for when he is
proved, he shall receive the crown of life, which god has promised to them
that do love him. Many mo spyces may be found in holy scripture, to make a
preservative, more wholesome for man's soul than tryakle is for the body, and
will lengar preserve it: but such as this is, being often times used, shall
preserve the senses of the soul from corruption, and than shall she not die.
but when the trumpet blows, although the body be dead, yet shall she go
surely and saufly to the throne of god, and claim his mercy, which he has
promised to them that believe in him, and keep his laws. But if we do
neglect it, and suffer the devil to prevail against us, with his subtle
persuasions: the senses of the soul shall be taken from her, and she shall be
spiritually dead: actually she shall with her body, to whom she consented,
arise and come to the judgment, trembling and quakyng: beholding above her
Christ, who has redeemed her, excedyngely angrye, deuilles on every side of
her, abiding her sentence, and all redye to swalowe her. Under her hell,
casting out flames of everlasting fire, ready to take her: none there of her
acquayntaunce: which shall be than hable to help her. Princis being in
equal ieoperdie, with her, and richesse being turned to poulder. These
things be no fables, but mattier true, and confyrmed by scripture. And who
that has any other suggestion or trust upon any excuses, he is not only
deceived, but his opinion is also erroneous. wherefore leat us have the sound of
the trumpette in our ears, at the least in the morning and evening,
thinking that the son of god comes to the judgment, we know not what hour.
Blessed (says Christ) is the servant, Luc. xii.
whom the lord at his coming fyndeth waking: him shall he set in authoritee
over his householde. This authoritee shall never be taken away, therein shall
be perpetual quietness, and joy never ceassing. This house hold is of the
company of most blessed spirits, abundyng in charitee, knowlage, and
gladness, in beholdynge continually in the most beaultifull presence of god,
the wounderfull and inspeakable warkes of his maiestee, in heaven, earth, and in
hell. whereon if we truly do think, we shall pass littell on the devil
and his systers, nor yet fear the sound of the terrible trumpet: but desire
with saint Paul, to be separate and dissolved from this mortal body, and to
be with Christ our lord, who tenderly and most constantly loves us, and
feign would have us, if we do well our duties. who for that he suffered
death for us, is worthy to receive, power, diuinitee, sapience, fortitude,
honor, glory, and blessing in worlds everlasting. Amen.

FINIS.
IMPRINTED at London in Fletestrete by Thomas Bertheset, printer to the kings
highness, the second of July, the year of our lord.M. DXLV.

Cum priuilegio ad imprimendum solum.





