Of the new lands and of ye people found by the messengers of the king of
porty^gale named Emanuel.

Of the.x. diverse nacyons crystened.

Of pope John^ and his lands and of the costely keys and wonders molodyes
that in that land is.





HEre a foretymes in the year of our Lord god. M.CCC.C.xcvi. and so be we with
ships of Lusseboene sailed out of Portyngale thorough the commandment of
the King Emanuel So have we had our vyage / For by fortune ylandes over the
great see with great charge and danger so have we at the last found oon
lordshyp where we sailed well.ix.C. my lee by the cooste of Selandes there we
at ye last went a land but that land is not now known for there have no
masters written thereof nor it knowethe and it is named Armenica / there we saw
meny wonders of beestes and fowls yt we have never seen before / the people of
this land have no king nor lord nor their god But all things is comune /
this people goes all naked But the men and women have on their heed neck /
Arms / Knees / and fete all with feders bounden for there bewtynes and
fayrenes. These folk lyuen like bestes without any resonablenes and the wymen
be also as common. And the men has conuersacyon with the wymen / who that they
ben or who they first mete / is she his sister his mother / his daughter / or
any other ky^red. And the wymen be very hoote and dysposed to lecherdnes. And
they ete also on a another The man etethe his wife his chylderne / as we also
have seen and they hang also the bodies or persons fleeshe in the smoke / as
men do with us swynes flesh. And that land is right full of folk / for they
live commonly.iij.C. year and more as with sykenesse they dye not / they take much
fysshe for they can goen under the water and feche so the fysshes out of the
water. and they werre also on upon a another / for the old men bring the young
men thereto / that they gather a great company thereto of towe parties / and
comethe on ayene the other to the field or bateyll / and slay on the other with
great hepes. And how holds the fylde / they take the other prisoners* And
they bring them to death and ete them / and as the deed is eten then sley they
the rest And they been than eten also / or otherwise live they longer times and
many years more than other people for they have costely spyces and rotes /
where they them self recover with / and hele them as they be seek.

GENNEA
Of the black Mores
ALL the first came we in the land of Canarien / which is.C. and.l. miles from
Lyssebone. And there betwyn been.ij. ylandes. In yt one is well made people and
men make there much cheese of great wild gootes. also is there fisshe and
suykere good cheep. That other yla^d is not enhabite there be little people
therein / and they be all a frayde and wild / also there ayeen lies the land
of Barbera / and is from them in to ye Gennea.CC.l. miles. and that is the
blackes mores land. and again ye begynnyg of this land is oon aforemo^tayen and
hooth caput vi ride / and there by is ye town Bitsagitsch.v.C. miles from
Lussebonen there by be many walefysshes and flyinge fysshes on the on side of
Bisagitsche.ij.C. and.l. miles sail men under ye sone so far / that men the
north sail sterre or pollumarticum / or the waghen called / no more may be
seen / but pollum ante articum or yt sowth laid sterre saw we fourth with the
forsayde More land is.M.iiij.C. miles great / there ye people goes all naked
with golden rings on hands and fete.

IN-ALLAGO


THat land of Allago is.v.C. miles greatter And gothe ayenste the beginning
of Arabien and there is that kingdom Safale in this land Allago is the people
clothed as above is marked / the were and bear for there clothes skynnes of
wild bestes. The men bear clokes made of barks of trees and ledder to kyuer
their members with. And the women kyuer them with skynnes of bestes. and take
upon there heddes for kerchers skynnes of oxe^ or other bestes also pyche the
their men's forhed like as me^ pytche the ships / and there dwelling is
under the earth. There is many cowes. oxe^ / great sheep and other fair
bestes. This is on fair and lusty land of good water and sweet herbs. This
people has a swyfte hasty speech. There is no money but of iron and that
every body take it for there ware they bear white staves there we pyns is lange
pykes and stones there they cast myghtly with. That Land is so full of sand
yt they must goo upon broad trenchers that they fall not and synke. After
that comes men into the land of arabyen.

IN: ARABIA
Arabia..
Coming in Arabia saw we ye people clothed like as here is figured stand.
Love this kyngdone has be oon of the three holy kyngys. Item there bind they
there ox son with Arabie gold about there horns / and erys. And also goldyn
rings about thyr legs. And for gold take they of marchau^des sylky^g
kerchers and lynen clothe. Item there after sewe now.v. yla^des. the first yland
named Mo^sabith. sixty miles from Safalen. is leeid ye town Quiola that was
found of the kings folk of porty^gal And they slew there much people and
robbed the town. And there without had there king edyfyed on castle that is
named saint Iacobis castle there in lies a.C. bold and hardy men that lies
and keeps it.



THe seuente miles from Quiola lies the town Bo^bassa that they also byrned
and robbed that also there they gatte much goods From thens now.xxiiij. mile
lies the great town Melida and they befrendes / and there be many sloueynes
and fell people out of Geneen From Melinda it is.iiij. score and.x. miles to on
Persia there gowe they over the sea. For by the town Megha into the ylande
Auxe^dia There is also one that has be of ye three holy ky^ges of the eest.C.
miles into the Kingdom of Canenor and there begin the spyces to grow and from
thens fare they forth in to the great land of great Indyen.

Of great Indyen. MAYOR INDIA

THey gowe from Cananor into great Indyen there the people goo all naked but ye
the kyuer there members with lynen cloth and and they be brounde black / with
long here and of tho women is not written but on kaute the sea saw men many
meruelouse people of manereren the women bear there children and their
householde stuff. Here find men gynger / peper / comeyn / and all manner of
spyces / and costely stones for little money. There be also many manner of
fruit fygges of good savior.vij. inches long and.iij. inches broad. There be
bulfeldes and coyes but the coyes sleep they not / there grows good wine /
much honeye / rise / costely corn white as wete mele / There by stands the
town of Banderana and it is.vij miles into Callienten from thens is.xl. miles
there men goo for all manner of spyces that men were wo^te to caray and convey
over the red see thorowgh Alexander but now is there one new way founde^
over the the sea in Calacute^ is many folk out of saint thomas land yt also
be crystened* and folk of other lands and nacyons they goo over into that
kingdom Kyngryche Gutschyn as hereafter sta^des written.

Of Gutschin that Kyngedome.


ANd than ca^ we in the kingdom of Gutschyn and there has the king of
portyngale do make.ij. Casteyles from here was the three holy kings. there
groeth much peper and the properest stapell thereof. That kingdom Cole^
is.xxiiij. miles from there / and there been many krystened men / we find also
great Olyfa^tes and many diverse manner and wonders bestes and other things that
men cannot wryghte all. gardey^es fruits is there much gretter tha^ in our
lands of Europa. That ylande Melaqua is from thens.viij.C. miles / There also
is much costely spyces. There is now.ij. yla^des the on is Bandan and therein
grows the cloves. That other Tanagora or Narnaria and there groeth not no
other wodde than white and red sandelen wodde / This is fortuned that for a
bell of a glass men may have one handful of peerles. In Gutschin bear some
times there king but that do the people of his court and hold obedyance
under them one with a another They do all there things all sleyghtly For as as
they be assembled in one gatherynge / than cries the captain I will sow /
and as the subjects here their captain cry sow tha^ take they part of /
the sede and no man says the contrary and lets the other lie and that
takeche the lord with out any body contrary saying / and so do they in all
merchaundyse. Forth by that kingdom Gutshyn / Colum / Bandan / and
Nagaria.xxx. miles in Arsinia there has the king.xij. kings under him / and
there lies buried saint Thomas apostell.



IN some of these aforsayde written lands ben great and fair fruits and they
be greatter than in these our lands of Europa In Illa mandra be great high
trees for the people of yt country hew great steps about to clyme up in to
the tree to gather the fruits that grows there on for when they be a thrust
to take there of. In Arsinia is great broad fygge Trees with great fygges
well.vij. inches long and.iij. inches broad and the Fygge tree is so broad of
brau^che and leaves that.xl. men may be hid under the foresaid branches and
leaves for the hete of the son / and there for to rest all to gather at their
one pleasure.



WE have in this vyage sailed about the forth part of the world for to reken
from Lussyngbore^ which is far equinoccyall scherlinie^.xxxix. grades and on
half so have we sailed over ye linie equinocciall.l. grades that makes xc.
grades therefore they of Lussbone is under ye forsayde linie.xxxix. grade and
one half in the high head of the hemels is the breyde of westes / so is them of
Lussbone to these folk to seen the.l. grades is over the self line soth
cornerwyse.v. grades in perpe^diculer linia which linie as we stand right of
ye point the hemls hang upon our head and these folk in their sides or rybbes
and woort set in the manner of on tryanghel (...) on drycantyche cornard.
therefore it must needs be yt the sowth lands be te^pered with sweet earth for
the north wyndes can not there blow.



AFter this manner of form is the King of Gutschyin borne with the nobleste
of his land / And before him is borne many instruments of musyke as
tro^pettes and other and.iiij. of the nobleste bears the canapie over his head
lest that the soon should burn him / and this king is beloved of all his
estates and common people.

Of the.x. dyuerce cristened nations.
IT is to know that ye people of crystindom is divided and ben in.x. Nacyons.
That is to understand the Latyne / Greeks / Indien / Iacobites / nestorijnes /
moronites / Armenes / georgianes / Surianes / mororabes / whereof ye most deyle
is ketters and kyt of / of the holy Romes church.

The first nacyon.


First nacyon is the Latynes and they have to their lord the Emperor of
Almayne and many Kings as the king of castylyan / of Aragon / of portyngale /
of nauaryen / and these kings is for spaynnes nacyon In yt nacyon of the
french land is one king of France and many dukes and Earls. In the nacio^
of Italian is the king of Cicylian / the king of Naples and many dukes and
Earls and there is also many lordshyppes as Veneyse Florence seven Ienuen.

IN the nacyon of Germanien is now many kings with out the emperor / as the
King of England / of Scotland / of Vngerien / of Boheme^ / of Polen / of
Denmark / of sweden / of Northwegen / of Dalmacyen / and there is many Dukes
and Earls etc. In that ylande of Sypers is the king of Sypers / All these a
fore written is under the obeyisau^ce or the church of Rome.

The second nacyon.
THe Greeks have spyrytually the Patriarcke of Constantynnoplen / and many
Archebysshops / bishops / and abbottes. And in ye temperalte have they one
Emperor and many dukes and earls / and there is but few of the^ that be
crystened / For the Agarenen and Turks has now the most part of Greeks /
and is not obedient to the church of Rome. And they have a great err for they
say that the holy ghost ca^ not of the sone but alone of the fader. And they
say also that there is no purgatory / that is all a yenste our belefe.

The third nacyon.


THey of Indyen has one prince and that is pope John^ whose myghtynes and
rychedome amou^teth above all princes of the world for he has under him.lxxij.
kings and as pope John^ daily rydeth he bear a fore him one cross of wode
for to think on at all times and remember upon the passions of Ihu^ and to the
battle does he bear.xij. crosses of gold made and set with precyouse stones
for his baners / in this land is the body of saint Thomas.

The fourth nacyon.
IAcobyten named also of on ketter Jacob (...) was be one dyssyple of the
Patryarche of Alexandryne / and this held the one great land in Oryenten and
Asyen and is named that land of Mambrone and it is by Egypten and go the to
Echyopen and into Indien to / and has under him well.xl. kings rychedom /
these be kytte and chrystened with a byrnynge yren for they branue the token of
the holy cross in their forehed / upon the breast / upon the arm / they
confess them to god alone and none prestes / and they say that in christo is
alone the godhed without the manhod / and some of them speaks Caldesche some
Arabier / some other speches after their la^gage of the land / and these been
condemned of the holy church in that counsayll of Ceden.

The fyfth nacyon.
THere be also Nestorijne^ named of the ketter Nestorinus that was one bysshope
of the byssops of Co^stantynenoplen and they set ij. persons in christo that
is the Godhed and ye persons / and they forsake that maria is the mother of god
/ but they believe well of Ihu^. and their writing is in caldenssher speech and
they make the sacrament in broune bread and there be great multitude of them
and they dwell in Tartarien and in great Indyen / and their land is as great
as a thousand of Italy / and these ketters be condamned in that third
counsayll of Ephesyn and is departed of the holy Romes church and abide in
their opynion.

The syxte nacyon.
BY the ketter Moren they be named Moroniten they say alone in christo is one
understand and one will and those dwell by Lybien in the land of Phenicen and
there be great multitude and they be bold and hardey men. and great warryars
with the bow / And they have their bishops clothed as the Latynes with the
bishops myter on his head and with the croysers staff and rings / These has been some time under the obeyissaunce of the church of Rome wha^ Innocentius
was pope / but afterward cain they again in their opynion and there a bide in
their opinion.

The seventh nacyon.
ARmenuyten is also named for that they dwell in the land of Armeneten nere
unto Anthiochyen and there is whryttyn service of the masses. and their other
tides is all in their one common speech so that they all mey understand it what
they sing or read / and they have their head or fader to whom they do
reverence as we do the pope. And they fast the lenton with greatter devotion
than we do / for they ete in the lenton no fysshe / nor they drink no wyue /
but they ete flesh upon frydayes.



The eight nacyon.
THis nacyon is named Georgidni of saint George for they have him in their
batelles for their patron / and they dwell in the land of Oryenten / and they
be fayer / lusty / and strong pepyll / and they be sore a drad of the Medon
perssen Assiryen there they about dwell And they have their scyrpture in ye
Greeks speech and they have their sacraments as the Greeks / and the clerks
have round crowns / and they seek the holy grave to Iherusalem with open or
spread baners. And they give the sarasons no trybute for the sarasons fereth
those folk very sore / there women bear harneyse like the men and they have
also beardes as ye men and they bear upon their heddes and upon hye cubettes
hye hattes and as the write to the Sodan tha^ gives he them that they dyssyre.

The Nynthe nation.
THe Suriane^ is named after their town Surie that is the grettest in all
Surye^ or Assyryen their scripture and service of god in ye Greeks speech but
they speak sarasons speech and they hold the manner of ye greeks / and have
bysshoppes that in all things be obedyent and they make their sacrament of
brown bread and they have the opinion of the Greeks aye^ the Latynes there be
some crystened that in the holy land is named Samerytanes that were converted
in the time that the apostels prithee but they understand the^ nor well in the
cryste^ believe.

The tenthe nacyon.
MOzoraben so called affter the late^ for they hold and use the manner of the
christian of Arbien / and of these were wont to be many people in Affrijken and
in Spaengnien but now is there little in the tellyng / They have i^ their
service of god lateyne as we do / And they be under the obeyisaunce of the
church of Rome. And the latynes prelates but in many things ben they diverse
departed for also the day has xxiiij. hours / Also many times hymns and
psalms and other orasouns have they and verylonge / And that that ye Latyns
read in the beginning of their service that read they in the mydle or in the
last end. And that sacrament of the auter breketh some of them in.vij. parts
and some in.x. parties / and these people be very devout and they mareye but
ones in their life and as the women has lost their first husbond so does
they meddle no more with no man / but a bide fro thensfourth in chastyte.

O For.ij. causes comes the departing of ye christian nacyons. The first cause
is that men in old time might the christian have only have general consiliu^ /
Therefore as the ketters stood up again the cryste^ belefe so was there no body
turned nor saught counsayll there again. The other cause was the ferswynmygnes
of ye oppressed pope of ye schole of Rome that no messe^gere nor learned should to
the krysten thou that were come in seche lodyng / for had they do that they
should have be converted to the right belefe. Thorowsth which right belefe
bring us to the highest glory the fader the sone the holy ghost three
persons and one god. Amen.

Pope John^ by ye grace of god the most mighty stekynge a boue all kyngys of
ye world give saluyte the Emperor of Rome. and also the king of France.

Our well beloved frynde We late you under stand and know of our land And
the manner of our lyuinge and of our people beestes and fowls. And you say
that we believe not in god and pray not to him as you do. So late we you
understand that we believe in god the fader. in god the son^e. and in god the
holy gooste. The which be vnpartyble and one very god. and is allthy^ge mighty.

And also certefye you with our lettres sealed and do you knowelege of our
folk or people and of our land. And if there be any thing ye we kan do for
you. send us word and we shall it do with good heart and will. And if it
please any of you to come in our land we shall give they in gold and silver to
thyr necessite / and make them great lordis. and give to them also land and
good to live on. and do to hem worship and honor. For the goodness that we have
herd say of you. And we do you knowledge that we have the richeste crown of
the world as of gold and silver and of precious stones in great multitude And
we have also under us mighty.xlij. kingesdomes and al good christian people. and
we keep also the pour people with our alms all that comes be it strenger or
of our own people thorough the love of almighty god our lord Ihesu Criste.

Item Our land is parted in.iiij. For the lands of Indien / there be two.
and in that grettest Indien is the body of saint Thomas. And this same Indien
is partiner of ye cost of orient for it lies beside a toure ye which is
caalled babel / and it id not far fro Babilonyen. And also that other part
of Indien is about Septe^tryon. and there is great plenty of wine / bredde and
all manner of vytayle

Item aso in our land be gryffons / and it is a great bird and a mighty. for
he will well carry in his neste an ore / or an horse for his yo^ge birds to
ete. Also in Saxen is a town which is called Grounzwyk there is one of the
claws yt which is well as great as an horn of an ox.

In our land be olypha^tes / dromedaries / wild oxes the which have.vij.
horns. also Beeres and Lions of diverse colors / as ye redd / grene / black /
and whitte Item and also be wild asses the which have long eeres / and have
two small horns. etc.

IN our land be also fowls ye which that have the maystery of all birds of
the world / and have a color like ye fire / and his wyngis kyt like a rasour.
and this birds ben called Ilerion. and in all the world is no more than two.
and they lyuen.iij. skore year and then^e they lay eggis and sytte upon
them.xl. days / and as soon as they have yonges they flee away / fader and
mother to the zee and there they drown them self. and all tho birds yt come
against them do them company to the zee. and as soon as the be drowned all the
other birds turn again to the neste there they young birds ben left / and
give them mete and drink to the time that the can flee and nurter them self.
etc.

Yet ben there other birds the which ben called Tygris / and they be so
strong that they will bear or carry in their neste a man sytting upon an horse
all armyd fro the head to ye foot.

Ite^ In our land is also a great deserte or forest theri^ dweleth people
both men and wymmen the which have no more than one eye before. and behind
they have.iij. or.iiij. eyes

Yet is in our land an other manner of people the which ete none other than
raw flesh. and they care not if it were of man or woman or of beestis and
also the care not of there own death. and as soon as there one of them dies the
ere them all raw / both there one fader or moeder. And they say yt man's
fleyshe is good and naturly to ete raw / for they say that they do it for
part of penance for there sins And they be also cursed of god / and they be
called Gog and Magog And of them be no more than one manner of people of this
world and they shall be dystributed or parted thorough all the world when
Antechryst shall come. and these same were the people or folk the which that
had put in prysone or in hold the great king Alexander of Macedonien. But
for all that he went his way And of this people shall be no judgment at the
dredefull day of dome like the prophet says. Nescio quis. etc.

But nevertheless thonder and lytenynge shall come fro heaven and bourne them
all in poder And when that we have any enemies thanne give we them license to
put them down and ete them that be ayensse us and then make we them to turn
again into there own land. For if they should abide long with us they should
undo us all and ete us like as they do there own propre folk.

And yet is there another manner of people / the which has rownde fete like
an horse / and also they have.iiij. sharp claws behind at there Heles.
Wherewt they strongely fight that there is no manner thing can sto^de ayenste
them / nether harnayse / yrone / nor stele they pass all thorowth / and this
people give unto us great trybute. and they be also without dowte great
laborers.

Yet is there a another small land in a part of that same forest aforesaid /
and it is.xlij. days Iourneyes long. And it is called Feminie the great. And
in that same land there be three Queen's without all other lands / thowe that
holde^ there been of these queen's forsayde And when these queen's shall goo to
field / then each of the^ has.iij. hondered. M. wymen and all in harneyse /
with out all the other women the which that caray vytayle with carte horse and
also with olyfauntes. And these women be very manly in fytynge and hardy. And in
this same land may come no men but.ix. days in the year and no longer / and
than they have conuersacio^ and felysshyp with the men and no more of the hole
year. For if the men there would abide the women should them slay all.

And this same land is closed all about with a water called Cyphon coming
our of paradyse And in this same land may come no man without a great ship or
a great bark.

Of the people named Pygnies.


ANd yet is there a another small land and also another River called Pyconye
that is.x. days iourneye long / and.vij. broad and this people of this
forsayde land be not great / but they be like children of.vij. year of age and
they have horseys as great as a great dog and they be good crystened folk
and they have no war ayenste noman / But they have war ayenste the fowls
every year / when they shall have in there fruit and corn And tha^ the king
puts on his harneyse. and tha^ they fight ayenste the birds. And than there
be slain on both parties many on / and also they be great laborers / and when
the fylde is don than the birds flee a way fro them.

Also in our land been ye Sagittary. the which be^ fro the myddel upward like
men / and fro ye myddell donwarde ben they like the half neder part of an
horse and they bear bows and arowes. And the shute stronger tha^ any other
nacyon of people.

And in our land be also unicorns and they been of the manner with black and
grene / and these unicorns slay many Lions. and the Lyo^ sleeth the unicorn
with subtylnes. When the Unicorn has put him to rest at a tree / and than
comes the Lion and ronnyth about the tree and after him tha^ ronnyth the
unicorn and would feign sley him / and than he ronnyth him self i^to the tree
with his horn so hard that he cannot pull it out again. than comes the
Lyo^ and has the mastery upon the unicorn.

Item there is a another part of a forest therein dwells another manner of
folk / and this people ben.xx. Cubettes of heythe But they were in time paste
to be of the heyth of.xl. Cubettes. And they have not the pore to come out of
that deserte or foreste and all is through the might of almighty god. For if
they should come out by there strength and hardynesse the would co^quere all
the world.

Here begynnith of ye bird the which is called Fenix.

In our land is also a bird ye which is called Phoenix and is ye fairest
bird of all ye world and there is no more than one in all ye course of nature.
and he lives C. year. and then flies he so high that the son set the
fire in his wings / and then^e comes he don again to his nest and there he
burns to pudre and of the ashes comyth a worm / and within. C days after
growyth there out another bird as fair as ever that other was.

Item Also in our land is plenty of wine bredde / flesh. And that is
necessary for mannys body

Item In our land may come none venyn beeste on that one side

Item Between our land and the Turks land is a river ronnynge and is called
Sydo^ it comes out of paradyse of the earth / and is full of precious stones

And also in our land ben ronnyge many small rivers the which that come out
of this forsayde river. and they also ben fulle of precious stones. As
Ysmaraddus Iaspis Sapphires Scobassus Dyamant Topasius / Carbonkel. Rubin. and
yet more other they which I not all can reherce.

Also in our land grows on herb and is called Parmanabel / and that same
herb is so mighty ever so who that same herb beryth a boute him he may
co^iure the devil of hell and do him say what so ever he will axe of hy^ and
therefore the devil dare not come in to our land.

Ite^ also in our land growith peper in forestis full of snakes and other
venym beestes. and wha^ it is ripe than send we for our folk and they put
that fire there in / and tha^ they venym beestys flee away* than we gadder it
and carried to our houses and washed in two or.iij. waters / and than we drey
it again / and also it waxed black and good

Item about this passage is a fonteyne or a conduyte / so who of this watere
drinked.iij. times he shall wax young / and also if a man have had a
sykenes.xxx. year and drynked of this same water he shall thereof be hole and
sonde.

And also as a man thereof drinked him seems that he had occupied the best
mete and drink of the world. and this same fonteyne is full of the grace of
the holy ghost. and who sow in this same water washed his body he shall
become young of.xxx. year.

And ye shall know that I am haloweth in my mother womb / and I am
old.v.C.lxij. year. and I have me wesshed.vi. times in that same water.

Item In our land is also a zee very peruulyous / and there can we have no
passage with no manner of shyppyng and than do we us carry there over with our
gryffous.

Item at that one side of this zee ronnyth a small ryuere and therein be many
precious stones. and also there growyth a certain herb that is good to all manner
of medycyne.

Also ye shall understand that between us and the Jews ro^nyth a great river
that is full of precious stones and it is so strong in here ronnyng yt noman
there over can pass / except ye saterdaye / and tha^ parted shehere and took
with here all that she fyndeth in here way. And this same land most we
stro^gely keep for our enemies. an up these costs have we.xlij. strong
castles none stronger in ye world. and ben well kept of people. To
understand.x.M. knights on horsbacke.vi.M. Cross bows.xv.M. long bows.
and.xl.M. othere men on horsbacke well armed. yt which these Castles have in
kyping by cause that the great king of Israhel shall not there pass with his
people. For he is twyes as strong as I am. And his land is twyes as great as
all Crystence and turkey. For he has in his keeping the second part of the
world And the great king of Israhel has under hy^ iij.C. kings.iiij.M.
princes. duces. earls. barons knights / squyers without nombre. and all these
be subgette to the great king of Israhel. But if he might pass over this
forsayde river with his people they should slay both christian and turks. And ye
shall know that we all saterdaye late pass.viij.C. or M. men for beye such
manner good or marchaundyse as they will have. but we late them not come with in
ye wallis of this castles. for they bye it with out ye walls of this
fortresses. and they pay there marchaundyses with platis of silver or of gold
for they have none other money. and when they have don there besynes they turn
home again in their own land. and these forsayde castles be sete to gyder
within a bow shot.

And ye shall understand that within a mile of these castles is a great Cite
and a fair and it is the strongest of all the world. the which cite is in
our keeping of one of our kyngis. and he receives tribute of the great king of
Israhel. And also gives us every year.ij.C. horses laden with gold / silver /
and precious stones. Except all charges and costs that men does in the cite
and in these forsayde castles. And when that we have war against them / than
slay we them all and late noman alive. and therefore they will keep no war
ayenste us. and the wymmen of the Jews be very fair none fayrer in earth now
a days lyuinge. And by this forsayde river is a zee there noman may pass /
but wha^ the wind blowyth fro benethe strongely than parted she here / and
thanne the pass with great have. and than they take with hy^ all manner of
precious stones. but they may selle none thereof for that we have taken thereof
our chose.

In a part of our land is an hylle there noman may dwell for hete of the
son* and there be worms many on without fire can not live. And by this same
hylle we keep.xl.M. people that no thing else but make fire / and wha^ this
worms feel the fire than they come out of the earth and goo in too that
fire. and there they spynne like the worms yt the sylke spy^neth And of that
same spynnyng we make our clotynge that we were on feste days. and when they
be foul / tha^ they be cast in to ye fire and they become as fair as ever they
were before

And ye shall understand that saint Thomas does more miracles than any saint
in heaven For he comyth bodly every year in his church and does a sermon / and
also in a palace there ye here after of him shall here

And ye shall also know that there be diverse of people of fason in our land
/ also there be people that have the body of a man and the head like a dog
and they be good takers of fysshe. and they be good to understand of their
speech. and they will goo in to the zee a hole day long to the time that they
have taken such as they would have / and than ye come again charged with
fysshe. and bear them in to ye houses / for they have there dwellinge places
under earth. and then^e take we part of there fysshes that us best lyketh* and
they do great harm among our be thou yt be wild. and they fight also
ayenste our archers. etc.

In our land is also one manner of birds and lay there eggis in the zee.xxi.
and there out grown young birds* and tha^ the flee away and we take sometime of
they^ for they be good for to ete wha^ they be young For if their were any man
that has lost his nature and ete of this same bird he sholl it get again and
become as strong as ever he was before.

Also in our land is that same tree / there yt holy creste^dom or olye our
ro^nith. and this tree is dreye / and there is a great serpent which yt tree
has in keeping all the hole year night and day but alone up sey^t Iohn^s day
and night and than slepyth the serpent or dragon. and than goo we to the tree
and take yt crisma. and of this same is no more than iij. po^d. and tha^ turn
we aye^ secretly with great dread and fere yt he us not see / for else he will
slay us. and this same tree is a days journey fro ye paradys of ye earth but
wha^ this serpent is a waked than maked he great moan and sorrow. and this
dragon has.ix. hedes and.ij. wings. and is as great as two horses. But for
all yt it follows us stylle till we ben come to the zee again. and than turned
it again. and then^e bear we that crisma to ye patriarch of saint thomas and he
haloweth it / and there with they make us al christian. and ye remenau^t send we to
ye patriarche of Iherusalem. and he send it forth to the Pope of rome. and he
puth there to olyet of life and than halowyth it / and then^ he sendeth^ all
cryste^te thorugh Also ye shall understand when we shall goo to war than do
we before us bear with xiiij kings.xiiij. rofers with gold and silver really
wroght with precious stones. and the other ky^ges come after us with great
stremers and baners of sylke and syndale very rychely wrought. Ye shall know
also that before us gone.xl.M. clerkis / and also many knyghtis. and men a foot
there be.ij.C.M. without cariers and cariers tho that go with the olyphantes
and carry our harneys and vitales.

ye shall understand also as we goo to fylde than put we our land in the
keeping of the Patriarche of saint thomas. And when we pecesably ride than do we
bear before us a cross of wodde in worship of our lord Ihesu Christ. Also in
the incomynge of every cite stand.iij. crosses made of wodde / for to remember
ye passion of our lord Ihesu christ. And when we ride pecesably than do we also
bear afor us a basyn full of earth to remember yt we be come of earth and that
we shall wax earth again. and we do also bear for us another basyn full of fine
gold to a token that we be the nobleste and mightyest kyngis of all the world.

There is also in our land noman so hardy that dare break his wedloke.. but if
he did he should be inco^tynent be burnyd. For our lord him self has ordyned
wedlok therefore it should be kept by reason if tbat we louyd our lord Ihesu
Christ. For it is one of the sacraments of the holy church

Also there dare noman make a lie in our land. for of he did he should
incontinent be sleyn and we be feythful in our saying and doying Also ye
shall understand that we every year goo vysite the holy body of the prophet
danyel in our forest / and we take with us.xM. clerkis and as many knyghtys.
and.CC. castles. made upon Olyphantes / fore to keep us fro ye dragons ye
which have.vij. hedes. the which that have their dwelling in that forest.

And there be also in that same place dates ye winter and somer hang on the
trees fair and grene. And ye foreste is great a.C. and.xxx. days journey. and
ye.ij. patriarchs ben before us at table for they have the might of the pope
of rome. And we have twyes as many abbotes i^ our land as there be days in a
year.xv. more And euerich one of them comes ones in ye year and says mass
upon saint Thomas auter. And I my self seye also mass in the great festis
days of ye year. and there for I am called pope John^. For I priste after the
outshewyng of sacrifice of the auters. and king after outshewing of Iusticie.
And I pope John^ was halowid before I was borne. for our lord send his angel
to my fader and said to him make a pallays the which shall be of the grace of
god and a chamber of that paradyse for your son coming For hi shall be the
grettest king of the world. and he shall a long time live. So who that in
this pallays comyth he shall have no hongre nor thryste. and he shall not deye
and as soon as my fader was a wakyd he was very merry / and inco^tynent he began
to make this pallays like ye shall here. At first of ye incomynge of this
pallays is made of cristall and the covering of it is of precious stones and
with in realy wrought with sterres like if it were ye heaven. and that pauing is
also of cristall and within this same pallays be none wy^dowes. and within this
same pallays be.xxiiij. pyllers of fine gold and of precious stones of all
manner sorts. and there am I at great feste days of the year and saint Thomas
prechyth i^ middell of this pallays to the people. And whithin this same
pallays is a conduyte or a fonteyne is like wine in drynky^ge / so who thereof
drincketh he desired none other mete nor drink and noman can tell fro whens
it comes or whyther it gothe. Also there is another great merueyll i^ this same
pallays when we shall goo to our dinner / so is there no manner of mete made ready
for us / not there is no manner of instruments to make mete ready with all. but
there comith before us all manner of delycious mete / that comyth there
thoroughe the holy ghost. And it is not well possible to write all manner of
goodness they which yt be in our land. And ye shall understand that we
writ nothing to you but that true is.. For if we should write lies to you /
god and sey^t thomas should punysshe us / for we should lose all our dignyte
and our worshypp.

And we pray you that ye will writ us again with the berer of this lettre. and
send to us ageyn a good knight of ye generacyon of france

And we pray the king of France that he will us recommaunde to the mighty
king of England. and also to all other ky^ges the which yt dwell beyond the
zee thou that be^ crystened and we pray god that he you will give the grace of
the holy ghost Amen. Written in our holy pallays in the birth of my self.v.
ho^dred. and seven

Emprenteth by me John^ of Doesborowe:.

(...)



