In Camera Scaccarij. Maij 1608.

DIRECTIONS for Commissioners, with the Steward of each Manor, As Well for
admitting of Tenants to Copy hold Estates, as for Assessing of Fines of the
same.

Resolved on by the right Honorable Robert Earl of Salisbury L. high
Treasourer of England, Sir Julius Caesar Knight, Chancellor and
vnder-Treasourer of his Majesty's Exchequer at Westminster, Sir Laurence
Tanfield Knight, L. Chief Baron, and the rest of the Barons there.

IMPRINTED AT London by Robert Barker, Printer to the Kings most Excellent
Majesty. 1608.

royal blazon or coat of arms

Directions for Commissioners with the Steward of each Manor, to admit
Tenants to Copyhold estates for Life or Lives, according to the Custom of the
Manor: Resolved on by the right Honorable ROBERT Earl of Salisburie L. high
Treasourer of England, Sir JULIUS CAESAR Knight, Chancellor and
vnder-Treasourer of his Majesty's Exchequer at Westminster, Sir LAVRENCE
TANFIELD Knight, L. Chief Baron, and the rest of the Barons there.
FIrst the Commissioners and the Steward with all care and diligence to inform
themselves of all surrenders, forfeitures, and deceases of Tenants for term of
life or lives, and of the quantity, quality, and true yearly value of each
thing so surrendered, forfeited, or happened by decease, which thereby are in
case to be granted in possession or reuersion for life or lives, by Copy of
Courtroll, according to the custom of the Manor.

Item, where by determination of such estates the Copyholde is in his Majesty's
hands, and is harrietable, one Justice of Peace, the Surueyor of the County,
or in his absence two Justices of the Peace nearest dwelling to the Manor of
and the Steward thereof, To assesse the fines at nine years true value of each
thing, the ancient Rent and yearly value of Custom works being reprised. And
thereupon to grant three lives, according to the Custom of the Manor; or if
the Custom bear but two lives, then at seven years true value, And where but
one life, five years value, and not under, reprising vt supra.

And where the land is not harrietable and so the less charge to the Tenant,
which land may in that regard bear the greater Fine to his Majesty, To
assesse the Fine for three lives at ten years true value, and for two lives
in present possession at eight years true value, And for one life in present
possession, if the Custom will bear no more, at six years profit, reprising
vt supra.

And where there is only a widows estate in Copyholde land being harrietable,
To contract with such as desire grant thereof by Copy for three lives after
such widows estate for six years true value of each thing, the ancient Rent
and yearly value of the works being reprised. But where it is not
harrietable, at seven years true value and not under.

And where the Custom allows four or five lives, (as in some few Manors
it does, or is so pretended) There to advance the Fine for his Majesty's
profit accordingly.

And where there is but one life in Copy and possibility of a widows estate,
the Copyhold being harrietable, To contract for two lives in reuersion at three
years profit, and not under (the rent and yearly value of Custom works
reprised.) And where the Custom allows no widows estate, or the Copyholde
is not harrietable, To assesse the Fine at four years of the true value, and
not under.

And where there is two lives in Copyholde and possibility of widows estates,
being also harrietable, To contract for no further estate.

And where the present Tenants having three lives in Copy will surrender by
composition that three others may be stated in Copy, There for the exchange of
the lives being of like age, to contract for one years true value and not
under. But where those that are to be admitted, or any of them are younger
then those that were formerly in Copy, The Commissioners to advance his
Majesty's profit accordingly. And so for exchange of one, two, and three lives
or more in reuersion, the Commissioners to have respective regard thereto.

Provided, that the children and next of the kindred of each former Tenant have
herein preferment, if willingly he or they will desire to give the Fines
before mentioned.

Provided also, that none of the said Justices of the Peace, Steward, nor
Surueyor, to be hereafter appointed, be Copyhold Tenant of any the Manors
whereof the Tenants are to be so admitted.

Directions for Commissioners with the Steward of each Manor, to assesse
Fines of Copy-holds wherein the Tenants have estates of Inheritance, according
to the Custom of the Manor: Resolved on by the right Honorable ROBERT Earl
of Salisburie L. high Treasourer of England, Sir JULIUS CaeSAR Knight,
Chancellor and vnder-Treasourer of his Majesty's Exchequer at Westminster, Sir
LAVRENCE TANFIELD Knight, L. Chief Baron, and the rest of the Barons.
FIrst the Commissioners and the Steward with all care and diligence to inform
themselves of all surrenders, and Descents of Tenants not yet admitted, and of
the quantity, quality and true yearly value of each thing so Surrendered or
Descended, and whether by the true and ancient Custom the Fine be arbitrable
or certain.

Item, where the land is harrietable, and the fine arditrable, The Steward with
one Justice of the Peace next dwelling to that Manor, and the Surueyor of the
County, or in his absence two of the Justices nearest dwelling, to assesse the
Fine upon admittance at one year and a halfes profit, according to the true
yearly value, and not under nor otherwise.

Item, where the land is not harrietable, and the Fine arbitrable, to assesse
the Fine at two years profit, according to the true yearly value and not
under.

Item, where the Fine is certain, and so to be proved by the ancient Court
Rols, tempore H. 7. and before, or by other sufficient matter of Record, there
to admit the Tenants for such Fine certain.

Item, where the Fine is pretended certain, and cannot be so proved to the
Commissioners as aforesaid, yet nevertheless (in such ease) to admit the
tenants, and respect the assessing of the Fine until such tenants have
attended the Kings learned Counsel, and satisfied them therein, or that some
further order shall be taken concerning the same: And for better notice and
information to be given, the Steward and Commissioners to certify the State
of such questionable certainty or uncertainty of the Fines, to the Barons of
the Eschequer.

Item, the said Commissioners and Steward to inquire with like care and
diligence what harriets, reliefes, or other matter of profit is due unto his
Majesty by surrender, alienation, or decease of any the tenants (of such
Manor) as well of Freeholde as Copyholde, as also of Lease lands, and to take
such order that his Majesty be duly and truly answered the said fines,
harriets, reliefs, and other profits from time to time as they grow due.

The said Commissioners and Steward to make true Certificate of their
proceedings herein to the Chancellor and Council, immediately after every
Court, under their hands. And also like Certificate of all Copyhold lands that
shall happen to escheat or otherwise come to his Majesty's hands, before they
grant them again by Copy.

Provided, that none of the said Justices of the Peace nor Surueyor be Copyhold
tenant of any the Manors whereof the tenants are to be so admitted.


