A Nest of Ninnies

Simply of themselves without Compound

Stultorum plena sunt omnia By Robert Armin

LONDON:

Printed by T.E. for Ion Deane. 1608



To the youthful and rightly complete in all good gifts and graces, the
generous Gentlemen of Oxenford, Cambridge, and the Innes of Court. To. Armin
greeting.
YOu first borne brothers of the highest skies,
Twins of best Jove by blessed Memoria,
From whom our glories and our livings rise,
Brothers and sons to him that brings the day,
(Phoebus) whom none can see but by your eyes,
You only and you ever I shall pray
(And praising ever) that your Sunnie shine,
May beautify our GLOBE in every line.


But what higher strain am I in when your selves have set my tongue lower?

Most liberal and well affected, I am brazd by your favors and made bold in
your ostended courtesies, I have seen you both ways as the Hare that squints
on either side, marry to look foreright I cannot because judgment out-lookes
me. But as the Philosopher squened at his cursed wife in some fear, because of
quiet, so I fearful presume not to look into the millstone least I gravel my
eye sight. I have seen the stars at midnight in your societies, and might have
Commenst like an Ass as I was, but I lackt liberty in that, yet I was admitted
in Oxford to be of Christ's Church, while they of Al-soules gave aim, such as
knew me remember my meaning. I promised them to prove mad, and I think I am
so, else I would not meddle with Folly so deeply, but similis similem, etc. If
I do offend as I make no question, my Pardon is signed I doubt not, marry
there is an Execution yet behind, and I long till I pass my plundge, that is
censure. They say he goes in colors, as one strangely affected, and I go in
Motly making my own cloakebag ready, If he prove porter and bear with me I
shall rest behoulding, if not I am his Martyr and suffer extremely. I have
Gentlemen in this book gone through Ireland, if I do stick in the bogs help
me out, not with your Skene head me, that is the way to spoil all, but with
your goad prick me on to the true tract. And you of our Innes of Court, nimble
braind brands that burn without smoking, I challenge of you neighbourly
neerenesse, and therefore dare say sumus in tuto. If you should fly out like
rank riders, or rebel like the Irish, twere much because my presumption
challenges better being in you. But since all is one, and one all, that's cared
for, singleness has such regard, I make a question, which if you easily
answer, I am satiffied, otherwise buried quick, how ever my love looses not
his labor, an University fire in the Winter, and a Temple pot may warm good
licour, in which you may drink to me, and i will pledge you, I may live to make
you amends if not no more but this, such a one died in your debt, and that's a
Countertenor many a one sings. Vale, as for vide and vici let Caesar at his
next ariue so salute you.

Yours ever affected, To. Armin.

A nest of Ninnies.
THe world wanton sick, as one s^n setting on sin (in morning pleasures,
noone banquets, after riots, nights moriscoes, midnights modicoms, and
abundance of trash trickt up to all turbulent reuellings) is now leaning on her
elbow, devising what Doctor may deliver her, what Physic may free her, and
what antidotes may antissipate so dangerous a Dolemma, she now begins to grow
bucksome as a lightning before death, and gsd she will, riches her
chamberlain could not keep her in, beauty her bedfellow was bold to persuade
her, and sleepy security mother of all mischief, tut her prayers was but
mere prattle: out she would, tucks up her trinkets like a Dutch Tannikin
sliding to market on the ise and away she flings, and whither thinck you, not
to the Law, that was too loud, not to the Church that was too proud, not to the
Court, that was too stately, nor to the City, she was there lately, nor to
the Camp, that was too keen, no nor to the Country where seldom seen: she
daines her a friendly eye: but of all into a Philosophers cell, who because he
was always poking at Fortune with his forefinger, the wise wittely namde him
Sotto, as one besotted, a grumbling sir, one that was wise enough, and fond
enough, and sold all for a glass prospectiue, because he would wisely see
into all men but himself, a fault general in most, but such was his, who thus
busied was took napping by the weal public, who smiles upon him with a
wapper eye, a jealous countenance, and bids him all hail mistress (says
Sotto) I will not say welcome, because you come ill to him that would be
alone, but since you are come, look for such entertainment as my folly fits
you with, that is, sharp sauce with bitter diet, no sweetness at al, for that
were to mingle your pills with sugar, no, I am all one, Winter in the head, and
frost in the foot, no Summer in me but in my smiles, and that as soon gone as
smiles, the bauble I play with, is men's estates, which I so tumble from hand to
hand, that weary with it I see (gluttingly and grieuedly, yet mingled with
smiles too) in my glass prospectiue, what shall become of it: the world
curling her locks with her fingers, and anon scratching her brain with her
itching pin, as one little regarding answers what then: marry says Hodge i will
show thee. See world in whose bosom ever has abundance been powered, what thy
imps of impiety be, for as they (I) all for the most part, as these which I
will present to thee in my glass prospectiue, mark them well, and see what
thou breedest in thy wantonness, six Children like thee, not the Father that
begat them, where were they nursed, in folly? fed with the flottin milk of
nicetie and wattonnesse, curdled in thy womb of water and blood, unseasoned,
because thy mother bearing temper was ever untrue, far from the relish of
right breed, and it is hard that the taste of one Apple should distaste the
whole lump of this defused Chaios, but mark me and my glass, see into some
(and in them thy self) whom I have discride, or describde these six parts of
folly in thee, thou shall see them as clear as day, how mistie thy clouds be,
and what rancknesse raines from them.

The world queasie stomackt, as one fed with the earths nectar and delicates
with the remembrance of her own appetite squinies at this and looks as one
scorning, yet beholding what will follow, at length espies a tall black man,
^earing like himself, a fool in motley, muckinder hunge, ever and anon wipes
his nose, at whose girdle hangde a small black jack of a quart, his usual
draft, his finger on his tongue as if he blamde Nature that cut not the strings
of it in more large manner, but hindered by defect he still did guess at
wisdom, though seldom attaining it. Well, he was gouty, big, post legged,
and of years something many, as in the right sequel follows.

This Fool was tall, his face small,
His beard was big and black,
His neck was short, inclind to sport,
Was this our dapper Jack.
Of nature cursed, yet not the worst,
Was nastie, given to swear,
Toylesome ever, his endeavor
Was delight in Bear.
Goutie great, of conceit
Apt, and full of favor,
Cursed, yet kind, and inclinde
To spare the wise man's labor.
Known to many, loud of any,
Cause his trust was truth,
Seen in toys, apt to joys,
To please with tricks of youth,
Writhed in the knees, yet who sees
Faults that hidden be?
Calfe great, in whose conceit
Lay much game and glee.
Big in the small, ancle all,
Footed broad and long,
In Motly cotes, goes Jack Oats,
Of whom I sing this song.


The world ready to disgorge at so homely a present, asked if it were possible
such breathde hers to command, oh says our Philosophical Hodge, hear his
jests, and what an unknown habit lives in him, then return judgment, mark
our application.

Jack Oats sitting at Cards all alone, was dealing to himself at Uide ruff
(for that was the game he ioyed in) and as he spide a Knave: Ah knave art
there, quoth he: When he spide a King, King by your leave, quoth he: if he
spied a Queen Queen Richard art come, quoth he: and would kneel down and
bid God bless her Majesty (meaning indeed the then Queen, whom he heard Sir
William Hollis his Master so much to pray for: But here is the Jest, Jack as
I say, being at Cards all alone, spying a Knave, and saying, Ah Knave art
there: A simple Seruingman being in the Hall waighting his masters coming,
walking by, and hearing him say so, thought he had called him Knave, took the
matter in dudgin, and miscalled the Fool: another Seruingman more foolish then
both, took Iacks part, so that in short time they two fell together by the
ears: who being parted, Jack Oats gives them each one a hand, and so takes
them into the Buttry to drink: the Knight comes in, seeing the Hall not yet
quiet, asked the mateer: Jack comes, I Will tell thee Willy, quoth he: As I was a
playing at Cards, one seeing I won all I played for, would needs have the
Knave frommee, which as very a Knave as he seeing, would needs bear him Knave
for company: so to bid them both welcome to thy house, I have bin to entreat
the Knave thy Butler to make them drink. I says Sir William, and you like a
knave made them fall out. I answered Jack, and your drink Sir knave made them
friends. Sir William laughing, departed.

News came to Sir William that such a Nobleman was coming to his house, great
provision was made for his welcome: and amongst all Jack Oats put on his new
Motley coat, clean Muckender, and his new shoes. Much preparation, was made,
which were too long to tell, for I Will assure ye it was one of the greatest
Earls in England, unfit to name here: but the Knight and his Lady met him at
the gate to entertain him: Sir William with a low congy saluted him, the good
Lady, as is the Courtly custom, was kissed of this Noble man: Jack Oats seeing
him kiss his Lady, on the sudden gives the Earl a sound box on the ear,
knave (quoth he) kiss Sir Willies wife? the good Knight amazed at this, caused
him to be whipped: but the kind Noble man knowing simplicity the ground of his
error, would not suffer it, but putting it up, left him and entered the house.
Jack seeing they were sad, and he had done amiss, had this wit in simplicity
to shadow it: he comes after and asked the Earl where his hand was? Here (quoth
he) with that he shakes him by it, and says, I mistook it before, knowing not
your ear from your hand being so like one another: Jack thought he had mended
the matter, but now he was whipped indeed, and had his payment altogether. Thus
fools thinking to be wise, become flat foolish, but all is one, Jack never
repented him.

AT a Christmas time, when great logs furnish the Hall fire: when Brawne is in
season, and indeed all Reueling is regarded: this gallant knight kept open
house for all comers, where beef, beer, and bread was no niggard. Amongst
all the pleasures provided, a Noise of Minstrells, and a Lincolnshire Bagpipe
was prepared: the Minstrels for the great Chamber, the Bagpipe for the Hall:
the Minstrels to serve up the Knights meat, and the Bagpipe for the common
dancing. Jack could not endure to be in the common Hall, for indeed the
fool was a little proudly minded, and therefore was altogether in the great
Chamber at my Ladies or Sir Williams elbow. One time being very melancholy, the
Knight to rouse him up, said, hence fool, I Will have another fool, thou shall
dwell no longer with me: Jack to this answered little, though indeed ye could
not anger him worse: A Gentleman at the board answers, if it please you sir I Will
bring ye another fool soon: I pray ye do (quoth the knight) and he shall be
welcome. Jack fell a crying, and departed mad and angry down into the great
Hall: and being strong armed (as before I described him, caught the Bagpipes
from the piper, knocked them about his pate, that he laid the fellow for dead on
the ground, and all broken carries the pipes up into the great Chamber, and
lays them on the fire. The Knight knowing by Jack, that something was amiss,
sends down to see: news of this jest came, the knight angry (but to no
purpose, for he loved the fool above all, and that the household knew, else
Jack had paid for it, for the common peoples dancing was spoiled) sent down
Jack, and bad him out of his sight: Jack cries hang sir Willy, hang sir Willy
and departes.

Sir William not knowing how to amend the matter, caused the Piper to be
carried to bed, who was very ill: and said I would now give a gold noble for a
fool indeed to anger him thoroughly: one of the Minstrels whispers a Gentleman
in the ear, and said, if it pleased him he would, whereat the Gentleman
laughed: the Knight demanded the reason of his laughing, I pray you tell me
(quoth he) for laughing could never come in a better time, the fool has
madded me. If it please you (says the Gentleman) here is a good fellow will
go and attire him in one of his coats, and can in all points behave himself
naturally like such a one: it is good says the Knight) and I prithee good
fellow about it, and one go call Jack Oats hither, that we may hold him with
talk in the mean time.

The simple minstrell thinking to work wonders, as one ouerioyed at the good
opportunity, threw his Fiddle one way, his stick another and his case the
third way, and was in such a case of joy, that it was no boot to bid him make
have, but proud of the knights favor away he flings, as if he went to tak
possession of some great Lordship, but what ere he got by it, I am sure his
Fiddle with the fall fell in pieces, which grieved his master so that in love
and pity he laughed till the water ran down his cheeks: beside this good
knight was like to keep a bad Christmas, for the Bagpipes and the Music went
to wrack, the one burnt, and the other broken.

In comes Jack Oats and (being merry) told the knight and the rest, that a
Country-wench in the Hall had eaten Garlic and there was seauenteene men
poisoned with kissing her: for it was his use to jest thus: by and by comes in
a Messenger (one of the Knights men) to tell him that such a Gentleman had sent
his fool to dwell with him. He is welcome says the Knight, for I am weary of
this fool, go bid him come in, Jack bid him welcome: they all laughed to see
Iacks color come and go, like a wise man ready to make a good end: What say
you to this says the Knight? not one word says Jack. They tinged with a knife
at the bottom of a glass, as toulling the bell for the Fool, who was
speechless and would dye (then which, nothing could more anger him) but now
the thought of the new come Fool so much moved him, that he was as dead as a
door nail: standing on tip-toe looking toward the door to behold his
ariuall, that he would put his nose out of joint.

By and by enters my artificial Fool in his old clothes, making wry mouths,
dancing, and looking a squint: who when Jack beheld, suddenly he flew at him,
and so violently beat him, that all the Table rose, but could scarce get him
off: well, off he was at length, the Knight caused the broken ones to be by
themselves. My poor Minstrell with a fall had his head broke to the skull
against the ground, his face scratcht, that which was worst of all his left eye
put out, and withal so sore bruised, that he could neither stand nor go: the
knight caused him to be laid with the Pyper, who was also hurt in the like
conflict, who lackt no good looking to, because they miscarryed in the Knights
service: but ever after Jack Oats could not endure to hear any talk of
another Fool to be there, and the Knight durst not make such a motion. The
Pyper and the Minstrel being in bed together, one cried O his back and face:
the other, O his face and eye: the one cried O his Pype: the other, O his
fiddle, Good music or broken consorts they agree well together: but when they
were well, they were contented for their pains: they had both money and the
knights favor. Here you have heard the difference twixt a Flat fool natural,
and a flat fool artificial, one that did his kind, and the other who
foolishly followed his own mind: on which two is written this Rhyme.

Natural Fools, are prone to self conceit:
Fools artificial, with their wits lay wait
To make themselves Fools, liking the disguise,
To feed their own minds, and the gazers eyes.
He that attempts danger, and is free,
Hurting himself; being well cannot see:
Must with the Fiddler here wear the Fools coats,
And bide his penance signed him by Jack Oats.
All such say I, that use flat Foolerie,
Bear this, bear more; this flat Fools company.


Jack Oats could never abide the Cook, by reason that he would scald him out
of the Kitchen. Upon a time he had a great charge from his Lady to make her a
Quince Pie of purpose for Sir Williams own eating, which the Cook endeavored
to do, and sent to Lincoln of purpose to the Apothecaries for choice Quinces:
Jack being at this charge given, thought to be even with the Cook, and waited
the time when this Pie was made: it happened so the Cook could get no Quinces,
my Lady (for it was the Knights desire to have one) sent about to Boston, and
all the chief towns, but all in vain, the season served not: but rather then
sir William should be unfurnished, sent to Lincoln again to buy up many
Quinces ready preserved at Pothecaries, which she had, though with great cost.
The Knight asking his Lady for his pie, she told him with much ado she had
prevailed, but with no little pains in seeking Quinces, for she was feign to
buy them ready preserved, and to make a virtue of necessity that way. Sir
William seeing it was so, said it should be as well eaten, and sent for his
Friends, Gentlemen, and others of no small account. There was other great
cheer provided to furnish up this sumptuous Feast, and as he invited them, he
told them it was a Quince Pie, which he would have eaten: the day drew on, and
the Gentiles were come, and all was in a readiness, and still Jack forgot not
the Pie, but stood faintly sick, and refused his meat: the Knight sorry that
his best dish failed him, made no small account of his well fare, asked him:
Jack, says he, Where lies thy pain? In my mouth says he (meaning indeed
his mouth hung for the Quince Pie) a Barber was sent for from a Market town
hard by, who searched his mouth and could find no cause of pain: but sir
William thinking the Fool wanted wit to tell his grief (though not wit to
play the thief) bad the Barber depart, as king Jack what he would eat? He
said nothing: What he would drink: He said nothing: which made sir William
doubt much of his health, refusing his liquor, when it was usually his
practice, and the Knight ioyed in it too: asked him if he would lie down? still
answering no; but would stand by the Kitchen fire. The Knight that knew he
never came there but he did some exployte, forgetting that, led him by the hand
(so much he made of him) and bad the Cook see he wanted nothing. Jack standing
still, groand and said: If he dyed, he would forgive all the world but the
Cook. Hang Fool (says the Cook) I care not for thee, die to morrow if thou will, and so followed his business. They knocked to the Dresser, and the dinner
went up: Jack had a sheep eye in the Oven: anon the second course came, the
Pie was drawn, set by and among other backed meats was to be sent up, but
wanting Sugar, stepped aside to the spicerie to fetch it, and Jack in the mean
time catches the Pie and claps it under his coat, and so runs through the
Hall into the Yard, where was a broad Moate, and as he ran, the hot Pie burned
his belly: I says Jack are ye so hot Sir Willies Pie. I Will quence. ye anon
sir Willies Pie says he, and straight very subtly leapes into the Moate up
to the arm pits, and there stood eating the Pie. The Cook comes in, misses
the Pie, withal misses Jack, cries out, the Pie: sir Williams Pie was gone, the
Author of that feast was gone, and they all were undone: a hurly burly went
through the house, and one comes and whispers the Lady with the news: she
tells sir William how Jack Oats had stolen the Pie. Jack was searched for, and
anon found in the Moate. It was told the Knight where the Fool was eating it:
Gentlemen (quoth he) we are dissurnished of our feast, for Jack my Fool is in
my Moate up to the arme-pits eating of the Pie. They laughed and ran tothe
windows to see the jest: there they might see Jack eat, the Cook call, the
people hallow, but to no purpose: Jack fed and feeding greedily (more to anger
the Cook, then disapoint sir William) ever as he burnt his mouth with have
dipped the Pie in the water to cool it: O says the Cook it is Sir Williams
own Pie sir: O says Jack hang thee and Sir Willy too I care not, it is mine
now: save Sir William some says one, save my Lady some says another: by James
not a bit says Jack, and eat up all, to the wonder of the beholders, who
never knew him eat so much before, but drink ten times more: at length out
comes Jack dropping dry, and goes to get fire to dry him: the Knight and the
rest all laughed a good at the jest, not knowing how to amend it. Sir William
sends for the Cook, who came up with a sorrowful heart, and lamentably
complaining, said it was the Knights fault for placing him in the Kitchen,
where he never was but he did like villainy. The Knight not satisfied with the
Cooks answer, presently discharges him of his service, and sent him to live
else where: go says he, trusse up your trinkets and be gone, the Cook seeing
no remedy departed.

Jack being dry up he comes, and knowing he had offended, tells a jest (for it
was his manner so to do) how a young man brake his codpeece point, and let all
be seen that God sent him, or such fooleries, but that was not enough, and to
chide him was to make of things worse then it was, and to no purpose neither. Sir
William demanded why he eat the Pie: because I had a stomach says Jack:
would naught else serve says the Knight but my Pie? No Willy says he thou
would not be angry then, and the Cook had not been turned away: but all is
well thou art rich enough to buy more. The Knight perceiving the fools envy,
sent for the Cook, and did let him enjoy his place again. So all parties well
pleased but the young big-bellied woman, who perchance longed for this long
looked for Pie, but if she did though long looked for comes at last, yet they
shoot short that aim to hit this mark, for Jack Oats had eaten the Pie and
served himself. This was a flat fool, yet now and then a blind man may hit a
Crow, and you know a flooles boult is soon shot, out it goes happen how it
will, had Jack kept his own counsel the Cook had been still out of service,
and had been revenged, but now being in his place again may live to cry
quittance for the Quince Pie.

These quoth the world, are pretty toys: I quoth the Philosopher, but mark
the applyance. By Jack Oats is Morrally meant, many discribed like him, though
not Fools natural yet most artificial, they card hence what their Parents
spin, and do such Apish tricks, that rapine, ruin and a thousand
inconveniences follow. By the knight is meant maintainers of Foolery: by the
Hall, the Inn where the cards of vanity causes many to be bewitched as
appears in the serving men, who busy in others braules are as easily made
friends as they were set together by the ears. By the second is meant reach at
Stars, aiming at honor, lighting sometime on the ear of memory, but ill taken
because badly meant, is rewarded with a deserved whipping. By the third is called
to question most that musically fret their time out in idle baubling, and will
become artificial Fools to outhraue Fools indeed, but stick often in their
own quicksands, and are got out with repentance. But the fourth and last
shows the devouring of devotions diet, how ever come by yet they will stand up
to the arme-pits in danger rather then to lack their wills, to slack or
rebate the edge of their appetites: with this the world a little humde and
haide, said she was not pleased that such lived and did promise some
amendment, but desired to see further.

NOw our Philosophical Poker pokte on, and poynted to a strange show, the flat
Fool not so tall, but this fat Fool as low, whose description runs in meeter
thus:

This Fat Fool was a Scot borne, brought up
In Sterlin, twenty miles from Edinborough:
Who being but young, was for the King caught up*
Ser'ud this Kings Father all his life time through.
A yard high and a nail no more his stature,
Smooth faced, fair spoken, yet unkind by nature.
Two yards in compass and a nail I read
Was he at forty years, since when I heard not
Nor of his life or death, and further heed
Since I never read, I look not, nor regard not,
But what at that time Iemy Camber was,
As I have heard I Will write, and so let pass.
His head was small, his hair long on the same,
One ear was bigger then the other far:
His forehead full, his eyes shinde like a flame,
His nose flat, and his beard small, yet grew square,
His lips but little, and his wit was less,
But wide of mouth, few teeth I must confess.
His middle thick, as I have said before,
Indifferent thighs and knees, but very short:
His legs be square, a foot long and no more,
Whose very presence made the King much sport.
And a pearl spoone he still wore in his cap,
To eat his meat he loved, and got by hap
A pretty little foot, but a big hand,
On which he ever wore rings rich and good:
Backward well made as any in that land,
Though thick, and he did come of gentle blood,
But of his wisdom ye shall quickly hear,
How this Fat Fool was made on every where.


The world smiling at this Rhyme describing so unseemly a portackt, gave leave
to the rest, and desired greatly to be satisfied with something done, as one
longing to know what so round trust a lump could perform, the poking arts
master tells his doing thus.

When the King and Nobles of Scotland had welcomed Iemy Camber to the Court,
who was their countryman borne in Sterlin, but twenty miles from Edinborough,
this Kings birth town, as Greenwich was our late Queens. They reasoned with
him to understand his wit, which indeed was just none at all, yet merry and
pleasing, whereat the King rejoiced, and seeing he was so fat, caused his
Doctors and Physicians to minister to him, but Physic could not alter nature,
and he would never be but a S. Vincents Turnip, thick and round. Wherefore the
Doctors persuaded his grace, that the purging of the Sea was good for him: Well
nothing was undone that might be done to make Iemy Camber a tall little
slender man. When yet he looked like a Norfolk dumpling, thick and short. Well
to Leeth was he sent, which is the harbor town of such ships as ariue at
Edinborough: nearer they cannot come, which is some mile from the City. To sea
they put in a ship, at whose departure they discharged Ordinance, as one that
departed from the land with the Kings favor: the Earl Huntly was sent with
him to sea, to accompany him, so high he was esteemed with the King. Who
hearing the Ordinance go off, would ask what do they now? Marry says the
Earl, they shoot at our enemies: O says he, hit I pray God, Again they
discharge, what do they now quoth he? marry now the enemy shoots at us. O
miss I pray God (says Iemy Camber) so ever after it was a Jest in the
Scottish Court, hit or miss quoth Iemy Camber: that if a maid had a Barn,
and did penance at the Cross in the high Town of Edinborough: what has she
done? did she hit or miss? she has hit says the other, better she had mist
says the first: and so long time after this Jest was in memory, yea I have
heard it my self, and some will talk of it at this day. Well to Sea they put
on a fair Sunshine day, where Iemy stood fearful of every calm billow,
where it was no boot to bid him tell what the ship was made of, for he did it
devoutly: but see the chance, a sudden flaw or gust rose, the winds held
strong East and by West, and the ship was in great danger, insomuch as the
Earl, Master and all began to fear the weather: by and by a stronger gale
blew and split their maine Maste, and gave their ship a mighty leake, insomuch
as the crack made them all screek out: which Iemy hearing was almost dead with
fear: some fell to pumping, others on their knees to praying. But the fat
Fool seeing themselves in this danger, thought there was no way but one with
them, and was half dead with fear, in the end the wind turned, and the
raging of the Sea began to cease: I warrant thee now (quoth the Master) Iemy
we shall not be drowned: I, will ye warrant us, says the Fool? I says the
Master, I Will give thee my ship for thy Chain, if we be drowned: bear
witness my Lord says he, a plain bargain, and with-that threw the Master
his Chain, who would have given it to the Earl, but joy of their escape made
him delight in the Jest, and therefore the Master inioyed his bargain. With
much ado they attained thither again, where the king fearful before,
awayted their landing now, and seeing Iemy not a jot less of body then he was
(only lightened of his Chain) how now, quoth he, how do thou man? O says
Iemy, well now King, but ill had not the Master been, who warranted our lives
for my Chain, the best bargain that ever I made, for no way could I have been
a looser: how says the King? marry I Will tell thee King, quoth he, say we had
been drowned, his ship was forfeit to me for my chain, Earl Huntly was a
witness to the bargain: and now we are not drowned, for my chain did warrant
our lives of the master: nay says the Earl not our lives, none but yours
Iemy, our lives were as safe unwarranted without a chain. With this the fool
had some feeling of sense and on a sudden cried out mainly for his chain
again, which was restored to him by the Master, but he lost nothing by that,
for he attained to a suit, as the story says, that he had been three years
about. Thus the King and Nobles went to Edenborough merrily talking of their
fear and welfare.

IEmy this fat fool used every day to go from the Abbey in the low town, up
the hill into the City of Edenborough, and one evening above the rest, he met
with a broken Uirgin, one that had had a barn (as there they are known by
their attire) wearing a loose kerchiefe hanging down backward, she I say cried
sallets, as thus: buy any Cibus Salletea. Iemy desirous of Sallets, calls her
to him, less says he what shall I give thee for a good sallet? fair sir
says the wench (for she knew him for the Kings fool, and she could not
please him better then to call him fair sir) you give me an atchison now he
having nothing but six French Crowns about him, can thou change me a
Crown says he? yea sir says she: he gives her a French Crown, and she gave
him a sallet for it, and she went her way.

Iemy thinks it was much to give a crown for that, for which she did demand
but an atchison: which in our money is but three farthings he runs after and
says, she had his fairest crown, but says he give me that and take your
choice of these: thinking by that devise to get the first Crown again. Will
ye change says the less? I says the fool: so she takes all the five and
gives him one again, and so laughing at his folly, goes her way, it was in
vain to exclayme, for they will hold fast what they get: but my fat fool goes
home to eat his Sallet, and inuites the King to a dear dish, and made him
laugh heartely at the jest: The King calls for Uiniger to his Sallet, because
his sweet meat should have sower sauce, and persuaded him it was well bought,
otherwise if the fool had repented his bargain, it was his manner to cry for
his money again, yet with it all the Court could not quiet him.

BEtwixt Edenborough Abbey the Kings place and Leeth, there stands an even
plain green Meddow, in which the King used most of his sports: amongst which
he rode thither one day to run at the Glove, or the King, as his Grace should
please. With him rides Iemy Camber on a trotting Mule: it was then a marvelous
hot day. O (says Iemy) how cold the weather is (so wise he was that he
scarce knew hot from cold No says the King it is hot, look how I sweat. No
says Iemy the Sun blowesvery cold. No says the King, the wind shines very
hot. The Fool was almost angry to be crossed and said, he would be hanged at
night if he did sweat that day: with this merry talk they rode on: but one of
the Kings footmen hearing this, told the King at their return he would make
his Grace laugh heartily: so the King very gallantly ran that time, and never
mist the glove, and so did the Lords: which Iemy seeing said it was nothing to
do: The King bad him run, he did so: but the Glove lay still, and Iemy could
not do it.

The Kings footman (that watched to do him a good turn) said, Iemy could do it
better blindfold: what can he quoth the King, I will never believe it: you
shall see else quoth he, whereat Iemy marueiled much that without sight a man
could do that which with all his might and sight he could not do, was
desirous to make trial, so was blinded with a scarf, while another took up
the glove, and was ready for the jest: Iemy runs, now for my Maistris says
he, they all shout aloud and cry rarely well done, and one vnblindes him,
while another puts the glove on the spear. So simple he was, that he thought
it was strange, and bragged all that day not a little, the king did alight and
went to drink wine at the Lord H^mes house, and Iemy went with him, while the
footeman had time to work his will, and mingling a conceit with butter (which
I will not name, least some one should practice the like) clapped it under the
saddle, and as they rode to Edenborough, says the King what say you to the
weather now Iemy? me thinks it is hotter then it was? nay it is colder says
he for I begin to sweat.

The trotting of this Mule made the mingled confection lather so, that it got
into his breeches, and wrought up to the crown of his head, and to the sole of
his foot, and so he sweat profoundly: still he wipt and he wipt, sweating more
and more, they laughed a good to see him in that taking: now you must be hanged
quoth the King as your bargain was, for you sweat very much: what remedy
says he, I am content to be hanged but while I live after, I Will never believe
cold weather will make on sweat: no more will I says the King, but hot weather
will. Not or cold, says Iemy, I am warm now I am sure, I would I were over
head and ears in some river to cool me So simple he was that he knew not
whether it was the sun or the wind made him sweat: at night the King caused
him to be washed and perfumed, yet he was scarce sweet twenty days after. Thus
this fat fool chaft, but not in his own grease.

Iemy, who was as you have heard, a tall low man, and was swift of foot, on a
time challenged the Kings best footman, for a wager to run with him from the
Abbey up the hill to Cannegate (which stood entering to Edenborough, as Ludgate
does to London, and the Kings place about Temple-barre) the King being told of
this challenge, thought it would be good sport to see it performed, still
persuaded Iemy to dare his Foote-man, who before denied him, and knew Fools
would talk any thing though far unfit to perform any thing. Still the King
would say he was made nimble to run, and asked every Noble-mans judgment,
who likewise soothed the King: it was so that they made him believe he was
swift of foot, that I think Iemy in the end persuaded himself, that none but
fat men could run well, and nimble men being light would fall soonest,
considering that light things being of small substance not feeling themselves,
would surely fall. But here is the sport, the Foote-man seeing it was the Kings
pleasure to see the wager tried, dared him, which made Iemy mad, that he would
run with him from Edenborough to Barwicke (which was forty miles) in one day, a
thing as impossible as to pull down a Church in one hour, and to build it
again in another: for Iemy was lost in the kings company once of purpose, but
five mile from the City, at the Earl Mortons castle at da Keth, and they
thought he would never have come home again: when the King heard every hour
he was coming, and still as he entreated every passenger to let him ride, by
the kings watch in the high way, they had warning given to the contrary: for be
was seven days going five mile: then judge how long he would be a running
forty? you will muse how he did for meat all the time: I Will tell you he
fasted all day, and went supperlesse to bed, but being in his first sound
sleep, meat was brought and laid by him, and a Choppin of Wine (for so they
call it there) which made him at his coming to Court tell the King, heaven was
gentler then earthly men would show him no favor, neither to ride nor feed
him, when he was every night cast into a sound sleep, then when he wakt he
was sure of meat from heaven to feed on: when the meat came from the Kings
kitchen at Edenborough Abbey.

But to go forward with our challenge, the king said the first word should
stand, and on Iemies head he laid a thousand marks: the Lady Carmichell that
laughed to hear all this wagered as much on the Foote-mans head: the day was
appointed the next morning, being Thursday, to begin at five a clock in the
afternoon in the cool of the evening and every one to his race must make him
ready. Iemy as he had seen the kings Footmen do, washed his feet with Beer,
and soakt them in Butter, so all that night and the next day there was nothing
but Iemy and his provision to that great journey. The time came, Iemy was
stripped into his shirt, trust round for the purpose: the footman and he begins
to run: the Footeman makes show of great labor, and the Fool made the
substance, for he was quickly in a sweat: they pult and they blowde, they ran
as swift as a pudding would creep. Iemy thought himself no small fool to
outrun the Footman, and did in his mind assure himself to win: the King
laughes to see the toil he made, and the Footman made great show and little
pains. By and by Iemy calls for drinck, and the King loath he should have any
harm with labor, caused him to have a mixed drink to cast him into a
sleep: who when he had drunck, as he ran on his wager, he dropped down in the
street, as heavy as if a leaden plummet that makes a Jack turn the spit, had
fallen on the earth dab: there he slept, and was carried by command to the
top of the hill, and laid down again: there he slept half an hour, and
when he wakt he remembered his journey: seeing people still about him, up he
gets, away he iogs, and never looks behind him: and seeing Cannegate so near
him, had not the wit to wonder how he came there, but laid hold on the ring of
the gate, and staid to be seen. By and by the footman comes sweating, with
water powered on his face and head: O my heart, says he: O my legs says Iemy,
I will not do so much for all Scotland again. Well, Iemy cries victory,
victory: and there was the kings Coath at hand, to carry him home, for of
himself he could never have gone, had his life lain on it. But when he came
home, the bragges he made, the glory he got, how he out-ran the Footeman
(and ran so easily as if he had been a sleep) was wonderful: I, it was sport
enough for the King a month after to hear him tell it. Well the King won the
wager he thought, and that was honor sufficient for him: not three days
after he bad the King put away all his Footmen, and he would serve his turn
to any place The King thanked him for his good will, and said when his need
was great he would make bold to use him: so Iemy this fat fool ever bragged
of this wager.

THere was a Laundres of the Town, whose daughter used often to the Court to
bring home shirts and bands, which Iemy had long time loved and solicited, but
to no end she would not yield him an inch of her maidenhead: now Iemy vowed he
would have if all Well, she consented at last and to be short soon at night at
nine a clock, being in the winter, when she knew her mother to be gone to
watch with a sick body, he should come and all that night lie with her: Iemy
though witless, wanted no knauish meaning in this, thought long till it was
night. But in the afternoon, this Maid goes up to the castle and gathers a
great basket of Nettles, and coming home strawes them under the bed.

Night comes, nine a clock strikes, Iemy on his horse comes riding forward,
sets him up and knockes at the door, she lets him in and bids him welcome
bonny man: to bed he goes, and Iemy ever used to lie naked, as is the use of a
number amongst which number she knew Iemy was one, who no sooner was in bed,
but she her self knocked at the door, and her self asked who was there,
which Iemy hearing was afraid of her mother: alas sir (says she) creep under
the bed, my mother comes. Iemy bustled not a little, under he creepes stark
naked, where he was stung with nettles: judge you that have feeling of such
matters, there he lay turning this way and that way, here he stung his leg,
here his shoulder, there his buttockes: but the Maid having locked the door to
him, went to bed, and there lay he in durance (as they say) till morning: when
the day broke up gets the Maid, to Court she goes, and tells the Kings
Chamberlain of the matter, and he told the King, who laughed thereat right
heartely.

The Chamberlain was sent to see him there, who when he came found him fast a
sleep under the bed stark naked, bathing in nettles, whose skin when he
wakened him, was all blistred grievously. The Kings Chamberlain bid him arise
and come to the King. I will not quoth he, I will go make my grave. See how
things chanced, he spoke truer then he was awar for the Chamberlain going home
without him, told the King his answer. Iemy rose, made him ready, takes his
horse and rides to the Churchyard in the high town, where he found the Sexton
(as the custom is there) making nine graves, three for men, three for women,
and three for children, and who so dies next, first comes first served: lend
me thy spade says Iemy, and with that digs a hole, which hole he bids him
make for his grave, and does give him a French crown, the man willing to
please him (more for his gold then his pleasure) did so: and the fool gets
upon his horse, and rides to a gentleman of the town, and on the sudden
within two hours after dyed: of whom the Sexton telling he was buried there
indeed. Thus you see fools have a guess at wit sometime, and the wisest could
have done no more, nor so much. But thus this fat fool fills a lean grave with
his carcass, upon which grave the King caused a stone of Marble to be put, on
which the Poets writ these lines in remembrance of him:

He that guard all men till ieare,
Iemy a Camber he ligges here:
Pray for his sale, for he is geane,
And here a ligges beneath this steane.


Is this possible says the world, that I should be so served, nay thou art
worse served heareafter, says he, for thou know not the following scene,
but attend it.

By the Fool is meant all fatness, by the King nature that nursed him, by the
Nobles such as sooth him, and by the Ship, thee, in which many dangers are
floting through the sense of sin, and so if life were awarranted Fools, fat
ones, rich ones, would give the Chain of their souls, that is linkt to
salvation, only to inherit this earth in thy company, when earth though it be
heaven to hell, by reason of the pains, yet the comparison auerts, it is hell
to heaven, in respect of pleasures. By the second is meant the surfets ot soul
and body that Fools buy with their gold, not sparing any price to please
appetite, though the edge of it slice from the bosom of good old Abraham, very
heaven it self. By the third, how the fat Fools of this age, will groute and
sweat under this masste burden, and purge to the crown from the foot, though
their brain perish through the prevailing practice of busy endeavor. The
Mule, morrally signifies the Devil, upon whose trot their fatness takes ease,
and rides a gallop to destruction By the fourth tail is prefigured the
presumption of greatness, who are willing to outrun speed it self, through
greedy desire. In this is shown how flattery feeds them, placing before them
as in a sleep, work and wonder, when, to say footh, all is not worth the
wonder, their desire is more then ability to perform, and their practice
above all, yet the nimble ouershoot them in act, leaving them a quickness in
will. In the fifth, answer is made to the fourth when often such forward
deeds, meet with backward lurches, and they are stung with their own
follyes, netling very lust with shame and disgrace: it signifies Adultery in
fat ones, who (above their own) whoring after strange Gods make their Religion
ride hackney to hell, and when shame takes them from the horse, they make their
own graves and are buried in their own shame, with this Motto above written.

Fat fools gather to their woe,
Sorrow, shame, and care,
Here they lie that gallopt so,
In Deaths ingraued snare.


THis morrall motion gave the world such a buffet that she skringde her face as
though she were pincht home, yet seeing no remedy but that the flat and fat
Fools should draw in her Coach together, she sits in the boot and rides on.
The Crittick, reaches his glass to her view and presents the third. O this
was an humorous Sir indeed, lean Leonard, they call him a Fool of strange
and propostrous breeding, begat of envy, and out of doubt his base Son: his
description has a strain of more wonder, long like a lath, and of proportion
little better, but give his report hearing.

Curled locks on idiots heads,
Yeallow as the amber,
Plays on thoughts as girls with beads:
When their mass they stamber.
Thick of hearing yet thin eard,
Long of neck and visage,
Hookie nosde and thick of beard,
Sullen in his usage.
Clutter fisted long of arm,
Body straight and slenderd,
Boistrous hipt motly warm?
Ever went lean Leonard.
Gouty legd footed long,
Subtle in his folly,
Showing right but apt to wrong,
When a'peard most holy.
Understand him as he is,
For his marks you cannot miss.


You hear Maddam says our Cinnick how he is marked, if ye meet him in your
pottage-dish, yet know him. The world tho thee loved not the description, yet
she coneted his condition, and began to woe his report, which making no bones
of the sweet youth gave his doings thus.

IN the merry Forest of Shearewood dwells a kind gentleman, whose name I omit,
fearing I too much offend in meddling with his fool: but I trust he will pardon
me, for sithence he is so well known thereabouts, I think it not amiss to
tell it at London, that people seeing the strange works of God, in his
differing creatures, we that have perfect resemblance of God, both in sense and
similitude, may the better praise his name, that we differ from them whose
humors we read, see and hear, are not so strange as true. I say again this
Gentleman had a fool, Leonard they call him, lean of body, looking like
envy, whose conditions agree with his countenance: one time above all other
he locked himself into a Parlour, where all alone he played at slide-groat, as
his manner was, pieces or counters he had none, yet casting his hand empty from
him, fly says he, short with a vengeance: then play says he (to his fellow)
when indeed there is none but himself: but thus with supposes he plays
alone, swaggers with his game fellow, out swears him with a thousand oaths,
challenges him the field to answer him if he be a man, appoynts the place
and all, that if any not knowing his conditions, should stand without and hear
him, would think two swaggerers were fighting in the room.

To his play again he falls, seven up for twelve pence, for that is his game
still: well, they fall out, they go together by the ears, and such a hurly
burly is in the room that passes: at the last the stools they fly about, the
Pots they walk, the glasses they go together* nay the Prayer books they fly
into the fire, that such a noice there was that the whole house wondered at his
folly* persuasions were to no purpose doors he would open none, till they
violently brake them open, though they were of gold, and so they did, and
entered the Parlour, found all this level coil and his pate broken, his face
scratcht, and leg out of joint, as a number say to this hour, that he is a
play fellow for the devil, and in game they cannot agree: but that is
otherwise, for in the great hall at the serving man's request he will play by
himself, if they will not play with him: and who so plays with him, though
they play for nothing and with nothing, all is one they must fall out, and if
others be not by to part them mischief may be done, for he will lay it on,
take it off who will: so that at his first coming he endaungered many, and
now take heed is a fair thing, for few will come near him. Thus you may fee
fools that want wit to govern themselves well, have a wilful will to go
forward in folly.

THis lean greedy fool having a stomach, and seeing the butler out of the
way, his appetite was such, as loath to tarry, breaks open the Dairy house,
eats and spoils new cheesecurds, cheesecakes, overthrows cream bowls, and
having filled his belly, and knew he had done evil, gets him gone to Mansfield
in Sherwood, as one fearful to be at home: the Maids came home that morning
from milking, and finding such a masaker of their Dairie, almost mad, thought a
years wages could not make amends: but O the fool lean Leonard, they cried,
hedid this mischief, they complained to their Master, but to no purpose,
Leonard was far enough off, search was made for the fool, but he was gone
none knew whether, and it was his property having done mischief, never to
come home of himself, but if any one entreated him, he would easily be won.

All this while the fool was at Mansfield in Sherwood, and stood gaping at a
shoomakers stall: who not knowing him asked him what he was? go look says
he, I know not my self: they asked him where he was borne: at my mothers
back says he: in what country quoth they? in the country quoth he where God
is a good man: at last one of the three iournymen imagined he was not very
wise, and flouted him very merrily, asking him if he would have a stitch where
there was a hole? (meaning his mouth) I quoth the Fool, if your nose may be
the needle: the Shoemaker could have found in his heart, to have took measure
on his pate with a Last in steed of his foot: but let him go as he was.

A Country Plow-iogger being by, noting all this, secretly stole a piece of
Shoomakers wax off the stall, and coming behind him; clapped him on the head,
and asked him how he did: the Fool seeing the pitch ball pulled to have it
off, but could not but with much pain, in an envious spleen, smarting ripe,
runs after him, falls at fistie cuffes with him, but the fellow belabored the
Fool cunningly, and got the Fools head under his arm, and bobd his nose: the
Fool remembering, how his head was, strikes it up, and hits the fellows mouth
with the pitched place, so that the hair of his head, and the hair of the
Clownes beard, were glude together: the fellow cried, the Fool exclaimed, and
could not suddenly part, in the end the people (after much laughing at the
Jest) let them part fair: the one went to pick his beard, the other his head:
the Constable came asked the cause of their falling out, and knowing one to be
Leonard the lean Fool, whom he had a Warrant from the Gentleman to search
for, demands of the Fellow how it happened: the Fellow he could answer nothing
but vm, vm, for his mouth was sealed up with wax: do thou scorn to speak,
says he, I am the kings Officer knave: vm, vm, quoth he again, meaning he
would tell him all when his mouth was clean: but the Constable thinking he
was mocked, clapped him in the stocks, where the Fellow sat a long hour farming
his mouth, and when he had done, and might tell his grief, the Constable was
gone to carry home Leonard to his Master, who not at home, he was enforced to
stay Supper time, where he told the Gentleman the Jest, who was very merry to
hear the story, contented the Officer, and bad him to set the Fellow at
liberty, who betimes in the morning was found fast a sleep in the stocks: the
Fellow knowing himself faulty, put up his wrongs, quickly departed, and went
to work betimes that morning with a flea in his ear.

THe Gentleman with whom this Leonard dwelt, haning bought a goodly fair
Hawke, brought her home, being not a little proud of his pennyworth, and at
Supper to other Gentlemen, fell a praising of her, who smoothing up his humor,
likewise failed not to add a toarch of fire to increase more flame, for
indeed the Bird was worthy of commendations, and therefore did merit praises.
Leonard standing by with his finger in his mouth, as it was his custom, often
hearing them praise the goodness of the Hawke, thought indeed they had meant
for goodness being far better meat then a Turkey or a Swan, was very
desirous to eat of the same: and unknown goes down, and suddenly from the
perch snatch the Hawke, and having wrung off her neck, begins to besiedge that
good morsel, but with so good a courage, that the feathers had almost choakt
him: but there lay my friend Leonard in a lamentable taking. Well, the Hawke
was mist, and the deed was found, the Master was fetched, and al men might see
the Hawk, feathers and all not very well disgested: there was no boot to bid
run far drams to drive down this vndisgested moddicome: the Gentleman of the
one side, cried hang the Fool, the Fool on the other side cried not, but made
signs that his Hawke was not so good as he did praise her for: and though the
Gentleman loved his Hawke, yet he loved the Fool above: being enforced rather
to laugh at his simplicifie, then to vex at his losses suddenly: Being glad
to make himself merry, tested on it ever after: upon whose Hawke a Gentleman
of his, very wisely writ these lines, and gave unto his master. Fools feed
without heed, unhappy be their feeding,
Whose heed being in such speed, attempted without heeding
May they choke that provoke, appetite by pleasure,
When they eat forbidden meat, and feed so out of measure.


The Gentleman laughed at this rhyme, yet knew not whether was the more Fool,
he for writing, the other for eating or he for loosing Well, putting the Hare
to the Goosegiblets, seeing there was no remedy, made himself pastime, pleased
himself, and did rest contented.

HE that mischiefs many, sometime wrongs himself: as hearken to this Jest:
Leonard of all things loved his Wheele-barrow, and would work all day and
carry dung in it, yet would sleep in it at night, he would set up meat for
his belly in it, I what did he without it? Once at a Christmas time, when the
fire in the Hall was full, Leonard was sore a cold, he got coals out of the
Scullery, and put them into his Barrow, and set them on fire, and so sat him
down to warm him, quite forgetting it was made of Wood, and wood would burn,
so in the end being warm, goes for a Jack of Beer, brings it, and sets it on
the fire to warm, so that the inside melted, and he dranck the drinck
notwithstanding: but on the sudden he seeing the Wheele-barrow flame that he
so loved, aloud he cries, O me, O me, O me, and takes it up flaming, and
trundles, it into the Hall, among the people to show: the young men and maids
tumbled over one another for fear* some had their faces burned, others their
legs: the maids their smocks, yea one set fire on another, for their Aprons
burned, and being many people the flame increased rather then decreased:
Leonard seeing none would help him, runs (for fear least the Gentleman should
know it) and thrusts it into the Barn to hide it, which some seeing, runs
after, and had they not come at that time, the Hay and Straw had been all
burnt, for it was already of a light fire, but being quenched out, all was well:
such is the envy of fools who seeing none would help him, thought to do
them mischief, which he did, but not much.

The World laughing a good at these jests, though to say sooth she could
hardly afford it, for fear of writhing her sweet favor, yet strayning
courtesy in this kind, did as our wantons do at a feast, spare for manners in
company but alone cram most greedily. So she forgetting modesty gapte out a
laughter, and like women hardly won cryde more more. The currish Crittick
said she should, and gave her the third pennerth of the morrall, and said, you
laugh at lean envy in a long fool, but you have cause to weep at long envy
in a lean age, as you live in. This fool cries not all mine, but distributes
like a kind companion, being a suficiall glass to gaze in. There be lean
fools as well as fat, such are they whose noses drops necessity, and they
smell out for Church lands, many tenaments, unthrifts furfets, looking leanely
in all this, but feed fatly in hope. This fatness goes to the heart, not
seen in the visage. These seem simple, but like Leonard hit home at advantage,
they can stop men's mouths and seal them up in advantage, and give the stocks
to the simple deseruer, when themselves are not blameless. O beware when you
see a long meager look, search him he has also reaching fingers, and can
slide a groat by himself as Leanord did, fall out, curse, swear, and batter
heaven it self with humor of folly. Such was the lean neckt Crane, who bad
the fat Fox to dinner making him lick the outside of the glass, while his
leanness fed within. You understand me madame, such are your landlords to the
poor, your lean lords to the fat tennant, or by a figure one for the other.
Thus they batten here, but the Devil will gnaw their bones for it.

By the third jest we observe a greediness in lean folly, that so good report
come in their way these eat up hawke feathers and all to put it by, though
they choke in the deed. Heerupon comes it lean envy swallows fat bits, I
mean honest manners, and makes them stirril of all good means, as the Lawyer
the poor clyants plow pence, the city the country commodities, that under
show of leannes they fat themselves to the ribs, good hold for flesh hooks at
the general waste. By the fourth and last (I would it were least) it bewrayes
a curious and common leanness in lewd livers, who to revenge on others will
fire their own wheel barrow. Like the lean tennant who fallen out with his
landlord, and seeing his neighbors house on fire desired his neighbors to
pull down his first, for fear of more danger, not that he loud his
neighbors safety and his own, but that he hated his landlord. Or the
contrary covetous of their own commodity fire themselves, and because they
will not burn alone endanger their friends, and say it is kind to have company.
These are fools indeed lean ones, these are fat at soul and make thick
doings for the devils diet. World I name them not thou know them well enough.
At this she bit her lip, knowing some that were lean Leonards in this, but kay
me I Will kay thee, give me an inch to day I Will give thee an ell to morrow, and
we will to hell together. The World dimpling her chin with mere modesty as it
were, throwing off variety of (...) (...), began to say sooth thou say true,
there are such tricks in me, but I know not how to mende, I am willing ^t
flesh is weak, prithee be more sparing, carpe but confound not, hope the best
amendment may come. Prithee go in furnish thy sallet, these herbs already are
sauory, and I pick out to my appetite, and though I be not altogether
pleased, yet am I not quite past patience, I will endure, for that disease that
lesters so must receive cure gladly, though it come with exceeding pain, yet
so much the profit by how much the perplexities cries aue to the danger.
Mistress says Sotto I am glad to sit so near you, and to be thought a kind
neighbor too is more then the world affords. But look who is here, we have
followde one with our flat and fat fool, disturbd by the leave. Now as in a
history we mingle mirth with matter, to make a please plaster for melancholy;
so in our glass we present to the lean a clean. One that was more bel^ued
among Ladies then thought can hatch, or opinion produce. His name is Jack
Miller, he lives yet and has been in this city within few days, and give me
leave to discribe him thus:

You that folly comprehend,
Listen to my story,
This description well attend,
I have writ it for ye.
This clean nigit was a fool.
Shapt in mean of all,
And of order fit to rule,
Anger in her loudest braul.
Fat and thick, neat and clean,
And delights in pleasure,
Save a nasty ugly strain:
Of an other measure,
From his nosthrils rumatick.
Grief it was to see,
Such a simple neatness spring,
From imbisillitie.
Creatures of the better sort,
For the Fool was clean,
Gave him love with good report,
Had not this ill been.
But let slip it was no fault,
Men as slougish be,
Since the wisest iump as short,
In all cleanlynesse as he.


Alas quoth the world, I am sorry trust me, that one so outwardly well, should
be so inwardly ill, and have that appearance in nastie defect, which of it
self is neat: but go on with the repeticion since we are mended in the
condition. We will winck at small faults, tho we yield it great in nature.
Nemo sine crimine and so forth. I quoth Sotto, say ye me so, have at him then,
out it goes, but mark it well.

IN a Gentleman's house where Jack Miller resorted as he was welcome to all: it
chanced so there was a Play, the Players dressed them in the Gentleman's
Kitchen, and so entered through the Entry into the Hall. It was after dinner
when Pyes stood in the Oven to cool for Supper: Jack had not dyned, and seeing
the Oven stand open, and so many Pyes there untold (he thought because they
seemed numberless) O says lack, for one of them p. p. pyes, for so he
stammered in speaking (the Players Boy being by, and in his Ladies Gown) could
have found in his heart to creep in clothes and all: but he persuaded Jack to
do so, to which he was willing, and very nimbly thrusts in his head into the
hot Oven, which being but newly opened, on the sudden he was singed both of
head and face, and almost not a hair left on his eyebrows, or beard: Jack
cries, O I burn, and had not the wit to come back, but lay still: the
Gentlewoman Boy took him by the heels and pulled him out, but how he looked I
pray you judge that can discern favors, Jack was in a bad taking with his
face poor soul, and looked so ugly and so strangely, that the Lady of the Play
being ready to enter before the Gentiles to play her part, no sooner began but
remembering Jack, laughed out, and could go no further: the Gentleman muzed at
what he laughed, but such a Jest, being easily seen, was told the Gentleman,
who sent in for Jack Miller, who came like bald Time, to tell them time was
past of his hair: but he so strangely looked, as his countenance was better
then the Play. But against night the Players dressed them in another place, and
at Supper Jack Miller sung his song of Dirryes fair, with a barmy face to take
out the fire, and looked like the Pater of the Alefat^^it was no boot to bid
him stut and stammer, poor Fool as clean as he was, he was now but beastly
faced, for he looked like a man, that being ashamed to show his face, had hid
it in a dry lome wall, and pulling it out again, left all the hair behind
him.

Jack, on Newyeeres day in the morning, was to carry a Newyeres gift to a
gentleman a mile off; and as he staid to have it delivered to him to bear,
asked which was the cleanest way thither? A fellow knowing his cleanliness,
sends him over a durty marsh: and so he folded up his hand (then clean) for
fouling, that at the gentleman's door he might put it on. The present came,
which Jack seeing, made legs to the gentlewoman, forgetting his band was in his
hose, carried a stif neck to and fro to the gentlewoman, and what ere she
spoke, or where ere she stood, Jack would look but one way, as though his neck
had bin starcht. And remember, says the gentlewoman, you abuse not my message,
nor my gift. No so so forsooth says Jack: and away he goes, and thought he
would see what it was, and as he went he lift up the basket lid and looked: Ah
ha quoth Jack I see now it is Almond bu bu butter. Along he goes, and seeing
the marsh wet and durty, thought to leap a little ditch, and so to go a
clean hie way, but (O poor Jack) he, basket and all lay in the midst of the
ditch up to the arm pits in mud, which Jack seeing got out, and goes to a
river by and washes himself first, his band next, where if it had been about
his neck as it should, it had been labor well saved, but he washed his basket of
Almond butter so long that the butter was washed away, which he perceiving, in
that woeful taking comes back and called for more bu bu butter. The gentlewoman
seeing how things went rather laughed then vexed, because she was so simple to
trust a fool with matters of trust, and bad him get him to the fire and dry
him, and said. Next time she would stay her servants leisure (who then were
abroad) rather then trust to a rotten staff. Thus clean fools light still on
beastly bargains.

IN the town of Esam in Worstersh. Jack Miller being there borne, was much
made of in every place: It happened that the Lord Shandoyes Players came to
town, and played there, which Jack not a little loved, especially the Clown,
whom he would embrace with a joyful spirit, and call him Grumball (for so he
called himself in gentlemen's houses, where he would imitate plays, doing all
himself, King, Gentleman, Clown and all, having spoke for one, he would
suddenly go in, and again return for the other: and stammering as he did
made much mirth To conclude, he was a right innocent, without any villainy at
all.

When these Players I speak of had done in the town, they went to Partiar,
and Jack swore he would go all the world over with Grumball. It was then a
great frost new begun, and the Haven was frozen over thinely: but here is the
wonder, the Gentleman that kept the Heart (an Inn in the town) whose backside
looked to the way that led to the river side to Partiar, locked up Jack in a
chamber next the Haven, where he might see the players pass by, and they of
the town loath to lose his company desired to have it so: But he I say seeing
them go by, creepes through the window, and said I come to thee Grumball. The
Players stood all still to see further. He got down very dangerously, and makes
no more ado but venters over the Haven, which is by the long bridge, as I
guess some forty yards over: yet he made nothing of it, but my heart aked when
my ears heard the ise crack all the way. When he was come unto me, I was
amazed, and took up a brick bat (which lay there by) and threw it, which no
sooner fell upon the ise but it burst. Was not this strange, that a fool of
thirty years was borne of that ise which would not endure the fall of a
brickbat? but every one rated him for the deed, telling him the danger. He
considered his fault; and knowing faults should be punished, he entreated
Grumball the Clown who he so dearly loved to whip him, but with Rosemary, for
that he thought would not smart. But the Players in jest breecht him till the
blood came, which he took laughing, for it was his manner ever to weep in
kindness and laugh in extremes. That this is true, mine eyes were witnesses
being then by.

Jack Miller welcomed to all places, and hard of none, came to a Gentleman, who
being at dinner, requested him for mirth, to make him a play, which he did, and
to sing Derries fair, which was in this manner. First it is to be noted, he
stutted hugely, and could neither pronounce b. nor p. and thus he began. As I
went to Derries fair, there was I ware of a jolly beggar,
Mistress Annis M. Thomas, under a tree mending of shoone,
Mistress Annis M. Thomas hight brave beggars every one.


And so forward: but the Jest was to hear him pronounce brave Beggars, and his
quality was, after he began his song, no laughing could put him out of it.
One standing by noting his humor that b. and p. plagued him, bad him say this
after him, which Jack said he would do.

Buy any flawne, pasties, pudding pyes, plum pottage, or pescods O it was death
to Jack to do it: but like a willing Fool he fell to it: Buy any, buy any
fla flaw: p p p pasties, and p p p pudding p p p pyes, p p p, etc.

And ever as he hit the on word, he would pat with his finger on his other
hand, that more and more it would make a man burst with laughing, almost to see
his action: sometime he would be pronouncing one word while one might go to
the door and come again: But ever after, Gentiles would request him to speak
that, where before Derryes fair was all his Song.

He came not long after (to this I am witness; because my ears heard it) to a
Gentleman's not far from Upton upon Seuerne in Gloucestershire: where at the
Table (amongst many Gallants and Gentlewomen, almost the state of the Country)
he was to jest and sing, especially they entreated him for his new speech of
the Pees: which he began in such manner to speak, with driueling and
stuttering, that they began mightily to laugh: insomuch that one proper
Gentlewoman among the rest, because she would not seem too immodest with
laughing: for such to the (...) (...) that think to make all when God (...)
they mar (...) so she straining her self, though inwardly she laughed
heartily, gave out such an earnest of her modesty; that all the Table rung of
it. Who is that, says one? Not I, says another: but by her cheeks you might
find guilty Gilbert, where he had hid the brush. This Jest made them laugh more,
and the rather that she stood upon her marriage, and disdained all the
Gallants there, who so heartely laughed that an old Gentle woman at the Table
took such a conceit at it with laughing, that had not the fool bin, which
stood (by fortune) at her back, and was her supporter, being in a great swound,
she had fallen to the ground backward: but down they burst the windows for
air, and there was no little boot, to bid run: she was nine or ten days ere
she recovered that fit on my knowledge. Thus simple Jack made mirth to all,
made the wisest laugh, but to this day gathered little wit to himself.

This quoth the World is mere mirth without mischief and I allow of it; Folly
without faults is as reddish without salt may pass in disgestion one without
the other, and do better, where both together ingenders but rheum, and mirth
does well in any. I says Sotto so way you not the true weight, as it is
sufferable to be whole so it is saluable to be hurt, and one to the other gives
aim, but to be neither is monstrous. I would feign Morrall of it if you
please. Leave was granted, for the World knew it would else be commanded, and
Sotto thus points at the Parable. By the first merry emblem I reach at stars,
how they fire themthemselues in the firmament, whether it be with sitting too
near the Sun in the day, or couching to near the Moon in the night I know
not, but the hair of their happiness often falls off, and shoots from a
blazing Commet to a fallen star, and carries no more light then is to be seen
in the bottom of Platoes inck-horne, and where they should study in private
with Diogenes in his Cell, they are with Cornelius in his tub. By the second,
the clean sooles of this world are patternd, who so neately stand upon their
ruffes and shooties, that the brain is now lodged in the foot, and thereupon
comes it that many make their head their foot, and employment is the drudge to
prodigality, made saucy through the mud of their own minds, where they so
often stick fast that Banks his horse with all his strength and cunning cannot
draw them out. By the third is figured saucie adventure in folly, for wisdom
puts forward no further then warrant, and for pleasure the wisest make
themselves fools. To conclude this foolish description of the fourth, many
sing out their times and like idiots true borne, confound with folly what was
created more holy, stutting out trifles that out method matter of more weight,
where nisetie her self will let go in laughter, though she spoil her
marriage. The World likte not this well, but bit the lip again, but as rich
men suffer wrongs for advantage, took her pennerths together, casts her eye a
side, and sees a comely fool indeed passing more stately, and who was this
forsooth Will Summers, one not meanly esteemed by the King for his meriment, his
mellody was of a higher strain, and he looked as the noone broad waking. His
description was writ in his forehead and ye might read it thus:

Will Summers borne in Shropshire, as some say,
Was brought to Greenwitch on a holy day,
Presented to the King, which fool disdayn'd,
To shake him by the hand; or else ashamed,
How er'e it was, as ancient people say,
With much ado was won to it that day.
Lean he was, hollow eyde, as all report;
And stoop he did too, yet in all the Court,
Few men were more beloved, then was this fool,
Whose merry prate kept with the King much rule,
When he was sad, the King and he would rhyme.
Thus Will exiled sadness many a time.
I could describe him, as I did the rest;
But in my mind I do not think it best:
My reason this, how e're I do descry him,
So many knew him, that I may belie him.
Therefore to please all people one by one,
I hold it best to let that pains alone.
Only thus much, he was a poor man's friend,
And helped the widow often in the end:
The King would ever grant what he did crave;
For well he knew Will no exacting knave:
But wished the King to do good deeds great store,
Which caused the Court to love him more and more.


The world was in love with this merry fool, and said he was fit to the time
indeed, therefore deserude to be well regarded. Insomuch as she longed to
hear his friscoes morrallised, and his gambals set down. And Sotto as
willingly goes forward thus:

Will Summers, in no little credit in the Kings Court, walking in the Park at
Greenwich, fell a sleep on the style that leads into the walk, and many that
would have gone that way, so much loved him, that they were loath to disease
him, but went another way, I, the better sort: for now adays beggars are
gallants, while gentiles of right blood seem tame russians: but note the love
that Will Summers got: A poor woman seeing him sleep so dangerously, either to
fall backward, or to hurt his head, leaning so against a post, fetch him a
cushen and a rope, the one for his head, and the other to bind him to the post,
from falling backward and thus he slept, and the woman stood by, attending as
groom of his chamber.

It chanced so, that upon great occasion, as you shall after hear, Will Summers
uncle came out of Shropshire to seek him in the Court, a plain old man of
threescore years, with a buttoned cap, a lockram falling band, course, but
clean, a russet coat, a white belt of a horse hide, right horse-coller,
white-leather, a close round breech of russet sheeps wool, with a long stock of
white kersey, a high shoo with yelow buckles, all white with dust: for that day
the good old man had come three and twenty miles on foot. This kind old man
coming up in his Countries behalf, and coming into Greenwitch, asked the way
to the Court: every one directs him, but one villain Page directs him by the
Court gate, to cross in a Boat over to Blackwal, and told him that was the
Court. The silly old man willingly paid his penny before hand, and was going
over: but some that ouer-heard their talk, hindered his journey, and laughed at
the Jest, yet pittyed his simplicity, and sets him the right way. When he came
in and saw such a place, he was amazed and stood gazing: which the Guard and
Gentlewomen in their windows had much sport to see: at last one asked him what
he was?

The old man answers, a poor Shropshire man and demands if there were not a
Gentleman in the Court dwelling, called by the name of M. William Summers? (for
the Country hearing him in favor in the Court, said he was so at least.) The
Courtier answered, here is such a one indeed. For fault of a worse, says he,
I am his Uncle, and wept with joy, that he should see him. Marry says the
man, I Will help you to him straight: for I tell you, not any in the court drust
but have sought him, which this man did, and it was told them, he was walked
into the Park, while the King slept that hot day: thither went they to seek
him. All this while my friend William was in counsel with the post, and the
cushen stood as arbitrator betwixt them, and the woman by as a witness what
was said and done, at last, came these two and wakened him. William seeing his
head soft, what soft post is this, quoth he? A post of mine own making, says
the woman. But she lost nothing by her good will: for ere she left Will.
Summers, she got him to get her sons pardon of the King, who was to be
hanged, three days after for piracy: but by Will. Summers means he deceived
the hangman. This and many good deeds he did to diverse.

The fool being wakened, looks about him, when he had thanked the woman,
asked what news? says the man, sir, here is your uncle come out of the
Country to see you. God a mercy cousin, says Will Summers. I thank thee for thy
labor, you cannot uncle me so. Yes truly Sir, I am your own dear uncle, M.
William, and with that wept. Are you my uncle says Will? I sir, says he. Are
you my Uncle, says he again? I sure and verily too. But are you my uncle
indeed? by my vusse I am says the old man. Then uncle by my vusse welcome to
Court, says Will Summers, but what make you here uncle? He up and tells his
coming to him. Will takes him by the hand, come says he thou shall see
Harry, uncle, the only Harry in England, so he led him to the chamber of
Presence, and ever and anon cries. Aware room for me and my uncle, and knaves
bid him welcome. You are welcome sir said they, the old man thought himself no
earthly man, they honored him so much.

But Will ready to enter the Presence, looks on his uncle, and seeing him not
fine enough to look on the King: Come uncle says he, we will have your geere
mended, leads him to his chamber, and attires him in his best fools coat,
simply God wot, meaning well to him, and the simple old man as simply put it
on, cap and all. Out they come, and up they came, and to the King they go, who
being with the Lord Treasurer alone merry, seeing them two, how Will had got
another fool, knew there was sport at hand. How now says the King, what news
with you? O Harry says he, this is my own uncle, bid him welcome. Well said the
King he is welcome. Harry says he hear me tell thee a tale, and I will make
thee rich, and my uncle shall be made rich by thee. Will tells the King, how
Terrils frith was enclosed. Tirrils frith, says the King? what is that? Why,
the Heath where I was borne, called by the name of Terils Frith: now a
gentleman of that name takes it all in, and makes all the people believe it is
his, for it took the name from him: so that Harry the poor pine, and their
cattle are all undone without thy help.

And what should I do says the King? Marry says Will send to the Bishop of
Hereford, he is a great man with Terrill, command him to set the Frith at
liberty again, who is now imprisoned by his means. And how shall I be rich by
that says the King? The poor will pray for thee says Will, and thou shall
be rich in heaven, for on earth thou art rich already. All this was done, and
Wills uncle went home who while he lived for that deed was allowed Bailey of the
Common, which place was worth twenty pound a year.

Howsoever these three things came in memory, and are for mirth incerted into
stage plays, I know not; but that Will Summers asked them of the King, it is
certain, there are some will affirm it now living in Greenewich. The King
upon a time being extreme melancholy and full of passion, all that Will could
do will not make him merry. Ah, says he, this must have must have a good
shower to cleanse it, and with that goes behind the Arras. Harry (says he i will
go behind the Arras and study three questions, and come again, see therefore
you lay aside this melancholy muse, and study to answer me. I (quoth the King)
they will be wise ones no doubt. At last out comes William with his wit, as the
fool of the play does with an anticke look, to please the beholders. Harry
says he, what is that the lesser it is, the more it is to be feared? The King
mused at it, but to grace the jest the better he answered he knew not. Will
made answer it was a little bridge over a deep river, at which he smyled.
What is the next William says the King? Marry this is next, what is the
cleanliest trade in the world? Mary says the King I think a Comfitmaker, for
he deals with nothing but pure ware, and is attired clean in white linen
when he sels it. No Harry says Will, you are wide. What say you then, quoth. the
King? mary says Will I say a durtdauber Out on it says the King, that is the
foulest, for he is durty up to the elbows. I says Will, but then he washes
him clean again, and eats his meat cleanly enough. I promise thee Will says
the King thou have a pretty foolish wit, I Harry says he it will serve to make
a wiser man then you a fool me thinks, at this the King laughed, and demands
the third question. Now tell me says Will if you can, what it is that being
borne without life, head, lip or eye, yet does run roaring through the
World till it dye? this is a wonder quoth the King, and no question, I know it
not. Why quoth Will it is a fart. At this the King laughed heartily, and was
exceeding merry, and bids Will ask any reasonable thing, and he would grant
it. Thanks Harry says he, now against I want I know where to find, for yet I
need nothing, but one day I shall, for every man sees his latter end, but
knows not his beginning. The King understood his meaning, and so pleasantly
departed for that season, and Will laid him down amongst the Spaniels to
sleep.

ON a time appointed the King dined at Windsor in the Chapel yard, at
Cardinal Wolseys, at the same time when he was building that admirable work
of his tomb, at whose gate stood a number of poor people to be served of
alms when dinner was done within, and as Will past by they saluted him, taking
him for a worthy personage, which pleased him. In he comes, and finding the
King at dinner, and the Cardinal by attending, to disgrace him that he never
loved, Harry says he, lend me ten pound. What to do says the King? to pay
three or four of the Cardinals creditors quoth he, to whom my word is past,
and they are come now for the money. That thou shall Will quoth he. Creditors of
mine says the Cardinal? I Will give your Grace my head if any man can justly
ask me a penny. No says Will? lend me tend pounds, if I pay it not where
thou owe it, I Will give thee twenty for it. Do so says the King, that I will
my Liege says the Cardinal, though I know I owe none. With that he lends Will
ten pounds. Will goes to the gate and distributes it to the poor, and brought
the empty bag, there is thy bag again says he, thy creditors are satisfied,
and my word out of danger.

Who received it, says the king? the Brewer or the Baker? Neither (Harry)
says Will Summers: But (Cardinal) answer me in one thing: To whom do thou
owe thy soul? To God (quoth he) To whom thy wealth? To the poor, says he.
Take thy forfeit (Harry) says the fool, open confession, open penance: his
head is thine, for to the poor at the gate I paid his debt, which he yields
is due: or if thy stony heart will not yield it so, save thy head by denying
thy word, and lend it me: thou know I am poor, and have neither wealth nor
wit, and what thou lendest to the poor, God will pay thee ten fold: he is my
surety, arrest him, for by my troth hang me when I pay thee. The King laughed
at the jest, and so did the Cardiuall for a show, but it grieved him to jest
away ten pound so: yet worse tricks then this Will Summers served him after,
for indeed he could never abide him: and the forfeiture of his head had like
to have been paid, had he not poisoned himself.

THere was in the time of Will Summers, another artificial Fool or Iester in
the Court, whose subtlety heapt up wealth by gifts given him, for which Will
Summers could never abide him: but indeed lightly one fool cannot endure the
sight of another, as Jack Oats the Minstrell in the flat Fools story, and one
beggar is woe, that another by the door should go. This Iester was a big man,
of a great voice, long black locks, and a very big round beard: on a time (of
purpose) Will Summers watched to disgrace him, when he was ingling and jesting
before the King. Will Summers brings up a mess of milk and a manchet, Harry
says he, lend me a spoone: Fool says the Iester, use thy hands, help hands
for I have no lands, and meant, that saying would warrant his gross feeding. I
says Will Summers, Beasts will do so, and Beasts will bid others do, as they
do themselves. Will, said the King, thou know I have none: true Harry says
he, I know that, therefore I asked thee, and I would (but for doing thee harm)
thou had no tongue to grant that fool his next suit, but I must eat my
cream some way. The King, the Iester and all gathers about him to see him eat
it. Will begins thus to rhyme over his milk: This bit Harry I give to thee, and
this next bit must serve for both which I Will eat apace: (me,
This bit Madame unto you, and this bit I my self eat now, and all the rest
upon thy face.


Meaning the fool, in whose beard and head the bread and milk was thick sown,
and his eyes almost put out. Will Summers he gets him gone for fear. This
lusty iester forgetting himself, in fury draws his dagger, and begings to
protest: nay says the King, are ye so hot, claps him fast, and though he
draws his dagger here, yet let him put it up in another plaee. The poor
abused Iester, was Iested out of countenance, and lay in durance a great while,
till Will Summers was feign (after he had broken his head to give him a
plaster) to get him out again: but never after came my Iuggler in the Court
more, so near the King, being such a dangerous man to draw in the presence of
the King.

Now Lady world says Sotto you wonder at this first jest, do not it is common,
for who so simple that being gordgd with broth themselves, will not give their
friends on spoonful, especially our kin. O we will to make them great make our
selves, and pollitikly rise again by their greatness. But he was simple in
that, for though he raised many, himself stood at one stay. But the deed is
not common therefore may fitly be termed a flooles deed, since the wise meddle
not with it, unless to plunge further in and wind from poverty. But leave it
to the greatest power of all to remedy and revenge, while earthly Majesty
grows great by adding liberty totheir afflictions, as in our commons of late,
God preserve him for it. By the second morrally, signification gives this, that
fools questions reach to mirth, leading wisdom by the hand as age leads
children by one finger, and though it houlds not fast in wisdom, yet it
points at it. Better so then the wise to put questions to fools, for that's to
put the money out of the bag, and leave the money behind to bad use, while
themselves beg with the bag. Such like Will Summers steep among dogs. The
third bids us charitably learn of simplicity to pay our debts, when the poor
creditor calls for it, but it is a general fault, and such who have doors shut
whereat the poor stand, shall find gates fast where themselves may not enter,
but especially we of the laity, for while the Pastor cherishes the soul, we
seek to starve the body, but lets be mindful least decaying one we loose
both. O the world could not endure this but offered to sting away. Nay nay says
the Cinnick soft and fair, a word or too more, and half angry looking into
his glass sees one all in blew, carrying his neck on the one side, looking
sharply, drawing the leg after him in a strange manner, describd in meeter
thus: Some thing tall dribling ever, Body small merry never:
Splay footed visage black, Little beard it was his lack.
Flat capt still in view, The Cities charge many knew:
Long coated, at his side Muckinder and inckhorne tide.
Preaching still unto boys, Aiming well, but reaching toys:
Loving all hating none, Less such as let him not alone,
As a liude, so a did: Was deaths scorn, though life's pride.


This is singular indeed says the world, I long to here of this dry poor
John. His name is John indeed says the Cinnick, but neither John a nods, nor
John a dreams, yet either as you take it, for he is simply simple without
tricks, not sophisticated like your Tobacco to taste strong, but as Nature aloud
him he had his talent. Whereat the World so fickled her spleen that she was a
gog, clap her hands for joy, and says she was deeply satisfied, and cried
more. The crooked stick of licorish that gave this sweet relish, being to set
his teeth to it, wipes his rheumy beard, and ^nites his philosophical nose,
snapping his fingers Barber-like after a dry shauing, iogs on thus:

THis innocent Idiot, that never harmed any, before I enter any further, I will
let you understand in two words, how he came to be of the hospital of Christ's
church: Some certain years since (but not a few years) there dwelt a poor
blind woman in Bow-lane in London, called by the name of blind Alice, who had
this fool of a child to lead her, in whose house he would sit, either on the
stayres, or in a corner, and sing Psalms, or preach to himself of Peter and
Paul, because he delighted to go to Sermons with blind Alice and heard the
Preacher talk of them. It chanced the Worshipful of the City (good
Benefactours to the poor) to take her into Christ's Hospital, with whom John
went as a guide to lead her: who being old after she dyed, he was to be
turned out of door: but the City more destrous to pity then to be cruel,
placed him as a fostred fatherles child, and they did well in it too, seeing he
was one of Gods Creatures, though some difference in persons.

Well, to go forward in what I promised you: John went to S. Paul's Church in
London, to meet with M. Nowell the Deane, whose bounty to him was great, and
the fool knew it well enough, whom he would duly attend after his preaching,
for ever he gave him at their meeting a groat, and he would bring it to his
Nurse: well, M. Deane preached not that day: whereupon John stands in a corner
with boys flocking about him, and begins to preach himself, holding up his
muckender for his book, and reads his Text.

It is written (says he) in the 3. Chapter of Paul to the Corinthians:
Brethren, you must not swear (for that was lightly all his text) then thus he
begins: Whereas or whereunto it is written: for because you must believe it: for
surely else we are no Christians Write the Sermon (Boy) says he (as the
Hospital Boys do) and then one must write on his hand with his finger, and
then he would go forward thus: The world is proud, and God is angry if we do
not repent. Good friend give me a pin, or good friend give me a point, as it
came in his mind: and so sucking up his driuell and breath together, would
pray and make an end: which being done, who bids me home to dinner now, says
John? The Boys that knew his qualities, answers, that do I, John. Thank ye
friend says he, and goes home to his own dwelling at Christ's Church. But at
this time one wealthy Merchants son, to make his father merry, bad him home to
dinner indeed, and will he or nill he, he must go with him, with much ado John
went, and coming into the house, simply sits him down (as his use was) in the
chimney corner. It was in Lent, when pease pottage bare great sway, and when
every pease must have his ease: John beholding pease pottage on the fire,
thought on his Nurse, for he was all saving for her, and seeing no body by,
stepped to the pot, and put a great ladle of pottage into his pocket, and
pittiously burnt his thigh, and but that the leather was thick, it had been
worse.

John feeling something burn, leapt and cried: they ran in to see the matter
why he cried, but more and more he exclaimed, I burn, I burn, and got out of
doors, and never leaves til he came to his nurse, who quickly shifted him, and
mended what was amiss, but the jest was to see the folk of the house who
wondering what he ayled, could not devise what the matter was: but a beggar in
the entry, who beheld al, told the truth of the matter, who lost a good alms
for his labor. But thus simple John by his own folly, died the inside of his
pocket, pease pottage tawny, and set a good scarlet red upon his thigh.

GAffer Homes being Sexton of Christ's Church, would often set John a work, to
toule the Bell to prayers or burials, wherein he delighted much: it chanced so,
that coming through the Church, and having nothing to do, seeing the bell so
easily to come by, towles it. The people (as the custom is) repaires to Church
(as they used) to know for whom it was. John answers them still, for his
nurses chicken. They said, Wherefore toules the bell, John? I know not. When dyed
he? even now. Who, John? Who? my nurses chicken, quoth he, and laughs. This
jest was known to every neighbor thereabouts, who sent to bid him leave
touling: but it was not his custom, till goodman Homes took the rope from
him, that gave the rope to him,

Well, there stood Jack towling from four a clock to sire, goodman Homes being
from home, who was not a little vexed at John's diligence, but laid the rope
ever after, where John could not reach it.

John was of this humor, ask him what his coat cost him, he would say a groat:
what his cap, band or shirt cost, all was a groat: ask what his beard cost,
and still a groat* So one Friday morning there was a Gentleman to ride down
into Warwickshire, about payment of an hundred pound upon a b^nos forfeyture:
the time was next day, by Sun set, it was no boot to bid him pull on his boots
and be gone. Well he made have, and went to do it without bidding, and yet for
all his have, his boots were seame-rent, and must have a stitch or two needs:
he sends them to a cobbler next to Christ's Church gate in Newgate market, who
was diligent to mend them straight: and as he had done, comes John of the
Hospital to him (as his use was) to carry home his work, and he sends John
home with the boots: As John was going through Iuy lane, a Country fellow that
knew him not, meets him, and seeing the boots, What shall I give thee for them
says he, John (who sold every thing for a groat) asked a groat. The fellow
seeing it was a good penniworth, gives him a groat and departs with the boots.
John, as his use was gave it to his Nurse. She asked him where he had it? He
said, for boots: but she not knowing his mind, fell to work again as he
found her.

The forfeiture of the bond so hammered in this Gentleman's head, that he
thought every hour two, till he had his boots, and mused they came not from
mending, sends for them presently. One comes sweating, (zoones) Cobbler the
boots, and being at work very busy, I says he, they are mended and carried
home. Another comes, boots, boots. Would she boots were in your belly, quoth
the Cobbler, once again they are gone home. By and by comes the Gentleman in
his white linen boot-hose ready to the purpose. A pox of lazy cobblers says
he, my boots, shall I forfeit a bond for your pleasure? The Cobbler puts of his
considering cap, why sir, says he, I sent them home but now. By whom says
he? By John view John says the cobbler. The Gentleman he runs home one way, the
cobbler another: well no boots were to be had: the Gentleman he stayed, and the
Cobbler he prayed, but all this while the boots delaid and came not.

The Cobbler seeks John at his nurses where he was, and found the boots were
sold for a groat. The Cobbler seeing no remedy, because the Gentleman was in
have, gives him five shillings with a heavy hey ho, toward a new pair, and
lost four shillings eight pence by the bargain: but the cobbler would never
let John carry home his ware more: nay, says the Cobbler, if my money can be
booted and ride post so by five shillings at a time, it is no boot for me to
say (...), but the next boots I Will make a page of my own age, and carry home
my self: for I see fools will afford good pennyworths.

ON Gaster Monday the ancient rustome is, that all the children of the
Hospital go before my Lord Mayor to the Spittle, that the world may witness
the works of God and man, in maintenance of so many poor people, the better to
stir up living men's minds to the like good. Before which the children of the
hospital like a captain goes John, whom to behold the people flock apace, and
the weather being hot their thrusting made John extreme dry. John considered
he was like to fast while dinner, yet kept on his rank to the Spittle, where
the Cannes did walk a pace by his nose but never came at him, which made him
more eager of drinck. Well while the children were placing, John stood making
of water, and seeing a gentleman's door open slips in, and the household without
standing to see my Lord Mayor pass by not regarded him, but he whose nose had
wit to smell good beer got down into the Seller, and fell to it tipple
square, till he was lost and quite drunck, and laid himself to sleep behind
two barrels, and unseen slept all that day. In the Sermon time he was mist,
sought and not found The afternoon came, the Gentleman's Butler with other good
fellows fell to carouse soundly, till the Butler was laid up too: here was a
Seller well fraught with fools: but all this while the beadels failed not to
search up and down the city, the crier cried a man child of the age of two
and thirty years, for at least he was so old. But return we to the seller:
the two drunkards waked both together. John calls Nurse, Nurse, which the Butler
(half awake) hearing thought the Devil had bin playing bo peep with him, but
when he looked and beheld him imagining how it was, he secretly sent him to the
Hospital, least he were blamed for his negligence in looking to the door no
better.

A number of things more John did, which I omit, fearing to be tedious: not
long after he dyed, and was old, for his beard was full of white hairs, as his
picture in christ's Hospital (now to be seen) can witness: buried he is, but
with no Epitaph. Me thinks, those that in his life time could afford him his
picture, might with his grave yield so much as four lines, that people may see
where he lies, whom they so well knew, and if I might persuade, his Motto
should be to this effect:

Here sleeps blew John, that gives
Food to feed worms, and yet not lives:
You that pass by look on his grave,
And say, your selves the like must have.
Wise men and fools all one end makes:
Gods will be done who gives and takes.


Surely says mistress Nicetie this pleases well to see one so naturally silly
to be simply subtle, it is strange, but I hear it and like a tale out of a
poor man's mouth hardly credit it. This fool says Sotto signifies many who
come to Church to meet acquaintance, more then for piety, and will sooner sell
the Church for money, then pawn ought to underprop it. At these the boys and
children of this world wonder, while manly age sees and will not see. For these
as the second tale says, Folly towles the bell, and a number longs to hear it
ring out, when the loss of John's Chickin is of more want then theirs, but a
rope out it, it will one day be better. There are as Hamlet says things called
whips in store. The third jest of John, shows morrally many things, amongst
which things, I mean works, are so cobbeld that to rid it with quickness,
folly may bear it up and down to the owner. While workmanship and time is
merely abusde, but it boots not to meddle in this, least some say, ne sutra,
etc. But let me tell ye this by the way World, there are knaves in thy seames,
that must be ripped out, I says the world and such I fear was your father. O no
says the Critticke, he was the silly Gentleman that staid while the fool
brought home his boots, and so forfeited his bond, that his good conditions lay
at gage for it mary, yes say the World and was after canseld at the gallous,
for such as he lies in wait to cousin simplycitie, and for a groat buy that,
which well got deserves a portague. At this the Cinnick fretted, and here they
begin to challengde the combat, but a parley sounded, summoned them to the last
tail with John to the celler in the spittell. Where if they please they may
carrowse freely, though they die deep in scarlet as many do, till they loose
themselves in the open streets, such Diogenes sought at noone days with a
lantern and a candell. Well the World so bufteted the Cinnicke at his own
weapon, that he plays with her as weak fencers, that carries flesh up and
down for others to dress. Such was the Cinnick, vns kilfull in quips and
worldly flaunts, rather to play with short rods and give venies till all smart
again, not in the brains, as the world did, but in the buttocks as such do,
having their Ioses displaid, making them expert till they cry it up in the top
of question.

Our sullen Cinnick sets by his glass in malice, knits a betill brow till the
room grew dark again, which the wanton World seeing flings out of his Cell
like a girl at barley break, leaving the last couple in hell, away she gads
and never looks behind her. A whirlewinde says the Cinnick go after, is this
all my thanks, the old payment still, does the world still reward mortality
thus, is virtue thus bed ridden, can she not help her self? and looks up to
heaven as he should say some power asist. But there he sat fretting in his
own grease, and for ought I know no body came to help him.

CONCLVSIO.
Thus Gentlemen as the kind hosts salutes her guests, saying you see your
cheer and you are welcome, so say I. It may be you like it not, I am sorrier,
you will say these sallets were ill dressed, like enough, but good stomachs
digest any thing, and that it was a dry feast: the Cinnick bad not the world
so much as drinck: true, a worldling right, who as the word is, Drinck before
you go, sets the cart before the horse and says, go before you drink, why
may he not in his cell? his betters will. I have seen it in Gentlemen's
Cellers, but I cry you mercy, there I think it is drinck till you cannot go.
Bownce is the worlds motto there, till they discharge the draine of all good
abearing, making the body break the peace in every corner, but blame me not, I
am tedeous, pardon my folly, writing of folly, if you knew, you would say nec
mirum. Where fore if my pardon may be purchased then so, if not you may bid me
keep my fools company.

FINIS.

