A Pleasa(...) Commodie, of fair Em the Millers daughter of Manchester: With
the love of William the Conqueror:
As it was sundry times publicly acted in the honorable city of London, by
the right honorable the Lord Strange his servant.

Imprinted at London for T.N. and I.VV. and are to be sold in S. Dunstones
Churchyard in Fleete-streete.

A Pleasant Commodie of fair Em the Millers daughter of Manchester. With the
love of (...)iam the Conqueror.
Actus Primus
Scaena prima.
Enter William the Conqueror: Marquis Lubeck, with a picture: Mountney:
Manuile: Valingford: and Duke Dirot. Marquis. WHat means fair Britains
mighty Conqueror
So suddenly to cast away his staff?
And all in passion, to forsake the tylt.

D. Dirot. My Lord, this triumph we solemnise here,
Is for mere love to your increasing joys:
Only expecting cheerful looks for all.
What sudden pangs than moves your majesty,
To dim the brightness of the day with frowns?

W. Conqueror. Ah: good my Lords, misconster not the cause:
At least, suspect not my displeased brows
I amorously do bear to your intent:
For thanks and all that you can wish I yield.
But that which makes me blush and shame to tell,
Is cause why thus I turn my conquering eyes
To cowardes looks and beaten fantasies.

Mountney. Since we are giltlesse, we the less dismay
To see this sudden change possess (...) cheer:
For if it issue from your own conceits,
Bred by suggestion of some envious thoughts:
Your highness wisdom may suppress it straight.
Yet tell us (good my Lord) what thought it is,
That thus bereaues you of your late content,
That in advise we may assist your grace,
Or bend our forces to revive your spirits.

W Con. Ah Marquis Lubeck, in thy power it lies
To rid my bosom of these thraled dumps:
And therefore, good my Lords forbear awhile,
That we may parley of these private cares,
Whose strength subdues me more than all the world.

Valingford. We go and wish thee private conference,
Public affectes in this accustomed peace.

Exit all but William and the Marquis. William. Now Marquis must a Conqueror at
arms
disclose himself thrald to unarmed thoughts,
And threatened of a shaddowe, yield to lust:
No sooner had my sparkeling eyes beheld
The flames of beauty blasing on this piece,
But suddenly a sense of miracle
Imagined on thy lovely Maistres face,
Made me abandon bodily regard,
And cast all pleasures on my woonded soul:
Then gentle Marquis tell me what she is,
That thus thou honor on thy warlike shield.
And if thy love and interest be such,
As justly may give place to mine,
That if it be: my soul with honors wings
May fly into the bosom of my dear.
If not, close them and stoop into my grave.

Marquis If this be all renowned Conqueror:
Advance your drooping spirits, and revive
The wonted courage of your Conquering mind,
For this fair picture painted on my shield
Is the true counterfeit of lo^^^ Blaunch
Princes and daughter to the King of Danes:
Whose beauty and excess of ornaments
Deserves another manner of defense
Pomp and high person to attend her state,
Then Marquis Lubeck any way presents.
Therefore her virtues I resign to thee,
Already shrinde in thy religious breast,
To be advanced and honored to the full.
Nor bear I this an argument of love:
But to renown fair Blaunch my Sovereigns child,
In every place where I by arms may do it.

William. Ah Marquis, thy words bring heaven unto my soul,
And had I heaven to give for thy reward:
Thou should be thronde in no unworthy place.
But let my uttermost wealth suffice thy worth,
Which here I vow, and to aspire the bliss
That hangs on quick atchiuement of my love,
Thy self and I will traueile in disguise,
To bring this Lady to our Britain Court.

Marquis. Let William but bethink what may avail,
And let me die if I deny my aid.

William. Then thus the Duke Dirot and Therle Dimach
Will I leave substitutes to rule my Realm,
While mighty love forbids my being here,
And in the name of Sir Robert of Windsor
Will go with thee unto the Danish Court.
Keep Williams secrets Marquis if thou love him.
Bright Blaunch I come, sweet fortune favor me,
And I will laud thy name eternally.

Exeunt. Enter the Miller, and Em his daughter. Miller. Come daughter we must
learn to shake of pomp,
To leave the state that carst beseemd a Knight
And gentleman of no mean descent,
To undertake this homely millers trade:
Thus must we mask to save our wr^^^ed lives,
Threatened by Conquest of this hapless Isle:
Whose sad invasions by the Conqueror,
Have made a number such as we subject
Their gentle necks unto their stubborn yoke,
Of drudging labor and base pesantrie.
Sir Thomas Godard now old Goddard is
Goddard the miller of fair Manchester.
Why should not I content me with this state?
As good Sir Edmund Trofferd did the f^^ile.
And thou sweet Em must stoop to high estate.
To join with mine that thus we may protect
Our harmeles lives, which ledd in greater port
Would be an envious object to our foes,
That seek to root all Britains Gentry
From bearing countenance against their tyranny.

Em. Good Father let my full resolved thoughts,
Wi^h settled pa^iens to support this chance
Be some poor comfort to your aged soul:
For therein restes the height of my estate,
That you are pleased with this deiection,
And that all toils my hands may undertake,
May serve to work your worthiness content.

Miller. Thanks my dear Daughter: these thy pleasant words
Transfer my soul into a second heaven:
And in thy settled mind, my joys consist,
My state reuyued and I in former plight.
Although our outward pomp be thus abased,
And thralde to drudging, stay less of the world,
Let us retain those honorable minds
Thar lately governed our superior state.
Wherein true gentry is the only mean
That makes us differ from base millers borne:
Though we expect no knightly delicates,
Nor thirst in soul for former soueraintie.
Yet may our minds as highly scorn to stoop
To base desires of vulgars worldlynes,
As if we were in our presedent way.
And lovely daughter, since thy youthful years
Must needs admit as young affections:
And that sweet love impartial perceiues
Her dainty subjects through every part,
In chief receive these lessons from my lips.
The true discouerers of a Virgins due
Now requisite, now that I know thy mind
Something enclynde to favor Manuils suit,
A gentleman, thy Lover in protest:
And that thou may not be by love deceived,
But try his meaning fit for thy desert,
In pursuit of all amorous desires,
Regard thine honor. Let not vehement sighs
Nor earnest vows importing fervent love,
Render thee subject to the wrath of lust:
For that transformed to former sweet delight,
Will bring thy body and thy soul to shame.
Chaste thoughts and modest conuersations
Of proof to keep out all inchaunting vows,
Vain sighs, forced tears, and pitiful aspectes,
Are they that make deformed Ladies fair,
Poor wretch, and such intycing men,
That seek of all but only present grace,
Shall in perseverance of a Virgins due
Prefer the most refusers to the choice
Of such a soul as yielded what they thought.
But hoe: where is Trotter?

Here enters Trotter the Millers man to them: And they within call to him for
their gryste. Trotter. Where Is Trotter? why Trotter is here.
in faith, you and your daughter go up and down weeping,
And wamenting and keeping of a wamentation,
As who should say, the Mill would go with your wamenting.

Miller. How now Trotter? why complainest thou so.

Trotter. Why yonder is a company of young men and m^ydes Keep such a styr for
their grist, that they would have it before my stones be ready to grind it.
But in faith, I would I could break wind enough backward: you should not
tarry for your gryst I warrant you. Here he(...) Em abo(...) neck.



Miller. Content thee Trotter, I will go pacify them.

Trotter. I wis you will when I cannot. Why look,
You have a Mill. Why, what is your Mill without me?
Or rather Mistres, what were I without you?

Em. Nay Trotter, if you fall achyding, I will give you cuer.

Trotter. I chyde you dame to amend you.
You are too fine to be a Millers daughter:
For if you should but stoop to take up the tole dish
You will have the crampe in your finger
At least ten weeks after.

Miller. Ah well said Trotter, teach her to play the good huswife
And thou shall have her to thy wife, if thou can get her good will.

Trotter. Ah words wherein I see Matrimony come load^n
With kisses to salute me: Now let me alone, to pick the Mill,
To fill the hopper to take the tole to mend the sails,
Yea, and to make the mill to go with the very force of my love.

Here they must call for their gryst within. Trotter. I come I come, in faith now
you shall have your gryst
Or else Trotter will trot and amble himself to death.

They call him again. Exit. Enter king of Denmark, with some attendants,
Blanch his daughter, Mariana, Marquis Lubeck, William disguised. King of
Denmark. Lord Marquis Lubecke welcome home,
Welcome brave Knight unto the Denmark King:
For Williams sake the noble Norman Duke,
So famous for his fortunes and success,
That graceth him with name of Conqueror:
Right double welcome must thou be to us.

Rob. Windsor. And to my Lord the king shall I recount
Your graces courteous entertainment,
That for his sake vouchsafe to honor me
A simple Knight attendant on his grace.

King Den. But say Sir Knight, what may I call your name.

Robert Windsor. Robert Windsor and like your Majesty.

King Den. I tell thee Robert, I so admire the man,
As that I count it heinous guilt in him
That honors not Duke William with his heart.
Blanch, bid this stranger welcome, good my gyrle.

Blanch. Sir, should I neglect your highness charge herein,
It might be thought of base discourtesie.
Welcome Sir Knight to Denmark hartelie.

To. Winds. Thanks gentle Lady. Lord Marquis, what is she?

Lubeck. That same is Blanch daughter to the King,
The substance of the shadow that you saw.

Rob. windsor. May this be she, for whom I crossed the Seas?
I am ashamde to think I was so fond.
In whom there is nothing that contents my mind.
Ill head, worse featurde, uncomely, nothing courtly.
Swart and ill favored, a Colliers sanguin skin.
I never saw a harder favored slut.
Love her? for what: I can no whit abide her.

King of Denmark. Mariana, I have this day received letters
From Swethia, that lets me understand,
your ransom is collecting there with speed,
And shortly shall be hither sent to us.

Mariana. Not that I find occasion of mislike
My entertainment in your graces court,
But that I long to see my native home.

king Den. And reason have you Madam for the same:
Lord Marquis I commit unto your charge
The entertainment of Sir Robert here,
Let him remain with you within the Court
In solace and disport, to spend the time.

Exit king of Denmark. Robert Wind. I thank your hightnes, whose bounden I
remain.
Blanch speaks this secretly at one end of the stage. Unhappy Blanch, what
strange effects are these
That works within my thoughts confusedly,
That still me thinks affection draws me on
To take, to like, nay more, to love this Knight.

Robert. Wind. A modest countenance, no heavy sullen look,
Not very fayer, but ritchly decked with favor:
A sweet face, an exceeding dainty hand,
A body were it framed of wax
By all the cunning artists of the world
It could not better be proportioned.

Lubeck. How now Sir Robert? in a study man?
Here is no time for contemplation.

Robert Windsor. My Lord, there is a certain odd conceit,
Which on the sudden greatly troubles me.

Lubeck. How like you Blaunch? I partly do perceive
The little boy has played the wagg with you.

Sir Robert. The more I look, the more I love to look.
Who seyes that Mariana is not fair?
I Will gage my gauntlet against the envious man,
That dares auowe there lives her compare.

Lubeck. Sir Robert, you mistake your counterfeit.
This is the Lady which you came to see.

Sir Robert. yea, my Lord: She is counterfeit in deed:
For there is the substance that best contents me.

Lubek. That is my love. Sir Robert you do wrong me.

Robert. The better for you sir, she is your Love,
As for the wrong, I see not how it grows.

Lubeck. In seeking that which is an others right.

Robert. As who should say your love were priuileged
That none might look upon her but your self.

Lubeck. These iarres becomes not our familiarity,
Nor will I stand on terms to move your patience.

Robert. Why my Lord, am not I of flesh and blood as well as you?
Then give me leave to love as well as you.

Lubeck. To Love Sir Robert? but whom? not she I Love?
Nor stands it with the honor of my state,
To brook corriuals with me in my love.

Robert. So Sir, we are thorough for that L.
Ladies farewell. Lord Marquis, will you go?
I will find a time to speak with her I trow?

Lubeck. With all my heart. Come Ladies will you walk? Exit.

Enter Manuile alone disguised. Manuile. Ah Em the subject of my restless
thoughts,
The Anuyle whereupon my heart does beat,
Framing thy state to thy desert,
Full ill this life becomes thy heavenly look,
Wherein, sweet love and virtue sits enthroned.
Bad world, where riches is esteemd above them both,
In whose base eyes naught else is bountiful.
A Millers daughter, says the multitude,
Should not be loved of a Gentleman.
But let them breath their souls into the air:
Yet will I still affect thee as my self,
So thou be constant in thy plighted vow.
But here comes one, I will listen to his talk.

Enter Valingford at another door, Man(...) hidi(...) self.
disguised Valingford. Go William Conqueror and seek thy love.
Seek thou a mynion in a foreign land
Whilst I draw back and court my love at home,
The millers daughter of fair Manchester
Has bound my feet to this delight some soil:
And from her eyes do dart such golden beams,
That holds my heart in her subjection.

Manuile. He ruminates on my beloved choice:
God grant he come not to prevent my hope.
But here is another, him isle listen to.

Enter Mountney disguised at another door. L. Mountney. Nature unjust, in
utterance of thy art,
To grace a pesant with a Princes fame:
Pesant am I so to misterme my love
Although a millers daughter by her birth:
Yet may her beauty and her virtues well suffice
To hyde the blemish of her birth in hell,
Where neither envious eyes nor thought can perce,
But endless darkness ever smother it.
Go William Conqueror and seek thy love,
Whilst I draw back and court mine own the while:
Decking her body with such costly robes
As may become her beauties worthynes,
That so thy labors may be laughed to scorn,
And she thou seek in foreign regions,
Be darkened and eclipst when she arriues,
By one that I have chosen nearer home.

Manuile. What comes he to, to intercept my love?
Then hye thee Manuile to forestall such foes. Exit Manuile

Mountney. What now Lord Valingford are you behind?
The king had chosen you to go with him.

Valingford. So chose he you, therefore I marvel much
That both of us should linger in this sort.
What may the king imagine of our stay?

Mountney. The king may justly think we are to blame:
But I immagined I might well be spared
And that no other man had borne my mind.

Valingford. The like did I: in friendship then resolve
What is the cause of your unlooked for stay?

Mountney. Lord Valingford I tell thee as a friend,
Love is the cause why I have stayed behind.

Valinford. Love my Lord? of whom.

Mountney. Em the millers daughter of Manchester.

Valingford. But may this be?

Mountney. Why not my Lord? I hope full well you know
That love respects no difference of state
So beauty serve to stir affection.

Valingford. But this it is that makes me wonder most:
That you and I should be of one conseite
In such a strange unlikely passion.

Mountney. But is that true? my Lord: I hope you do but jest.

Valingford. I would I did: then were my grief the less.

Mountney. Nay never grieve: for if the cause be such
To join our thoughts in such a Simpathy:
All envy set aside: let us agree
To yield to eythers fortune in this choice.

Valingford. Content say I, and what so ere befall,
Shake hands my Lord and fortune thrive at all. Exeunt.

Enter Em and Trotter the Millers man with a kerchife on his head, and an
Vrinall in his hand. Em. Trotter where have you been?

Trotter. Where have I been? why what signifies this.

Em. A kerchiefe, does it not?

Trotter. What call you this I pray?

Em. I say it is an Vrinall.

Trotter. Then this is mystically to give you to understand
I have been at the Phismicaries house.

Em. How long have thou been sick?

Trotter. In Faith, even as long as I have not been half well,
And that has been a long time.

Em. A loytering time I rather immagine.

Trot. It may be so: but the Phismicary tells me that you can help me

Em. Why, any thing I can do for recovery of thy health,
Be right well assured of.

Trot. Then give me your hand

Em. To what end.

Trot. That the ending of an old indenture
Is the beginning of a new bargain.

Em. What bargain?

Trot. That you promised to do any thing to recover my health.

Em. On that condition I give thee my hand.

Trot. Ah sweet Em. Here he offers to kiss her.

Em. How now Trotter? your masters daughter?

Trot. In Faith I aim at the fairest,
Ah Em, sweet Em: fresh as the flower:
That has pour to wound my heart,
And ease my smart, of me poor thief,
In prison bound.

Em. So all your ryme lies on the ground.
But what means this?

Trot. Ah mark the devise,
For thee my louefull sick I was, in hazard of my life
Thy promise was to make me whole, and for to be my wife.
Let me inioye my love my dear,
And thou possess thy Trottter here.

Em. But I meant no such matter.

Trot. Yes woos but you did, I Will go to our Parson Sir John
And he shall mumble up the marriage out of hand.

Em. But here comes one that will forbid the Banes.

Here Enters Manuile to them. Trotter. Ah Sir you come too late.

Manuile. What remedy Trotter.

Em. Go Trotter, my father calls.

Trotter. Would you have me go in, and leave you two here?

Em. Why, dare thou not trust me?

Trotter. Yes faith, even as long as I see you.

Em. Go thy ways I pray thee heartily.

Trotter. That same word (heartily) is of great force.
I will go: but I pray sir, beware you
Come not too near the wench. Exit Trotter.

Manuile. I am greatly beholding to you
Ah Maistres, sometime I might have said my love,
But time and fortune has bereued me of that,
And I am abject in those gracious eyes
That with remorse erst saw into my grief,
May sit and sigh the sorrows of my heart.

Em. In deed my Manuile has some cause to doubt,
When such a Swain is rival in his love.

Manuile. Ah Em, were he the man that causes this mistrust,
I should esteem of thee as at the first.

Em. But is my love in earnest all this while?

Manuile. Believe me Em, it is not time to jest
When others joys, what lately I possessed.

Em If touching love, my Manuile charge me thus?
Unkindly must I take it at his hands,
For that my conscience cleeres me of offense.

Manuile. Ah impudent and shameless in thy ill,
That with thy cunning and defraudfull tongue,
Seekese to delude the honest meaning mind:
Was never heard in Manchester before,
Of true lover then has been betwixt us twain:
And for my part how I have hazarded
Displeasure of my father and my freindes
Thy self can witness. Yet notwithstanding this:
Two genlemen attending on Duke William
Mountney and Valingford, as I heard them named,
Often times resort to see and to be seen,
Walking the street fast by thy fathers door,
Whose glauncing eyes up to the windows cast,
Gives testies of their Masters amorous heart.
This Em is noted and too much talked on.
Some see it without mistrust of ill.
Others there are that scorning grynne thereat,
And says, there goes the millers daughters wooers.
Ah me, whom chiefly and most of all it does concern
To spend my time in grief and vex my soul,
To think my love should be rewarded thus,
And for thy sake abhore all women kind.

Em. May not a maid look upon a man
Without suspicious judgment of the world?

Manuile. If sight do move offense, it is the better not to see.
But thou did more unconstant as thou art,
For with them thou had talk and conference.

Em. May not a maid talk with a man without mistrust?

Manuile. Not with such men suspected amorous.

Em. I grieve to see my Manuiles ielosie

Manuile. Ah Em, faithful love is full of ielosie,
So did I love thee true and faithfully,
For which I am rewarded most unthankfully.
Exit in a rage, Manet Em. And so away? what in displeasure gone?
And left me such a bitter sweet to gnawe upon?
Ah Manuile, little wottest thou,
How near this parting goes to my heart.
Discourteous love whose followers reapes reward,
Of hate, disdain, reproach and infamy,
The fruit of frantike, bedlome ielozie.
Here enter Mountney to Em. But here comes one of these suspicious men:
Witness my God without desert of me:
For only Manuile honor I in heart:
Nor shall unkindness cause me from him to starte.

Mountney. For this good fortune, Venus be thou blessed,
To meet my love, the mistres of my heart,
Where time and place gives opportunity
At full to let her understand my love.
He turns to Em, and offers to take her by the hand, and she goes from him.
Fair mistres, since my fortune sorts so well:
Hear you a word. What means this?
Nay stay fair Em.

Em. I am going homewards, sir:

Mountney. Yet stay sweet love to whom I must disclose
The hidden secrets of a lovers thoughts,
Not doubting but to find such kind remorse
As naturally you are enclyned to.

Em. The Gentleman your friend Sir.
I have not seen him this four days at the least.

Mountney. What Is that to me? I speak not sweet in person of my friend,
But for my self, whom if that love deserve
To have regard being honorable love:
Not base affects of loose lascivious love:
Whom youthful wantons play and dally with:
But that unites in honorable bands of holy rytes,
And knits the sacred knot that Gods. Here Em cuts him off.

Em. What mean you sir, to keep me here so long?
I cannot understand you by your signs.
You keep a prattling with your lips,
But never a word you speak that I can hear.

Mountney. What is she deaf? a great impediment.
Yet remedies there are for such defects.
Sweet Em, it is no little grief to me,
To see where nature in her pride of art
Has wrought perfections rich and admirable.

Em. Speak you to me Sir?

Mountney. To thee my only joy.

Em. I cannot hear you.

Mountney. Oh plague of Fortune: Oh hell without compare.
What boots it us to gaze and not enjoy?

Em. Fare you well Sir. Exit Em. Manet Mountney.

Monntney. Fare well my love. Nay farewell life and all.
Could I procure redress for this infirmity,
It might be means she would regard my suit.
I am acquainted with the Kings Physicians:
Amongst the which, there is one mine honest friend,
Seignior Alberto, a very learned man.
His judgment will I have to help this ill.
Ah Em, fair Em, if Art can make thee whole:
I Will buy that sense for thee, although it cost me dear.
But Mountney: stay, this may be but deceit,
A matter fained only to delude thee.
And not unlike, perhaps by Valingford,
He loves fair Em as well as I.
As well as I? ah no, not half so well.
Put case, yet may he be thine enemy,
And give her counsel to dissemble thus.
I Will try the event, and if it fall out so?
Frindship farewell: Love makes me now a foe. Exit Mountney.

Enter Marquis Lubeck, and Mariana. Mariana. Trust me my Lord, I am sorry for
your hurt.

Lubeck. Gramercie Madam: but it is not great:
Only a thrust, pricked with a Rapiers point.

Mariana. How grew the quarrel my Lord?

Lubeck. Sweet Lady, for thy sake.
There was this last night two maskes in one company,
My self the foremost: The other strangers were:
Amongst the which, when the Music began to sound the Measures,
Each Masker made choice of his Lady:
And one more forward than the rest stepped toward thee:
Which I perceiving thrust him aside, and took thee my self.
But this was taken in so ill part,
That at my coming out of the court gate, with iustling together,
It was my chance to be thrust into the arm.
The doer thereof because he was the original cause of the disorder
At that inconvenient time, was presently committed,
And is this morning sent for to answer the matter:
(...)enters Sir (...)rr of (...)for with (...)lor.
And I think here he comes. What Sir Robert of Windsor how now?

Sir Robert. In Faith my Lord a prisoner: but what ails your arm?

Lubeck. Hurt the last night by mischaunce.

Sir Robert. What, not in the mask at the Court gate?

Lubeck. Yes trust me there.

Sir Rob. Why then my Lord I thank you for my nights lodging.

Lubeck. And I you for my hurt, if it were so?
Keeper away, I discharge you of your prisoner. Exit the Keeper.

Sir Robert. Lord Marquis, you offered me disgrace to shoulder me.

Lubeck. Sir I knew you not, and therefore you must pardon me
And the rather it might be alleged to me of
Meare simplisitie, to see another dance with my Maistris
disguysed, and I my self in presence: but seeing it
Was our happs to damnifie each other unwillingly,
Let us be content with our harms,
And lay the fault where it was and so become friends.

Sir Robert. In Faith I am content with my nights lodging
If you be content with your hurt.

Lubeck. Not content that I have it, but content
To forget how I came by it.

Sir Robert. My Lord, here comes Lady Blannch, lets away.

Enter Blaunch. Lubeck. With good will, Lady you will stay?

Exit Lubeck and Sir Robert. Mariana. Madam.

Blaunch. Mariana, as I am grieved with thy presence:
So am I not offended for thy absence,
And were it not a breach to modesty,
Thou should know before I left thee.

Mariana. How near is this humor to madness
If yon hold on as you begin, you
are in a pretty way to scoulding.

Blannch. To scoulding huswife?

Mariana. Maddam here comes one,

Here enters one with a letter. Blaunch. There does in deed. Fellow would
thou have any thing with any body here?

Messenger. I have a letter to deliver to the Lady Mariana.

Blaunch. Give it me.

Messen. There must none but she have it.
Blaunch snatcheth the letter from him. Et exit messenger. Go to foolish fellow.
And therefore to ease the anger I sustain,
I Will be so bold to open it, what is here?
Sir Robert greets you well?
Your Maistries, his love, his life? Oh amorous man,
How he entertaines his new Maistres?
And bestows on Lubeck his od friend
A horn night capp to keep in his wit.

Mariana. Maddam though you have discourteously
Redd my letter, yet I pray you give it me.

Blaunch. Then take it there, and there, and there.

She tears it. Et exit Blannch. Mariana. How far does this differ from
modesty:
Yet will I gather up the pieces, which happily
May show to me the intent thereof
Though not the meaning.

She gathers up the pieces and ioynes them. Mariana. Your servant and love sir
Robert of Windsor
Alius William the Conqueror, wishes long health and happiness.
Is this William the Conqueror, shrouded under
The name of sir Robert of Windsor?
Were he the Monarch of the world
He should not disposesse Lubeck of his Love.
Therefore I will to the Court, and there if I can
Close to be friends with Lady Blaunch,
And thereby keep Lubeck my Love for my self:
And further the Lady Blaunch in her suit as much as I may. Exit.

Enter Emsolus. Em. Ielosie that sharpes the lovers sight,
And makes him conceive and conster his intent,
Has so bewitched my lovely Manuils senses,
That he misdoubts his Em that loves his soul.
He does suspect corriuals in his love:
Which how untrue it is, be judge my God.
But now no more: Here comes Valingford:
Shift him off noww as thou have done the other. Enter Valingford.

Valingf See how Fortune presents me with the hope I looked for.
Fair Em?

Em. Who is that?

Valingf. I am Valingford thy love and friend.

Em. I cry you mercy Sir: I thought so by your speech.

Valingf. What ayleth thy eyes?

Em. Oh blind Sir, blind, stricken blind by mishap on a sudden.

Valingf. But is it possible you should be taken on such a sudden?
Unfortunate Valingford to be thus crossed in thy love.
Fair Em, I am not a little sorry to see this thy hard hap:
Yet nevertheless, I am acquainted with a learned Physician,
That will do any thing for thee at my request.
To him will I resort, and enquire his judgment,
As concerning the recovery of so excellent a fence.

Em. O Lord Sir: and of all things I cannot abide Physic:
The very name thereof to me is odious.

Valingford. No? not the thing will do thee so much good?
Sweet Em, hither I came to parley of love
Hoping to have found thee in thy woonted prosperity.
And have the gods so unmercifully thwarted my expectation?
By dealing so finisterly with thee sweet Em?

Em. Good sir, no more, it fits not me
To have respect to such vain fantasies,
As idle love presents my ears withal,
More reason I should ghostly give my self,
To sacred prayers for this my former sin,
For which this plague is justly fallen upon me,
Then to harken to the vanities of love.

Valingford. Yet sweet Em accept this jewel at my hand
Which I bestow on thee in token of my love.

Em. A jewel sir, what pleasure can I have
In jewels, treasure, or any worldly thing
That want my sight that should deserne thereof.
Ah sir I must leave you:
The pain of mine eyes is so extreme
I cannot long stay in a place. I take my leave. Exit Em.

Valingford. Zoundes, what a cross is this to my conceit?
But Valingford, search the depth of this devise.
Why may not this be fained subteltie,
By Mountneies invention, to the intent
That I seeing such occasion should leave off my suit,
And not any more persiste to solicit her of love.
I Will try the event, if I can by any means perceive
The effect of this deceyte to be procured by his means,
Friend Mountney the one of us is like to repent our bargeine. Exit.

Enter Mariana and Marquis Lubeck. Lubeck. Lady, since that occasion forward
in our good
Presents place and opportunity:
Let me entreat your woonted kind consent
And freindly furtherance in a suite I have.

Mariana. My Lord you know you need not to entreat,
But may command Mariana to her power
Be it no impeachment to my honest fame.

Lubeck. Free are my thoughts from such base villainy
As may in question Lady call your name:
Yet is the matter of such consequence
Standing upon my honorable credit,
To be effected with such zeal and secrecy,
As should I speak and fail my expectation
I would redound greatly to my prejudice.

Mariana. My Lord wherein has Mariana given you occasion
That you should mistrust or else be ielous of my secrecy.

Lubeck Mariana, do not misconster of me:
I not mistrust thee, nor thy secrecy,
Nor let my love misconster my intent,
Nor think thereof but well and honorable.
Thus stands the case: Thou know from England
Hither came with me Robert of Windsor, a noble man at Arms,
Lusty and valiant, in spring time of his years,
No marvel then though he prove amorous.

Mariana. True my Lord, he came to see fair Blanch.

Lubeck. No Mariana, that is non it.
His love to Blanch was then extinct
When first he saw thy face.
It Is thee he loves: yea, thou art only she
That is maistres and commander of his thoughts.

Mariana. Well well my Lord, I like you, for such driftes
Put silly Ladies often to their shifts
Often have I heard you say, you loved me well:
Yea, sworn the same, and I believed you to.
Can this be found an action of good faith,
Thus to dissemble where you found true love?

Lubeck. Mariana, I not dissemble on mine honor:
Nor fails my faith to thee. But for my friend,
For princely William, by whom thou shall possess
The title of estate and Majesty,
Fitting thy love and virtues of thy mind,
For him I speak, for him do I entreat,
And with thy favor fully do resign
To him the claim and interest of my love.
Sweet Mariana then deny me not.
Love William, love my friend and honor me
Who else is clean dishonored by thy means.

Mariana Borne to mishap, my self am only she,
On whom the Sun of Fortune never shyned:
But Planets ruled by retrogard aspect,
Foretold mine ill in my nativity.

Lubeck. Sweet Lady seace, let my entreaty serve
To pacify the passion of thy grief,
Which well I know proceeds of ardent love.

Mariana. But Lubeck now regardes not Mariana:

Lubeck. Even as my life, so love I Mariana.

Mariana. Why do you post me to another then?

Lubeck. He is my friend, and I do love the man.

Mariana. Then will Duke William robb me of my Love?

Lubeck. No as his life Mariana he does love.

Mariana. Speak for yourselfe my Lord let him alone.

Lubeck So do I Madam, for he and I am one.

Mariana. Then loving you I do content you both.

Lubeck. In loving him you shall content us both.
Me, for I crave that favor at your hands:
He for hopes that comfort at your hands.

Mariana. Leave of my Lord, here comes the Lady Blaunch.

Enter Blaunch to them. LuBeck. Hard hap to break us of our talk so soon,
Sweet Mariana do remember me. Exit Lubeck,

Mariana. Thy Mariana cannot choose but remember thee.

Blaunch. Mariana well met, you are very forward in your Love?

Mariana. Madam be it in secret spoken to your self,
If you will but follow the complot I have invented
you will not think me so forward
As your self shall prove fortunate.

Blaunch. As how?

Mariana. Madam as thus: It is not unknown to you
That Sir Robert of Windsor,
A man that you do not little esteem,
Has long importuned me of Love:
But rather then I will be found false
Or unjust to the Marquis Lubeck,
I will as did the constant lady Penelope
Undertake to effect some great task.

Blaunch. What of all this?

Mariana. The next time that Sir Robert shall come
In his woonted sort to solicit me with Love,
I will seem to agree and like of any thing
That the Knight shall demand so far forth
As it be no impeachment to my chastity:
And to conclude, point some place for to meet the man,
For my conueiance from the Denmark Court:
Which determined upon, he will appoint some certain time
For our departure: whereof you having intelligence,
You may soon set down a plot to were the English Crown.
And than?

Blanch. What then?

Mariana. If Sir Robert prove a King and you his Queen
How than?

Blanch. Were I assured of the one, as I am persuaded
Of the other, there were some possibility in it.
But here comes the man.

Mariana. Madam begone and you shall see
I will work to your desire and my content. Exit Blanch.

William. Con. Lady this is well and happily met,
Fortune hitherto has been my foe,
And though I have often sought to speak with you,
Yet still I have been crossed with sinister happs.
I cannot Madame tell a loving tale
Or court my Maistres with fabulous discoursies,
That am a soldier sworn to follow arms:
But this I bluntly let you understand,
I honor you with such religious Zeal
As may become an honorable mind.
Nor may I make my love the seege of Troy
That am a stranger in this Country.
First what I am, I know you are resolved,
For that my friend has let you that to understand,
The Marquis Lubeck to whom I am so bound,
That whilst I live I count me only his.

Mariana. Surely you are beholding to the Marquis,
For he has been an earnest spokes-man in your cause.

William. And yealdes my Lady then at his request.
To grace Duke William with her gracious love?

Mariana. My Lord I am a prisoner, and hard it were
To get me from the Court.

William. An easy matter to get you from the Court,
If case that you will thereto give consent.

Mariana. Put case I should, how would you use me than?

William. Not otherwise but well and honorably.
I have at Sea a shipp that does attend,
Which shall forthwith conducte us into England
Where when we are, I straight will marry thee.
We may not stay deliberating long
Least that suspicion, envious of our weal
Set in a foot to hinder our pretense.

Mariana. But this I think were most convenient
To mask my face the better to escape unknown.

William. A good devise: till then, Farewell fair love.

Mariana. But this I must entreat your grace,
You would not seek by lust unlawfully
To wrong my chaste determinations.

William. I hold that man most shameless in his sin
That seeks to wrong an honest Ladies name
Whom he thinks worthy of his marriage bed.

Mariana. In hope your oath is true,
I leave your grace till the appointed time.

Exit Mariana. William. O happy William, blessed in thy love:
Most fortunate in Marianaes love,
Well Lubeck well, this courtesy of thine
I will requite if God permit me life. Exit.

Enter Valingford and Mountney at two sundry doors, looking angerly each on
other with Rapiers drauen. Mountney. Valingford, so hardly I digest an injury
Thou have proffered me, as were not that I detest to do what stands
Not with the honor of my name,
Thy death should pay thy ransom of thy fault.

Valingford. And Mountney, had not my revenging wrath
Incenst with more than ordinary love
been such for to deprive thee of thy life,
Thou had not liude to brave me as thou do wretch as thou art,
wherein has Valingford offended thee?
That honorable bond which late we did confirm
In presence of the Gods,
When with the Conqueror we arrived here
For my part has been kept inuiolably
Till now too much abused by thy villainy,
I am enforced to cancel all those bands,
By hating him which I so well did love.

Mountney. Subtle thou art, and cunning in thy frawd,
That giving me occasion of offense,
Thou pickst a quarrel to excuse thy shame.
Why Valingford, was it not enough for thee
To be aryuall twixt me and my love,
But counsel her to my no small disgrace,
That when I came to talk with her of love,
She should seem deaf, as fayning not to hear.

Valingford. But has she Mountney used thee as thou say?

Mountney. Thou know too well she has:
Wherein thou could not do me greater injury.

Valingford. Then I perceive we are deluded both.
For when I offered many gifts of Gold and Jewels
To entreat for love, she has refused them with a coy disdain,
Alleging that she could not see the Sun.
The same coniectured I to be thy drift,
That fayning so she might be ridd of me.

Mountney. The like did I by thee. But are not these natural impediments?

Validgford. In my conjecture merely counterfeit:
Therefore lets join hands in frindship once again,
Since that the jar grew only by conjecture.

Mountney. With all my heart: Yet lets try the truth hereof.

Valingf. With right good will. We will straight unto her father,
And there to learn whither it be so or no. Exeunt.

Enter William and Blanch disguised, with a mask over her face. William. Come
on my love, the comfort of my life:
Disguised thus we may remain unknown.
And get we once to Seas, I force not then,
We quickly shall attain the English shore.

Blaunch. But this I urge you with your former oath.
You shall not seek to violate mine honor,
Until our marriage rights be all performed.

William. Mariana, here I swear to thee by heaven,
And by the honor that I bear to Arms,
Never to seek or crave at hands of thee
The spoil of honorable chastity
Until we do attain the English coast,
Where thou shall be my right espoused Queen.

Blanch. In hope your oath proceeds from your heart,
Lets leave the Court, and betake us to his power
That gouernes all things to his mighty will,
And will reward the just with endless joy,
And plague the bad with most extreme annoy.

William. Lady, as little tarriance as we may,
Lest some misfortune happen by the way.

Exit Blanch and William. Enter the Miller, his man Trotter, and Manuile.
Miller. I tell you sir, it is no little grief to me,
You should so hardly conseit of my daughter,
Whose honest report, though I say it,
Was never blotted with any title of defamation.

Manuile. Father Miller, the repair of those gentlemen to your house,
Has given me great occasion to mislike.

Miller. As for those gentlemen, I never saw in them
Any evil entreaty. But should they have proffered it?
Her chaste mind has proof enough to prevent it.

Trotter. Those gentlemen are as honest as ever I saw:
For in faith one of them gave me six pence
To fetch a quart of Seck. See master here they come.

Enter Mountney and Valingford. Miller. Trotter, call Em, now they are here
together,
I Will have this matter thoroughly debated. Exit Trotter.

Mountney. Father, well met. We are come to confer with you.

Manuile. Nay? with his daughter rather.

Valingford. Thus it is father, we are come to crave your frindship in a matter.

Miller. Gentlemen as you are strangers to me,
Yet by the way of courtesy you shall demand
Any reasonable thing at my hands.

Manuile. What is the matter so forward?
They came to crave his good will.

Valinford. It is given us to understand that your daughter
Is suddenly become both blind and deaf.

Miller. Marie God for bid, I have sent for her, in deed
She has kept her chamber this three days.
It were no little grief to me if it should be so?

Manuile. This is Gods judgment for her treachery.

Enter Trotter leading Em. Miller. Gentlemen I fear your words are two true:
See where Trotter comes leading of her.
What ails my Em, not blind I hope?

Em. Mountney and Validgford both together?
And Manuile to whom I have faithfully vowed my love?
Now Em suddenly help thy felfe.

Mountney. This is no desembling Valingford.

Valingford. If ir be? it is cunningly contrived of all sides.

Em. Trotter lend me thy hand,
And as thou love me keep my counsel
And justify what so ever I say, and I Will largely requite thee.

Trotter. Ah, that's as much as to say you would tell a monstrous,
Terrible, horrible, outrageous lie,
And I shall sooth it, no berladie.

Em. My present extremity wills me, if thou love me Trotrer?

Trotter. That same word love makes me to do any thing.

Em. Trotter where is my father?

He thrusts Em upon her father. Trotter. Why what a blind dunce are you, can
you not see?
He stands right before you.

Em. Is this my father?
Good father give me leave to sit
Where I may not be disturbed
Since God has visited me both of my sight and hearing.

Miller. Tell me sweet Em how came this blindness.
Thy eyes are lovely to look on,
And yet have they lost the benefit of their sight.
What a grief is this to thy poor father?

Em. Good father let me uot stand as an open gazing stock to every one,
But in a place a lone as fits a creature so miserable.

Miller. Trotter lead her in, the utter overthrow
Of poor Goddardes joy and only solace.

Exit the Miller, Trotter and Em. Manuile. Both blind and deaf, then is she no
wife for me?
And glad am I so good occasion is happened:
Now will I away to Manchester
And leave these gentlemen to their blind fortune. Exit Manuile

Mountney. Since fortune has thus spitefully crossed our hope,
Let us leave this guest and harken after our King:
Who is at this day landed at Lirpoole. Exit Mountney.

Valingford. Go my Lord I Will follow you.
Well, now Mountney is gone
I Will stay behind to solicit my love,
For I imagine that I shall find this but a fained invention
Thereby to have us leave off our suits.

Enter Marquis Lubeck and the King of Denmark angerly with some attendants.
Zweno. K. Well Lubeck well, it is not possible
But you must be concenting to this act?
Is this the man so highly you extold?
And play a part so hateful with his friend?
Since first he came with thee into the court
What entertainment and what countenance
He has received, none better knows than thou.
In recompense whereof he quites me well,
To steal away fair Mariana my prisoner,
Whose ransom being lately greed upon,
I am deluded of by this escape.
Besides, I know not how to answer it
When she shall be demanded home to Swethia.

Lubeck. My gracious Lord, conjecture not I pray
Worser of Lubeck than he does deserve.
Your highness knows Mariana was my love,
Sole paragon and mistres of my thoughts.
Is it likely I should know of her departure,
Wherein there is no man injured more than I.

Zweno. That carries reason Marquis I confess.
Call forth my daughter. Yet I am persuaded
That she poor soul suspected not her going:
For as I hear: she likewise loved the man,
Which he to blame did not at all regard.

Rocilia. My Lord here is the Princess Mariana:
It is your daughter is conveyed away.

Zweno. What, my daughter gone?
Now Marquis your villainy breaks forth.
This match is of your making, gentle sir:
And you shall dearly know the price thereof.

Lubeck. Knew I thereof, or that there was intent
In Robert thus to steal your highness daughter:
Let heavens in Justice presently confound me.

Zweno. Not all the protestations thou can use,
Shall save thy life. Away with him to prison.
And minion, otherwise it cannot be,
But you are an agent in this treachery.
I will revenge it thoroughly on you both.
Away with her to prison. Here Is stuff in deed?
My daughter stolen away?
It booteth not thus to disturb my self,
But presently to send to English William,
To send me that proud knight of Windsor hither,
Here in my Court to suffer for his shame:
Or at my pleasure to be punished there.
Withal, that Blanch be sent me home again,
Or I shall fetch her unto Windsors cost,
Yea, and Williams too if he deny her me?. Exit Zweno.

Enter William taken with soldiers. William. Could any cross, could any
plague be worse?
Could heaven or hell? Did both conspire in one
To afflict my soul, invent a greater scourge
Then presently I am tormented with?
Ah Mariana cause of my lament:
Joy of my heart, and comfort of my life.
For thee I breath my sorrows in the air,
And tire my self: for silently I sigh,
My sorrows afflictes me soul with equal passion.

Soldier. Go to sirrah, put up, it is to small purpose.

William. Hence villains hence, dare you lay your hands
Upon your Sovereign?

Soldier. Well sir, we will deal for that.
But here comes one will remedy all this.

Enter Demarch. Soldier. My Lord, watching this night in the camp,
We took this man, and know not what he is:
And in his company was a gallant dame,
A woman fair in outward show she seemde,
But that her face was maskte we could not see
The grace and favor of her countenance.

Demarch. Tell me good fellow of whence and what thou art.

Soldier. Why do you not answer my Lord?
He takes scorn to answer.

Demarch. And take thou scorn to answer my demand?
Thy proud behavior very well deserves
This misdemeanour at the worst be construed.
Why do thou neither know, nor have thou heard?
That in the absence of the Saxon Duke,
Demarch is his especial Substitute
To punish those that shall offend the laws.

William. In knowing this, I know thou art a traitor.
A rebel, and mutenous conspirator.
Why Demarch, know thou who I am?

Demarch. Pardon my dread Lord the error of my sense,
And misdemeaner to your princely excellency.

Willi. Why Demarch, what is the cause my subjects are in arms?

Demarch. Free are my thoughts my dread and gracious Lord
From treason to your state and common weal,
Only reuengement of a private grudge
By Lord Dirot lately proffered me,
That stands not with the honor of my name,
Is cause I have assembled for my guard
Some men in arms that may withstand his force,
Whose settled malice aymeth at my life.

William. Where is Lord Dirot?

Demarch. In arms my gracious Lord
Not past two miles from hence,
As credibly I am assertained.

William. Well, come let us go,
I fear I shall find traitors of you both. Exit.

Enter the Citizen of Manchester and his daughter Elner and Manuile. Citizen.
In deed sir it would do very well
If you could entreat your father to come hither:
But if you think it be too far,
I care not much to take horse and ride to Manchester,
I am sure my daughter is content with either:
How say thou Elner art thou not?

Elner. As you shall think best I must be contented.

Manuile. Well Elner farewell, only thus much,
I pray make all things in a readiness,
Either to serve here or to carry thither with us.

Citizen. As for that sir take you no care,
And so I betake you to your journey.
Enter Valingford. But soft what gentleman is this?

Valingf. God speed sir, might a man crave a word or two with you

Citizen God forbid else sir, I pray you speak your pleasure.

Valingford. The gentleman that parted from you, was he not
Of Manchester, his father living there of good account.

Citizen. Yes mary is he sir: why do you ask?
Belike you have had some acquaintance with him.

Valingford I have been acquainted in times past,
But through his double dealing,
I am grown werie of his company.
For be it spoken to you:
He has been acquainted with a poor millers daughter,
And diverse times has promised her marriage.
But what with his delays and floutes,
He has brought her into such a taking,
That I fear me it will cost her her life.

Citizen. To be plain with you sir:
His father and I have been of old acquaintance,
And a motion was made,
Beteewene my daughter and his son,
Which is now thoroughly agreed upon
Save only the place appointed for the marriage,
Whether it shall be kept here or at Manchester,
And for no other occasion he is now ridden.

Elner. What has he done to you?
That you should speak so ill of the man.

Valingford. Oh gentlewoman I cry you mercy,
He is your husband that shall be.

Elner. If I knew this to be true?
He should not be my husband were he never so good:
And therefore, good father,
I would desire you to take the pains
To bear this gentleman company to Manchester
to know whether this be true or no.

Citizen. Now trust me gentleman he deals with me very hardly,
Knowing how well I meant to him.
But I care not much to ride to Manchester
To know whether his fathers will be,
He should deal with me so badlie.
Will it please you sir to go in, we will presently take horse and away.

Valingford. If it please you to go in
I Will follow you presently. Exit Elner and her father.
Now shall I be revenged on Manuile,
And by this means get Em to my wife.
And therefore I will straight to her fathers
And inform them both of all that is happened. Exit.

Enter William, the Ambassador of Denmark, Demarch, and other attendants.
William. What news with the Denmark Ambassador?

Ambassador. Mary thus, the King of Denmark and my Sovereign
Does send to know of thee what is the cause
That injuriously against the law of arms,
Thou have stolen away his only daughter Blaunch,
The only stay and comfort of his life.
Therefore by me he wills thee to send his daughter Blaunch:
Or else forthwith he will leuy such an host,
As soon shall fetch her in dispite of thee.

William. Ambassador, this answer Iretorne thy King.
He wills me to send his daughter Blaunch:
Saying I conuaid her from the Danish court,
That never yet did once as think thereof.
As for his menacing and daunting threats
I nill regard him nor his Danish power.
For if he come to fetch her forth my Realm,
I will provide him such abanquet here
That he shall have small cause to give me thanks.

Ambassador. Is this your answer then?

William It is and so begone.

Ambassador. I go but to your cost. Exit AmBassador.

William. Demarch our subjects erst levied in civil broils,
Musterd forthwith for to defend the Realm,
In hope whereof that we shall find you true,
We freely pardon this thy late offense.

Demarch. Most humble thanks I render to your grace.

Exeunt. Enter the Millier and Valingsord. Miller. Alas gentleman, why should
you trouble your self so much
Considering the imperfections of my daughter
Which is able to with-drawe the love of any man from her,
As already it has done in her first choice.
Master Manuile has foraken her,
And at Chester shall be married to a man's daughter of no little wealth.
But if my daughter knew so much:
It would go very near her heart I fear me.

Valing Father miller: such is the entyre affection to your daughter,
As no misfortune whatsoever can alter.
My fellow Mountney thou seeste gave quicly over,
But I by reason of my good meaning
Am not so soon to be changed
Although I am borne off with scorns and denial.

Enter Em to them. Miller. Trust me sir I know not what to say,
My daughter is not to be compelled by me,
But here she comes herself: speak to her and spare not:
For I never was troubled with love matters so much before.

Em. Good Lord shall I never be rid of this importunate man?
Now must I dissemble blyndnes again,
Once more for thy sake Manuile thus am I insorced,
Because I shall complete my full resolved mind to thee.
Father where are you?

Miller. Here sweet Em, answer this gentleman
That would so feign enjoy thy love.

Em. Where are you sir? will you never leave
This idle and vain pursuit of love?
Is not England stord enought to content you?
But you must still trouble the poor
Contemptible maid of Manchester.

Valing. None can content me but the fair maid of Manchester.

Em. I perceive love is vainly described,
That being blind himself,
Would have you likewise troubled with a blind wife,
Having the benefit of your eyes,
But neither follow him so much in folly,
But love one, in whom you may better delight.

Valingford. Father Miller, thy daughter shall have honor
By granting me her love:
I am a Gentleman of king Williams Court,
And no mean man in king Williams favor.

Em. If you be a Lord sir, as you say:
You offer both yourselfe and me great wrong:
Yours, as apparent in limitting your love so unorderly,
For which you rashly endure reprochement:
Mine, as open and evident,
When being shut from the vanities of this world,
you would have me as an open gazing stock to all the world:
For lust, not love leads you into this error:
But from the one I will keep me as well as I can,
And yield the other to none but to my father,
As I am bound by duty.

Valingford. Why fair Em, Manuile has forsaken thee,
And must at Chester be married, which,
If I speak otherwise than true,
Let thy father speak what credibly he has heard.

Em. But can it be Manuile will deal so unkindly,
To reward my justice with such monstrous ungentleness.
Have I dissembled for thy sake?
And do thou now thus requite it?
In deed these many days I have not seen him,
Which has made me marvel at his long absence.
But father, are you assured of the words he spoke,
were concerning Manuile?

Miller. In sooth daughter, now it is forth,
I must needs confirm it.
Master Manuile has forsaken thee,
And at Chester must be married
To a man's daughter of no little wealth.
His own father procures it,
And therefore I dare credit it,
And do thou believe it,
For trust me daughter it is so.

Em. Then good father pardon the injury,
That I have don to you only causing your grief,
By ouer-fond affecting a man so trothlesse.
And you likewise sir, I pray hold me excused,
As I hope this cause will allow sufficiently for me:
My love to Manuile, thinking he would requite it,
Has made me double with my father and you,
And many more besides,
Which I will no longer hyde from you.
That enticing speeches should not beguile me,
I have made my self deaf to any but to him.
And lest any man's person should please me more than his,
I have dissembled the want of my sight:
Both which shadows of my irreuocable affections,
I have not sparde to confirm before him,
My father, and all other amorous soliciters.
Wherewith not made acquainted, I perceive
My true intent has wrought mine own sorrow.
And seeking by love to be regarded,
Am cut of with contempt, and despised.

Miller. Tell me sweet Em have thou but fained all this while for his love,
That has so descourteously forsaken thee.

Em. Credit me father I have told you the troth,
Wherewith I desire you and Lord Valingford not to be displeased
For ought else I shall say,
Let my present grief hold me excused.
But may I live to see that vngratfullman
Justly rewarded for his treachery?
Poor Em would think her self not a little happy,
Favor my departing at this instant,
For my troubled thought desires to meditate alone in silence

Exit Em. Valingf Will not Em show one chereful look on Valingford?

Miller. Alas sir, blame her not, you see she has good cause,
being so handled by this gentleman:
And so I Will leave you, and go comfort my poor wench
As well as I may. Exit the Miller.

Valingford. Farewell good father. Exit Valingford.

Enter Zweno king of Denmark with Rosilio, and other attendants. Zweno.
Rosilio, Is this the place whereas the Duke William should meet me?

Rosilio. It is, and like your grace.

Zweno. Go captain away, regard the charge I gave:
See all our men be martialed for the fight.
Dispose the Wards as lately was devised.
And let the prisoners under several gardes
Be kept apart until you hear from us.
Let this suffice, you know my resolution.
If William Duke of Saxon be the man,
That by his answer sent us, he would send
Not words but wounds: not parleis but alarmes,
Must be descider of this controversy.
Rosilio, stay with me, the rest begone. Exeunt.

Enter William, and Demarch with other attendants William. All but Demarch go
shroud you out of sight,
For I will go parley with the Prince my self.

Demarch. Should Zweno by this parley call you forth,
Upon intent injuriously to deal:
This offers too much opportunity.

William. No no Demarch, that were abreach
Against the law of Arms: therefore begone,
And leave us here alone. Exeunt.
I see that Zweno is master of his word.
Zweno, William of Saxony greeteth thee
Either well oryll, according to thy intent.
If well thou wish to him and Saxony,
He bids thee frindly welcome as he can.
If ill thou wish to him and Saxanie,
He must withstand thy malice as he may.

Zweno. William, for other name and title give I none
To him, who were he worthy of those honors
That Fortune and his predecessors left,
I ought by right and human courtesy
To grace his style with Duke of Saxony.
But for I find a base degenerate mind,
I frame my speech according to the man,
And not the state that he unworthy holds.

William. Herein Zweno do thou abase thy state,
To break the peace which by our auncesters
Has heretofore been honorably kept.

Zweno. And should that peace for ever have been kept,
Had not thy self been author of the breach:
Nor stands it with the honor of my state,
Or nature of a father to his child,
That I should so be robbed of my daughter,
And not unto the utmost of my power
Revenge so intolerable an injury.

William. Is this the color of your quarrel Zweno?
I well perceive the wisest men may err.
And think you I conveyed away your daughter Blanch?

Zweno. Art thou so impudent to deny thou did?
When that the proof thereof is manifest?

William. What proof is there?

Zweno. Thine own confession is sufficient proof.

William. Did I confess I stole your daughter Blanch?

Zweno. Thou did confess thou had a Lady hence.

William. I have and do.

Zweno. Why that was Blanch my daughter.

William. Nay, that was Mariana,
who wrongfully thou detainest prisoner.

Zweno. Shameless persisting in thy ill,
Thou do mayntaine a manifest vntrothe,
As she shall justify unto thy teethe.
Rosilio fetch her and the Marquis hither.

Exit Rosilio for Mariana. William. It cannot be I should be so deceived.

Demarch. I heard this night among the soldiers,
That in their watch they took a pensive Lady:
Who at the appointment of the Lord Dirot is yet in keeping.
What she is I know not,
Only thus much, I ouer-hard by chance.

Welliam. And what of this.

Demarch. It may be Blaunch the King of Denmarkes daughter.

William. It may be so: but on my life it is not?
Yet Demarch, go and fetch her straight.

Enter Rosilio with the Marquis. Rosilio. Pleases your highness, here is the
Marquis and Mariana.

Zweno. See here, Duke William, your competitors
That were consenting to my daughters escape.
Let them resolut you of the truth hereing,
And here I vow and solemly protest,
That in thy presence they shall lose their heds:
Unless I here where as my daughter is.

William. O Marquis Lubeck how it grieueth me,
That for my sake thou should endure these bonds.
Be judge my soul that feels the martyrdom.

Marquis. Duke William, you know it is for your cause,
It pleases thus the King to misconceiue of me,
And for his pleasure does me injury.

Enter Demarch with the Lady Blaunch. Demarch. May it please your hightnes,
Here is the Lady you sent me for,

William. Away Demarch, what tellest thou me of Ladies?
I so detest the dealing of their sex,
As that I count a lovers state to be the base
And vildest slavery in the world.

Demarch. What humors are these: here is a strange alteration.

Zweno. See Duke William, is this Blaunch or no?
You know her, if you see her I am sure.

William. Zweno I was deceived, yea utterly deceived,
Yet this is she: this same is Lady Blaunch.
And for mine error, here I am content
To do whatsoever Zweno shall set down.
Ah cruel Mariana thus to use
The man which loved and honored thee with his heart.

Mariana. When first I came into your highness court,
And William often importing me of love:
I did devise to ease the grief your daughter did sustain,
She should meet Sir William masked as I it were.
This put in proof, did take so good effect,
As yet it seems his grace is not resolved,
But it was I which he conueid away.

William. May this be true? It cannot be but true.
Was it Lady Blaunch which I conueid away?
Unconstant Mariana,
Thus to deal with him which meant to thee naught but faith.

Blaunch. Pardon dear father my follyes that are past,
Wherein I have neglected me duty
Which I in reverence ought to show your grace,
For led by love I thus have gone astray,
And now repent the errors I was in.

Zweno. Stand up dear daughter though thy fault desesues
For to be punished in the extremest sort.
Yet love that couers multitude of sins
Makes love in parents wink at childrens faults.
Suffices Blaunch thy father loves thee so,
Thy follies past he knows but will not know.
And here Duke William take my daughter to thy wife.
For well I am assured she loves thee well.

William. A proper coniuntion: as who should say,
Lately come out of the fire,
I would go thrust my self into the flame.
Let Maistres nice go Saint it where she list,
And coyly quaint it with dissembling face.
I hold in scorn the fooleries that they use,
I being free will never subject my self
to any such as she is underneath the Sun.

Zweno. Refusest thou to take my daughter to thy wife?
I tell thee Duke, this rash denial
May bring more mischief on thee then thou can avoid.

William. Conseit has wrought such general dislike
Through the false dealing of Mariana,
That utterly I do abhore their sex.
They are all disloyal, unconstant, all unjust:
Who tryes as I have tried,
And finds as I have found,
Will say there is no such creatures on the ground.

Blanch. Unconstant Knight, though some deserve no trust
There Is others faithful, loving, loyal, and just.

Enter to them Valingford with Em and the Miller, and Mountney, and Manuile,
and Elner. Willi. How now Lord Valingford what makes these women here?

Valing. Here be two women, may it please your grace,
that are contracted to one man,
And are in strife whether shall have him to their husband.

William. Stand forth women and say,
To whether of you did he first give his faith.

Em. To me forsooth.

Elner. To me my gracious Lord.

William. Speak Manuile, to whether did thou give thy faith?

Manuile. To say the troth: this maid had first my love.

Elner. Yea Manuile, but there was no witness by.

Em. Thy conscience Manuile a hundred witnesses.

Elner. She has stolen a conscience to serve her own turn.
But you are deceived, in faith he will none of you.

Manuile. In deed, dred Lord, so dear I held her love,
As in the same I put my whole delight.
But some impediments which at that instant happened,
Made me forsake her quite,
For which I had her fathers frank consent.

William. What were the impediments?

Manuile. Why she could neither hear nor see.

William. Now she does both. Maiden, how were you cured:

Em. Pardon my Lord, I Will tell your grace the troth,
Be it not imputed to me as discredit.
I loved this Manuile so much, that still methought
When he was absent did present to me
The form and feature of that countenance
Which I did shrine an ydoll in mine heart.
And never could I see a man methought
That equald Manuile in my partial eye.
Nor was there any love between us lost,
But that I held the same in high regard,
Until repair of some unto our house,
Of whom my Manuile grew thus jealous:
As if he took exception I vouchsafed
To hear them speak, or saw them when they came:
On which I straight took order with my self
To void the scrupule of his conscience,
By counterfaiting that I neither saw nor heard,
Any ways to rid my hands of them.
All this I did to keep my Manuiles love,
Which he unkindly seeks for to reward.

Manuile. And did my Em to keep her faith with me
Dissemble that she neither heard nor saw.
Pardon me sweet Em, for I am only thine.

Em. Lay off thy hands, disloyal as thou art,
Nor shall thou have possession of my love,
That can so finely shift thy matters off.
^ut case I had been blind and could not see,
As often times such visitations falls
That pleases God which all things does dispose:
Should thou forsake me in regard of that?
I tell thee Manuile, had thou been blind,
Or deaf, or dumb, or else what impediments
might befall to man, Em would have loved and kept,
And honored thee: yea, begde if wealth had faylde
For thy relief.

Manuile. Forgive me sweet Em.

Em. I do forgive thee with my heart,
And will forget thee too if case I can:
But never speak to me, nor seem to know me.

Manuile. Then farewell frost:
Well fare a wench that will.
Now, Elner I am thine own my gyrle.

Elner. Mine Manuile? thou never shall be mine.
I so detest thy villainy.
That whilst I live I will abhor thy company.

Manuile. Is it come to this? of late, I had choice of twain
On either side to have me to her husband:
And now am utterly rejected of them both.

Valingford. My Lord this gentleman when time was
Stood some thing in our light,
And now I think it not a miss
To laugh at him that sometime scorned at us.

Mountney. Content my Lord, invent the form.

Valingford. Then thus.

William. I see that women are not general evils.
Blanch is fair: Methinkes I see in her,
A modest countenance, a heavenly blush.
Zweno, receive a reconciled foe,
Not as thy friend, but as thy son in law,
If so that thou be thus content.

Zweno. I joy to see your grace so tractable.
Here take my daughter Blanch,
And after my desease the Denmark crown.

William. Now sir, how stands the case with you?

Manuile. I partly am persuaded as your grace is,
My lord, he is best at ease that medleth least.

Valingford. Sir may a man be so bold,
As to crave a word with you?

Manuile. Yea, two or three: what are they?

Valingford. I say, this maid will have thee to her husband.

Mountney. And I say this: and thereof will I lay an hundred pound.

Valingf. And I say this: whereon I will lay as much.

Manuile. And I say neither: what say you to that?

Mountney. If that be true: then are we both deceived.

Manuile. Why it is true, and you are both deceived.

Marquis. In mine eyes, this is the proprest wench.
Might I advise thee, take her unto thy wife.

Zweno. It seems to me, she has refused him.

Marquis. Why there is the spite.

Zweno. If one refuse him, yet may he have the other.

Marquis. He will ask but her good will, and all her friends.

Zweno. Might I advise thee, let them both alone.

Manuile. Yea, that's the course, and thereon will I stand.
Such idle love henceforth I will detest.

Valingford. The Fox will eat no grapes, and why?

Mountney. I know full well, because they hang too hye.

William. And may it be a Millers daughter by her birth?
I cannot think but she is better borne.

Valingford. Sir Thomas Goddard hight this reverent man,
Famed for his virtues and his good success:
Whose fame has been renowned through the world.

William. Sir Thomas Goddard welcome to thy Prince,
And fair Em, frolike with thy good father.
As glad am I to find Sir Thomas Goddard
As good Sir Edmund Treford on the plains:
He like a shepherd, and thou our country Miller.

Miller. And longer let not Goddard live a day,
Then he in honor loves his sovereign.

William. But say Sir Thomas, shall I give thy daughter?

Miller. Goddard and all that he has,
Does rest at the pleasure of your Majesty.

William. And what says Em to lovely Valingford?
It seemde he loved you well,
That for your sake durst leave his King.

Em. Em restes at the pleasure of your highness:
And would I were a wife for his desert.

William. Then here Lord Valingford,
Receive fair Em.
Here take her, make her thy espoused wife.
Then go we in, that preparation may be made,
to see these nuptials solemly performed.
Exeunt all. Sound drums and Trumpets.
FINIS.

