decorative border

Here bigynneth the dyfference of astronom, with the gouernayle to keep man's
body in health, all the four seasons of the year.

woodcut of astronomer surrounded by four stars

Of the dyfference of astronomy.
ALexander fayresone, I pray the that if thou may do it, that thou rise not,
nor eat, nor drink, nor do any other thing, but by the council of somethat
knows and has the science in knowlegynge the sterres and astronomye. And
thou shall wit my dear sone that almighty god has made nothing without
cause, but has done every thing reasonably. And by certain scyences and
ways, the wise phylozopher Platon sought and felt the operacyons of all
things composed of the four elements, and the humors contraryes. And had
also the knowledge of the things created and formed. And also my dear sone
Alexander I pray the believe not such fools which say that the science of
the planettes is so hard to be known, and that none may come thereto. Surely
they be fools and wot not what they say. It is a noble thing to know
things which be to come. If thou know the things which be to come, thou
and other persons may put remedy by good prayers. And require the creatoure
that has ordained the^ to return their malice, and ordeyne them otherwise.
Think nor dear sone that god has ordained and predestynate such things, but
that by his power he may change them otherwise when he pleases. Wit thou
deresonne that the good people pray to our creatoure with orysons and devout
petycyons, by fasting and sacrefyces, byalmesse and other manner, axynge of
pardon of their sins and doing penance, that our lord may return and
remember such predestynacyons which other do fear so much. Return we
deresone to our first purpose, wit thou that astronomye is devised in. iiij.
parts. That is to wit in ordinance of sterres, In the dysposycyon, of
signs, and of their elongacyons. Of the mouynge of the son. And this partre
is called science of astronomy: The other part is of the knowledge of the
mouynge of the says and of the moon. And this party is called astronomye.
And is the worthyest, of sterres, planettes, and signs. And, there is M.
xxviij. planettes sygned and formed, of the which we shall speak more plainly.

Of the gouernayle of health.
HEalth among all things is to be gott^n and has more tha^ any might of
r^chesses. For the keeping of health is by using of equal things conioy^ned
to the^ body, as by aftemperaunce of humors. For the glorious god has
ordained them, and given diverse remedies to the aftemperaunce of the humors
to the keeping of health. And has showed it to his holy men and prophets, and
to many other Just men which he did choose and enlumyned with the holy ghost,
in his sapyence dyuyne, and mighty. And has given them the gifts of the
science of these things here after following. These philosophers put the
beginning of it. That is to wit they of ynde, of Greece, and of Athenes.
Which philosophers were Just and perfyte, and their wr^tynges were the
beginning of science and secrets. For in their wrytynges is nothing found
to be reproved nor sp^ylt, but approved of all wysemen*

Of the gouernayle of sick people.
ALl wise and natural philosophers say that man is made and composed of four
contrary humors, the which have always need to be sustained with meat and
drink. The substance whereof behooves to issue and be corrupt if any do
always eat and drink, and he should wax weyke and fall in great dyseses and
have many inconuenyences. But if he eat and drink temperatly and he shall
find help of life, strength of body, and health of all the members The wise
philosophers say that if any man trespace the god of nature, and the good
manner of living, be it into much eating and drinking, or to much slepynge,
or waking, into much walking or resting, being to laxatyfe, or to much
lettynge of blood or to little, it can not be but he must fall into many
dyseases, and greues. Of the which dyseases I have bryefly found, and therein
I will shewethe my council, and remedy for the same. All wise Philosophers
accords in one saying. Who so keeps him fro over much eating and
drinking, and from that excesses aforesaid, and keeps temperau^ce, he shall
be helthfull of his body / and live long. For I can find no man but he is of
this opinion, and wylsay that aldelectable things of the world, be it
inpleasure of the body, it is but for to live the longer in them. But for a
more secret ye ought to enforce you to do such things as ben belonging to
long life, and not to folowethe appetyte, that is to wit not to put lie meat
upon ^eate. And dear sone I have herd often spoken of ypocras which kept
manytymes dyete to the end that he might live andendure the longer. Not for to
live and endure for the meat and drink. Also dear sone it is great
holsomnesse to be purged of superfluytes and evil humors which ben in ye
body.

In how many manners a man may keep his health.
GOod sone I pray the have in thy mind steadfastly these certain instruccyons
and keep the^. Know thou that health is chyefly in two things. The first is
let a man use such meats and drynkes as he has been nourysshed with. The
second that he purge him of ill humors that be corrupt and grieve him. For
the body of man is fed with meats and drynkes which nourysshe it by
natural heat that dries, nouryssheth and fedeth the moystnesse thereof.

Of diverse meats for the stomach.
When the body is fat and full of vapors, gross meats is good for it. And
of the nourysshynge of such a body, the dygestyon is gross, and of great
quantyte for the great heat, and vapors of the body And when the body is
sclender and dry a subtle and moist meats be good for it. And the dygestyon
thereof is of small quantyte for the streytnesses of the conduytes. And it is
great wisdom and science for a man to use such meats as ben good and
appertenent to his complexyon, that is to wit if he feed him with hot meats
temperatly But if the heat be to grievous and brennynge with in the body by
over strong wynes and hot meats, or other accydentes than contrary meats
and drynkes will do great ease and profit, that is to wit such as bencolde.

Of the stomach.
If the stomach be to hot, than hot and course meats be good. For such a
stomach is like a mighty fire for to brenne great weight of logges. But when
the stomach is cold and feeble than it is good to have light and subtle
meats.

The signs to knowledge the stomach.
The signs of a stomach that is of an ill and weyke dygestyon is wha^ the
body is unlusty, heavy, and slothful the face is swollen, and he yaneth often,
and has pain in his eyes, and holketh often and rudely and the bolkynge is
sour and unsavory, watery and styukynge, and thereby is bredde wyndes and
swellynge of the belly and the appetyre of meat is marde. Therefore sweet sone
be ware of meats and drynkes that may hurt or becontrary to thy health.

An epistle of great value.
Most dear sone Alexander sithe it is so that the body of man is corruptyble
by dyuersyte of complexyon, and of contrary humors that be in it, whereby
often there comes corrupcyon to it, I thought to deliver the some thing that
shall be necessary and profetable to the. In the which I will treat of the
secrets of physyke which shall please the For certain dyseases come to a
king which be not honest to show to physycyons. And if thou wylt observe this
lesson, thou shall have no need of Physycyons, except in causes that may come
in battle, the which may be exchewed. Alexander fair sone when thou rysest
from thy sleep, walk and stretche thy members eqally and comb thy heed, for
stretchynge of the lymbes gives force, and combynge reyseth the vapors that been come in slepynge and puts them from the stomach. In somer was she thy
heed in cold water, which shall yield the natural heat, and shall because
of appetyte to meat. Tha^ clothe the with goodly and rich apparel. For the
heart of man delyteth in the beholdynge of precious meats and clothing. Than
rub thy tethe with some course lynnyn, or other thing that is hot and dry
of compleccyon, and sweet of smell for it is wholesome for the tethe, and keeps
them clean, cleanses the stenche of ye muoth and clereth the voice, and gives
appetyte to eat. And rub the heed often in the same wise for it opens the
claustres of the brain, and thycketh the neck and other members, and cleanses
the face and the sight, and prolongeth stowpynge of age, and amendeth the
blood. Also anoint the sometime with sweet smelling oyntementes, as the time
requires, for in such sweetness thy heart takes great pleasure, and is
nourysshed thereby. And the spyryt of life takes refeccyon in good odoures: and
the blod renneth merely through* the baynes of the body. After that take
sometime an electuary of a wood called Aloes / and Rubarbe which is a precious
thing, to the price of four pens, which thou shalt find written in the
book of physycke, and this shall do the much good, for it voydeth the heat of
the Mouth, of the Stomach, and warmeth the body and wastes wyndes, and makes
good taste and sauoure. After this I council the that thou be often with thy
noble and wise men of thy realm, and speak to them of thy besynesses that
thou have to do. And govern them sadly according to their good customs.

Of the manner to travail.
OR ever thou eat, or thine appetyte comes at thine hour accustomed do some
travail, that is to wit walk or tide a little, or do some other work, for
it helps the body much, it a voydeth all ventosytees, and makes the body
lyghter, stronger and lustyeth the Stomach, and wasted evil humors of the
body and makes the flewme of the stomach descend.

Of the manner of eating.
Fair sone when thy meat is set before the, eat of such as you desyrest
most, resonably, with well leuayned breed. And eat of such as ought to be
first eaten. For there be two manners of dygestyon of meat in a man, that is
to wit, soft, and hard. For in the botto^ is most heat for to make meat,
because it is most flesshely, and nighest the heat of the liver where with the
meat is soden and dygested

Of abstynence of meat.
When thou eatest, eat by leisure, though you have great appetyte to eat. For
if thou eat gredelye noughty humors do multyplye the stomach is laden the
body is grieved, the heart is hurt, and the meat remains in the stomachs
botome vndygested.

How pure water ought not to be dronken.
ALso beware deresone that ye drink no pure water, specially when thou haste
eaten meat. But if thou be wont thereto. For as soon as the water is upon the
meat, it coleth the stomach, and quenches the heat of the dygestyon and
comfort of the meat. It lets dygestyon and greueth the body. If thou must
ned^s drink water alone, take it the most temperatlye, and as little as thou
may.

Of the manner to sleep.
When thou have taken thy refeccyon and haste lust to sleep lie down on
asofte bed and sleep te^peratly. And first lie down on the leftesyde, and
sleep thereon a reasonable space, for the left side is cold and has need of
warmeth. And if thou feel any pain in thy belly or in thy stomach, than lay
thereto a sovereign medycyne, yt is a warm lynne^ cloth laid thereon, wit thou
dear sone that travail is good and gives heat to the stomach, but after
dinner it is a noughty thing for the meat abides vndygested in the botome of
the stomach, and thereof be bredde many dyseases. And sleep before fedynge it
is not good, for it makes the body leave and dries the humors. But slepynge
after fedynge is good, for it fulfylleth the body and gives force, and
nourysshynge thereto. For when the body of man rests, than the natural heat
draws the heat that was spredde in all the me^bres in to the botome of the
stomach and gives strength thereto upon the refeccyon of the meat. And heat
requires rest. Therefore some philosophers have said that it is better and
holsomer to eat at night than in the morning, for the eating in the morning
because of the heat of the day greueth the stomach, and the body is more
trauayled therewith. And moreover the person chafeth in trauaylyng doing his
business, in going and speaking, and many other things that belongs to the
body of man, by the which heat that is outward toward none the natural
heat that is inward is weyked and appeyred, and the meat is hard to dygest.
But at night it is more easy and less grieved with the heat of traueyle. And
the here and members of man ben more in quiet by the coldness of the night
that gives natural heat to the stomach.

The keeping of custom or wont.
THou shalt understand my dear sone that he that is wont to eat but one
meal often is dyseased, for the stomach is without dygestyon and the body
has small nourysshynge. And he that is accustomed to eat at one time ones,
another time twyse, he shall lightly perceive yt it does him harm, for custom
charge nature.

How one ought to change custom.
ANd if need constreyne the toch au^gethy custom, do it wisely, that is to
wit by little and little. And so by the grace of god thy chaungynge shall be
good. But above althynges beware that thou eat not till thou feel thy stomach
empty and that it has made good dygestyon of the first meal. And this thou
may know by the desire that thou shalt have to thy meat: and by thy spatle
that turns subtylly in thy inouth, And if thou eat without need or appetyte
the heat of thy Stomach shall be made cold as yse. And if necessyte be that
you must eat, and have an appetyte thereto, the kind heat of thy stomach will
be as hot as fire, and of good dygestyon. And beware that when thy appetyte
comes that thou eat not forthwith, for it will gather ill humors of thy
body in to thy stomach, which will hurt thy brain. And if thou tarry over
long or thou eat, it will feeble thy stomach, and the meat will do thy body
no good. And if so be that thou may not eat as soon as thy appetyce
requires, and that thy stomach be full of ill humors do so that thou may
vomyte or thou eat, and after that vomyte take an electuary, and eat surely

Of the four seasons of the year.
Our intencyon is to treat in this book of the four seasons of the year, with
the qualyte, property, contraryte, and dyfference of each of them. And they ben
certain seasons of the year divided as follows. That is to wit prymtyme or
vere begins when ye son enters in the sign of Aries, and lasts. iiij.
score and. xiij. days, and. xviii. hours, and the fourth part of an hour.

That is to wit from the.x. day in the end of March, to the four and twenty
day of June. And in this season the days and nyghtes benegall of length The
wether is fair. The warm wether comes. The snowes melte, ryuers run swyft
and clear, and wax warm, the moystnesse of the earth ryseth to the heyght of
trees, and causes them to smell sweet. Meadows and graynes sprowte and corn
grows and all flowers take color, birds ben clothed with new robes, and
enforce them to sing. Trees ben decked with leaves and flowers, and the lands
with seeds. Beestes engender and all people take strength and lust. The earth
is arrayed goodly, and is as a fair bryde clothed with Iewelles of diverse
colors because she should semethe fayrer at her wedding.

Of Prymtyme, and what it is.
THe prymtyme is hot and moist temperatly as the air. This season ye blood
moeueth and spredeth to all the me^bres of the body, and the body is parfyse
intemperate complexyon. In this seasonchekyns, kyddes, and poched eggs ought
to be eaten, with let uses and gotes milk in the sethre months. Prymtyme
begins when the son enters the sign of Aries and lasts. xcii. days,
an hour and a half fro the x day of March to the x. day of June. In this
season is the best lettynge of blood of any time. And than is good to travail
and to be laxatyfe And to be bathed. And to eat such things as will purge
the belly. For all dyseases that comes, either by purgynge or bledynge,
retorneth anon in this Prymetyme.

Of somer and what it is.
SOmer begins when ye Son enters the first point of the creuyce, and
lasts.xcij. days, and an hour and a half. That is to wit fro the.x. day of
June to the.x. day of September. In this season the days be long and the
nyghtes short. And in all regyons increases and abateth their heat and the sea is calm, and the air mek and fair The flours wyther and serpents
increase and shed their venym, and sprede their strength. The myghtes of man's
body be fortyfyed. And all ye world is full of wealth, as the fair bryde that
is goodly stature and in perfyte age. The season of somer hot and dry, and
than coler is moeued. And in this season is good to bewar^ of al things that
be hot and dry of complexyon. And take heed of to much eating or drinking
for thereby is ye kyndly heat quenched In this season eat meats of cold and
moist complexyon, as deal, milk with vyneygre, and potages made with barley
meal. Eat fruit of eygre savor, as Po^megarnetes, and drink small wynes,
and use not the company of women. In this season let the not blood, but if
great need compel the. Use little travail, and seldom bathing.

Of Autumpne, or heruest.
HEruest enters when the son comes in to the first degree of the balaunce
and lasts.xci. days and an hour and a half. That is to wit fro the.x. day
of Septembre to the.x. day of Decembre. In this season the day and night be
of one length. And than the days wax short and the nyghtes long. The air
is ^^rke, and the Wyndes enter the North^n regyons or septentryon.

The wether changes, and the Ryuers and Sprynges wax less. The Orcheyardes
and Fruytes wydereth. The beautye of the Earth faydeth. Birds cease their
singing. Serpents seek their holes where they assembled their living in
Somer for the time of Winter. The earth is as an old naked woman that goes
from youth to age. This season of Harvest is cold and dry, this time black
coler is moeued. In this season is good to eat meats that be hot and moist
as Chekyns, Lamb, and drink old Wynes, eat sweet Reasyns. And keep the from
all things that bread black coler, as lyenge with Women more than in somer,
nor bathe the not but if great need require it to be done In this season if a
man have need of vomytynge, do it at noone in the hotest of the day. For at
that time all the superfluytes of man's body gathers together. Also it is
good to purge the Belly with a medycyne ordeynen therefore and other things that been to expulce black coler and to refrain humors.

Of Winter and wha it is.
Winter comes wha^ the Son enters the first degree of the sign of
Caprycorne and lasts.lxx. days, and an hour and a half. And begins the
x. day of Decembre, and contynueth to the.x. day of March. In this season
the nyghtes ben long and the days short, it is very cold. The wynes be in
the press, and the leaves fall, and Herbs leeseth all their strength or the
most part. All Bestes hydeth them in Caves and Pyttes of Hills. The air and
the wether is dark.

And the earth is like an old decrypyte person, that by great age is naked
and nyghe to the death. Winter is very cold and moist, and than behooves the
to use hot Meats, as Chekyns, Hens, Motton and other hot and fat
flesh, eat Fygges, Nuttes, and drink grene Wynes. And beware of to much
laxe and bledynge, and eschew company of women, for it will feeble thy
Stomach, and bathes be good. And for the great cold the natural heat
enters into the body, and therefore the dygestyon is better in Winter than in
Somer. And in Heruest the Belly is cold, and than the poores ben open by heat
of the season, and reproves the natural heat of all the parts of the body.
And therefore the Stomach has but little heat, whereby the dygestyon is
febled, and the humors assemble there.

Of natural heat.
SOne Alexander I pray the keep the kyndly heat of thy body, and thou shall
have long health. For the body of man dies in. ii. manners. One is by great
age the which overcomes the body and dystroyeth it. The other is
accydentally, as by weeping, syckenesse or other adventure.

Of things that fatteth the body.
Right dear sone these be^ things that fatteth the body. That is to wit
ease of the body and fyllynge it with deynty meats and drynkes, and Milk,
and than to sleep on a soft bed. All sweet smelling flowers in their season,
and bathing in fresshe Waters. But if thou bathe the, tarry not long in it,
and have sweet smelling things in the Bathe. And never drink Wine but it be
well tempered with water. And specyallye in Winter make water of flowers called
Assynini and put it in to thy Wine, for it is hot of nature. And in Somer use
Vyoletes and flowers of Malowes and other things that be cold, and use to
vomyte ones in a month specially. For vomytes wassheth the body and purges it
of wicked humors and stynke that is in it. And if there be but few humors in
the Stomach, it comfort the natural heat. And when thou have vomyted
dwyllyngly, the body will fill it with good humydyte and be of good dysposycyon
to dygest. And if thou gouernethe thus, thou shall be merry at thy Heart, lusty
with reasonable healh and good understanding, glory and honor, and over all
thine enemies vyctory. Also I will that thou delight in the beholdynge of
goodlye persons, or in redynge of delectable books, or in werynge of precious
garments, and goodly Iewelles, as the time requires.

Of things that leans the body.
THese be the things that makes the Body to be lean, weyke, and dry, to
much eating, to much trauelynge, to much walking in the son, to much
going, to much slepynge before noone melancoly, fear, to Bathe in water of
the nature of brymstone, eating salt meats, to much drinking of old wine,
to be to laxe, and over much lettynge of Blood. For Ypocras says that he that
Bathe him with a full Belly, or lies with a Woman shall have syckenesse in his
entrayles. And also to run, or to ride, or to much travail after meat
bredeth a great disease called Palsy. And much eating of fysshe, or milk
and wine togather ypocras says it will make one lazar.

Of the first part of the body.
OF the four parts of the body the heed is the first For in the beed gadereth
all superfluytes, and evil Humors, which thou shalt sele and know by these
signs following. The eyes be^ troubled, the herynge is thycked and the nose
strylles ben stopped, if thou feel such a disease take an Herb called
wormwood, and sethe it in swetewyne till the half be wasted, than holdeit in
thy mouth and wasshe it many times therewith till thou feel that it does the
good, and eat white Mustarde sede powdered with thy meat. And if thou do not
thus thou may happen to have some disease, and specially inthyne eyes, in thy
brain, and in other parts of thy body.

Of the second part of the body.
THe second part of the body is the bulk, if disease come there thou shall
know it by these signs following. The tongue is let, the mouth is salt,
bitter, and vnsauer^. The mouth of the Stomach sour withgrese in all thy
members. It behooves the to eat but little and to vomyte, than eat a little
Sugar of roses with aloes and take good comfortynge spyces and eat an elctuary
named Dionisium. And if thou do not thus, thou may fall in dyseases of that
side, of the Raynes, and Fevers and specially of the Tongue whereby thou shall
not properly speak, and diverse other maladyes. Decoccyon of Yysope is good.

Of the third part of the body.
THe third part of ye body is the womb, if it be combred with evil Humors
thou shall know it by these signs. The Belly will Swell with pain and
styfness^ in the knees, going a slow pace. It behooves to use some subtyle
and light Meats, as is said before with the gouernynge. And if thou do not
thus there will follow ache in the hyppes, in the mylte, in the back, and other
joints, and in the liver, with ill dygestyon.

Of the fourth part of the body.
THe fourth part of the body ben the genytours. If superfluyte and noughty
humors gather in them thou shall know by these signs. The appetyte will wax
cold, and redness will appear upon them and upon the share. Than must thou
take a sede called Api^ with Fenellsede and the root of Mugwort, and of
another called Acham, and atracies. And with these Herbs put the Rotes in good
white Wine, and drink a qua^tyte of it every morning with a little water and
honey and eat not much after it. And if thou do not thus thou shalt have
Pain in the Bladder, and Liver, and shalt not pysse, and shall have grefe in
the Intrayles and Lunges with brekynge of the Stone. Sweet sone Alexander I
have read also the Hystoryes of a mighty king, which assembled all the best
Philosophers that were in Ynde and Greece, commanded them to make a medycyne so
profitable that he should need none other for his health. The Greeks said he that
Drynketh every Morning twyse his Monthfull of warm Water shall have a good
end, and shall need none other medycyne. The Physycyons of Ynde said that it
is good to eat eueryday Fasting aquantyte of Greynes of whytehony. And
mesemeth that who so takes one of these said Medycynes by reason shall not
have pain in his Womb, nor ought not to fear Palsy, nor Gowte, nor ache in
his Joints. And who so Eats every morning. vij. Dragmas of clusters of
sweet Wine grapes, shall not fear that disease of flew me, and it will a mende
his mind, and claryfye his understanding, and he needs not to doubt Fever
quattaynes. And who so Eats in the Morning a Fygge with Nuttes and aquantyte
of leaves of Rue, that day shall not need to fear Venym.

Of natural heat.
Most mighty king I require the to study the manner to keep the natural heat
of thy body, with the moisture thereof, in the which. ij. things lies the
health of the person. And know thou that the dystruccyon of the body comes
in two things, one is natural, and the other is against nature. And for the
contraryte of the co^plexyon of man, and when age surmounteth the body it
behooves for to dye. Otherwise unnaturally by adventure, as by weeping, or
stones, or by syckenesses and lack of help, or by Venym: and other chances.

Of the qualytes of Meats.
FVrther more it is good yt thou know the nature of meats, for some ben
gross, orcours, and some ben light and subtyle. The subtyle bredeth thynne
blood, and good, as pure white, Chekyns, and new laid Eggs Gross meats ben
good for such as ben of hot humors, Laborers, fasting, and that sleep
after meals. Mean meats bredeth no Hot nor superfluous Humors, as the
Flesh of La^bes, young Porke, and other that been hot and moist, but such
meats change often in rostynge to hardness to heat, and dryenesse. And they
ought to be eaten forthwith after rostynge, and ben good if they be so taken
with good spyces. Some meats bredeth melancoly, as Befe Cowes Flesh, and all
Flesh that is course and dry Other that bredeth and feed in moist and watery,
and shadowy places ben more subtyle, better and holsomest.

FINIS.
Imprynted by me Robert wyer Dwelling at the Sign of Saint John^ Euangelyst,
in Saint Martyns Parysshe beside Charynge Cross.

three blazons

printer's devices of Robert Wyer (McKerrow 68 and 69): "cut of St. John the
Evangelist with eagle" above "the name and mark of Robert Wyer" ROBERT WYER.




