THE IMAGE OF GOVERNANCE COMPILED OF THE ACTS AND SENTENCES notable, of the
most noble Emperor Alexander Seuerus, late translated out of Greek into
English, by sir Thomas Eliot knight, in the favor of Nobylitie.

ANNO. M. D. XLI.



TO ALL THE NOBILITY OF THIS FLOVRYSHYNGE ROYALME OF ENGLAND, THOMAS ELYOT
KNIGHT DESIRES INCREASE OF VERTVE AND HONOR.
AS I LATE WAS serching among my books, to find some argument, in the
readinge whereof I might recreate my spyrites, being almost fatigate with the
long study about the correctinge and ampliatinge of my Dictionary, of Latin
and English, I happened to find certain quaires of paper, which I had written
about.ix. years passed: wherein were contained the acts and sentences notable,
of the most noble Emperor Alexander, for his wisdom and gravity callid
Seuerus, which book was first written in the greek tung by his secretary named
Eucolpius^ and by good chance was lent unto me by a gentille man of Naples
called Pudericus. In reading whereof I was maruaylousely ravished, and as it
has been ever mine appetite, I wisshed that it had been publisshed in such a
tunge, as mo men might understand it. Wherefore with all diligence I endeavored
my self whiles I had leysour, to translate it into english: all be it I
could not so exactly perform mine enterprise, as I might have done, if the
owner had not importunately called for his book, whereby I was constrained to
leave some part of the wark untranslated: which I made vp^ as well as I could,
with sum other Autours, as well latins as grekis. having this book in my hand
I remembered, that in my book named the Governor, I promised to write a book of
the Form of good governance: And for as much as in this book was expressed of
governance so perfect an image, I supposed, that I should sufficiently discharge
my self of my promise, if I did now publishe this book, which except I be
much deceived) shall minister to the wise readars both pleasure and profit.
Than did I ^ftsones peruse it, and with more exact diligence conform the style
thereof with the phrase of our english, desiringe more to make it plain to all
readers, than to flourishe it with over much eloquence. Which book I do
dedicate unto you noble lordis, gentil knights, and other in the state of
honor or worship, as being most ready to be advanced to governance under your
Prince: so that your virtues be correspondent unto your fortunes. Yet am I not
ignorant that diverse ^here ^e which do not thankfully esteem my labors,
dispraysinge my studies as vain and unprofitable, saying in derision, that I
have nothing won thereby but the name only of a maker of books, and that I
set the trees, but the printer eats the fruits. In deed al though disdain
and envy do cause them to speak it, yet will I not deny, but that they say
truly: for if I would have employed my study about the increace of my private
commodity, which I have spent in wrytinge of books for others necessity, few
men doubt (I suppose) that do know me, but that I should have attained or this
time to have been much more welthy, ^ in respect of the world in a more
estimation. But to excuse me of folly, I will profess without arrogaunce, that
when I considered, that kunninge contynueth when fortune sytteth, having also
rynging always in mine ear, the terrible check that the good master in the
gospel gave to his ydel ser^aunte, for hidinge his money in a clowte, and not
disposinge it for his masters advantage, Matt. 18.
those two wor^es, Serve nequam, so sterid my spirits, that it caused me to
take more regard to my last rekning, than to any riches or worldly promotion.
And all though I do neither dyspute nor expound holy scripture, yet in such
warkes as I have and intend to set forth, my poor talent shall be, God
willinge, in such wise bestowed, that no man's conscience shall be therewith
offended, my book called the Governor, instructinge men in such virtues as
shall be expedient for them, which shall have authority in a well public. The
Doctrinal of princis, which are but the counsayles of wise Isocrates, inducinge
into noblemens wits honest opinions. The Education of children, which also I
translated out of the wise Plutarche, making men and women, which will follow
those rules, to be well worthy to be fathers and mothers. The litel Pasquill
although he be merry and plain, teching as well servants how to be faithful
unto their masters, as also masters how to be circumspect in espying of
flaterars. Semblably thoffice of a good cou^cellour, with magnanimity or good
courage in time of adversity, may be appara^tly founden in my book called, Of
the knowledge belonging to a wise man. In reding the sermon of saint Cyprian by
me translated, the devour reder shall find no little comfort in plages or
calamities. The banquet of Sapie^ce is not fastidiouse, and in little come
shewith out of holy scripture many wise sentences. The Castle of Health being
truly ^ad, shall long preserve men (being some phisicions never so angry) from
perillouse siknes. My little book callid the defense of good women, not only
confou^deth villainous report, but also teachith good wives to know well their
duties. My Dictionary declaringe latyne by english, by that time that I have
performed it, shall not only serve for children, as men have excepted it, but
also shall be commodiouse for them which perchance be well learned. And this
present book, which I have named the Image of governance, shall be to all
them which will read it sincerely, a very true pattern, whereby they may shape
all their procedinges. And in none of these warkes I dare undertake, a man
shall find any sentence against the co^mandmentes of god, the true catholyke
faith, or occasion to stere men to wanton devises. Wherefore I trust unto god,
mine account shall of him be favorably accepted: all though some ingrate persons
with ille report or mockes requite y^ my labors: to whom I will only recyte
this merry fable of Esope, written by Maximus Planudes. A good woman had an
husband, who would be ofte^tymes drunken, wherewith she being ashamed, and
diuisinge by what mean she might cause him to leave that horrible vice, at the
last when he was a sleep, she carried him unto the charnell house, wherein were
put the bones of dead men, and leuing him lyinge there, she made fast the
door, and departed. And when she thought that he was waking, she taking with
her bread and meate^ returned to the charnell house and knocked at the door,
her housband fayntly asked who knocked there, the good woman answered, I which
have brought meat with me for the dead men, peace said her husband, thou
increacest my pain in speakinge of meat, bring me some drink I beseech the.
That hering the good woman, alas said she that ever I was borne, for this vice
gotten by custom, my housbande has made it a natural habyte, which will
never forsake him.

This fable needs no declaration: for every man may perceive what it meneth.
Moreover many being ignorant of good letters, do universally reprove all them
that be studiouse in lerninge, alleginge this commune proverb, The grettest
clerks be not the wisest men: affirming, that they be founden negligent about
their own profit, and consequently unapt to the ministration of things of
weighty importance. How untrue their allegations be, and on how feeble a
foundation they are builded, it shall in this wise appear unto wise men. First
the said proverb seems by him which lacked lerninge, to be devised, sens that
he preferrith ignorance before kunninge: which arrogance declared him to be a
very fool, and vnwitty: consideringe that by knowledge most chiefly, a man
excels al other mortal creatures, and thereby is most like unto god. And
lerninge is none other thing, but an aggregation of many men's sentences and
acts to the augmentation of knowledge. And if some learned men do neglect their
temporal commodities, it is for one of these causes: either by cause they have been so desirouse of knowledge, and in respect thereof esteemed so little all other
pleasures, that they thought the time all to little, which they did spend in it,
holdinge them selfs with that which served for natures necessity right well
co^te^ted, or else like as the grehound that was sent to great Alexander by the
king of Albania, wha^ there were showed unto him severally a great heart, a bore,
and a bear, he vouched not saulf to look on them, but lay still wagging his
tail: tha^ was there brought forth a great lion, to whom he did arise softly,
and setting up his bristels, and showing his tethe, fleing to the lion, lightly
strangled him. Afterward a puyssante olyfante being brought to the place, the
grehounde semynge to rejoice at the greatness of the best, roused him, and
after two or three questinges, he lept to the great olyphant, and after a long
fight overthrew him and killed him. So I dout not but that some men there be
living, in whom is such courage, that in things of little importance may seem
to be negligent, disdayninge as it were to spend their wits or labors about
the pelfry of riches: which being ones called to authority joined with
liberty, will ^nforce them selfs to make their ministratio^s noble and
excellent. Such were Solon, Aristides, and Phocion in Athenes, Publicola,
Fabritius, Curious, and Cato Uticencis at Rome, whose lives I would to god were
in English, and the like be now living, if they were sought for.

And for the confutation of that pestiferous opinion ye great learned men be
unapt to the ministration of things of weighty importance, this shall be
sufficient. First as I late said lerning is the augme^tatio^ of knowledge, which
the more that it is, the more may be perceived what shall be most necessary in
things which happen in co^sultation. and the more that it is perceived, the
better and more aptly may it be ministered and executed. Examples we have of
Moses, who being excellently learned in the most dyffuse doctrines of the
Egyptians and Ethiopians, was by almighty god chosen to guide and rule his
people, which were innumerable and most froward of nature: and with what
wonderful wisdom and patience did he govern them by the space of.xl. years,
being without any cities, towns, or any certain possessions? Who were better
leders of armies than great Alexander, Scipio, Lucullus, and Caesar, which were
men al of great lerning? who better handled matters of weighty importance, than
Octauian called Augustus, Hadrian, Marcus Antoninus, Alexander, Seuerus, and of
late years Carolus Magnus, al emperors of Rome, and men very studiouse in all
noble sciences? When was there a better consul tha^ Tully^ or a better senator
tha^ Cato called Uticencis? And to return home to our own countray, and
whereof we our selfs may be witnesses, how much has it profited unto this
realm, that it now has a king our sovereign lord king HENRY theyght
exactly well learned? Has not he thereby only sifted out detestable heresies,
late mingled among the corn of his faithful subjects, and caused much of
the chafe to be thrown in the fire? also hipocrisy and vain superstition to
be clean banysshed? whereof I doubt not, but that there shall be or it be long,
a more ample remembrance, to his most noble and immortal renome? This well
considered, let men cease their said foolish opinion, and hold them content
with their own ignorance, and for my part, say what they list, I will during
my life, be in this wise occupied, in bestowing my talent, being satisfied
with the contenting of such men as ye be, adourned with virtue, the most
preciouse garment of very nobylitie.

But now to the intent that ye if ye list, may attaynin estimable profit by the
reding of this little warke, I do exhort you, that redynge it distinctly and
studiousely, first ye mark diligently, how by the lasciuiouse and cemisse
education of Uarius Heliogabalus, he grew to be a person most monstruouse in
living, also how not withstandinge, that he not only suffered, but also
provoked the people to live in a most beastely license: yet horrible sin at
the last became to all men fastidiouse and loathsome. Wherefore they slew in
most miserable facion him that consumed infinite treasour in supportinge their
lewdenes. Than shall ye note diligently^ how much it profytted to Alexander,
who n^^te did succeed him, that he had so wise and virtuous a mother, and
that he was brought up among so wise counsailours. Also the manner of his
meruaylouse procedinges, in reformynge a public weal, left unto him
corrupted so shamefully, wherein was more difficulty, than to begin it, where
never was any. Mark also his most noble qualitees, and how they were
tempred. Moreover the form of his speakinge, and how as he grew in years, so
waxed it more mature and seryouse, sometime aboundaunt, otherwhiles short and
compendiouse, as oportunytye served. In his acts and decrees, what Justice and
prudence were in them contained, what severity he used, sparinge neither him
self, nor his friends or mynysters. Finally, all his life is a wonderful
myrrour, if it be truly radde and justly considered, which if ye do often
look on, ye may thereby attire your self in such facion, as men shall
therefore have you in more favor and honor, than if ye had on you as rich a
garmente as the greatte Turk has any. Only for my good will in translatynge
it for you, I desire your gentle report and assystence against them, which do
hate all things, which please not their fantasyes.

THE TABLE
OF what lygnage the Emperor Alexander was, and the signs betokenynge his
empire. Cap. i. The education of Alexander, and how he profyted in virtue and
doctrine. Cap. ii. Of the monstrous lyuinge of the Emperor Varius
Heliogabalus, whereby the city of Rome was corrupted. Cap. iii. How Alexander
was made emperor, and of his wonderful temperaunce in refusing diverse great
honors. Cap. iiii. The example of virtue given by Alexander in the form of his
lyuinge and daily customs. Cap. v. The letter of Gordian the senator to the
emperor Alexander. Cap. vi. The answer of Alexander to the letters of Gordian.
Cap. vii. The first practice of Alexander in redr^^^nge of the empire into his
pris^^at honor. Cap. viii. In what form the emperor Alexander had his
couns^^le, which always atte^ded upon his person. Cap. ix. The oration of
Alexander to the senate. Cap. x. How the correctours of manners, called Censors
were elected, and with what rygour they executed their office by the
commandment of Alexander. Cap. xi. Of the great prudence of Alexander used in
the election of his counsaylours and officers. Cap. xii. How extremely
Alexander hated extorcioners and ^ribours, and how much he favored them that
were virtuous. Cap. xiii. A notable example given by Alexander in repreuing an
ambitious and vainglorious counsaylour. Cap. xiiii. The consultation
concerning the punishment of Turinus, and the excellent reason of the emperor
Alexander. Cap. xv. How Alexander instructed and entertained them that were
officers, and of his liberality toward them that did well their duties. Cap.
xvi. How curious the emperor Alexander was in assigning of justices in his
laws, and how he used liberality or sharpnes toward them, according to
their merits. Cap. xvii. Of the great care and diligence that Alexander used
about the public weal, and of certain new officers ordained by him. Cap.
xviii. How the emperor Alexander did ordeyne new officers in the weal
public, and what belonged to their authorities. Cap. xix. The detestation that
Alexander had unto idelnes, and the vices thereof procedinge, and of diverse
provisions that he made against it. Cap. xx. Of baynes and places of exercises,
made for the people of Rome, by the emperor Alexander. Cap. xxi. Of the
magnificence of the emperor Alexander in su^ptuous and necessary warkes, and
in what exercises he caused the nobility and gentelmen of Rome to be occupied.
Cap. xxii. Of hospitals and other provision made by Alexander for men that were
decrepite, or so diseased that they could not labor. Cap. xxiii. In how
sundry wise Alexander exercysed his own person, so that he was never
unprofitably occupied. Cap. xxiiii. How the Emperor Alexander, at the request
of his mother Mammea, sent for the most excellent clerk Origin: and of
diverse notable sentences spoken by the same emperor, concerning the
receyuinge of the christen faith. Cap. xxv. How Mammea the Emperors mother
exhorted him to be married, and what wise answers he made, and finally took to
wife the daughter of a noble and ancient senator. Cap. xxvi. Of the severity
that Alexander used, as well toward them that were proud, as to the^ that
were malaperte and did not their duty. Cap. xxvii. The oration of the
emperor Alexander to the people of Rome. Cap. xxviii. The severity that the
emperor Alexander used in chastisinge as well the pride of the people, as also
his men of war or soldiers. Cap. xxix. How the Emperor Alexander reformed
the usury, whereof he spoke before in his oration made to the people. Cap. xxx.
The sentence of Catelius. eodem. The sentence of Gordian. eodem. The law
concerning vsuries made by the Emperor, Senate, and people of Rome. Cap.
xxxi. what love and benevolence the emperor showed to the people of Rome, and
of other his wonderful virtues. Cap. xxxii. Of the circumspect curiosity of
the emperor Alexand^^ in admittinge counsaylours. And of his answer coueringe
that matter. Cap. xxxiii. The most noble answer of Alexander made to Alphenus,
concerning the disablynge of Sextilius Rufus in his absence. cap. xxxiiii. How
Sextilius herynge that he was made praetor, fled: And what the Emperor said
concerning that matter cap. xxxv. The letters of the emperor Alexander sent to
Sextilius and how vnwyllyngly he returned to Rome, and received the office of
Praetor. cap. xxxvi. A notable question meued by Julius Paulus unto the Emperor
Alexander. And the wise answer which he thereunto made. cap. xxxvii. Of a great
exclamation made against a gentilman called Marcus Geminus by his libertines.
And the o^ration of Iunius Moderatus, made in the Senate. cap xxxviii. The
oration of Iunius Moderatus. eodem. The wonderful prudence and equity showed
by Alexander the Emperor, in the determination and sentence in the matter
precedinge. cap. xxxix.
Thus ends the Table.


OF WHAT LYNAGE THE EMPEROVR ALEXANDER was, and the signs betokenynge his
Empire. Capi. i.
AURELIUS ALEXANder sommetyme Emperor of Rome, was borne in the royalme of
Siria, in the City of Arcene, whose father had to name Uarius, which was
lyneally descended from the noble house of Metellus the Romayne, called Metellus
the virtuous. Albeit some writers suppose, that Seuerus, before he was
emperor, was amorous of a woman in Siria, and by the art of Astronomy
finding in her nativity, that she should be an emperors mother, he took her
to wife, and had issue by her, Uarius the father of Alexander: but finally the
progeny of this Emperor is very uncertain: wherefore in mine opinion his life
and acts be the more to be honored and meruayled at, considering that being
come of so uncertain a lynage, and borne so far from the city of Rome, and
in so barbarous a country, he could so well govern the empire of Rome, which
before his time was with pride and other detestable vices extremely corrupted.

The mother of Alexander was called Mammea, a woman of notable wisdom, as it
shall hereafter appear by the bringing up of her son, and preserving of him
as well from the vices, whereunto he was not only provoked, but also well nygh
constrained, by that most beastely emperor Uarius Heliogabalus, his cousyn
germayne and predecessor, not withstandyng there was in that noble woman
Mammea, a great spyce of auaryce in gatherynge and keeping of treasure, which
finally was the only cause of the death both of her and her son. The said
Mammea was daughter of a woman called Mesa, which was borne in Phenicia, in a
town called Emesa, and was sister of Iulia, wife of the emperor Seuerus. This
Mesa living, Seuerus and Bassianus his son, was contynually abiding in the
courts of those emperors: and after the deceasse of Bassia^us, she was
commanded by Macrinus than emperor, to depart to her country, albeit the
emperor granted that she should take with her such tresure, as she had
gathered, which was abundant. She had also two daughters, the one called
Semiamira, the other Ma^mea. Semiamira had a son named Bassianus, which was
of excellent beaultie. And because he was prelate in the temple of the sun,
whom the Phenices do call Heliogabalus, he was semblablye called by that
name, having added thereto the name of Uarius, which is in english diverse,
forasmoche as some men suppose, that he was conceived of the sede of diverse
men, his mother Semiamira being incontinent, and as it were common to many
men, during the time that she abode in the emperors court with her mother.
Not withstanding her son Heliogabalus, by the crafty means of his grandame
Mesa, was declared to be the son of the emperor Bassianus, and by the favor
of the men of war of the Romans, who than murmured and had in hatrede the
pride and cruelty of Macrinus (who was emperor after Bassianus) and his son
Diadumenus, the said Uarius Heliogabalus was advanced unto the empire, who
with voluptuous and monstrous living, in such wise corrupted the city of
Rome, that therein uneath remained any step of virtue or honestye.

Contrary wise the other daughter of Mesa called Ma^mea, of whom I intend now
to write, induced rather by nature and reason, than by the example of her
viciouse mother, so nourished and trained her said son Alexander in virtue
and lernyng, that partly by her education, but much more by his own
inclination natural, he became one of the most perfect princis that ever
governed.

The education of Alexander, and how he profyted in virtue and doctrine.
Capit. ii.
TOVCHYNGE THE EDVCATION in chyldhode of Alexander, his noble mother Mammea
failed not to provide with all diligence and circumspection, that her son
might be nouryshed in virtue, and among honest company, and that fro the time
that he issued out of his infancy, he were contynually instructed in all manner
of doctrine, both civil and marciall: so that afterward he of his own
courage never suffered any day to pass, without exercysyng him self either in
letters, or in faictis marciall. In the first part of his chyldehode he had
instructours. Ualerius Cordius, Titus Ueturius, and Aurelius Philippus: which
afterward wrate his life. Also in his country he was taught in greek by Nebo
the grammarian, and the rhetorician Serapio, and Stilio the philosopher. At
Rome he had teachers in the latin tongue, first in grammar Scaurinus a famous
master, in rhetorike he was instructed by Julius Frontinus, Bebius Macrinus,
and Iulianus Gramanus. Al be it he did not so much delight in latin
eloquence, as in the greek, ne did therein profit so much: but he loved all
men that were learned, and fea^ed them also, lest they should write of him any
thing sharply, or to his rebuke.

Moreover he sent often times for those excellent personages, communicatynge
with them things which were done as well privily as also openly: willing
them, that all that they found to be true, they should put it in writing:
suffrynge also them to rep^oue him when they seemed conuenyent. Often times he
made verses in greek very pleasant, and was much inclyned to music. In the
mathematical scien^es, that is to say, Arithmetike, Geometry, and Astronomy, he
was very well learned. And therefore diverse times by his commandment, the
professors of those sciences purposed openly questions. In divination he was
so excellent, that he therein surmounted the diuynours of Gascoyne, Spain, and
Hungry. He pain^ed also excellently. Also he did sing very pleasantly, but
never in the presence of any other, but only of his servants and pages of
his privy chaumber. He wrate the lives of good princes in verses eloquently,
and sange them unto the harp and organes, right swetely, but that did he
only for recreatynge his spicites, when they were troubled with vehement
study: as it often times happened by incomparable labor about the great
affairs of the weal publyke. He was of visage fair, and well proporcioned in
body: large and goodly of personage, and therewith was strong and durable to
sustain peynes, as he that knew his own strength, and in the preseruyng
thereof was not found negligente. Thereto he was amiable, and toward every man
gentyl, and easy to be spoken unto. Also there was in him so much humanity
and benevolence, that he would often times vysite not only the best and the
second of his friends and servants being sick, but also them that were
inferiors and of base hauyour, desyryng them to tell to him freely what they
thought of him, whom he would attentifely here. And when he had herd them
thoroughly, than as the thing, which was spoken of, did require, he would
diligently amend and correct it. And when his mother would say often times
to him, Sir ye be to familiar and easy, and therefore ye shall cause the
imperial astate to be the less set by, he answered thus, But yet shall it
be more sure, and continue the longer. This was his disposition, procedyng as
well of the perfection of his most gentylle nature, as of the education of his
good and circumspect mother.

Now will I proceed to write of his excellent wisdom and virtue, experienced
in his authority imperial, wherein was declared the most perfect form of
governance that ever was practiced by any prince (as I suppose) which shall
appear the more manifestly, if first I treat somewhat of the most miserable
astate of the weal publyke, and as it seemed incorrigible, at the time that he
received the governance thereof, he than being but of the age of.xvi. years,
which being considered and kept in remembrance, this history shall be to the
reders thereof (except I be deceived) both pleasant and meruaylous, and no
less profitable to governors that do prefer their publyke weal before
wilful appetite and particular plesures.

Of the monstrous living of the emperor Varius He^ioga^a^^^, whereby the city
of Rome was corrupted. Ca. iii.
MACRINVS the emperor for his avarice and tyranny being abandoned (or rather
betrayed) of his own people, and slain with his son Diadumenus, who in
beaultie and goodly stature excelled al men of his time, Uarius Heliogabalus,
of whom I late spoke, was advanced unto the empire, by the hole consent of the
Senate and people of Rome, who gave hasty credence to all reports that were
made to the honor and praise of their new princis. (Such is the appetites of
men, which be meued anon with credulity: for such things as they desire,
they coucyte to here of, and do delight in new tydinges, though it be falsely
reported.) But Heliogabalus as soon as he was come unto Rome, out of the
country of Siria, he immediately declared his beastely nature, by insuynge
vices most abhomynable, and aduauncyng the favorers and haunters of the same
vices, and inforcynge with all his study and puissance, to exterminate out of
the city of Rome all virtue and honesty, from whens a little before, all the
world received doctrine and example of honor, concerning as well virtuous
manners, as marciall prowess.

First in lechery this Heliogabalus was so insaciable, that not only he
exercysed that vice openly, in common baynes and bordell houses, with sundry
women of diverse degrees and countries: but also he ordained a senate of common
harlattes, among whom were diverse noble matrones and damsels of Rome, their
husbands or parents not being so hardye to let or rebuke them, unto whom
often times, after he and his ribauldes had saciate with them their lecherous
appetites, he made a solemn contio^ or proposition, calling them his
companions, and exhorting them to set al their study and wit to induce al
other women unto the form of their living: declaring expressly, that he
above all other things most desired, that all men and womenne of the city of
Rome should be semblably disposed as he was. I hold it not convenient to be
written in any vulgar tunge, how he transformed and abused his proper kind,
in such wise, as I suppose the most vicious man now living would be
ashamed, not only to behold it, but also to here it, and that did he not
only secretly or in his house, but also openly, all men that would, beholding
and lokinge on him. I omit the residue, which in mine opynion ought never
to have been written for abomination thereof, much more never to have been of any
man known.

He also promoted to the greattest dignities of the publyke weal, common
bawdes, notable ribauldes, solicitours and furtherers of dishonest appetites,
often times cokes and deuisats of lecherous confections and sawces: Semblably
by such persons he sold dignities, auctorites and offices in the public weal.
He also elected into the Senate, and to the roumes of great capitaynes, dukes,
and gouernoures of countries most vile personages, not having regard to any
age, gentylnesse of blood, merit, possessions or substance. He had of his
priuye counsel in all his acts, two Carters, the one named Protogenes^ and
the other Cordius. His glotonye was almost equal unto his lechery: in so much
as he therein vanquished Uitellius, of whom it is written, that at one supper he
was served with seven thousand fysshes, and five thousand fowls.
Heliogabalus when he soiourned nygh to the sea, he would never be seruid with
sea fish: but being in places far distante from the sea, he caused all his
household to be served with most delycate sea fyshe. It abhors me to
express his beastely living, but to the intent that the excellent virtues of
his most noble successor shall be more apparent and commendable (like as al
thing that is vile or course, does set forth more pleasantly that thing
which is precious and fine) it is requisite that I describe this monster in
some part as he was. All be it I do not (...) every thing that I have read
of him, as well for that it shall be to good men odious to here, as also it
might happen to incend the wanton and lewd co^rages of some readers, inclined
to semblable qualities, which (god knows) is much contrary unto my purpose.

But to return to this monstrous Emperor, which consumed days and nyghtes
in lecherye and glotony, having some day all his company served with the
brains Ostriches, and a strange foul called Phenocopteri: an other day with
the tunges of Popingayes, nightyngales, and other sweet syngyng birds,
oftentimes with the myltes of most delycate fyshes. I omytte other light
fantasyes, whereof I have written in my book called the governor, where I
treat of sobriety. Finally it is remembered, that he was never two days
together served with one meat, nor ware twyse one garmente, nor companyed
twyse with one woman, except his wise. As often as he removed in progress,
there followed him.vi. C. chariottes laded only with bands, common harlottes,
and rybauldes. This company had he instead of counsaylours, and so delyted in
this form of living, that he said oftentimes, that if he had a son, he would
ordeyne for him masters, that should compel him to live in semblable facion.
To these monstrous vices he added to cruelty, in puttyng to death diverse
noble senators. Also using the counsel of wytches and inchanters, he made
his sacrifice with young children: And violently rauyshynge from the noble men
and women of Italy, their young infantes, he caused in his presence their
bodies to be opened they living, and most cruelly serched in their tender
bowelles for his most damnable desteny. He had in special favor one named
Zoticus, who for familarite used between them, was taken of all the chief
officers for the emperors husband. This Zoticus under the color of the said
familiarity, sold all the sayings and doings of the emperor, intendyng to
accumulate abundance of richesse, by promisynge fair to many men, but finally
deceyuynge all men. for coming out of the emperors privy chamber, after that
he had herd every man speak, that suyd unto him, to some he would say, thus said
I to the emperor of you, unto an other Of you I herd the emperor say thus to
day. To diverse he would say, Your matter or request shall come this to pass. As
is the facion of such manner of persons, which being from a base condition
admitted of princis into ouermoche familiarity, they selle the fame and renome
of their masters. Such as I have rehearsed were the counsaylours of
Heliogabalus. for all wise and virtuous men he deedly hated. Wherefore he
banished the noble man Sabinus, unto whom Ulp^anus the great lawyer wrate his
books. And semb^ably he put out of the city the said Ulpian, only because
he was named a good manne, and caused Siluinus the noble orator, whom he had
made master to Alexander, to be put to death. And he ordained a tumbler to be
great master of his household, a carter named Gordius he made captain of his
guard. An other tumbler he made chief captayn of an army. The greattest rouines
and affairs of the empire, he committed to mynstrels, players of enterludes
and dysardes. To his bondmen and most vile servants as they excelled in
abomination, so preferred he them to the governance of realms and provinces.
Also of his rabell of brothelles, to some he gave the rule and governance of
the youth of the city: some he made rulers of the senate, to other he gave
preeminence and souerayntie over al them that were gentilmen, finally he
intended to distroy all virtue, and to constrayne all men to live beastely as
he did. And for that cause he commanded that the noble Alexander his auntes
son should be slain, either violently or by some poison: forasmoche as he
perceived him to declyne from his appetite: but Alexander was always preserved
by the providence of god, who inclyned the minds of the senate and people to
his preservation. for nothing avails the malice of tyrants against
innocentis and good me^, where almighty god will not have the^ to perysh.
Wherefore this monstrous emperor, desyryng the destruction of Alexander,
procured his own death, agreeable with his abhomi^able living. for his own
servants and soldiers, which were prepared for the guard of his person,
dreadynge lest the people making insurrection, that they should be parteners of
his mischeuous end, being also tedious of his abominations, conspired to
deliver the common weal of him. And suddenly apprehended his adherentes and
familiars, and with sundry torments did put them to death. Finally pursuyng
Heliogabalus to a privy or draught, whereunto he fled, there they slew him,
and his mother Semiamira, and afterward his horrible carayn being drawn
throughout the city with hooks, was of all the people defiled with ordure,
and other matter foul and stynkyng, and at the last was brought with all
kinds of reproach, to the common draughtes of the city, wherinto they would
have thrown him, but for as much as the hole of the draught could not receive
him, they tied him to a stone of great weight, and threw him into the river of
Tyber, to the intent that he should never be buried. This was the worthy and
convenient end of this most beastly and unclean monster, who with the emperors
Nero, Caligula, Domitian, and Co^modus, his predecessors, was a notable and
commodius example to all princis succedynge, to declare, that not withstanding
their majesty and puissance, they for their vices abominable, were first
hated, and afterward slain, and dishonored by their propre subjects.

And in this history it is to be specially noted, that not withstanding that
he not only permytted, but also wylled his subjects to live in a license, and
with out correction, for sin, moreover used toward them such lyberalitie,
that he fed them with most delycate and exquisite meats, gave unto them
money in habundance, and also to them, which dyned or supped with him, he gave
all the vessel and plate, were it of gold or silver, wherewith he was served,
and made many other distributions to the hole people wonderful sumptuous: Yet
the Romans not withstanding abhorrynge in him their own propre vices, or
rather being therewith saciate or tedious, they finally slew him, as is before
written, after that he had reigned syx years, and being than but in the.xxi.
year of his age.

^^we Alexander was made emperor, and of his wonderful tem^^^ance in
^e^^^^ynge diverse great honour^. Cap. iiii.
IMMEDIATELY after the death of Heliogabalus the senate and people of Rome
being surprised with incredibie joy, used all diligence and speed, that
Aurelius Alexander, whom they had defended from death, might forthwith as
very emperor receive all authority and honor, that parteyned to the
imperyall majesty. Wherefore they contended among them selves, which of them
moughte apply to him most titles and names of dignity. wherefore he was the
first that received at one time all ornaments and tokens of honor, aydynge
thereto the name of Caesar, which a few years before he had received, but much
rather his honest life and virtuous manners, whereby he obtained such favor of
all men, that when Heliogabalus would have slain him, he could not bring it
to pass, the men of arms resisting, and the senate obstynatelye refusing:
but all these were but trifels in regard that he approved him self worthy,
whom the senate ought to save harmless, whom the men of war desired to be
in saufegarde, and generally by the sentence and opinion of all good men, was
elect to be Emperor, being than but of the age of.xvi. years.
Notwithstanding he was than of such a wonderful soberness, that where the
senate would have given to him the surname of Antonine (which name for the
incomparable virtues that were in Antoninus Pius, and Antoninus the philosopher
late Emperors, was usurped of other Emperors following, for a pryncipall
title of honor) he humbly refused it: semblably did he the name of great
Alexander, saying openly unto the senate.

I beseech you honorable fathers, do not call me unto this necessity, that I
should be compelled to satisfy you in the merits of so high a name as Antonine
is. For if ye seek for goodness in a prince, who was better or more virtuous
than Antoninus Pius? If ye seek learning, who was more wise or cunning than
Marcus Antoninus? And who was more harmless than Uerus Antoninus? Noble
fathers, these high names of honor be bourdonous and to greuouse for my
youth to sustain. For who will gladdely here a dumme man called Tully, an
idiote Uarro, a tyrant Metellus? And as touching the name of great Alexander,
it is much more incongruent, consydering that with better reason I moughte
have taken the name of Antonine, induced by color either of affinytie, or else
of equal astate in the imperial majesty. but the name of great Alexander,
wherefore should I have it? What great things have I yet done to deserve that
name, which Alexander the greek after great enterprises, Pompei the Romayne
after many triumphs, had given unto them? Cease therefore honorable fathers, to
confer to me honors above my merytes. and sens ye will have me called great,
suffer me to be one of you, who in very deed be great in honor and perfyte
magnificence.

This moderate and sobre answer of so young a prince, inflamed immediately
the hearts of the senate and people much more to honor him, than if he had
received those strange names: and from that time he had the renoume of
Constance and gravity. More over for his great Austeritie again the
presumption and lightness of his soldiers and servants, he was named of
them Seuerus, which betokens constante or sharp in punishemente. which name
in his time gat him much reverence, and afterward great fame and renoume
among his successors. Finally this most towardly prince with incredible joy
was triumphantly conuayed by all the Senate and people, to the imperial
palaice: where being left, he prepared him self to the reformation of the
hole empire, than being in ruin.

The example of virtue given by Alexander in the form of his living and
daily customs. Cap. v.
IMMEDIATELY after that Alexander by the consent of the Senate and people, was
stablyshed in the imperial authority, and for his excellent goodness was
most ardentely beloved of the multitude, also the remembrance of Heliogabalus
and his adherentes for their detestable vices being every where hated, and
with detestation abhorred: This noble young emperor taking than opportunity to
restore the publyke weal to her pristinate form, with the majesty
imperial, late violated, and well nyghe perysshed, through the negligence of
the said monster.

He by the counsel of his wise and virtuous mother Mammea, first purged his
own palaice, excludynge out of his court and all offices, disshoneste and
infamed personages: and by no means would suffer to be in his householde any
other, than by all men should be thought necessary.

Moreover he openly protested, making an oath, that he would never have a
superfluouse number of servants, to the intent that he would not grieve the
publyke weal with his prouysion, saying, That emperor is a shrewde pupyll,
that fedeth with the bowelles of his commons, men which be not necessary, nor
yet profitable to the weal publyke.

How much he hated vnklennesse of living, he well declared, when he
commanded that no woman infamed should salute or vysite his wife or his mother.
All his life was a perfect Example of Temperance. His aparaile was wonderful
clean, but not to sumptuouse and after some men's opinion, more meaner than
to his astate apperteyned. Semblable moderation the empress his wife observed.
Finally during his time he used diligente correction of his own manners:
wherefore all noble men assayed to follow him. And all honorable women ensued
the empresses exaumple.

Moreover this emperor was of such an incomparable mansuetude, that he
commanded, that no man should write unto him in any other form, than should
be written to a pryuate person, reserving the name of emperor. And also
prohybited, that no man should call him lord, but salute him as one of the
senators, and in this form, Be glad Alexander. And if a man had used in
gesture or speech any manner of flattery^ he was either put back, if the place
so required, or else with a great laughter was mocked by them which were
present.

And for as much as he would not be saluted or visited but of them which were
honest, and of good fame he decreed, that no man should enter into his
palaice but only such as knew them selves uncorrupted with notable vices.
And caused to be proclaimed, that no person, knowing him self to be a
thief or extortioner, should be so hardy to salute the emperor, upon pain of
lesyng his life. He had this sentence often times in his mouth: Thieves
only complain of poverty, thereby coveting to hide their mischeuous living.

Finally no day passed, wherein he did not some thing charitably, gentylly,
or honorablye, but that things he did in such wise, as therein he neither
consumed ne wasted the common treasure.

He procured seldom any condemnatio^s, but those that were done he never
pardoned. The tributes or fee fermes of cities, he often times gave to the
repairinge and buyldinge of the same cities. Moreover to diverse poor men, of
whose virtue or wisdom he had perfect knowledge, he lent of his Treasure to
purchase lands, receyuynge again his own money, only of the rentes of the
same lands, and let the said persons have the possession and all other
profyttes.

He would not suffer any of his court to wear any garment myxte with gold,
or other wise preciouse or costely: nor he him self delyted in rich
apparayle, saying, That governance was in virtue and not in beauty or costly
apparayle.

At his table he used no gold but pure berill and crystal, and other like
matter to drink in: he exceded not CC.li. weight of silver vessel in all his
householde.

Preciouse stones that were given to him, he caused to be sold, estemynge it
to be a womanly appetite to have such iewelles, which he might neither give
to his soldiers, ne in having them find any profit. Wherefore on a time
when an ambassador had given to the empress two orient perles of wonderful
greatness, he commanded them to be sold. And wha^ no man could be found
that would give as much as the price was esteemed, lest any euel example should
proceed of the empress, if she should be seen to wear that thing, which
no manne could bye, he caused them to be hanged at the ears of the image of
Uenus: thereby declarynge, that such things either for the inestimable price
was meter for gods than for men, or for the unprofitable beaultie thereof,
served only for persons of wanton appetites, whereof Uenus was goddess and
patroness.

No less temperaunce used he in meats and drynkes, never exceeding four
sundry kinds of flesh and fyshe at one meal, and those with a great
moderation and reason. He drank wine not skarsely, nor to much, but
competently.

In feasts or bankettynge he never would have any wanton pastyme. His pleasure
was to behold birds fyghtyng together. And therefore he had in his garden,
places, where birds of sundry kinds were enclosed and kept, wherein he took
synguler pleasure. Notwithstanding to the intent that he would in noothing
aggrieue the market in feding them with corn, he had servants that provided
for them eggs of wildefoule and culuers.

In honest recreation he was meruaylouse merye and pleasant, amiable in
communication, at the table so gentle, that every man might demand of him
what he would. And to the intent that he would be the more circumspecte, he
ordained the wise man Ulpiane^ one of the greattest interpretours of the law
civil, to be in the stead of his tutour, his mother repugnynge thereat at the
first, but after she gave him therefore greatte praises. When he dyned or
supped a broad, he had ever with him Ulpiane or other well learned men, to the
intent he would than here histories conceynynge learning, wherewith he said that
he was both recreate and also fed. If he satte pryuilye, he had a book by
him and radde therein oftentimes, but that was in greek, for the more part. In
open feasts he used the same simplicity that he did in his palaice.

He so much had flattery in hatred, that he would not here orators or poets
speak any thing to his praise, calling it folyshenesse: but he hard gladlye
orations, perswadynge to virtue, and also the acts of other good pryncis, as
well Romans as Greeks, specially the praise of Alexander the great, which
conqueryd the more part of the world.

He went oftentimes openly to the common schools to here rhetoriciens and
poets greeks and latynes. He hard also orators recitynge causes, which they
had prosecuted either before him, or before the great officers.

Finally he so much esteemed and favored lerning that he ordained greatte
salaryes to be given to rhetorycians, teachers of grammar, physicians,
astronomers, geometricians, musiciens, deuisers of building and ingines.
Architecti.
And provided for them places to read in, and scholars also, gyuynge to poor
and honest men's children that hard them, their commons fre. with like
charity he retained advocates in pore men's causes. And such lawyers as
freelye did help poor men with their counsel and labor, he rewarded them
with corn and wine to maynteyne their householde.

He also yerelye perused his laws, and reformed them according as occasion
changed or happened. and he him self diligently and rigorousely executed them in
his own person and servants. And therewith was of such gentylnesse, that
he would offer to give place to the ancient Senators that came unto him. And
would suffer no man of honesty that preaced to speak with him, to be repelled.
He never did wrong to any person, semblably of wrongs he was a vehemente and
sharp persecutour, sauinge, That in his own wrong he was much more
tractable than in a strangers. If he lay not with his wife, he was in the
morning betyme in his privy closet, where were set the image of Christ,
also the pictures of Abraham, Socrates, Apollonius, and other uncient and
virtuous men, where, by the space of half an hour, he remained in prayers.
And for this devotion and maruaylouse exaumple of living, he was had of all
men in wonderful reverence. All be it his temperate and sobre living, being
thought of some men not agreeable nor congruente to his majesty, he was
exhorted to advance his astate, both in princely port, and more sumptuous
manner of living, leauinge his affability and strayte observation of his
laws, as it shall appear by letters following, mutually written between him
and his counsaylours.

The letter of Gordiane the senator to the Emperor Alexander. Cap. vi.
THERE WAS IN the city of Rome an honorable Senator named Gordiane, who
had sometime ben consul (which was the highest dignity next to the
emperor) and was the rychest man of all the city, having the greattest
possessions in the countries adioynynge, that any man had, the emperor only
except, and also was a man of excellent lerning and wisdom: Wherefore during
the life of Heliogabalus, this Gordiane, having his monstrous life in
abomination, and perceyuyng the majesty of the empire to decay by his
negligent and dissolute living and that there was no hope of remedy, obseruyng
the time, he by little and little withdrewe him into such places, as he had
of his own, far from the city, faynynge him self to be grieved with such
dyseases as did debilytate his wits, and therefore required to be far from
resort of company and much noise, which being in the city, he moughte not
eschew. This excuse the emperor Heliogabalus herd gladlye, as he that feared
and also hated the gravity and authority of Gordiane, and therefore lycenced
him to depart and remain in the countreye, as long as it lyked him,
thinking by his absence to be more at liberty, and to live more wantonly: So
with the emperors favor or rather folly, Gordiane quietely and also
pleasantlye passed the time that Heliogabalus lived. And when he herd of the
death of that monster, he would not return to the city, but sent his
consent of election to the senate, after that he knew that by assent of the
people, Alexander was named emperor. And when he was required of the senate to
come personally, he aggrauated his impedyment, alledgynge syckenesse, although
in deed, neither in body nor wit he was in any part dyseased: but knowing
Alexander to be very young, and also cousyn germayn to Heliogabalus, he drad in
him both the one and the other, fearyng lest nature should prevail again
education, when he should come to an absolute liberty, and be out of the
state of all correction. But soon after that Alexander was stablyshed in the
empire, and that his virtues were commended and publyshed, Gordiane reioycynge
thereat, took thereof meruaylous comfort. Albeit for his native gravity and
stately courage, he lyked not the affability and familiarity that Alexander
used, now being the chief prince and souerayn governor of all the world:
wherefore or he would make any access to his presence, he would prove his
wisdom and virtue in admyttinge his counsayles, wherefore he wrate in this
wise unto him.

NOBLE AND EXCELLENT prince, the fame of your advancement unto the governance
of the empire, was to me as it is unto all the world, most joyful tidings,
consyderyng the lamentable astate of our publyke weal, with the certain hope
that all men have in you, being meued with your virtues incomparable, which
daily more and more ye do manifest by your most honorable example in living,
declared to all that do behold, not only your royal person, but also your
servants and familiar companyons. Among which virtues, your affability and
gentylnes have acquyred no small praise among the people, as commonly they
delight in sweet countenance, and myldenes of governors, wherein they trust
to find more liberty. But most noble prince, although for these qualities, ye
deserve praise and love of your subjects, yet in the imperial majesty
requires to be a more strange countenance, and a seld and difficult access
unto your person, consyderyng that by the familiarity of him that is a master
or governor, as well evil men as good, do receive boldness to speak, and they
which be evil, do busyly assaut him, either with flatterye, or with
detractynge of other, whereby princis, although they be of good natures, and
well brought up by their parents, yet be they oftentimes transformed into
monsters, that is to say, into beastly lyuers or rauenouse tyrants. I omyt
contempt, which induced by familiarity, bryngethe the subject to
disobedience. Let it not displease you, that I seem to have in your highness
any suspicion. Uerily as a man that has a fair and honest wife, whereby he is
meued to love her entierly, would not have her gladly stand in the market place,
and admytte without discrepance every manne equally, and with like pleasant
countenance, suffer every man to speak to her what he list, although he
knows her to be virtuous and constant: as well for as much as the natural
shamefastness that ought to be in a woman, may not admytte such open resort
and communication, as also the ears that be often assaulted, can not ever
escape, but be they never so well fortified with wisdom, at the last like a
castle wall, they being sore shaken with many sweet words and long
enteruieu, they yield at the last, ill custom expellynge shamefastnes, and
finally all wisdom being rejected, and nothing set by. Semblably most
excellent prince, your person is to the senate as dear as the wife to her
husband, and for your fair virtues we of good reason ought to be so ^alous
over you, that wyllyngly we should not behold you fall into any custom,
which might allure you into any ill disposition, remembryng the late calamity
that the city and empire were brought unto by your most mo^struous p^decessour
Uarius Hel^ogabalus. Wherefore like as now ye be to him most contrarious in
living, so we desire to have you resyst al occasion, that might give never so
little a pathe for flatterers, detractours, and promoters of vice, to enter into
your counsel or favor. Who can aduaunte him self to be well assured from
this net of hypocrisy, which has (as I might say) sundry and diverse
meshes of flatterynges, which uneath any man can escape that will tarry until
the net be cast over him? The remedy than is either with majesty to repel
it, or to cut it asunder with sharp rebukes: and that in the presence of other:
or so greuousely to persecute always those hypocrites, I do mean flatterers,
with open punishment, that al me^ may know and abhor them. And that other
thereto by nature inclyned, may be ever aferde of like experiment. But the first
way is most sure undoubtedly. For rebuke and punishment comes after the
danger, but majesty precedeth, and therefore more profytteth. For such
persons rebuked or punyshed, perchance excusing them self that they do it
by to ardent affection and desire to please, or by their youth and lack of
experience, or recognysing their folly, and promisyng amendment, may happen
eftsoon to crepe into favor and than they work their net so fynely, that
it can not so sone be perceived, and pytcheth it more covertly applienge it
aptly to their masters conditions, so that it shall be almost impossible for
him to escape, but that in one meishe or other he shall be tangled.
Contrariwise by majesty (that is to say, statelye countenance and difficulte
access) joined with wisdom. impresseth such reverence, that men not only do
fear to approach unto their soueraygne lord, oneles they be called, but also
to speak any thing, whereby they being discovered, should lose their
credence, hoping never again to recover it, consyderyng that by majesty and
wisdom, the access to the prince is made impenetrable, sens to them that
never offended he is so hard and diffuse to be spoken unto. Thus to your
majesty have I showed mine opinion, wherefore if by my counsel ye do leave
your affabilite, and familiar access, and embrace gravity and princelye
astate, ye shall be saufe from the perils that I have remembered, and have
equal honor with your predecessors, which would not be seen of the people but
seldom, and oftentimes with a courtayne before their visage, sitting in their
place of astate, which they took of the Persianes. for things seldom seen
be most esteemed: and they that be frequent and often in eye, be little
regarded, which as ye increase in age, and experience, ye shall find true, and
to be written of a faith full counsaylour, that desires the increase of your
virtue, with the public weal of our most noble city and empire.

The answer of Alexander to the letter^ of Gordiane. Capi. vii.
WHEN THE Emperor Alexander had received and radde the said letters of the
senator Gordiane, he seemed to rejoice more thereat, than at all the honors
and titles that were given him by the Senate and people, saying with a loud
voice: Yet there remains some hope in the public weal, that it shall not
utterly perish, sense we have Gordiane the Senator left to assiste us. And
therewith he called for h^s tables, and immediately made to him answer, as
hereafter ensues.

GORDIANE honorable father, how much better had the Senate and people of Rome
provided for their publyke weal, if they had taken you to be their Emperor,
having regard to your auncientie and excellent wisdom, where, in me they
find nothing but frail youth, and lack of experience, for only
detestation of the negligence of my predecessor, with the desire that I have
to increase virtue, has sown of me such opinion among the Senate and
people, that not remembrynge you (perchance for lack of your presence) they
have inhabilled me to this estate above my merits. Ueryly no man douteth, but
that ye being borne in the city of a right ancient and noble house of the
Romaius, as of your fathers side issuyng from the honorable senators called
Gracchus, and by your mother descended from Traiane the emperor, might with
that gravity and sternesse, which is in you, as it were by nature ingenerate,
and among the people of Rome, above forty year in the pryncipall dignities
experienced, most honorablye have meynteyned the imperial majesty. Where I
being borne a stranger, and my blood (although it proceeded of the noble
house of Metellus) being to the more part of the senate and people unknown,
am constrained to auale that majesty, that in you should be comendable, and in
the stead of your gravity and sadness, to use toward all men affability and
such form of gentylnesse, which ye seem in me rather to prohibit than to
disprayse, lest that my novelty should ^easse to be pleasante unto the people,
if by my sharpness or strange countenance I should seem to deceive them in
their opinion. Remember you not, that the haulte countenance and the difficulte
access, which was in Tarquine the last king Romans, acquired to him that
odiouse surname to be called Tarquine the proud? and although that he were
both valiant in wars, and in garnyshynge the city very industriouse, yet
when occasion and opportunity happened of rebellion, the people being brought
into fury, declared than how much more they hated him than they did fear
him, ne had him for his noble acts in any estimation or reverence. Moreover
when they had expelled him out of the city, to the intent they moughte have
more familiar access unto their governors, and find in them more affability,
from thense forth unto the time of Caius Caesar, they yearly elected new
governors, calling them Consules, as it were counsailours: supposyng that in
their time of authority, the remembrance that they should be private
persons the next year following, should cause them to use the people the
more famyliarly and also gentylly. And when those officers being of long time
chosen of the nobility only, became in process of time haulte minded and
stern toward the communaltie, the people with long sedition compelled the
Senate to join at the last, with a noble man in that office one of their
company.

Julius Caesar with affability, mercy, and gentylnesse became so puissaunt,
that neither the Senates authority, nor the prowess incomparable of the great
Pompei, nor yet the inexpugnable armies prepared against him, had power to
resist him, yet shortly after that he had decreed, that no man should approach
him, and became in his countenance and words more stately, he was slain in
the middell of the city by fyfty Senators only.

The great Alexander being so familiar and gentle among his people, that he
did not only vysyte homely their pauilyons and halys, mynystrynge to them al
thing that they lacked, but also suffered them to come to him boldly, and
often times to speak to him rudely, he drue them with him into the furtheste
parts of the world, into most barayne and dangerouse countrayes: and by
most gentle persuasions vainquisshed nature, which abhorred the tedyouse
iournayes, the trauayles intolerable, the venomous stinging of serpents, the
hungre and thyrst that sundry times happened, and other incommodyties and
incredible labors, which might not withdraw them from following their
prince, so much his most amiable gentylnesse subdued their appetites. But
after that he following the kings of Persia (whom ye seem to praise in your
letters) used a more pompouse estate than he was accustomed, and neither would
behold or speak to his people famylyarlye, nor suffer them to speak to him
freely, how sone after, changed they than their copye? and as his affabilytie
decayed, and pride increased, so their loving affection toward him, in like
wise relented, which constrained him to omytte part of his enterprise, and
return unto Babylon, where among his friends at a banquet, he was destroyed
with poison.

The incomparable humanity and gentylnesse of noble Germanicus (who should
have succeeded Tiberius in the empire, if the treason of Piso had not frustrate
the trust of the people) caused his son Caius, being yet in his cradell to
be so favored throughout the army, that they having him with his mother
Agrippina among them, took no less care for him, tha^ if he had been propre
son to eueryche of them, which love in such wise remained, that immediately
next after Tyberius, they made him emperor, who in the beginning of his
reign, vsyng the humanity of his noble father, governed the empire quietly,
as he that was meruaylousely beloved of the people. But when to advance his
majesty, he became strange, counterfaytynge his visage in a glass into a
terrible gravity, couetyng to seem fearful unto the people: and when he was
openly seen, which was but seldom, he syttyng in apparel all of gold, laded
with iewelles, compelled the senate and people to worship him, as god, how
sone after was his statelynes turned into mockery, and he being of all men
abandoned, was like an horrible monstre slain, and drawn through the city?

Consider the affability and gentylnesse of the noble Augustus, Titus the
son of Uespasian, Nerua, Traiane, Antonine called Pius, and Marcus Aurelius,
whom no man can derogate of any part of honor and wisdom, and see where ye
may therewith compare any sturdye gravity, or haulte and strange countenance
of any other emperor or prince. Certes Gordiane honorable father, he much
erreth (in mine opinyon) that prefers fear before love, without the which
(witnesses Socrates) nothing either with god or with man may dure or abide.
Fear depends on love, and without love it is soon had in contempt.
Suppose not ye, that he was a wise man that said, ^
Men whom they fear they hate, and whom they hate, they would were distroyed?
Wisdom causes men to be honored, lyberalitie to be meruayled at, but
gentylnesse and affability only to be hartyly loved. Gravity proceeds of
wysedom^ and consists not in countenance, but is compacte of two virtues,
Constance and Prudence. Wherefore it can never be cou^terfayte, if the acts be
well expended and tried. For where it lacks, the said two virtues, it is
either nicenes and to be laughed at, or else pride outrageous and to be abhorted
and hated. But affability can never be vicious. for though it be in one that
lacks discretion, yet by liberty of speech, which increases thereby, he
shall be so oftentimes warned, that he shall defalcate that thing that seems
superfluous. Ne the access of flatterers or detractours, to him that mortally
hates them, can bring any damage. For he is to much a fool that will show
his breast naked unto his enemy. And to him that is surely armid, it is no peril
though his ennemy assaut him, ye perchance if his enmy find him invincible, he
shall afterward be aferde to approach him.

Thus have ye father Gordiane, not only mine opinion herein, but also my
determynate sentence, not thereby dispraysynge your honorable gravity, which
for the causes that I have reherced, is in your person right laudable, but in
me, being not so well known in this city among the Romans, which of their
nature be free, and were never in servitude, it seems not to be so expedient.
Albeit if I reigned in Persia, where the people from the beginning have been
best governed by tyranny, I would perchance otherwise do, chaungyng
affability into strangenes and stately countenance, which improprely (in mine
opinyon) ye in your letters have named Majesty. Thus fare ye well, and haste
you to return unto the senate, which with me desires the presence of your
excellent wisdom.

Soon after the emperor Alexander, being elected consul, he solicyted the
senate and people to elect also Gordiane into that office, affyrmynge that his
youth required for the utility of the publyke weal to be joined with such a
companyon as Gordiane was, whose wisdom, experience, and gravity, was of all
men sufficiently known.

The first practyse of Alexander in reducyng of the empire into his prystinate
honor. Cap. viii.
THE NOBLE AND prudente lady Mammes, mother of the emperor Alexander,
considering her son to be now entered into the most dangerous passage of
youth, being but.xvi. years old, feared lest the excellency of his astate (as
it oftentimes happened to other) should incite him to assay things, which
frail nature thinks delectable, and tastynge ones of them, his tender youth
might not withstand the assautes of pleasant affections, whereby he might
eftesones bring the empire into ruin and infamy, and him self and all his
blood to utter destruction. Therefore she perceiving him to be obedient to her
exhortations, (in deed she was a woman of much wisdom and holiness, but
that she was somewhat noted of couetyse) she with good reason persuaded to him,
that he could never well stablyshe his astate Imperyall, but only by reducynge
of the senate and people into their prystmate order, which could never be
brought to pass, except that first his own palaice were clean purged of
personages corrupted with vices, and into their places men of approved virtue
and wysedom elected. And semblably that to the examp^e of themperours own
householde, the sundry dignities and offices in the weal publik were aptly
distributed: consydering that the princis palaice is like a common fountain or
spring to his city or country, whereby the people by the cleannes thereof be
long preserved in honesty, or by the impurenes thereof a^e with sundry vices
corrupted. And until the fountain be purged, there can never be any sure hope
of remedy.

Wherefore Alexander immediately after that he had received of the senate and
people the name of Augustus, whereunto was annexed the entier power and
jurisdiction imperial, whereby he might command or prohibit what he thought
most convenient, first he dyscharged all minysters, which the monstruouse
beast Heliogabalus had vndyscretely promoted of most vile and dyshonest
personages, banyshyng also out of his palaice, al such as he might by any
means know, to be persons infamed. semblably flatterers, as well those,
which therefore were favored of his predecessor, as them, whom he
apprehended abusyng him with semblable falsehode. According to that example he
reformed the hole senate and judges, and also all other dignities and offices
in the public weal. In like manner he pourged his garrisons and men of war,
and corrected their lyberties and privileges, given indiscreetly to them by
other emperors, or by them misused.

Moreover with all speed convenient, by the advice of Ulpiane his tutour,
Frontinus, and other the wiseste men of the Senate, he with all dilygence
elected out of all parts of the empire, a convenient and honorable company of
wise and honorable counsaylours. This number were the most excellent lawyars,
of whose sentences is made the text of the law cyuile, gathered in the books
named the Digestes. There was also Fabius Gabinus, surnamed Cato for his
singular wisdom. Also Gordiane, of whom I late did write, a man of much
grauytie and nobleness, whose son was afterward emperor. Moreover there
was Claudius Uenatus a noble and eloquente orator, Also Catilius Seuerus,
kinseman to the emperor, most excellently learned above all other, Serenianus
a man of great perfection and gravity, And Caius Marcellus, who was of such
virtue and goodness, that never historye remembered a better. These good and
honorable personages, with many other not of much less estimation, at all
times and places attended upon that noble Emperor: of the which Ulpiane was
in manner his chancellor or keeper of the imperial monumentes: And the
Emperor had him for his chief counsaylour.

In what form the Emperor Alexander had his counsel, which always
attended upon his person. Cap. ix.
^^^ius Ma^ichus
THE form of Alexanders Counsel, was as hereafter ensuith. First all
matters and causes civil of great importance, he caused to be examined and
brought in order by the great lawiars before rehearsed of whom Ulpiane was
chief, and they made true report thereof unto him. Moreover he would never
make decree or ordinance without.xx. lawiars substancially learned, and fyfty
other expert men and eloquente, and that was done after this manner. Every man's
opinion and sentence was throughely and quietly herd, without interruption or
altercation. Thereto were assigned.viii. secretaries or clerks, men of quick
and substanciall memory, who in brief notes or siphers made for that purpose,
wrate every word that by those counsaylours was spoken. Moreover a competent
time was given to every counsaylour to study, and seek for such reason as he
would purpose, to the intent they should not speak unadvisedly in things of
importance.

It was also this Emperors custom, that when he treated of laws and matters
polytike, he called thereto learned men, and such as were eloquente and well
reasoned. If he commoned of matters touching war and hostility, he called to
him old and expert capitaynes, which had valyantely acquitted them selves in
sundry battayles. Also them that were expert in the situation of places,
pitchynge of fields, and preparation of camps. He would also here diverse,
which were perfectly and rypelye instructed in histories, inserchynge by them
what the Emperors and princis as well Romans as of other nations before that
time, had done in semblable causes, as were at that time in reasonynge. And
after that all their opinions and sentences were written, by the secretaries
(as is before mentioned) and that they co^ferring to gether, had made thereof
one perfect minute of every man's saying, and delivered it to the Emperor
with as much haste as was possible: Than he in a place secret pervsyngethe
mynute, and assemblinge and ponderynge the sentences thoroughly, after a
competent time therein bestowed, either gatheringe of them one perfect
conclusion, or else adding to some thing of his invention, he finally opened
his conceit among all his counsaylours, whom he had before hard, not
withstanding he gave to them liberty, either to allow his sentence, or if any
man had any thing newely devised, eftsoon to declare it. And that sentence,
which was of most wise men approved, that always prevailed, and he thereto
consented, and caused it with all diligence to be put in experience. For he was
of such moderation of mind, that nothing more pleased him, than to here any
man with a substanciall and true rayson to confute his opynion: which caused
him to bring to pass things to be meruayled at. But now will I declare the
oration that he made in the Senate, after that he had set in good order his
own propre householde.

The oration of Alexander to the Senate. Ca. x.
THE INESTIMABLE majesty of this empire (as ye well know honorable fathers)
like as it took beginning and increase of prowess and politic wisdom, so by
the same and like means it must be conserved. Our most noble progenitour and
founder of this empire, the valiant Romulus being in his tender infancy cast
out of the palaice, and nourished among the poor ^erdinen, with sustaynynge
much hunger, told, and continual travail, achieued this little portion of
ground, wherein now stands the pryncipall ruler and mastresse of all the
world. To the aid of his prowess he added to, the quiet and vigilant study
of rude shepardes old and decrepyte, whose bodies being macerate with
labors, and made feeble with age, although they might nothing profit in
battle, yet their wits being confirmed by long experience, and free from
the vexation of wanton affections, they no less advanced and set forth the
enterprise of the courageous Romulus, than did the diligence and prowess of
his lusty soldiers. Neither his strength or courage, ne the wits of his
rude seuatours became so excellent, as it seemed at that time to be, by feeding
superfluousely, by beastely idelnes, or wanton pastymes, but only by
temperaunce in living, vigilant providence, and contynuall exercise: whereby
strength is nourished, and wits be increased: Like as by the other the
strength of body is resolved, and the wits be consumed or vnprofytably
dispersed. And certes like as the first is proved to be true by the example
before declared, and many other succedyng that time: so the last is semblably
verified by late experience, and whereof the steps yet do remain to our no
little grief and displeasure: considering that thereby this noble empire is
like to fall into extreme ruin, and perpetual infamye, onelesse your most
excellent wysedomes will dilygently and constantly prepare your selfs to the
certain remedy against this peril intolerable, which remedy only shall be
the purging and refourmation as well of this most honorable company of
senators, as of all other dignities and estates in the weal publyke. In the
which inquisition we desire none other prerogative, but that it may take his
first beginning at our proper palaice and householde, and in our own person
to be first executed, to the intent that the pryncipal fountain, being found
clean, the remnant of our subjects, whose order of living proceeds of our
example as ryuers and sundry lakes from a head spring which is set on a
mountain, may with little difficulty be more easily pourged. Nor other
astate or preeminence will I require, but where youth refuses in me the most
reverend name of father of the country, which ye offered unto me, yet
condescendyng to part of your gentle requests, I will gladly receive the
names and titles of protector of the senate and tribune, or else if better do
like you, defender of the Romayn people. And on that behalf, I require you,
for the approbation of my sincere love to the publyke weal, that according to
the ancient and laudable custom of this noble city, ye will cause to be
chosen Censores or correctours of manners, such personages as never were infamed
with any vice notable, and whose lives be inculpable, and therewith be
sufficiently furnyshed with wysedom and gravity, void also of all private
affection, fear, auaryce, and flatterye, who like good surgeons, shall not
forbear with corrosyue and sharp medicines, to draw out the festred and
stynkynge cores of old marmolles and inueterate soores of the weal publyke,
engendered by the long custom in vice. To the which remedy, as a necessary
minister, I shall put to my propre hands and assistance unto the death.
Leaving remembrance after me, that in making me your emperor, ye nothing have
appaired of the imperyal majesty, but have advanced it with the publyke weal
of your city. To the ratification of the which judgment of you noble
fathers, I shall apply holly my study, travail, and diligence, calling god to
witness, that the senate and people of Rome, shall sooner fail the publyke
weal, than I shall leave any part of my duty.

How the correctours of manners, called Lenfores, were el^cted, and with what
rygour they executed their office by the commandment of Alexander. Cap. xi.
THE SAID oration of the emperor Alexander being fynysshed, a wonderful
rejoicing entered into the hearts of the senators, which were virtuous and
honorable, and being replenished with joy, they all spoke on high with one
voice, saying, Emperor Alexander, ^
god ever preserve the. God sent the unto ^s. God ever defend the. God has
delivered the from the unclean Heliogabalus. God keep the perpetuallye. Thou
dyddest long tolerate that myscheuous tyrant, thou do lament his
abominable living. and at the last god has delivered the and us also of him,
and to this has brought the.

After these and many mo congratulations made to the emperor, he gyuynge to
the senate condign thanks, departed to his palaice. And shortly after there
were chosen by the common consent of the senate and people, Marius Maximus
four Censores, two to remain in the city, and other two for Italy, and the
provinces under the name of latins: from whens were elect for the more part
senators, judges, and other chief officers, which had jurisdiction and
authority to give any sentence. The Censors for the cite were Fabius Sabinus,
and Catilius Seuerus, men of excellent wisdom and gravity. And for the
prouynces were made Quintilius Marcellus, and Caius Manlius, men of ancient
nobility and great severity.

The office of Censores was to note the manners of every person, Office of
Censores.
which was in any degree of honor, that is to say, above the astate of the
common people, wherein was showed such rygour, that no man was spared, so that
if a knight, a judge, or a senator, had used any unseemly thing, appayryng or
staynyng the estimation of the degree, which he represented, it was in the
authority of the Censores to degrade him or dyscharge him of his office or
dignity.

Sone after the said election, they made Alexander consul: who with all
diligence procured, that Aelius Gordianus, of whom I late spoke, was made his
companyon in the Consulate, whereat some of the people grudged, fearing lest
the sturdynesse and haulte courage of Gordiane, should change the incomparable
gentylnes of Alexander into cruelty and pride: but it succeeded all other wise,
for the wise emperor, by the exquysite gravity of his companyon, reformed so
his nature, which was in wise men's opinion more easy and simple than
apperteyned to the imperial estate, that by all men's judgment he became in
moderation of virtues of all other incomparable.

The Censores immediately after that they were elected, vigylantly and sharply
executed their offices. For first they discharged out of the Senate all such
which by Heliogabalus, for their abhomynable living or flatterye, were
thereto promoted. Semblably they pourged the order of knyghtehode, disgradynge
all knights, which were shameless lechours, maynteyners of thieves, or they
them selves robbers. In like wise all those which of baudes, ruffyanes,
carters, cooks, and other like reprocheable persons were by Heliogabalus put
in authorite. The same industry they used in refourmyng Judges, and other heed
officers, as well in the city as about in the provinces. Finally none astate
or degree escaped their rebuke or correction. Ne the emperors palaice was
exempt from their jurisdiction: In so much as Aurelius Philippus, who was
sometime a bondeman, not withstandyng that he was manumysed, and had been the
emperors scholemaister, and after wrate his life, forasmoche as he did ride in
a charyot, and would be saluted as a senator, the Censores caused him to be
ladde to prison, and prohybyted him for coming to the emperors palaice, but
only on foot, and his copped cappe on his head, which fascion only was used
of them that were infranchised. And although for his good learning and
honesty, some noble men advised the emperor, that he should require the
Censores, that they should withdraw their rygour in correctynge Philippe,
considering that he had been sometime his scholemaster: He nothing would do,
to let or restrain the sharp correction of the Censores, but much extollyng
their constance, he answered: If the common weal may have ever such
officers, in short space there shall be found in Rome mo men worthy to be
Emperors, thanne I at my coming found good Senators.

And immediately he ordained, that there should never lybertine, that is to
say, any man of a bond auncetour be of the Senate, saying: That the order of
kynghthode was the place from whense were fetched the plants of the Senate,
that is to say: from whense the Senators were elected. Not with standing he
purchased a goodly mancion, with sufficyent revenues, not far from Rome,
which he gave to the said Philippe, saying to him: Before I was Emperor, I
disdeyned not to follow thy doctrine: Now be thou as well contented, for the
encreas of mine honor and of the weal public, to obey to mine ordynance. And
although the majesty of the City may not permytte the to be openly received
in the number of our familiares, yet privy resort shall approve our favor
toward the, not lost, but increased.

Of such meruaylous seuerytie was this Emperor, that no kind of affection
or pryuate appetite might reflecte him from the sharp execution of his laws
or lawdable customs of the city, as more yet shall appear in the chapter
following.

Of the great prudence of Alexander used in the election of his counsaylours
and officers. Capi. xii.
IT OFTEN times happens, that where god does ornate a prince with natural
gifts, and also great understanding and sharpness of wit, he for lack of
election (which is a great part of Prudence) having about him
counsayllours, companions, and officers unmeet or unworthy, makes the said
ornaments unprofitable, or peradventure incommodious to the weal publyke,
whereof, he has governance, whereby the renoume, which were condign, and as
it were incident to rare and excellent qualities, is lost and dies with the
body, orels (which is much warse) is turned to perpetual reproach and
dishonor: which the Emperor Alexander circumspectlye consydederynge, he with
an incomparable study prepared for him self certain rules of election, as
hereafter follows.

^
First he determined to love all, that was virtue, and to hate all, that was
vice, in what person so ever the one or the other should happen.

Also what so ever pleasure or commodity might come to him by embracing or
tolleratyng of any notable vice, he would rather lack it, though it were to
his detryment, than to be seen to change his opinion, lest any man should
thereby take occasyon to commend vice.

And for as much as under his Empire were diverse and sundry nations, whereof
also the people by natural disposition be dyuersely inclyned to virtue or
vice, he therefore applied him self to know the sundry wits, manners,
affectes, and studyes of men, borne in every region country and notable cite,
throughout the world: which knowledge he apprehended so exquisitely, as well
by studiouse readinge of many histories and other notable warkes of moral
philosophye, as by dylygent examyninge of capytaynes, and merchants, which
had trauayled and benne in sundry countries: whereby he was wonderfully helped
in his elections and iugementes, as it shall hereafter appear.

He would never accept commendation of any person, before that he him self
had spoken with him, and that by secret scrutiny he had been truly infourmed
of him. And yet the commendation that he would afterward here, should be a
part, none other manne herynge, but him self, lest if many were present,
and he that commended were in auctorytie, other herars although they knew the
contrary, should either affirm a false commendation, or else fear to say
truth, if they should be thereof demanded.

In them that were counsaylours, he utterly abhorred ambition and flattery. In
judges, he hated with extreme detestation couetyce and wrath. In both the one
and the other he loved Syncerytie, Sincerity.
vulgarly called uprightness.

The perfect knowledge of men's conditions^ he had not by the report of
their superiors or equalles, ne by them which dwelled far from the
habytation of those whom they praised, but by the examynation of their nyghest
neybours, being men of honesty, and not their enemies. And that was practiced
by such of his own yemen as were most ancient and sage: which finding
occasion to ride through the countries, where they were neither borne nor had
possessions, should make this dyligente scrutiny or search. And to such manner
of persons the common people would more familiarly and plainly declare their
opinions than to gentylmen or men in authority. But if the Emperor perceived
afterward, that he had been untruly informed by any of his said espialles
(which sometimes he did by further experience, as being in his progress, or
him self heryng and discussynge complayntes of the common people openly and
with a great delyberation and gravity) he than extremely and without hope of
remission, punyshed the false reporters, were it in praise or detraction:
causyng their tunges to be perced through with a hot brennynge iron, and to
be banysshed his court and presence for ever. Which punishment, although it
will seem to some men sore and cruel, yet consyderyng, that using this mean,
he was never deceived by counsaylours, and also that Justice was dewely
executed by them that were in authority, that manner of rigor may be
thought necessary and very expediente. Also the punysshemente being in a few
executed at the beginning, the severity of the prince became so terryble,
that men so greuousely feared him, that neither desire, reward, nor dread of
any other man could let the said espialles to report trewelye, according as
they had founden by their diligent scrutiny.

One meruaylous cawtell he used, that is to say: One man was not oftentimes in
that trust of espyall. And those personages were chosen and appointed only
by him self, without making any other man privy, until he had deprehended
them with some manner of falshode.

Fynallye he was of such a wonderful discretion and sobrenesse, that no
report could bring him out of patience, or into suspicion, until he had
well tried the report with some praty experyence, as it shall be declared
hereafter.

And thus I make an end of the first part of his governance, which was in
ordering of his own person and court: whereby pryncipally he brought not
only the city of Rome but also all the hole empire (not withstandinge the
beastely license brought in by Heliogabalus) in as good estate as ever it was
in the time of any of his most noble progenitors.

How extremely Alexander hated extorcioners and brybours, and how much he
favored them that were virtuous. Cap. xiii.
THE EMPEROVR Alexander had such indignation toward them that were
extorcioners or brybours, that if by chance he espied any of them, he was
therewith so grieved, that he immediately would vomit up colar, and his face
being as it were on a fire, of a long time might not speak one word. On a
time one Septimius Arabinus, who in the time of Heliogabalus was a famous
brybour, came in the company of Senators, to salute the emperor Alexander,
who beholding him said with a loud voice: O lord god, behold, Arabinus not
only lives, but also presumes to be in the senate. peradventure he trustethe
in me, iudgyng me to be an ignorant and folyshe emperor.

Moreover he ordained, that where there were fou^den any extortioners, or
brybours, that they should be openly examined and judged, and by the governors
of countrayes sent into exyle. When he was in his progress, such as were
governors or Justices in prouynces, whom he herd worthily commended without
synister affection, he would in his iourneye take them into his horselyghter,
co^munyng with them of the state of their country, and honoring them with
rewards, saying, That like as extorcioners and brybours are to be
impouerysshed, so good men and just are to be enryched.

In heryng the complayntes of his souldyours against their capitaynes, if he
found any capytayne faulty in that thing, whereof he was accused, forthwith he
caused him to be punyshed after the quality of his offense, without any hope
of remyssion. Semblablye did he to his soldiers and servants. For where
they iniustely grieved any person, he corrected them sharply, and with a
meruaylous austeritie.

To one of his secretaries, which forged an untrue ^yll in his counsel. he
commanded the synewes of his fyngers, wherewith he did write, to be cut, and
so to be utterly banyshed. Wherefore he was called Seuerus, which is as much
to say as sharp or rigorous: for severity is rygour in punyshement,
according to the quality of the offense, having respect to a good purpose,
without any desire of vengeance. And it is that part of Justice, that
consysteth in execution: the commendation whereof shall appear in the next
chapyter.

A notable example given by Alexander in repreuynge an ambicious and
vaynglorious counsaylour. Cap xiiii.
I SVPPOSE IT shall not be tedyous to good men to here one incomparable example
of the severity of this meruaylous emperor, which although it shall seem to
many that shall here it, to be over vehement and grievous, yet in reading the
chapter next folowinge, it shall be sufficiently declared by the words of the
same emperor, that his said rygour in judgment was necessarylye used, and with
equalytie in justice, deseruynge in no part to be repreued, but now will I
reherce the said story.

There was about the said Emperor a man of great honor called Uetronius
Turinus, whom for his great wit and sagenes in appearance, the emperor had
in syngular favor, in so much as he called him to his priuye counsel, and
used to be with him more famylyar than he was commonly with any other, which
so much blinded the inward eye of Turinus, that he could not se in him self,
which he not long before had condemned in other. such incomparable swetenes
is founde^ in the familiar company of princis. Wherefore like as when the
companions and servants of Ulysses had eaten abundantly of the herb called
Lotos, the taste thereof was so pleasant and meruaylous, that all that eat
thereof, forgetting their own propre country, coueted to remain still in that
region, where that herb grew, and but only by violence they could not be
brought to their ships, to return to their propre houses: semblably
Turinus after that he had been with the emperor in an inward and secret
familyaritie, he found it so pleasant, that forgettyng from whense he was
called, and taking little head of any other part of his office, he put his
hole study and delectation to augment the opynion of men, that thought that the
emperor would nothing do, without his advise, whereby he should be magnyfyed
and honored above all other of the emperors counsaylours. And therefore he had
contynuall suite made unto him, as well by them that had suits to the Emperor
in their particular causes, as others that looked for offices or great
promotions. To every man a part he would promise his favor, and therefore
received great rewards and presents. but finally whom he knew that the
emperor had preferred in office, or any thing determined in his just cause.
(for that moughte he know being with the Emperor so secret, although the
good emperor did nothing by his persuasion only, but by prudent advise and
good delyberation, as it shall hereafter appear) on him would he beck, if he
were in the chamber. And often times in a day he would come from the emperor
into the chaumber of presence, or place, where suitors awayted, and of whom he
had received money, to them would he say, that he had remembered them, and in
their request or matter received good comfort, when in deed he spoke not thereof
one word. Finally by the color of this familyar and secret recourse that he
had to the emperor, he gathered much treasure: but at the last diverse, and in
great number, to whom he had promised that thing that they sued for, not
withstandyng they received nothing in conclusion but noddes with the heed,
found them selfs deceived, and their great sommes of money vaynely employed,
whereat they murmured and partly meued with disdayn, partly with poverty, they
brast forth at the last into manifest grudgynge, which came to the emperors
ear, by what means I know not, but such abuses can not be long hid from
princis, that have their ears perforate (as is the proverb.) Which the
emperor heryng, he was meued with meruaylous displesure, consyderyng that
Turinus, whom he had in so great estimation, abusing his person, in faynynge
him to be his pupyll or servant, had sold his determinations and sentences,
whereby he had defamed his majesty in that that Turinus had brought me^ in
belefe, that the emperor did nothing (but as it were) at his only beck and
commandment. Which opinion to redress he used this polycie. He caused one to
desire a thing of him openly, and afterward to su^ to Turinus privily to help
him in his demand, and secretly to move the emperor for him, which being
done, and that Turinus had promised his good will to him that sued, and sone
after saying, that he had somewhat meued the emperor therein, where in deed he
spoke not thereof any one word, and that he abode an answer thereof, whereupon
he received of the said suter a great sum of money. which the emperor
knowing, he caused him to call eftesones on Turinus, but he as if he had in
hand other business, only beckened on him without speaking any thing to
him. for in deed the Emperor had given to an other that thing, which this
man sued for, which grudginge thereat, discovered openly what Turinus had of
him received: that knowing the emperor, he caused Turinus immediately to be
arrested, and openly in his presence to be accused, which was done by a
greatte number, whom he had also deceived, taking of them great sums of money
for offices, and other things, which they never obtained. Wherefore after that
Turinus was condemned by sufficient and credyble witness, in whose presence he
had received this brybery, and in whose hering he had effectually promised, he
was judged by the emperor, to be ladde into the open market place, where most
resort was of the people, and there being bounden to a stake, with smoke made
of grene styckes and wete stubbell, to be smouldred to death. and during the
time of his execution, the emperor commanded a bedell to cry, With fume shall
he die, that fumes has sold. But to the intent that men should not think that
for one offense the judgment was to cruel and rigorous, or ever Turinus was
condemned to die, the emperor made diligent search, and by evident profes it
was founden, that Turinus had often and in many causes, received money of both
parts, promysyng to advance their cause to the emperor. Moreover to prove
the severity of this emperor laudable, it shall be declared in the chapter next
following.

The consultation concerning the punishment of Turinus, and the excellent
reason of the emperor Alexander. Cap. xv.
IN THE MEAN time that Turinus was accused, and before his condemnation, the
Emperor Alexander according to his customable usage, gave convenient time to
his connsaylours to delyberate by them selves, or ever that they gave any
sentence, what punishment should be equal to the offense of Turinus, and
necessary for an example to other, that they presumed not to do the semblable.
After when the counsel was called, every man was commanded to declare his
opinion: Some raysoned, that the open rebuke with sufficient satisfaction unto
the party, should be a conuenience punishment: Other addyd to imprysonnement
for a certain time: diverse would that he should be banished far from the
court: many affyrmed with vehement arguments, that he deserved to be beheaded,
consydering that in abusing the emperors majesty, in selling greatte offices
to persons unworthy, he had put the publyke weal in no little hasarde. The
emperor advisedly herynge all their opinions, last of all, as it was his
manner, reasoned in this wise, as hereafter follows.

My trustye and well beloved counsaylours, we have hitherto attentyfely herd
and throughely considered your wise and honorable sentences, declared with free
and uncorrupted minds, although by the diversity of your natural
inclynations, your sundry reasons seem to have no little dyuersitie, as it
happens in all consultations, wherein diverse men do show their conceiptes freely
without fear of blame, as I doubt not but ye do. Not withstandyng for as much
as heryng all your opinions and reasons, I have my wit the better instructed
to find out and declare (except I be deceived) what should be the most
expedient and necessary punishment of Turinus, for the offenses which he has
committed, wherein ought to be no less severity (as I will preue with good
reason) than if he had attempted to have slain me, or to brenne this most
noble city of Rome, the honorable mantion of gods, and common refuge of all the world. Fyrstye remember, that ye chase me to be your governor, not only
for the nobility of my progenitors, ne for their images or monumentes of
thankful remembrance, ye, rather for the beastely and most abominable life
of Helyogabalus, my cosen germayn, ye had more cause to refuse me: neither ye
made me your Emperor and prince for the goodlynesse of my person, or prowess
showed by me in your wars: I being yet for tenderness of age uneath able to
do feats of arms, much less to lead an army, specially such one as
perteyneth to this noble empire. But true lie it was for the good estimation
and hope that ye had in the towardness of mine education and nature,
thinking it to be aptely disposed to virtue, wherein being brought up in
chylhode, I ought to have always about me, such as be of like disposition, and
by their assistence and counsel, to moderate and rule the publyke weal of
this city. It ought therefore to be kept in remembrance, that as I have
said, by the good opinion and hope that all men have conceived of me, this
publyke weal, which being subverted, I found as none, I have reedified (and
be it spoken without boste) almost made new from the foundation. Than if he
that inforseth him self to brenne the houses, or to beat down the walls of
the City, by good justice and reason should suffer death: by a much greatter
reason ought Turinus to dye, that has endeavored him self to subuerte and
destroy that, whereby the publyke weal as well was begonne^ as is also
preserved, consyderyng that the publyke weal in estimation is to be preferred
before the material city, as much as the life of man and renoume of virtue be
of more value than stone or timber, wherewith the walls and houses be builded.
And therefore Aristotle, in defynyng what is a City, City.
does not call it a place builded with houses, and enuironned with walls, but
says, that it is a company, which has sufficiency of living, and is
co^stitute or assembled to the intent to live well. Wherefore it is the people
and the weal of them that makes the city. And the destruction and
subversion thereof, ought with more rigor and vehemente punishment, to be
revenged, if more sharp punishment may be than death, than brennynge and
beatynge down of material houses or walls.

This well and deepelye considered, it shall not be thought, that they that
have reafoned for the mitigation of Turinus punishment, had before in
remembrance and sufficiently examyned the greuousenesse of his offense,
according as I have declared it, but only considered his bare act without any
circumsta^ce. But yet the treason done also to me, aggrieueth the trespace. Is
it not treason, to conspire the destruction of thy soueraygne lord? most of
al, of whom thou art entierly favored, and put in great trust. Is there any
diversity between the stickyng of him with a daggar, or kyllyng him with
poison, and by some circumstance to cause his people to rebelle against him,
and in their fury to slay him? who comparynge to gether the form and manner
of these offenses, will not suppose it reason, that the punishementes therefore,
should be much more vehement and sharp than for any other transgression,
sense justice limitteth equal punisshement in proportion, according to the
importance, that is to say, The greatness or smalnesse of the offenses.

Now let us consider the quality or substance of Turinus mysdemeanour. In the
time of the emperor Seuerus and Caracalla, he was in small estimation, but
after that I was elect emperor, he craftily smelling out my disposition, by
little and little acquaynted him self with some of those, of whom for their
virtues I had best opinion, and counterfaytyng their manners, he at the last so
aptly set forth such gravity, which he adourned also with a wonderful
sharpnes and promptitude of wit, that he opteyned to be kyghly recommended
unto me by the wisest men of my counsel, by whose advise first I made him one
of my treasorers. Finally I called him nere me, and made him of my pryuye
counsel, wherein we found him so necessary, that in our opinyon his
sentences were equivalent, and sometime surmounted them that had been in most
estimation. And to the intent that he would augment that opinion and credence
that we had in him, he ever used a great severity or straytenes in his
sentences again flatterers, dissemblers, and persons corrupted, namely such
as sold their endeavor or diligence in optaynyng our favor in any matter or
for any office. And by his industrye diverse were detected unto me, and
punysshed according to their merits. For these causes I more and more took him
in favor, and to encourage other to ensue his example, I did advance him as
ye know, to the highest dignities within the city, except the consul, and
have participate with him our most privy secrets, using him so familiarly,
that diverse other of our counsaylours have partly disdayned. Now behold what
he has done. First he has deceived and mocked us with his hypocrisy,
abusing our symplicitie and winning our favor, and not our favor only, but
also our credence and trust, whereby he might finally work to his private
commodity, and to our confusion. For he being with us in such familiarity as
none other was, he practiced those things that we most abhorred, that is to
say extorcion, selling of right and wrong, and marchandysyng of offices and
dignities. To whom is extorcion or brybes not grievous? although the gyuer
receives great lucre. Is there any thing to be more abhorred than selling of
Justice, which knows no reward? How much more intolerable is the selling
of injustice or wrong, whereby the one part suffers damage by sustaining of
wrong, the other is more indamaged by lesynge of his good name and also his
money, if it happen, as it has done oftentimes, by a good and rightuous
governor, that he which has done wrong, be compelled to make restitution:
But pryncipally and above all other am I most indamaged. For I unawares and
innocent being brought into the hatrede of men, should be distroyed before that
I might know that I were in peril. Now consider ye the importance of
Turinus offense, conferryng it with all that which I have rehearsed, and by the
way remember, that not only he that sleeth his prince, or depopulateth his
countreye, and makes it desolate, but also he that conspireth to do it, and
thereto endeuoreth him self with all his puissance, though he be let by some
occasion or study, deserves to dye by the determynation of Justice
dyst^^butife. By what mean he would do it, it is not material: except
peradventure some man might suppose, that the act were more odious of him
that procurid the people to distroy their own prince or country, whom they
are bound by allegiance and duty with all their power to defend, than of him
that do solicit strangers or ancient ennemies, to invade his country.
Finally if any common person, never receyuyng of me any benefit would report
in the ears of people, that I went about to change the astate of the weal
publyke of this noble city, to slay all the senators, to withdraw the people
from their ancient lyberties, and finally to bring the majesty of the empire
into a tyranny, and by such false information excyteth and styreth the senate
and people to hate me, and couete my destruction: such one proved at the last
to have said falsely, I believe ye would not think only worthy to dye, but ye
would with your own hands dysmembre him, and pluck him in pieces. Why should
you not than think, that Turinus, whom I most favored, and was about me
most secret, not by reportynge evil of me, (which perchance would not be
believed) but by actual deeds and openly, committing iniustyce, and tyranny,
in mayntaynynge, supporting, and comfortynge wrongs, extorcions, oppressyons,
and other enormities against the weal publyke, also aduauncyng evil and
ungracious personages to dyggnities and offices, whereby justice ought to be
mynistred, and the publyke weal governed, and by these means quenchynge the
good opinyon and love that all men had toward me, and chaungynge it to a
fervent grutche and hatred, they thinking that Turinus did al thing by our
apoyntment, styre the hearts of the people against me: why should ye not I say,
think, that such one has deserved to dye? And as he was with us in syngular
favor and trust, and therein like to none other: so ought his death to be
syngular and strange, that by the novelty thereof it may be more terryble,
whereby other may fear from hensforthe to abuse in such manner our affability,
which being in us natural, without such a munition can not be sure and safely
preserved. And for this our sentence no man ought to deem us cruel, or to
lack mercy, if he consider dilygently all that we have spoken. And do also
remember, that to keep an infinite number of men from the rygour of Justice, I
spare not to execute the same rigor on him, whom I specially favored.

After that the emperor had concluded in this wise his reason, there was no man
offered to reply thereto, perceiving him rather meued with zeal than with any
particular displesure, and to say the truth, when they had pondered his
consyderations, not fyndyng suffycient argument to confound his opinion,
finally they all being in number fyfty wise and honorable counsaylours,
rejoiced that they had so wise and virtuous an emperor, which preferred
Justice and the weal of his people, before any pryuate affection or singular
appetite. Than immediately followed the execution of Turinus, which was
appointed by the Emperor, in form as ye herd it declared in the last
Chapyter.

How Alexander instructed and entertained them that we^^ offycere, and of his
lyberalytie toward them that did well their duties. Cap. xvi.
NOT VVITHSTANDYNG the severity of this noble emperor in the sharp
punishment of oppressions, extorcions, and other offenses of semblable
importance, yet was he toward such as justly executed their offices, for the
publyke weal, very favorable, gentle, and bounteous. For if any of them
had peradventure at the beginning or first enter into his room or
authority, used less dilygence, or omytted some thing that he ought to have
done, either for lack of experience, or having not therein sufficient
instruction, forsene always that he did nothing by corruption or vycious
affection: the Emperor calling such one to him pryuily and aparte from all
other, first he would remember him for what cause he had called him to that
room or authority, the importance or charge whereof he would also declare,
and than would he somewhat commend him for his honesty and temperance, wherewith
he would confess him self to be satisfied, according to his expectation, than
sadlye and with a wonderful gravity, he would admonest or warn him of his
lack in diligence or in omission, showing what damage the publyke weal might
sustayn, by lack of his circumspection, and without that, their virtues should
be unprofitable to their office or dygnitie. After would he exhort and require
them with gentle countenance and words, to use more study and travail
about the affairs of the weal publyke, committed unto them, promysyng to
them for their good endeavor, his assystence and favor with honest recompense
in the end of their trauayles. Moreover although he were thus industrious in
espyenge out the demeanor of every man in his office, yet would he not suffer
any other person to rebuke or to scorn them, saying, that where any obedience
is due, thense ought to be excluded al rebukyng or mockyng, consyderyng that
thereof ensues contempt, which like a pestilence consumes all laws and
authority: And that he and the senate were iuges of the duties of them that be
in authority. Also he used to say oftentimes, that it happens sometime, that
they, which be slack in their duties at the beginning, after that they have been monished thereof, either by their friends, or by the goodness of their propre
wits, they have been industrious and dilygent. Contrary wise other, which at
the first have been quyck, with a meruaylous dexterity and promptnes, they have
by little and little relented, and having gathered good estimation and abundance
of substance, have withdrawn them selves from peynful affairs, and at the
last be to no man but only to them selfs profitable.

Wha^ any man had exercised his office duly, vpryghtly, and circumspectly in
the public weal, at the end of his term, when there was a successor unto
him being present appointed, than would he say unto him that departed out of
his office. The publyke weal gives to you right hearty thanks. Tha^ would he
reward him in such wise as bring private he might according to his degree,
live the more honestly. His reward was in land, cattle, horses, grain, iron,
stone, and other things necessary to build a commodious place, wherein after
great travail about the weal publyke, he moughte refreshe both his body
and spirits. And ever after the emperor had him in most tender famyliaritie.

^
Uerily in one thing he used an incomparable dilygence, wherein he surmounted
in mine opynion all other emperors. There was no man in dignity or office,
either by the assygnement of the senate, or by his commyssyon, but that he
knew his person, and form of living. And that much more is, he had in his
chamber bylles contaynyng the number of them, which were his soldiers in
wages, and also every one of their names, and what time they had served. And
when he was by him self quiet from great affairs, he perused the number of
them, their dignities wages and fees, to the intent that he would be for all
occasions surely provided. And therefore when he had any thing to do with his
soldiers, he named every man in his communycation: and when they were
present, he called them unto him. And when he was solicited to promote any
person, he marked his name, and than would he search his books of remembrance,
wherein were the names of them that had served him, with the time of their
service. also their reward or promotion, and at whose request, or by whose
solicitation they were promoted.

In offices he seldom suffered to be any deputies, saying, They only should
be advanced, which by them selves and not by deputies could order the publyke
weal. adding thereto, that men of war had their ministrations, and learned
men theirs, and according thereunto should roumes be disposed, that every man
should do that thing whereof he had most knowledge. He had therefore written what
he had given, and that remembryng, if he found any man, to whom he had either
given nothing, or that which in value was not equal unto his merits: he
called him; and said, what is the cause that thou askes^e nothing of me?
desyreste thou to have me thy dettour? Ask some what, that lacking promotion,
thou complain not of me. He gave always such thing as impaired not his
honor, as goods of men attaynted, not being in gold or silver. for that was
always put in the common treasorye. Also he gave bayly^wykes and rules of places
civil, but never of war, except it were to them which were expert and
approved true capitaines. Receyuours he changed every year, and called them an
evil that needs must be suffered. As for chief judges, proconsules, or
lieutenauntes, he gave none of those roumes in reward, but by a delyberate
judgment either of him self or of the Senate. Such was the wonderful and (as
I might say) most curious circumspection of this excelle^ prince Alexander,
which in mine opinion can not be by man's tunge sufficiently extolled.

How curiouse the emperor Alexander (...) in assignynge of (...) in his
laws, and how he ^sed (...) them according to their merit^e. Cap. xvii.
SVONE PERSONS as he assygned to be judges in (...), he with good (...) did
chose them which were best learned in the laws, and were of much auncientie,
and therewith having good gravity, and were known to be sincere and of good
conscience, and unto them was appointed an honorable stipeude: In so much as
to them that were iuges in prouynces, was given to every of them.xx. Romayne
pounds of silver, six silver pottes, two mules, ^
two mulettes, two horses, a horsekeper and a mulettour, two robes or habites,
to sit in judgment, one honorable garment to wear in his house: one for his
bayne or study: Also a hundred pieces of gold: Moreover one cook, and if
they were unmarried, one concubine. And after that they had left their
administration, they should yield again the mules, mulettes, horses,
mulettours, and cooks, which all the said time were found of the common
treasure, the resydue they should reteyne still, if they had done well in their
office: And if they had done evil, they should pay the quatreple or four
times so much as they received.

He never would suffer that any office, which had jurisdiction, or execution
of Justice, should be sold or opteyned by giving of money, or any other
reward. And therefore where one of his most pryuye servants had promised to
one, to obtain of the Emperor for him an office, which had civil
jurisdiction or adminystration of Justice, and therefore had taken a hundred
pieces of gold: The emperor commanded, that he should be hanged on a galouse
openly in the high way, wherein the emperors servants should most often
pass to his manours, without the city. And wha^ Ulpiane, one of the sage men
of his counsel blamed his sentence as cruel and representynge a tyranny, he
patiently hard him, and aunsweared immediatlye, saying, The residue of my
manners declares me not to be furiouse, or to take pleasure in cruelty,
specially to them whom I favor and have next about me. See you not, what
worms and flies would increase to consume the grain and fruits of the earth,
if the pleasantness of the spring time and beginning of somer should ever
continue, and the sharp and terrible winter did not with his sharp frostes
and bitter wyndes purge the earth of such evil increase? who knows not,
that in all thing that is sweet, worms be founden, which will sone consume all that they bread in, if it be not preserved by laying about it some thing bitter
or very unsavory? If the ancient laws of this cite judges him to dye, that
spitefully pulls down or de fyleth themperors image, or cou^terfayteth his
coin, seal or sign manuel, of how much co^gruence and more with justice is
it, that he should sufferdeth, which with selling of the administration of
justice, pluckith down and defyleth among the people the good renoume of the
Emperor? or cou^terfayteth and changes the mind of the Emperor, which is his
very image immortal, whereby both the prince and the people suffers
incomparably more damage than by forging of money. Do not ye being so wise a
man, consider, that he which byeth a thing, may sell it? And for my part
while I live, I will never suffer any authority to be used as marchaundise. For
that which I suffer, I may not with mine honor condemn or prohibit. And I
can not for shame punish a man for selling that thing that he byeth.
Wherefore if ye consider every thing well, ye shall find no cause to blame me
of cruelty, or resemble me to a tyrante.

With these words Ulpiane found him self satisfied, and wonderynge at the
Emperors wysedom, ceased to speak any more against him in any semblable
judgment.

When he made any ordinary judges, advocates, or proctoures, he caused them to
be openly named, requirynge the people and gyuynge them courage, if there were
cause to accuse them, to prove the crime by open witness. And he was wont to
say, Sense christen men and jews in the election of priests, caused them to
be in such form tried: it should be inconvenient, if the same were not used
in the governors of countries, unto whom were committed both the lives and
substance of men that be under them. Foresene if they did not sufficiently
prove it, and that it seemed to be maliciouse detraction, the accusour should
forthwith be beheaded.

Of the great care and diligence that Alexander used about the publyke weal,
and of certain new officers ordained by him. Cap. xviii.
THE HOVSEHOLDE servants and counsaylors of the emperor being well tried,
and by his own example brought in good order, also the heed officers, iuges,
and all other that had authority in the publyke weal, being well chosen and
instructed by the example of the emperors court: it was a wonder to behold,
with how little difficulty, and how soon the resydue of the weal publyke
was brought into a good facion, all men delytynge in virtue, and praysyng the
beaultie and commodity thereof in their superiors. Also reioysinge at the
affability and gentylnesse of the noble emperor, and semblably dreadynge his
seuerttie, they brought at the last virtue in custom, whereby happened that such
vices as before seemed little, and were nothing regarded, became to all men,
or at the leest to the more part detestable. In so much as the emperor neded
not to send forth any espiall to espy men's conditions. For such as were
evil, were every where noted, and of all men dysdayned. So that by them it
happened, as it does by one that is sick in a hot sever, which first
abhorteth every medicine that the physician does offer to give him: but when
he beholds the physician drink any thing thereof, tha^ is he the better
content to a^say of the same: but by reason that his taste is corrupted, to him
al thing that is wholesome seems unpleasant, be it never so delectable, finally
fearing either to dye, or to be compelled to receive a more greuouse medicine,
he takes the potion by little and little, until at the last by custom of
drynkyng thereof, he has brought that potion to be as familyar and agreeable
unto his taste, as was his common and most usual drink. And than does he
scorn both them that wylfully would dye rather than they would take medicine:
and also them that be their kepers or rulers^ which do suffer them to take
only that which contenteth their appetite. Semblably did they who by the
emperors exaumple, accustomed them selfs to virtue and (...), eschewynge
such vices, which before they, had (...).

How the emperor Alexander did ordeyn new officers in the weal public, and
what belonged to their authorities. Ca. xix.
NOW LET us return unto the emperor Alexander. When he perceived that by
the example of him, and other great officers, the people began to apply and
waxed apt to receive due reformation of the state of their living, he
meruaylousely thereat reioysyng, gave him self holly to the restorynge of the
publyke weal to her pristinate honor. Wherefore to the intent that nothing
should escape unreformed, he ordained to be in the city and also in the
prouynces many officers, somewhat mo than before were accustomed to be,
appoyntyng causes civil and criminal to sundry jurisdictions, saying, where
one man has many matters to order of sundry effects, it fares with him as it
does with a man's stomach, for the stomach receives meats, diverse in
qualities and effects, which all together can not be by one man's Nature duly
con^octe and dygested. For sum meats be in operation hot, and be not apt
but for a cold stomach: some contrariwise be very cold, and in a cold stomach
will never be boiled. other meats be of gross and hard substance, and require
a strong and mighty stomach to endue it: other be soft and delycate, and
being to hastily digested, it nothing profyteth. Not withstandyng any one of
the said meats being in one stomach, are better prepared to digestion than
many, co^syderynge the travail that Nature must have in the seperacion of
sundry qualities, that be in diverse meats to prepare them to their effects,
whereto they were ordained. And if the natural heat in man's body be not
thereto sufficient, that which is ordained for nourysshynge of life, is
converted to corruption of blood and other humors, which is cause of
syckenes. But if any meat happen to come into the stomach, which meat is apt
for his temperature, there shall he be perfectly concocte or boiled, and by a
natural dygestion made apt for the nouryshynge and preservation of other
members. According to this similitude. If one man being in authorite, which I
resemble unto the stomak, be he never so well learned or wise, if he take upon
him the ordryng and dyscussyng of all manner causes, his wit, which is in the
stead of nature, shall be therewith so much encumbered, that being studiouse or
occupied about one matter, in the mean time an other is appayred: and if he
leave the first, to refourme the second or third, the first is than in
warse case than he found it, the parties contendynge being chaufed, and in a
more fervent contention. Or in a cryminall cause the offenders being left
uncorrected, puttyng al fear apart, not only do persevere but also increse in
their evil doings. Finally where one man has the depeachyng of many matters,
none one of them may be brought to a perfect conclusion. For as much as to
every act belongs opportunity, which can never be found, where many matters
be enterlaced, opportunity being only espied by a vigilant and constant
study. More over where many men be in authority, good wits shall not be
hid nor unrewarded, and many shall apply them to virtue and study, upon
hope of preferment. And where as be many particular authorities, there shall
sundry matters be the sooner depeached. This was the saying of Alexander.

And therefore by the consent of the senate and people, he ordained first
according to the counsel of Plato, certain persons, which were named
Conseruatours of the weal publyke: to whose office it appertayned to se, that
the children of the Romans were well brought up and instructed according to
the capacity of their wits, from the age of seven years unto syxtene, and
that in their plays and recreation were nothing dishonest. Also that at
certain times appointed, they were exercysed in ryding, if they were sons of
gentylmen. Also they and the resydue, were exercysed in swimming, runnyng,
wrastlyng, and to occupye all weapons of war. Semblablye that the maidens,
during the said age, were brought up in shamefastnes, humbleness, and
occupation necessary for a housewyfe. And that they were not seen out of their
fathers houses, but only in the temples, unto the which women only resorted,
and that in the company of their mothers or such other as were in their places.

Moreover it pertayned to the said Conseruators, to control every householder,
of what estate or degree so ever he were, if there were found any excess in
his fare, or that he had resort of riottous persons: or that he kept any mo
servants than had roumes in their howses, or in some necessary business were
contynually occupied.

Also that no man neither in him self, his wife, nor his servants should
excede or in any part change the apparayle that by the laws or the emperors
ordynaunces had been provided.

Moreover to se that no vitailing house nor bordel house should have their
doors open, or receive any person, either before the son risen, or after the
son set, which was done to the intent that every man should be known,
that repaired to such places, and much good happened by that prouisyon.

These Conseruatours were three score in number, that is to say, For every
trybe two, Rome being divided into.xxx. tribes. and twice in the wike they
assembled and did communicate such defaultes as they had founden, and forth
with all they certified to the prouoste of the city all the defaultes,
reseruyng the education of children, which they them self reformed by sharp
admonition given to their parents: whom if they found dissobediente or
neglygent, they certyfyed thereof the Senate; who caused the said parents to
be punisshed as ennemies of the publyke weal of the citte. Them which
offended in the other artycles, the prouoste of the city punyshed, according
to the statutes and ordynaunces in such cases provided.

The Pretores, Questores, and other like offices and authorities he augmented
in number, all be it he divided their jurisdictions, to some he appointed only
contractes, in the which word were comprehended all things wherein bargayne
or promise was contained: and that he caused to be extremely examyned and
discussed by the said officers, and in whom was founden to be any dysceipte
or faith broken, he without hope of any remyssyon or pardon, was immediately
beaten with whyppes: which was also the punishment of them that had stolen
pryuyly without any violence. The emperor saying, That it was but of fantasye
and a thing to laughe at, to make a dyfference between stealing and disceit
or breakyng his bargayne, where it appears to be no dyuersitie, but only that
this has trust and credence joined with it: and the other has none, but is a
syngle iniurye. Wherefore in reason it is the lyghter offense, where, by the
other means, not only the thing is gotten with as much injustice as if it
were stolen: but also faith other wise called trust, which is the foundation
of Justice, and consequently of the public weal, is dissolved. And therefore
it ought to be revenged with no less punishment than simple theft.

Puruayours for grain to the city he made of honest and diligent persons,
and to them he assigned particular auditors, notwithstanding at the end of
the year, both the puruayours and auditors left their offices, and other
were chosen.

To them that were his baylyffes receyuours surueyours and other that procured
or gathered the revenues of his crown, he gave competente salaries: but be
favored them not, calling them a necessary evil. Wherefore if he perceived,
that any of them had gathered much richesse, he would take al from them,
saying, Let it suffice you, that ye have taken so long pleasure with my
goods: and beware that ye take not from other men iniustely, lest ye make me
more angry with you. All be it if he perceived any of them afterward to live
vpryghtly, and to have good wit and learning he advanced them to some other
roumes, wherewith they confessed their service to be recompensed. Finally he
never punished any man greuousely for his own particular causes, and the
sharpness that he used in punishinge offenses against the weal publyke. when
his considerations were well examyned and pondered, it was thought by all wise
men to be right expedient.

To the prouoste he joined.xiiii. which had benne Consules, calling them
governors of the city, commaundynge them to here with the prouoste, the
affairs of the city. And that no sentence were given, nor act made. but that
they al, or the more part were thereat present.

The detestation that Alexander had unto idelnesse and the vices thereof
procedynge, and of diverse provisions that he made against it. Cap. xx.
THIS most noble Emperor was so roted in virtue and fervent zeal toward the
weal publyke, that all vice was to him almooste intolerable. And for as much
as he perceived, that idelnesse, that is to say, Ceasynge from necessary
occupation or study, was the synke, which received all the stynkyng canelles
of vice, which ones being brymme full, suddenly runs over through the city,
and with his pestiferous air infecteth a great multitude of people er it may
be stopped and cleansed. And that not withstanding, the people being ones
corrupted with this pestilence, shall with greatte diffycultie and with long
tracte of time be delivered. And yet ere that shall be brought well to pass, a
great part of the people shall peryshe: which this wise and virtuous
Emperor considering, and having thereof maruaylouse care, to the intent to
withdraw men from all excuses of idelnesse, he with an incomparble prudence
ordained for every astate some form of exercise to be necessaryly or
vertuouselye occupied, beginning at the base people or communers, which were
most in number, and proceeding forth to every other degree or condition.

First all vile occupation or labor, whereby nature moughte be corrupted, or
bodily strength decayed, he caused only to be exercised by bondemenne or
strangers, that is to say, not being citezens. Semblably, he would not suffer
any citezen to be a marcha^t aduenterer, nor to sell any thing by retayle,
that he him self wrought not, or were not made by his own provision or
study: saying, That the Romans by trauaylyng into sundry cou^trays,
gathered and brought into the city with their marchaundise, the vices of other
people, which apprehended by other (as the more part of men do delight in new
fangelnes) is the cause of more damage to the publyke weal, than a hundred
times the value of the marchaundise may be commodiou^e. Moreover finding ones
a delight to accumulate treasure, and desiring to excede one an other in
richesse, they attend so much to their own particular lu^re, that they
abandon al liberality, benevolence and charity, except it be very few.
Fynallye they be never to the publyke weal profitable. Also they that retayle
that which is bought of the crafts man that warketh it, they not only
defraude other of the just price, contrary to the direct order of equity,
but also do consume the time idelly, being not occupied neither in bodily
exercise, nor in virtuous or commodyouse study. Therefore to such practyse or
mystery, he admytted only strangers. And also to bring out of other
countries and to selle to the citezens all such things as thereof was none
growing in Italye, or not in sufficient quantity, as wolles, metal, and
sylke. Foreseen that none of it were wroughte in any place out of Italy. And
of such strangers it was lefull to the Romans, to bye in gross, and
retayle, All be it there should no mo retayle than were appointed by the Senate:
and those also should be examyned and assigned by the Provost of the city, and
such as were to him associate. And the said marchaunte strangers were by the
Emperors commandment very courtaisely entertained, and so were all other
strangers, which repaired to the city to bye there any thing, orelles to
practice any excellent kunnynge or craft, and were exonerate of all charges
for the wars, except it were only for the defense of the city. But of
them he suffered to be but a certain number, which was not lauful for them to
excede. And unto them were assigned of the Romans certain judges and
officers, which yearly also were changed. But now to treat how he kept the
people from idelnesse.

First he provided, that where there was not any artifice or craft necessary,
but that it might be found within the city, which he ordered in this wise. He
knew every year ones by the officers called Censores, how much people were
dwellinge in the city of every age. Also by them which were called Ediles,
how many householdes there were of every craft. Than would he diligentely
enserche, of what perfection their warkes were, wherein they were occupied. and
if he found therein much lack, so that the byars should suffer detrymente,
than enjoined he the seller thereof, that he should no more work to sale, until
he were instructed more perfaitely. Not withstanding that person was compelled
to work under an other man, which was more perfyte, until his work were
commended.

Moreover he ordained, that after that the children of the communers could
write and read perfytly, they were set to some artifice or craft. But if
within one year it appeared, that they were unapt thereunto, or that it were
much contraryouse unto their nature: than the Conseruatours examyning as much
as they could, to what craft or science necessary their wits were most
apt, unto that should they forthewith be set, to learn of them which were
good warkemen. And therefore he gatte out of all parts of the empire the most
kunnynge and parfecte craftesmen in every science to dwell in the city, not
only compellyng them by his authority, but allurynge them with yearly
stipendes of grain, to the finding of their householdes, and also to be free
from all manner exactions in peace or war, to instruct in their crafts
perfectely the youth of the city.

The crafts, which he would that the more part of Romans should occupy,
were those, wherein both the body and wit moughte be exercysed, which he
said perteyned to men that were free of condition: other occupations, wherein
was bodily labor only, he said was for bondemen and beasts. And therefore
within the territorye of the city of Rome, and in the manours and serines of
the gentylmen Romans, he ordained that bailyfes and surueyours of husbandry
should be fre men and citezens, and that the plough men and laborars should be
bondmen and strangers. In other cities besides Rome, some of these things were
changed after the necessity and nature of the people, wherein this emperor
always had a maruaylous consyderation.

After this diligent provision, if any one of the people had been found idell by
the space of one hole day, except in feastfull days and other times of solace
appointed, he was forthwith examyned, and having no lefull and approved
excuse, he was first whypped, and after by the Conseruatours committed to one
of the crafts, that he was of, and for every day that he was openly seen to be
idell, the person unto whom he was committed, should for a month set him to
any labor that he list, as his slave or bondsman, gyuynge to him meat and
drink only. And it was not to any other man lefull, during that time, to
give him meat or drink, or to speak with him, other wife than to rebuke him.
And after the said correction, the said Conseruatours should see that he were
bestowed where he moughte work with a competent living.

The semblable order was dilygentely, and (as I might say) exactly kept by
the Emperors strait commandment, both in Greece and Italye. And where
execution any time failed, or was neglected, the officers were deposed with
open reproach, and forfayture of the third part of their substance: which
was employed immediately on grain, and distrybuted equally and freely among
the people well occupied, within the city or town where such thing hapne^.
And with great difficulty the said officers in such wise deposed, could
ever after opteyne of the emperor, to come in auctorite. By the fear whereof,
and the said di^^ribution unto the people, this ordinance was never omytted,
during the life of Alexander. Wherefore it was a wonder to behold, how
suddenly idelnes was every where excluded, and kunnynge in every occupation
augmented.

Of baynes and places of exercyses, made for the people of Rome, by the
emperor Alexander. Cap. xxi.
MOREOVER to the intent that the people should not be to much fatigate with
contynuall labor, whereby their bodies should become decrepite and unapt to
the wars, he not only amended and enlarged the hot bathes made by diverse
emperors and princis before him, wherein the people of Rome accustomed to
refresshe and make clean their bodies, but also made new bathes more pleasant
and sumptuous, joining them to those that were made by Nero the emperor,
conuayeng into them water naturally hot, runnynge by conduites of marble
from mountains in Naples, by the space of.CC. miles from the city of Rome.
And also he brought into sum parts of the ^ayn^s cold water from the most
pure and delectable sprynges, the people to use the oone or the other at their
own plesures. Moreover he bought certain houses, which stood nygh to the said
bayne, and caused them to be pulled down, and that place he made to be
leuelled, and to be set with young trees in the most pleasant facion, having
there large places, wherein the people after that they were bayned, moughte
rounne, leap, or wrastell, or use any other semblable exercise, to the which
places the said trees gave a commodyous and pleasant vmbrage. And in the
wrastlyng places the ground was thick covered with Camomyle, Origanum, and
otherlyke grasses, both sweet in savor and soft to fall upon. Also the said
emperor much delyted in the beholdynge of the said exercises. Wherefore it was
the most part of his pastyme or solace, to see the people exercised in form
aforesaid, or else the gentylmen to assay them self in form of battle, as
hereafter shall be declared.

To the said baynes and places of exercise were assigned a number of kepers
and ministers, to whom were gy^en sufficient salaries. And those places were
always kept so nete and dylectable, that to the eyes or nose, was never any
thing unpleasant or noyfull: by the which clennesse the city was
meruaylouselye preserved from sundry syckenesses, which undoubtedly do grow of
corrupt exhalations, ventyng out of men^ bodies. And for that cause to avoid
occasyon of pestylence and other horrible dyseases, this Emperor prohybyted by
special laws, ingurgitations, bankettes, late suppers and long. Moreover
causyng the controllers of markettes (of whom there were diverse) which were
every year chosen of special honest men, and not auaricyous or nedy, to have a
vygilant eye on the market, that not only vytayles were sold by a due weight
and measure, and at prices set by the senate, but also that they were not in
any part cor^^pted in savor or substa^nce, and that no such thing were sold
for vitayle, wherein any poison naturallye might be inge^dred and hyd, as
musherons, frogs, and other lyk^ things, ^^unden out rather by wanton
a^^^tites, than by nature ingendren to serve for man's sustynaunce^ and in these
things, if any lack were perceived to be, the emperor and senate with a
dilygent scrutiny found out the person, by whose defaute it happened, with also
the controller, which seemed to be neglygent. And the seller was according to
the laws sharply punyshed. The controller or other officer, if there were
fou^den in him negligence, was with great rebukes expellyd from his offy^e, and
had the tenthe part of his mouable goods confiscate, which being brought
into money, and bestowed on wheat, was distributed among the people, which
dwelled in that part of the city, where the offense was committed.

It is here to be considered, that such sums as were forfayted by corrupt or
neglygent officers, came never to the use of the emperor, nor he gave them to
any person, but employeng it on corn, he caused it to be distributed among
the people. Which in mine opinion was a meruaylous polycie, for thereby he
declared, that he used severity not for his own particular advantage. And
also the people, which suffered detrime^t by the lack of the officers, received
the benefit of that which was forfaited. which caused a multitude to ly always
in awayte to find some misdemeanour in the officers, to the intent they might
thereby be the better releued. And the officers at the last becam merueilous
circumspect. And finally the prince for his wisdom and charity not only
praised, but also as a universal father of al his people was most enterly
beloved.

Touching such persons as were in extreme poverty, and either by grievous
syckenes or feeble age, were decrepite, or otherwise not able to labor, I will
after the next chapyter declare the incomparable prudence of this excellent
emperor.

Of the magnifycence of the emperor Alexander in sumptuous and necessary
works, and in what exercises he caused the nobility and gentylmen of Rome to
be occupied. Ca. xxii.
BESIDES the baynes, which I late remembered, made in the city of Rome,
Alexander made also in every royalme being subject to the empire of Rome,
common baynes, he also made greatte and strong barnes in many cities, for the
people to keep in their pryuate stuff and goods, such as had not of their
own private houses of suffycient strength for that purpose. He made also many
fair houses and mancion places, which immediately he gave to his friends,
whom he perceived to be most trusty and honest. In a place called Baianum, he
made warkes magnifike or sumptuous, garnished with images of them which were
joined to him by any affinity. He made meres and pooles to be wondered at,
bryngyng the sea unto them, and causyng them to be replenyshed with strange and
princypall fyshes. Also he edyfied great and wonderfulle brydges, and repaired
all them which were made by Traiane, leauyng not withstanding to Traiane the
name and honor thereof. In the market place of Nerua, he set up great images of
the most noble emperors, some on foot, and some on horsbacke, with their
titles over their heedes, and between every image a great pyllar of brass,
contaynyng all their gestes and acts worthy remembrance. He made also a
basilike or place, where civil controversies were herd and iuged, which
contained in bread one hundred fete, and in length a thousand, and stood all
upon pylers of porphery, which is a stone of purple color, and the pylers
were garnyshed with images of noble pryncis, Greeks and Romans, wroughte in
pure white marble, with their names over their heedes, and under their feet,
their acts wrought also in very small images of copper in a most lively and
quycke demonstration. But in one kind of magnificence he passed all other. For
where diverse cities by erthquaues had been frushed, and therewith defourmed, he
of the revenues of the same countries, gave great sums of money to the
reedifieng of them. And many he efetsones restored to their pristynate beaultie
and strength, diverse he made more substancyall and sure. There was no town
of reputation in his time decayed, but that he caused the occasion thereof to be
serched for^ and to be forthewith reformed. The havens of Italy and Sicile, he
caused not only to be cle^sed and repaired, but also to be made more stronger,
to defend outward hostility.

Moreover, for the exercise of them, which were above the astate of the common
people, he repaired and new made many places and things necessary, which is
expedient to be put in remembrance. First he vysited all the libraries that
were in the city: And where he found any books deformed either with
auncientie, or by neglygent keeping, or by any other means, he caused them to
be new written and laid in their places, and the houses to be not only
cleansed, but also made more ornate and necessary: As making for every book an
huche locked, to the intent that wha^ any man came to study there, he should
have no moo books to look on, than one of the kepers of the lybrary (whereof
there were a good number retained to give their attendance, having therefore
competent salaries) should deliver unto them. And before they departed, the
said keeper should pervse the leaves of the books, that they looked in, to
the intent that if they did cut or rent any out of the volume, they should be
apprehended, and by the officers called Ediles, committed unto prison, and
there should remain until they had repaired sufficiently the books that they
had defaced, and also caused an other like book to be written, and bestowed in
the said lybrary. And if any such person had escaped by negligence or favor
of the keeper, and the defaute founden by some other, the keeper was expelled
from his office without hope of remyssion, and was also compelled to redoube
the harm in likewise as he should have done which committed the offense, if
he immediately had been apprehended. He made also a new lybrary, garnyshyng it
as well with most principal warkes in every science, as also with the images
of the authors, wrought most excellently both in imbosed warke and
portrayture: which lybrarye was divided into sundry galeryes, according to
diverse sciences, all builded round in the form of a cerkle, and being
separate with walls one from an other: And in that portion that belonged to
Geometry and Astronomy, were about the walls great carts and tables,
containing sundry lines, figures, descriptions, dimensions, or measurynges,
conuersions of sterres motions and reuolutio^s of planettes, spheres and
imaginary cerkles, with also material speres quadrantes, astrolabes, and all
other instruments belongyng to those sciences. Semblable tables were in that
portion that pertayned to Arithmetike and musyke, containing the sundry
proportions of numbers and tunes, and thereto was added harpes, lutes, organes
soft in sownynge. For all instruments that were loud and made great noise,
were excluded thense. the cause appears to wise readers. The place which was
compassed about with the said lybraries, was also round, and decked with
pleasant imagerye, and having s^ates commodiously about it: where they that
came to study in the lybraries, moughte walk or sytte at their pleasure, and
communicate each with other that which they had radde or perceived. And to
these places there failed not to come daily a greatte number of gentylmen.

For other necessary exercise, the emperor enclosed with a high wall, a
gruunde ioynynge to his own palaice, containing in circuit one Italyen mile
and a half, which within the wall was enuyronned with a galery of th^e
heightes for men to stand in and behold, which galeries were also of stone.
And in the space that two men might stand and talk, there was a small pyller
of marble, decked with images of men that deserved noble remembrance. The place
was divided or set out with many large alayes, plain and straight, conteynyng
in bread one hundred feet, and in length one thousand fete, those alays were
floored with plaster, and the resydue was thycke sprad with fine grass and
camomyl, having here and there banks for men to rest them when they were
werye. The young gentylmen of the city when they repaired to the palaice to
give their attendance, they in the mean time that the emperor was in
preparynge him forward, exercysed them selfs, some in the said alays, in
runnyng or casting the balle, sum in the grene places wrastlynge leaping,
and castyng of the dart. And in the galeries stood other of the nobility and
gentylmen, such as lysted to behold them. And without the walls were great
and high trees of cypress and fyrre, with broad tops, conuayd thither with
great industry: which trees did cast over the walls a pleasant vmbrage or
shadow, and defended them that did exercise from the vehement heat of the
sun beams. And also in winter kept the place more mylde and temperate in
resoluynge or breakyng the violent and cold blastes of the northern and
western wyndes. Often times the emperor him self delyted to come and behold
the said exercyses: but in his own person he never exercysed him self but
priuyly, and a few being present, to the intent that if he were vanquished in
any feate (as sometime it happened, although few men surmounted him in
strength and delyuernes) he would not give occasion to be dispraised, and had in
contempt of his subjects. When by extreme heat in the som^mer, or by rain
and other vehement tempests of winter, the said exercises moughte not be
used, than the young gentylmen some repaired to the said lybraries and passed
the time vertuousely in readyng, writing, or playeng on instruments, diverse
haunted the schools of philosophers, rhetoricians, and poets (of the which
sort there were at that time in Rome a great number) and herd them either
recite their own warkes, or expound other old authors. Mary would resort to
the common houses called Thea^res, and purposyng some matter of philosophre,
would there dyspute openly. Other would pyke out of some ancient story some
question concerning martial or civil polycie, and in commendyng or
dyscommendynge it, declare their opinyons and sentences in the form of a
consultation: which exercise was of no little importance to the increase of
wit and prouysion of counsaylours. And at such exercise the emperor
pryncipally delyted to be present in his own person, as well to have knowledge
of other men's wits and towardnes, as also to gather of their reasons some
sentence or matter, which being kept in remembrance, might perchance profit
him in matter more serious or ernest occasion. Besides these persons there
failed not to be some, more given to play than to study, which also had a
fair and large place in the palayce, where they played at the chesse and other
like games, wherein they might be plesantly occupied, wherein the winnyng was
neither gold nor silver, but only victory and commendation of wit or
dylygence. Not withstanding it was lefulle for them at such games to play
for money, so it exceded not a sum certain, which was assessed by the
emperor and senate. At dyce it was not to any man lefull to play: The
emperor having this sentence always in his mouth, Our forefathers trusted in
wisdom and prowess, and not in fortune: and desired victory for renoume and
honor, and not for money: And that game is to be abhorred, wherein wit
sleapeth, and ydelnes with couetyse is only learned. And for the mortal hate
and indignation that he bare to this loss of time (for so ought it rather to
be called, than a play) He made a law, which was ratified by the authority of
all the senate and people. That if any manne were found playeng at dyce, Dyce
playenge.
he should be taken for frantike, or as a fool natural, which could not well
govern him self: and his goods and lands should be committed to sage and
discrete personages, appointed by the hole senate, which employing on him that
which was thought necessary for his astate or degree, should bring truly that
which remained to the common treasory: to the intent that when he returned to
thryfte, or was seen by a good space of years, to use good husbandry, in
employeng well and honestly that portion that he had, he should be eftesones
restored as well to his lands and goods, as to the revenues and profyttes
that were grown in the mean time, while they were confyscate or in the rule
of his tutours. Finally next to thieves and extorcioners the emperor most
hated them which after the said law being made, were found to be dyse
players, and would not have any of them called either to office or counsel.

Of hospitalles and other provision made by Alexander for men that were
dec^epite, or so diseased that they could not labor. Capi. xxiii.
ON A TIME the Emperor Alexander visytynge all parts of the city of Rome, to
behold how the Temples and other solemn edifices were kept and repaired, in
passinge through the streets he beheld a great number of persons, some
defaced with horrible disseases, and some mutylate of their members, as
lacking arms or legs, or the necessary use of the one or the other, which
he considering with a severe and grave countenance, at the last said to a
noble man called Julius Frontinus, who at that time was Praetor or Governor of
the city under the Emperor: What sort of people be these, which being
horrible and noyouse to behold, do seem unprofitable to the weal publyke,
sens they can not labor, but consume those things which are ordained for
them that can defend the weal publyke and us when occasion requires? Than
answered Frontinus.

Sir they be your natural subjects, whereof part be depryued of their members
by chance of war, where in they have served you and your noble progenitors
Emperors of Rome, some do lack the office of their members, by natural
infirmities, the resydue, which to your majesty and all other seems to be
an horrible spectacle, are men attached with greuouse sickenesses, which do
happen to them (as physicians do say) by the putrifactio^ of natural humors.
And whereof (said the Emperor) proceeds such putrefaction of humors, suppose
you? Truly (said Frontinus) as I have read and herd say, it comes of
oone of these causes, either for as much as great abundaunce of superfluouse
humors thycke and clammy, be dispersed in the body, whereby the po^es (which
are lyttel holes in the skin throughout all the body, that be invisible) be
stopped, so that the exhalation or brethe enclosed in the body, may not issue
out by the same pores: whereunto a strange or unnatural heat being joined,
makes the said putrefaction. Sometime it happens of meats or dryn^^^ being
corrupted ere they be received. Sometime where as well the air as the bodies of
men be distempred. Also it happens sometime by the wrath of god, where he is
offended or neglected in such duty as belongs unto him, as it has been
perceived often times in this city, and declared by prophets.

Ye have answered right well (said themperor) unto my demand. But yet for as
much as I suppose, that ye call them superfluouse humors, which are more than
conueniente to the natural proportion and temperature of the body, wherein they
be, I pray you tell me if ye can, whereof comes that superfluous abundaunce,
and by what occasion do they become thycke and clammy, whereby the pores (as ye
say) be stopped. Truly, said Frontine, as I have hard of physicians, and also
daily experience and reason declares it, it proceeds of repletion and
idelnesse, that is to say, by eating immoderately above that which natural
heat may concocte in the stomach, also ingorgynge meat upon meat, ere that
meat which was first eaten be fully digested, also by not using competent
exercise, whereby nature is comforted, and prepares her self to labor about
the concocting and digestyng of that which the body receives. Ye have now
satisfied me (said the Emperor) and well to the purpose. Now behold, said
he. Frontine honorable father, what a pernyciouse negligence was in our
predecessors Emperors, besides the il example of diverse of them, which have
like il tutours, suffered the people of Rome their pupilles so many years, daily
to consume them selves by license in living, which has brought into the
city such horrible sickness, which I will provide to expel thense if it be
possible.

The next day following he assembled his counsel, which as I said before
was of fyfty reverend personages, to whom he declared the communication between
him and Frontine, who at that time was present, being one of the
counsaylours, affyrmyng that he was fully determined, as well to provide for
them, which either were attached with the said horrible syckenesses, and for
those which were by wars for the weal public mutulate in their members, or
maimed, as also to put clean away, or at the least way to minyshe the
original occasyons of the said syckenesses. Which noble entreprise being of
al them that herd him, commended: finally it was thought expedient by the
noble Emperor, and by all his said counsel approved, that within the city
of Rome there should be two fair and large hospytalles builded, to receive and
keep them, which were so mutulate or maimed in the wars, that they could
not exercise them selves in manuell occupation (for all other labors were
done by captives, bondemen, and slaves, and the Romans were thereof
discharged) Also with out the city in some village nygh to it, whereby passed
some river, should also be edified two other hospitalles ample and necessary
for five hundred sick persons, unto whom should be appointed five physicians,
substancially learned in phisike, and well experienced. Also five expert
surgeons, with two apoticaries, men of good credence and trust, which should
be bounden to have always al necessary drouges, vigorous in their force and
virtue, without sophistication or other deceyte in symples or compoundes. Also
that they should burn or utterly reject all things, which were either
corrupted, or so dried, that it should seem to the phisytions (who should as often
as they list examine the wares) to be noyous, or to medicine unprofitable. The
meat which was ordained for these sick persons, should be so little in
quantity, that it was less than suffycyent for any hole person. And when it
was asked of the Emperor, why he would that they should have so littell a
pytaunce, he answered meryly, that he did it for three special consyderations.
The first was, that he

These allegations of the wise emperor was than confyrmed, by diverse which
had known it by long experience. Concerning them which were mutulate or
maimed in wars for the weal publik, they should have a more plentiouse
entertaynement, if he were in poverty or lacked friends. But they which were
not in that necessity, should have appointed by the Senate and the Emperors
consent, an honest proportion in corn and wine, to spend in their own
houses, as a thankful remembrance of the Senate and people for their good
endeavor whiles they were able.

Moreover to provide for time to come, that is to say, that the causes before
remembered, whereof the said horrible sickenesses proceeded, he affyrmed, that
the best and most sure mean, was to pacifye the ire of god, and to make him
beneuolent unto the people, which should be most assuredly done, by
excludinge horrible vices and abominations out of the cite, and to honor god
purely. As for the disposition of men's bodies, made apt by surfettes and
idelnesse to receive corruption, and consequently horrible sickenesses, he
determined to make an Edict or imperyall ordinance, confyrmed by an act of
the Senate, that no man should use mo than two meals in one day, and that there
should be at the least.vi. hours between every meal. Also that the Censores
or correctours of manners, should take diligent head, that if they found or
were informed, that any manne of the comminaltye went to his meal, before he
had wrought sufficiently in some occupation, that the same Censores should
cause him to be apprehended and kept in some prison, by the space of three
days, having but ones in the day only, one ounce of bread, and a little
water, without any other nourishement: the Emperor here rehersynge a proverb,
whereof he had herd part of the christen men: Let him eat that labors, for
he that labors not, is not worth that thing that he eats. And such as
moughte not be withdrawn from ydelnesse, he would have them sent into Spain,
to dig for gold: or into the isles called Cassiterides, to labor in tynne
works. And if within a while they labored well without cohertion or
grutchynge, those should be revoked into the city, there to apply diligentely
their occupation.

He would also that the common people should not have at one meal, but one
kind of flesh or fyshe, and that should not be either delycate, or in great
quantity. And if any man were found doing other wife, he should forfayte to
the common treasory double the value of the meat which he had for that meal
provided. And that no gentylman should have mo than three sundry dyshes at oone
meal, besides fruit: nor any senator above.iiii. diverse dishes, and one
kind of fruit if he list. Which number he him self did not excede,
although no law did thereto compel him. He would not that any citizen should
resort to open tauern, but that every man should have his provision in his
own house. And that tauernes and common Cooks should serve only for them,
which dwelled out of the city, and came thither for some necessary
business. And if any citezen were found in tavern, eating or drinking, he
should be ^ente for to the Censores, and be sharply rebuked, at the second
time, excluded out of all assemblies, and noted ever after as a man out of
credence or possibility to any preferment. At the third time he should be sent
to the mines, and there remain, until he seemed to have amended his manners. A
gentylman should be at the first time rebuked. at the second time, lose the
name of a gentylman, and be rekened among the base people. the third time his
goods should be committed to a tutour, whereof he should have no portion, until
it were well perceived that he had utterly left resorting to tauernes. A
Senator being found in such places, should incontinent be discharged out of
the Senate, being during his life without hope to be thereto restored.

When the emperor Alexander had concluded these things with his own
counsaylours, he soon after came into the senate, and there recited in an
eloquent and sobre oration, the said articles, declarynge what fervent desire
he had to save the people of Rome, not only against outward hostility, but
also against inward perils and consumption of their bodies by horrible
syckenesses, which oration fynisshed, all the senate with tears in their eyes
for gladness, in the name of them selves and the people, rendered most hearty
thanks to the emperors majesty. And forthwith without any exception or
myslikyng of any one thing, they confirmed it by an act of the senate. And the
next day the Tribunes assembled the people, and declared to them all that
preceded: which they so ioyousely herd and received, that they ratified it with
their common consentes with these acclamations. Noble Alexander we pray the
goddis, that they have no less care of your majesty than ye have for us. Most
happy be we that we have you among us. Noble Alexander, the goddis preserve
you, the goddis defend you, proceed forth in your purpose. We ought to love
you as our father, to honor you as our lord, to marvel at you as a god here
living among us. Thereto they added: Noble Emperor, take what ye will of our
treasure and substance, to accomplish your purpose.

The emperor heryng of this lyberal offer, caused to be answered in his
behalf, by Frontine his Praetor, The emperor thanketh you, but nothing will
he charge you with, touching the buyldyng and furnysshyng of the said.iiii.
hospytalles, for he will do it of his own treasure: only two things he
requires of you, which shall not be burdeynous to you. First that ye cease
not to pursue and obey continually all the said statutes and ordynaunces. The
second, that ye will be content, that such common revenues, which seem to
him vaynely employed and against the weal publyke, may without any
grutchynge of your part be laid to the mayntenance of the said hospitals.
Thereat all the people eftsoon with one voice cried: Do noble emperor what
shall seem to you good. For your most blessid nature can not err or do amysse
any thing that ye purpose. Hereat the emperor rejoicing, and remembrynge that
long time before, he thought that the plays called Florales and Lupercales,
and the abhomynable ceremonies of Isis (in the which were showed by men and
women naked, most abhomynable motions and tokens of lecherye) were prouokers
and nouryshers of beastely vice: he therefore by the consent of the senate,
abolyshed the said plays and ceremonies. And the revenues, which belonged to
the mayntenance of them being very great, he appointed to lay them unto the
said hospitalles, with some part of his own possessions, which he had
purchased. Finally the said four hospitalles within the space of one year were
builded on the river of Tybet in the most ample and magnifike facion: so that
all the chambers of the syck people were so made, that the floores of them
were.x. fete above the ground, and distant one from an other.xx. feet, every
chamber having his bayne, and fresh water conuayed into every one of them by a
cundyte, their places of easement over the river, the wyndowes lyeng north and
northest, the floores of great thyck plankes close joined, in the nether story
were the sellers, larders, wardropes, and such other offices. At the south
side were like many chambers, the wyndowes opened toward the north, the
kytchyns and lodgings of officers and minysters, which should serve the sick
men were at the weste end. At the east end having a prospect into the north
was the ware houses, which served for medicines, to them were joined the
lodgings of the apoticaries, physicians and surgeons, and they were right
fair and honestly furnyshed. Of no less magnificence were the two hospitals
in the city, but rather more costely, whereby the beaultie of Rome was much
augmented. These things being stablysshed, the senate took on them the
governance of them, appoyntyng every year by lotte ten senators to be thereof
surueyors and controllers of all the officers and other mynysters. And the same
senators at the end of their year to make account openly to the Tribunes and
people, of the employment of every parcel of the said revenues. And if any
were found in arrerage, he should be compelled immediately to pay to the
treasory of the said hospytals four times as much as the arrerage amou^ted to.
Finally so much commodity happened unto the city of Rome by the said
hospitalles and other ordinances before rehearsed, that within very few years
after, no foul syckenes was perceived to be in the city nor ydell person, by
occasion whereof a great part of the chambers in the said hospitalles were
vacant and much of the revenues were saved: which being brought to the common
treasory, afterward eased the people of taxes in time of war, to their no
little comfort and quietness.

In how ^undry wise Alexander exercysed his own person, so that he was never
vnprofytably occupied. Ca xxiiii.
THE MIND of this noble emperor was so fervently set and determined, to the
good governance and advancement of the weal publyke, and the conservation of
the same, that in eight the first years of his empire, which was the most
part of his reign, in as much as he raygned but.xiii. years and.ix. days.
he did almost none other thing, but contynually sit with his counsaylours,
which were never fewer than fyfty men excellent in learning and virtue,
traictynge and deuysynge things expedyent for the weal publyke. And by the
example of Augustus the emperor, he reported to the hole senate ones in a
month, such things whereupon they were concluded, with the principal reasons
which thereto induced them, which if the more part of the senate semblably
liked, than were the provisions or ordinances devised, by their sentence
approved, and incontinently enacted and published. And to the intent he would
not have his labors and the authority of the senate frustrate by the lack of
execution (Not withstandyng that he had many espialles as I said before, to
awaite the defautes of officers) he used many times to dysguise him self in
diverse strange facions, as sometime in the habit of a scholar of philosophye,
comen out of Greece, and speaking nothing but Greek, which he did most
exquisitely, oftentimes like a merchant, come out of Siria, or Persia, which
had than but one language, and that spoke the emperor naturally, for as much as
he was borne in Siria. And having with him one or two men of that country,
which he did counterfaite, he like a scholar or servant would one day haunte
one part of the city, an other day an another part: And most politikely find
occasion to se the state of the people, with the industry or negligence of them
that were officers, which progress he would never dyscouer to any man, but
only to Ulpian, or one or two mo of his most secret counsaylours or servants,
neither before that he began it, nor after, and to them that accompanied him,
he commanded, that they should keep it ever secret, as they would avoid his
most grievous displeasure. And in deed during his life, it was by them never
dyscouered. But sometime he could not so escape unknown, but that he was
sometime perceived. but dreadyng his severity, they that met with him, and
knew him, darste not salute him, or make any sign of knowledge unto him. But
when that they had dysclosed it, all they that herd it, examyned their own
acts, and al they, which at that time had done any thing worthy to be
reproved, lived in dread lokynge to be therefore corrected, or at the leest
ways blamed. Co^trarywyse, they which had done any thing worthy commendation,
took meruaylous comfort, doutyng not, but that their good acts should either
with benefytte or with the emperors praises, be shortly rewarded, whereunto
soon after was added to profit either in some office, or in other yearly
revenues.

After that he had reduced the city to this honorable state, he than by the advice of his most discrete cou^saylours, ones or twyse in the weke, used to
solace out of the city, with a great company with him of honorable personages.
for he never showed him self openly as Emperor, but with a great and
honorable presence, above any other king of the world, albeit than he
expressed a meruaylous familiarity to all men indifferently, that list to
approach him, without repulse to any man being in honest vesture, and not
dyseased with infectiue syckenesse. In this solasyng he hunted the heart, the
wild bore, or such as be called Alces, brought for the nones out of the great
woddes of Germany, which be in quantity higher and longer than any ox. He
hu^ted also oftentimes the bear, but that never saving only when he was in the
parts where they were bredde, saying, that forasmoche as the bear was of his
nature a deuourer of cattle, he desired not to have of that kind in those
places where cattle is nourished. In huntyng these beasts he sometime on
horseback proved his strength, sometimes shotyng, otherwhyles castyng at them
iauelyns, which served for that purpose. Oftentimes he only beheld other
young gentylmen hunting, which he divided into sundry companies, and
appointed to them a number certain of arowes or iauelyns, to the intent that
one should not be more exercised, or take more solace in huntyng than an other.
The lions, lybardes, tygres, panthers, and other like strange and furyous
beasts, he had in great numbres, which were kept only to the intent that at
certain times in the Amphiteatre, and other like places in the city ordained
to the purpose, the people might take pleasure in beholdynge them, and also
seeing some such desperate persons, as would adventure their lives, fight with some
of the said beasts, or one beast to fight with an other. But never would he
let any gentylman Romayne to do any such battayl, saying, that he esteemed
none so little, that he would put him in danger for such a beast, whose body
being dead, was nothing profitable.

He took also pleasure to hunte the falowe dear, the too, and the hare with
greyhoundes, inforeyng his horse (wherein he much delyted) to give as many
tournes to the game that he hunted, as the greyhoundes should do, And in that
pastyme having to every beast of venery but two dogs at the most, he
contended with many other young gentyl men on horseback, which were by him
self only appointed, to show him self most deliver and redye to incountre
and check the game at the most advantage, wherein was a right pleasant and
also profitable exercise, showing a vysage or representation of a skyrmyshe in
wars, specially when he hunted the heart, and the bestes named Alces. For
thanne there required to be showed much strength and hardynes, and in the
pursuit labor and peynfulnes. And in this solace he used much prudence. For
they which one day hunted with him, should not hunt the next day, but behold
other hu^tyng, and mark diligently the lack of them that hunted in to much
haste or slownes, to the intent that they might refrain such defaut. And they
that did best were praised. And by him that was the provost of hunting, it was
regestred in the emperors presence, how many times every man was commended,
to the intent that as roumes of capytayns and petite capitaynes were void in
any of the emperors garrisons, they which in the said huntynges were judged
most actife, if other good manners were in them founden according, should be
preferred to such roumes after their merits. But always this good emperor had
a vigilant respect to the form of their lyuynges, and advanced no man
suddenly, but with long delyberation and good aduysement.

Moreover not withstanding his huntyng or other recreation, he never would let
any day pass, without either consultyng some thing for the weal publyke, or
gyuyng some true sentence in judgment, or redyng some place in good authors, to
augment his wysedom, or writing some story or other thing worthy remembrance,
he was such a nygard of time, that he was meruaylously grieved, if he spente
any day in solace without doing of any of those things that I have reherced.
Not withstandyng that in the mean time, all the affairs of the empire were
treated and ordered by men assured good and faithful, whom he knew well would
not be corrupted. And when need required, he herd matters before it was day,
and prolonged the time until it were late and within night. And not with
standing he never showed countenance of werynes, ne to be in any part froward
or angry: but had always one manner of visage, and in all things seemed merye
and pleasant. Undoutedly he was of an excellent prudence, as in whom no man
could find any lack, and of so ready a wit, that if any man merrily would
taste him with a pretty taunt, he should shortly perceive that he understood him.
After the common affairs as well civil as marciall, he gave the more part
of his study to the readyng of greek authors, redyng the books of Plato of a
publyke weal. And when he would read any latin books, he rad specially the
books of Tulli, of a public weal, and also his offices. Sometimes he radde
orators and poets: among whom was Serenus Ammonicus, whom he knew and
favored, and also Horace. He radde much the life of the great Alexander, whom
specially he followed, not withstandyng he abhorred his drunkenness and cruelty.
All be it the one and the other is defended and excused by some good authors:
whom oftentimes the emperor much believed. After his study he applied him
self to wrastlynge, runnyng or throwyng of the balle moderately. After his
exercise he having his body anointed with precious and holsom oyntementes (as
it was at that time the use) entered into a bayne or stewe not hot, where he
tarried sommetyme by the space of one hour, not only to wash him, but also to
exercise him self in swymming. And when he was come out of the bayne, he would
eat a good quantity of mylk, sopped with fine manchet, and a few eggs, and
thereto would he drink methe, and taking this for his breakefaste, sometime he
would dyne also: And oftentimes he absteyned until supper. Always at after none
he applied the time to sygninge and reading of letters and bylles, they which
were called remembrauncers, standing about him. and if by the reason of
sickness or age it were payneful for them to stand, he caused them to sit
down, having the secretaryes or clerks reading the said letters or bylles
unto them. Always the emperor having a pen with his own hand added to
that which was necessary, but that did he by the advise or sentence that
seemed best or most convenient. when he had perused al these things, al his
friends were let in together, and who that list might freely and boldly speak
than unto him, and he merrily and comfortably gave ear unto them. albeit he
would not here alone any man, but only his great master, or Ulpian the lawyer,
and such as were associate with him in some special cause of Justice, but yet
he never talked with any of them, but that he caused Ulpian also to be present.
In this form this noble emperor passed his time, enterlacing therewith other
manner of solace.

How the Emperor Alexander, at the request of his mother Mammea, sent for
the most excellent clerk Origene: and of diverse notable sentences spoken by
the same emperor concerning the receiving of the christen faith. Capi. xxv.
AT THIS TIME there was in the city of Alexandria in Egipte a man excellent
in all manner of learning, Euco^
and therewith wonderful eloquente in the greek tongue, whose name was
Adamantius Origenes: in so much as when he was but of the age of.xviii. years,
he was in all the liberal sciences and in philosophye learned exactely above
all men's estimation, he was son of one Leonidas, who for the christen faith
was beheaded. Also this Origene was chrystened, and from his tender age most
perfytly brought up in the rules of that religion, which he always most
exactly observed, as well in all kinds of abstinence, as in example of
humilytie, and contempt of things worldelye. He was for his great learning
and severity of life, appointed by the bishop of christen men in Alexandria
to preach and expound the books, which they called the Bible: by occasion
whereof he drew a great number of people daily to the said christen faith:
which although the emperor Alexander knew, after that he did perceive, that
they were exquisite folowers of virtue, and peace, he would not suffer that any
of them should be apprehended or punished: but had them in great admiration and
reverence.

The fame of this great clerk Origene came to the ^a^es of Mammea the
Emperors mother, who (as some men supposed) was al ready persuaded to embrace
that profession. wherefore to be the more perfitely instructed therein, she most
affectionately couayted the presence of the said Origene. And therefore she
awaytyng opportunity, came to the emperor her son and desired him, that he
would send for the said Origene, whose famous learning was only by report
known unto him. To the which request he easelye granted. And he him self
indicted letters to be directed to Alexander than being the bishop of christen
me^ in Alexandria, the tenor whereof hereafter ensues.

Alexander Emperor Augustus. The letter^ of Alexander the Emperor.
etc. to Alexander the chief bishop of Christianes in the great city of
Alexandria, well to do. The fame of the virtue and wonderful learning of
Adamantius Origenes, your great philosopher, sounds continually in our ears,
which makes us desyrouse to behold and here him, ^
whose name contendeth in honorable renoume with our imperial majesty. We
notwithstanding not enuyinge his glory, but couaytyng to be part takers of his
inspired learning, and folowers of his virtue, do require you, to license him
to come unto us to Rome at his leysour without festination or travail. We have
written to our prouoste of Egypt, that he provide for him all thing expedient
for his iourneye toward us. Fare ye well.

After that the bishop had received these letters, he much reioysynge
therate, sent for Origene. But with great difficulty might he persuade him to
take that iourneye, he allegynge by diverse arguments, that it should be more
necessary, that he continued his preachynges and lessons, where a great part
of the people were all ready informed in the chrystian faith, and daily
increased, and waxed desirouse of the interpretation of divine mysteries, than
goinge to the city of Rome, where abounded al vice, pride and tyranny, there
to sow preciouse seeds, as it were in the sand, or to give orient perles to
swyne. Yet finally when the bishop and other sage personages had credybly
informed him of the most excellent virtues of the Emperor Alexander, and in
what sort he had reformed the state of the city of Rome, he condescended to
goo thither. which being intimate unto the Prouoste of Egypt, he according
to the Emperors commandment, provided for him a ship with all things
necessary unto his iourneye. And because he beheld him symply apparayled, he
ordained for him sundry garments in the most honest sort that philosophers
than used: but Origene would not receive any part thereof, not so much as hosen
or shows, but like as he always accustomed to go from his chyldhode (that is
to say, in a syngle garmente of clothe and barefoted) so went he to Rome. And
when at his arriuayle there were brought unto him a mule and a chariote, to
ride in the which he best lyked, he answered, that he was much less than
his master Christ, which rode but one day in his life, and that was on a
sely ass mare. Wherefore he would not ride, except he were sick or decrepite:
so that his leggis might not serve him to go.

The Emperor and his mother herynge of the coming of Origene, caused him to
be brought in their presence, where he according to his duty right humbly
saluted the emperor knelynge, but the emperor with most gentylle
countenance embraced him, and enforced him to stand on his feet. Semblablye
the emperors mother deuoutely saluted him, reioysynge much of his presence.

And when the emperor had beholden his natyue gravity, and most assured
countenance, he in his heart judged him to be a reverend personage. Than
demanded he of him, what thing he professed. He answered, Ueritie. The emperor
asked of him, what he mente thereby. He said, It was the word of the living
god, which was infallyble. The Emperor asked, which was the living god, and
why he so called him. Origene answered, That he did put that distinction for a
difference from them, whom men being long drowned in error did call their
goddis, whom they confess to be ones mortal, and to have dyed. but the god,
whom he preached, was ever living, and never dyed, and is the life of all
things that be, like as he was the creator of them.

And when the emperor had required him to declare the unity of God the
creator, he devoutly lyftyng up his eyes, after a short meditation, with an
incomparable and most compendious eloquence, he forthwith opened that mystery
in such wise, that as well to the emperor and his mother, as to all other
standing about them (of whom I Eucolpius most happily was one) it seemed that
we were brought out of a long sleep, and than did we se things as they were
in deed, and that which before we esteemed and honored were but vain dreams
and imaginations. Yet the emperor after a little pause, said unto Origene,
that he much meruayled, why men of such wonderful knowledge, should honor for
God, a man that was crucified: being but of a poor astate and condition. O
noble Emperor, said Origene, Consider what honor at this present time the
wise Athenienses yet do to the name and image of Codrus, their last king of
Athenes, for as much as at the time that war was made by the two people
called Peloponenses and Dorienses, against the Athenienses, answer was made to
them, which counsayled with Apollo at Delphos, that the Peloponenses and
Dorienses, if they slew not the king of Athenes, they should have the victory:
whereof Codrus heryng^ preferrynge the safegarde of his people before his own
life, took on him the garments of a slave, and bearing on his shulder a
burdeyn of styckes, he went to the host of the ennemies, and there of a
purpose quarellyng with some of them, and in the prease hurtyng one with his
knyfe, he was by him, which was hurt, strike^ through the body and slain: by
occasion whereof, after that it was perceived and known of the enemies, they
being confused, raised their camp and departed. And for this cause the
Atheniensis, have ever sens had the name of Codrus in reverence, and as all men
do think worthily and not without reason. Now than consider most excellent
prince, how much more worthy, with what greatter reason and bounden duty
ought we and all men to honor Christ, being the son of god, and god, who
not only to preserve mankind from danger of the devil, his ancient enemy,
but also to deliver man out of his dark and stynkynge dongeon of error, being
sent by god the father from the highest heuens, wyllingly took on him the
servile garment of a mortal body, and hydyng his majesty, lived under the
vysage of poverty, and finally not of his enemies immediately, but much more
against reason, of his own chosen people the Jews, unto whom he had
extended benefits innumerable, and after his temporal nativity were his
natural people and subjects, he quarellyng with them, by declaryng unto them
their abuses, and pryeking them with condygne rebukes, at the last he was not
slain with so easy a death as Codrus was, but in most cruel facion was
scourged until no place in his body was without wounds, and than had a
crown of long and sharp thorns set and pressed on his heed, and after long
torments and despytes, he was constrained to bear an heavy cross, whereon
afterward his both hands and feet were nailed with long and greatte nails
of iron, and the cross with his naked and bluddye body being lift up on
heyght, it was let fall with violence into a mortayse, that all his joints
were dissolved. And not withstandyng all this tourment and ingratitude, he
never grudged, but lyftyng up his eyes unto heaven, he prayed with a loud
voice, saying: Father forgive them, for they know not what they do. This was
the charity most incomparable of the son of God, employed for the
redemption of mankind, who by the transgression of Adam the first man that
ever was created, was taken prisoner by the devil, that is to say, kept in the
bondage of error and sin, from the actual vision of goddis majesty, until
he were in this wise redeemed, according as it was ordained at the beginning.

At these words of Origene all they that were present were wonderfully
astonyed, and therewith the emperor with a sturdy countenance said unto
Origene: Ye have wonderfully set forth a lamentable hystorye, but yet
notwithstanding therein be things dark and ambiguous, which do require a more
plain declaration. For what makes you bold to affirm, that Jesus, which in
this wise was crycyfyed, was the son of god and god, as ye have called him?
Sir said Origene, sufficient testimony, which of all creatures reasonable
ought to be believed, and for the most certain proof to be allowed. What
testimony is that said the Emperor? Truly, said Origene, it is in diverse
things. First the promise of god, by whom all this world was made. Also by
his holy spirit speaking by the mouths of prophets, as well Hebrews as
Greeks and other whom ye call Vates and Sybillas. Thyrdely by the nativity of
Jesus of a pure virgyne without carnal company of man, the most pure and
clean form of his living without sin, his doctrine dyuine and celestial,
his miracles most wonderful and innumerable, all grounded on charity only
without ostentation, his undoubtful and perfect resurrection, the third day
after that he was put to death, his gloriouse ascension up unto heaven in
the presence and sight of five hundred persons, which were virtuous and of
good credence. ^
Also the gift of the holy gooste, in speaking all manner of langages and
interpretynge scripture, not only by him self, but also afterward by his
apostles and disciples, and given to other by imposition of their hands. And
al these things ordinarily followed according unto the said promises and
prophecies. I omyt to speak of the confession of dyuels, which by Jesus and
his apostles in his name were cast out of people, which were obsessed. The
oracles and answers of them, whom ye untruly call goddis, do remain in
confirmyng this testimony. And when Origene had said all this, he forthwith
began there, and disclosed the aunsweres of Apollo made at Delphos, affirmyng
Jesus to be God. afterward he recyted and declared the prophecies as well of
the Hebrews as of the Sybilles and other. Last the promise of god unto the
Patriarchs, by the which it manyfestly appeared, that Jesus was Christ and
god, and that by his temporal natiuitte he was king of Israel, and that the
Jews were his natural subjects. Which declaration of Origene was so evident
and plain, and set forth with such wonderful eloquence, devotion, and
lerning, that it persuaded the emperor and diverse other, which than were
present, whereof I Eucolpius was one, to embrace the profession of Christis
faith and doctrine, for the which I give most humble thanks unto god, by whose
only grace I was called. And for that time the emperor gave license to Origene
to return unto Alexandria: for as much as he darste not attempt to publyshe
the christen faith by his authority, the persecution of christen men being
but late cessed, and they being yet odiouse to the Senate and people. Not
withstanding in his pryuy closette he had the images of Christ, of Abraham and
of Moses, and being by him self he honored done god, as I my self being
often times secret with him did well perceive. Lampi^^^
And at the last he made request to the Senate, that there moughte be made a
temple to Christ, wherewith they all were sore grieved, and did obstinately
deny it, saying that they had counsayled with the gods, of whom they had
answer, that if that were suffered, al men should be christianes, and al other
temples should be made desolate. Wherefore he ceased his entreprise, but always
he was studiouse in the books of Christen men, and often times used their
sentences. Is when any man went out of the high way, and would pass through
an other man's ground, breaking his enclosure, and riding over his corn or
grass, if he perceived it, he would cause him to be beaten with staves or
rods in his presence, after the quality of his trespace: or if he were a man
of honor or worship, he would give to him great rebukes, and say unto him,
would thou have that done unto the, that thou doeste to a another? And when a
man was punisshed for any such trespace, he would cause it to be openly
proclaimed: That which to thy self thou would not have done, do not in any
wise unto an other. Also when cooks of the city claymed a certain place,
which christen men had, and his pleasure was therein required, he wrate in his
rescripte, that it were better that god were there honored in any manner of
fascion, thanne that cooks should have thereof possession.

Eucolpius writes, that on a time he said to him, and to Philip his bondeman:
I perceive, ye do wonder at the learning of Origene, whereby ye be induced to
embrace the christian profession. Trewely the humility and charytie of the
christen people, which I have herd of, and do daily behold, do much more
stere me to believe, that their Christ is god, than the residue of all his
persuasion.

And on a time when two christen men contended proudely together, and they
accused each other of speaking reprochefull words of the Emperor, he called
them before him, and prohibited them to name the^ selfs christen men, saying:
your pride and malice do declare, that ye be not the folowers of him whom ye
profess. Wherefore though ye find lack in me, the which I will gladly
amend, yet will I not let you against justice, reprove by your acts him,
whose life and doctrine ye all do affirm to be uncorrupted and without any
lack.

Which words being ones sprad among the christen men in the city of Rome,
it made them all afterward more circumspecte, and in humility and charity to
be the more constante.

How Mammea the Emperor mother exhorted him to be married, and what wife
aunsweres he made, and finally took to wife the donghter of a noble and ancient
senator. Cap. xxvi.
WHEN THE Emperor was come to the age of.xx. years, his mother Mammea exhorted
him to take to his wife some maiden of a noble and ancient house, to the
intent that he might have generation, which should be for the sure
tranquillity of the city and empire, and to the pryncipall comfort of him,
the Senate, and people of Rome. After that he had diligently herd his mother
say all that she would, he made to her an answer in form following: I dare
well say madame, that ye have given to me this counsel, of a sincere and
natural love, that ye bear toward me your only son. But for as much as
it is the matter, which within my self I have much more debated than (I
suppose) ye have done, although per chance ye have thought more on it, I will
declare unto you, how I find in my fantasy, that the taking of a wife should
be to the publyke weal and to my self more daungerouse than fruitful,
specially at this time. for where ye will me to take a maiden, if she shall be
much younger than I am, perchance she shall not be so apt for generation of
children, strong and lusty as if she were of mo years. And I couayte not to
deface the imperial majesty with children weak and unlusty. Also the
sturdynesse of the Romans may not sustain to be governed, but of them
which as well in personage as wisdom be convenient and semely. If she shall
be as old, or elder than I am, thanne shall I bring my self to much
unquietness and trouble of mind. for ye know well, it is not yet passing
four years agone, that the abhomynable monster my kynsmanne Deliogabalus,
left not only the city of Rome, but also all the country of Italy so
polluted with detestable lecherye, that with much diffycultye might one find
an house, wherein had not ben committed sum kind of that vice, either
voluntary, or else by inforcement. wherefore if I should mary one of the said
city or territory, although I found her by fame and experience a maiden, yet
should not that discharge my mind of suspicion: thynkyng always, that she was
rather so kept by restraynte of lyberty, than by her own chastity,
considering that she did here or se daily such wanton allectiues and
prouocations to lecherye, that the custom thereof did assault the mind so
contynually, that it were well nyghe impossyble to escape uncorrupted, although
the body by vigilant custodye abode undefiled: And this suspicion should wrap my
heart in such melancholy, that I should seldom be merry or pleasant with her,
who^ for mystrust I could not love perfytly. And to take a wife of any other
country, ye know well it has not been the use of Emperors, or other noble
men of this cite, I suppose it has been for the wars, which has and might
eftsoon happen to be, between us and these outward countries. Wherefore if the
women thereof should be married to the emperor and other of the nobility, and
that soon after should happen hostility between them and those countrayes,
much inconvenience moughte come to the city and publyke weal by means of
the women in fauourynge their parents, the means I will not rehearse, for
offending of you and other ladies, and also sens you and all that are wise,
may shortly coniecte what I mean. Finally I am determined, not to alter that
custom, which is both ancient and honorable. Moreover I can not be sure to
have generation when I am married, and thanne the only cause thereof is utterly
frustrate^ and to me, which shall be always in study and busynes about the
weal publyke, the wife remains a tedious impediment and charge superfluous.
Se^blably shall I be unto her an unpleasant cumbrehouse, fyndyng little ydell
time to be in her company, and being fatigate with busynes about the weal
public, I shall be less diligent and pleasant with her, than she would have me,
whereof might proceed not only co^tencion between us, but also matter of warse
occasion. And where ye seem to affirm, that my generation should be for the
tranquillity of this city and empire, and for the comfort of me, the senate
and people: Trewely when I remember what daughters the most noble Augustus
had, whom for their corrupted living, and for the grefes, which he thereby
sustained, he was wont to call them his botches and boyles. When I think what
sons the reverend Uaspasian, the wise and most virtuous prince Marcus
Antoninus, the honorable Seuerus left, for their successors in the empire of
Rome, which were all slain for their detestable lyuynges, O how lyttelle
care I for chyldern, ye how glad would I be always to lack them? that my
benefits which I intend to imploye on the weal public, by the folly or vice
of my children be not consumed, men more hating my name for that I have
begotten and left unto them in the stead of a governor, a rybaulde or
tyrant for to succeed me: than they will praise me for mine own charity. O
what sorrow and pain shall my soul suffer (if there be any care among them,
which be passed out of this world) when I shall behold with immortal eyes,
my child, which is of mine own substance, to abandon that thing, which I
loved, to embrace that which I hated, to be of the Senate abhorred, of the
people detested, and of al foreyne princes dysdayned, and finally of all
honest men persecuted like a serpent or monster, like a wolf or a tygre,
infamed for lechery, pursuyd for tyranny? O happy sterilytie, whereby lacks
annoyance. O hateful fertilitle, where of comes sycknes or pestylence. I am
sure, that sterilitie can no more hurt me, but only take from me the name of
a father, or the dotynge pleasure to se my little son ride on a cokhorse, or
to here him chatter and speak like a wanton. And I am not sure that fertility
shall bring to me any more quietness, tha^ I have all ready. For my child being
of such inclination, as best shall content me, if death take him from me, than
shall I languyshe in tourmentes incurable, consyderyng that I can not well
sustain the death of my servants. if he live with me, and be either a fool,
a rybauld or tyrant, tha^ should I like Edippus scratch out mine eyes, rather
than I would behold such a monster proceed of my body: ye rather slay him with
mine own handis, than to let such one to succeed me. Or if he escaped me, I
would ask that only reward of the senate and people, that they would sacryfyce
him on my tumbe when I were buried. Therefore mother I pray you cesse from
exhorting me unto marriage, until I be thereto better dysposed, which shall be,
when in beholding one, which perchance I have not yet seen, some affection, or
I be ware, may in me, as it has in other, surmount both lernyng and wisdom.

With these words, the wise lady showing her self as she were content,
departed unto her lodgyng. But it was not long after, that she bode the emperor
unto a supper and banquet: And against his coming she had assembled a great
number of the fairest maidens in Rome, attendynge upon their mothers, or on
some other ancient and sad gentle women, whom when the emperor beheld, he
forthwith coniected the intent of his mother. Notwithstanding he most
gentyllye countenanced them all, and showed him content well with their
company, although it were not corresponde^t unto his fantasy. But after that he
had eaten and drunk more wine than he was accustomed to do, being chaufed in
body and spyrite, in casting his eyes hither and thither, he at the last
beheld an excellent fair maiden named Memmia, which was daughter of a noble
man called Sulpicius. And after that he had devised with her, and found her
to be wise, sobre, and of syngular humility, he much loved her, and at the
last by the continual provocation of his mother, and consent of his counsel,
he afterward married her, but she dyed shortly after, wherewith he took no
little dyscomforte, saying oftentimes: So greatte a treasure as I have lost,
a man seldom fyndeth. Death were gentyl, if he took nothing but that that
offe^deth. Eucolpius will not be known, that he had any moo wives: but
Lampridius uses the authority of one Desippus, who says, that Alexander had
an another wife, who was daughter of oone Martianus. But when it was found,
that he would have slain the emperor by treason, he was put to death, and his
daughter separate from the Emperor. Herodianus affyrmeth, that all that was
done by the malice of Mammea the emperors mother, without other cause, only
because she could not sustain her sons wife to be called Augusta. and
therefore she caused her to be exyled into Africa, and all the lands and
goods of her father, Mammea took and converted unto her own profit: which
report I suppose not to be true, consyderyng that Mammea was so wise and
virtuous a lady, and being well instructed in Christis relygion, knew well how
detestable unto god is envy and cruelty.

Of the severity that Alexander used, as well toward them that were proud,
as to them that were malaperte and did not their duty. Cap. xxvii.
ON A TIME he being Censor or correctour of manners with Julius Paulus and
Callidius Rufus, and walking in the streets of Rome with a few other
disguised like communers, he happened to meet with a senators son, having
with him a greatte train of young men, whom he and they that were with him
saluted, doing to him reverence: the young man beheld them disdaynefully, and
with a proud countenance, without saying any thing: and they which were
with him did also the semblable. Wherefore the Emperor at his return home to
his palayce incontinente discharged the father of the said young man out of
the senate: saying, that he was not worthy nor meet to be of that reverend
company, whereby the weal publyke ought to be governed, and the emperor him
self to be chiefly counsayled, sense he had so ill brought up his son, that
not only he himself lacked humanity, and extended a more stately facion than
perteyned to his degree, but also by his example caused them that were with
him, to embrace pride, which is captain of vices, and chief confou^der of all
public weals. Sone after he sent for the said young gentylmanne and his
companions, and sharply rebuked them, saying, that pride is the most horrible
monster, and of al men so hated, that it is not had in detestation of good men
only, but also to them which be proud, they that be less proud be in deed
of all other most odiouse. And as pride sleeth love, provoke dysdayne,
kendleth malice, confounds Justice, and subuerteth weals publyke, so
gentylnesse and affability do stere up affection, augmente benevolence,
incende charity, supporte good equity, and preserve most suerly countries
and cities. And after that he had charged them to abandone and leave the said
vice and other, and to embrace virtue and gentle manners, whereby they should
acquire more estimation than by high countenance, and menacing them, that if
the said fault were eftesones spyed in them, he would not only exclude them
from hope of al dignity, but also from the name of nobility, and put them in
the number of the base communers, and so he let them depart.

This sharp correction aualid many a proud heart so that by custom of
gentilnesse, pride was so much abhorred throughout the city, that if any
manne, perchance by a natural habit or fascion, or unadvisedly and not of a
purpose, seemed to them that beheld him, to have a proud countenance, he
was either laughed at, or disdaynefully wondered at, so that he was
constrained, had he never so sturdy a courage, to be a shamed. Whereof proceeded
a proverb: Slaves and bondemen have only this liberty, to use a proud
countenance, because they be shameless: and noble men be known always by
their gentylnesse.

It was not long after that the emperor lokynge out at a wyndowe of his
palayce, perceived certain gentyllmen exercisynge them selfs in wrastlyng,
runnynge, and leaping, to whom came certain communers of the base people,
and without any sign of reverence, or asking leave, they myngled them selves
with the gentylmen, and malapertly enterprysed to contend with them in those
recreations, with arrogante bostynges and words of presumption. And when the
gentylmen being therewith offended, bade them be content with their degree,
and else where to pass the time with their companyons and equalles, the said
communers taking that in despyte, with countenance bragginge and sturdy,
proudelye made answer, that every of them was better able to live, and had
more abundance to use liberality, and to haunt pleasures, than the best of
the other. And if the emperors guard had not come the sooner, the communers had
faught with the gentylmen, and put them in danger, for they were mo in nombre.
This as it hapened the Emperor beholdynge, he took therewith a vehement
displeasure, being therefore so angry, as erst he was never. Wherefore he caused
the said communers to be kept in saufegarde, and straytely commanded, that
nothing that was done should be rehearsed, until he had further declared his
pleasure. And forthewith he sent for the Prouoste and Tribunes, and required
them to send their mynisters to summone all the communers of Rome being men,
to be the second day folowinge in the Theater of Pompey, where the emperor in
his own person would also be present, and declare to them things
concerning the most daungerouse state of the weal publyke. The Emperors
commandment, accordyngely was executed. And a haulte pase made at the end of
the Theater, where the emperor should sytte in his majesty, and all the
people should playnelye behold him, and perfitely here him. For the Theater
was a place made in the form of a bow that has a great bente. And in all
the round part were many benches one behind an other and over an other (for
it was narroweste beneth, and upward grew larger and larger) And there sat
all the people. At the strayte end, which was to the other part as the
stringe to the bow were the seats of the Senators, and behind them of the
gentilmen. At the time appointed, the people being in the Theater as they were
commanded, the Emperor came accompanied only with the Prouoste and Tribunes,
leaving all his guard at the gate of the Theater. At his coming all the
people did rise, and with most ioyouse acclamations, did salute him: but he
contrary to his old custom, with a displeasaunte countenance passed by them.
whereat they were not a lyttel abashed, and with hearts full of a loving dread
and constant silence, they prepared their ears to here attentifely what the
Emperor would say: who after that he had long beholden the people, at the
last with a grave countenance full of majesty, he spoke unto them as
hereafter follows.

The oration of the emperonr Alexander to the people of Rome. Cap. xxviii.
WE wot not how to begin to speak unto you, for we know not by what name we
shall call you. for if ye were Senators, we would call you fathers: if ye were
gentylmen, we would call you friends: if ye were as ye should be, good
co^muners, we would call you good people of Rome, as we were wont to do. But
sens election has not made you senators, nor nature gentylmen, nor your
merits good co^muners, we be in no little doubt what we shall call you. for
if we should call you Romans, we fear lest Romulus, of whom proceeded that
name (if he be deified as ye do suppose) being therewith offended, will be
aduenged as well on us as on you, for abusyng his glorious name on such people,
which goth about to dissolve this noble empire, destroy this city, which he
first began with his most excellent prowess and wisdom, and that wars is
(if any thing may be wars) extinct utterly the most honorable and glorious
fame of this city and people thereof, which has perced the clouds, flowen
over the high mountains, and passed the peryllous sees and large ryuers, run
through the great deserts and wyldernesses, and touched the furthermoste
bounds of the world. We will therefore omyt to call you by any name, until we
can find one mete and according unto your merits. Perchance at our coming,
ye beholdynge our countenance toward you more strange than it has been,
thought that we were meued with some private dyspleasure, for some thing
touching our person, or that we were altered from our late temperance, unto a
tyranny, conceyuing suspicion of our nature, by the remembrance of that
monster our late predecessor, forasmoche as we both came of one lynage,
which I deny not. Truly, if this were your fantasy, we will soon acquit our
self thereof, and set all your minds at a more liberty. We will say this
much unto you, as touching our person and family, no man with words has
offended us, no man has taken aught from us, no man (that we know) has gone
about to betray us, nor there is any other thing privately done to our
incommoditie that has dyspleased us. And as for our accustomed manners, which
did content you, we have not, nor intend not to alter them. Tyranny, as we have
ever had it in extreme detestation, so do we now most abhor it. The corrupt
nature of our predecessor had never place in us. One gardeyn at one time
brings forth both poison and wholesome medycine. We see one woman, which by
one man has many children, of them some be fair and personable, some ylle
favored and crooked, some be wise and apt unto doctrine, other be fools and
dull wytted, one is courageous and hardy, an other is a dastarde and cowarde,
this child is gentle and inclyned to virtue, the other is fierce and wrapped
in vices. This is not a rare thing, but in daily experience. If this
dyuersitie happens to be in one gardeyn and in the generation of one father
and also one mother: than may we well escape the cause of your suspicion, we and
Heliogabalus having diverse fathers and diverse mothers, and they as diverse in
their conditions, as ye your selves can bear witness, which have known and
seen proved the chaste living, sanctimony and prudence of our reverend mother,
and in what honesty and virtuous dyscipline she has nouryshed us, and brought
us up, unto the time that by god we were called unto this dignity. This ought
to be enough, as well to persuade you, that neither any thing concerning our
self has moved us to displesure toward you, as also to exclude out of your
minds all suspicion of tyranny. Now shall ye know the very cause why we be
discontented with you. For all though we said at the beginning, that ye went
about to dissolve this empire, destroy this city, and extincte the glorious
fame thereof, which in deed is the cause of our displeasure and heaviness, yet in
those general words, ye do not perceive (I suppose) what we mean thereby.
Wherefore take good head, and ye shall here i^ declared more specially.

Romulus after that he had builded this city, he by his divine reason
considered, and (as I doubt not) in the time of the building experience
declared, that in a confuse multitude of people, they being of diverse wits
and conditions, if order lacked, there might not be a perpetual concord, but
by contynuall varyance and dyscorde, the people of necessity should be
compelled either to abandon the city, and deuydynge them selfs to seek for
sundry places to dwell in, or abydyng there in contynual sedicion, should
shortly and easily be subdewed or dystroyed by their neighbors dwelling about
them. Wherefore he yssuyng of a gentle and noble house, excellyng the resydue
of the people in noble courage and fynenesse of wit, first devised and
stablyshed this order, that the company, which he had assembled as well of
them, which he had brought with him, as of those which he out of diverse
parts had allured unto him, should generally be called Romans for ever: And
that of them should be three states or degrees, every one of them necessary for
the weal publyke of his noble city, in their sundry administrations,
duties, and exercises. To the first state he chase out of the hole
congregation one hundred of men ancient in years, which in moderation of
living, sobrenes of manners, and sharpnes of wit, were of the princypall
personages of all that noumbre, of them he ordained and stablyshed a
counsel, whereby the affairs of the city, and appendaunces thereof should be
ruled and minystred. And these counsaylors for their age should be called
Senators, (for Senes in latyne are old men) not withstanding being saluted
or spoken to, they should be named fathers. Also the college or company of
them was incorporate by the name of the senate. Moreover of this college,
should be elected the great Judges and officers in the weal publyke, to whom
should be committed the determination of Justice, the execution of ceremonies
and solemn sacrifices, and other authorities, which do belong unto
governance. Wherefore he would that in this state there should be a majesty,
which of all other men should be had in a syngular honor and reverence.
Semblably like as this state was ordained for counsel and governance, so
elected he out of the resydue, which were lusty in years, valyant and hardy, a
greatter number, whom because in wars they should be on horseback, he
called them Equites, and the order he called Equestris, to them should
chiefly pertayne the defense of the city against the invasion of ennemies,
with other small administrations, about the necessary provisions and orname^tes
of this noble city. And this state also would he have honored of the rest of
the people, and to the intent that they should be known from other men, he
assigned them to wear a ring, and to bear in their hands iauelyns, whereof
afterward they were called Quirites, which in the old tunge of this country
signified spear men. Of this state should be elected the Senators, when the
just number of the Senate decade. The third state was of the base people or
communers, to whom severally should not be committed any authority, but should
apply their occupations, and be ready to execute the statutes and ordynances
made by the senate, also be obedient to the great officers, in that which
pertayned unto the weal public: Moreover when wars required that they
should go forth, than to be obedient and diligent at the commandment of their
capytaynes and leaders. This order being stablysshed by Romulus, as long as in
every degree it was duly observed, how meruaylousely did this city prosper,
ye how wonderfully did a few Romans in regard, not only defend this little
territory, against the great number and puissance of diverse and sundry people,
confedered against them, but also beat them back unto their own howses,
entered into their cities, despoyled them of their substance: and also compelled
them not only to desire perpetual peace, but moreover at the last to become
their subjects and tributaries? And when this good order began to be broken,
your state aspiryng to gouerna^ce and rule, where ye were ordained to obey
only: what year can ye find clear from sedition and dyscorde among you? who
can number the Romans, which have been slain in the civil wars and
commotions? who could without tears recite the dolorouse astate of this cite
in the time of Cinna and Marius, whom for disdain that ye had unto the
nobility, ye did eleuate unto the highest dignities? By this your disorder
came unto the city sundry calamyties. Ye chase Caligula to be your Emperor,
and where might there be found a more horible tyra^t? in the which name he so
much delyted, that lokynge in a glass he would most diligently form his
visage into the most terrible facion: Also in recompense of your kindness, he
wysshed that all the people of Rome had but one neck, that he moughte stryke
it of at one stroke. I am ashamed to reherce my predecessor and kynseman
Heliogabalus, the detestable vessel of abomination. But ye ought to be more
ashamed, that ye setting a part so great a number of honorable personages, as
were than in the senate, for their experience wisdom and prowess, worthy
every of them to be Emperors, chase the said Heliogabalus, a stranger borne,
a boy in years, a fool in regard of their wisdom, to be your soueraygne
lord, who brought you to the most vile subjection that any people were in the
world? for is there any thing in mankind so vile, as to be under the
condition of brute beasts? What beast can ye name that will suffer in his
presence an other beast to occupy in the act of generation her, whom he has
chosen for his make and companion? but to his power will resist and fight with
him. Heliogabalus held you in such captivity, that partly to avoid his
displeasure, partly to flatter him and get somewhat of him, ye not only
suffered him to abuse your wives and your children, such as best lyked him,
but also increaced your bordell houses, and with open eyes let your wives and
your children daily and nyghtely to haunte them. And openly in the streets
(which I abhor to reherce) to apprehende men, and provoke the^ to lechery. I
omytte for the shortenesse of time many such other elections, which have
proceeded of your gross and presumptuouse wits, after that ye had
transgressed the order, wherein Romulus left you, and exceded the terms of your
office or duty: which at the last was perceived by you (as I did suppose)
when ye being tediouse of that beastely license, which that beast
Helyogabalus gave freelye unto you, had slain him, and took me to be your
emperor, although with all my power I refused that bourden, until I was by
the Senate and you constrained to take it. And than desired you me, to reduce
the state of this city unto the first order. Wherabout I have trauayled these
eight years, with not a little pain, study and labors: beginning at mine
own household, to the intent that as well by the exaumple of my servants and
officers, ye and other being under my rule, might the sooner refourme your
selves, as also that ye might the better perceive, and be less offendyd with
my seuerytie. And because I did se much til example proceed of the Senate, also
that ye were oppressed with the pride and corruption of iuges and officers, I
vsyng much diligence weeded them out, and discharged them of their
authoritiesme they went not unpunished according unto their merits.

I purged also the state of gentylmen of ribauldes and riottours, and advancing
thereunto other, I caused them to be daily exercised in acts of prowess,
orelles to here lessons in such manner of doctrine, as thereby they might
acquire more wisdom, to be officers or counsaylours in the weal publyke.
Only the state of the people I did not visit, saving in punishment of
thieves, for as much as I iuged that ye had least liberty to do any great
yuell, being (as I said) oppressed with tyranny. And that those vices which
were among you, like as they were taken by the example of your superiors, so
trusted I, that by their punishmente, the said ill manners should be forsaken,
and by the virtuous example of such honest men as I have put in their places,
good manners should be as gladly embraced. But now I perceive all has hapened
contrary to mine expectation. for the sparinge of you, and the correction of my
servants, with the sharp reformation of the senate and gentylmen, has
brought you unto such a presumption and arrogance, that ye contend to be
equal with gentilmen, using no form of reverence unto them, either that ye
think, that I fear more your purssaunce, than I favor their honesties: or
else that your richesse do make you so proud, which ye abusyng in excessive
vseries, ye therewith devour the patrimonies of many young gentylmen, and have
made them beggars, or by the seuerytie of the ancient laws of this city,
taken them in bondage and slain them in irons. And by such colorable
rauine, ye have bought great possessions in Grecia, Sicile, and Spain, whereby
ye accumulate treasours and pleasures like to great princes. If ye think me to
be aferde of your puissaunce, your opynion is false. for above all things I
most desire to dye for the defense of the weal publyke of this noble city:
and in deed rather will I dye, than see the calamities which needs must ensue
thereunto, if order be not kept, as I before have declared.

At that word all the people cried with one voice pouryng out tears from
their eyes, Live most noble and gracious emperor, he that would your death,
let him die, let him be rent into pieces. our puissance shall not annoye you,
but unto death shall defend you. ye have restored us unto life that were deed,
unto liberty that were in thraldom, unto honor that were dishonored. Live
virtuous emperor, and what lack ye find in us, refourme it, and we shall
obey you, and he that will resyst or rebel, let him be slain and drawn with
a hoke through the city, and thrown into Tyber. Ye be in governance our
father, whom we chyefely will honor. In age ye be our most derest son,
whom more tha^ our own lives we do favor. And than eftesones they cried. Live
most gentle and ryghtwyse emperor.

Hereat the emperor relented, and with much peyn retained the tears of his
eyes: And after that he had settled his spyrites and countenance, he spoke
than unto them in this wise: I am well content that ye have declared, that
there is yet in you some portion of virtue, which gives me hope, that neither
the noble renoume of this city begun by Romulus, and augmented by other
honorable governors, nor my labors in restoryng thereof, when it was decayed,
and lykely to perysshe, shall fall into ruin. But if ye be constant in this
affection, I trust that right shortly the publyke weal shall flouryshe, and
that this city and people, shall be in as much estymation as ever it was in the
time of any of our progenytours. And now have I found again your old name,
whereby I will call you: Ye chylderne and successors of the virtuous Romans,
I say you most victorious people, branches of Romulus, subduers of realms,
samplers of virtue and prowess to all the world, mitygate your covetous
appetites, expel from you avarice auale your high courages, I mean in
exceeding the bounds of your popular state, and comparyng your selfs with
your superiors, be charitable and merciful to your own country men, where
their necessity may be relieved with your abundaunce^ be you ashamed, that
people of other countrays, people barbarous and rude, should condemn you of
cruelty, for destroyenge your gentilmen, the chief ornament and defense of
this noble city, that they should reproach you of rudeness and pride, in
omyttyng to do reverence to them, which do in order excelle you. Remember,
that like as if the state of senators do decay, of the gentilmen are elected
into the senate such as be virtuous: so ye that shall be found equal to them
in virtue, (for your substance only can not make you gentylle) shall be
advanced to the state of gentylmen according to rayson. Than consider if ye
would not than also requite to be preferred in reverence. Nothing shall more
cause a man wyllyngly to do his duty, than to think what he would require of
him that is inferyour unto him. And it has been said of wise men, that he,
which would be a ruler, should first learn to be a good subject. For truly a
proud and covetous subject, shall never be a gentylle and temperate
governor. Now have I no more to say to you, but apply your selfs with good
wylles to restore this city to the ancient and most laudable order, as I
shall endeavor my self by example and diligence to bring it eftsoons unto his
perfection.

Thus ended the emperors oration, and therewith he arose and departed, all the
people poursuynge him with this acclamation: The goddis immortal keep and
defend you most noble emperor. ye ar the crown of our glory, of our welthe and
prosperity: hated be he of goddis and of men that would you displeasure. Do
what best lyketh you, the goddis immortal defend you.

The feueritie that the emperor Alexander used in chastyfyng as well the pride
of the people, as also his men of war or soldiers. Ca. xxix.
AFTER that the emperor was returned home to his palayce, he decreed, that the
said communers should be depryued of their liberty, and name of Romans, and
to be delivered as bondmen unto the said gentylmen, with whom they
presumptuousely had contended, and so to remain in that state, except they
redeemed them selves by making the said gentylmen, in possessions and
mouables, better than they them selves were, when they contended (for in deed
the said communers were very rich men, as well in substance mouable as
yearly renenues) that done, they should be eftsoon restored unto their
liberty, addyng thereto, that it should not be lefull unto the said gentylmen,
to infra^chise them in any other condition. Finally the said communers
abhorryng servitude, in continent redeemed their heedes, according to
themperours decree: which example was found afterward so profitable to the
weal publyke, in retaynynge the ancient order, and restraynyng sedition,
which before that time now and than happened, that it was thought of al men,
that there was never decree or law made, that was more benefyciall unto the
city. And the emperor was therefore not only feared, but also more honored
and loved of all the people, which were good citezens and chiefly favored the
weal of their country.

Like severity he used to all other states, as partly it is before rehearsed,
and partly I will now briefly declare. Lamprid^
He so herd the complayntes of soldiers against their capitaynes, that if he
found any captain in fault, he punished him according to the quality of the
act, without purpose to pardon him.

Like austeritie he used to them that served him in wars. Lampridi^
For on a time when he herd that one of them had done wrong to a poor old
woman, he discharged him of his retayner, and gave him to the woman to be her
bondsman, that he being a carpenter, should with his craft and labors relieve
her. And when the resydewe of the souldyours were therewith grieved, he
persuaded them to be therewith contented, and did put them in fear to grudge
at it. Oftentimes he dyscharged hole legions, never fearyng his army, for as
much as never man could reprove him, that in his life any captain or petite
captain took or detayned any thing of their soldiers wages. When he came to
the city of Antioche, his men of war fell to wantonness, hauntynge women's
baynes, and other riottous pastymes: which being brought to his ear, he
caused them all to be apprehended and put in prison, which being known to
them, which were of the fellowship of those that were taken, they began to make
a commocion: Than the emperor went to the place of judgment, and caused the
prisoners to be brought before him, the resydue of men of war, standing al
armed about him. And than began he in this wise.

Companio^s in arms (so that the acts of your fellows do discontente you) The
discipline left to us by our auncetours mainteyneth and keeps the weal
publyke, the which if it be let to decay, we shall lose as well the name of
Romans, as also the Empire. We may not suffer things to be done, which
late were supported by that unclean beast Heliogabalus. The Romayn soldiers
your fellows, and my companions in war, they haunte brothelles, tauernes, and
baynes in the greek facion, and thereto one provoke an other: shall I suffer
this any longer, and not stryke of their heads? Therewith arose a great
rumor and noise in the people. Than said he again: ye that be here, cry out
when it is necessary in bataile against your ennemies, not against your
emperor and soueraygne lord. I dare say, your capytaynes taught you to use
those cries against the Polones, Germaynes, and Persianes, not against him
that has given to you meat, lyuerye, and wages. Cease therefore of your
terrible cries, which only be necessary in war and battle, lest that I
with one mouth and one voice dyscharge you Romans, and yet I doubt where I
may so call you. For ye be not worthy to be of the people of Rome, if ye know
not the law of the Romans. And when they cried louder, and also menaced him
with their weapons, he eftsoons said to them: Put down your hands, which if
ye be valyant, ye should advance against your enemies, for these things do
make me nothing aferde. And if ye slay any man, the publyke weal, the senate,
and people will not fail for to revenge us. But when they brauled and
murmured never the later, he cried to them with an high voice, saying, Get you
hens Romans, and put of your harneys.

A wonderful exaumple, they all putting of their harneyse and souldyours
cotes, departed every man to his lodging. There was it perceived how much his
severity profyted. Thanne the emperors guard brought all the standerdes into
the camp, and the people them selfs brought all their armure to the emperors
palayce. And the legion which he had discharged, after that he was sued
unto.xxx. days before he went toward Persia, he eftesones restored into his
place, and by their prowess most specially, he afterward vaynquished his
enemies. Not withstandyng or he departed, he commanded all the capitaynes of
the said legion to be beheaded, because that through their negligence, the
soldiers passed their time riotously in a place of execellente pleasure
called Daphnis, and had made the sedicion, they wynkynge at it.

How the Emperor Alexander reformed the usury, whereof he spoke before in his
oration made to the people. Capi. xxx.
SONE AFTER that Alexander had chastised the pride of the common people of
Rome, as before is rehearsed, he him self came into the Senate, and there
declared the sundry inconveniences, which had happened, as well to the city as
unto the countries thereunto subject, by the de^estable practice of usury,
which utterly repugneth against all humanity, charytie, and natural
benevolence, that ought to be among people that do live in a mutual
concord: but most specially among them which live under one obedience, under
one law or polycye. The inconuenyences which hapened, he showed to be these.
First where the gentilmenne, and the more part of men of war, were from
their cradelles brought up in idelnesse, being not instructed in any
occupation or science, saulfe only in feats perteynynge to war, in the time
of peace and tranquillity, or when the wars be not so great, that they
require the hole puissaunce of Rome, than they which be not sent forth to
battle, some do pass their time in daliaunce and bankettynge with wanton
women, or at dyse and other chargiouse solasynge, or in both, with the one and
the other, shortly consumyng their substance: some do delight in other
excessive pleasures, as to have great and beautiful houses, large and ample
orchardes, and walks enclosed with high and strong walls great pondes and
meeres, conuaying thereunto by a long distaunce the salt water through rocks
and mountains, and to have in them diverse strange kinds of fysshes. In the
which entreprises, they also have not only consumed their goods and
patrimony, but also the warke above their expectation, far exceeding their
power, they have been constrained to borowe great sommes of money. Other there
have been, which of an ambiciouse courage, have used prodigal expenses as well
in continual feasts and bankettes, as in distributions of great sommes of
money among the people, and gyuynge great rewards to corrupt Senators and
other great officers, to atteyne before their time, or not being worthy to some
high place or dignity: whereby, they being brought into poverty, have been
also constrained to seek help of other, to maynteyne their folly. Al these
persons how unprofitable they be unto the weal publyke, report me unto
you, specially if ye consider also, that when they have borrowed so much, and
the somes borrowed being so increased by usury, that they be not only in
desperation to borowe any more of their creditours, but also in the state to be
greuousely punished according to the laws: than desire they some alteration
in the weal publyke, than fyshe they out the ambiciouse courages of them
which are in authority, and between whom of the noble men is envy disdayn or
pryuate displesure, than seek they matter of sedition within the cite, which
not being wisely repressed, has at his back division of parts, ciuyle
commocions, often times battle and destruction of people. Read the histories
of Rome, and see how often they called for new tables, that is to say, that
the instruments and obligations made for debt, should be cancelled, and those
dettes acquyted: and until it was done the commotion ceased not. Now se ye,
that the chief cause of this inconuenyence, was the said pestilent practice
of usury, which as the occupyers did se the wantonness and prodygalitie of
the nobylitie, gentylmen, and other increace, so did they augmente it, more
estemynge their propre lucre than the weal publyke, charity, benevolence, or
natural humanity. Wherefore in my judgment such vsurars among the Romans
ought not to be numbered, but if they be not wyllyngely reformed, they should
be taken and used as perniciouse ennemies unto us all.

Here all the Senate, except a few, with one voice commended the zelouse
intent of the Emperor, and offered their consentes in making such a law as
should seem to the Emperor and them expedient, unto the redress of so great
an enormitie. Than one Catelius a noble Senator, and a man of great virtue,
said in this wise.

The (...) of (...).
Mine opinion is noble Emperor and reverend fathers, that no kind of usury
shall be here practiced within this city, but first I would that search be made
diligently, how many Romans, and who they be. which are entered into
bonds, for the payment of usury, and likewise who be the creditours. and the
principal det being known: the creditours to be compelled by an edict of your
majesty, to hold them content with repayment of the sum or value of the
thing that they lend. And than by an ordinance of this counsel, the said
principal dettes to be paid out of the treasure of the city, the dettours
bryngyng in pawn or surety to repaye it within five years unto the
treasoryes. Also that no man shall lend money or any thing else, which the
dettour shall be constrained to change into money to serve his commodity, upon
any condition bargayne or promise to have lucre by the said lone. And if that
he do, all his mouables to be immediately forfayted to the commune treasory.
Moreover, that if any Roman shall happen to be in necessity, by any
mysfortune or casualtie, or by necessary charges, which he could not escape,
that he should come to the prouoste of the city and treasorers, bringing with
him one senator and two of the people, men not suspected of infamye, which
shall swear by the goddis preseruatours of the city of Rome, that they know,
that the necessity does not proceed of the said ill occasions: That done, he
shall lay in his sufficient pawn, or bring in two hable persons to undertake
for the repayment of the money, which he will borowe, the treasorers shall
deliver so much to him, as to the Provost and them shall seem to be sufficient
for his necessity. And if any other man will beneuolently lend them that,
which they will desire, without practyse of usury, if the borower has
consumed his goods in such folly as before is declared, that than he shall not
be charged with the repayement of that that he borrowed, but that the creditour
be clearly excluded from thensforth, to have for his said lone any manner of
remedy. But if constraynt or mysfortune do cause the necessity, and any man
lend to an other for a beneuolent charity, without any color of usury: than
if the dettour neglect the repayment thereof, and wyllingly let the day pass
when it ought to be paid, than he without mercy to sustain the rygour of the
common laws of the city. And so this law being well executed and never
omytted, we shall neither have vsurour dwell in this city, nor gentylmenne
landlesse, nor persons sedicious, which shall be able to annoye the
universal weal publyke. Now ye have herd mine opinion, whereto ye may add
or make some thing less as it shall seem best to your excellent wysedomes.

Than the emperor desired Gordian an ancient senator, who is named before,
to show his opinyon, and he risen out of his place, pausyng a little, said
in this wise.

I learned when I was young, noble emperor and fathers, that he which shall
give counsel, specially to the making of laws, ought to consider four
things, That his counsel be honest, that it be necessary, profitable, and
possible. Three of them have be remembered by Catelius Seuerus, the fourth it
seems that he had forgotten. I do well agree that the thing that he would
have done is charitable, and therefore is honest, also that it is necessary to
repress the ryottouse and prodygall living of gentylmen: it is profitable
unto the weal publyke, to have all occasions of sedition, and seeds of war
civil to be extirpate. And truly no better deuyse may be found than
Catelius. according to his great lernyng and wisdom, has right well
declared. But let us see, if the relief appointed by Catelius, for the^ whom
he names worthy to have it, shall be always certain and possible. And if not,
tha^ must we instead thereof, find sum other prouysion more certain, though
it be not so easy, that good men in their unwilling necessity be not
disappoynted. Is it possible trow ye, that the common treasure shall be always
abundant, that is to say, able to furnyshe al things necessary for the weal
publyke, and in the overplus to be also sufficient to releue the said private
necessities? Consider the greatness of this noble empire, the great number of
realms, countrayes, and cities, whom the prowess of our noble auncetours,
have by force constrained to be subject unto us, and by force we keep and
retain them. Think you, that they all will ever remain in peace and
tranquillity? Do you not know that all living things desire liberty, and
mankind most specially? Remember you not, that will constrained seeks ever
oportunite to slyppe of his colar? Forgette you, that almost yesterdaye the
Moors began to rebelle, and had shaken of their yoke, had they not been
quickly repressed by Furius Celsus? Also the great countray of Illiria, from
whens we have our chief men of war, made late a commocion, which had been no
small danger and loss to this empire, had they not ben valiantly and wisely
pacified and brought in good order, by the noble captain Uarius Macrinus,
kynsman unto your majesty most noble emperor. Armenia was in peril to be
lost, if it had not ben well defended by the prowess of Iunius Palinatus.
And it is douted of some, whether the Germayns will continue the leage that
they made with us. It is privily muttered among the people, that Artaxerxes
king of Persia, does gather much people and treasure, intendyng not only to
subdue all Armenia, but also the hole country of Asia, unto the sea of
Propontis, which deuydeth Asia from Europa, claymyng it in the ancient right
of the kings of Persia. What other people will do, we be uncertain: As
uncertain be we, what treasure will be sufficient to furnysshe all things
necessary against those peryls. Ye we be not so sure of our provinces and
ancient dominions, from whens we have our yerelye revenues, pensyons, and
tributes, but if other rebel and prevail against us, (which the goddis
forbed) puissance faylyng us, and good fortune forsakyng us, it is to be
supposed, that they will rather pay nothing than ought, be also governed rather
by their own countrymen, than by us that be strangers. Than what have we
left us to keep this noble city, to defend us, our chylderne, our wives, the
temples and aulters of goddis immortal, if our common treasure be not rich and
abundant, wherewith we may get succors in some place, provide vitayles
sufficient, and strongly fortify our munitio^s and fortresses? Also we be not
sure, where war shall assail us, either by land or by see. if it happen to
be by the land, yet know we not whither it shall be in diverse countrays or one.
if in sundry countrayes, than must we have diverse armies, and diverse
provisions, according as the state of the countrayes requires, some being
fervently hot, some exceeding in cold. the one full of mountains unapt for
caryage, the other thick of wodes: this lackyng fresh water, that drowned in
fennes. If it be on the water, than be the charges greater and much more
uncertain, ships with their takelynge and ordinance above all other things
being most costly, and oftentimes or their ennemies mete them, they be
either devoured with storms, or by contrary wyndes constrained to run on
quycke sands or rocks. Wherefore we must always have a great number of ships
in making, and a greatte noumbre of persons retained to furnyshe them. I
will not omyt the most necessary prouysion of grain for this city, which
oftentimes by scarsitie in the countrais adjoining unto us, we have been
compelled to make in countries far distant from us at very high prices, which
if the like necessity happen unto us, undoubtedly it will exhaust wonderful
tresors. These things considered, it shall seem (I doubt not) expedient,
that the common treasure remain always untouched, but only for commune
necessity, the incertayntie whereof proves it impossible, that the common
treasure shall be ever sufficient to releue the pryuate necessity of them that
are spoken of, sense misfortune, and other constrained means unto pouertye,
shall every day happen to some man. Wherefore now let us deuyse a more
certain provision. And trewely few men have so much compassion and charity
(the more pity is it) that they will lend their goods to an other man, have
they never so much, except thereby may return to them some advantage or
profit. And to constrayne them to lend (except it were for defense of the
weal publyke) it were against justice. Wherefore finally this is my sentence,
let a certain gain be lymitted by the Emperors majesty, which being
thought by us tolerable to the borower, and competently sufficient unto the
creditour, let it be declared by the Trybunes unto the people, with the
resydue, which was indifferently and wisely devised by Catelius Seuerus. And I
doubt not, but that it will lightly pass and be inacted by all their voices.

This oration and sentence of Gordiane was well commended, as well of the
emperor, as of all the senate. In conclusion, after a little debatynge, it
was appointed by the emperor, that the creditours should have for the
forbearynge of every Sestertium (which in englysh money of old grotes,
whereof.viii. made an ounce, amounts to.iiii.li.xvi. s. viii. d.) for every
day lone, the third part of As called Triens, (which was the third part of
an old Romayne penny called in latyne Denarius, which was the poyse of an old
english grote, and so the usury for the hole year amounted in Roman money
to.xii. pense one As and.ii. Trientes, in account of English money.xii.
grotes, the tenthe part of a grote, and two parts of a tenth part divided in
three parts. which sum moughte be more easily cumpted by the Romans, which
had the said small money Trientes coined, thanne by us that have no such
money. Not withstanding for as much as it well appears, that the gain by
the lone of one hundred pounds sterlynge by the hoole year, amounted not by
this rekenyng but to.iiii.li.xii. d. and the third part of a grote or there
about, comptyng by the old grotes, whereof went but.viii. to the ounce, of the
money currante, whereof do go.xi. grotes to the ounce, the usury amounts
to.v.li.x. s. vii. d. ob. or there about, which will seem to all men, not
being usurers, to be a gain sufficient and reasonable. But now to return
to our matter. This sentence of the Emperor and Senate being declared by the
Tribunes, as it was appointed, all the people with most ioyouse spirits, and
as loud as they could cry, consented that it should be made a law perpetual
in every point, according as the Emperor and Senate before had devised it.
whereupon incontinente the act was drawn and publyshed as hereafter follows.

The law concerning vsuries made by the Emperor, Senate and people of Rome.
Cap. xxxi.
NO NECESSITY be considered from henseforthe in them that consume their
substance in dise playinge, outragiouse expenses, or lechery: who so ever
lends to them, let it be at his ieoperdy and without hope of remedy.

Whom fortune perverse, long syckenesse, service, frendeshyppe, disloyalty of
them that he trusted, thieves or oppressors have brought unto pouertye, to him
let men extend their compassion and charity: or if his necessity do
constrayne him to borowe, let him come to the prouoste of the city, and
declare his necessity, and whereof it proceeded, having with him one senator
and two of the comuners, persons well known and credible, which being deposed,
that his words be true and unfeigned, and what they suppose shall be sufficient
to releue his necessity, the Prouoste shall assign one rich man of the
city, if the party him self name not a another, to whom or to him that is
named, the Prouoste shall direct his letter in the name of the Senate and
people, willing him to deliver to the said person, the sum that he needs,
taking of him sufficient suertie for the repayment of the sum that he lent,
with the increase for every day sparinge of one Sestertium, xii. Romayne
pence, one As, and.ii. Trientes, and so after that rate in all other sommes
above the sum of Sestertium, and not to excede that gain in any manner
condition.

andHe that refuses to lend for this gain, let him as unworthy the name of a
Romayne, or to take any benefyte by the weal publyke, be of the Censores
deprived of the name of a citezen, and noted for ever with the crime of
ingratitude. This law decreed by the Senate, inacted by the people, confyrmed
by the imperial majesty, be for ever establyshed, and never by any other law,
custom, or ordynance to be abolyshed. And who that with violence resists
against it, let him be taken for rebel and ennemy unto the weal public.

What love and benevolence the emperor showed to the people of Rome, and of
other his wonderful virtues. Cap. xxxii.
YE HAVE HERD much declared of the virtuous severity or sharpenes of this
noble Emperor Alexander, now shall you here as much of his gentylnesse,
patience, and affability. After that the said act was proclaimed throughout
Rome and Italy, the emperor calling to his remembrance, that the said law
was made only for them which hereafter should be constrained to borowe, and
that there were many at that time in danger, whom by that act should take no
benefyte, he being moved with pity, caused suddenly search to be made by the
Censores, how many were in the danger of usury. And than sent he for all the
usurers, and after that he had a little blamed them for their avarice and
ingratitude toward their country, at the last altering his countenance and
speech unto a more myldenesse, he desired them al at his contemplation, to take
for that time their pryncipal some that was borrowed, and clearly to remytte all
the resydue, promising, that the money should be paid to them out of his
treasure. Which request of the Emperor was pronounced in so gentyl a facion,
that the creditours with one voice not only granted unto it, but also promised
to remitte part by his arbitrament, where he thought convenient. which the
Emperor most thankfully taking, gave the creditours leave to depart,
commaundynge them to keep the thing secret, until they knew more of his
pleasure.

Than commanded he, that all such as were run in the danger of usury, should
be warned to come before him, not at one day or time, but first they which
were reputed and known to be men of honesty, and by some mysaduenture were
brought unto poverty. And being trewely certified what goods or lands they
had in possession, he remembered to them what peril they were in, and lamented
the state of the city, that the gentylmenne, by negligence or lack of good
husbandry, should be in bondage and captivity unto the communers, which ought
to be inferiors to them, and do to them reverence. O said he, where is the
noble courage of Romulus progenye^ who follows Quincium, Publicolam, Curium,
Fabritium, noble Senators? which after that they had vaynquyshed princis,
and achieued sundry great victories, ben diverse times Consules and Dictatours,
the highest dignities within this city, they lived so moderately, that rather
thanne they would be subjects to the auaryce of other, they chase to live in
poor howses of husbandry out of the city, with a pot full of wortes, and
such a small pitaunce for them and their wives. as now our servants would
disdain to be fed with. And lest abundaunce at any time, should provoke
them to live more delycately, they refused no^ only great sums of money
sent to them by strangers, but also possessions offered them by the Senate and
people, for their endeavor and labors about the weal publyke. Thus I say
unto you, whom although mysaduenture, or charges enforced, have exhauste some
or the more part of your substance or patrimony, yet have ye not therefore
abated your dyete, nor absteyned from pleasures, nor mynisshed your famyly: but
without vsyng good husbandry, and without circumspection, have contrary to the
said honorable Senators, chosen rather to spend your old age in misery, and
to be in bondage unto your inferiors, thanne ye would retain in captyuytie
your wanton appetites.

But here when the Emperor perceived that they were ashamed and made heavy
countenance, than said he unto them: Would ye not gladly be eftsoon at
liberty, at the least way out of the dange^ of usury? They with a voice
most lamentable answered: Ye noble Emperor. Will ye said he, with good
will pay to your creditours the princypall duty, having time convenient
that it may be levied of your possessions, having left unto you some portion
to live on? They answered: ye noble prince, else were we unhappy.
Notwithstanding among them were some, and not many, which had not left
either goods or possessions to pay the hole duty. Than the emperor
withdrue him into his chamber, and caused them severally to be brought unto him
one after an other, and according to their substance in possessions or
mouables, he rated them to pay of the pryncipall debt, some all, some more
and some less. And because they had not the money than ready, he promysyng to
discharge them of the said payementes by their consentes, assigned to them,
which had possessions^ two parts thereof, and the third part he reserved to
him self, until the sum were thereof received, whereto they were rated. Of
them that had goods and no possessions, he appointed that the sum,
whereunto they were rated, should be valued in their said mouables by their own
friends, and be brought unto some place, where by the Emperors officers it
should be received. And ere they departed, he caused in their presence, every
sum to be severally told out of his cofers. And than sent he for all the
creditours, and putting them in remembrance of their gentle promise made
unto him, and declarynge also what he had done, he caused every man's
portion according to the said rate to be delivered unto them. And for them
which had neither good nor possessions, he paid half of the pryncipall debt
out of his own cofers, with a clear acquitaunce unto the party. And
commaundynge the creditours, to bring to him cancelled the obligations and
instruments belonging to the said duties, and gyuing to them hearty thanks,
he let them depart.

Semblably perswadynge the dettours to frugalitie or moderate lyuinge, he also
prayed them to forsee as much as they could that wylfully they commytte not
them selfs to the hasardes of fortune. he than imbracynge them all, badde
them fare well. who gyuynge to him most humble thanks, and for joy
pourynge out abundance of tears, departed with glad tidings home to
their houses. As for them, which at dise playinge, in riote and lechery, had
con^inned their substance, he if any were left, caused it to be valewed as
well possessions as mouables, and to be divided among their creditours,
according to the quantity of the true debt: And in satisfaction of the
remnaunte, he adiuged them bond: so that for a certain time as the Emperor
would apportion him, having regard to the debt, he sh^lde serve one
creditour^ and afterward an other, in most vile seruyces, receyuynge therefore
nothing, but only meat drink and clothyng, belonging to slaves. And that
the creditours should have over them equally as much authority as they had
over them which they had bought or taken in battle. Not withstanding it was
at the liberty of the creditours, to aquite them of their service, but not to
infraunchise them, until the time were expired, which was by the emperor
appointed: but during that time, they ware continually the habit or apparayle
assigned to bondemen, ne were esteemed for Romans, nor enjoyed any pryuylege.
If they obediently served and contented their creditors, at the end of the
term, which the emperor appointed, they were set at liberty, and restored
to their first astate and condition. But if they fled from their master, or
contemptuously withstode his commandementes, fightyng with him, or doing to him
any notable iniurye, they were condemned to perpetual servitude during their
lives. They which had left nothing to pay their creditours, to them he
appointed a longer captivity, estemyng the value of his service as well to
the faculty of the person as to his astate and condition. As if he were very
wytty, well learned, or a perfect artificer, by reason whereof his service
moughte seem very commodious or profitable. Also being a gentylman, the more
estymation that he were of, the more grievous and odyous to him should be his
service and punishment: Wherefore to the one and the other, less time was
thought to be suffycient, than to them which were of gross wit, or ignorant
of good occupation, or else base or vile of condition.

This ordinance being put in due execution, It was thought at the first of
some men to be very cruel, but after that it was ones perceived, what a
marvelous frugalitie or temperance of living, was suddenly found, as well in
the city of Rome, as also through out all Italy, Also what delight men took
to be seen them selves moderate in apparayle, honest in living, also
exe^cisynge them selves in pastymes convenient, not dishonest or chargeous.
Also to have them in derision, whom they ^ounde in any manner of wise attemptyng
the contrary. Than extolled they the excellent wit and virtue of the most
noble emperor. And where before they called him cruel and tyrannous, they
ceased not to name him equal to the goddis, most benygne and most gracious,
confessyng that had not ben his severity, they al with the city and empire
had utterly peryshed.

Of the cyrcumspect curiosytie of the emperor Alexander in admyttyng
counsaylours. And of his answers touching that matter. Cap. xxxiii.
THE INCOMPARABLE diligence of this noble emperor about the weal publyke, is
to be meruayled at, and of all princis to be observed and followed. For what by
his own travail and excellent prudence, what by his continual scrutiny by
wise and honest espialles, he assuredly knew the qualities, manners, and
appetites of al men (except very few) dwelling in Rome or Italy, which either
by reason of their possessions or substance, or for any other estimation among
their neighbors, were lykely to be called to some authority. Also of all
those, which in other regions and prouynces, were for some cause notable or
famous. This knowledge caused him to be circumspecte in admytting counsaylours
and other great officers. As among many examples I will declare one, whereof I my
self can bear witness.

After the death of Quintilius Marcellus, a man in great authorite about the
emperor, as he was well worthy for his syngular wisdom and virtue (in so
much as it was thought, that there was never a better man borne in Rome, and
therefore the emperor did extremely lament his death) the noble man Frontine,
whom also the emperor entierly loved, awayting his time, advanced to him with
a commendable report an honorable personage, who was named Fabius Macrinus, to
be in the place of Marcellus. After that the emperor had herd and well
considered the words of Frontinus, whereby was set forth the ancient stock
from whens Fabius descended, his great possessions and substance, the grauite
of his personage, his great experience in sundry auctorities: the emperor
did cast on Frontine a dyspleasant countenance, and after that he ceased
to speak, the emperor made answer in this wise.

How much has your judgment deceived us Frontine? how could ye this long
dissemble with us? I had thought that ye had ever esteemed the stock by the
fruit, and not the fruit by the stock. No man commends the boughs or
branches, because the stem of the tree is great, long, or streighte: but if
they be well spreadyng, thycke of grene leaves, and well set with good
fruit, than men say that tree has a fair top, that tree bears good
fruit. And although the tree be never so mysseshapen or crooked, the owner will
dig about it, and use al diligence for to preserve it: but if the stock be
never so fair, if the bowghes be rotten or seat, the owner will shrede them,
and throw them into the fire. If the frutte be unsavory or withered, who takes
any great head of the tree? who will gather the fruit? but rather let them
rotte on the tree or fall down, for he cares not for them. Who loves rotten
groundsyll or post, because that it was part of an ancient house? Who sets
by a ragged a resty or ill favored colte, because that the harreyse, whereof
that kind is commen two hundred years passed, wan the price of runnyng at the
game of Olympus? I confess, that long continuance in any thing that is good
adds an admiration, but no praise to the thing: all be it the thing founden
good, prayseth the contynuance or long endurynge thereof. A good child
renews and also augmenteth the praise of his parents: the ill child raseth
out of men's hearts the fathers honor and benefytes. Also great possessions
or substance, makes virtue suspected, because they be minysters of pleasant
affections, and also nouryces of wanton appetites. Moreover the gravity of the
personage is not proved by stately countenance or dysdaynfull silence, but by
constance in virtue, and words always apt for the time and purpose. And
experience, which is not commended by laudable acts, does deserve no more
praises, than the gate of a blind horse about a wide horsemyll, which gryndeth
no corn. And that old capitayn, which in many batayles and iourneys has been
found always negligent, deserves no garlande. Many authorities do require an
exquisite trial, forasmoch as authority does abate fear, and minister
boldness, boldness draws in license, license is mother of myschiefe, which
needs must be suffered until favor relenteth. These things considered
Frontinus, either your judgment is not so perfect as I would have taken it to
be, or else ye secretly winkyng at the said faults, have dissembled long with
me, and kept things from my knowledge, contrary to your allegiance and duty.

With these words Frontinus being aferde, kneled down, and besought the
emperor to pardon him of his folly, confessyng that he had not perfyte knowledge
of the disposition and manners of the said Fabius. but forasmoch as he had been
favorable toward him and his friends in his ministrations, he mutually desired
his advancement.

Thereat smyled the emperor and said: Shall this plage never cease, which in
royalmes and cities has so long reigned? that mutual beneficence blyndeth
men's judgments. And whiles power with plesures gets great acquayntaunce,
virtue is unknown, and in the court frendles. I know, Frontinus, that pride
in Fabius Macrinus is a domestical vice. For in all the house of Fabius it has been excedyngly noted, and in some hystories remembered. And in this man as well
the remembrance of his ancient nobility, as his long continuance in
authority, has more increaced it, as I my self have marked, and also herd
other murmuring at it, when I have secretly walked in the city in a pryuate
apparayle. Wherefore I will not that he be in our counsel nor palayce, that
either his pride should be of young men followed, or of old men dysdayned, or
of us suspected. His greatte possessions and riches declares, that he can not
be with a little contented, sens the more part thereof he has gathered under
the color of his authorities, being not left unto him by his own parents,
nor received of our lyberalitie, nor by the gift of our predecessors. And very
seldom where honor increceth avarice abateth. I hate not Fabius in the state
that he now is, although I favor not in him the said notable vices: but if he
were ner^r unto us, we could neither sustain them, nor suffer him
unpunished, if he than used them. Also in his long experience I never herd
him for justice commended: but I have herd his arrogance, his long delayeng
of suitors, and his parcialitie, of many dyspraysed. Truly such a man is
neither mete to be a nigh cou^sailour, nor to say the truth in any great
office. These things considered Frontinus, speak no more of him, but search
for some other, in whom synceritie and temperaunce be joined with wisdom.
Such one, if he be of an ancient house, shall bring to our palayce an
honorable remembrance of his noble progenitors, and as well to noble as
unnoble shall be an excellent pattern or presydent. If he be but late come to
worship, his advancement shall engender in noble men an honest envy, either
to excede him in virtue, or at the least to be judged equal unto him. to poor
men it shall be an allectife and root of good hope, that they be in the rank,
where the reward of virtue is dealyd.

And thus cessed the emperor to speak. And Frontinus departed, being both
ashamed of his enterprise, and abashed at the wisdom of his noble master.

The most noble answer of Alexander made to Asphen^s, concerning the
dysablynge of Sextilius Rufus in his absence. Cap. xxxiiii.
THE EMPEROVR had a custom which was very commendable, that he never made
any senator, without the counsel of the hole senate, and every senator
should give his sentence, also testimony of his living, and credence should be
brought in by honorable personages. But if either the senators that spoke, or
the witnesses were fou^den to have spoken untruly, they were rejected into the
lowest place of estimation among the people, being also condemned as deceyuers
or forgers, without hope of remyssion.

There was dwelling in a village by Rome a gentylman called Sextilius Rufus,
which was right well learned in all parts of philosophy, and also in the
sciences lyberall. But forasmoch as he considered the frequent alteration of
the weal publyke, with the manyfolde peryls and troubles in the administration
thereof, he of purpose withdrewe him therfro as much as he might, although his
father had been a senator in his life, and he among his neighbors and diverse
of the nobilite was had in good reputation. Not withstandyng for the causes
before rehearsed, and that he desired nothing so much as quietness of mind,
and to solace him self in the most pleasant herbar of science, and vysityng
the most dylectable warkes of ancient writers, he seldom came to the emperors
court. or resorted to plays or bankettes, ne did come to salute the great
officers nor men in authority, as the use was at that time. And among the
young galantes he was not beloved, because he favored not their ryottous
pastymes. And the men of law had him in dysdayne, because he repugned
against their subtle gloses, and blamed their auaryce^ finally he being fully
content with the golden mean, lived right honestly in a manor, which he had
competently furnyshed with possessions sufficient for the prouisyon of his
mean household, which was to his neighbors more bounteous than sumptuous.

After that the emperor had pourged his palayce and the senate of unworthy
persons, corrupted with detestable vices, and with much difficulty found
other to set in their places: It happened, that some good man named to him
Sextilius Rufus, declarynge the common report, which he had herd of him. The
emperor, who knew all to be true that was spoken, held his peace not
withstandyng, harkenyng what should be other men's sentences. The more part of
them, which were present, affyrmed, that Rufus for his honestye wisdom and
learning was mete to be of the senate, but three or four said nothing. At the
last Alphenus a great lawyer, and in good estimation with the Emperor,
objected, saying, that Rufus not withstanding that he was learned in diverse
sciences, yet was he neither profoundly learned in the laws civil, nor much
experienced in affairs of the empire. And that his little husbandry and small
provision about the increace of his lyuinge, declared him to be a man of no
great polycie, nor of any dexterity about things of importance. And that the
aptitude of his nature, was only in studious meditation of sundry sciences, and
in wrytinge more than in doing. Adding to that philosophers were never good
practysers in a weal publyke, nor yet good men of war. Wherefore in as much
as he that is a senator, not only ought to be a man mete for polytike
governance, as well in gyuyng counsel in matters thereto pertaining, as also
being chosen to be Praetor, or to any other mynistration of Justice, not to be
ignorant in gyuynge judgment in causes brought before him: but also he ought
to have some experience in marciall affairs, that being chosen consul, or
leader of the host of the Romans, he might se the men of war to be well
instructed and exercysed. And that in all things belongyng to war, the state
of the city be sufficientlye furnyshed. Moreover, that in battle joined
either by his ignorance or baseness of courage, the Romayn army be not
dystroyed. These things con^yered, it seemed to him, that it was not expedient
to receive Rufus into the number of Senators.

The emperor heryng Alphenus, and beholdynge that no man proffred to speak
after him, except three or four mo, which were lawyers, and one Omnius
Camillus a noble man, who had some dysplesaure toward Rufus for one of his
servants: these seemed by their countenaunces to approve the saying of
Alphenus. That perceyuyng the emperor, he lokynge on Alphenus spoke in manner
as hereafter follows.

I see well Alphenus, that not only the vulgar and unlettered people be
angrely stered and do retain displeasure against them, which without malice,
do rebuke in a generaltie the vices and faults, which be founden among them:
but also (which I do lament) men specially chosen for their wisdom and
learning, do disdayn them that rebuke the abuse of that study or exercise,
which these wise men most chiefelye have haunted. I know that Sextilius in
one of his books has sharply noted the detrimente done unto justice by
couetouse lawyers, which by their subtle wits have inuolued the laws
civil into such obscure and ambiguouse sentences, that no man without their
declarations, may know how to do or minister justice in cases, for the which
the said laws have provided. Nor they that make laws can expound them
afterward without a lawier, which perchance was not first privy to the law
making. These and like annotations of Rufus do not a little offend you that
be lawyars, although ye have abandoned practice. And that dyspleasure only
has caused you to make this conclusion, that Rufus is not mete to be of the
Senate the resydue of your argument does sufficiently prove it. First the
diversity of sciences, where in your self do confess, that he is well
learned, does not disable him to be a Senator, but makes him more convenient
and necessary for so noble a counsel. For to whom does it more apperteine to
use words in their propre signification, and to set them in order, so that
they make not the sentence perverse or doubtful, than to a senator, or one
having rule in a weal publyke, and that is the thing which grammar teaches? ^
Logike is none other, but the science of reasonynge, helping natural wit
to find truth more quickly out of diverse opinions, by affyrminge or
denying: which in a senator may not be spared. A man shall not well govern
a city or country, and set in good order the manners of people (as Plutarche
says) except he be well fournyshed with eloquence, wherewith only he may
persuade, affectuousely stere, inclyne, and lead where he lysteth the minds
of the multitude: And that is best learned by Rhetoryke. ^
How many things happen in the state of a city or Realm, which requires a
diligente and exact computacion with numbres? ^
and that by Arithmetike is best perceived. In assignynge of bounds and
limittes, also to the making of municions and fortressis, also in deuisynge of
engines for wars, who dare say that geometry is not expediente? ^
which describes equality and inequalitte, aptness and unaptness, good
proporcion, and deformity. Also without armony nothing is semely or
pleasant, and by concord and discord all publyke weals do stand or decay:
ye and as some philosophers have written, by them all things had their
beginning. And this is best understand by the science called musyke. Musyke.
Moreover he that leads an army, if he be instructed in the diverse
temperatures of sundry contreyes, by the natural discourse of the sun, by
the five cerkles, the alteration of hours in day and night, by the distance of
clymes and parareles, which be sensible lives and spaces, whereby the sun
passes about the firmamente: Also the moon with her mutable figures, and
special authority over waters and humors, the natural influence of other
celestial bodies and signs, I mean in plenty or scarsity of things
concerning man's sustinaunce, and in storms or caulmenesse of wether: Al
which things be known by the divine science called Astronomy. Astron^mye.
I say if a captain be therein instructed, and not to much curiouse or
arrogant, he shall the more saulfly keep always his army. Julius Caesar being
therein exactely learned, vainquished by celeritie and sundry preuentions not
only the fortune and most expert chivalry of valiant Pompey: but also the
incomparable wits of five hundred Senators. And our noble progenitour
Hadriane the Emperor was thought to have exployted things in battle by the
help of this science above men's expectation. I omyt Hercules, which became
disciple to Atlas for the commodytie which he thought to find in astronomy.
Finally as ye al know. I have had no lyttel delight in these four
mathematical sciences, and yet have for the vtilitye that I find in them,
when I do contemplate the perfyte state of a weal publyke: And the same is
approved both by Plato and Aristotle, which shapeth their examples by
proportio^s of Arithmetik, geometry, and musyke, where they write of concord
in virtues or polytyke governance. This well considered, a senator either for
gyuynge of counsel, or for being a captain in wars, shall find none
impediment by having these sciences, but using them moderately, and as
occasion requires, they shall be to him not only an excellent ornament, but also
a necessary treasure, and to all sorts of governance a thing right expedient.
What although Sextilius be not profoundly learned in the laws civil? is that a
good argument, that therefore he may not be a good counsaylour, or in other
authority about the weal publyke? Consysteth all the senate of lawyers? Or
stands the weal publyke, and all her affairs only by laws all ready
stablyshed? May no public weal be without lawyers? How many noble Senators
have there ben, and yet are^ which never radde over all the.xii. tables? and
yet have they be found to reason wittily, and minister prudentely. Be laws any
thing else than rules of Justice, whereby she commands what should be done, and
what ought not to be done, where a weal publik should prosper^ Than is it
euydent^ that Justice makes laws, and not law Justice. Also he has redeth
the law, sees the commandment of Justice, but saying the law only in that
that he sees it, he does not know Justice. but contrary wise, he that
knows Justice, by her may discern what is right or wrong, what is equal or
unequal, and by the pattern of Justice may inuente a remedy propise and
necessary, which expressed in word or writing may be called a law. The
knowledge of Justice either happens by special influence from the high god: or
else it is gotten with the study of wisdom, comprehended in the books of wise
men, who of Pythagoras were callid Philosophi, which does signify the lovers
of wisdom. Wherefore they which either by divine inspiration, or by study of
the warkes of excellent wise men, have the truest knowledge of Justice, and have
best understanding what is just, and what is unjust, and consequentely can
provide remedies according to justice: which remedies if they ones be made
universal, they be laws, how so ever they be pronounced, be it by a multitude
or by one person, as the edict not only of the emperor, but also of him that
is Praetor, is a law, as well as that which is made by all the hole senate, or
inacted by the Tribunes and people of Rome.

And where ye say that philosophers were never good practysers in a weal
publyke, nor yet good men of war, if ye do mean by practyse, that
detestable exercise, which is subtle deceyuyng, crafty enterminyng,
mayntenance of injustice, perverse counsailyng and unmeasurable getting, I
confirm than your saying. for a philosopher abhors such practyse, and as
much as he may does and persuades the contrary. But if ye do intend by that
word practyse, only the laudable exercise in thadmynystration of a weal
publyke, truly ye be in a great error and folly, and do speak as if ye were
one of the vulgar people ignorant of letters, ye and that more is, private
displesure has caused you to forget what ye your self has seen, contrary to
that which now ye have spoken. I will not rehearse all them, which being
studious in philosophy have governed publyke weals, or have executed their
ministration therein substancially: but some will I speak of.

Who governed Egypt and Libia more nobly, than did Hermes called Mercurius
Trismegistus? and what philosopher was in all sciences equal unto him? Who ever
kept his country in such a quietness, and made it so rich as did Solomon
king of the Hebrews? which as it is founden in their hystories, translated
into greek by the commandment of Ptholome called Philadelphus king of Egypt,
was so great a philospher, that he dysputed of all things natural and
supernatural: and for his wonderfulle knowledge there came to here him out of
all parts of the world men and women, being at that time in most reputation
of learning? Was ever this city of Rome in so good order as it was during the
time of Numa Pompilius, which was.xl. years, who being an excellent
philosopher and a pryuate person, was chosen to be king, and so much more
is his governance to be commended, that he brought the people, which were
rude, fierce, and ever continually in wars with their neighbors, into so
good an order and temperaunce of manners, that they which before were their
enmyes, had them in admyration and reverence? Who made better laws or better
ordered the common weal of the city of Athenes than Solon the great
philosopher, as long as they could sustain their own welthe? The same city
had never a more noble Capytayne, nor a more valiant than was Pericles: who
with Anaxagoras contynuallye studied phylosophye. And to descend to a more
late time: where was there a better captain, or a more noble warrior than
Scipio Affricane? who had always with him Polybius the philosopher, and in
vacant times from battle he either herd him read, or disputed with him.
Semblably Lucullus was so studyous in all kinds of lernyng (as Plutarche
writes) that where he herd that any great learned men disputed together,
thither would he go, and studiousely here them: and (as the the same author
says) he haunted and embraced all kind of philosophy, with most familiar
acquayntaunce and custom, specially that which was called Academica, or the
doctrine of Plato. And was there ever a more noble, a more polytike or more
valyant captain, and more esteemed and drad of most puissant pryncis than he
was? Lord god what a senator was Cato called Uticensis? whose virtue was
wondered at through the world, whose magnanimity and incomparable severity
more profyted unto the publyke weal of the city, than the vyctories of Pompey
and Caesar. And was not he so studyous in philophy, that he could not temper him
self, but that he must needs read Greek books, when he satte in the senate?
What consul can ye compare to Marcus Tullius, who only by his divine and most
excellent wisdom preserved the publyke weal and city of Rome from utter
subuercion, which needs must have happened by the conspiracy of Cataline and his
confederates, if it had not ben by the incomparable wit of Tullius found out,
and by his divine eloquence plainly conuynced, and by his wonderful wisdom
suppressed and clean extynguyshed? And how studious he was, and exactly
learned in all kinds of philosophy and ^loquence, his most noble warkes do
declare with fame immortal. I pass over Nigidius, Uarro, Trasea, and many
other sage and honorable senators, which were not only excellent
philosophers, but also prudente counsaylours and valyant capitaynes. yet will
I reherce some, which were in the time of your remembrance. The emperor
Adriane was so profoundely learned in all philosophye, that he dysputed openly
at Athenes with the chief philosophers of all Grecia, and vanquysshed
Phauorinus, who at that time was of all other most famous: and to what prince
or capytayn gives he place, either in marciall prowess, or ciuyle governance?
What more honor ever happened to Rome than that Marcus Aurelius Antoninus
succeeded immediately Adriane, whose life was confessed to be the most certain
law unto al people to rule or be ruled: And he for his exquisyte knowledge in
all philosophye, was most commonly called Antonine the philosopher, not by
reproach as some would suppose it: but for a most excellent and rare
commendation. And what man did ever more encreace the weal public, or better
defend, it, than did this most noble and virtuous emperor? And be it of you
received without suspicion of boste, as it shall be spoken of me without any
vaynglorye: I which may not be compared with the most inferior of them
before named, either in learning or prowess, yet how much I have amended the
state of the weal publyke, ye all can bear witness: And that I have nothing
appaired the imperial majesty, it has been of the Senate and people in your
presence confessed. And this could I not so well have done, if I had not
instructed my wit with the doctrine of philosophers. What say you by
Gordiane, Uenatus, Aelius Seremanus, Catilius Seuerus, Frontinus, Tacitus, and
Aurelianus, honorable Senators, and our trusty counsaylours? and Sabinus
which sytteth here with us? have they not right well showed them selves to be
apt unto governance, when they have been Consuls, Tribunes, and Pretors: yet
be they no lawyers, but the more part of them be studyous in philosophy, and
other lyberall sciences.

And now to make an end of this matter, wherein I have tarried the longer, to
the intent that I would extirpate this vain opinion, which men have had
against philosophers and them that be studyouse. Trewely that which ye do
note in Sextilius to be littell husbandry and small provision, proceeds not by
lack of good policy, as ye have supposed, but he advisedly does neglecte to
be rich or to aspire to any authority by ambition or flattery, preferryng
temperate and sure quietness, before daungerouse and unthankful labors, and
more estemeth to be an honest liver, tha^ a malapert crauer. Also by his study
in philosophy it seems that he has acquired a great magnanimytie or noble
courage, not extentynge the force of his wit and knowledge in things which are
but of lyttel importance: wherein he fares like to the puissaunte grehounde,
which was sent to the great Alexander by the king of Albany: unto whom when
there was brought a great bull, he therefore would not ones meue, afterward a
mighty and fierce lion, was like wise showed to him, which he only beheld
and moved his tail, but he would not therefore arise out of his place. Finally
there was brought forth a meruaylous great olyfant: than stood he on his feet,
and did set up his brystelles, and showed his teethe, and being comforted by
Alexander, he lepte to the olyfant, and byt him, and after a few assaults
killed him. Like wise Sextilius being content with his astate, extends not
his wit to augmente it. but if he be favorably called to things of greatter
importance, and therein well comforted, I doubt not but that he will show,
that his study has not ben vaynely employed. I marvel that ye do not
consider, that authority and favor not only shows a good wit, but also
does polyshe that which is rude. Fullars, taylours, horsekepers, and marinars,
were by the Emperor Commodus, and my predecessor Heliogabalus, advanced to be
Consules, Pretores, and Tribunes, which as I herd say were so changed in
their wits, that it seemed unto them which knew them before, that saving
their visage, and personage, they were altered and made other men, so much in
their words and procedinges they excelled above their accustomed wits, all
men's expectation. How much more hope is there of those men, which by
education and study have their wits helped? Suppose ye not, that there be
within our empire thou^^ndes of men, which being but of mean reputation, if
they were set in authority, or about our person. would set forth noble wits
equal to yours, and perchance better (which I speak not displeasantly, but
only to warn you to eschew arrogance) Truly god gives wisdom, but favor
and authority most chiefly shows it in a weal publyke. Earth
nourissheth the rote of the tree, but the comfortable sun brings forth the
blossoms, and if storms do not let, he with his wholesome heat rypeth the
fruit, and makes it pleasant. In like wise study and labor brings in
knowledge^ which by the comfort of princes appears abroad in some
ministration. And if envy or displeasure bring none impediment: the increase
of favor makes learning fruitful and profitable unto the weal publyke. ye
all here my sentence. And for as much as the more part of you (as I well do
perceive) esteme^ no less Sextilius Rufus than I do. I will that he be sent
for, and received into the Senate, and his name registered in the table of
Senators. whereunto all the counsel according, it was for that time dissolved.

How Sextilius herynge that he was made Praetor, fled: And what the Emperor
said concerning that matter. Cap. xxxv.
AFTER THAT it was declared unto the Senate, that the Emperor had chosen
Sextilius Rufus to be a Senator, and what he had said on his behalf, they
all reioiced in the Emperors wisdom and judgment, and at his next coming
into the senate they all did arise and gave thanks unto him, for bringing
into that college such a man as Sextilius was. Sone after Sextilius being
sent for by the Emperors most gentyl letters, came into the senate, and as his
lerning and honest manners required, was beloved and commended of all men
except very few, whom envy and private displeasure contynuallye fretyd:
which the wise emperor perceyuinge, to the intent as well that the virtues of
Sextilius should be more known, and also be increaced by his comfortable
assistence, as also to manyfeste to the comfort of other, how much he was
inflamed in the favor of virtue and doctrine, he caused Sextilius to be chosen
Praetor, which than was the highest office next to the emperor, in the
ministration of Justice. Thereof herynge Sextilius, he being thereat abashed
and meruaylouse sorowefull, privily withdrue him self out of the city: and
not making long abode at his own house, in a strange habit, having but
one man with him, went unto Athenes, determining to pass his time there in
study, until the fame of him were somewhat decreaced. and an other chosen unto
that office. Of this the adversaries of Sextilius gathered no little
occasyon, not only to pursewe hym^ with mockes and derisyon, but also to
accuse him unto the emperor of dysobedience and obstinacy contrary to his
allegiaunce, and ^lso to blame him for his departure, without askyng ^^eenes.
All these accusations the Emperor herd without being any thing meued
against Sextilius, and at the last beholdynge the accusers with a dyspleasant
countenance, he said unto them as hereafter follows.

How dare ye, thus presumptuousely assault our patience with your false
accusations? Or how may ye for shame pour out your malice thus in our
presence? What gives you boldness to be thus malapert in attempting our
reason with your envious persuasions? Think ye us to be so dull and gross
witted, that we can not perceive your co^spiracies? or so deaf, that we can
not here your false rumors, which ye have sprad of Se^tilius? or so blind,
that we see not your cankred affections and passions sparklyng in your eyes,
inflamyng your vysage, blastyng out with your words, which for anger and
haste, be so set out of^ order, that in them do appear your detestable folly. I
tell you, Sextilius by this his departing, has nothing offended us, or
mynished the opinion that we have had of him, but has augmented it, and right
well contented us. For if envy and malice has not made you forget: full, ye may
remember, that when we chase him to be a senator, one thing wherein we
commended him was, that he neglected to be rich, or to aspire to authority, se
ye not how he has confirmed my sayung, and that I spoke it not for special
affection? he has not only neglected authority, but that more is, he is
fled from it, when it came toward him. When we sent for him, he came unto
us, and being appointed to be a senator, he did obey us, and gladly applied
his study and counsel thereto pertainyng: only hering that he was chosen
Praetor, before that he had mon^tion thereof, he fled, as if he had been pursued
with such force, as he had not ben able to strive with, fearing (as I said,
when I praised him) the dangerous and unthankful labors, which he supposed
to be in such offices. And whither or to whom is he fled? not to the
Persians, not to the people of Barbary, or other our enemies: but he is
peasibly gone unto Athenes, which city next unto Rome we most favor. And
there in a private habit, he lives in study, in that exercise which he
supposes that he can better sustain, than the governance of a weal publyke.
But not withstandyng, shall we herefore reject him and judge him unworthy to be
called to authority? Nay, than were we ylle aduysed, and might be noted
varyable in our opinion, sens we judged him ones hable for neglectyng thereof,
we now deem him more hable for the refusyng: ^e we will be therefore more slack
in the offrynge. ye we alsoo will thereto gentylly require him. For truly
authority ought to be given to such as cares lest for it, and kept from
them, which prease fastest toward it. For he that desires, would have it for
his only commodity: he that looks not for it, consydreth that he is chosen
for others necessity. Therefore how diverse is their mynistration, it ever
appears, where as both happens. Leave your vain enterprise, to bring us in
dyspleasure with him, who is worthy more honor than we can give him, and by
his lawdable flyghte has vanquished your envy, and to your great reproach has
publyshed your folly. We therefore command you to avoid out of our presence, and
that we see you not, until we call for you.

The letters of the emperor Alexander sent to Sextilius, and hew vnwyllyngly he
returned to Rome, and received the office of Praetor. Cap. xxxvi.
FORTHWITH the emperor him self indicted letters unto Sextilius, in manner
following. Alexander Augustus, etc. The tydinges of your sodayn departing,
honorable Sextilius, was to the senate and people greuouse, to your enemies
(although they be few) pleasant and ioyouse, dolorous to your friends, of whom
there be many, but to us not strange, dyspleasant, nor meruaylous^ forasmoche
as we longer have known your notable temperaunce, than we have used your
presence. Wherefore now we more consider your humylitie and virtuous
shamefastness, than that which your enemies do call obstinacye and
dysobedience. Persuade now to your self, that where before we did favor you,
now do we most hartilye love you, and have no less ardant desire to have the
fruition of your virtue and lernyng, than has the true lover of his wife or
companyon. What such love is, ye that have been at Socrates banquet, do know
most certaynely. Return therefore with honor gentylle Sextilius, satisfy the
desire of me, that am both your emperor and lover, rejoice the senate and
people, shame your enemi^s, and recomfort your friends. Let it suffyce unto
shamefastness, that she has caused you to ieoparde, not only your estimation
and credence, but also your life and substance, if there had been a senate
uncircumspect, a people disordred, or an emperor a tyrant. Let her now give
place to prudence and magnanimytie, her time of rule is expired in you, theirs
is now come, for divine providence has so provided, and wylleth it be so, sens
she has called you to the dygnitie, which ye well have deserved. In vayn were
your long travail in study and learning, if actual experience did not
show forth their fruits. I confess, that the books, which ye have made,
have well instructed other to governance: but yet when the public weal calls
you, to be ready in your own person to serve her, it is your chief office and
duty. For so god has ordained you, nature commands you, your country
compels you, and philosophy beadeth you. Return therefore hardily, and
accept with good courage and thankfullye the reward of your virtue. Ne the
mynystration shall be strange unto you, that in study have had with Justice
such familiarity, and have rad so many bo^^s of good polycie. Also (which
ought much to comfort you) ye have a favorable emperor, expert assifrentes,
diligent ministers, and people obedient, ye be^^ge Praetor, how many men expert
in that office shall desire your company, and be glad to participate with you
that which experyence or custom has usurped from lernynge^ where law civil
is necessary, among (...) assisten^^s shall ever be some, which therein shall
counsel you. but finally if ye have always respect unto justice, and
consider the causes with a prudente and dyligent scrutinie, the great knowledge
of the law civil shall not much trouble you. Lay therefore all dread apart,
and be not seen for fayntnes of courage to forsake that, which the Emperor,
Senate, and people, lords of the world, have with so great affection and
judgment prepared for you. Take heed of (...) and let us shortly embrace you.

These letters were sent by post, and in short time delivered to Sertilius,
than being at Athenes in the (...) of Sereus Cherone^sis, with other
philosophers: which ^e receiving with reverence opened and radde, (...)
reading of them, partly stered with the lo^ynge persuasions of the most noble
emperor, part^^ oppressed with dolor, saying that he might make no longer
defense against his election, and that he must needs enter the daungerouse
raze of authority pyght full of peryls, he let the salt tears tryll down
by his chekes. But when they that were present understood why that he showed
such countenance, contrary wise ^hey rejoiced excedingly, as well at the
wo^^^^f^ll wisdom of the young emperor, as that the virtue and learning of
Sextilius was in conclusyon so well considered, calling Rome a city most
blessed, that should have such a Praetor: And withone consent they so preased
on Sextilius with invincible arguments, that he accorded to return toward
Rome, and to receive the said office. Not withstanding after that he had
sit a good space without speaking, he abrayded out at the last, and
complaynyd him in this wise.

O what miserable astate shall I now come to? wherein diligence shall be cause
of displeasure, negligence of reproach, sharpness shall be dreadeful, pytie
unthankful, familiarity suspiciouse, frendshyp dangerouse, every man's
countenance pleasant, many men's minds offended, flattering openly,
dysdaynynge secretelye, against my commyge attendance, in presence much
courtesy, being out of office or favor, lack of acquaintance. But of force I
must obey that the emperor commands, and yet he commands not, but most
gentylly allureth, whereto my friends also consenten, and reason determyneth. I
therefore commytte all unto god, who with his providence al thing disposes.

And so he departed, and in short space arrived at Rome, where with many
noble Senators, and the chief of the people he was gladly received. Many
other wise and well learned men did this noble prince elect, and most
gentilly invite unto the ministration of the weal publyke, by occasion whereof
oppression, extortion, bribery, and other corruption of justice, were out of
the city of Rome duringe this emperors life, utterly exterminate.

A notable question moved by Julius Paulus unto the Emperor Alexander. And the
wise answer which he thereunto made. Cap. xxxvii.
YE HAVE herd before what austeritie and sharpness in punishment the
Emperor Alexander used toward all them, which by any manner corruption gave
untrue sentences. Semblably against thieves, and oppressoures of people he was
no less rigorouse, punyshynge them sharply and openly, without remission or
hope of pardon: touching treason he did never alter or add any thing to the
punishementes which were before ordained: And in conspiracies against his own
person, he often times suspended his sentence or deferred execution, as well
to try out the counsayles and practices of the offenders, as the first
occasyon of their displeasures: also whether their natures were obstynate or
proud, aspirynge unto supremitie: or if they were mylde and easy, and seemed to
be in^ended thereto by the provocation of other, and diverse such, some he
pardoned, and with most gentle persuasions not only reduced them to due
obedience, but also bound their hearts to him in a perfyte allegiaunce, some
he caused for a time to sustain imprisonement or exyle, and as he found them
repentant, so did he relieve them. In their exile it was punishment of
death, to give to them any thing, but meat and drink, and that but course
and of small quantity, also to be in their company longer than they brought
them meat, or to speak with them, or to receive letters of them: so that they
lived alone among people, in a prison vnclosed^ and in a common resort in
most paynefull solytude. He had not withstandyng in those places of exile some
trusty persons abydyng, who marked in what form they sustained that
punisshemente, whether they were very repentaunte or sturdy, and according to
such men's intimation, he caused the exile to be shorter or longer. And here
about he was very curyouse and dilygente.

On a time Julius Paulus a noble counsaylour, meruaylyng that the emperor was
so pitiful toward them, which offended his person, being so rigorouse
against all other transgressors, he fyndyng the emperor at leysoure, said
unto him in this wise: Sir if it shall stand with your pleasure, I would be
feign satisfied, in a thing, which causes me to much wonder at you. Speak on
(said the Emperor.) Sir, said Paulus, In all the time that I have served your
majesty. I have considered, that your proper nature is mylde, facile, gentle,
and wytty, and therewith adourned with incomparable pacyence and constance.
Wherefore when I behold you in publyke or civil matters always so bente to
the rigor of justice, that ye will pardone none execution, the offendour being
justly condemned: yet in transgressions against your majesty, be they never so
greuouse and lefully proved, ye often times do give your most gracious pardon,
and sometime unasked. And some have I known, which have been condemned for
committing acts against their allegiance, to whom ye not only rem^ ted your
graces displeasure, but also received them familiarly, and entertained them
with great liberality, as Oninius Camilius, who by secret means aspired to
the imperial majesty, when he was therefore brought before the senate all
tremblyng, his conscience disclosing his trespace, ye gyuynge to him thanks,
that he willyngly would take on him the charge of the weal publyke, which other
good men refused when it was proffered, and calling him copartener of the
empire, led him from the Senate unto your palayce, and caused him to sytte with
you at supper, in more ryeher: apparayle than ye ware at that time, with much
other benevolence showed unto him at your goinge in wars toward Persia. This
thing makes me and many other to marvel. Wherefore the causis which hereunto
moves you, I am most desyrouse to know, which by mine own wit I can
not determyne. And many other as well as I, be therewith perplexed. I therefore
most humbly beseech your majesty, that by your own mouth it may be
resolved.

The emperor after a little pause, thereunto answered: Truly Paulus we be
nothing offended with your demand, but arryght well contented to declare unto
you and other men of like wisdom, the reason and cause that does meue us to
do any thing in our office imperial, that thereby we may exclude all ill
suspicion and approve our beneuole^ce toward the weal public. Albeit if ye
had seen as much of philosophy as ye have done of the laws civil, ye should
not have had need to have made this demand. But now to your question, ye
must confess Paulus, that in our person be two states or conditions: one by
nature common with other men, the other by election pryuate and from the
people excepted. In the first we be resembled to beastis, for the affections
and passions, wherein we communycate with them. In the other we be like unto
goddis immortal, in supreme dignity excellyng all other men, which is to us
happened, and not ingenerate, by the prerogative of virtue, which is supposed to
be more excellent in us: H^bitus co^^^m platiuu^ and pra^^cus.
which virtue is none other thing but disposition, and exterior act of the
mind agreeable to reason, and the moderation of nature. The supreme dignity
that we have received is only in governance of men, which do participate
with us in Nature, wherein they always remain equal with us, but by Reason they
be made inferior unto us, for they supposyng it to be more habundantly given
us, have therefore wyllyngly submitted them self unto our governance. And what
that governance ought to be, our names of dignity, which the people has
given us, do express it sufficiently. For they gave to us first the surnames
of Caesar and Augustus, for remembrance of the prowess of the one, and the
wisdom of the other, which like as they desired, so they trusted to be
abundantly in us. They call us also Emperor. Imperator.
Which dignity among the ancient Romans consisted in the principal
governance of hoostes and armies, not only in leadyng them unto wars
(which was also the office of a duke) but also to see them ever well
exercised, Dux.
keeping always and in every place good order and justice. Moreover the senate
and people have given us a name excellyng al other in honor and dignite,
calling us Father of their country. Pater patriae.
May there be imagyned any name greatter or higher? For where ye have wytsaufe
lyberally to consecrate many of our progenitors, and calling them goddis,
have made them equal one to an another. Only Jupiter, whom Orpheus does call
life, you and your progenytours have called Father, as it were by a special
prerogative above all other, which name is agreeable unto his propretie. For of
life all things have being and meuyng, which act of creation, or (more
naturally to speak it) generation, is incident to the name of father. like as
also his office is to preserve and keep safe that which he him self has
engendered. Consyderyng how inestimable an office and dignity are included in
that divine and most reverend name of father, making me thereby the mortal
image of the living god: how circumspect ought I to be, that I do nothing
unworthy that name so lyberallye given me? Ye know well Paulus, that in men's
children be diverse and sundry dispositions, some be apt of their nature to
virtue and towardness, some have not nature so prompt and beneuolent, wherefore
they must be by education thereunto formed: some be quycke of wit, some dulle
in capacity. of sharp wits, some most do resplendyshe in acts that be
honest, other seem quyckest in malice and shrewdnes. The good and diligent
father of eueryche of them is equally careful, and assayeth first by
education to make them all conformable unto his appetite. And therefore at the
first with sweet meats and praty gifts he allureth them all for to love him,
and where they offend (as none or else very few are perfyte in virtue)
correctyng them with a little sharp rod, he makes them also to fear him.
And if he beat a shrewde boy, it is done as well to put other in fear to
offend, as to make him amend. And sometime the father to restrain the
prompte dysposition that he sees in his chyldern to vicious qualites, does
abdicate now and than oone, that is to say, puts them out of his familye,
and clearly excludes them from any hope of inheritance. sometime perceyuyng
their shrewdnes to cease, if any transgresses against him self only, either
he corrects him moderately, or by a wise and gentyl persuasion, assayeth to
induce him to know well his duty, and to pluck from him opinion of a falls
liberty. Next unto god, who is so great a father, as he which is father of a
hole country? that is to say, father of them that be fathers, their children
and family. How much than ought the care of him, excede far the cares of
all other? the charity of him, the love of all other? the wisdom of him, the
prudence of other? The studyous father more cares how to bring up his
childern in honesty, than how to live pleasantly. The loving father has more
solicitude about his chylderns health, than about his own welthe. The wise
father more considers, what his son shall be in the estimation of other
men, than how he may content his syngular affection. I have showed to you the
office of a private father. What will ye now say to me, that in office am the
universal father of all the hole country? Whyl ye say, that I should have
less care, less love, or less wisdom and polycie? I suppose no, I know
therein your opinyon suffyciently. Than take good head what I say. The rigor
of Justice, which ye seem to note in me, in punyshyng offenders against the
weal public, is but a form of discipline, convenient and necessary, having
regard to such children as I found in this city, corrupted with all kinds of
vice, and having their minds and wits all dysposed to folly, which being a
general detriment, I have used therein a more sharper remedy: and therefore
consequently it has been found the more convenient and spedy.

In offenses touching our only person, we have descended in our mind from
the imperyall majesty, and considered our first astate left us by nature,
wherein lokynge as in a myrrour, we behold the same matter that other men be
of, and therein the seeds of sundry affections. this causes us where we find
hope of amendment, in lamentyng the mysery of mankind, to be meued with a
fatherlye pytie, and much less estemynge the daungier of our person only,
than of the hole country. We endeavor us by mercy and gentylnes, to restore
that unkind child, which has offended us, eftsoon to his brethern and
company. Not with standing if he be so malicious and arrogant, that he will
not cease to abuse our pacyence, we than refuse him to be our child, and as
an enmye unto the weal public (for so be all that intends hostilytie
against him, which is heed and father thereof) we commytte him to the senate
and people, for his malice and treason to be justly condemned. And thus
doing, we accomplish all the parts of a father: and keeping the people in a
moderate fear and good order, we execute the office of a good emperor.

Thus have ye Paulus a just account of our mynistration, I wot not how it
contenteth you, sure I am that mine own conscience therein was never offended,
nor the publyke weal grieved, nor any good man thereby oppressed, whereof I have
the senate and people my witness, and him only my judge, who being in heaven,
fails not to punyshe all them that abuse his image.

Herewith Julius Paulus seemed to be satisfied, and most humbly thanking the
emperor, and meruailynge at his greatte wisdom and temperaunce, for that
time departed.

Of a great exclamation made against a gentill man called Marcu^ Geminus by his
libertines. And the ^ration of Iunius Moderatus, made in the Senate. Cap.
xxxviii.
LIKE wise as this Emperor Alexander was rigorouse and terrible to corrupt
iuges and oppressors of justice, so was he most favorable and bounteouse unto
all such as were sincere in their ministrations and supportars of equite. On a
time as he went toward the Senate, there came against him a great number of
persons, homely apparayled and of a rude presence, which as the Emperor
approached them, they fell down on their knees, and in a most lamentable form
with one confuse cry accusid a gentilman called Marcus Geminus of oppression,
and to bring him more into displeasure and envy, they added to their complaynt,
that he was one of them that co^spired with Omnius Camillus. The Emperor herd
them, and diligently marked their gesture and countenance, wherein he perceived
to be more rankour than dolor, more sturdynes than humble shamefastnes, more
obstinat cruelty, than reason or honesty: He than asked of them, what people
they were. They answered, saying: that they were husbondmen of Campania. He
commanded them to withdraw them until they were sent for, and showing to
them a right gentyl vysage, he passed from them.

The people receyuyng a more arrogant courage, of the comfortable countenance,
which it seemed that the Emperor made to them at their departing, leaving for
the while their counterfayte sorrows, they spent the days in tauernes and
vytaylynge houses, the nights in places of bawdry, promisinge unto them
selves victory against Geminus, adding thereto with most dispitefull arrogance,
that his tourmentes and death should be a dreadefull example to gentill men, and
that from thenseforthe their plough men and tenauntes should be fellow like with
them. Which menacis and bostynges were soon after reported unto the Emperor:
But first as soon as he was comme to the Senate, he showed there all that was
happened, and than he demanded the Senatoures, if any of them knew Marcus
Geminus. Diverse of them answered in order, that they knew him well, and that
he had been always reputed a man of much honesty, and having a competent
living for his degree, had ever lived therewith temperately, without note of
reproach unto this time. Herewith as the Emperor sat maruaylynge at the fury
of the said clamorous people, and the commendation given to Marcus Geminus, an
ancient Senator named Iunius Moderatus, who was reputed to be a man of
greatte worship, and was of the age of one hundred years, or there about, did
stand up on his feet, and said in this wise.

The (...) Iuni (...) Mode^^^^^.
Most noble Emperor, all be it that I am not required, nor do now intend to
take on me the defense of Marcus Geminus, with whom I have no manner
acquayntance, yet to the intent that your most gentill and pitiful heart tempred
with justice, should be no lenga^ perplexid, as it apperethe to be by your
countenance, I will by remembringe your majesty of the general state and
condition of them, which have commplayned on Marcus Geminus, in some part (I
trust) resolve the importance of your admiration and study.

Ye do well perceive, that the complayners be al of Campania, a countray most
plenteous of all thing that the earth may bring fourth, and therewith so
fertile, that it does not require great toil or labor, but only good
diligence in observing the opportunity of time in sowyng and planting, with the
preservation of the things whiles they be growing. With this fertility, the
bodies do become fat and lusty, and thereby are made ille disposed to labor,
the which disposition the goodness of the soil always supportith: thereof
proceeds obstinate sturdines against their superiors, and often times
commotions and sodayn rebellions: and with great difficulty has that people be
brought unto a perfect obedience, which was after that they had rebellid
against the Romans being confederate with Hannibal and the Carthaginensis: At
the which time they being vanquisshed by Fuluius, many were slain, the
multitude were sold in bondage unto the Romans among whom the feldes and
possessions were at that time divided, it dured a long time, that the Romans
being good husbondes them selves, ouerseing their tyllage and husbondry,
keeping the Campanes in servitude, hourdaining them with continual labors,
fedinge and clothing them moderatly, and more nerer to scarsety, than
superfluity, leuing them no more vacation from labor than the festyual days,
which the laws have appointed: the country abode in continual quietness, and
justice was there sufficiently ministered, by one only magistrate, sent unto
them yearly out of this city. There dwellid Sace^na, Tremillius, Julius
Atticus, and diverse other gentilmen, as well in husbandrye, as in other
wisdom and policy noble and famous, without exclamations unto the Senate.
Moreover the gentylmen brought up in that country, for their temperance in
living, and prudent governing of their own famyly, were often times elect
into the senate, and esteemed always for the best senators. But after the
subuertion of Carthage, and that al Greece and Asia were in our jurisdiction,
Spain made tributary, and Gallia brought under subjection, Idelnesse, with
delicate appetite entered to gyther into this city, and so much abounded, that
it was from thense distributed into all the hole region of Italy. And than the
gentilmen of Campania, left their ancient frugality and diligent governance,
and did set all their study, only about things pleasant and dilectable, not
being contented with the commodities of the same countray, ne with the same
measure and quantity, which they before used, but with outrageous expenses,
sending into other countries far of, for other kinds of things which they
had not growing, they vnsaciably fed therewith them selves and their servants,
and contemnyng the exercise of husbandry, they negligently have suffered their
servants to be oppressed with gourmandise, and to reiecte their accustomed
fare, and to have it more delicate. Also to increase sleep and pastime, and to
minishe their labors and diligence. Moreover by private contentions among the
same gentylmenne (which always happens where temperance lacks) by ambition
and envy, they that were bondemen were infranchised and made libertynes, to the
intent that their lords would be seen puissant of men, Libertines were of like
conditions, as our copye holders were of old time.
to maynteyn their quarelles: Whereby it is happened that the progeny of the said
bondmen are now of such sturdines, that they disdain and take scorn to be
corrected, ne will otherwise labor than it shall like them. And if their
lord will sharply call on them, they will not let, boldly to make resistance:
and where they be not thereto suffycient, they will suborne some false quarrel
to make a co^motion, trusting thereby to rob and destroy their lords: or if
they can not bring that to pass, at the least they will make unjust
exclamations, where they find a prince, whom they suppose to have his ears
open to tales and reportis, and will condemn in his opynion men complained on,
before perchance that he knows them. Hereof have we to many examples, as well
in the time of Tyberius, Nero, and Domitiane, as in the time of my remembrance.
Were not Dulius Sillanus, and Antius Lupus, men of great honesty, condemned to
death by the Emperor Co^modus, upon the false complayntes of their lybertines?
which grutched against them, because that Sillanus was a stern man, and of
the ancient seuerytie. Wherefore they moughte not sustain him, punyshyng them
contynually for their ydell and ryottous living. Lupus because he would not
suffer his lybertines to incroche upon his possessions, and to retayn certain
portions of land, which after the death of Petilius Rufus his mothers uncle
(whose heir Lupus was) they had taken by stelthe, whiles he was in Asia.
wherefore they appeched him unto themperor, saying that he was of familiar
counsel with Caius Regilius, whom a little before. Commodus had put unto
death. Petronius in the time of Caracalla the emperor, was also put unto
death by a like occasion. And to speak of mine own experience, by the space
of.xl. years, so long I continued in keeping of husbandry in the country of
Umbria, having therein much delectation. I found the rustical people my
neighbors prompte to iniuryes, murmuring at Justice, grutchyng at labors,
desirous of pleasures, ingrate against benefytes. At the first I was with them
familyar and homely, than found I them always carlyshe and sturdy. than against
mine own nature I changed my copy, and became toward them more strange in
countenance, more rare in speaking, more selde in pardonynge, more quycke in
reuengynge such injuries as they wyllyngely did me. Moreover I was more
frequent in commandyng my lybertines, and would my self se them to do truly
their services, nothing omyttynge: than had I little and seldom any occasion
to be offended with. There was none injuries offered me of my neighbors, which
beholdynge me so sharp to my lybertines, and so rygorous in Justice, feared to
dysplease me. My lybertines forgettyng all pleasures, studied with labor and
dilygence to get some praise of me. Than considered I well, that good dettours
oftentimes spared, become ill payers, small injuries oftentimes pardoned,
makes of neyghbors pernycious enemies. I servant made malapert, will kycke at
his duty, and labor by custom becomes ^asy, behold, that gentyl masters
have always proud servants. And of a master sturdy and fierce, a little
wynke to his servant is a fearful commandment. The nature of libertines is
much contrariouse to that which is gentle. The gentylman, gentilly entreated
is content to do all thing: The vile nature, famylyarly used, grudgeth at
every thing. This is every day proved, but no wit can make straight which
nature made crooked. Geminus is a gentylman of an old house of the latins,
whose great graundefather Rubellius Geminus was consul in the late days of the
emperor Tiberius. He has his possessions in Campania (as I have herd say) by
an auncetour of his mother called Pomponius Sura. Perchance his novelty there
may be disdayned, and the moveable people lackyng somewhat of their wylles, may
be comforted by some of equal degree unto Geminus, by their exclamations to
bring him out of credence, and consequently unto some ieoperdy. Wherefore
serves the Praetor Triphonius, who is known to be a man very discrete, well
learned, and of a great judgment? if they came to him, why did he not here
them? If he would not here them, why complain they not of him? If he did here
them, why is Geminus left still unpunished? If he be punyshed, why is he
eftsoon accused? Mine advise is most noble Emperor, that Marcus Geminus be
hastily sent for, that he have no leisure to solicit the Praetor Triphonius:
and that immediately afterward a letter be directed to the same Praetor, wyllyng
him to advertise your majesty with all expedition, what may be proved in the
ratification of such artycles as been objected in the accusation of Geminus:
which proves being sent up unto us, if Geminus can not refell them, than let
the laws of the city proceed against him. If the suggestion be found false
and malicious, than shall your majesty do like a virtuous governor, and
father of the countreye, if by your excellent wysedom and rule of justice, ye
provide that the false accusers and their abbettours may be so punyshed that
they and other persons of like inclination, may be aferde to abuse your
clemency and most gentle nature. And now has your majesty herd all mine
opinion.

This sentence contented the Emperor, who therefore commended the substancial
wisdom and compendious eloquence of the old Moderatus. And according thereunto
was Geminus sent for by an officer, and sone after a letter was sent to
Triphonius, according to the minute before rehearsed: which was delivered to
the Praetor incontinent upon the departing of Geminus.

T^^ wonde^full pru^e^ce and ^^^itie showed by Alexander the Emperor, in the
determynation and sentence in the matter precedynge. Cap. xxxix.
AT THE coming of Geminus to Rome, he was forthwith committed unto Catelius
the Senator to be secretelye kept, with comfort given unto him, that if such
things as he was accused of, could not be proved by witness or matter
sufficient, his accusation should be to him an happy displeasure.

In the mean time Triphonius the Praetor, when he had radde the emperors
letters, fearing his rygorous justice to rulers and judges corrupted or
negligent, he forthwith sent unto the most honest inhabitauntes, not being
gentylmen, which dwelled in towns and villages next adioynyng to the
habitation of Geminus: whom not being yet wa^e of the departing of Geminus,
nor for what cause they were sent for, the Praetor calling unto him one of them
after an other, he severally examyned them, what they knew or supposed of
Marcus Geminus, in what condition he used him self, first concerning his
faith to the emperor senate and people of Rome, also in Justice and equity
touching his neighbors, moreover frugalitie and temperance in his own family,
finally in oppression and cruelty to his tenauntes and lybertines. Addyng
thereunto, that the emperors majesty was informed, that Geminus in all the
said points was greuousely noted, which being sufficiently proved against
him, his punyshement should be to all other men a dreadful example, whereby
poor men should afterward live in the more surety, and out of the danger of
cruel affections. Every one that was examyned aparte, freely without alteration
of words, affirmed, that Geminus was a man of great honesty, and that they did
never suspect his faith of allegia^ce, although he repaired sometime to
Oninius, when he soiorned nigh to him, which he seemed rather to do for the
honoring of Oninius dignity, tha^ for any special affection that he had toward
hym^ considering that they were most unlike of conditions. For Oninius was
proud, ambiciouse, and prodigal: Geminus was gentle, moderate in living, and
temperate in spendyng. The other was allmoste ignorant of lettres, delyting in
riote and lechery: this man well learned, and having his principal pleasure in
redyng or writing. So diverse conditions could never join hearts in a fervent
affection. Moreover they could never perceive, that Geminus at any time
preysed Onimus, otherwys^ than is the general praise given to men in authority,
calling him honorable. Concerning justice and equitye, they said that therein he
was ever found notably erneste, in so much as by keeping his promise and
couch^ he sustained often times no little detriment. Also he remitted oftentimes
a good part of his duty, which the laws gave him, sometime of gentylnesse,
sometime meuid with the persons necessity. The mesurable fare and good order of
his family, was to all his neighbors an excellent pattern. To his tenantes and
libertines at his first coming he was of much affability but after that he
had perceived by the ancient tables and minume^tes belonging unto his
patrimony, that his libertines had withdrawn some part of their services, and
craftily entrelaced his domini^^^ lands with their servile possessions, he
first assaid to persuade them to restore unto him his inheritance, offering to
remytte unto them their wrongful intrusions, with all the profits which they
had thereof received, if they would willingly depart from that which by justice
they might not keep from him: but they little regarding his honest request,
obstinately denied to leave the possession of those lands, which they had so
long occupied, and became in all their acts toward him stourdy and malapert,
wherewith being displeasantly meued, he with his household servants and friends
expelled them from the possession of such lands as they wrongfully occupied:
wherewith they being erasperate, and desirous to be revenged (supposing that
if they complained to the praetor, the truth shortly appering unto him, they
should no thing prevail, but be for ever excluded from their unjust
occupation) they conspiring to gyther went unto two gentilmen dwelling hereby,
the one called Duillius, the other Cotta, who always had envy at Marcus Geminus,
and might not sustain his commendation, but used to speak reprochfully of
him. When they had herd what the libertines purposed, they excedingly rejoiced
there at, and gave to them not only comfort in their procedinges, but also
sums of money toward their charges, with secret lettres unto their friends
and acquaintance in the city of Rome, desiring them to assist and solycite the
cause of the libertines. They said moreover, that there remained yet in the
town of Geminus, as well libertines as men free of condition, his tenauntes,
which being of a more honest nature, and persuaded at the first with the
reasonable request of their lord, would by no means consent unto the
conspiracy, not withstandinge that they were there unto preased as well by the
said gentillmen as by the libertines. Which persons they thought expedient to
be also examined. That hering the Praetor, commending their truth and modesty,
he depeched those deponentes for that time, commanding them to keep al thing
secret, and immediately he sent for the said residue of the tenantes and
libertines of Marcus Geminus. Who being like wise examined, in all and every
thing agreed with the first witnesses. Than Triphonius incontinent caused
horses to be provided, and those persons without any longer abode, to be
conveyed to Rome with his lettres unto the Emperor, conteynyng the true
report of the said examinations. Which letters the Emperor reading him
self, commanded that those men, which were comme to the city, should be
forthwith brought to his presence, in most secret wise, which was performed.
Than the Emperor calling to him Ulpianus, Catelius, Paulus, and Sabinus, who
at that time were in the palayce, he commanded the said persons to be brought
forth, and him self demaundinge like questions of them, as Triphonius had
done, but in another order and facion, he found their words in every
condition, like as they had deposed, sauinge that they thereunto added, that the
complaynors before their departing, and after that they were comme from
Duillius and Cotta, had importunately desired these men to goo with them,
saying, that they nothing doubted, but that Geminus at the least should lose his
head, and that they for their trauelles should have his goods, or a good part
thereof divided among them: and that Duillius and Cotta trusted to have his
lands by gift or by purchase. That hering the Emperor, with vysage inflamed,
and eyes sparkelynge as fire, braste out in these words following.

O villayne nature bestiall and monstruouse. O cruel envy foul and
malitiouse, the one never vanquysshed with gentilnes, the other never contented
with virtue and sobrenes. How often have wise men ben by such falshode
deluded, Emperoures, kings, and other potentates by such serpents abused,
justice oppressed, mercy sklaundered, good people destroyed, false harlottes
advanced? God forbid that I should ^yue Emperor of Rome, if I would not see
this enormytye punisshed, whereby all public weals may be shortly subverted.
for where order fails, obedience decays, boldenes increases, deceyt
eskapeth, injury preuaylethe, avarice corrupts, the state of a weal publyke
sone after perishes. When he had said thus: he commending the truth and
sincerity of them, which had spoken, communded that they should remain still
in his palayce in a place secret, until it were his pleasure for to call for
them. Than caused he to be published throughout the cite, that Marcus Geminus
was likely shortly to be condemned. Which being commen to the ears of his
accusers, they replenished with joy, romed about the city, embracing their
friends and confederates, with mutual congratulations, making bankettes one to
another, for exceeding joy forgetting to sleep, but passed forth the nyghtes in
drinkyng and syngyng, and deuisyng tourmentes for Marcus Geminus. Of all this
herd the Emperor, who dissembled his anger, albeit he had no less
solicitude, in providing the means how their mischief and falshode might be
in such wise corrected, as good men might be free from such perilles, and
the example might utterly drown the malice of wretches. As soon as Duillius
and Cotta had herd of the brute of the condemnation of Geminus, with all speed
they both came unto Rome, brynging with them great presents to give unto
such as were nyghe about the Emperor, to thintente that they by their means
might attain to the possessions of Geminus. But these noble men, unto whom
they offered to give the said presents, refused to take them, fearyng
themperours severity. As soon as the Emperor had herd of the coming of
Duillius and Cotta, he sent for them, and in the presence of diverse Senators,
after that he had taken them by the hands, with a familiar countenance, he
dissembled to them, that he was much grieved with the unkindness of Geminus,
toward his person, and also his oppressions and injuries toward his
libertines and tenantes. With that Duillius and Cotta being much comforted
toward their purpose, to aggrauate the complayntes against Geminus, and seming
to do well, dispraysed the rigorous tyrany of Geminus, and commended the
simplicity of his lybertines, saying, that they would not so soon have
complained on Geminus, if they had not ben by them vehemently styrred and
provoked thereto.

After that the emperor had been a while in a study, as it were to say some
thing against Geminus, at the last with a familiar visage, he said unto them:
Ye have known in how much detestation I have always had the oppression of
innocents, the iniuryes done with extreme malice and violence: And yet not
withstandyng the sharp corrections, which have been executed against such
malefactors, as well by ancient laws of this city as by our own decrees and
ordynaunces, yet as it seems that pestylence in the weal publyke ceasseth
not. Wherefore we now would, that some new and strange correction were
devised for Geminus, which should be such as to al men of every degree, it
might be the most fearful example to offend in like condition. And as
touching the offense toward me, I shall hold me content with the judgment,
which the laws have provided. And more over, to the intent that men shall
perceive, how much we favor them that do supporte true men against
tyrants, I would that some reward were also devised for such supporters,
equal and convenient unto their merits. And herein will we first here your
sentences, for as much as ye do seem to be men of zeal. and are reported to
be wise men and polytike about your affairs. Wherefore we intend to have of
you better acquayntance, that the public weal by you may be amended.

These words of the Emperor, Duillius and Cotta took to be all for their
benefyte, and thynking that they had good opportunity, offered them to acheue
their desire, thynkyng that the more sharp and vehement punyshement they did
deuyse for Marcus Geminus^ the better it should content the mind of the
emperor. First Duillius forgettyng him self, with face all inflamed with
malice, declarid his sentence in this wise. Forasmoch as the Emperor had
referred the offense committed against his majesty, to the judgment of the
laws civil, (albeit that such punysshement were insufficient for such a
traitor as Geminus was) concerning his oppression of innocents, his
correction might be no less than that he being al naked, should by his
lybertines be first of all whipped throughoute the city of Rome with whyppes
full of ruelles called Scorpions, and afterward his nose and ears being cut
of, so with reproaches to be conuayde unto the town of his habitation, and
there to be eftesones whypped by all his lybertines: and from thens to be
carried into the Isles called Nebrides, and never to return into Italye: his
chylderne also to be banysshed for ever out of that territory: restitution also
to be made to the lybertines of all that which was bereft them. As concerning
the resydue, they which were accusers of traitors and supporters of the same
accusers, should have divided among them, the one half deal of their goods
and possessions: so that the one half thereof should be to the accusers, the
other half to the supporters of them, the other half deal of the hole should
be confiscate to the emperors treasure. Cotta agreed in every thing with
Duillius, saving the deformynge of Geminus and banyshement of his children,
saying, that therein was to greatte a visage of cruelty. In the disposition of
the goods and possessions, he added unto the sentence of Duillius, that if the
accuser or supporter were a bondsman or libertine, he should have no pa^te of
the possessions, but only the fourth part of the mouables, in the residue he
agreid with Duillius. When they had spoken, the emperor and other that were
with him, seemed to commend their zealous affection, and the emperor fyndyng
occasion by the lack of time, and that his supper abode than for him, did
depart from them, saying that he would advise him on their wise counsels,
and lycenced them to depart with a familiar beck. Who being returned to their
lodgings, and sendyng for the lybertines and other of their acquayntaunce:
after that they had declared what they had spoken, and how nigh the confusion
of Geminus did approach, and what trust they had to enjoy his goods and
possessions, there was made among them joy without measure, with reuelle and
bankettyng, so that the report thereof came to the ears of the emperor, and
of all the Senate, which remained in a great expectation of themperours
judgment. Afterward the emperor commanded his place of astate to be made ready
in the Theater of Pompey, and that the people of Rome should be summoned to be
ready there the third day following, which was accomplyshed. And the emperor
being set with his noble counsaylors with him, he commanded that as well the
libertines, as Duillius and Cotta should prepare them to the accusation of
Geminus, who came into the place, bringing with them one Rutilius Lupus a
subtylle Rhetorician, to be their advocate. But Geminus only trustyng on his
own conscience, refused to have any other patron, than the true examination
and justice of the emperor and other, which were his judges. And the Emperor
was therewith right well contented, consyderyng that the time of the
controuersye should be made thereby the shorter.

First Lupus began his oration with a great praise of the Emperors virtues,
which the Emperor in no wise sustaynynge, but being therewith offended,
interpellyd Lupus, and commanded him to enter into his narration, and to
declare immediately the state of the matter contained in the complaynte of the
lybertines. Than Lupus being partly abashed, for as much as his beginning was
to make themperor and herers beneuolent toward the libertines, and to make the
cause against Geminus to seem more grievous, he coldly entered into the matter,
and generally obiectid against Marcus Geminus his familiar resort unto Omnius
Camillus before that he was detected of treson. And thereunto he brought in for
witnessis Duillius and Cotta, who^ he callid men of great worship, Geminus
speaking yet nothing, nor changinge his countenance. Duillius and Cotta by to
much malice and couetyse, forgettyng them selves, preased forth, and said, that
they had oftentimes seen Geminus not only at souper with Oninius in the time of
his conspiracy, but also talking familiarly and secretly with him. Therewith
the emperor taking occasion, demanded of them, what it was that Geminus spoke to
Oninius. They said, they wist not. for they stood far from them, and might
not here them. The Emperor demanded, if they did se when Geminus came and
departed. They answered, that for the more part they came before him, and
abode long after him. He asked more over, in what form Geminus departed from
Oninius. They said, for the more part with no pleasunt countenance of the one
or the other. The Emperor asked, if Geminus were desired by Oninius to come,
or if he came to him unsent for. They said, they could not remember, but that
Oninius sent always a servant for Geminus. The Emperor demanded, if he did
likewise with them. They answered, no. The Emperor immediately sent for
Oninius, who being reconsiled to the Emperor, was than in the Senate, and for
Carnilius his servant, who had detected his treason: and in the mean time the
Emperor turned him unto Geminus and said, that if he were the man, that he
showed to be, he would less esteem death than the loss of his credence, and
that for his part he more esteemed the confession of truth, than the auenging
of his displesure. Wherefore he charged him upon the faith of an honest man,
to tell plainly, whereof was the communication between him and Oninius.
Gemynus answered, that the first access that he had to him was voluntary and
unsent for, only to salute him, because he was a Senator, and in great
estimation, not knowing any thing of his trayterouse affection: But perceiving
his qualities, and natural appetites not to be agreeable to his opinion and
study, he cessed to come, until he was desired of Oninius, which as he after
perceived, was for his incommodity. For Oninius desired of him a mantion place,
which he had joining to the gardens of Nero, from the which he would in no
wise depart. All be it often and sundry times Oninius sent for him, and as
well by offrynge great sums of money and friendship, as sometime by menaces,
he assayde to get of him the house. but last of all he thretned him, that
having all thing at commaundment, as he doubted not but that he should see it
comme to pass shortly, he would leave him neither house nor life. With the
which words Geminus said, that he was astonyed, and so departed with his
displeasure. But yet not thinkinge, that Oninius intended any conspiracy,
considering that he was alied unto the Emperor, and was by him advanced unto
great riches. Thus ceased Geminus to speak any more. And by that time
Carnilius was commen, who being demanded, what acquayntance he had known to
be between Oninius and Marcus Geminus: he answered, that he knew none
acquaintance between them, but that often times he had herd Oninius his
master say to his secret friends, after that he had a long time talked with
Geminus, that he was a sturdy and obstinate person, and would not confourme him
to his requests, concerning a house which he had nygh to the cyty, wherefore if
he might bring his purposes to pass, he would leave him neither house nor
heed on his shoulders. The Emperor demanded, if Geminus were any of them that
Oninius counseled with concerning his co^spiracy. Thereat smilid Carnilius and
said, that Oninius never had him in so much reputation, for he ever esteemed him
to be most unapt to any such practyse. Than came in Oninius, and the
Emperor commaundynge him, sat down by him: And the emperor asked him if he
knew Marcus Geminus. And he fearing that he had complained of him, blusshed,
and said, that he could never find kyndnesse in him, and that his nature was
overthwart and always against his desires. Wherefore he desired the emperor not
to give to much credence unto him in such things as he complained of him,
other than touching the request made for his house in the city, which he
confessed to have desired importunately, and for that cause only had often
times conuented him wha^ he repaired into that countray. The emperor with that
answer was well contented, and demanded, if he had any better opinion of
Duillius and Cotta. He said, that they were of a another sort, and more
confourmable unto his appetite. Thereat the emperor laughed in his heart (as he
after declared unto his familyars) markynge the folly as well of Duillius and
Cotta, as of Oninius Camillus, which unawares had disclosed their secret
affections, and declared the innocency of Marcus Geminus. And lycencyng Oninius
to return to the Senate, he commanded Lupus to resort to the resydue of the
accusation of Geminus: who partly being discoraged, with a weak eloquence
alleged the injury and cruel oppression of Geminus, extended unto his
tenantes, taking from them their ancient possessions, and annexynge them to
his dominycall lands. Therewith Geminus being somewhat meued, plainly denied
that it was their ancient possessiooio^s, but affirmed that it were his proper
dominical lands, which between the death of his uncle and his entry, they had
unjustly usurped and falsely concelyd. Wherefore not only he by the law might
justly expulse them from that which they vnlefully occupied, but also by their
ingratitude they had forfaited their manumissions, and consequentely the lands
given to them by his auncetours of good right ought to resort eftsoon to his
possession. This heryng the emperor, he demanded of the complaynantes of what
state and condition they were? They all confessed, to be the lybertines of
Marcus Geminus, and that such lands as they had, were servile. as for the
which they were bounden to certain obseruances. But they plainly denied, that
they had forfaited any thing, and with great exclamations, and out of order
cried out on Geminus. Than commanded the emperor, that the gentilmen and
residue of the libertines and tenantes, sent by Triphonius, should be brought
in, who being in likewise examined, declared openly the stealing of Geminus
dominicall lands, by the said lybertines, which were accusers, the
coniuration of them to the destruction of Geminus, their privy solicitation of
other, the malicious supportyng of Duillius and Cotta, with their secret
confederacies, and all other things as before they had showed to the Emperor
at home in his palaice: which as well the accusers as Duillius and Cotta heryng
dysclosed contrary to their expectations, they all were confounded, and in
their amassed countenance sodein and silence, seemed to the emperor and all that
were present, to confess their untruth and malice. And therewith Cotta fearyng
the emperors severity, fell on his knees, and besought the emperor to pardon
him, and likewise desired Geminus to forgive him his malice, confessing all to
be true, which was now spoken on his behalf. Herewith the emperor was
fervently styred with displeasure toward the accusers: after that he had
spoken with the resydue of the iuges, he gave sentence in this wise.

For as much as it appiereth unto us, that thou Marcus Geminus art innocent of
that treason, which thy cruel libertines, with the supportation of Duillius
and Cotta have falsely accused the of, we declare the to be a true gentylman,
loyal to the weal public and maiestly imperial, and denounce unto all
men, that none be so hardy to renew this suspicion, whereof thou art purged.
And for thy patience, wysedom, and temperance, we deem the worthy to be
admitted into the college of Senators. Than the emperor tournyng him to the
lybertines said: Ye vyllayn generation, full of pestyferous malice, rude and
most bestial of nature, void of all courtesy, false and deceyptfull toward
your sovereign, cruel and vengeable against justice and raison: For as much as
ye with all your will and puissance have endeavored your selfs by your falls
accusation, not only to have brought to a shameful death Marcus Geminus your
natural lord, a true and innocent gentylman, and a necessary membre of the
well publyke, which if it had happened, thereof should have succeeded unto the
weal public, notable damage, and to our person perpetual reproach, and burden
unto our conscience: We therefore judge you al worthy no less to suffer tha^
Duillius one of your captayns gave in his sentence at home in our palayce
against Marcus Geminus. that first ye shall be whypped throughout the city with
Scorpions, and than your noses and ears to be cut of, and so to be brought
into Campania, and there to be eftsoon whipped in every town, and last of al,
to be hanged in chains on high gybettes, as ye be.xvi. in number, in.xvi. of
the gretest towns of that country, and that your children shall lose the
privilege of the manumissio^ of you and your ancestors: and that none of your
blood be from hensforth manumised by any Consul or Praetor. Moreover all your
possessions holly to remain to Marcus Geminus, your moueables by the consent
of Geminus, (whereunto we exhort him) to be equally diuyded and given to his
other tenantes and lybertines, which refused to be consentyng or party to your
procedynges.

Than looked he on Duillius and Cotta, and first said to Duillius: Thou
detestable serpente of villain progeny, which nature in the, neither might be
subdued with authority, nor altered with riches, for as much as by envy only
thou have maligned ageinste Marcus Geminus, and with all thy power have
supported his libertines, to accuse him most falsely of treson: and more over
thy self have in such wise appeched him, that in thine own words it appears
that thou were of a more familiar resort unto Oninius than Geminus was, and by
Oninius confession more conformable unto his appetyte, and what is declared by
those words, but thou and Cotta were consenting unto the conspyracy? Thou
shall therefore receive thine own judgment, which thou would have given on
Marcus Geminus, that is to say, thou shall be disgraded of al honor, and
despoiled of thy garments in the myddel of this cyty: And from thense whipped
with scorpions unto the high way called Via Appia. and from thense thou shalt
be carried unto Tarentum, and being there eftsoon whipped, thou shall be
rendered with thy children in seruytude to Marcus Geminus. And al thy
possessions to remain for ever to him and his heirs. And as to the Cotta,
although that thou haste desired pardon, yet for as much as thou haste
polluted the noble and aunciente blood, whereof thou came, embracing villayne
conditions, and chosinge rather to be confederate with villayns and maliciouse
wretches, than to favor virtue and justice, it were not expedient that thou
sholdeste be so pardoned, that thou sholdest clearly eskape without
punishment, specially considering, that thy nobility was a cause that Geminus
was much more suspected, than if thou had not joined thy self with his
libertines. Thou shall therefore sustain part of thine own judgment, which
thou would have given on Geminus, that is to say, thou shall forthwith lose
all thy moueables, which also with the goods of Duillius shall be equally
parted, the one half to be brought in to the commune treasorye, the other half
to be given indifferently among those gentylmenne, which honestly have
declared unto us the innocence of Marcus Geminus. And as for thy lands, during
thy life to be confiscate, afterward to return to thine heirs. Moreover
that thou thy self shall never return in to Campania, but remain stylle here
in this city, except we upon other considerations hereafter meuinge us,
shall clearly pardon the.

This was the end of the Emperors sentence. Wherewith all the people rejoiced
and cried with one voice: happy is Rome, that has such a governor, happy is
the world, that it has, such an emperor, but most happy be we that have such
a father. Live noble Alexander, for the gods do favor the, all princes does
honor the, all ille men do dread the, all good men love the. Live and
prosper most excellent Emperor.

With these and other most ioyouse acclamations, the emperor issued out of
the Theater and departed toward his palayce, having with him Marcus Geminus,
all the streets being full of men women and children, castyng before him
imnumerable roses and other sweet flowers. The next day was the Emperors
judgment put in executyon, and Geminus admitted in to the Senate. This was
the last ingemente that the Emperor gave openly in his own person, diverse
other iugeme^tes he gave, which were in tables according as other Emperors
used to do.

HITHERTO is the report of Eucolpius: much more he wrate, as it seemed. for
diverse quayres lacked in the book. Wherefore to make some perfect conclusion,
I took the residue out of other, which wrat^ also the life of this Emperor.

HERODIANVS a greek authoure, writes, that the journey made against
Artaxerxes the king of Persia, was lost through the slaknes of Alexander,
whom he supposes to be retained from his enterprise by his mother Mammea, who
would not let her son ieoparde his person against the Persians: but
Lampridius, who gathered his work out of the books of Accolius and Eucolpius,
who were always in company with the Emperor Alexander, writes in this wise: He
being such an Emperor in his house and abroad, he entreprysed the iourneye of
Parthia, whereunto he prepared all thingis with such discipline and reverence
about his own person, that it might be said, that Senators went and not
soldiers. Where so ever the host was, the chief captains were circumspecte,
the captains honest, the soldiers beloved. And therefore the inhabytauntes of
countrayes received him as god. The men of war loved the young emperor as
their brother, their son, and their rather. They were honestly cladde,
conveniently hosed and shodde, rychely armed, very well horsed with harneyse
and brydels accordingly trymmed. that he which beheld the emperors army,
should have perceived the state of the weal public. He him self labored to be
judged worthy to have the name of Alexander, and to surmount him of Macedone.
in such form he went into Persia, and vanquished king Artaxerxes, who came
against him with seven hundred elephantes, bearyng on their backs towers of
wood full of archers and artyllery. Also a thousand and five hundred
chariottes armed with sythes, and people innumerable. And afterward Alexander
returned unto the city of Antiochia, and with the pray that he took of the
Persians, he made all his men of war rich. Than first began Persyanes to be
slaves to the Romans. But because that the kings of Persia do dysdayne,
that any of their people shall live in servitude, he was content, that they
should be redeemed, the money being given to them which took them prisoners,
being returned to Rome, was conuayde unto his palayce with all the senators
gentylmen and people, the wives and children of his soldiers enuy^onyng him,
and his triumphall charyot following him, being drawn with four great
elephantes. And entering into his palaice, he was lift up with the hands of
the people, so that during the space of four hours he might not walk on
his fete, all the people crienge about, Now is Rome saufe, for Alexander is
safely returned.

Afterward he lived in most tender love of the people and Senate^ but at the
last the Germaynes wasting and destroyeng the countray, he being ashamed that
the Parthians now being vanquysshed, that nation should prease so nygh to the
head of the weal public, which people were subdued by petite emperors, he
prepared his voyage toward them, and departed against all men's wylles, every
man bringing him a hundred and fifty miles on his way, with hope of victory,
and sone return to the cyty. but being in France, and fyndyng the legions
sediciouse, he coma^ded them to be rejected. By which occasion the french
men's stomakes, as they be always obstinate and froward, and oftentimes
displeasaunt unto the Emperors, would not suffer any longer his rygorouse
gravity. Wherefore certain soldiers, which were enriched by Heliogabalus, by
the comfort and aid of that monstruouse mulettour Maximus, whom they made
afterward Emperor, they suddenly entering into the pauillion of Alexander,
slew both him and his mother, he nothing fearing their malice. Other opinions
there be of his death. Finally the rage of vnchrifty persons, which might not
sustain his excellent virtues, traiterousely slew this most noble Emperor:
Whose death all Rome lamented, al good men bewailed, all the world repented.
whom the Senate deified, noble fame renoumed, al wise men honored, noble
writers commended. Whose life may worthily be a pattern to knights, an
example to judges, a myrrour to princes, a beautiful image to all them that
are like to be governors: Whereby they may have in continual remembrance, to
embrace and follow his most excellent qualities.

FINIS.
LONDINI IN OFFICINA Thomae Bertheleti typis impress. Cum priuilegio ad
imprimendum solum.

ANNO. M.D.XL.


