ENCHIRIDION, SEV FASCICVLVS ADAGIORVM SELECTISSIMORVM: OR A MANVALL OF the
choysest Adagies, collected out of the most ancient Poets and Philosophers,
never before translated into English, with the proper sense and Application.

Authore Iohanne Leycester.

Hoc ab homine exigitur, vt prosit hominibus: si potes^multis; si minus,
paucis; si minus, proximis; si minus sibi.

Seneca. LONDON Printed by GEORGE ELD. 1623.

Ad Lectores.
FVrtiuis olim varijsque superbijt Oschen
Plumis: ex multis fit liber iste libris.
Read cuique suum, vil^scit protinus Oschen:
Hic sine natura foetet, and art liber.
Ex herbis fit mel; hominis ceu simia, (...)
Aemula naturae est, Moeonidisque Mare.
Sic licet ex multis opus hoc, tame^ vtile quonis
Test, voluminibus candidiusque tuis.
Per Iohannem Leycester.

ENCHIRIDION ADAGIORVM.
1 APertae Musarum januae. Propertius.

2 Applica ad amussim lapidem, non ad lapidem amussim. Plutar.

3 Aduersus solemn ne loquitor. Pythagor.

4 Asinus asino, sus sui pulcher. Alcimus.

5 Asinus in paleas. Aristoph.

6 Annosa vulpes haud capitur laqueo. Aemil.

7 Ante tubam trepidas. Cicero.

8 Animus in pedes decidit. Homer.

9 Ante victoriam encomium canis. Athenaeus.

10 Adhibes Lucernam in meridiem. Diogen.

11 Aiacis risus. Diogen.

12 Ab Asino lanam quaeris.

13 Ab equis ad Asinos. Procop.

14 Ad ambas vsque aures: Suidas.

15 Acurem tangere: Plautus.

16 Aliorum medicus, ipse vlceribus scatens: Plutarch.

17 Alis luporum catulos: Theocrit.

18 Alter Hercules: Aristot.

19 Alter Ianus: Cicero.

20 A front atque a tergo: Plato.

21 Altera manu fert aquam, altera ignem: Plutar.

22 Amicus amico: Teren.

23 Auro loquente, nihil pollet quaeuis oration: Horat.

24 Adrastia Nemesis.

25 Aethiopem lauas.

26 Asinus esuriens fustem negligit: Aristot.

27 Asinus portans mysteria: Aristoph.

28 Asinus ad tibiam.

29 Aquam igni miscere: Plutarch.

30 Arenam metiris: Teren.

31 A Remo ad tribunal: Plautus.

32 Aquila uon capit muscas: Suidas.

33 Argenti fontes: Diogen.

34 Assidua stilla saxum excauat.

35 Baeta tum hyeme and aestate bona: Suidas.

36 Bellerophontes literas: Zenod.

37 Bis septem plagis Polypus contusus: Zenod.

The third part of Spain, so called of the River Batis.
38 Baetica Cantilena.

39 Bonus dux bonum reddit comitem. Aristot.

40 Bos ad praesepe.

41 Bos apud aceruum: Suidas.

43 Boues messis tempus expectantes.

44 Brasidas vir bonus, sed Lacedemon multos habet praestantiores: Plutarch.

45 Bubo canit lasciue.

46 Bunias index est: Zenod.

47 Cancer Leporem capit: Aristoph.

48 Camelus saltat: Plutar.

49 Cani das paleas, asino ossa: Plutarch.

50 Canis festinans coecos parit catulos: Aristot.

51 Capram caelestem ex orient co^spexerint: Plutarch.

52 Capra Scyria: Plaut.

53 Carpet citius quam imitabitur.

54 Cauam Arabiam serere: Nam caua Arabia sua sponte per se tenax est.

55 Cauda blandiri.

56 Coecus coeco dux: Hora.

57 Coecus and claudus non intrabunt Templum: 1 Regu^ Chap. 5.

58 Ceruinus vir: Plutarch.

59 Celinis in ferro: Aristoph.

60 Coeci perscriptio: Diogen.

61 Ceruus canes trahit. Theocrit.

62 Corui mali ouum malum.

63 Crocodili Lachrymae.

64 A measure used amongst the Grecians, which held as much Corn as would
serve a man for one day.
Chaenici ne insideas. Pythag.

65 Chironium vulnus.

66 Cibum in matulam ne immittas. Plaut.

67 Citius vsura currit quam Heraclitus. Aristoph.

68 Clamosior lauro ardente. Diogen.

69 Cocheae vita. Plutar.

70 Colubrum in sinu fouere. Aesop.

71 Claue findere ligna, and securi fores aperire. Plutar.

72 Colophonia ferocia. Diogen.

73 Compendiaria res improbitas, virtus vero tarda. Martial.

74 Complura masculi canis cubilia. Suidas.

75 Coturnix Herculem.

76 Crater litium. Aristip.

77 Cupidinum Crumena porri folio vincta est.

78 Cur non suspendis te? Aristop.

79 Cretizare cum Cretensibus.

80 Cui multum est piperis etiam oleribus miscet. Martial.

81 Cum hasta cum scuto. Hom. Hastaque and gladio Saxisqueinge^tibus instant.

82 Date mihi peluim. Suidas.

83 De alieno liberalis. Homer.

84 De calcaria in carbonariam. Tertull.

85 De Coelo ad Synagogam. Tertull.

86 De fructu arborem cognosco.

87 Dulce commune naufragium. Plautus.

88 Delio natatore eget. Proper.

89 Destitutus ventis, remis adhibe.

90 De toga ad pallium. Tertull.

91 Deus ex improuiso apparens. Lucian.

92 Dicendo dicere discunt. Tere^.

93 Digna canis pabulo. Suidas.

94 Digna canis sede. Diogen.

95 Dionysius Corinthi. Cicer.

96 Discum quam Philosophum videre malunt. Plaut.

97 Dives factus iam desijt gaudere lent. Aristip.

98 Dives promissis. Plutar.

99 Domi manner oportet belle fortunatum.

100 Duabus Anchoris fultus. Aristid.

101 Duos insequens lepores, neutrum capit. Zenod.

102 Dulce pomum quum abest Custos.

103 Duobus pedibus fugere. Suidas.

105 Eadem oberrare chorda. Horat.

106 Eandem tundere incudem. Cicer.

107 Elephantem ex musca facis. Lucian.

108 Ex eodem ore calidum and frigidum efflare.

109 E multis paleis parum fructum collegi.

110 Endymionis somnum somnis. Aristot.

111 E perforato poculo bibere. Zenod.

112 E Squilla non nascitur Rosa. Theog.

113 Etiam chorcorus inter olera. Zenod.

114 Euitans Charybdim in Scyllam incidit. Homer.

115 Faciem vel os perfricare. Plin.

116 Facile cum valemus recta consilia aegrotis damus.

117 Falces postulabas. Suidas.

118 Fame mori miserrimum est. Homer.

119 Fertilior seges in agro alieno. Ovid.

120 Filum neuisti, and acu opus est. Hermip.

121 Finem vitae specta. Solon.

122 Fluuius non semper fert securos. Aesop.

123 Flamma fumo proxima. Plaut.

124 Formica Camelus. Lucian.

125 Fortes fortuna iuuat. Cicer.

126 Fortuna reddit insolentes. Homer.

127 Fratrum inter se irae sunt acerbissimae. Euripid.

128 Fricantem refrica: Diogen.

129 Gallus insistit: Hor.

130 Gigis annulus: Lucian.

131 Grues lapidem deglutientes* Aristot.

132 Habet and musca splenem.

133 Halcyonis agis dies.

134 Hanc technam in te ipsum struxisti: Lucan.

135 Herbam dare. Fest. Pompon.

136 Herostrati gloria.

137 Hinnulus Leonem: Lucan.

138 Hodie nullus, cras maximus: Aristoph.

139 Hydram secare.

139 Ignem igni ne addas: Teren.

140 Ilias malorum: Suidas.

141 In alieno foro litigare: Martial.

142 Industriam adiuuat Deus: Homer. Partim Diuum aliquis tibi suggeret.

143 In vino veritas: Athenaeus.

144 Laqueus laqueum caepit: Lucan.

145 Lecythy pinguior: Diogen.

146 Lerna malorum.

147 Linum lino nectis: Proper.

148 Locrensis Bos.

149 Lupus est in fabula: Teren.

150 Lutum luto purgare: Aristoph.

151 Machinas post bellum afferr^ Brutus.

152 Magis mutus quam piscis.

153 Male parta male dilabuntur.

154 Meliores nancisci aues: Zenod.

155 Mortuo Leoni and lepores insultant. Homer. in mortem Hectoris.

156 Mutua defensio tutissima: Homer.

157 Non certatur de Oleastro: Plato.

158 Odium agreste: Lucian.

159 Olet lucernam: Proper.

160 Ouium nullus vsus.

161 Palinodiam canere.

162 Parturiunt montes, nascetur ridiculus mus. Aesop.

163 Penelopes telam texere. Homer.

164 Pica cum Luscinia certat.

165 Pinguis venture non gignit sensum tenuem.

166 Plumbeo iugulare gladio. Tull.

167 Porcellus Acarnanius: Lucian.

168 Pro eleganti medico malus Poeta: Plutar.

169 Praeuertit anchorae iactum Deus. Plutar.

170 Pulchre fallit vulpem. Suidas.

171 Putre salsamentum amat origanum: Athen.

172 Quanquam non dicis, tame^ apparet e pelle.

173 Ranarum more bibere. Athen.

174 Refricare cicatricem. Plaut.

175 Sacram anchoram soluere. Lucian.

176 Semper Africa aliquid noui apportat: Plutarch.

177 Si caseum haberem, non desiderarem opsonium. Plut.

178 Sydera coelo addere. Ovid.

179 Smaragdus insignis in luce quidem obscurus. Suid.

180 Spes seruat afflictos. Ovid.

181 Stateram ne transgrediaris. Pytha.

182 Strumam dibapho tegere. Tul.

183 Sus in volutabro coeni. Tertull.

184 Sus tubam audiuit. Aesop.

185 Sybaritica mensa. Plaut.

186 Tacit stomachari. Homer.

187 Taciturnior Pythagoreis.

188 Tantali hortum. Diogen.

189 Taurum tollit qui vitulum sustulerit. Tertull.

190 Teipsum non alens canes alis. Plaut.

191 Telluris onus and inutile pondus. Homer.

192 Temulentus dormiens non est excitandus.

193 Terebyntho stultior. Suidas.

194 Testudo intra tegimen tuta.

195 Thassus bonorum. Plutar.

196 Terra amat imbrem.

197 Timidus Plutus. Plin.

198 Thersitis facies.

199 Timidior Pisandro. Plutar.

200 Titanicus aspectus. Mant.

201 Thraces foedera nesciunt. Plin.

202 Toll toll mazam quam ocysfime scarabaeo. Zenod.

203 Toll calcar defensaculum. Aristot.

204 Totus Echinus asper. Lucian.

205 Trabs in omnibus. Diogen.

206 Tragaedias in nugis agere. Plaut.

207 Trochi in morem. Hermip.

208 Trutina iustius.

209 Tuam ipsius terram calca. Suidas.

210 Tussis pro crepitu: Aristoph.

211 Tyria maria.

212 Vallus vitem decipit: Propertius.

213 Veneri suem immolauit: Hor.

214 Ver ex anno tollere.

215 Velut vmbra sequi.

216 Victi non audent hiscere: Zenodo.

217 Vinum animi speculum: Iuuenal.

218 Viri senis astaphis Caluaria.

219 Virgula diuina: Plato.

220 Vnica filia duos parere generos.

221 Vnguis in vlcere: Plautus.

222 Vno die consenescere: Theocrit.

223 Vocatus aut non vocatus Deus aderit.

224 Volam pedes ostendere: Hesych.

225 Volaticum Iusiurandum.

226 Vrit absque torre. Zenod.

227 Vsque ad rauim.

228 Vtrem vellis.

229 Vulturis vmbra.

230 Vt Argiuum clypeum abstulerat ita gloriatur.

A MANVALL OF ADAGIES.
1 THe Muses Gates stand open.

Applied to those who are of an excellent wit and judgment.

2 Apply the Stone to the Masons rule, and not the Masons rule to the Stone.

Applied to such as seem to frame the Laws according to their living, and not
to change their manners to the Laws.

3 Speak not against the Sunn^.

Applied to those who are wilfully obstinate and headstrong, against a matter
most probable.

4 An Ass seems fair to an Ass, and one Sow to another.

Applied to them who frequent their companies who are like to themselves; as
the Proverb is: Like will to like.

5 An Ass upon straw.

Applied to them who beyond all hope have obtained great dignity.

6 An old Fox will not be caught in a trap.

Applied to those who by reason of their age and long experience will not be
deceived.

7 Thou quakest before the Trumpet sound.

Applied to them who are afraid before any danger appear.

8 His courage falls down into his feet.

Applied to all cowards and timorous men.

9 To triumph before the victory.

Applied to vain boasters, who use to reckon their chickens before they be
hatched.

10 You use a Lantern at noone days.

Applied when a long discourse is made of an evident matter.

11 Ajax his laughter.

Applied to those who are merry for any thing which they afterward repent.

12 Thou seek for wool of an Ass.

Applied to such men who seek for those things which they cannot obtain.

13 From Horses to Asses.

Applied to them who are fallen from dignity to a mean estate, as from a
Scholar to a Carter.

14 Well nigh to both ears.

Applied to them who devour their meat greedily, such we call a greedy gut.

15 To touch the matter with the needles point.

A Pro. used when a matter is rightly defined.

16 A Physician of others, and yet himself full of sores.

Applied to such as can see a mote in another man's eyes, and yet not see the
beam in their own.

17 Thou fosterest Wolves whelps.

Applied to such as return reproaches for a good turn received.

18 A second Hercules.

Applied to a painful and industrious man.

19 A second Ianus, a wise King of Italy.

Applied to men who are very wary in their affairs.

20 From the face and the back.

A Pro. implying diligent circumspection, comparing things past with things
present.

21 He carries water in one hand, and fire in another.

Applied to such as can give glozing terms to a man's face, and reproaches
behind his back.

22 A friend to a friend.

A Pro. used of such as refuse no danger to gratify a friend.

23 Where gold speaks, speech preuailes nothing.

A Pro. that shows that money and rewards can effect any thing.

24 Two Heathenish Goddesses: the first is fained to deprive a man of memory
and wit, the other executes revenge.

A Proverb used when proud men are beaten, and as we say, Pride will have a
fall.

25 Thou washest a Blackmoore.

Applied to those whose pains is to no purpose.

26 A hungry Ass cares not for a cudgel.

A Proverb against those that for profit sake care not for disgrace.

27 An Ass bearing Mysteries.

Applied to such as profess that in which they have no skill.

28 An Ass to a Flute.

Applied to those who neither understand, nor praise those things which are
excellent, and praiseworthy.

29 To mingle fire and water together.

Applied when we attempt to make things in their nature contrary to one
another, to agree together.

30 Thou measurest the Sand.

Applied to them who attempt a thing impossible to effect.

31 From the Oar to the Throne.

Applied to those who from a mean estate are advanced to dignity, and as we
say, Jack is become a gentleman.

32 An Eagle stoopes not to Flies.

Applied to those who being puffed up with ambition, despise their inferiors.

33 Fountains of Silver.

Applied to such who speak unlearnedly, yet proudly, and arrogate that to
themselves which they know not.

34 Continual drops make hollow the stone.

A Proverb showing that labor and industry ouercomes the most hard and
difficult things.

35 The Beet is a good root both in Summer and Winter.

Applied to those who carry two faces under one hood, and can shift in all
Estates.

36 Bellerophons Letters.

Applied to such as carry Letters that make against them, and as we say, he
makes a rod for his own tail.

37 Polypus beaten with 14 stripes.

Applied to them who are made better with adversity: and it is taken from one
Polypus, who kept a Fish a long time, and did beat it often, that it might eat
better.

38 A Spanish brag.

Applied to such as spend some part of their life in joy and tranquillity, and
pass the end of their life in sorrow.

39 A good Leader makes a good companion.

Applied to them who make other men better by their good example.

40 The Ox at the manger.

Applied to them who practice no lawful calling, but live idely, such we call
carpet Knights.

41 The Ox at the heap.

Applied to those who have a great estate, and know not how to use it: like an
Ox muzled is put into a barn full of bay.

43 The Oxen look for Harvest time.

Applied to such as take great pains for profit.

44 Brasidas is a good man, but Lacedemon has many better.

Applied to such as think better of themselves than any other.

45 The Owl sings merrily.

Applied to ignorant men, that reason of matters they have no skill of.

46 The Raddish is a sign.

Applied to such as dissemble love, till they have opportunity for revenge.

47 The Crabfish catches a Hare.

Applied to them that speak absurdly of a thing impossible, and as true as the
Sea burns.

48 The Camel danceth.

Applied to those that would seem to do that which by nature they are unapt
unto.

49 Thou give the Dog straw, and the Ass a bone.

Applied to those who do things contrary to nature and reason.

50 A hasty Bitch brings forth blind Whelps.

Applied to those who take no deliberation about their affairs, and as we say,
not too fast for breaking your shinnes.

51 They beheld the celestial Goat in the East.

Applied to such as bring all their enterprises fortunately to pass.

52 A Goat of The Isle where Ulysses suffered shipwreck.
Corcyra.

Applied to such as have many virtues, but some vices do stain and deface
them.

53 He will sooner carpe at, then imitate.

Applied to such as are still censuring other men's actions, yet do nothing
worthy themselves.

54 To sow the hollow part of Arabia.

Applied to such as take great pains where no need is.

55 To fawn like a Dog wagging his tail.

Applied to Flatterers and Parasites.

56 The blind leading the blind.

Applied to such as wanting knowledge, seem to give counsel.

57 The blind and the lame shall not come to minister in the Temple.

Applied to such as are put out of any Office, as unworthy.

58 A Hart-like man.

Applied to such as trust more to their legs then their strength, such we call
fresh water soldiers.

59 Celinis all in iron.

Applied to all bragging and boasting fellows who seem to be brave men in
their own eyes, and in no bodies else.

60 A blind man's writing.

Applied to such as describe a matter, and yet understand it not themselves.

61 The Heart hunts the Hounds.

A Proverb used when we would signify any preposterous thing.

62 An ill Bird has an ill Egg.

Applied to such whose life and conversation is agreeable to their depraved
nature.

63 The Crocodiles tears.

Applied to such, who under the form of lamentation and mourning seek to
deceive others.

64 Deceive not the measure.

Applied to such as take no care for things necessary for themselves.

65 Chirons wound.

A Proverb used of such as have an incurable wound, taken from Chiron the
Centaure, whom Hercules wounded in the foot.

66 Cast not thy meat into a Pispot.

Applied to such as use good Discourse to a naughty and lewd fellow: as Christ
says, Cast not your Pearls before Swine.

67 Usury runs swifter then The weeping Philosopher.
Heraclitus.

Applied as a Caveat to them which borrow upon Usury: for it is swift, and
brings Poverty suddenly.

68 Louder then the crackling Bays.

Applied to such whose tongues will never lie still, but are wagging
continually.

69 A Snailes life.

Applied to such as live a lazy and luskish life, without profit to themselves
or the commonwealth.

70 To cherish a Snake in ones bosom.

Applied to all ungrateful and unthankful persons.

71 To cleave wood with the key, and open the door with an Axe.

Applied to such, whose actions are very preposterous, as for a man to bring up
his children in servile fear, and make his servants equal with himself.

72 As eager as Scammony.

Applied to all arrogant men, who despise their inferiors.

73 Dishonesty is very brief, but virtue is very slow.

A Proverb showing that a man may soon be vicious, but not without great
labor can become virtuous.

74 A Dog has many lodgings.

Applied to such libidinous men as cannot be content with one woman.

75 A Quail and Hercules.

Applied to such as have escaped great danger by their help of whom they
expected least.

76 A Goblet full of contentions.

Applied to such as are the Authors of strifes and discords, such we use to
call make-bates.

77 Loves Bag is bound about with a Leekes blade.

Applied to those who care not what they bestow to compass their Love.

78 Why do thou not hang thy self?

Applied to such as desiring the safeguard of their country, do cast
themselves into inevitable dangers.

79 To play the deceiuer with deceivers.

Applied to two crafty companions, who would feign deceive one another.

80 He that has Pepper enough, may put the more in his sallads.

Applied to rich men, who may live delicately upon their plenty.

81 With spear and shield.

Applied to those who leave nothing unattempted to effect their purposes.

82 Give me a Basin.

Applied to those who being vexed with ill words, cannot refrain, but must
utter their minds.

83 Liberal of another man's.

A Proverb when men are bountiful, and frank of another man's purse.

84 Out of the Lime-pit into the cole-pit.

Applied to such who escaping one evil, do straightwayes fall into another.

85 From heaven to the Synagogue.

Applied to those men who from a quiet estate are fallen into cares and
troubles.

86 I know the tree by the fruit.

A Proverb, or rather a similitude: For that every tree is known by his
fruit, so is every man by his deeds.

87 It is sweet to suffer ship-wracke together.

Applied to those who being in misery, would have all men in the same case.

88 He wants the cunning diuer Delius.

A Proverb used when a hard thing is spoken, and requires a cunning Expositor.

89 If thou want wind, use the Oars.

Applied to such as being crossed in their purposes, must use some other means.

90 From a Gown to a cloak.

Applied to such as are fallen into poverty from a wealthy estate; as from a
Gentleman to a beggar: very common now adays.

91 God appearing on a sudden.

Applied to those who being in great perplexity and danger, have beyond hope
been delivered, and atchiued their desired ends.

92 By speaking men learn to speak.

Applied to such who are fearful to become excellent in any thing because the
beginning is difficult.

93 A dog worthy scraps.

Applied to such as strive by pains and virtue to live: As we usually say, the
Labourer is worthy his hire.

94 A dog worthy a stool.

Applied to such as are promoted to honor without desert.

95 Dionysius of Corinth.

A Proverb showing the mutabilitie of estate, as in the example of Dionysius,
who being expulsed his kingdom fled to Corinth where he taught little children.

96 They had rather see a quoyt then a Philosopher.

Applied to such as love their pleasure better then their profit.

97 Now he is rich, he takes no delight in his grains.

Applied to them who having obtained dignity, despise their first estate.

98 Rich in promises.

Applied to such as care not what they promise, yet perform nothing.

99 He that is fairly blessed may stay at home.

A Proverb, declaring that they that have all things at their hearts desire,
should live at home, if they would live happily.

100 Held fast with two Anchors.

Applied to those who are so diligent and circumspect in their affairs, that
they cannot be disappointed.

101 He that follows two Hares at once, takes neither of them.

Applied to such, as through covetousness aiming at two Offices, lose both.

102 The fruit is sweet when the Keeper is away.

This Proverb may be taken two ways, either when wicked men go from one
wickedness to another unpunished, or when any thing is gotten from another by
deceit.

103 To fly away on both feet.

Applied to them, who use all means possible to escape imminent danger.

105 To strike one string false often.

Applied to such as offend many times in one gross fault or other.

106 To strike upon the same Anuile.

Applied to such, who use often to repeat one and the same matter, and are
always harping on one string.

107 Thou make an Elephant of a Fly.

Applied to such, as by their eloquence in speaking or writing, make a great
protestation of a small matter.

108 To blow hot and cold with one breath.

Applied to such as can sooth a man to his face, and reproach him behind his
back.

109 I gathered but a little corn of a great deal of chafe.

Applied to those who bestow a great deal of labor, but to little purpose.

110 Thou sleep like Endymion.

Applied to all luskish and slothful people, who live like Drones.

111 To drink in a Cup boared through.

Applied to such as pour out all that is in their mind, to their own or
others hurt.

112 A Rose springs not from an Onion.

A Proverb used when an honest man begets a child, which resembles his
father in all goodness.

113 Pimpernell is amongst the Potherbs.

Applied to those who being of no reputation, yet through their haughty
stomach meddle in matters not concerning them.

114 Seeking to avoid one rock, he falls upon another.

Applied to those who avoiding one danger fall into a greater.

115 To rub the face or mouth.

Applied to them who have cast off all shamefastness, which is the sign of a
naughty heart.

116 When we are in health we can give good counsel to the sick.

Applied to them who can advise others when they offend, yet cannot perceive
their own faults.

117 You asked for a sickle.

Applied to such, as being demanded a matter, give a clean contrary answer.

118 It is a most miserable thing to die with hunger.

This Proverb may be taken in a divine sense, and meant of those whose souls
do perish for want of the heavenly food, Gods word.

119 The Corn is more fruitful in another man's ground.

Applied to them who are of a covetous mind, and think all too much that
others have.

120 Thou have spunne the thread and want a needle.

A Proverb signifying that it is not sufficient to begin well, but to hold on
to the end, and persevere.

121 Observe the end of his life.

A Proverb showing the mutability of humane condition, as in the examples of
Priamus, Craesus, Bajazet, etc.

122 The River does not always carry men safe.

A Proverb showing that if one speed well, another should not presently think
to do the like.

123 The flame is nearest the smoke.

Applied to such as run into hurts and dangers which they are afraid of.

124 The Ant and the Camel.

Applied to them who speak things very unequal.

125 Fortune helps the valiant.

Applied to such as are no cowards, but will enterprise their affairs with
resolution.

126 Fortune makes men proud.

Applied to such as have Fortune as it were in a string, and so become insolent
and disdainful toward others.

127 The anger of Brethren is most deadly.

A Proverb declaring that the hatred amongst brothers, is more cruel then
among the vulgar.

128 Rub him again that rubs thee.

A Proverb showing that one good turn requires another.

129 The Cock stands to it.

Applied to such as being overcome, yet having stout hearts, give the onset
again.

130 Applied to them who are by any subtility deceived.

131 Cranes swallowing stones.

Applied to such as are wise to prevent danger.

132 A Fly has a spleen.

Applied to such who though they are weak* yet are as apt to revenge as the
strongest.

133 Thou live in the Halcyon days.

Applied to them who never meet with any cross or sorrow through their whole
life.

134 Thou have set this snare to catch thy self.

Applied to them who plot a mischief for others, and in the end it falls upon
their own pate.

135 To give an herb.

Applied to such who are overcome either in the field, or in the school.

136 Herostratus glory.

Applied to such who look for a reward for some notable villainy done.
Herostratus burned the famous Temple of Diana.


137 A Fawn and a Lion.

A Proverb used when stout and strong men are foolishly provoked of weak
wretches.

138 To day No body, to morrow a great One.

Applied to such as are suddenly come to riches or honor, from a poor and
abject condition.

139 To cut off the monster Hydra.

A Proverb when one mischief comes in the neck of another.

139 Add not fire to fire.

Applied to such as being of an impudent nature run from one vice into
another.

140 A Troy of evils.

A Proverb used when a number of evils befall any one man.

141 To plead in strange Court.

Applied to such who deal in matters wherein they have no skill.

142 An old Proverb to be applied to them that are painful, and industrious
to get their living.

143 There is truth in wine.

Applied to such as being drunk, reveal all their secrets.

144 One trappe caught another.

A Proverb used when one knave detecteth another.

145 More greasy then an Oil pot.

Applied to great eaters who for all their meat, are never the handsomer in
their bodies.

146 A Lerna of wickedness.

Applied to such men in whom are all kind of vices and abominations.

147 Thou tiest thread to thread.

Applied to such as speak one thing and do another.

148 An Ox of Locria.

A Proverb used when one speaks of a vild and fond thing, which Proverb was
borrowed of the Locrenses, who offering to Jupiter the similitude of an Ox,
thought they had done him great honor.

149 The Woolfe is in the tale.

A Proverb when the party of whom there is communication had, comes in
unawares.

150 To wash away dirt with dirt.

Applied to him who committing an absurdity in his talk, and meaning to cover
it, utters another absurdity as bad, or worse then the former.

151 To bring Engines after the war is ended.

Applied to them who are busy about a matter that is finished.

152 More silent than a Fish.

Applied to such as are more silent than becomes them.

153 Goods ill gotten, are ill lost.

Applied to such as get their wealth by deceit, which will not continue with
them.

154 To beget better Birds.

Applied to such as after great trouble do suddenly enjoy a happy issue
thereof.

155 The Hares skip when the Lion is dead.

156 A mutual defense is safest.

A Proverb showing that Concord expels the violence of ignominious men.

157 Men strive not about a wild Olive.

Applied to such as use frivolous questions in a matter of importance.

158 A rusticke hatred.

Applied to them whose hatred is implacable; and as we say commonly, I could
eat his heart with salt.

159 He smells of the Lantern.

Applied to such who by great study attain to the understanding of things
unknown to them.

160 There is no use of Sheep.

Applied to all slothful persons, who like a dull Horse will go no longer
then he is spurred.

161 To make a recantation.

Applied to those who are unconstant and unstable, turning every wind.

162 The mountains were in labor, and brought forth a silly Mouse.

Applied to all braggers, who are free of words, and slow of actions.

163 To weaue Penelopes web.

Applied to those who labor hard, yet can see no fruit of their labors.

164 The Mag-pie contends with the Nightingale.

Applied to such as presuming upon their skill, contend with them that surpass
them.

165 A fat belly has not a thin sense.

Applied to such as are much given to belly cheer, and yet think to excel in
wit, which cannot be, for riotousnesse duls the wit.

166 To cut ones throat with a leaden Sword.

Applied to such as are overcome with an easy argument.

167 A little Hog of Acarnania.

Applied to those who do wallow in all kind of sensuality and pleasure.

168 An ill Poet for a fine Physician.

Applied to those who are not content with their estate and calling, but assay
things beyond their reach.

169 God goes before the casting of the Anchor.

A Proverb when chances are prevented by Gods help.

170 He deceived the Fox finely.

Applied to such as are overtaken in their own craftiness.

171 Stinking salt Fish must have wild Marioram.

A Proverb showing that honesty needs no cloak.

172 Although thou said it not, yet it appears by the skin.

Applied to such whose countenance bewrayes them when they lie.

173 To drink after the manner of Frogs.

Applied to such as delight in drunkenness.

174 To rub an old sore.

Applied to them who reuolue old matters in their mind, which causes greater
grief.

175 To weigh the holy Anchor.

A Proverb used when a man flying from one place to another, is feign to use
that for his fafe-gard which never fails him.

176 Africa always brings some news.

A Proverb used toward men of small trust, that always hunt after news.

177 If I had Cheese, I would not care for cates.

Applied to those who are content with such things as please their own
fantasy, though they be simple.

178 To add stars to the Sky.

A Proverb used when great rewards are bestowed upon them that need them not.

179 An excellent Emrald seems to be dark in the light.

Applied to them that have good skill in Arts, yet will not show it when more
excellent men are in place.

180 Hope preserues the distressed.

181 Exceed not the balance.

A Proverb showing that nothing ought to be done, but that which is honest and
lawful.

182 To hide a buncht back with a purple garment.

Applied to such as endeavor to cloak their wickedness with some color of
godliness.

183 A Sow in a durty puddle.

Applied to those who having left their lewd behavior for a time, at length
like Swine return to their filthiness.

184 The Sow heard the Trumpet.

Applied to those who are neither sorry nor merry at that which they hear.

185 A voluptuous and sumptuous table.

A Proverb, when Temperance can have no room for surfeiting and Drunkenness.

186 To vex secretly.

A Proverb, when a man is angry with himself.

187 More silent then the Pythagoreans.

This Proverb sprang from Pythagoras Scholars, to whom five years silence was
commanded.

188 Tantalus Orchard.

Applied to them who are wealthy, yet cannot have the fruition of their goods.

189 He will take up a Bull that has lifted a Calfe.

Applied to those who falling into small sins in their youth, commit great
ones in their riper age.

190 If thou make not much of thy self, thou make much of dogs.

Applied to those who to fulfill their sensual appetites, neglect their own
profit and commodity.

191 The burden of the earth.

Applied to those Drones and Caterpillars in a Commonwealth, who neither have
will nor desire to profit their Country.

192 A drunken man is not to be waked.

A Proverb showing that although a man have gone astray; yet if he repent him
of his fault, it ought not to be iterated.

193 More foolish then the Turpentine Tree.

Applied to such as are Asses and Dolts, yet think themselves jolly fellows.

194 The Snaile is safe within her Shell.

Applied to those who are content with that which they enjoy at home, and
commit not themselves to the hazard of fortune.

195 A Thassus of good things.

Applied to such as are very liberal in their promises, taken from the Isle
Thassus very plentiful of Almonds.

196 The earth desires rain.

Applied to them who desire such things as will turn to their commodity.

197 Plutus is fearful.

Applied to all rich men who are in continual fear to forgo their wealth.

198 A Thersites in shape.

Applied to such as are monstrously misshapen and disfigured in face and body.

199 More cowardly then Pisander.

Applied to men extraordinarily fearful.

200 Titans Countenance.

Applied to such as have a frowning surly countenance; of such we say they
look as though they had eaten Bulbeefe.

201 The Thracians know not Covenants.

Applied to all such as have no honesty in their doings or sayings.

202 Take away the Custard from the Beetle.

Applied to such as feed grossly and homely, and refuse nothing that is set
before them.

203 Lift up thy spur for defense.

A Proverb used when a man suffering injury, prepares himself to take
revenge.

204 He is as full of prickles as a Hedgehogge.

Applied to such as are so dainty to be dealt withal, that do a man what he
can, he cannot tell how to please them.

205 A logge is in all things.

A Proverb warning all men to be circumspect in their affairs.

206 To make a Tragedy of trifling matters.

Applied to them who make a great hurly burly about matters of no value.

207 In the manner of a Top.

Applied to such men who are mutable and variable in all their actions.

208 More just then the Balance.

Applied to them who are of an upright heart.

209 Tread upon thine own ground.

Applied to them who are continually meddling in other men's matters.

210 A cough for a fart.

Applied to such as can cunningly cog out an ill matter, and daube one lie with
another.

211 The Carthaginian Seas.

A Proverb used when any busy or cumbersome matter is in hand.

212 The stake deceiues the Vine.

Applied to them that deceive their friends in their greatest need, when they
are put in trust.

213 He sacrificed a Sow to Venus.

A Proverb used when a man presents his better with some gift unfit and
unworthy his person.

214 To take away the spring from the year.

Applied to them who choose the best of any thing, and leave the worst for
others.

215 To follow like the shadow.

A Proverb noting two companions that are never asunder.

216 They that are overcome, dare not mutter.

Applied to such as being convicted, have nothing to say for themselves.

217 Wine is the minds glass.

Applied to such as will disclose their disposition in their drink.

218 An old man's pate is a rayson.

A Proverb showing that the bodies of aged men are shrunk together like a
rayson.

219 A Divine rod.

A Proverb used when we enjoy whatsoever we wish, without help of any man.

220 To get two sons in law by one daughter.

Applied to them who will promise to two persons one and the same thing, which
but one can attain.

221 The nail is in the sore.

Applied to such as when a matter is bad enough, will make it worse.

222 To wax old in one day.

A Proverb showing that nothing does so soon cause old age, as great cares
and grief.

223 Called or not called, God will be at hand.

A Proverb when a thing comes to pass, whether we have regard to it or no.

224 I will show you my Feet.

Applied to fresh water Soldiers, that trust more to their feet then their
hands.

225 A flying oath.

Applied to such whose word is as sure as an obligation sealed with butter.

226 It burns without a firebrand.

Applied to such as are angry without a cause.

227 Even unto hoarsenesse.

Applied to such as will never give over, though they have said as much in a
matter as can be said.

228 Thou gnawest a bladder.

Applied to such as take a thing in hand, where there is no good to be done,
but loss of time and labor.

229 The Cormorants shadow.

Applied to such as do nothing but gape after gain and profit.

He brags as though he had carried away Achilles shield.

FINIS.
Martial. lib. 4. Epig. 91.
I Am lector queriturque deficitque;
Iam librarius hoc and ipse dicit,
Ohe jam satis est, Ohe libelle.

