THE DEFENSE OF GOOD WOMEN, DEVISED AND MADE BY SIR THOMAS ELYOT KNIGHT.

ANNO. M.D.XL.

TO THE MOST NOBLE AND MOST Virtuous princess Queen Anne, wife unto the
most excellent prince our most graciouse soueraygne lord, king HENRY the.
VIII. Thomas Elyot knight desires all honor.
AFTER THAT I had diligently rad and considered, the life and history of queen
zenobia, a lady of most famous renoume for her excellent virtues and most
noble courage: I was right desyrouse, that it should be radde in our own
language, whereby women (specially) moughte be provoked to embrace virtue more
gladly, and to be circumspecte in the bringing up of their children. But with
that imagination there came also to my remembrance, the ungentle custom of
many men, which do set their delight in rebukynge of women, although they
never received displeasure, but often times benefyte by them: ye when their
wanton appetite stereth them, they offer to serve them, and do extol them
with praises far above reason. which thing I of my nature abhorrynge,
determined (for the reverence that all honest men ought to bear to the
virtuous and gentyl sort of good women) to prepare for the^ a sufficient
defense against ill mouthed reporters. Than forth with entered in to my fantasy
the devise of this little treatise, wherein I did imagine, that the time were
now when zenobia lived, which was about the year after the incarnation of
Christ. CC.lxxiiii. when also the noble Aureliane was Emperor of Rome. And to
induce that noble pryncesse to declare her own life, I devised a contention
between two gentylmen, the one named Caninins, the other Candidus. Caninius
like a curre, at womennes conditions is always barkynge, but Candidus, which
may be enterpreted benygne or gentle, judges ever well, and reproves but
seldom: between the^ two the estimation of womankind comes in question. And
after long dysputation, wherein Candidus (as reason is) has the preeminence,
at the last for a perfyte conclusion, Queen Zenobia by the example of her
life, confirms his arguments, and also vainquisheth the obstynate mind of
froward Caninius: and so ends the matter, which I do dedycate unto your
hyghnes most noble pryncesse, humbly desyryng your highness in such wise to
accept my good will and service and this littell warke as your own, that
under your gracis protection and favor it may saufely pass through the
daungerouse raze of dysdayne and envy, and be received thankfully and ioyousely
of al good women in this your noble realm, who by the only example of your
excellent majesty, may be always desyrouse to embrace virtue and gentylnesse,
wherein consists very nobility.

Often reading
Causes good understanding.
coat of arms of Sir Thomas Elyot FACE AVT TACE


CANINIVS, CANDIDVS, ZENOBIA.
CANINIVS.
SVCHE IS THE condition of Venus derlynges, so long as they be styrred with
pleasant affections, they be still insensible in the feelynge of Sapience. Ye
all do know Candidus, kynsman to Aureliane the emperor that now is, an
honest young gentylman, well learned and courtayse, so that his nobleness does
appear in his manners. Yesterday did I see him deuysyng with ladies, whereby I
coniected that he was a lover, and therefore I lamented. And as he happened to
come by me, I rouned him in the ear and said to him softely: Beware noble
young man, I perceive ye be gyued, pluck out your legs er the boltes be
ryueted. Thereat he smyled, and layinge his hand upon mine, he said to me
privily: I wot what ye mean. I pray you be to morrow with me at Tiburtum,
which is but a little out of the city, where I have a fair and commodiouse
lodginge, there shall we soupe with some other gentylmen. And there will I
vanquishe your wylfull opynion conceived against women: or else I being
vanquished with sufficient reason, will from henseforth leave al mine affection.
And so departed he from me. This is Tiburtum, for yonder is the palayce of
Hadrian. well Candidus will not be long, his noble nature will not let him
break promise. for lack of faith defaceth al virtues. CANDIDVS. Ye spoke
never a more true sentence, nor a more honest. for undoubtedly Faith, which
some do call trust, is of justice so great a portion, that without it neither
god may be pleased, nor any weal Publyke may be surely stablished. And they
which do lack it them selfs, with a little touch broken be not a little
offended. CANINIVS. It is truly spoken, and now to talk of the matter, for
the which ye willed me to mete with you here is now happened a right good
occasyon. CANDI. Ye mean the matter concernnge women, which we two now have
taken upon us. CANINI. Even the same master Candidus. CANDI. Goo to on gods
name: what have ye to charge with all women? CANI. Nay first I pray you tell
me one thing that I will ask of you. Be not ye of that sect of Philosophers
called Pirhonici? CANDI. What mean ye thereby? I know not that sect: yet have
I seen a good part of philosophye. CANI. It is the sect which affirms, that
nothing is in deed as it seems to be, saying, that snow is black and not
white, the earth is not stable but ever mouinge, and many an other froward
affection, contrary to truth and al common reason. CANDI. No no Caninius, I
never favored such vain opinion. CANI. yet many one does, chaungynge only
the terms. for sens snow is so often times seen, they fear to say that it is
black, lest they should therefore be laughed to scorn. But virtue, who is not
so commonly seen, and of so many men looked on, is now of diverse men so
peruersely esteemed, that it is of some called folly, of many men fantasy, and of
some curiosity. Also the favorers thereof are little set by, as persons
unprofitable and nothing worldely. But to our purpose, I asked of you, if ye
were of the sect called Pirhonici, for if ye so were, I would think it vain
to reason then with you. But ye say, ye be not of that sect, than is it as
I said at my first coming hither. CANDI. What is that I pray you? CANI. ye
that be lovers be dull and insensyble in feelynge of Sapience. for although ye
be infourmed by daily experyence, that in woman kind faith never rested, yet
be you still as blind as your litel god Cupide. for the chyldishe affections
which ye bear to your ladies, causes you to think the things which ye se,
to be nothing but vanities. CAN. Now in good faith that is merrily spoken. CA.
Well yet, some have repented them bitterly, fyndyng the lynke suddenly broken,
and in the stead of faith falshode and treachery. CAN. Nay ye now do but rail I
promise you truly. In deed both by reading and heresay I have found women much
blamed for their inconstancy: but for mine own knowledge I never perceived any
such lack to be in them, but rather the contrary. CA. Sir by the consent of
al auctours my words be confirmed, and your experience in comparison thereof is
to be little esteemed. CANDI. I perceive ye be of the company, which
dyssapoynted sometime of your purpose, are fallen in a frenesy, and for the
displesure of one, do spryng on al women the poison of infamye. But now
Caninius, sense ye be wise and well learned, subdue your passion. for impatient
hering, with words hastily and unadvisedly spoken, is a sign of folly and
litel discretion. wherefore now here me speak though it shall not savor to your
opinion. The authors whom ye so much do set by, for the more part were poets,
which sort of persons among the latins and greeks were never had but in small
reputation. For I could never read that in any weal public of notable memory,
Poets were called to any honorable place, office, or dignite. Plato out of the
public weal which he had devised, would have all poets utterly excluded.
Tulli, who next unto Plato excelled all other in virtue and eloquence, would
not have in his publyke weal any poets admitted. The cause why they were so
little esteemed was, for as much as the more part of their inuencions
consysted in leasynges, or in sterynge up of wanton appetytes, or in pourynge
out, in raylynge, their poison of malice. For with their own gods and
goddesses were they so malaparte, that with their aduoutries they filled great
volumes. Jupiter, whom they call king of gods and of men, they bring him out
of heaven to his harlottes transfourmed sometime in to a bull, an other time
like a ram, a stynkynge got or a serpente. His queen Juno like a cow,
Mercurius like a wulfe. Ne they left heaven unpolluted, fainynge that the god
Mars made Vulcane cokeolde, committing aduoutrye with Venus, wife to Vulcanus.
But Vulcane was a wyly pie and said nothing, but being a smythe, he made
such suttell manakles, that er the two lovers were ware, he tied them so fast
to gether, that they moughte not be severed: and than called he the hole route
of gods and goddesses, and made them to se Mars and Venus where they lay
naked, whereat they al lewghe, but Mars was angry and Venus almost ashamed.
Other poets there be, which in their most lamentable and woeful ditties so
do humble them selfs to their maistresses, as they would lycke the duste
from their slyppers, and as soon as either by age, or with hauntynge of
brothelles, the flame of carnalitie is thoroughly quenched, or else if women do
constantly refuse their dishonest desires, anon arm they their pens and
tunges with serpentyne malice, obiecting against al women most beastly
conditions. Whereby they more detect their propre inconstancy than women's
vnfaythefulnesse. CANI. Now in good faith ye have well circumscribed your
masters properties. CANDI. Whom call ye my masters? CANI. Mary poets. for in
their warkes is the only study of you that be lovers. for that book, which
lacks complayntes with wepynges and sighinges, is to you men that be amorouse
wonderful tediouse. CANDI. Truly Caninius ye are much abused, taking me to
be of that sort of wantons. Nay truly, True lovers, of which company I
confess my self to be one, are in no part of their conditions. for only
delityng in the honest behauour, wisdom and gentylnesse of ladies, or other
matrones or damselles, we therefore desire to be in their companies, and by
mutual deuisinge to use honest solace. But show me Caninius, what other
auctorytie have ye, to prove that in womenne lacks fidelity. CANI. Why set
ye so little by poets and poetry? CANDI. Ye when they excede the terms of
honestye. But if they make verses containing quick sentences void of
rybauldry, or in the commendation of virtue, some praty allegory, or do set
forth any notable story, than do I set by the^ as they be well worthy. CANI.
If ye will give no credence to poets, what say ye to philosophers and writers
of stories, with whom ye may find such abundaunce of examples and sentences
of the false hode of women and their unhappiness, that if they should be
rehearsed, I trow ye would not abide it, I know so your shame fastness.
CANDI. Truly none of them, which were them selfs honest and continente, have
written in dysprayse of the hole kind of women. What has Plato, Xenophon,
Plotinus, and Plutarch, or other philosophers like unto them written in that
matter, whereby they have made them inferior to men? or if they have in womenne
any thing blamed, it may appear to be but in some, and not in the more part,
if it be well and syncerely considered. And also in stories where one woman
perchance is for some fault dispraysed, that is counterpeysed with a great
number for their virtue commended. Now I pray you, was Helene, for whom Troy
was destroyed (being ravished by Paris) so much to be blamed, as Hercinia the
wife of Romulus, and more than a thousand of het companions, are to be praised,
which in the rage of battle joined between their husbands and parents, so
reconciled them, that with one consent they inhabited one city, and lived to
gether in perpetu all unity? Ought the unchastity of any woman to be so
remembered, as the continence of queen Penelope ought to be honored, who in
the absence of Vlixes her husband, the space of.xx. years, kept her honor and
fame uncorrupted, notwithstanding that with many diverse wowers she was daily
assaulted, but by no manner of mean moughte she be founden, by deed word nor
countenance in her chaste purpose unconstant. And to resist carnal affections,
she was always seen, although she were a queen and a kniges daughter,
vertuouslye occupied. What cause found Paris to forsake his first lady Oenone,
but only that the beaulty of Helene was much more famous? And yet his cruel
unkindness might not exclude love from her gentle heart, but she remayninge
still continente, after that Paris was slain by Achilles, she with
exclamations and effusions of teres entered into the charlotte where his
carcaise lay, and when she had bained her fair lyppes in his putrified
wounds, and had saciate her self with mortal solace, fynallye she there died
oppressed with heuinesse. But because these be of some men taken for fables, I
will briefly declare the faythfulnesse of diverse womenne rehearsed in stories.
In the host of the noble king Cirus, was a great prince (as Xenophon writes)
whose name was Abratades, whoo had to his wife a fair lady named Panthea of
excellent beaulty, this prince being slain in battle, she attaynynge his
body, and with her own hands washing the wounds, and imbaulminge it after
the facion of her own country, she in the presence of Cirus, with a knife,
which she had privily hid, semynge in words and counteance desirous to be
with her husband, whom she most tenderly loved, she perced her own heart,
and with him was buried: not withstanding that of king Cirus, whom her
husband had much praised a lyttel before, she was in marriage desired. Porcia,
daughter to the wise Cato, and wife unto Brutus, when she had hard of the
death of her husband fynding occasion to be alone from her servants, she
taking the hot burning coals out of a chymnay, devoured them hastily, and
forthwith died. Also when Seneca by the sentence of the cruel Nero the
emperor, was condemned to die, his wife called Paulina, desirous to be
continual companion with her old husband, caused also her veins to be
perced, and so would have died, had not Nero commanded her veins to be bound,
and the blood to be stopped, she notwithstanding afterward lived in sorrow
contynuall more paynefull than death, and during her life, her dedly pale
color declared to all men, which before knew her, the bitter sorrows, which
for her husband she always sustained. In the time of the cruel confederacy of
Lepidus, Octauiane, and Antony, a gentylman called Ligaryus, was by his wife
and a maiden servant, kept at Rome in his house privily: but what for fear of
punishemente, and hope of reward, he at the last was discovered, who^ being
led to be beheded, his loving wife continually followed, desiring the
ministers to put her also to death with her husband, allegyng that also to die
she had well deserved, for as much as she had kept her husband at home, after
that she knew that he was attainted: but saying that no man did take regard
to her hearty request, she returned home to her house, and shutting fast all
the doors, and absteynynge from all meats and drynkes, finally with sorrow
and famyne she ended her life, and departed to her husband, whom she so much
loved. But lest we should be to long from our supper, I will cesse to recite
any mo stories, whereof there be no little number, declarynge the constance of
ladies and damselles. And if ye would say, that there has been and is a much
greatter number of them that are ill, and full of unfaithfulness, yet if that
were true, than must ye consider, that in all kinds of things, are commonly
found more warse than better, or else should good things lack their
estimation, as it shall appear by this conclusion. for he that never has seen
any other metal than gold, maruayleth not at it, nor in his estimation
sets much by it. And where there be none other stoones found but Diamandes,
Saphires, Emerauldes, and Rubyes, there men do tread on them, and sell them
for trifles. But if one should come to a coutreye, which seemed barrayne,
covered with an infynyte number of stones ragged, of ill color and facion, if
he chance to find here and there a poynted Diamande, well proporcioned and
orient: I dare say, he will lay up those few Diamandes as a great treasure,
and not remembryng the ragged stones, in the beholdynge of them take no
little pleasure. Semblably although a greatte number of women perchance were
viciouse, yet ought not a man reproach therefore the hole kind of women, sense
of them undoubtedly many be virtuous. CANINI. Ye have well assembled things
for your purpose. But what say you to Aristotel, whom ye have skypte over, in
the namynge of philosophers? he says, that a woman is a work of nature
imperfect. And more over, that her property is to delight in rebukyng, and to
be always complaining, and never contented. Now take heed master Candidus.
Perfection is ever constante and never changes, but a woman is a creatue
imperfect, she therefore may never be stable or constante. ye know this form
of argument, for I espy by your talkyng ye ar learned in logike. More over,
rebukynge is a mislykynge, and no man myslyketh the thing that he loves, but
all that he loves he favors and lyketh, but women of their nature do delight
in rebukynge, and the thing wherein any person deliteth, he coueteth, and
coueitynge it he will at the last (if it be in his power) execute it. Women
therefore lackinge some other, on whom they may practice their property, will
rebuke some time their husbands, whom perchance they loved: and than
mislyketh she the thing that she erst loved. wherefore ye must grant, that
she is inconstant. Also who that is never content, may never be constant,
the cause why is to all men apparent. Wherefore there needs not any more
argument, women for these reasons that I have rehearsed, be of their nature
always unconstant. is it not thus? Now knacke me that nut master Candidus. I
trow it be to hard for your teth, although ye were as well tothed as Curins
De^tatus, which as men say, held fast a ship with his tethe until it was
taken. CAN. In good faith Caninius ye are a merry companyon. But although my
tethe be not so strong, yet shall I so use my tunge in the stead of my tethe,
that I will therewith open your cobnut, that to all them that will be contented
with reason, it shall appear well, that it is pypped. CANINI. In faith ye be a
mete advocate for women, sense ye have tethe in your tunge, for likewise have
they all, if they be tothlesse. CANDI. And it seems that ye lack teth to hold
in your tunge that it go not to lauesse. But now will I assay to knacke your
nutte master Caninius. Where ye said, that of a purpose I skypt over
Aristotel, there ye said truly, In good faith so did I. And here have at your
blockehouse, out of the which is shot against women all this artillery. Sir
when I affyrmed, that none of the philosophers which were honest and continent,
wrate any thing in dysprayse of womankynde, I remembered even than your master
Aristotel, and iuged him not worthy to be of that number, but his report much
less to be regarded, than the fayninges of poets, whom I have rehearsed, and
for this intent. For Poets wrate against women in wanton ditties, to content
men with new fangled devises. But the reproach to women, given by Aristotel,
was in treating of matter wayghty and seriouse, whereby it appears, that the
said words so spytefully spoken, proceeded only of cankred malice, whereunto he
was of his own nature dysposed, which may be of them shortly perceived, that
beholds in his warkes, none other philosopher escape unrebuked. Ne trewelye
he was ashamed to rent with rebukes the immortal fame of Plato his master,
of whose divine mouth he had twenty years sucked the most sweet honey of noble
philosophye, which malice grew of this occasion, as ancient authors have
made thereof mention. For as much as where he was more curyouse in his
apparayle and deckyng, than was convenient to his profession, also more light
in countenance, and dissolute in living, than became an instructour of virtue
and wisdom, Plato therefore preferred other his scholars before him, which he
very displesauntly taking, sought occasion to rebuke his master wha^ he was
dead, which he never dare while he was living. That Aristotel was dissolute
and also inconstante, it may appear by this, which is written of him. for to
Hermia which was his concubine he did sacrifice, and made solemn hymns while
she was living. Can ye compare any madness or folly, to this man's abuse and
vnco^stancy? May there be so great an abuse, as to give dyuyne honors to a
mortal creature, also to an harlot and common sinner? what inconstancy was in
him, which calls that a creature vnperfyt, to whom he did solemn sacrifice,
sange devout hymns, and often times kneled? To blaspheme so his goddess,
ought not this great philosopher be foul ashamed? Wherefore Caninius by mine
advise, do ye not lean more to his authorite, than unto truth, virtue, and
honesty, but consider his nature inclyned to malice, his fond error and
vain curiosite, and that which ye disprayse in women, apparante inconstancy.
CANINI. Ye have a great affection to Plato I perceive verily: but will ye deny,
that a woman is of her nature imperfect? CANDI. ye mary will I. for wherein do
you note her to be imperfect? Is it in the soul or in the body? CANI. In
both of them trewely, for they be weaker than men, and have their flesh
softer, less hear on their visages, and their voice sharper, and as I have
read, they have in some parts of their bodies, their boones fewer. And as
concerning the soul, they lack hardynes, and in peryles are tunerouse, more
delycate than men, unapt to paynfulnesse, except they be thereto constrained,
or steryd by wylfullnesse: And the wit, that they have, is not substanciall
but apyshe: never flory shynge but in vngraciousenesse, or in trymmynge them
selfs with praty deuyses, or excusing their faults with vnstudyed answers,
or in praty mockes or scorneful dalyaunce, or to invent mischieues to saciate
their malice. In other things it is unapt unto knowledge, except one or two,
which I have red of, who in Rome has pleaded as Orators. But that is not to
be maruayled at, sens they being instructed in eloquence, their domestical
exercise, I will not say chiding, makes them bold to contend in pleadynge.
In the parts of wisdom and civil policy, they be founden unapt, and to
have litell capacity. But their most vnperfection is their inconstancye,
which proceeds of their said natural debilitie. For where as the affection
of much dread or much love abounds, stabilitie lacks, and wit little
preuayleth. Contrary to this I dare well say, ye can make none evasion. CAN.
yes, and dysproue all your malyciouse conclusion. But I pray you Canimus, let
me ask you a question. be all the books of your master Aristotel of equal
authority? CA. ye that be they verily. CAN. In the instytution of householde
keeping, called Oeconomice, Aristotel writes in this wise. The company most
according to nature, is that which is ordained of man and woman, which was
constitute, not to the intent only to bring forth their semblable as other
beasts perticipatours of nature and with out reason, but for love specially,
and mutual assystence. And he says also in the same book, and not far from
thense. This company is not because that each of them has in every thing and
the same al their virtues like profitable, but some of their virtues seem to be
contrary one to an other, and yet in conclusion they agree to one purpose. for
nature made man more strong and couragiouse, the woman more weak fearful and
scrupulouse, to the intent that she for her feblenesse should be more
circumspecte, the man for his strength much more aduenturouse. Be not these
the words of your master? how say you? CANI. Where ye say truth I will not
deny you. it is of his sentence the very pythe and effect. for he wrate in
greek ye know well enough. wherefore they be not in the same words as ye do
speak them. CAN. It makes no matter if I do truly interpret them. But now
to our purpose. Is perfection and vnperfection in things, any thing else,
than abundaunce and lack of that, which is expedient to the end whereunto
nature has ordained them? CA. Nay in good sothe, for I think that a true
difinition. CAN. But let me see, where I called it abundaunce, Abundance.
I might better have named it sufficience. Sufficie^ce
for abundaunce does properly signify more than is necessary. Sufficience
descryueth the thing with bounds and limittes, the excess whereof is called
superfluity, and the lack may be named necessity. CANI. In faith ye be to
curiouse. Perdy the word neither made nor marred any thing of our purpose.
for abundaunce and sufficience is commonly taken for one thing. CAN. ye and
that has subverted the order of al thing. for truly words used in their
proper signification, do bring things to a plain understanding. And where
they be much abused and wrested from their true meaning, they cause sundry
errors and perpetual contention. But let us now return to our question.
Klaye is a kind of earth soft and clammy, and for those qualyties serves to
make walls for houses, and to that end has his perfection: Although a stone
be a matter hard and consolidate, and serves also for walls, and makes them
stronger to serve for municion. The horse has much strength, and therefore is
apt for iourneys and burdens: the sheep is feeble and fearful, and may
therefore easily be shorn. And yet each of these in his kind has his
perfections. To men nature has given puissaunce in members, braunes hard and
consolidate, the skyn thick, perchance mo bones as ye say, to sustain
outward labors. And to seem the more terrible, much hear on their visage.
To women she has given the contrary: to the end and intent which your master
rehearsed, that her debilyte should make her more circumspect, in the keeping
(says he) at home such things as her husband, by his puissaunce has
gotten. for those words also he added to the^, which are before spoken. Is
not that a company according to nature, where the one dylygentelye keeps
that, which the other by labor prepares? for what profits it to prepare,
where saulfe kepinge lacks? Getting and keeping
In preparynge is labor or study, of keeping comes use and commodytie, and
therefore to speak indifferently, it deserves much more praise than the
geatinge. But now tell me one thing. wherein suppose you does a man excel all
other creatures? is it in greatness or puissance of body? CANI. No verily.
CAN. Than wherein suppose ye? CANI. In that that his soul is adourned with
reason. CAN. Stop there I pray you a little season, what call ye reason?
CANI. Why be ye now to learn, what thing is reason? CAN. Ye by my holy dome.
And this is the cause. for many men lean to their synguler opinion, iudgyng all that is contrary, to stand with no reason. wherefore I pray you make me thereof
a true definition. CANI. I will, to content with your fantasy, although that ye
ca^ do it I know well much better than I. Reason.
Reason is the principal part of the soul divine and immortal, whereby man
does discern good from ill. this thing whiles it discerns or seuereth the
one from the other, it is called Discretion: Discretion.
when it takes the one and leaves the other, it is named Election, Election
judgment of some men. The exercise thereof is called Prudence, of some
Circumspectio^. Prudence
Circu^spection.
And yet is euerich of these things nothing but reason, which to man is so
propre, that lackinge it, he loses his denomination. CAN. In good faith ye
have made of reason a right good description. And now I perceive that the
thing, whereby man excels all other creatures, is reason only. CANINI. Ye
verily. CANDI. What think you, is reason only in men? is it not also in
womenne suppose you? CA. yes, that is it naturallye, for the word Man, which
I named, includes as well woman as man, when it is written or spoken so
generallye. CAN. I am glad that I have found you so reasonable in talking of
Reason. But what say you by sharpness of wit, Wit.
does it not between man and beast make like dyuersitie? CANI. No suerly. for
wit is of the part of man that is mortal, and that is founden by daily
experyence. For where the vapors in the body be pure and suttell, which do
ascend into the brain, the wit becomes sharp and delycate: And where they be
gross ponderouse and smoky, the wit is dull and nothing pleasant. And
therefore phisicious have experie^ced by clarifying and te^perating the corporal
humors, to correct the wit, which is either with gross matter oppressed,
or with adust vapors smouldred or choked. But reason might never be brought
into a beast, which by nature lacks it. And yet in diverse of them have
been perceived so suttill wits, that therein me^ have seemed to be of them
vainquished. CANDI. I think it to be true that ye say. Than in whom reason
most does appear, ye will affirm, does most excel a beast in his nature.
CANI. ye master Candidus, that may ye be sure. CANDIDVS. And ye were agreed
while ere, that to keep diligently that which is gotten, is worthy more praise
than in the getting. CANI. ye, for there comes more effect of the keeping.
CANDI. And so ye conclude, that the power of reason is more in the prudente and
diligent keeping, than in the valiant or politic geatyng: And that
Discretion, Election, and Prudence, which is all and in every part reason,
do excel strength, wit, and hardiness: And consequentely they, in whom
be those virtues, in that that they have them, do excel in just estimation
them that be strong, hardy, or politic in geattynge of any thing. CA. ye
have well gathered to gether all that conclusion. CANDI. Behold Caninius,
where ye be now: ye have so much extolled reason, that in the respect
thereof bodily strength remains as nothing: for as much as the corporal
powers with powers of the soul can make no comparison. And ye have not denied,
but that this word Man, unto whom reason perteyneth, does imply in it both man
and woman. And agreinge unto Aristotels saying, ye have confirmed, that
prudence, which in effect is nothing but reason, is more aptly applied to the
woman, whereby she is more circumspecte in keeping, as strength is to the man,
that he may be more valiant in geattynge. And like wise ye have preferred the
prudence in kepinge, for the vtilytie thereof, before the valiantness in
geattynge: And semblably them which be prudent in keeping, before them that be
only strong and hardy in geattinge. And so ye have concluded, that women,
which are prudent in keeping, be more excellent than men in reason, which he
only strong and valiant in geatynge. And where excellency is, there is
most perfection. Wherefore a woman is not a creature imperfect, but as it
seems is more perfyte than man. CANI. Why, have ye dalyed herefore with me
all this long season? CAN. Suerlye I have used neither dalyaunce nor
sophistry: but if yeconsyder it well, ye shall find it but a natural inductio^,
and plain to al them that have any capacity. But yet have I some what more to
say to you. Ye said more over Caninius, that the wits of women were apt
only to trifils and shrewdenes, and not to wisdom and civil policy. I will
be plain to you, I am sorry to find in your words such manner of lewdness,
I cry you mercy, I would have said so much vngentylnesse, and in your own
words so much forgetfulness. CA. What mean ye thereby? CANDI. ye have twyse
granted, that natural reason is in women as well as in men. CA. ye and what
then? CAN. Than have women also Discrecio^, Election, and Prudence, which do
make that wisdom, which perteyneth to governance. And perdy, many arts and
necessary occupations have been invented by women, as I will bring now some
unto your remembrance. Latin letters were first founden by Nicostrata, called
also Carmentis. The.vii. liberal arts and poetry by the.ix. maidens called
the Musis. Why was Minerua honored for a goddess? but because she found
first in Grecia, plantynge or setting of trees: also the use of armor: and
as some do testifye, she invented making of fortresses, and many necessary
and notable sciences. Also that the wits of women be not unapt to laudable
studies, it apereth by Diotuna and Aspasia two honest maidens, which in all
parts of philosophy were so well learned, that Socrates, master to Plato,
nothing disdayned to come to their lessons, and called Diotima always his
mastresse. Cleobulina, the daughter of Cleobulus, one of the seven wise me^ of
Greece, wrate diffuse and mistycall questions in heroical versis. Also
Leontium a woman, excelled al men of her time in wisdom and eloquence, in
so much as she wrate against Theophrast, the most eloquent disciple of
Aristotel, in womennes defense, which book if it now had remained, should have been sufficyent to have put you to silence. If the learning and wisdom of the
lady Cassandra, daughter to king Priamus, had been regarded more than the
counsayl of flatterers, the city of Troy and kyngedome of Frigia, had
longer remained, And Priamus with his noble succession had many years rayned.
Behold our progenitors the ancient Romans in all extreme dangers, when other
counsel utterly failed, did not they resort to the books of Sibylla Cumana,
called also Amalthea? and pursuing her advise, which she had there declared,
did they not escape the perils which thanne were imminente? Hundredes of such
women are in stories remembered, but for speed of time I will pass them over,
sens I trust that these be suffyciente to prove, that the hole kind of women,
be not unapt unto wisdom as ye have supposed. As concerning strength and
valyante courage, which ye surmise to lack in them, I could make to you no
less replication, and by old stories and late experyence, prove, that in arms
women have been found of no little reputation, but I will omit that for this
time, for as much as to the more part of wise men it shall not sound much to
their commendation: Saving that we now have one example among us, as well of
fortitude as of all other virtues, which in mine opinion, shall not be
inconueniente, to have at this time declared, and so of this matter to make a
conclusion. CANINI. And I have mine ears thereto prepared. CAN. The best matter
is ever good to be spared, until the tale be almost at an end, and than shall
the herers with the length thereof be little offended. Sir there dwells here by
me a lady, late a great queen and wife to Odenatus king of Palmyry, which
is a city and countreye in Surry, her name is Zenobia: she has had of our
host victory twice, and now late was taken prisoner by Aurelian the emperor,
all be it for her nobylitye virtue and courage, she was pardoned of her life,
and a fair house is appointed to her in this village. she is well learned in
greek, and does competently understand latin, but excellently the Egiptian
language. She her self techeth her children good letters, and being now
vacant from other business, wrytcth as they say of Alexandria and the
orient eloquent stories. I have boden her to supper, it will not now be long
or she come hither. And when ye do here her, I dare well say, ye will be
changed from your opinion, and confess, that in womenne is both courage,
constance, and reason. CANINIVS. But I pray you of this matter say to her
nothing. CANDI. Ah, I see well ye be loath to come to a reckoning. Thus do they
all that be of your fascion, In wise women's absence speak reprochefullye, and
when they be present, flatter them plesauntly. But lo where she comes, let us
mete with her. Your ladyshyp is very heartily welcome. ZENO. Ye have caused me
to do, that I have used very seldom. CANDI. What is that madame? ZENO. To be
out of mine own house at this time of the night. CAN. I thank therefore your
ladyshyp. for I think the same, but I will promise you, nothing shall come to
your herynge or syghte, but that both to here and see may stand with your
worship. ZENO. That I heartily pray you, for the remembrance of my princely
astate may not sustain words of dishonesty. And because I am now as a
private person, I fear the common success of famylyaritie. CAN. What is
that madame I pray you heartily. ZENO. For I dread infamy, I tell you plainly,
more than ever I did the loss of my lyberty. CAN. No such thing shall happen
madame I promise you trewely. for here ye shall find nod men but of honest
condition. ZENOBIA. Yet some in devising with ladies, reioysynge to be therefore
had in a certain suspicion, will by the way of dalyaunce conney from them
some thing, which being showed, do engender in the beholders some dishonest
opynion. Diverse be not ashamed, to make their aduant, that they have received,
which of her that they speak of, was never ones proffered. These things master
Candidus have made me afraid, to come to suppers and bankettes. CANI. Mary
that is well said. And yet some time such things have been seen offered.
CANDI. Perchance of some young maidens which did it of courtesy. yet much more
have been asked that have been denayed. I have known it my self, I promise you
faithfully. ZENOBIA. Truly I like not such manner of folly, I have been brought
up in other study. CANDI. I pray you madame, let me ask you a question: but
first pleases it you to sit down and rest you? for I trow your supper is
not yet redye. ZE. Now what is your demand, speak on hardily? CAN. Of what
age was your ladishyp, when first ye were married? ZENO. Twenty years and above.
CANDI. It was great pity, that ye so long tarried. ZENO. But it was the more
for my commodytie. for I knew the better what longed to my duty. CANDI. Your
duty madame, what mean ye thereby. ZENOBIA. For by my study in moral
philosophy, wherein I spent the years between syxtene and twenty, I perceived,
that without prudence and co^stancy, women might be brought lyghtely into
error and folly, and made therefore unmeet for that company, whereunto they were
ordained: I mean, to be assistence and comfort to man through their fidelity,
which other bestes are not except they be by the force of man thereto
constrained. I found also, that Justice teaches us womenne, to honor our
husbands next after god: which honor rests in due obedience, whereby
mutual love betwyxte them is in a more feruence. for undoubtedly no woman him
loves, whose hate or displeasure she nothing fears. Also Justice
restrayneth us to do any thing, Justice.
which is not semely. By Fortitude are we still kept in a virtuous constancy,
Fortitude.
as well in resisting affections and wanton persuasion, as also to sustain
(when they do happen) afflyctions pacyently. But in a woman, Te^per^^ in women
no virtue is equal to Temperaunce, whereby in her words and deeds she always
uses a just moderation, knowing when time is to speak, and when to keep
silence, when to be occupied and when to be merye. And if she measure it to the
will of her husband, she does the more wisely: except it may turn them
both to loss or dyshonestye. yet than should she seem rather to give him wise
counsel, than to appear dissobedient or sturdy. In every of these things
consisted my duty, which I should not so well have known, if to my husband
I had sooner be wedded. CANI. In deed ye had been paste learning thereof, when ye
ones had been bedded. ZE. In good faith ye say trewely. for when I had been out
of the dread of my father (who kept me in this study continuallye) and had
ones tasted the pleasant devises, which are provided for queens and other
great ladies, ye may well suppose I should sone have lost, that delectation,
which I had in study. CAN. Ye say even truth by the faith of my body. but
madame, after that ye were married, what profit was to you, the know lege of
letters? ZENO. Much, master Candidus I promise you verily. for during the
life of my noble husband of famous memory, I was never hard or seen, say or
do any thing, which might not content him, or omytte any thing, which
should delight him. such circumspection, good lerning minystred unto me, that in
hunting and other pastymes, I retained always such gravity, that of any
dyssolute appetyte, none could conceive of me any suspicion: and yet my
learning was had of none honest man in any derysyon. But after the death of
my husband, I found of learning a meruaylouse treasure. For when I considered
the state of things, which thanne happened to gether, what danger was to the
realm immynente for lack of a governor, and that my children for their
tender youth, should be little regarded, and I being a woman, should
nothing be feared. Also what tutours my children should have, it was very
uncertain. Ambicion always raigninge in every country, which can not gladly
suffer in any one person such manner of souerayntie, that under the name of
protection, he should have in subjection all the nobility. And although that
such one might happen to be, yet having in remembrance as well ancient
histories as late exaumples, I dradde, Ambition.
Avarice.
lest in so greatte authority Ambition and Avarice might cause men to
forget their obedience trust and fydelytie. I considered also, that the realm
of Palmyry, was environed with enemies. for on the one side was the host of
the Romans, which always awayted to find opportunity, to invade my realm,
and to subdue it under their Empire. The thieves of Araby were on the other
side, which all redye were entered the marches, and spoiled the country. The
king of Media, to be discharged of his trybute, joined with our enemies,
willing to bring my realm in perpetual captivity. Was it any marvel, if
all these things did excedyngly trouble me? CAN. But finally madame, what
remedy found ye? ZENO. After that I had a little bethoughte me, I
determined to prepare remedies quickly, and to sustain fortune at al times
patiently. And to the intent that the name of a woman, should not among the
people be had in contempt, I used so my procedynges, that none of them might
be said, to be done womanly. Wherefore I sat always abroad among my nobles and
counsaylours, and said mine opinion, so that it seemed to them all, that it
stood with good reason. I came often times among the people, and remembered unto
them, the liberty and honor which they had received, by the excellent
prowess of my noble husband, showing to them my children, which for tender
age thanne were but feeble, exhorting them with sundry orations to retain
their fidelity. I visited all the hole realm and the marches, reedified
fortressys, and new made also sondrye municions. More over, I caused good
laws to be publyshed, obset uynge them first in mine own householde, and
caused them in all other places to be well executed. I made Justice chief ruler
of mine affection, and in all consultations would I be present, where I herd
all other speak first, that I would not be ignorant: and than showed mine
advise, wherein I seemed, not to be negligente. Touching my servants I used
such a dilygent scrutiny, that they were always persons of synguler honestye.
By this manner industry I quietly go uerned the realm of Palmyrye. And also
added much more to mine Empire, not so much by force, as by renoume of just
and politic governance, which all men had in such admyration, that diverse
of our said ennemies, which against the realm erste did conspyre, and had
invaded my iurisdyction, chase rather to leave their hostility, and to remain
in our subjection, than to return to their own country. to the which
wisdom and polycy I attained by the study of noble philosophye. Also thereby I
acquired such magnanimity, that now I keep in as strayt subjection al
affections, and passions, as the Romans do now me and my children. All this
considered, my study was to me much more commodious because it was so long
or I were married. Wherefore I may conclude that I had well tarried. CAN. Ye have
said very well by the faith of my body. And all that ye have spoken I have
before hard as well of your friends as of your ennemies confessed. How say you
Canmius, be you any thing changed in your opinion? CANI. I would never have
looked for such a conclusion, I see well inoughe, that women being well and
virtuously brought up, do not only with men participate in reason, but some
also in fidelity and constauncie be equal unto them. CANDIDVS. Madame, your
supper is redye, may it like you to enter in toward it. ZE. With right good
will: but yet if this gentylman has aught to say against women, I am not
unprovided for to defend them. CANI. No madame, I am by your ladyshyp all
ready satisfied, he is wise that with reason is shortly contented. And where
Reason serves not, silence is praised. ZENOBIA. Yet a good mind, in silence,
is ever well occupied. CANDIDVS. And he that thinks well, and speaks treuthe
is most to be loved. Madame I will lead you the way into my house. ZENOBIA.
With good will I follow you. CANI. The conclusion is good, where both parts
are pleased. And if they both be wise, it makes no matter though fools be
offended.

Thus ends the defense of good women.
LONDINI in aedibus Thomae Bertheleti typis impress.

CVM PRIVILEGIO. Ad imprimendum solum.

ANNO. M.D.XL.

