Here follows Three Practyses, now used at Mountpyller, by mon sire Emery. a
romayne borne in Rome, a Doctoure in Astronomye and Phesyke, and other does
practyse the same, First an oil, or ontment, and a powder, and the.iii. a
water, for many Infyrmytes and deseases for the health of the body.

These is practysed

Emery, and many diverse other.

in Mountpyller by master John^.



Oil of Roses, is thus made, take a pound of Roses and four of oil, and
rub them well betwyxt thine hands, and put them in a vessel of glass with
oil, ye mouth of the vessel stopped, and set it against the hot son.xii.
days, and so do thereto fresshe roses, and let it stand against the son,
other.xii. days And if thou voylte make more, let it stand longer, and cleanse
it and keep it to thine use. The virtues of this oil be these, it avails
against ay^ge of the head in a hot cause, as in a Fever, and against hete of
the stomach wherther it be anointed therewith or drunk, for it is cold and
dry.

Of oil of mandrage.
Oil of Mandrage, is cold and moist, it avails against a^y^ge of ye head,
and to them that has the Franes^e, and pobagre of hot humors. It is made
thus of the apples of mandrage of hennebelle and of popye. take and put them in
oil, by twelfe days against the son, and than seth it to wasting of the
Iuse at a slow fire, and in party of that oil resolves and opium, than keep
it to thy use. Or it is thus made with the iuse of mandrage meddled with ye
seeds of he^nebelle, and of popye and boil them together in a dowble vessel
to wasting of the iuse, a dowble vessel is said in thus manner, take a caudron
and put therein water, and in the water put the vessel that conteyneth the
oil, but meddle them not together, afterward cleanse it, and put to the
clensynge also opium, and afterward boil it a little, and keep it to thine
use.

Oil of Lylye.
Oil of lylye is cold, and it has amytigatyf virtue. it avails for akyng of
ye head, of a hot Fever and against brennynge of the stomach, and of the
entrayles thus it is made grynde the flows of lylye well and put them in wine
and oil, against the son.xii days. and stop the vessel than with soft
fire, seth it to wastyng of the wine, and keep it in a dowble vessel and
afterward cleanse it, and keep it to thine use.

Oil of yuy.
Oil of yuy, avails against akynge of the head of hete or of a Fever, or of
other cause against fervor of the stomach, and of the entrayles, thus it is
made gry^de the leuys of yuy, and put them in wine and oil, and in the
foresaid manner seth them and cle^se them, and keep them to thine use.

Oil of populeon.
Oil of populeon, is cold it avails against theforesaid eueles that comes
of hete, and thus it is made, gather the tender croppes of pepuleon in ver, and
grynde them, and put them in wine and oil, and seth them in the foresaid
manner, and cleanse them and keep them to thine use.

Oil de bay.
Oil de bay is hot, and it is made in the manner of oil de olyf, or else it is
made thus grynde bays and when they be ground, let them lie four days, and
with hot hands knede it and then put water there to, and let it seth well
long in a cawdron, and than cleanse it thorughe a cloth, and when it is cold
gather it that swymmeth above and keep it, to thine use for that is god.

Oil of Feuerfoy.
Oil of Fetherfoy, is hot it avails to them that has the Podagre or the
Palsy, of cold cause and do all that suffers, because of flume any evil, and
thus it is made. put the sede of Feuerney in moist earth and put clothe there
under, and let it be there.ix. days, and afterward grynde it strongly with
oil, and put it in a bag and cle^se it so, or else it is made in another
manner, take of Feuertney three pound of oil, four pound and make poudre of
the Feuerney, and do it in the oil nine days after cleanse it and keep it to
thine use.

Oil of Sauyne.
Oil of Sauyne is made thus take Sauyne and grynde it wonder small, and do it
in oil three days, or four than seth it to the mydle.

Oil of Byrche.
Oil of Byrche is made thus, the byrche when it is ripe grynde it and seth it
in water, cleanse it and let rest ande till it be cold, and the fat that
fleteth above gather it and keep it

An oyntement of elm.
AN oyntement of Elm, it avails against brennynge of hot water of fire,
take oil and new fresshe greece, and of the tenderness of the Elm of each three
ounces, and water that suffyseth, and make it thus grynde the greece well, and
dyssolue the oil in water, and put the branches therein and seth it well with
a slow fire, and when they ben soden grynde them all together in a mortar and
meddle it besely and clente it, and keep it to thine use

Oil of pulyoll, or hullewort.
Oil of Pulyoll or Hulleworte take the croppes with the leuys and flowers and
sethe them in oil in a dowble vessel, this oil does away cold causes, but
the special virtue of it is if the regyon of mates be anointed therewith, it
comfort and dries the cold humors, and yeldeth it able to conceynynge.

Oil of Eggs.
Oil of Eggs, take.xx. yelkes of eggs and bren them somewhat in pan till
they be black, and then take the pan of the fire, and set it ^owynge and
thryst the yolks of the eggs, and there shall distylle out a manner of fatnes,
that is called oil, the special virtues of this oil, be to aswage brennynge,
and scaldyng and to do away impetigme^ and serpetigme^ and other.

Oil of whete.
Oil of whete is thus made, put whete betwyxte two brennynge plates of yren,
and thirst it and there shall distylle a manner of black oil that with a fire
shall be anointed upon red blaynes impetigme^, and serpe rigme^. Also it
avails in bre^nynge.

Thus ends the First practyse of oils. And hereafter follows the practyse
of Powdres.
POwdre against dum grain, and the palsy take prymerose, solsecle, lauandre
auance, sauge, rue, betoyne, of each three penny weight, of rosemaryne twelfe
penywight of cardre sede of karsen, of time, of syleris, motane, of each nine
penny weight, and of pyony yclensed, nine penny weight of castorea, nine penny
weight of gynger, of galy^gale, of canell, of clowes, of nutmygges, ligni
aloes, cassia lignea, of each on nine penny weight, sal geinme, nine penny weight
of sugar, and ounce and a half, and make powder of all these.

A powder against cardyacle.
A Powder against the Cardyacle and against to much feblenesse take Champhore
musk of each three halfpeny weyghte, shauynge of yuory, of gold, and silver, of
either threpeny weight,

Powder against flux.
A Powder against flux of blood of the nosethrylles, take encense mastyke,
sandragone, nine of each three penny weight, brenne them in a shelle over the
fire, and meue them till they wax black, and make there of soryll powdre and
cast that in.

Powdre for delycate men.
A Powdre for delycate men, to comfort dygestyon, and to amend the sight,
take Canell cardemoi^ and piperis, soleris, maiorane, cruceantos, calamite, of
each half an ounce, nutmeges, opiu^, peradis, selis, of each an ounce consex a
penny weight, salge^me half an ounce. ferrugis, well te^pered two ounces, and
make powdre of these and use them.

Powdre against theouar.
A Powdre against the quartayn and vice of the spleen, take Coryandre earne.
serni combusti of each ix. penny weight anellanes cle^sed.ix.

Powdre for wounds.
A Powdre to make for wounds and botches valerya^ and bu ruet.

Powdre of Betoyne.
A Powdre made of Betoyne and drunk with water is good for dygestyon, and for
the cowghe, and also for a wound in the head.

Here ends the practyse of powdres. And follows the practyse of waters,
necessary.
WAter that is good for man's sight take sauge, fenell, veruayne betayne
egrymonye, sanamundy, camedrios eufrasye, pympernell, tryfoyle, rewe, of each a
like much, and grynde them well in a mortar, and afterward take the powdre of
aloen, and a little camphorie, and mynge together with euerose and stylit and
that water is profitable for all manner dyse ases of iyen and it restores sight
that is lost.

water of Coperose.
WAter of Coperose, take coperose and grynde it and put a little water to the
powdre, and let it stand a day and a night and strain it thorughe a cloth,
this water is good for iyen and the canker in the mouth, and for holimet
angere in the vysage.

water to sle foul worms.
WAter to sle foul worms, take Arthro^, wormewode, sauyne, the water of these
sleyth the vermyne in a man's iye lyddes, and in his share beneth the navel.

water of dragons.
WAter of Dagons, the man yt drynketh water of dragons it sleth the worms
within him, and who so wassheth the fretynge and gnawynge.

water of Tormentyll.
WAter of Tormentyll, who so drynketh the water thereof it comforts man's
mawe it cleanses benyme, and swellynge and swynasy it does away.

water of Bytayne.
WAter of Bytayne is good for the ache and for sore iyen.

water of Egrymone.
WAter of Egrymone is good for hory wounds and does away ye sli^tche.

water of auence.
WAter of anence and mynge it with honey and stylle it, and it bynemyth the
stenche of wou^des and helyth well.

water of bawme.
WAter of Bawme bynemeth stenche of the teth.

water of long de befe.
WAter of long de Befe, is good for the Cardyacle.

water of pympernell.
WAter of Pympernelle, ^ylage, wey bread hylworte, flosc^^^. beuer lenes,
selerquicle take all these and wasshe them well, and stamp them and still them
in a styllawry.

water of Fenell.
WAter of Fenell is good for narownes in the brist when it is stylled.

water of Columbyne.
WAter of Columbyne will cast out broken bones, and water of ache when it is
stylled, who so drynketh it or the iuse of columbyne,

water of mynte
WAter of mynte is good to comfort the stomach, it cures bytynge of an hou^de
if it be ground with salt.

water of Valerian.
WAter of valerian who so ever drynketh of it diverse days fasting, he causes
and purges the Renys his breast, and it causes all fleume about the heart to
void, and comfort ye stomach, and claryfieth merueylously the nature of
man, and causes wealth, use this often in the morning fasting and at even,
and what ma^st im^eth the rote and temper it with swore creme and drink it in
ye morning and at evening all his nature shall be safe, and it shall make him
well of nature, and he that uses it often times though he be very dry of
nature, he shall have in short space enough and causes to pysse well.

Here follows of the most profytablest time that beth to draw blood of men
and women. Now it is to say all the days most profitable and best.
IN the beginning of March, in the.vi. and the.x. day, thou shall draw out
blood of the right arm. In the begi^nyng of Apryll on the least arm, and that
on the xi. day for thy sight. In the end of Maii of which arm thou wylt and
that against the Fever, and if thou so do, neither thou shalt lose thy
sight ne thou shall have no fever as long as thou lyuest.

(...) eth this practy^e of (...) Emerye. (...) ely Imprynted (...) wire.


