At a Session of Sewars holden at Cambridge, the xiij. and xiiij. days of
October, Ann. Dom. 1619. before the Reverend Father in God, NICHOLAS, Lord
Bishop of Ely, Sr. Edward Peyton, Knight and Barronet, Sr. Edward Radcliffe,
Sr. John Cuts, Sr. Simeon Steward, Sr. Richard Coxe, Sr. William Wendie,
Knights; John Gostlin Doctor of Physic, Vicechancellour of the University of
Cambridge, Richard Foxton, Mayor of the Town of Cambridge, John Richardson,
John Cropley, Henry Smith, Doctors of Divinity, M. Daniel Wigmore, Archdeacon
of Ely, M. Jerome Beale, Batchelour of Divinity, and Master of Pembroke Hall
in the University of Cambridge, Robert Steward, Francis Brackin, Isaac
Barrowe, Daniel Goodricke, Edward Fincham, Peter Franckland, Humphrie Gardener,
Esquiers; John Pepis, John Orwell, Thomas Goodricke; Edward Smith, Gentlemen,
Commissioners of Sewars amongst others assigned: It is ordered as follows:
viz.
WHEREAS The said Commissioners of Sewars, by their Act, Order, and Decree of
Sewars made at their last Session, holden at Ely the xxij. and xxiij. days of
September 1619. in observation of his Majesty's pleasure, and for expedition of
the Undertakers in their general Contracts with the Owners, and parties
interessed in the Fennes, and drowned Lands did provide and ordain, that the
former order of Sewars (declaring the effect of his Majesty's Letters, and of
the Letters of the right Honorable the Lords of his Majesty's most Hon. Privy
Council, and the dutiful obedience of the said Court of Commission of Sewars
thereunto, as also the careful provisions which in the said Order are made and
set down for the better satisfaction, and content of all people whom it may
concern) should be published in all parish Churches, and in all Courts Leetes,
and Courts Baron, before the fifth day of this present October, To the end
that all Owners, commoners, and other persons interessed in any drowned grounds
within the County and Isle aforesaid, having notice thereof, might apply
themselves with speed to repair to the said Undertakers, or their Assigns,
for making and concluding their contracts; That in default thereof, this Court
of Sewars now assembled, might take further order for the said Undertakers
their speedy proceeding in their works according to his Majesty's pleasure,
and accordingly the said general notice has been given by the Universal
publication of the said order made in form aforesaid: Whereby no person, or
persons, Lords, Owners, Commoners, or parties interessed in the said Fenne, or
drowned grounds, may justly plead excuse of ignorance of his Majesty's royal
pleasure, and the straight command thereof, and of the just proceedings of this
Court: And that the said Undertakers having here made their appearance, and
personally attended the making and concluding of contracts with the Lords,
owners, commoners, and parties interested in any the said Fenne-lands, who of
their own accord and discretions would so apply themselves to contract without
delay; And this Court likewise (in a judicial and legal form of proceeding)
have now summoned and called the said Lords, owners, commoners, and parties
interessed by the name of the Towns, Villages, Manors, or Lordships, whereof
they are to give their immediate and direct answer, whether or not they would
contract, and agree to set out certain parts and portions of Land several and
Common, in all and every the said Towns, Villages, Manors, or Lordships, to
be allotted and allowed by way of Contract (according to the statute in that
cause provided) unto the said Undertakers, and their heirs, and assigns for,
and in recompense of their said worthy work of draining the said Fennes; And
now at this Court, some of the said Commoners, and parties interessed in
Commons, and wast grounds, appearing before them, have given their answer, that
they are willing to contract, and are ready so to do; and others have excused
themselves by reason of the absence of the Lords of the Manors, who are Lords
of the soil wherein they have interest in common.

THIS Court being therefore resolved to confirm the willingness of such the
said Lords, Owners, Commoners, and parties interessed, as have declared
themselves ready to contract: And to reform the defaults of such, as after so
public notice given (as aforesaid) do absent themselves through ignorance,
or negligence (in further performance of their most awefull obedience to his
most excellent Majesty, and dutiful respect to the Right Honorable the Lords
of his Majesty's Privy Council their directions, and Commands, by which they
are straightly charged and commanded, to expedite the Contracts with the said
Undertakers to their uttermost power, and authority, and extent of their
Commission,) do order, enact, and decree;

THAT for and toward the said worthy work of draining the said hurtfully
drowned grounds (by cleansing the Out-falls of Neane and Welland) all, and
every Lord, Owner, Commoner, and party interessed in any hurtfully drowned
grounds, shall pay to the said Undertakers the sum of twenty shillings per
Acre, upon, and for every Acre of such hurtfully drowned grounds, as shall
receive any benefit by the said draining on this side, and before the sixth day
of December next; or in default of such payment, this Court will order and
decree, such portion and portions out of the said drowned lands, respectively
to the Undertakers, and their heirs, as shall be agreeable to the benefit
which the said lands shall receive by their draining; And as it shall seem
meet to the now Commissioners of Sewars, inhabiting in the County of
Cambridge, and Isle of Ely, or greater part of them (with the assent of the
Undertakers) in a Session of Sewars to be holden within the Town of Cambridge,
or City of Ely, the same portion or portions of Land respectively to be set
out before the work begin; but the Undertakers not to have any interest
therein, or occupation thereof, before the grounds be drained, and then the
Undertakers to secure them so drained, according to the true intent of the
Order made at Ely, the xxij. and xxiij. of September, 1619. which said Order
the Undertakers promised in Court they would observe, according to the true
intent thereof.

IT IS ALSO ordered and agreed unto, that Copies of this order shall be
delivered to the Sheriff of the County of Cambridge, or his Deputy, and the
Bayliffe of the Lord Bishop of Ely, to be delivered unto the Bayliffes of the
several hundreds, within the County and Isle aforesaid; And they are hereby
commanded with all speed to deliver the same unto the Ministers of the
several Parishes, Hamlets, and Villages, within their hundreds, to publish
within their Churches, or Chapels, the next Sabbath day after the receipt
thereof; To the end that all Owners, Commoners, and other persons interessed
in any drowned grounds, within the County and Isle aforesaid, may take notice
thereof, and repair to the Undertakers, or their Assigns, at the Bell in Ely,
for lands lying in the Isle of Ely, the xxvj. and xxvij. days of this instant
October, And at the Faulcon in Cambridge, the xxviij. and xxix. days of the
same month for lands lying in the County of Cambridge, for making and
concluding their Contracts according to their former offer, and the Order made
at Ely, the xxij. and xxiij. of September last past: And that the Bayliffes of
the said several hundreds, shall truly certify the said Commissioners of the
due delivery of the said Copies of this Order, at their next Sessions of
Sewars, which is to be holden at the Guyldhall in the Town of Cambridge, at
eight of the clock in the forenoone, the ix. day of December next.

Copia concordat cum originali.

