A DECLARATION, Of the reasons, moveing DON EMANVEL* Borne Prince of Portugal.

Having been heretofore a Devotary, under the name of Pater Felix, in the
Order of the Barefooted Carmelites, to forsake the Romish Religion, to join
himself unto the Catholic and Apostolic Church; and in the same to profess
the purity of the Gospel.

The Abridgement of this Declaration was presented unto the Consistory of the
French Church at Delf signed with the hand of the said Prince, and after Sermon
read in his name to all the Assembly, and after all, ratifyed by his own
mouth, the 15. day of January 1634.

With certain Letters written from Brussels, since his coming over into these
Provinces.

Translated out of the French into English by I. R. M. D.

Ezech. 20.18, 19. Walk ye not in the statutes of your Fathers, neither
observe their judgments, nor defile your selves with their Idols. I am the Lord
your God, walk in my Statutes, and keep my judgments, and do them.

Printed in the year 1634.

A DECLARATION, Of the reasons, moveing DON EMANVEL, Borne Prince of Portugal,
Having been heretofore a Devotary of the order of the unshod Carmelites, under
the name of Pater Felix, to depart from the Romish Church, for to adjoyne
himself unto the Reformed church, of the United Provinces, and to profess in
the same the Purity of the Gospel.
ABove all things, I thank the Lord, that the city which did embrace me,
comeing into the world, and the Church wherein I received the H. Baptism,
shall hear this day the public witness, that I am to give of my faith.

Those, from whom not long since I am departed, and those, amongst whom I now
rank my self, (though different of judgment, in matter of salvation) seem
notwithstanding (as I conceave) to have a common desire, to know the motives of
my change in Religion.

Therefore not to frustrate the one or other of their desire, and to obey the
Counsel of the Apostle Peter, to be always ready, 1 Pet. 3.15
to give an answer to every man, that asks you a reason of the hope that is
in you, with meekness and reverence.

First, I testify, I have not consulted with flesh or blood, but with the
Spirit of the Lord; which often has forced me, to follow his precepts,
speaking of Babylon: Rev. 18.4.
Come out of her my people, that ye be not partakers of her sins, and that ye
receave not of her plagues.

I doubt not, but there will be many amongst the enemies of the Religion, which
I now embrace, that will abandon me, the one will soil me with false
backbiteings, the other will seek to devour me with several calumniations,
others will accuse me of temerity, others again will take up some perverse
opinion against me.

All this have I propounded unto my self; and seeing those, which be true
Christians, ought not to refuse, to bear a little weight of the Cross of
Jesus Christ after him, I will comfort me with that he says to those which
shall be slandred for his holy names sake: Blessed are they, Mat. 5.10 11, 12.
which are persecuted for righteousness sake, when men shall revile you, and
persecute you, and shall say all manner of evil against you falsely, for my
sake; Rejoice and be exceeding glad, for great is your reward in Heaven.

I do no wise regard the reproaches but rather rejoice the more that I receave
them for this cause, and forgive unto all that utter these things against me:
Proposing unto my self, for a law of patience, the Example of our Lord Jesus
Christ: who being cursed, Mat. 3, 44.
did not curse again; and his command, that we should bless them that curse
us, do good to them that hate us, and pray for them, which despitefully use
us, and persecute us.

Finally, I do not only neglect all tongues and pens, that for this cause
might be injurious unto me, but rather will pray to God for them, as Steven
did: Lord impute not this sin unto them.

I desire every one might take notice, that my departing out of my Monastery,
where I made my profession, was neither secret nor fugitive, but public and
with knowledge of the place I was to travel too; with notice and full consent
of the Superior of that order, in which I was, as appears by the letter of
Obedience, granted unto me, which remains in the hands of a Devotarie of
the same order, which I took with me for company. I have not done it
privately, for the Serenissima Infant, on whom I hope God had mercy, both
knew it, and allowd of it; and I also certifyed it unto my Lord the Prince of
Portugal, my most honorable Lord and Father, who did also approve of it.

One thing I confess, that I did not detect unto them my purpose, taking a
pretext to come into these Countries, without which I could never have hoped to
enjoy this liberty.

As concerning my life and conversation in the monastery, it were not fitting,
that I should praise my self; but for defense against the malicious
detractio^s, which they think to cast upon me, as if I were departed for some
Crime committed, or that the rigor of the order did stomach me to stay there;
I refer my self unto the testimony, which may easily be gathered partly by
the Letter of Obedience, which is not granted, but with approbation of being
free from the bonds of Censure: as also by those Letters, which I have
received, whilst I have been in this Country, from the Serenissima Infant,
from my Lord the Prince of Portugal, my Father, from the Provincial of my
order, and from some eminent persons: of which some of them remained in the
hands of him, that was my associate in my journey, who is returned to the
monastery, and some shall be joined behind this declaration; all as witnesses
of a good affection toward me. And since a year, or there about, that I came
over hither, has there been none that has brought any accusation against me;
yea have not entertained a bad report of me, save since they saw me frequent
the Sermons in the Reformed Church; but the knowledge they have of my life, and
conversation, and their own conscience, will make them lie to God, and to the
world, in all things they shall oblaterate against me. The long silence is a
sufficient testimony of my good respect and honor, in which I lived amongst
them; And I assure them, that I will not recompense evil for evil, though I
were provoked thereunto: neither shall I touch the honor of any person, or the
order which I have disclaimed.

Esteeming it a thing more honorable, to despise the sayings of the
imprudent, then to resist them. Prove. 26.4
Answer not a fool, according to his folly, least thou be also like unto him.

If they object, that worldly considerations have moved me to depart, I
confess some have; but they served my intention no further, but as means to
the principal; which was spiritual, and for my soul; for the which, by the
freedom of my body, I have sought to attain to the liberty of the pure worship
of God; and for my mouth, that I might without danger confess the holy name
of God, and declare his truth; of which I had at that time sufficient knowledge
to urge me to remove: but since the one and the other were so near combined,
that I could not sever them; I was constrained to employ them both by one and
the same means.

It was not to take unto my self a larger freedom for the delights of this
world, for there is not so small a Chapel, so well barred and shutt up by the
most rigorous monasteriall statutes and institutions, but there may be found
one rift or other, by which any thing may slide in, that will serve such as
have with their mouth only denied their lusts.

Neither was it on hope or exspectation of any worldly inheritance: for whence
should such things befall me? It is known to every one, to what case the
Royal Bloods of Portugal is driven, by the unjust possession of the house of
Spain, who not being contented to have robbed from it, his Royal and
Patrimoniall goods; has also forced the person of Don Emanuel, my honorable
Lord and Father, to desist from all rights and titles thereunto; in so much,
that at the Court in Brussells, they will not afford him the title of a Prince.

That every one then may rightly understand from the beginning the means of
this my conversion, whereof I give the Lord alone glory, I would give the whole
world to understand, that Don Emanuell, Prince of Portugal, my honorable Lord
and Father, has always, and does yet for the present, make profession of the
Romish Religion, and that my Lady Emilia of Nassau, my honorable Lady and
Mother (whom God has taken into his Kingdom) has always professed the
Catholic and Apostolic Religion, in the Christian Reformed Church; as also
she departed in that said faith. The difference of Religion between them was
the cause (for each of them were strongly addicted to their Religion) that
there was a devision of their Children, concerning matters of salvation: yet
have I had that benefit, together with my Brother Don William, and my beloved
Sisters, that we received the H. Baptism in the Reformed Church of this town,
and there was promised by those that did present me to the Baptism, that I
should be instructed as much (as lay in them) in the truth of this Religion:
And my Lady, my Mother, findeing herself principally and most strictly to be
obliged by this bond, has not been defective in her duty, to fulfill her
promise.

Therefore, whereas children in their tender years, commonly are left under
the tuition of their mother, till the strength of their body, and the capacity
of their understanding, might be more capable to soar up higher; I did remain
under the protection and wardship of my Lady, my mother, of happy memory, till
the age of 12 years old, during which time, she did instruct me in the
principles of the knowledge of my salvation; having taught me the articles of
the Creed, the Lords prayer, and the ten Commandments, with a small
Catechism. And God, through his grace, has so blessed these principles and
impressions in me, that since that time, I have been always much addicted
unto this Religion, which my Lord the Prince my Father, observeing by my
conversation and manners, did take it so heavily, that seeing me one day,
having the New Testament by me, took it from me, and cast it into the Garden,
did entertain me hardly with speeches and blows, whereupon my Lady my Mother,
of happy memory, to comfort me, told me, I was happy to suffer for
righteousness sake. Then my Lord the Prince my Father, to prevent that which
he did already spy, sent me and my Brother into France, recommending us to
Don Christofer, Prince of Portugal, our honorable Uncle, who also makes a
full profession of the Romish Religion, that the first impressions we had
received, might be reprinted, by new instructions, our understandings being of
small judgment, and ready to receave any thing. But God, who had from my youth
wrought so much good upon me, did grant me to record that which I had learnd;
which kept me always in a continual doubt, that that which they taught me
concerning Gods service in the Romish Church, was not the true service of God.
In the mean while, I lived in that Error, in the time of my abideing there,
following my instructions, which my Lord the Prince my father had caused to be
taught unto me: And confess, though my public profession, and the doubtful
suspicion which I had of doing well, (following the broad way of the Romish
Religion,) had caused me to take his side; nevertheless I felt certain
inclinations, making me averse from it, and a desire to know the way to
salvation in the difference of Religion, of which my honorable Father and
Mother made profession, each of them glorying of the true Christianity, which
having but one truth for a foundation, could not suffer such a contradiction.

The success of my desire could not be accomplished so soon as I had wished;
the Authority of my Lord my Father, the manner of life in the world, in respect
of my birth, the exercises and several services, in which they have employed
me, and the natural negligence of man, which makes him so careless of his
salvation, especially in his nonage, had by the multitude of ashes so covered
the sparks of fire, that they were almost wholly smoothered, and did appear
no sooner then that good God, (who quenches not the smoking flax) by the
holy stirring of his Spirit, has revived and illuminated that spark at that
time; when there was least appearance for my salvation, and I lay deepest
grovelling in the greatest darkness of a devout superstition; and in an Order,
into which, the advice of several men, with many considerations of the State,
in which I found my self to be, did enduce me to tread; hopeing to find there
a shorter and a clearer way then is the common road, departing out of this
world, that so with less trouble, as I thought I might com into Paradise. I
made my promise, and received my Vesture from the hands of the Serenissima
Infant: therein I lived about 4 year and a half, and findeing my self free
from all worldly care, having delivered into the hands of her Highness my
place of a Captain of a Company of Soldiers, with which they had furnished
me, I did bestow the solitarines of my profession, and the time which I had, on
the learning of the Lattin tongue, and of Philosophy; having made a good
entrance into them, they did serve me for a help, to get by reading of several
books the best science, which is the true knowledge of God, to his honor, my
salvation, and edification of others, propounding unto my self for a mark, to
establish my self in the faith of the Romish Religion, in which I lived as in
my proper Element.

But the Almighty God, who had already decreed me to go out of the Kingdom
of darkness, unto the clearness of his light, and from the public doctrine
of lies, unto his truth, has changed that pernicious juice, of which my veins
were full, into a saving nourishment of my soul; and the weapons with which I
had thought to help my self, to resist those that should resist me in my
religion, are become enemies to my purpose, and forcible means, to conquer
me, and to draw me to Christ.

For, according to the custom, used in the Romish Religion, and in the
Monasteryes, thinking my special study should consist, in reading of the most
renowned Doctors, whom they condign with the honorable title of Fathers, I
did employ my self unto that; but meeting with several difficultyes, yea
contrarietyes, in one and others opinion, yea that the most famous amongst
them, and whom they allege most for their advantage, (viz. S. Augustine) has
written a whole book of recalling of that which he had formerly falsely
believed and taught, I began to suspect their writeings, and to dive well
into the truth of this thing; without bindeing my self superstitiously unto
the title of Fathers; I concluded with my self, that those Fathers heretofore
were but Children, and that their light was derived from else where. I
therefore traced their descent, not of their persons, but of their Doctrine;
whose original I found must have been in the holy Scriptures of the Prophets
and Apostles, who are the first Fathers, on whose foundation the Church of God
is grounded; whose Cornerstone is Christ; and that Christ is the true light,
inlightening the whole world; from the glistering beams of that stone have
they derived all the light they had, as John says: Search the Scriptures;
John. 5.39 2 Pet. 1.19
And Peter compares it to a light shineing in darkness.

Being then come to the source and spring of life, my spirit did suggest unto
me, that I ought not to dive further, and that by the pureness thereof I ought
to judge of the taste, color, and clearness of the floweing waters, which
commonly participate with the qualityes, occurring in the veins of the Earth.
The same can be manifested by paralelling of a great number of writeings of
these good Fathers, with the Holy Scripture, in which, remarkable tokens of
their error may be spied, and that they have not always rightly followed the
way of truth: But as their writeings can not totally be rejected, since they
are not throughout corrupted, so also may they not fully be received, as an
infallible rule of Faith. I sort them amongst the Professors, and public
Teachers of the truth, not as testimonies of it; for Gods truth needs not the
testimony of man.

It is not my purpose, nor my profession, to play the Artist, but to manifest
whose Disciple I am; but that the Fathers (amongst the rest S. Augustine and S.
Ambrose, desireing that their writeings should be examined by the holy
Scripture) have showed me this; and I also purpose to hold my self to this
rule. In it I have read the prohibition God made, concerning the services
contrary to his commands, and against the profession the Israelites made of
the institution of their Fathers. Walk ye not in the Statutes of your Fathers,
Ezech. 20, 18, 19.
neither observe their judgments. I am the Lord your God, walk in my
Statutes, and keep my judgments, and do them. In the Gospel I read: One is
your Master even Christ. Mat. 23, 8.
Whence I conclude, that the writeings of the Doctors must be examined by the
word of God; and if they teach otherwise, they are seducers.

Besides, I find written, that the Sheep of Christ hear his voice; John. 10,
27
and follow no strangers, but fly from them. Whence I conclude, that, whosoever
speaks other language then does Christ unto his flock, (which is his Church,)
are no true Sheepheards, but deceavers. I read also the praise Paul gives the
holy Scripture; which was then received in the Church of God (as he says:) All
Scripture is given by inspiration of God, and is profitable for Doctrine, 2 Timothy 16, 17.
for reproof, for correction, for instruction in righteousness, that the man
of God may be perfect, thoroughly furnished unto all good works; whereby I
conclude, seeing by the same a Christian, who is a man of God, may be perfect
and thoroughly furnished to all good works; that it is not only convenient,
but also sufficient unto salvation. They slander therefore vilely, that
condemn that Spirit of God of imperfection, who did inspire it unto his
Servants, Prophets, Evangelists, and Apostles; as the Teachers of the Romish
Church do. And seeing it is called by the Prophet David, Psalm. 119.105.
A lamp to his feet, and a light to his paths; I conclude, that it is not
dark, and that it needs no strange light to make it self known: It being so
then, that the Gospel of Christ is the only rule of our Faith, like as the
Law of God is the only rule of our obedience, who shall hinder me from
subscribeing and saying Amen to the words of the Apostle, relateing twice; And
denouncing a Curse against himself, Gal. 1, 8, 9.
yea against an Angel of Heaven, if he taught other doctrine then he had
taught before; and to esteem all doctrine of man accursed, whether by
tradition, or the unwritten word, whereof the foundation may not be found, in
the written words of the Prophets, Evangelists, and Apostles, that is, in the
writeings of the New and Old Testament, which we, and they of the Romish
Church confess to be Canonical.

Therefore they of the Romish Religion, to supply the imperfections, wherewith
they slander the holy Scripture, obtrude the writeings of such persons, which
were not inspired immediately by the spirit of the Lord, affirming, that the
holy Scripture of it self is not authentic, without the authority of the
Church, and the Church is ancienter then the Scripture, (a ridiculous thing,
for whence did the Church learn, but from the Scripture, Eck. loc. commnn.
cap. 3.
and the Disciple but from his Master?) as also that the Scripture is like to a
leaden rule, like a nose of wax, which they can turn and bend which way they
list as a Fable of AEsop, without the authority of the Church, that it is a
cause of heresies, and therefore prohibited to be read by laymen. And the
Council of Trent, advancing the unwritten traditions to the same honor and
dignity, with the holy Scriptures, as being the same, the foundation of Faith,
without which foundation the authority and dignity of the Scripture falls to
the ground; in truth, being insolent, blaspheming, and diminishing the dignity
of Gods word, and making the same depend upon human authority; Me thinks
therefore for this consideration only, I have cause enough to detest all such
Religion, which is in a high degree, injurious to God; and in which persisting,
there is no salvation: For though they vaunt in words, of the service of God,
yet in truth, they perform more unto the Creature then unto the Creator, and
the honor of man is more advanced there, then the honor of God.

That Religion vindicateth unto her self (though by unjust usurpation) the
honorable tittle to be the Church of Christ, but she wants the essential
signs thereof, which are the sincere preaching of his holy Word, and the
lawful administration of the Sacraments. Concerning the word of God, the
common people know it not, no body may read it without permission of their
Superior, and if the Preachers read the same unto the people, whether in the
Gospel or Epistles, or in the administration of the Sacraments, or whether a
part of it be granted unto them in their books of devotion, as in the Mattins
and service of our Lady Mary, or other Saints, it is all ways in a language
unknown to the people, yea oftentimes passing the understanding of him that
teaches it; Whence it comes that that great Apostle of the Gentiles, 1 Cor.
14.11.
teaches concerning unknown languages in the Church, that he that hears,
not knoweing the power of the voice, shall be unto him that speaks a
Barbarian; and he that speaks shall be a Barbarian unto him. That prohibition
of reading the word of God, is the cause of so many errors in the Romish
Church; and one may apply justly unto the ignorant, that which Christ says
unto the Sadduces, Mat. 22, 29
you err not knoweing the Scriptures.

As for the interpretations they give of it, and for the applications, they are
either false or ridiculous; few of them true, which may be gathered by these
small remnants, without touching the whole pieces, from the beginning to the
end, as may be seen in the whole book of conformityes, of the pretended S
Francis, printed at Bullin, dedicated unto the Cardinal du Ruveve, 1590, a
book full of Fables, false miracles, prodigious lies, and horrible
blasphemies, yea such a book, that words are not sufficient to express the
inpudency thereof: by this Example only, the rest may be judged. In the second
preface fol. 6. page 2. colum. 1: of the said conformityes, the Author shows,
that S. Francis was a man extraordinarily ordained by the providence of God, to
be sent into the world, and, to show that, he alleages that of the first of
Genes. Let us make man, which words (says the Author of the Conformityes, is
of the whole Trinity, sending S. Francis into the world; Therefore not of Adam;
for there were not two men created, but one; but it is apparent by the text,
that it was Adam; therefore not S. Francis: behold the foundation of his
Holiness lies in lies, and all the rest of the Types of the Old Testament,
and all the persons that should have been figures of him, are founded on the
same truth. This book was brought hither amongst these, which were taken in
the Silver-fleet, by the Admiral Pieter Heynen, Anno 1628, and may be seen at
Delft. In the same page, to show how great the renown of his power should be,
Christ is brought in speaking to S. Francis: 2 Samuel 7.9
I have made thee a great name, like unto the name of the great men, that are
in the Earth: Words which Nathan the Prophet, by the command of God, spoke to
David; and presently after, the Author adds: His name is become renowned,
Ecl. 45.4.5
(the reason?) for he has made him honorable amongst Kings, and has showed
him his glory, he sanctified him in his faythfulnesse and meekness: Words that
are spoken of Moses the great Leader of the people of God. They are not ashamed
thus to sport themselves with the Scripture. Of the same brood is that that
follows, a certain writer reprehending those which spent the revenues of
Bishoprics and other benefices, to keep Whores, Comedians, and Hounds,
alleges the words, which our Savior speaks to the woman of Canaan, who
prayed for the deliverance of her child: Marc. 7.27
It is not meet to take the childrens bread, and to cast it unto Dogs; and to
threaten those that did confer Ecclesiastical benefices upon those of their
consanguinity, or others allied unto them; Woe unto him that builds the city
in blood; Hab. 2, 12
and when amongst the Ceremonies of the coronation of the Pope, after that by
the Canonical men of S. John of Lateran, he is set into a close-stoole, the
Cardinals lifteing of him up, with great state, do they not mock at the word
of God, when they utter the words of the song of Hannah, the mother of the
Prophet Samuel: He rayseth up the poor out of the dust, and lifts up the
beggar from the dunghill, to set them amongst Princes, etc. And after, 1. Sam.
2, 8
that the said Pope is thus raised, he takes a handful of small money, like to
farthings, called Bajoci, (taking heed there be neither gould nor silver
amongst it, for fear of lyeing,) and casts that amongst the people, saying
that which S. Peter said unto the poor lame man, asking for alms deeds:
Silver or gould have I not, but that which I have I give unto you. Is he not
profane and lyeing? for his Officers, to make for him a free passage, cast a
heap of money along the streets, in token of liberality, for to get the people
out of his way: These are but glimpse of their profane applications.

As for the false interpretation of the holy Scripture, one may meet with them
so frequently in the vulgar translation of the Bible, which the Counsel of
Trente has Canonized, and would have to be of greater authority, then the
Original Hebrew or Greek, that it seems that the intention of the said
Counsel was, to obtrude a bastard in stead of a legitimate; that is a false
doctrine in stead of a true one. These few Examples shall suffice: It is said
in Genesis, that the seed of the Woman shall break the head of the Serpent;
that seed of the woman is Christ, which is of the seed of the woman, not of the
seed of the man, like as the Lady Mary, and the version of the Romish Religion,
to attribute that unto the virgin Mary, which belonges only to Christ, has
translated it in this manner, that the bruiseing of the head of the Serpent
should be attributed unto the woman, not unto her seed; those which have but
small insight into the Hebrew tongue, must without contradiction confess, that
this is falsely translated; For the article in the Original Hebrew, has a
reference unto the word Seed, not to the word Woman.

Eccl. 9.1.
In Ecclesiastes, the Hebrew Text says: No man knows either love or hatred,
by all that is before him; the Roman version has it, a man knows not whether
he be worthy of love or hatred, and that to establish the doubtfulnesse and
incertainty of man's salvation; they have most wickedly joined unto it, but all
things are kept in uncertainty for time to come. In Psalm 94. Worship at his
footstool, the Roman version is, worship his footstool; To draw from them the
adoration of the Creatures. In the Epistle to the Hebrews, Jacob worshipped
(viz. God) upon the top of his staff, the Roman version has it, worshipped
the top of his staff. It may be he had thereon, some image of the virgin
Mary, which came not into the world, but many ages after him. In the same
Epist, chapt. 13: Forget not to do goood, or to communicate, for with such
sacrifices God is well pleased; the Roman version, for God is appeased by such
sacrifices, and that to establish, the merits of good works.

And to prove that there are two swords in the Church, the one spiritual, and
the other material, Boniface the eight Pope of that name, abused that, which
the Disciples spoke unto Christ, Extr. vog. com. tit. 8 Voam Sanct.
Behold two swords; upon which Christ should have answered, 't Is enough. And
to prove, that the employeing of this sword appertains unto the Pope, as
being the Successor of Peter, are not these words applied to good purpose: Put
thy sword into thy sheath?

And Pope Innocent the third, for to extol the Popes authority above the
Emperors; writeing unto the Emperor of Constantinople, is it not fitly
alleged, Decr. lib. 1 de major. and obed. can. Solilicitae.
that God made two great lights, the Sun, that is the Pope, the Moon, that
is the Emperor, and conclude from thence, that as far as the Sun exceeds
the Moon in greatness, so much less is the dignity of the Emperor, in
respect of the Popes.

As for their translations, printed in the French tongue, one may see by the
Bible, printed at Paris, An. 1538. by Antony Bonnemere, dwelling on S. Hillary
hill, in the Court of Albret, that there are, (beside the false insertions,
which are here and there put in among the text) several omissions of whole
verses of the text, and others added, the one to obscure the truth, the other
to lay the foundation of their lies. These Examples shall suffice, out of a
great multitude. Upon the 2 Chapt. of Exodus where there is first mention made
of Moses; goeing beyond the Scripture, they specify the name of his Father and
Mother of the Daughter of Pharao, adding thereunto that Moses did throw down
to the ground the Crown, which the King of AEgipt, playing with him, had set
upon his little head, upon which Crown was made Hammon, one of their Gods, and
that he broke it; upon which the Priest of Heliopolis should say unto the King,
this is the child which God would have us kill, which will bring under the
Land of Egypt.

And to make experience, whether the child did this maliciously, or out of
innocence, they caused burning coals to be brought before the child; and the
child took one, and put it to his mouth, and burnt the tip of his tongue, and
thence it came, he retained his whole life time a stammering speech: And the
rest of the whole chapter is stuffed with the like Fables. On the 32 chapter of
the same impression in the same book, many other things are added unto it,
that Aaron and Hur, resisteing the people of Israel, which did ask Gods of
them; the people were incensed against them both, for denying of them, and that
they did spitt so abundantly on the face of Hur, that they did smoother him,
which Aaron seeing and fearing the like, gave way to their importunity, and
made the Goulden Kalf: that the powder of the Goulden Kalf, which Moses caused
to be burnt, being drunk by the Israelites in water, caused them to have
gilded beards, which was a special mark to know those, which had worshipped
the Kalf: These are Fables like to the Legends of the Saints.

With the same conscience have they proceeded in the New Testament; They
interpret these words of Mar. 4. Repent, for the Kingdom of Heaven is at hand,
thus, do penance, for the Kingdom of Heaven will approach, that is, you
shall merit and gain the Kingdom of Heaven: And that to show that Paradise is
purchased by good works. In the 26. of the same Evangelist, one may find 40
lines of strange glosses amongst the text. In the Gospel of S. Luke, have they
added unto the words pronounced by our Savior Jesus Christ, unto the converted
murderer, Luc. 23. thou shall be with me this day in Paradise.

They have added unto it, for before the resurrection of Jesus Christ, no man
or Prophet entered into Heaven; but all the just were sojourning hard by Hell,
in a place like unto it, where they waited that the Son of man should pull
them out of it, and where they had neither pain nor glory. Much to purpose, to
prove the welt of the Fathers. In the first to the Corinths, you find in the
Greek text. 1. Cor. 14, 18.
I give thanks unto my God, that I speak more languages then you all; For to
excuse themselves of that text, that they speak in their service a language,
that others understand not, and that it suffiseth that it be understood of God,
they have translated it, I thank my God, which speaks the languages of us
all. And in the following verses, they have corrupted it, and wilfully left
out these words: to that end, that I may also instruct the rest; and in place
of five words, have they set down ten words; and in stead of ten thousand in a
strange language, they write five of several languages; and all this, for
fear least their service in a strange language should be condemned by these
words of the Apostle: In the Epistle to the Hebrews, after these words, at the
end of the 17. verse of chapt. 10. And their sins and iniquities will I
remember no more; presently follows upon it: Now, where remission of these
is, there is no more offering for sin, verse. 18. They have altogether
skipped this verse; because it overthrowes directly the pretended sacrifice of
the Mass, and consequently is against the prayers for the dead, and their
annual prayers for the deceased. By these few observations, (for when should
one have done in quoteing the infinite number of others?) one may judge of the
good faith of the Doctors of the Romish Religion, which are not ashamed
publicly to write in the Preface of the said Bible, in this manner: you may
read this present book, which is the holy Bible, which was translated out of
Latin into French, without any thing Nota.
put to it, save the very truth, as it is in the Lattin Bible, nothing is Nota.
left out, save that which should not be translated, and this translation is
not made for the Clergy men, but for laymen, mean Devotaries, and Hermites,
which have not the schollership they ought to have; and because none should
accuse those of the Reformed Religion, that they forget new accusations,
against those of the contrary Religion, behold some other words of the
Preface: And this French Bible is first reprinted by command of the most
Christian Prince of France, He raignd An. 1459.
Charles the eight of that name, and afterward it was corrected and reprinted;
Mark corrected, whence we have good cause to suspect, that in the time of that
good King it was honestly translated, without addition, substraction, or gloss
with it, but afterward the people by reading of it, coming to understand the
errors of that Doctrine, they could not revoke the impression, but made a new
one, suteing with the condition of the times, to prevent by a holy deceit (as
they speak in the Romish Religion) that the traffic of the soul should not
cease, and that fertile field of pardons and indulgences should not lie
untilled, and barren.

With the like proceedings they furnish themselves, to make the Fathers and
ancient Doctors in the church fruitless, to discover their lies, to that end,
that the clearer sighted, and those that are not of the simple Devotaries, that
is to say, ignorant sort, should not mark, that the judgments of those good
men were in many things contrary unto the Novelties and impieties, which after
their time came up, and are taught unto this day in the Romish Religion; and
that is the cause moveing them by a malicious art, to castrate the Fathers,
having blotted out whatsoever was found in their writeing, not to be
conformable unto the Decrees of the Counsel of Trente: And the workmen unto
whom the commission of so meritorious a deed was granted, seeing they could
not accomplish their work, without making too great inscisions, they have
devised by an artificial invention, either to deny or excuse, whatsoever any
of these Fathers have written, or at least to give it a favorable
interpretation thereof. These are their propper words, speaking of Bertram
Priest, in their index expurgatorius, printed at Antwerp, by Plantin, 1571. by
command of the King of Spain, under the government of Duc d'Alva, as also an
other Register of books prohibited, a year before: so are also the other Indices
expurgatorij, that is to say, a register of books, that must be repurged;
printed in Spain, such also as were printed in Italy, or in that of Venice
Anno 1619. first made by the authority of Pope Pius the fourth, augmented by
Sixtus the fifth, and lastly viewd, and published by command of Clement the
eight, p. 19. you shall find these words: One ought also to blot out all the
words of the holy Scripture, which are wickedly applied against the sound use
of them. Such also as are wrested to an intention, contrary to the opinion of
the Doctors and Catholic Fathers.

Further, and that which aggravates their enormity is, that there is this day in
the Romish Religion, one of the greatest Sacrileges that can be committed
against the express command of God; Deuteronomy. 4, 2.
neither to add nor to diminish unto the word which he had commaund^d us. Add
not unto his words, Prove. 30.6
least he reproove thee, and thou be found a liar. And an obstinate sleighting
of the threatenings, which God denounces against such audacious men, with a
protestation to execute them, as you may see in the Revelation. Revel. 22.18,
19.
If any one shall add unto these things, God shall add unto him the plagues
that are written in this book; and if any one shall take away from the words
of this book of this Prophecy, God shall take away his part out of the book
of life, and out of the Holy City, etc.

Whence could proceed that horrible prudence so imprudently, to change the very
words of the Holy Scripture, and to make it legittimate, but from a desire
which they have, to maintain the people in the darkness of the Kingdom of
Antichrist. And that is the wisdom and prudence from below, that without any
apprehension of the foresaid threatenings, they have crossed out the second out
of the Law of the ten commandments, Exodus 20.
which forbiddes to make Images or resemblance of things which are in Heaven or
in the Earth, or in the water under the Earth, etc. a crossing out done, to
entertain the service of the Creature, in the opinion of the ignorant: as if
it made a part of Gods service; and yet it is a thing most opppsite to his
glory: For in Esaias he says: My glory will I not give unto another, Esa. 42.8.
neither my praise to graven images. In the mean while, whosoever shall examine
well, the whole Religious service of the Romish Church, shall know, that it
leanes more toward the Creature then toward the Creator: witness the
Almanacks of every nation, in which there is never a day, which does not
celebrate a particular saint: besides these which are combined with others, and
those that comeing too late, could get no place; unto whom, notwithstanding
for recompense, they have established a great solemnity; on which day they
serve them together; unto the best qualified have they distributed the days,
dedicated the Churches, consecrated the Images, given the Ornamets, and
besides, in the invocations, which they make before their Images, they
attribute such titles unto them, which appartaine only to God: yea in the
Churches they have erected Images of those things, which were never seen: all
this directly against the second commandment of the first Table, wherein God
expressly forbiddes, to make such to fall down before them, or perform unto
them any service, and therefore they have taken away that commandment from the
peoples knowledge, for there is never a book of devotion amongst them in any
language whatsoever, which contains that commandment; God then has
forbidden them, but the Romish Religion approves of them, because they are the
books of the Layics, that is of the ignorant, whom they command to travel,
every where, unto several pilgrimages, far, and near, for to visit several
images: And in this regard, I cannot altogether condemn them, who (speaking
of the Romish Church) say that the Religion there taught, is imaginary, and
painted; For wheresoever you cast your eyes, it every where aboundes with
pictures and images: Their Temples are full, within, without, or above; their
Altars laden with images, the leaves of the Altars painted with Images; their
robes and weeds embrodred with images, the glasses altogether darkened by the
multitude of the painted images, their books of Devotion, the Massebooke,
Breviaryes, Mattins, all full of images; their beads hanging on their neck, or
girdle, adorned with images; their Pilgrims, comeing from S. James, or S.
Michiles, or from elsewhere, burdened with images; the doors of their houses
clapped full with papers of the Fraternity; their cubbards in their chambers, and
their cabinets furnished with images; and where shall one find a place amongst
them, that is not therewith unright?

Justly then (said he) that this Religion is nothing but painting and
imagination; For witness of the wrath of God against Idolaters, one may read
the memorable punishment of the Children of Israel, who with their heart did
worship the true God, though it were under the similitude of a Kalfe, Exodus
32.4, 5
when it is said, to morrow is a solemn Feast unto the Lord, etc. Behold those
Gods that brough you out of the Land of Egypt.

In the Romish Religion, they paynt God the Father in their Churches, in the
streets, they hang his image for a sign at the Tavernes, with the image of the
Son, and the H. Ghost; And under it is written, in the Trinity; and the name
of the Master of that place is called by his neighbors, the Master of the
Trinity, as they call one, the Master of the Goulden Lion, or the like. To
paint the Deity, and to make it resemble a Creature, is not that on a purposed
will to sin against that which Moses told the people of Israel, when he
appeared before the Lord in the Mount Horeb? The Lord spoke unto you out of the
midst of the fire: Deuteronomy. 4, 12 15, 16.
ye heard the voice of the words, but saw no similitude, only a voice; And a
little further: Take ye therefore good heed unto your selves, (for ye saw no
manner of similitude on that day that the Lord spoke unto you in Horeb, out of
the midst of the fire,) least ye corrupt your selves, and make you a graven
image, the similitude of any figure, the likeness of male or female, etc. And
our Savior Christ, confirming this Doctrine, adds: Ioh. 1, 1^
No man then has seen God.

Therefore I hold the Romish Religion for Idolatrous, for image and idol
differ not but in the language, the one being Greek, and the other Latin, in
which Quae sequitur Epicurus tota sunt Democriti tomi imagines quae idola
nominant.
Cicero expounds the word Idolum by Image, and to eschew all ambiguity in
words, God added the word of similitude or likeness, and afterward, what
agreement has the Temple of God with Idols? So that I follow the instruction
of S. John: 2 Cor. 6, 16 2 Ioh. 5, 21
Little Children keep your selves from idols.

The Romish Religion deprives our Savior Christ of a part of his glory, for to
honor the Creatures with all, joining companions with him, in the business of
intercession, as Angels, men, women, trees, Iron, Clothes: Their manuals of
Devotion and Prayer-bookes are full of Hymns, made to Saints. They say unto
the wood of the Cross, (severally considered from the person of Christ) In the
Hymn, vixilla Regis prodeunt.

Offi. Beat. Mar. Venet. 1601.


Increase righteousness unto the good; and give grace unto the sinful. In
the prayer they putt up unto Christ they say: Lord grant unto us that those,
which come to adore thy holy Cross, may be delivered from the bonds of their
sins. They attribute unto the thorns of the Crown of Christ, Offic. B.
virg. Mar. Fol. 265. quel le Spine curdeli scacundal cuor mio ogni superbia.

Sanctissima Dei nappa, sancta sudarij, ora pro nobis.


power to convert the heart, to purge it from pride, and to deliver sinners, in
the day of judgment, from the confusion they deserve by their sins. What
could they say more unto the holy Virgin? yea, what could they hope more of
Christ? So also they worship the Napkin that served Christ at the institution
of the Lords Supper, saying: Most holy Napkin of God pray for us; yea the
Monks of Fons have some Relics of it: They of Cahors do pray unto the holy
Kercher, yea pray to the Lord by the virtue of the same Kercher.

Such devotion toward the Creatures, makes me marvaill, that the Romish
Religion has not made other Articles of Faith then did the Apostles, as they
have made the commandments of the Church equal, with the commandments of God;
For since they call upon the Creatures, yea some of them unanimated things, it
is a sign that they believe, and put their trust in them, they should say
then: I believe in the Cross, I believe in the Nayls, I believe in the Thorns,
I believe in the wood and stone, I believe in our Lady, and so make a new
Creed; If then they do not believe on them, how shall they call upon them
without Faith. To, 10, 14
For (says Paul) how shall they call on him on whom they have not believed?

Concerning the tittles, they attributed to the Lady Mary, they are blasphemous
against God, for that which belongs unto him alone, they ascribe unto the
virgin Mary, in the Songs, made to her praise; They make her everlasting,
before all ages, that Kings reign by her, and give all the glory unto her,
which appertains only unto the Father, Son, and H. Ghost, stileing her the
mother of mercy, taking away of sins, sanctifying the hearts. And unto her
honor (though to the great dishonor of God) they have altogether perverted
all the 150 Psalms of David; in which they have every where changed the name
of Lord into Lady, as in the 110 Psalm, which the Lord applies to himself:
Mat. 22, 44
The Lord spoke unto my Lord sit thou at my right hand, etc. they have put into
the new Psalm-booke: The Lord said unto my Lady (that is unto the Virgin Mary)
sit thou at my right hand, etc. If she be then at the right hand of God, she is
in so great a degree of glory, as Christ himself: For he is no where else set
but at the right hand of God, as says the Creed: He sits at the right hand of
God; and Psalm 57. in place of God, they have put: Lady have pity on me! O
Lady! have pity on me, for my soul hopes in thee; and so the whole Psalms
through: She is to them the Queen of Heaven, the Gate of Paradise, the
Fountain of life, mercy, grace, salvation to all those that hope in her; titles
only, fitting the sole Redeemer of the world.

They bestow no less honor upon the Saints, canonized by them, unto whom
they distribute (as seems) good unto them, either greater or smaller charges:
S. Nicolas is President of the Navigation, S. George of the Fruits of the
Earth, S. Rocus of the Pest, S. Fremin of the Gout. S. Main of the Scabs, S.
Eloy of the Horses, S. Antony of the Hogs; There is nothing that has not his
protector, even unto the pulletts, which have S. Leodigar, to defend them from
the pip, and so of all the rest. And by such coards of Superstitious Idolatry,
they bind men to the invocation of the Creature, and turn them away from the
worship of the Creator.

And whosoever would read the books of those Spirits, that have altogether
erred from the truth, studied for the honor of their Saints; one may find,
that they made them fouler in their actions, then the most infamous persons:
One may see in the book of Printed at Ments 1612.
Disciplus, of the Miracles of our Lady Mary, in the Dialogue of Printed at
Antw. 1605.
Caesarius, in the second Tome of the flowr of Examples, printed at Roan, Anno
1616: that the Lady Mary, being aided by Angels, did favor unto several
whores, that were her Devotaries, a happy deliverance; supplying their places
in the Monastery, whilst they went many years revelling with their Ruffians;
and for to imitate her other Saints, would be no less courteous.

Is that to honor the memory of the Holy Virgin? it is rather by the like hope
of her favor, to relaxe the bridle to all kind of loosenes. It is an horror
to see such things taught in the writeings of Christians.

These Saints are become heads of the Orders, every one having their
proselites or Devotaryes, every one their particular government, habit, color,
different fashion, and by that distinguished in the Romish Religion, like as
the Lackeys by their Liveryes in the Court of Kings and Princes. They give them
the tittles of Fathers and Mothers, not as unto such as are instructours and
Administratours, under the charge of others, but as unto such as have engendered
this Religious posterity unto God, against that which our Savior expressly
forbids, in Mat. 23. Call no man here upon Earth your Father. The one has
S. Francis for their Father, the other S. Dominicus; others such as came
afterward, as S. Ignatius, lately canonized by the importunity of the
Jesuits. And the Souveraine Father of all these Fathers is the Pope; For he it
is that blessed them first, and afterward canonizeth them, that is, brings
them into the rank and catalogue of the Saints. Therefore he by prerogative,
bears the name of Father, with that adjective of Holy, yea in the abstract it
self his Holiness, as they speak of God, his Deity, or his Bounty: For when
one speaks unto the Pope, he says: Holy Father, a tittle which our Savior
Christ gave unto his Father, Ioh. 17, 11
saying: Holy Father, keep them in thy name. But the Pope suffers himself to
be called in the Superlative degree, In the Gloss Clementine, etc.
most Holy Father; and why not, since he suffers himself to be called God, yea
our Lord God? He vaunteth himself to have all power in Heaven and in Earth,
lib. 1. of the holy Ceremonies, chap. 6. He gloryeth that by the abundance of
his power he can dispense with the Laws, yea that he is above the Laws; he
will have us to receave the holy Scripture, because the Pope has pronounced
his sentence of them. He names himself the Bridegrom of the Church, the Lion
of Judah, the Root of David, the Savior of Sion; Titles belonging only to
Christ. Bellarmine says: that the Church is the spouse of the Pope, yea
(Christo secluso) without consideration of Christ: He vaunts himself to have
all the power of Laws within his own bosom.

In the Canon, Si Papa, in the 40 distinction, he exempts himself from the
judgments of men, whatsoever he do. These are the proper words of the Canon:
If the Pope be found negligent of his, and his Bret^rens salvation,
unproffitable and slow in his work, and concealing the good, (which is most
hurtful to himself and others) in the mean while he leads whole bands of
innumerable people with him to the first 1. E. the Devil.
Slave of Hell, for to be beaten eternally of him, with several blows; No man
may presume to reprehend his faults; because he that must judge all men, ought
not to be judged of any person, except he be found to err from the Faith.

By this last close it appears, that at that time, they thought the Pope might
be an Heretic, and now they think, he cannot err; behold a manifest
contradiction: A great number of other observations upon this subject, do
offer themselves, both in the Canons and in the writeings of the new Doctors of
the Romish church; whence may be easily inferred, that he, which is so eminent
in pride, ought not to take it in ill part, if they tell him, that one may
justly presume, that it is of him, that the Apostle speaks, 2 Thessalonians. chap. 2.
seeing he carries himself, as if he were God, in taking upon him the title
of God, and attributes unto himself such a power, for he vaunteth himself to
have all power in Heaven or Earth. In the first book of the Holy Ceremonies,
Sect. 7. Chapt. 6. witness, Innocent the third, in the Bulle, which is in the
third Tome of the Counsels, who grants increase of honor, and a degree in
Heaven above others, unto those who shall go beyond sea to war: And seeing
himself crowned with a triple-crowne, which they call, the Kingdom, he
receaveth with contentment, as by enjoying of his Souveraine power, this
salution: Know that you are the Father of Princes, and of Kings, the Governor
of the World, and the Liftenant of Christ here upon Earth. And what would
Boniface the 8. witness less of himself? (by report of Charles of Moulin,
Doctor in Law, Counselor of France and Germany fol. 595.) the said Boniface,
to declare himself to be Lord and Sovereign over all men, in all things,
whether Spiritual or Temporal, on the day of Iubile, Anno 1300.) of which he
was the first institutor, and commanded to be celebrated every Afterward
Clement. 6. did reduct it to 50 year, and afterward Sixtus 4. to 25 year,
which was An. 1475.
hundred year) did show himself unto a great confluxe of people, upon a
stage, clothed in the habit of a Pope, like to a Pagan Priest, having three
Crowns on his head, and next day in a worldly habit of an Emperor, crowned
and armed, having a naked sword in one hand, and the Globe of the World in the
other hand, speaking aloud these words: Behold 2 swords, thou see S. Peter,
thy Successor, and thou Christ, behouldest thy Vicar.

And to shut the mouth of those, which draw into question the right of
Soverainty to the temporal things, which he attributes unto himself, as well
as unto the spiritual; within two years after he made an Edict, which he
published for an Article of Faith, and necessary to salvation, upon penalty of
eternal damnation; Such proceedings savor not the sweet smell of Christ, who
liveing in the world, said to his auditors: learn of me, Mat. 11, 29
to be meek and lowly of heart. Neither did they agree with the humble title of
the said Pope, which he used in the writeing of a letter to Phillip the Fair,
King of France; qualifying himself with the title of Bishop, and Servant of
the Servants of God. The same pomp and magnificence in that Sovereign power,
(in the fruition whereof the Successors of the said Boniface have maintained
themselves) is seen enough, that though they write themselves, the Servants of
Servants of Jesus Christ, yet in effect they pretend to be the Lord of Lords of
those that be the Servants of Christ, and manifest it plainly to the Emperor,
Kings, and Princes, present at his inauguration, causing them as Lackeys to
hold the stirrup, when they mount a horseback, making them to take the bridle
of the horse, to lead him apart on his way, in token of submission. And if he
cause himself to be carried in a chayr, four of the most qualified, whether
Emperor or Kings, take him upon their shoulders, assisted by four strong
servants, for to help them, to bear the heavines of the lead.

And whilst the Pope dines, being set alone at table, the Bishops and
Cardinals on two other tables, each according to their dignity: the mightiest,
and most noble amongst the temporal Lords, though they were Kings themselves,
serve in their own person to the Pope. When an Emperor must be Crowned, and
he come to Rome, to receave the Romish Crown, comeing near the place, the
Pope is set upon a stage, compassed about with Cardinals, the Emperor
lighting down, as soon as he perceives his Holiness, boweth his knee to the
ground, bare-headed, shows him great reverence; and approaching nearer to his
Throne, bows again his knee to the ground; at last comeing to the feet of the
Pope, he kisseth them for devotion, in honor of the Savior. All these things
are evident signs, that he lifts himself above the Sovereign powers of the
Earth. And if his pride had been limited in putting his foot upon the neck of
the Emperors, as did most arrogantly Pope Alexander the third, unto Emperor
Frederic Barberousse, in the entry of the gate of the Temple of S. Mark, at
Venice, speaking these words, Psalm. 91, 13
as if they were written on his behalf: Thou shall tread upon the Lion and
Adder, and the young Lion, and the Draggon, thou shall trample under foot; one
might impute this action for a humane argument: But to lift himself above him
whom he worshippeth and acknowledges for his Creator, it is to make himself
a fellow sinner to those, of whom Jude speaks, Iud. 8.5.
which despise Dominion, and speak evil of dignityes, and followers of the
Angels, which kept not their first estate, but left their own habitation: For
this is done at Room, at clear noonday, in sight of more then 10000
witnesses, who from all corners of Italy flock thither, to see that Feast, and
to receave there the blessing of the new Successor of S. Peter, the Vicar of
our Lord Jesus Christ. When he marches thus, accompanied and led by Cardinals,
which are Princes of that Court, served by Emperor, and Kings, carried upon
their shoulders, in token of their Religious piety: His consecrated Host,
(which he says he believes to be his God, his Creator, and his Redeemer) is
sent before, as it were to prepare him the way, very plainly accompanied; For
they that go before it, are the porters of the Cardinals, here and there
amongst the people; after them follow in order the Harbor and Taylour of the
Pope, with their budgetts, the Family of the Pope, and the common Gentry, the
Nevewes and Cosins of my Lords the Cardinals, the footbench of the Pope,
carried upon a white horse, lead by one of the horselers, afterward a few
runners with Standards of several colors; after them the Chamberlins with the
noblemen of better fashion then the former, after them two Pursuivants, with
their staves in their hands, afterward a troop of servants of the Pope,
carrying lighten torches in their hands before the Sacrament, two household
Chapplaines, with two silver Lanterns, on horseback, and afterward comes the
Sacrament upon a white horse, having a silver bell about his neck, lead by the
servant of the Chaplain; afterward comes the Chapplaine himself on
horseback; after him follow the Singers, the Clerks, and Auditors of the
Chamber, there is the whole train of the Sacrament. But in the train of the
Pope are the Prelates, Abbots, Bishops, Archbishops, Patriarchs, Cardinals, in
the train two Deacons, assisteing the Pope, and finally the Pope himself, on a
white horse, embrodered and costly adorned, under a Canopie, borne up by eight
great Lords and Ambassadors; and compare the train of the one with the train
of the other, and the applaudeing which is done to the Pope, with small
attendance and state they worship their God with; doubtless one may judge,
that the Pope is the Master, and God his Servant. The short rehearsal hereof
is true; and whosoever please to read it, I can open unto him the book of the
Romish Pontificalls, printed at Venice, Anno 1582. dedicated unto Pope Gregory
the thirteenth of that name.

Add unto the former things that divine power which the Pope attributes unto
himself, and which flows by his influence (as from a spring) from him upon
all Priests of the Romish Religion, to be able to change the nature of things,
to deprive them of their substance, and to substitute others in their place;
The accidents of those things that perish, yet remaining, to cover their other
corporal substance with, which shall have two accidents, in color, taste, and
form, of which the senses can have no knowledge, either workeing, or else
pretending to work those things, which God never made, and unto which nothing
is found like, amongst all the miraculous works, of which the holy Scripture
makes mention, either in the Old or New Testament: a power unheard of, whence
the new and unknown work is called Transubstantiation, and to persuade the
poor ignorant people thereunto, they take away the use of their eyes,
tasteing, tongue, and hands, and deprive them of the liberty, to discern and
judge of things, according to their natural propertyes, what they are, and to
command that they should believe, that that which was black was white; and
that they must follow him that goes before, though it were otherwise against
the judgment of their own eyes. This is one of the rules, the thirteenth in
order of those, that establish the Jesuits, to cleave to the opinion of the
Romish Church, in these words: Finally, that we may keep the conformity,
Exerc. spiritual. societat. Ies. authore Ignatio de Loyola Viennae Aust. An.
1563. fol. 139. b.
and agreement of judgments, with the Catholic Church, if she conclude any
thing to be black, that we see is white, we must grant with her, that it is
black; To attribute unto her self such power, is not that to equalize her with
God? and in considetion hereof, to lift her self up above Angels, Thrones,
Dominions yea above the Virgin Mary, and which is most horrible above Jesus
Christ our Creator, and to dare publish this in books, is not this enough, to
conclude that the Religion, doing these things, was decyffered of S. John in
his Revelation? by that woman set upon a scarlet colored beast, full of names
of blasphemy, Rev. 17, 3. and 13, 6.
and the beast that opened his mouth in blasphemy against God, to blaspheme his
Name, and his Tabernacle, and them that dwelt in Heaven. Now, the Pope, in
quality of a Priest, and all other Priests does thus, consenting unto books,
made by men of their order, wherein all these blasphemies are found, and to
point this out, as it were with fingers, that they may not think, we only
discourse of generallityes, or certain heare-sayes, or unwritten words, read
one of the most famous commentatours, upon the Canon of the Mass, namely
Gabriel Biel, a German of Nation, who lived, and was much esteemed of Pope
Alexander the sixth, Anno 1494. his book afterward reviewed and corrected, was
printed at Lions Anno 1527. one shall find there, lesson 4. fol. 5. and 6.
many, and several reasons, to raise the dignity of the Priests, above all
Creatures in Heaven and in Earth, amongst the rest, that by the words of the
Priest, the Heavens are opened, pass through the throng of Angels, comeing to
the Queen of Heavens, and Lady of the world, though she exceed all other
Creatures in abundance of grace, yet gives place to those which have the holy
Government of the Church, or the administration of the mystery committed unto
them. And further: Hearken therefore ye Priests, tasters to the true Solomon,
and Chamberlains of Christ. You may also read an old book, called Lavacrim
conscientiae, printed at Paris by Denis Roce, you find there, that the author,
Lavacr. conscientiae cap. 5.
speakeing of the dignity of Priests, sets the^ above Kings and Angels, at last
above the virgin Mary, in these words: He is more excellent then the most
worthy Virgin, in that he creates the body of Christ, yea he prevails more on
Earth, then the most powerful Angel of Heaven, yea then the Virgin Mary her
self, for unto thee, O Priest, thy Lord and thy God becomes obedient, for to
be present at the time of consecration. And speakeing of the Priests they bring
in Christ, speakeing these words to them: I have given you more power, then
unto all the Angels and Saints of Paradise, yea unto my beloved Mother, to
wit, in the consecration of the Eucharist, wherein I am always obedient unto
you, as well unto the wickedest, and most roguish Priest, as unto the holiest
Saint, and you have I exalted above all Creatures; Besides, the Priest is
worthier then a King, holier then an Angel, and a Creator of his Creator And
in another book of the said age, called Stella Clericorum, the Priest is
honored with such dignityes, that he is called, the Creator of his Creator,
and of all Creatures; Besides, God has preferred him above Angels, Thrones,
and Dominions; Yet further, he that created me without my self, is now created
himself by my means. All these books, without addition or exaggeration, have
these same aforesaid words in their writings; Could one add to such
blasphemies? Is it not good reason one should abhor, and avoid such Religion?
and renounce the head thereof? who exalts himself above all power, either
temporal or spiritual, above that which he confesses to be God, and yet
receaveth the title of God.

As concerning the articles of Faith, of which (with us) he and his make
profession, the Doctrine of the Romish Religion destroys many fundamental
points thereof: The Articles of Faith (agreeing with the H. Scriptures) teach
us, that Jesus Christ is the Son of David, accordeing to the Flesh, which he
took upon him, in the womb of the holy Virgin: the body which the Priest
ears, at the celebration of the Mass, is not of the seed of David, but of the
seed of corn, came not forth out of the Matrix of the Virgin, neither was it
there nourished the space of nine months, but was formed by the will of the
Priest, (such a conception was not by the Holy Ghost, but by the intention of
the Priest, provided that he had an intention,) but was brought forth from two
hot Irons, where it was formed, (such a birth was not of the virgin,) its
roundnesse, whiteness, flatnesse, taste, weight, are not accidents to an
humane body, as Christ had, liveing in the world, and dying for us, neither the
inconveniences such an Hosty is subject unto, as to be eaten of Worms,
Patrets, or Ratts, to rotte, to be swallowed into the stommack, and from thence
to be cast out otherwhere, to be broken, and to be cast up again by the
Priest, are no propertyes to a body, glorified, as that is of our Lord Jesus
Christ, after his resurrection: to be in a place, without taking up of any
space, to be in ten thousand mouths of communicants, which at the same hour
keep their Easter in a great town, and to become as it were infinite throughout
whole Christendom, stands not with the nature of a body; for infiniteness is
only proper to the Deity, and thus attributeing unto the glorified body of our
Lord an infiniteness, they make a new Divinity; and generally believing this,
they contradict an Article of the Creed that says: He is set at the right hand
of God the Father Almighty; as also opposite unto that which the Angels did
speak unto the Apostles, after the ascension of our Lord, Act. 1, 11.
that he shall come so as they saw him goeing to Heaven. But they saw him
ascend corporally; let them now bring us witnesses, without gainsaying, which
saw him descend corporally: it contradicts also that which the Apostle says,
speaking of our Lord Jesus, being raised again. Wherefore henceforth know we
no man after the flesh, 2 Cor. 5, 16
yea though we have known Christ after the fllesh, yet now henceforth know we
him no more. If the Apostle had believed the presence of Christ, bodily to be
upon the Earth, he would not have said: we know him no more after the flesh;
and Christ would not have said: Mat. 26, 11
Me ye shall not have always with you, if at the command of the Priest he
were always present at the Host. He that would dive deeper into this matter,
might bring to light so many absurdityes, that those which teach this doctrine,
should be convinced within themselves, that like poor blind men, they have
followed without knowledge those which caused them to err from the truth,
contained in the said Articles of Faith.

As for the Sacraments of the Baptism and the Lords Supper, (without examining
the number, they add unto them) they are in the Romish Church so corrupted,
and maimed, in their administration, that he which should compare them with the
practice of the Apostle, and of the Primitive Church, should find such
difference, as between a true child, and a counterfeyted, between a
healthful body, and a diseased. Unto the singleness of Baptism, which is
administered in single water, in the name of the Father, of the Son, and of
the Holy Ghost; how many noveltyes have they added unto it, of which they can
show no word nor example, Salus me^tis and corporis Ad ejicie^dos Daemones,
morbosque pellendos.
much less any command in the word of God, nor in the purer ancient times: To
wit, the conjuring of the water, salt and oil; Of the salt, to be to all
those which use it, a saveing of soul and body; Of the water, to cast out
Devils, and take away sicknesses: Wherefore put they salt into the mouth of
the infant presented to the Baptism? Salutare sacramentum ad fugandum inimicum.
To what end say they these words to it: receave the salt of wisdom? wherefore
call they it a saving Sacrament, to drive away the Devil? Will they add the
salt unto it as the eight Sacrament? where shall they find that God has
commanded it to be consecrated by his Servants, for the faithful people?
Populo venienti ad Credulitatem per servos suos consecrari praecepit.
who told them that the Devil is in the body of the infant newly borne? To
command five times with a conjuration that evil Spirit to go out; which
might give occasion to any one, for to ask whether the Devil was within the
body of the infant, whilst the mother was with child of it, or whether he
entered after it was borne; whence should follow, either that the mother with
the child had the devil within her, or that the condition of the infant dying
in the mothers belly, is more happy the^ its birth, seeing the devil makes his
dewlling place in that little body after it is borne; as if God gave the
Children of Christians, as soon as they were borne, to the devil for a pray; If
they deny the one or the other, to what end do they command in the name of
God the devil to com out of a body, into which he entered not?

This is then to take the name of God in vain, in so many exorcismes and
adjurations, as they make with so many signs of the Cross reiterated. Who
gave the Priest charge to putt his spittle in the ears and nose of the infant,
In odore^ suavitatis. Such spitle may be justly suspected to be dangerous for
the infant, if the Priest be not an honest man.
for a smell of a good savor? Who commanded him to put the oil upon the
breast, and between the shoulders of the infant? We read not that God
commanded those things in the circumcision, nor Christ in Baptism, of which
the Element, being water is unto us, by the washing of our bodies; an external
sign of the cleansing of our persons, by the blood of our Lord Jesus Christ:
and notwithstanding they in the Romish Church attribute such virtue, unto the
outward administration of the water, and to the intention of him that
administreth, that they make the efficacy of the Baptism to depend absolutely
upon it; in so much that any one being Baptized with water, and not knoweing
certainly, whether he that Baptized did pronounce the words of the Baptism,
with an intention to do that which the Church does, cannot be certain that he
is truly Baptized; and this outward administration of the water in Baptism,
being judged by them necessary to salvation: that made them set down these
questions in their books: Manipulus curatorum, made in the year 1333, printed
at Paris, 1476. dedicated to the Bishop of Valence, cap. 2. de materia Baptismi.
whether in want of water one may not use urine, Pottage, Lee, Rosewater,
snow-water, dirt? whether one may cast a child into a well, if there were
nothing to draw water withal; and so to Baptize it? whether and how one ought
to Baptize a child, comeing forth in the birth with the hand or foot, and not
with the head, when there is danger it would die in the mothers womb. The
same necessity being presupposed, made them resolve, Pupilla oculi clericorum,
made by a Chancellor of the University of Cambridge, An. 1385. Printed at
Roan, 1510.
to give-power to Baptize unto women, children, not only Christians, but also
into infidels, unbaptized Heretics, Jews, Pagans; any wicked howsoever (then
also unto sorcerers) yea without excepting the Devils themselves; provided
they do it by the commandment of God, and according to the order of the
Church. Strange things; by their adjurations they make against the Devil, they
pretend to cast him out of the body of the infant; and notwithstanding they
will accept of a Baptism, performed by the Devil, upon condition that he has
had a good intention: But who shall be the Devils surety, that he has done it
according to the order of the Church, and from a good intention? I pass many
other things over with silence, which might be worth the markeing, concerning
this subject.

As for the Sacrament of the precious body and blood of our Lord Jesus Christ,
the Romish Religion has altogether abolished in effect, and has not left any
true token of that, which he ordained unto his Disciples; nor of that, which
the Primitive Church for many hundred years has practiced. Our Savior by
this Sacrament has instituted the commemoration of his death; the Churches for
their consolation have celebrated the memory thereof so many ages; but the
Romish Church in stead of a Sacrament, has brought in a Sacrifice, which they
call Propitiatory, that is, appeasing the wrath of God, for the sins of the
liveing and the dead, that is that which seems most strange unto me, seeing
Jesus Christ as God; Therefore infinite, as the Son of man, conceaved of the
H. Ghost, without blemish, therefore just, holy, and perfect; and lastly, as
Mediator between God and Men, participating of both natures, joined together
in the unity of his person; and that person having according to both his
natures, all perfection, who by a voluntary yielding presented himself to God
for us, to satisfy his Justice in our name, has had no defects or wants in his
Kingly, Priestly, and Prophetical office, neither by consequence in his
benefits of protection, redemption, or instruction. To say the contrary, is to
blaspheme, and accuse him of insufficie^cy; If he be then sufficient, he is
perfect, he has left us the^ nothing for to perfect, to our redemption, nor
for the propitiation of our sins; For the which no oblation more is to be
done, seeing he has obtained remission for them; as witnesses the Apostle:
Now where remission of these is, Heb. 10, 18
there is no more offering for sin; therefore no more sacrifice: whence I
conclude to make sacrificers, for successors of Jesus Christ in that office;
that is to rank them amongst the offering Priests of the old Testament, who by
death were hindered to continue their charge: That is then to say, that Christ
is not eternal; which is to belie the Scripture, which says, that he is an
High Priest for ever, according to the order of Melchisedec. And to reiterate
the same Sacrifice to the same end that Jesus Christ did offer himself, is to
say plainly, that he has not satisfied God his Father, and that is to accuse
his oblation to be defective; which cannot be said without blasphemy; and if
that be defective, and has not been sufficient to satisfy the Justice of God
his Father, offered by himself upon the Altar of his Cross, by the Eternal
spirit, Heb. 9, 14
who shall persuade us, that an offering by the hand of a sinful man could
be pleasing unto God? (but who dare say, that the Priest exceeds Christ?) who
shall then assure us of the remission of our sins by such a Sacrifice? whence
I draw this consequence, either, that there is not at all forgivenes of sins,
or that it must have been obtained by Jesus Christ; and that in that Sacrifice,
which he offered unto God, in giveing himself: And that therefore there is no
Sacrifice more to be offered, but one by a remembrance to be made of Christ's
Sacrifice, according to his ordinance, as that was done by the Primitive
Church, and as it is yet ordinarily maintained in the Reformed Church.

The Mass it self, examined by the word of God, shall be found not to be a
propitiatory Sacrifice for sins, as can be gathered by that which the Church
of Room says of the Mass, that it is a Sacrifice without blood, that is, in
which there is no death; and the Apostle in the Epistle to the Hebrews says:
Heb. 9, 22.
Without shedding of blood (that is without death) there is no forgivenes of
sins. Whence I understand first, that it is false, that they say that the
pretended Sacrifice of the Mass should be the same which Christ made upon the
Cross; for the difference stands upon a manifest contradiction, the Sacrifice
of Christ was with shedding of his blood, and that of the Mass is without
shedding, then it is not the same; or else you must say that Yea and No, to
affirm and to deny, are the same. Now from the passage of S. Paul, and the
definition of the Mass I draw this argument, in the conclusion whereof I
find, that in the pretended Sacrifice of the Mass there is no forgivenes of
sins.

Where there is no shedding of blood, there is no forgivenes of sins.

In the Mass there is no shedding of blood; Ergo in the Mass there is no
forgivenes of sins.

To what end then do they call the Mass a Sacrifice propitiatory, or of
appeasement, seeing we know it is without satisfaction unto the Justice of God?
But it is without satisfaction, because it is without death; for the wages of
sin is death: Ro^. 6.23.
Therefore it is not propitiatory for the sins of the liveing; much less
for those which they imagine to be in purgatory. And seeing we believe the
forgivenes of sins, as we confess in the Articles of Faith; wherefore should
we make new Sacrifices to obtain it? For we believe not that which is
uncertain, but that which is certain, else it would be but uncertainty and no
Faith: we make a profession of Faith, yea of that Faith, concerning the
forgivenes of sins, and seeing we have it in the the Church of Christ, there
remains no oblation more for sin; That is it which the Apostle teaches us
in these words: Heb. 10, 18
Now where remission of these is, there is no more offering for sin. He had
spoken in the verse going before, of sins and iniquityes which God had
forgotten. From this passage then I form this argument, whereof the conclusion
is, that in the Christian Church, there is no oblation more to be made for
sin.

Where there is forgivenes of sins, there must be no more oblation for sin.

But in the Christian Church there is forgivenes of sins.

Ergo, in the Christian Church there is no more oblation for sin.

What will become then of the Mass, except they say it is not in the Christian
Church, but only in the Church of Room? But, for that I know, that the Mass
destroys the assurance of our salvation, does ruinate the foundation of
Faith, and is injurious unto the dignity of the person of our Savior Jesus
Christ, and blasphemous against the perfectness of his Sacrifice; my
conscience obliges me to renounce it; and to join my self to those, who with
devotion, at the Sacrament of the Lords Supper, which our Savior instituted,
keep a remembrance of his death, and believe that he having suffered it on the
Cross, in which he perfected his only Sacrifice, and that propitiatory to
appease the wrath of God; Heb. 10, 14
He has by that one offering, perfected for ever them that are Sanctified.

As for the vows, unto which in the Romish Religion they oblige the
consciences, to the exact observation of those things, which are not commanded
in the word of God, and to deprive themselves of those things, which are
created for the Lawful use of man, preferring certain days before others,
and having neither command nor example of those things in the word of God, nor
in the practice of the Primitive Church, neither also of those distinctions of
Orders, of Devotaryes, which each of them have their particular Patron; I find
that all these are human inventions, proceeding from the ambition and vanity of
certain men, Col. 2, 18.
which would rule over others, at their pleasure, in a voluntary humility and
worshipping of Angels, intrudeing into those things, which they have not seen,
vainly puffed up by their fleshly mind; not permitting unto Christians the
liberty which Christ has purchased them, but desireing to charge them with
ordinances, Touch not, taste not, handle not, which all are to perish with the
vseing, Col. 2, 21
after the Commandments and Doctrines of men; which things indeed have a show
of wisdom, in will-worshippe, and humility, and neglecting of the body, not in
any honor to the satisfying of the flesh.

All this is nothing but a vain deceaving, according to the rudiments of the
World, and not according to Christ. But those shows of Holiness, in these
voluntary devotions, in stead of bringing men to the true humility of the
Spirit, have filled them with pride, and an opinion of perfection, each of
them, that were founders of those noveltyes, making their order ambitiously,
more commendable by their strictness; in so much, that we daily see one or
other fashion of a Religions habit come up, which never heretofore was known:
These diversityes have brought so strong a Jealousy amongst these Orders, that
they are come to enmity, envy, contention, partiallity, and to take upon them
other Names then that of Christ, Ephesians. 1, 22
whom God has given above all things to be head of his Church. For the one
will say (for which the Apostle reprooveth the Christians that were at
Corinth,) I am Paul's, I am Apollos, I am Cephas, and I am Christ's; 1 Cor. 1, 12
now one claims one head, another another. Bernardines, Augustines, Iacobines,
Dominicans, Benedictians, Carmelites, Cordeliers, and those that will be
esteemed more then all the rest, and are always hated of the other Orders,
have chosen the Name of Jesus, calling themselves his associates, namely
Jesuits, for ask them of what Order they are, they will answer, of the
Society of Jesus. The women must have their part, and not without reason, that
no perfectness to that devotion should be wanting, for lack of that Company,
which is so necessary for man, to sweeten his life: The founders of these
Orders, saw that it was not good, for man to be alone they made him a help,
like to himself; in devotion, habit, rule, of life, Beggary; yea not many
years ago, because those which call themselves of the Society of Jesus; had
no she fellows of the same name, there are a Company of Devotary women, which
took upon them the same title, but because that this seemed to be done by
private Authority, it was wisely condemned by the Pope, for fear least that
would infer many dangerous consequences; as is more largely contained in the
Bull of Pope Urban the eight, printed at Rome, by the Printer of the
Apostolical Chamber, 1631.

Esse plantas Ecclesiae Dei noxias, quas ne ulterius se diffunda^t, radicitus
evellendas and extirpa^das decrevit.
These Religious women called themselves Iesuitesses, which Pope Urban
condemned, to be rooted out, as plants noisome to the Church of God. And all
these Orders are bound by a solemn vow, to live in the state of continence,
and are kept from the Holy Marriage, though they be not free from such
affections, which bind one to the Lawful use of it, they that will profess
their vessels in holiness, according to the words of the Apostle: That this is
the will of God, even our Sanctification, 1 These. 4, 3.4.
that we should abstain from fornication, that every one of us should know,
how to possess his vessel in sanctification and honor. And that which he
says to the Corinths: 1 Co. 7, 8, 9
To those that are unmarried and Widows, if they cannot contain, that they
marry; for it is better to marry then to burn. Heb. 13, 4
As also to the Hebrews: Marriage is honorable in all, and the bed undefiled,
but Whoremongers and Adulterers God will judge.

Let any body read the whole Old and New Testament throughout, he shall not
find one word which tends to the forbidding of Marriage, nor one jot that
commands the vow of perpetual continence. The Priests and Prophets were
married, as also the most part of the Apostles of Christ, as can be gathered by
that which Paul says, 1 Cor. 9.5. and Mat. 8.14. of the Mother in Law, that is
of the Mother of the Wife, of the Apostle S. Peter, whom Christ healed of an
ague.

Notwithstanding, against the express commandment of the word of God, the
Church of Room forbids Ecclesiastical persons, of both sexes, to marry;
against the Examples of the Prophets and Apostles in this matter; against the
practice of the Primitive Church, which may be gathered by the reading of the
History. S. Paul did not forbid the Bishopps Marriage, when he ordaines, 1 Timothy
3, 2, 3, 4.
that the Bishop should be the husband of one Wife, etc. which must not be
interpreted of one Church only (as do those which wrest his words, as also
other Scriptures to their own condemnation) but of an espoused wife; as
appears by the comparison he makes in the same place, between the Family of
the Bishop, and the Church which is committed unto him: And those who under the
pretext of making the Ecclesiastical men less buisied in the affairs of
this world, and more free to attend on spiritual things, have forbidden them
Marriage, have brought them into snares of thousand wicked temptations, which
make them committ such horrible mischiefs, the rehearsing whereof would make
one sh^ke: how many smootherings of newborn babes are there found, to recover
the honor of those that lost it? It was not without great cause, that Pope
Pius the second (as testifyeth Platina, who has written the lives of the
Popes) said, that if there were great motives to forbid Priests to marry, for
far greater reasons one ought to restore them their liberty again; And S.
Bernard the Abbot, having examined well how necessary Marriage is, to prevent
that the Church of God might not be a place of all unclean Spirits, says
flatly: Take from the Church the honorable Marriage, In Cant. Salo. Ser. 66.
and the Bed which is undefiled, do you not fill it with Concubines,
incestuous, effeminate, and Sodomitish persons; finally, with all sorts of
filthiness? And since it could not be, but offenses should come; Mat. 18, 7
but woe unto them by whom they come; So must scandalls come, to verify that
which the Prophetical Spirit of God has revealed unto the Apostle Paul, 1 Timothy 4.1. 3
where we read, that amongst the Doctrines of the Devil, he forgets not to
mark the forbidding of marriage, and abstinence from meats, which God has
created to be received with thankes-giveing, of them which believe and know the
truth. And in this regard how can they excuse before God that yoke which they
would impose upon the consciences? Since the Apostle manifests: 1 Timothy 4, 4 5.
That every Creature of God is good, and nothing to be refused, if it be
received with thankesgiveing, for it is sanctified by the Word of God, and
Prayer. As also to the Colossians: Let no man judge you in meat or in drink,
Col. 2, 16
or in respect of an holy day, or of the New Moon, or of the Sabbath days.
And to the Romans: That the Kingdom of God is not meat and drink, To. 14, 17
but righteousness, and peace, and joy, in the Holy Ghost. And to the
Corinths: 1 Cor. 8, 8
Meat commends us not to God, for neither if we eat, are we the better,
neither if we eat not are we the worse.

Who makes them so bold to bring them under the yoke of bondage, whom Christ
has freed? And who being ransomd by him, must not be deprived of their
libertyes, which he has purchased them? And who has given them that power, to
oblige men by solemn vows, upon pain of damnation, not to transgress these
commandments, which the Apostle says to proceed from such as have departed
from the Faith, 1 Timothy 4.1.2
giveing heed unto seduceing Spirits and Doctrines of Devils, speaking lies in
hypocrisy, etc. People that punish more rigourously the transgressions of the
commandments of men, then of the commandments of God, as can be seen in the
taxation of the Apostolical Chauncery, printed by Galeot du Pre, in the great
Palace Hall at Paris, Anno 1533. wherein the dispensations and absolutions for
paricide, are better cheap, then to have a grant to eat flesh on forbidden
days. For Example, the absolution of a woman that has taken a drink, for to
void her living Child, is taxed but to 18 pence tournois, or thereabouts; and
a dispensation not to be obliged to fast certain days, and to have leave to
eat cheese, is taxed to 66 pence: If a Layman kill a Priest, or a Clark, must
pay 6 shillings, must do public penance, and must be beaten at five Parish
Churches. A husband that has beaten his Wife, being with Child, so that she
have a mischaunce, shall pay two shillings: He that shall counterfeyt the
Apostolical Letters, must pay 9 shillings. If any one kill their Father,
Mother, Brother, or Sister, must pay 16 or 17 pence; and one that has gotten
his Orders by Simony, 17 shillings and a groat.

By these few Examples one may see that sins are set at a certain price; and
those which are against humane constitutions, at a higher rate then those which
are contrary to the commandments of God. We read not that such pecuniary fines
were imposed by the Apostles upon the poor sinners, that which we read in the
Gospel is: Repent, for the Kingdom of Heaven is at hand. If ye repent not,
ye shall all perish; Act. 3, 19
Repent ye therefore, and be converted, that your sins may be blotted out,
and such like words; Where we find nothing spoken of money paid for sins.
Such proceedings are contrary to that which the Apostle requires in a Bishop,
that he be not covetous of filthy lucre: Me thinks, it is a thing not well
beseemeing a Prelate, to receive such forfeitures, as a Justice of Peace should
exact of such as infringe the Politic Laws. To such Prelates may be applied
that which God said to Esaias: Esa. 57, 17
For the iniquity of his covetousness was I wroth and smote him.

No sin, nor punishment of sin, can by money be satisfied before God, Christ
has satisfied him for us, and is come into the World to call sinners to
repentance.

As for purgeing of the souls after this life, of the remnant of the
filthiness, whereof they had no leisure, nor means, to cleanse themselves in
this life, being by the new Doctrine of the Church of Room reserved to
finish, and to purge themselves in Purgatory, I esteem it as Fables; as well
all those things which they write in their books, the Flower of Examples, the
Goulden Legend, where there are such pretty Historyes, as would talk any one
asleep; and a thousand tales that are as foolish as false. And all this to the
great dishonor of God, overthroweing directly his Justice and Mercy; His
Justice, for since there was satisfaction made for our sins by Jesus Christ,
who has taken upon him our infirmityes, and has borne the punishment to
purchase peace unto us, he cannot be unjust, for to ask a second satisfaction
of us: unto which I add that no punishment can be satisfactory in behalf of
sinful man, but eternal death: to say that the pains of Purgatory, and that
imagined fire, is not for satisfaction, but for purgeing, it is to deny the
words of the Apostle, who assures us on Gods part, that the blood of his Son
Jesus Christ, has cleansed us from all our sins. It is also against his
Mercy, for if he pardons, he quitteth the debt, and forgiveth the punishment.
To impute unto him then to punish, is to rob him of his Mercy, for to punish
is proper to Justice; and to pardon to mercy. Surely that Child would think
his Father had deceaved him, if, after he had given him assurance of the Pardon
of his fault, he caused him to be whipped to the blood:

Now, since the greatness and the durance of the pains of that imaginary fire
and place, are esteemed equal to those of Hell, such as the damned suffer,
excepting that they are not eternal, yet notwithstanding of a long durance,
every mortal sin requireing 7 years to be dissolved in that fire, and well
evaporated; now to give some comfort to such as must pass this refineing
place, before they can enter into Paradise, they have found a way to touch the
tongue of those that are in these flames with a drop of water, which are the
indulgences granted by the Pope, unto those that shall merit it by giveing
monyes to all those churches, in which they shall solemnise the Pompes, that
are ordained on the days of Iubily, or other times, on which they shall be
distributed, according to the abundance of the treasure of the Church, which is
rich in the merits of the Church, and such good works which those have done,
that have paid more then they ought: That is it that can be purchased by those
devout souls, which go in pilgrimage to our Lady of Loretta, S. James in
Galice, but especially to Roane, Indulgences of the Coard of S. Francis, by
Pope Sixtus the fifth, 1585
where in three months of the year, the Brothers and Sisters, that have girded
themselves with the Coard of S. Francis, may gain, four million eight hundred
sixty three thousand two hundred and seven and fifty years Indulgence, besides
the forty days, to increase the service of God, to the honor and reverence of
Saint Francis.

Those are the words of the Bull, so that the service of God be for S. Francis.
How much could one gain then in a year, and how much in ten year? For this
spring never dries, provided that the purse never be empty. And doubt not, but
all other Orders have also their privileges, and gratifications, in so far,
that those which believe these things, have reason to cry out with admiration,
to the praise of the liberty of the Pope, in the distribution of so many
indulgences, O the depth of riches and Indulgences of the Pope; 1 Pet. 1.18, 19.
but those that believe the contrary, and know, that they were not redeemed
with corruptible things, as silver and gould, from their vain conversation,
but with the precious blood of Christ, as of a Lamb without blemish and
without spot, say, that life everlasting is a gift of God, and those that can
purchase it with money, are worthy to be spoken to, as the Apostle speaks to
Simon Magus: Thy money perish with thee, Act. 8.20, 21.
because thou have thought, that the gift of God may be purchased with Monye;
Thou have neither part nor Lot in this matter, for thy heart is not right in
the sight of God.

Unto these indulgences are fastened the considerations of the Saints, by whose
merits they pretend to obtain a great part in Paradise, and these Saints
honored for their miracles, which they have done dureing their life here, or
after their death, paralelled by those of the Prophets, and of our Savior
Christ, shall be found much inferior and baser. Among these are not forgotten
the Relics, which are under the Tables of the Altars, which are seen through
a glass, those which you must believe without seeing, so many arms and heads
of one body, of which every one gloryeth to have the true, one a certain
witness, that neither the one nor the other have the truth. And though, after
the Gospel began to be more fully manifested, then in the times of our
forefathers, yet they have a few years ago brought out of the grave diverse
new bones, to increase Idolatry, for the credit of such as were never known
heretofore: which served mightily to the advancement of Ignatius de Loyola, to
make him ascend out of the Lower rank of the Blessed Fathers, unto a Higher
of Saints, by a trick of a Canon of the Pope; For when that Miracle was done
(if it be true) the Pope had not yet drawn him out of that Blessedness, to
take place amongst the Saints. The narration is witnessed by James Blase,
Bishop of S. Omer, signed with his hand, and sealed with his seal, that, in
the town of Bourbourg, a Diocy under his Bishopric, the 15. of July, 1610.
there was a maid, which was brought to the utmost of her life, by retention of
her Urine, the space of 26 days, was cured as soon as the Relics of Loyola
(without specifieing what member) had touched the party affected, the water
taking his ordinary course without pain. This miraculous work was printed at
Luyck, by Leonard Streel; at Paris by Pater du Croc; and at Roan by Adrian
Ouyn, in the same year 1610. In other places other such miracles were done;
and at least the poor blind people believe them; and because they are
printed, they print them also into their own judgment.

Those that ask miracles testify that they are infidels, for the believing
need no miracles, 1 Cor. 14, 22. Tongues are for a sign, not to them that
believe, but to them that believe not.
but those that believe not, as in the 1 Ioh. 4.1. Believe not every spirit,
but try the spirits whether they are of God: So must one not believe every
Miracle, but try the Miracle whether it be of God. And behold the mark given
to the people of Israel by the Almighty himself: If there arise among you a
Prophet or a dreamer of dreams, and gives thee a sign or a wonder, and the
sign or the wonder come to pass, Deuteronomy. 13, 1, 2, 3, 5.
whereof he spoke unto thee, saying: let us go after other Gods, which thou
have not known, and let us serve them; Thou shall not hearken unto the words
of that Prophet, or that dreamer of dreams, for the Lord your God prooveth
you, to know whether you love the Lord your God with all your soul: And that
Prophet or that dreamer of dreams shall be put to death, because he has
spoken to turn you away from the Lord your God.

Who sees not that the miracles, whether true or false, which are taught in
the Church of Rome, do tend to turn the Christian people from the adoration
of the true God to that of the Creatures? Therefore ought one to cast them
away, for they teach but lies; as it is also written of the Images: Ier. 10, 15.
They are vanity and the works of error. How happy then are they to whom God
gives grace to know this abuse, and forsake it with all their heart!

And as for Relics, the H. Scripture does recommend none to us, but to the
contrary shows us, to prevent such Idolatryes, as we see to be so rise in
Christendom; God himself would hide so sure the body of Moses, who had done
such service unto the people, that unto this present day his grave is yet
unknown: For it is probable that the Children of Israel would quickly have
fallen to Idolatry, since they did hang after the Idols and false Gods of the
Gentiles. The Example of that good King Hezechias is worth consideration, in
that he did take away the high places, 2 Kings 18, 4.
and brake the Images, and cut down the groves, and brake in pieces the
brazen Serpent* that Moses had made; For unto those days the Children of
Israel did burn incense to it. For if there were ever any thing worthy to be
kept for a relic, it was that that deserved it, for that Nu^. 21, 9
Serpent was commanded by God, and being looked upon according to his
commandment, and the promise adjoined unto it, the persons that were bitten by
the fiery Serpents, were healed. Behold a great miracle, yet notwithstanding,
because it was an object, and occasion of Idolatry, it was broken in pieces by
King Hezekiah; And since the Scripture has not commanded us to keep the
forskin of our Lord Jesus Christ, or his garment or tears, the milk of the
Virgin Mary, her hair, or smock, the Stool of S. Peter, and a thousand such
fopperyes, which they show for relics, and to which they pray in the Church
of Rome: By what authority do they obtrude these to the people? All these
things are as truly amongst them, Act. 5.15.
as the Cough of S. Joseph, and the shadow of S. Peter. By this appears
plainly, that the world desires to be deceaved.

I will not speak of the holy Beads, Agnus Dei, made of wax, unto which they
attribute the same virtue, that they do unto the blood of Christ; Of the
Masses, for the dead, and the prayers said over them: clean contrary to that
which they say of the estate of the souls in In the Canon of the Mass they
say, that they sleep the sleep of peace, but the peines of purgatory fire, are
very contrary to sleep. They pray also for those that rest in Christ, then also
for our Lady and the Saints.
purgatory. I speak not of the hallowing of the Bells, at the melting whereof,
whilst the metal runs into the mould, they sing: Veni Creator Spiritus,
etc. and call upon the Holy Ghost, for the good Success whereof; When the
Bells are cast, they sing: Te Deum Laudamus, etc. We praise thee O Lord; At the
last, a Domino factum est istud: This the Lord has done. When they hang them
up, they sprinkell them with holy water, sacred Oil, and blessed salt, with
prayers, that the Bells be filled with the virtue of the Holy Ghost, for to
bring people to devotion, to drive away Devils, assuage Tempests, etc.
Afterward, they are seven times touched with the Unction, on the outside; then
perfumed with incense and Mirrhe, with prayers, that they may be filled with
the deawe of the H. Spirit. Finally, after all, wetted with holy Water, the
Priest (the Godfathers and Godmothers, laying hands upon them) gives them
their names; the Bells being covered with four yards of Linen, as many
Ceremonies, as in Baptism; and to all actions, several invocations of the
name of God: which all are impious and profane. They take the same course with
the ships: I pass over the sacrilege, so frequent in the Church of Rome, to
say silent Masses, for Horses, Hogs, and other Beasts, for which Christ did
not shed his blood: they call these Masses by the name of those Saints, to whom
they attribute the especial care of those brute beasts, as S. Eloy for the
Horses, S. Anthony for the Hogs: I mention not the impiety of certain
Priests, that use the Sacrament in conjurations and sorceries, and of those
that make the toades eat their consecrated Host, as may be proved by the
judgment passed not many years since, in the Parliament of Provence, Lavac.
conscientiae, cap. 6, p. 24. b.
over Priest Gaufredi, a renowned Conjurer: For I know that those sins,
though practiced in their Religion, are not approve of; so also though I
condemn the bad manners of many amongst them, that was not the principal
motive that occasioned me to come away, (for every where are to be found bad
and good) but the Doctrine which they teach there, contrary to the truth of the
Gospel. There are also other points enough, besides those here formerly
observed, but I think these to suffice; to show that God having given me this
knowledge. I was obliged to advance my self by it, and to give him thanks,
that he has not only instructed me, but also strengthened my heart with a
holy resolution, to come away (as I did) from the profession of the Romish
Church, and following the inward motion of the spirit of God, without being
induced or enticed by any person, but urged by my conscience, I join my self
to the profession of the truth of the Gospel, as it is taught in the Reformed
Churches, by the word of God, which acknowledge Jesus Christ alone for their
head, of which they are the true spouse, and which alone deserves the title of
Catholic and Apostolic Church; into the bosom whereof I yield my self, to be
there nourished by the sincere word of God, which is the milk of the
understanding; and comforted and strengthened by the use of the Sacraments,
which are there administered, according to his ordinance; Praying God to show me
that mercy, that I may live and dye in that profession craveing pardon from
him, for the love of his holy Son, that have so long participated with so
many Idolatries, Superstition and abominations: desireing the true faithful of
the Church, to acknowledge me in this Christian profession, and to love me as
one of the members of the body of Christ, in the communion of the Saints. Amen.

FINIS.
LETTERS Written from Brussels, to Don EMANVEL, Son of my Lord the Prince of
Portugal, since his comeing over into the United Provinces of the Netherlands.
De son Altesse Serenissime, en Espagnol.
LOs negocios corryentes importa mucho que os legueis a qui a Brusselas
encubierto, dexando ay toda vuestra gente; assi os lo pido, y qui me abisareys
en llegardo, pues ymporta mucho. Y Dios os guarde como desseo. De Brusselas, eu
11. de Hebrero, 1633.

ISABEL:


In English.
IT is necessary for present affairs, that you come hither to Brussells
privately, leaveing there all your folks. This it is that I desire you should
do, and that you advertise me of your arrival, for much depends upon it. God
keep you in his protection, as I hope. From Brussells the eleventh of February,
1633.

ISABELL.


From my Lord the Prince of Portugal.
SON,
The death of her Highness has cast us all into great heaviness, the
Children in such a cause serve to comfort their Fathers: Therefore I pray you
to take your journey hither, as soon as you can; and I wish you could persuade
your Sister Donna Louisa, to take a progress this way with you, for as little
a while as she pleases. You may counsel her, etc. Tell her the freedom and
security there is here. You are obliged to do it for your honors sake, and
for Gods sake above all. The advice of good Friends shall be a great help unto
you. The Lord suggest a holy Counsel unto you, full of his grace, and believe
that I am

Your Father D. EMANVEL.
From Brussells, on S. Nicolas-day, 1633.

De Friar Elias de S. Marie Magdalaine. Ihesus Marie.
PAx Christi. Dios quede con V. R. y noz de gracia para ne perder lo que
eternamente dura, par lo que tan brevemente passa lo que mucho se deve
considera, por mui cierto tengo, que a todo tiempo que V.R. quisiere continuar
la vida que con tanta perfecion ha comencado, todos le reciberemos en los
brasos, porque assi lo merece la buena compagnia que nos hizo. Dizen que V.R.
muda de Religion; para salvarse muy segura es la Catholica. V.R. lo considere,
porque errar en ecte punto, sera errar eternamente. Io sere hasta la muerte,
muy, verdadero amigo y servidor de V. R. y comotal, me alegrare de sus bienes,
y sentire sus males, de que Dios guarde a V.R. como yo lo deseo, y le de lus
para que*vea lo mucho que pierde, en perdera a Dios que en los manos se le puso.

De V.R. Humilde siervo fray Elias de S. Maria Magdalaine.
En 15. de Enero 1634.

Jn English.
THe Peace of Christ. God be with you, and give us his grace, not to loose that
which is eternal, to possess that which passes away suddenly, which
deserves a good consideration. I am verily assured, that at what time soever
you shall please to prosecute the Religion, which you have begun with such
perfection, we all should receave you with open arms: For such deserves the
good fellowship we had of you. The speech is that you change in Religion,
consider well, that the Catholic Church is full of assurance of salvation, and
to fail in this point is to loose himself eternally. I shall remain till
death your trusty friend and servant, and as such a one I shall rejoice in your
prosperity, and Symphatize with your afflictions, from which I pray God to
preserve you, and that he would open your eyes, that you may understand how
much you loose, in loosing God, whom you have had in your hands.

Your humble Servant and Brother Elias of S. Mary Madelaine.
15. January, 1634.

FINIS.

