OF THE Knowledeg which makes a wise man.

LONDINI IN AEDIBVS THOMAE BERTHELETI. M. D. XXXIII. CVM PRIVILEGIO.

The proheme of sir Thomas Elyot knight.
GOd, unto whom all men's hartis be opened, and the will of man speakethe, is
my wytnes, that to the desire of knowledge, whereunto I have hither to ben ever
of my nature disposed / I have joined a constant intent to profit thereby to my
natural country: Whereunto acordyng to the sentence of Tully, we be most
specially bounden. Wherefore after that I had applied the more part of my life
in perusynge diligently every ancient warke, that I might come by / either
greek or latin, conteyninge any part of philosophy necessary to the
institution of man's life in virtue, I have endeavored my self to set forth such
part of my study as I thought might be profitable to them, which should
happen to read or here it. But diverse men rather scornyng my benefit than
receiving it thankfully do show them selfs offended (as they say) with my
strange terms.

Other finding in my bokis the thing dispreysed / which they do commend in
using it. Like a galde horse abidynge no playsters be always gnappynge and
kyckynge at such examples and sentences as they do feel sharp or do byte
them / accomptyng to be in me no little presumption, that I will in notynge
other men's vices correct Magnificat, sens other much wyser men and better
learned than I, do forbear to write any thing. And which is warse than all
this: Some will maliciously divine or coniecte that I write to the intent to
rebuke some particular person couaytinge to bring my warkes and afterward me
into the indignation of some man in auctorytie.

Thus unthankfully is my benefyte received / my good will consumed, and all my
labors devoured. Such is of some men the nature serpentine, that lappyng
sweet milk they convert hit forth with in to poison, to distroy him of whose
liberality they late had received it. How incomparable be these men unlike to
the most excellent prince our most dear soueraygne lord? whose most royal
person I heartily beseech god to preserve in long life and honor. His
highness benignely receyuynge my book / which I named the Governor, in the
redynge thereof sone perceived that I intended to augment our English tongue,
whereby men should as well express more abundantly the thing that they
conceived in their hartis (wherefore language was ordained) having words apt
for the purpose: as also interpret out of greek, latin / or any other tongue
into English, as sufficiently / as out of any one of the said tongues into an
other. His grace also perceived / that through out the book there was no term
new made by me of a latin or french word, but it is there declared so
plainly by one mean or other to a diligent reder that no sentence is thereby
made derke or hard to be understand. Ne the sharp and quycke sentences, or
the round and plain examples set out in the versis of Claudiane the poet in
the second book / or in the chapiters of Affablitie, Benevolence, Beneficence
/ and of the diversity of flaterers / and in diverse other places / in any
part offended his hyghnes: but (as hit was by credible persons reported unto
me) his grace not only took hit in the better part, but also with princely
words full of majesty co^me^ded my diligence / simplicite and courage in that I
spared none astate in the rebukynge of vice: which words full of very nobilite
brought unto my remembrance the virtuous Emperor Antonine, called for his
wysdom Antonine the philosopher, who on a time herynge that there was in the
City of Rome a plain and rude person / which always spoke in the rebuke of
all men, and never praised any man: he sent to him / requirynge that he would
come and speak with him. And when he was come, the Emperor had these words
unto him. My friend / wherein have I ever offended the? The fellow therewith soore
abashed answered in this wise. Sir your hyghnes never offended me, that I am
ware of. Than art thou (said the Emperor) an vncourtoyse subject, that thou
haste so long dissembled with me, not tellyng unto me my faults.

And after the Emperor retained him still gyuyng unto him dowble wages /
commaundynge him to use his old liberty. And when diverse men meruayled
thereat, he affirmed openly, that princis vices were sooner espied by other men
tha^ by them selfs: and that there was much more difficulty in remembering
them of their vice or lack, than in extolling and commending their virtues.

So well did this most noble Emperor consider, that his exaumple might be
more profitable unto the publyke weal of the city, than any other thing in
his person or dignity.

In like wise our most dear soueraygne lord perfectly knew that no writar
ought to be blamed, which writes neither for hope of temporal reward / nor
for any private disdain or malice, but only of fervent zele toward good
occupation and virtue. Perdie man is not so yet co^formed in grace, that he can
not do syn. And I suppose no prince thynkethe him self to be exempte from
mortality. And for as much as he shall have mo occasions to fall, he ought to
have the moo friends or the more instruction to warn him. And as for my part
I eftesones do protest, that in no book of mi making I have intended to touch
more one manne than an another. For there be Gnathos in Spain as well as in
Greece, Pasquilles in England as well as in Rome, Dionises in Germanye as
well as in Sicile, Harpocrates in France as well as in Aegipt, Aristippus in
Scotland as well as in Cyrena, Platos be few, and them I doubt where to
find. And if men will seek for them in England / which I set in other
places, I can not let them. I know well ynowghe diverse do delight to have
their garments of the facion of other countries, and that which is most
plain is unpleasant: but yet it does happen sometime that one man being in
auctorytie or favor of his prince, being seen to wear sommething of the old
facion: for the stra^genes thereof it is taken up ageine with many good fellows.
What I do mean every wise man perceyueth. Touching the title of my book, I
considered that wisdom is spoken of, much more than used. For where in it
rests few men be sure. The commune opinion is into three partis divided.
One says it is in much learning and knowledge. An other affirms / that
they which do conducte the affairs of greatte princis or countrayes, be only
wise men. Nay says the third, he is wysest that lest does meddle, and can
sytte quietly at home and turn a crabbe, and look only unto his own
business. Now they which be of the first oppinion be always at varyance.
For sum do chiefly extol the study of holy scripture (as it is rayson) but
while they do wrest it to agree with their wills, ambition, or vain glory, of
the most noble and devout learning, they do endeavor them to make hit
servile and full of contention. Some do prefer the study of the laws of
this realm, calling it the only study of the publyke weal. But a great
noumbre of persons, which have consumed in suit more thanne the value of
that, that they used for, in their anger do call it a common detriment. All
though undoubtedly the very self law trewely practiced / passes the laws
of all other countrayes. In thinking on these sondrye opynyons, I happened for
my recreacyon to reed in the book of Laertius the life of Plato, and
beholdynge the answer that he made to king Dyonyse, at the first syghte it
seemed to me to be very dissolute and lackyng the modesty that belo^ged to a
philosopher: but when I had better examined it, therein appeared that which is
best worthy to be called wisdom.

Wherefore to exercise my wytre, and to avoid Idelnes, I took my pen and
assayde / How in expressyng my conceyte I might profit to them, which
without disdain or envy would often times read it. If any man will think
the book to be very long, let him consider, that knowledge of wisdom can not
be shortly declared. All be hit of them which be well wyllinge it is soon
learned, in good faith sooner thanne Primero or Gleeke: Such is the strange
propretie of that excellent counnynge, that it is sooner learned, than taught,
and better by a man's rayson than by an instructour.

Finally if the reders of my warkis, by the noble example of our most dear
soueraygne lord do justly and louyngely interpret my labors, I during the
residue of my life will now and than set forth such fruits of my study
profitable (as I trust) unto this my countray. And leuynge malycious reders
with their incurable fury, I will say unto god the words of the Catholic
Church in the book of Sapience: Sap^. 15.
To know the good lord is perfect Justice / And to know thy Justice and
virtue is the very root of Immortalite: And therein is the knowledge that is
very wisdom.

Defautles in pryntynge.
Lefe. Line. iij. iiij. he began. viij. xxi. put out (for) and put in. (But
moreover). xix. xxxi. fleshly. xxi. xviij. that hit sygnifieth. xxij. xliiij.
to the point lxvij. xi. cautherize. lxviij. xxi. cautherization. lxxviij. xvij.
Wherefore sens. xvij. put out (sens) lxxxxi. xxiij. be the servants. Cj.
xi. the deed se.

The first dialogue.
ARISTIPPVS. PLATO. ARISTIPPVS. Who is this man / whom I perceive coming
hitherwarde? It seems to be Plato. Let me se? It is verily Plato him self.
What means it / that he is in this wise aparailid? His garments be very
short / and more simple tha^ he was accustomed to were. Well, though there were
some debate between us in Sicile, yet will I salute him / and desire him to
show to me the state of all his affairs.

For in wise men rests no malice / all though diversity in opinions or form
of lyuinge causes sometime contention between them. Plato / thou art well
founden again in this contray.


PLATO. Gramercie Aristippus. But yet thou have said truer tha^ I wene thou
art ware of.


ARISTIP. Why, I know the to be Plato, though thou be in this single apparaile.


PLA. Ye that I suppose. But thou saydest that I was well founden: And in deed
thou saydest true after the common opinion. for sens thou departiddest from
Sicile I have been twice in the point to have died / and also twice sold for a
bondeman or slave. Wherefore thon may with good rayson say, that I am well
founden, that have been so often in perile to be lost. For commenly men do
call him lost, which despayreth of his life / or of a free man is made a
slave. But whither that opinion be true or no, we shall speak more thereof
hereafter. Finally Aristippus (god be thanked) I am well eskaped.


ARI. I do not a little marvel of this that thou tellist me. For when I went
from king Dionise, he might not suffer, that thou moughtist be one hour from
him.

Moreover he regarded nothing that was spoken, except it were by thy sentence
approved. In the morning as soon as he was out of his bed Plato was sent
for. Uneath Dion and Aristomenes could get of him one hour in the day /
that thou moughtist teach them and other towardely gentilmen such part of
Philosophy as they desired to learn. Finally for the incomparable favor that
the king bare to the, thou were had in the court almost in as much
reverence as the kings own person. And when thou passiddest by, noble men and
other of the kings household / would rise quickly and as a storm had fallen
in their necks, ducke to the with their heddis uncovered: yet diverse in their
minds grutched at thy fortune, thinkinge that the great pleasure / that the
king had in communinge with the / withdrewe him from heringe of other men, of
whom there was a great noumbre, which had / some commune some private causis
to treat of with him, if they might by thine absence have found opportunity.


PLA. Thou say troth Aristippus / and that perceive I more clearly now,
than I did before those things happened unto me. But now will I recite the my
story.

Sone after that thou haddist optained license of the king to go unto Athenes /
he becam wonderful stourdie, in so much as no man might blame any thing /
wherein he delited: nor praise any thing, which was contrary to that / that he
used. And that sobre and gentle manner in heringe sundry opinions raisoned
before him / whereto of a custom he was wo^t to provoke the and me, was laid
aparte / and supposinge that by heringe of sundry philosophers dispute and
raison, he him self had attained to a more perfect knowledge tha^ any other
that spoke unto him, began to have all other men in contempt. And as it were
Iupyter / who (as Homere says) with a wynke made all heaven to shake / he would
with a terrible countenance so visage them / whom he knew would speak their
opinions freely, that they should dreede to say any thing / which they knew
should be contrary unto his appetite. Not withstanding on a time he willed me
to declare in his presence the majesty of a king, and how much he excelled
and was above the astate of any other person: which request I gladly herd /
thinkinge to have had good opportunity to warn him of his blyndenes and folly.
Therefore I began to commend the perfect image or figure of god, which was
manifest in the astate of a king, who ruled him self and his people for the
universal weal of them al. And when I had described his auctorite and
preeminence by the excellency of his virtues: prouinge that nothing moughte be
amended, but by that which surmounted or was better than it which was to be
corrected / as vice by virtue, falshode by truth, wrong by Justice, folly by
wisdom, ignorance by learning / and such other like. Afterward I studiousely
did set out a Tyraunte in his propre colors, who attends to his own
private commodity.

Here at king Dionise frowned and became angry. And interruptynge my words
said unto me:

This is a tale of old fools / that can not be otherwise occupied. And I
answered again, that those words of his / sauored of Tyranny.


ARI. I marvel Plato that thou spakest, so vnavisedly: I do mean, sens thou
knew well enough king Dionise nature and disposicion / that thou perceuinge
him to be meued, would so suddenly imbrayde him of his words so despitefully.


PL. Well as for that / we shall raison there of hereafter. Finally I was well
auised what I would speak: but now will I tell forth my tale, what happened
afterward to me.

Sir, the king being inflamed with fury / furthwith would have slain me. But
being entreated importunately by Dion and Aristomenes he withdrewe his
sentence / not withstanding to the intent that he would be avenged, he gave
me to Polidis / who was thanne Ambassador sent to him from the Lacedaemonians.
Who had me with him to Aegina, and there sold me. Now a littell before
there was an ordinance made in that Countray, that if any man of Athenes came
in to that I Will, he should immediately lose his hedde: which ordinance was
made by Charmander thanne being captain of that countray / who espieng me /
and knowing who I was, caused me to be apprehended and brought unto the place
of Judgment / requiringe that on me his said ordinance might be put in
execution. Whereunto I made no defense, but taking mine adventure patiently,
and contemning death as it became me / I abode my Judgment. At the last one,
either in despite / or of purpose to save thereby my life, spekinge openly and
with a loud voice, said to Charmander and the Judges: The ordinance if it be
well perceived, is made again men of Athenes: but Plato (that is here) is a
philosopher. Which words, as it happened / were well taken and lawghed at of all
them that were present. And therewith they discharged me of the said penalty.

All be hit for the hostility that was than between them and Athenes they
would not let me freely depart, but decreed that I should efte soones be
sold. There happened to be at that time Aniceris, which dwells at Cyrenas / a
man well learned, who paid for me. xx. li. and furthwith delivering to me his
servant, whom thou beholdist here, has sent me as thou see home to my
contray: The garments that I wear, he that boughte me of Polidis took from
one of his slaves / and gave them unto me, when he had taken from me mine
apparaile that I brought out of Sicile: which as thou know was right honest
and competent.

Not withstandinge neither the cruelty of king Dionise, nor the malicious
decree of the Aeginites might remove my courage from virtue and truth / no
more than the twice selling of me, nor this vile habit of a slave or bondsman
may change mine astate or condition.

But now Aristippus I will answer the to that / wherein thou semest to blame
me of imprudence or litenes: saying, thou meruay lest that I would speak so
vnauisedly / sens I knew the nature of king Dionise and his disposition.
Reme^brist thou not, that my coming in to Sicile was to behold the
wonderful mountains / which do send out of the tops of them great flames
of fire and smoke, and to inserche out the natural causis thereof? And that all
though the king sent often times for me / yet would I not come unto him, for
as much as through all Greece he was named a Tiraunt. At the last he sent unto
me Dion / which is a man as thou know of honor and gravity almost
incomparable: who said unto me that the king was incredibly meued with desire
to se me, for the greatte fame (as he affirmed) of wisdom and knowledge / all
though I my self know no such thing / to be in me. And moreover the same
Dion showed me, that he supposed much profit should happen to the royalme of
Sicile by our metynge and communication / the king presently beholdynge and
herynge in me that, whereof he has so great expectation: that is to say (as I
moughte use Dions word) virtue and wisdom.


ARI. In deed I herd not only Dion, but also diverse other report every
thing as thou haste spoken.


PLATO. Than thou know, that the king fervently desired to se me.


ARI. That is truth.


PLA. And moreover to speak also with me.


ARI. Ye verily.


PLA. Because he herd good report of me.


ARI. So it appears.


PLA. Supposist thou Aristippus / that the report of wisdom and virtue is
good in a Tyrants opinion?


ARI. Ye as long as he thinks that nothing that is spoken or done repugnith
against his affections.


PLA. What afterward?


ARI. He accompteth it but a vanity / iudginge as sick me^, nothing to be
good, that agrees not with the sent of his appetite.


PLA. Now in good faith though thou thy self have a delicate mouth / and thy
taste distempred, yet I can the thank: for now thou say truly. But it
seems to the, that wha^ Dionise sent for me, he tha^ thought that wisdom and
virtue were good / and that I having the^ (as it was reported) was a good man:
and therefore he desired to se me.


ARI. Ye so it seems.


PLA. And men do desire to se a thing either for the beauty thereof / which
causes them to love it, or for the strangenes thereof, whereby they be meued to
wonder at it / or for commodity that they before have received by hit.


ARI. I think thou say truly.


PLA. But except I be deceived by false myrrors, or like to chaungeable lovers
/ which do mislyke the beauty, whereof they have daily fruition / perchance I
contempne that in my self / which I would praise in an other, I am neytherin
beauty nor personage to be compared to an infinite noumbre of young men /
which be in Greece, and also in this royalme of Sicile. Besides that, I am now
above the age of forty years, and have also travailed in to diverse contraies
to seek for wisdom / whereby the form and strength of my body is not a
littell appayred. Moreover thanks be to god, I suppose there is neither
stature nor form in my personage so far out of just measure or fascion /
where at any man can find occasion to wonder or marvel. And as for any
commodity that king Dionise has received of me / before my coming unto him
/ I can not perceive what it should be / sens I never wrate unto him / nor never
before was in his co^pani: what think thou was than the cause that he
desired to se me?


AR. What else, but to the inte^r that having the in his presence, he might in
demaundinge of the, here that declared by thy mouth: wherefore thou were called
a wise man / and if thou did express the same in thy demenure and
countenance / which helps much (as I might say) to the ratifienge of good
opinion.


PLA. What say thou? Does demeanure and countenance ratify the opinion of
wisdom?


ARI. Ye verily so think I.


PLA. What meanest thou thereby?


ARI. For according to the profession or quality / wherein men have opinion
that wisdom does rest / so ought to be the form of lyuinge / countenance,
and gesture: which joined all to gether makes one hole and perfect harmony /
which sends in to the hearts of the beholders and herers a voluptie or
fervent dilectation.


PLA. I can the thank Aristippus / thou haste now declared to have been (as I
was) the disciple of Socrates. And if thou would extend voluptie no further
(which thou so much praysest) than thou haste done now / there should never be
contention between us, but folowinge directly the doctrine and steps of our
master Socrates, not only we two should agree in our opinions / and form of
living / which should make that harmony, whereof thou spekest. For all men
that know us both by the unity of our doctrine should be brought to ensue
one conformity of lyuinge, or at the least couayte to follow it / wherein should
be a perfect harmony. The hole quiar synging in one tune. Where, by the
discord of our two doctrines, men doubtinge which of us two speaks most
truly / I commendinge the voluptie or perfect dilectation / which is in
knowledge / thou preferringe the voluptie of the body and senses, they be
divided in to sundry opinions: some extollynge mine admonicions as more pure
and separate from the nature of beasts, and therefore approchinge nere unto
divinity: other more sensual and having less rayson, do embrace thy
persuasions, as more illecebrouse or dilectable / calling thy doctrine more
natural and of less arrogance: many there be, which do couayte learning and
wisdom / but having not their minds sufficiently purged of affectes / but
either by nature, or by ill bringinge up inclininge always to pleasant
motions or appetites of the body they admit them gladly.

But while they study to follow both our doctrines: they of all other do
make the greattest discord and imperfect music. For when they would seem to
extolle the dilectation in knowledge / they auaunce it meruaylously in their
disputations and raisoninges: but in pursuing their affectis and wanto^
apetites they destroy their first opinion: And vainly do enforce them to make a
concord between that which of their own nature be most repugnant. Which
discord dissolueth that harmony, whereof thou spakest: for men beholdinge in
one person such instabilitie, they semblably do wander in sundry opinions /
now praysinge one and vsinge an other, as occasion happens. But here will I
leave to dispute any more in this matter / lest I moughte happen to refricate
the late variaunce between the and me / and now will I return again where I
was.

I trow thou saydest / that according to the profession or quality, wherein
men have opinion that wise dome does rest, so ought to be the form of
lyuinge, countenance / and gesture. In good say the I suppose thou say
truly. For if Lais the harlot / in whom thou take pleasure in fulfyllinge
thy carnal appetite, should show her self to the in fluttisshe and vile
apparaile, her head unkempt / her face and hands soiled and imbrued with greece
of the potage that she had eaten, and her legs and fete spotted with myar /
beholdynge the with a stourdy countenance: thou should not be much moved to
embrace and kiss her, all though she spoke to the words wanton and amorouse,
and after the custom of harlots / praise the with rebukes, and rebuke the with
praises. In likewyfe if Diogenes / who (as thou know) contempneth all thing
save only poverty, would stand in the market place with his berde clean
shaven, and his hear trussed up in a caul of gold / and having on his
fingers ringes with diamandes and rubies / and on his legs fine hosen well
guarded, and shoen of the trimmest fascion, And because perchance it is winter,
and therefore the wether is cold / having a pan with hot coals standinge at
his elbowe: If he would rebuke the people of to much curiosity and delicate
lyuinge / and praise wylfull poverty and apparaile, that only seruen for
necessity, also would exhort them to contemn or despise al riches and honor
/ and to embrace paynfulnes: Think not thou that they would laugh him to
scorn / and account him for a dissarde or with to much study fallen in to a
frenzy?


ARI. Yes be my troth, for it were a maruayllous folly.


PLA. And why supposest thou?


ARI. For the fresshe apparaile and riches that he shows / openly declares
to all men that he therein deliteth and takes pleasure. And that wherein a man
does delight, in deliting therein he prayseth it: than is it not a great
folishnes to praise and disprayse / as it were in one instante? That is to say
in use to commend a thing openly / and in words to disprayse it expressly.
And it should seem to the beholders, that he exhorts me^ to contemn riches /
that he might be rich only. And that he persuadeth them to sustain cold and
other pains, that he might take his ease and sit by the fire / whiles other
men labored. Wherefore if they regarded littell his counsel / they were not
to be blamed.


PLA. Yes, his counsel perchance were to be considered, whether it were
expedient or no: but surely his person and discretion were to be littell
esteemed. Now Aristippus, thou think that king Dionise desired to se me, to
the intent that he might behold, if in my countenance and form of lyuinge I
did express that thing / wherefore he herd me commended. And it seems, that
therein the king declared him self to be a very wise man, that he trusted more
to the act, than to words or opinion.


ARI. Ye truly he has a sharp wit, and in that a man might well praise his
ymagination.


PLA. Thanne what think thou Aristippus? If I should have laid a part mine
own aparaile, and have bought such as thou wearest / guarded and decked with
golden buttons / supposest thou not that wha^ I came to his presence / and that
he saw me, in such wise aparailed, he would think that I would speak of the
dilectation that is felt in medlynge with fair women and pleasant: or in the
sundry diversities of sweet savors / and tastes of metes / that the cook
has well seasoned: and in other like things, in whose effects thou
determinest to be perfect felicity? Than because he has before herd the
dispute as abundauntly thereof as any man's wit might ymagine, he would
littell esteem my coming / and think the report, which was made of me, to
be false. But if he would vouchefaufe to tarry, than if I disputed of fortitude,
temperaunce, and other like virtues, and there with exhorted him and other
princes, to abstain and be continente / blaminge their avarice, lechery, and
other dissolute manners / with their curiosity and superfluouse apparaile:
Supposest thou not that he would lawgh at me / and in mockage bid me change
mine apparaile?


ARI. Nay, paraduenture he would command one to fetch for you a furred hoode
to save with your honesty.


PLA. Ah, king Dionise is beholding unto the. For thou would that men should
think / that he were of great modesty. But what if before that he herd me
speak, he had caused me to sytte with him at souper / and there beheld me
feed errantly / perusinge all the delicate disshes: and thereto drank stoutly
of every cup that was offered me: and after souper / with such wenches as
were present, devise wantonly / and also play and dalie, exceeding the terms
of honesty, but when I beheld him do the semblable, I would than commend
sobrenesse / and dispraise gloteny: commend excedingely continence, and
dispraise vehemently wanton daliaunce and lechery: how much trowest thou would
he than set by me?


ARI. As much as of a good fool / that should make him merry. For he would take
al thy words but for iapery.


PLA. I wene thou say truly. Now let us inserche somewhat on the other
part. When Dion brought me until him / and that he beheld me cladde in
apparaile convenient and semely to my profession, neither sea^t nor superfluous
/ neither most rude, nor yet sumptuous, my countenance thereto equivalent, which
(be it spoken without any boste) with great study and diligence, I have
prepared to have always in such a temperance / that it shall never be founden
dissolute or light / nor yet froward or stourdy / think thou that he had
than good opinion of me? and thought that the wisdom and virtue was in me,
which men had reported?


ARI. Ye undoubtedly / and therefore he reioiced much at thy coming.


PLA. For any other thing trowest thou, than because I was wise and virtuous,
as he judged by mine apparaile and countenance? And that he hoped to here of me
some wisdom declared?


ARI. No truly / but even for that cause only.


PLA. On my faith Aristippus thou well do deserve the greatte gifts and
benefits that thou haste received of king Dionise / sens thou so diligently
have affirmed him to be the lover of wisdom. For in that, that he couayted to
here it declared / he desired it, and no man would desire that thing that he
loves not.


AR. So I suppose.


PLA. But yet hereafter it shall appiere contrary: But for this time admit
thy persuasion of king Dionise to be true / that he favored wisdom and
virtue, and that he hoped to here it declared better by me than by other. If
now he sytting and studiously applienge his ears to give me good audience,
should here me commend the pleasure that is in sumptuous and pleasant housis,
in rich apparaile and tapestries, in plenty of goodly and fair concubines /
in abundaunce of delicate meats and drinks / and heapynge up great treasour
of money and iewelles: think not thou / that I spoke contrary to his
expectation / which he had of me by the report of my lyuinge, confermed by
mine apparaile and countenance, as thou late affirmiddest? Think thou that
he would not have thought / that either I had mocked him, or flatered him, if
he has so sharp a wit and quick inuencion as thou do suppose him to
have, and therefore have caused me to be expelled out of his palice, as a
counterfayte dysarde or spy? Or aunswering me that of such things as I
commended he had more knowledge and experience than I / and therefore in vain I
labored to declare that to him, which I knew much less than he him self
did? Saying that he couayted to here of me, what wisdom was, whereof he had
herd so many diverse opinions: And wherein as the report was made unto him, I
was iustructed sufficiently, wherefore he would require me to declare that only
unto him / which he supposed I knew better than he did.


ARI. It is very likely that he would have done so.


PLA. If thou had than ben there Aristippus / would thou have cou^sailed
me to have resisted that gentyl princis request, who with such humanity, as
thou have herd of, so much desired to se me / and to here me speak?


ARI. Nay that would I not.


PLA. Than thou would that I should satisfy his desire?


ARI. Ye truly.


PLA. After that he had seen me, what remained?


ARI. To here the speak.


PLA. Any otherwise than he had opinion of me?


ARI. No verily.


PLA. And according as mine apparaile / and countenance pretended, so I should
do?


ARI. According.


PLA. Not usurping thy profession in persuadinge to him things that were
dilectable, or praysinge the dissolute form of his lyuinge, not only contrary
to mine apparaile and countenance / but also which I my self do aborre / and
have always reproved openly.


ARI. No / that dissimulation were to foul and apparent / and should have
set him (as thou say dest while ere) in great displeasure with the /
supposinge that thou had mocked him.


PLA. Tha^ would thou not, that I should have used any dissimulatio^: for thou
supposest that king Dionise would have been therewith displeased. It seems
therefore that thou co^cludest / that I should tell him truth / and according
to my profession.


ARI. Ye so god help me.


PLA. Thou know well Aristippus / that my profession has ever been, That
no man is happy, Alcib. ^
except he be wise and also good / and that felicity is in wisdom and
goodness. And contrary wise / that they which be ignorant and ill / be
unhappy / and that ignorance and sin is infelicitie and misery.


ARI. I know well thou have ben in that tale yet continually.


PL. What say thou Aristippus / is not wisdom knowledge? Or what thing is
it else?


ARI. Why do thou ask me that question / whereof no man makes any doubt?


PLA. For I feared lest thou would have said, that the vsinge of things
dilectable had been wisdom only.


ARI. But not without knowledge, whereof proceeds election. For than should I
have affirmed / that a horse / which deliteth in etyng / a dog in hunting, a
got in lechery, did it by wisdom: whereby I should prove my self to be
folisshe and ignorant. Moreover I am of that opinion, that a wise man lives
not always in voluptie or pleasant dilectation / but that for the more part
(...) is so affectioned. Also without knowledge the troubles and impedime^tes
whereby dilectatio^ is let / may not be comprehend to be eschewed.


PLA. Well than / although in the affect of dilectation we two disagre / thou
preferrynge the dilectations of the flesh before the dilectations of the
soul / I condemnyng all such affection do vtterli sever it from wisdom: yet
we do agree / that knowledge is ever in a wise man. But what knowledge meanest
thou? The knowledge of a good horse from a bad / a hole sheep from a cothed, or
such other like? Or else the knowledge how to build a fair house, or how to
set trees, that in a littell space of time thou may have a fair orcharde?


ARI. That knowledge is good.


PLA. Yea and proceeds of a sharp wit / but yet it is not that knowledge that
makes him / that has it, to be a wise man.


ARI. I suppose not.


PLA. What say thou by him, that finds the menes to gather great sommes of
money / offices, or greatte possessions with littel labor: think thou not
him to have that knowledge / which we call wisdom?


ARI. It approaches very nigh, but I dare not affirm it to be so, because I se
daily, that the most part of those persons happens to such things more by
fortune than by their own merits or Industry.


PLA. On my faith I love the Aristippus / for now thou say truly. What
they / which from a poor astate do come to great rule and auctorite, shall I
name them all wise men?


ARI. Much less thanne the other. For besides that that fortune has also
there no littel portion, it moreover depends not on the power, wit, or
diligence of him, that comes to authority, but holly on the will of a second
person / that is to say of him that promoteth him to it. Wherefore have he much
wit or none, as he shall like or content the person that may advance him,
so shall he come to authority. Wherefore sens it happens not only of his own
study, I se no cause why to call him a wise manne.


PLA. Thou spekest very well and raysonably / but what supposest thou them to
be, which in every matter, that is meued, can raison fetely, making men that
do here them / wonder at their conueyance, though it be sometime far from the
purpose? be not they wise men? And that thing that they have, is it not the
very knowledge, that makes wisdom?


ARI. No, but it is a good part of inuencion, which comes of wit. All be
it because that which they do rayson is never certain, it is rather opinion
than wisdom, and also that manner of prompte raysonynge happens more of nature
than study, and therefore it is more commended of vulgar persons or
ignoraunte: than of them which be of a ripe and perfect judgment.


PLA. Perchance thou say truly: yet may it also be in them that be wise, not
as wisdom it self, but as a setter furthe of wisdom to him that hereth /
like as the painter has the very image in his mind, but when he would that
other men should perceive it, he on a table with sundry colors paynteth it /
and sets it forth:

And yet if the paynter do not before he warketh / and in the payntynge,
conceive in his mind the hole proporcion of the image wha^ it is painted, it
shall lack his perfection. And although the fresh colors and vernishe makes
it pleasant to the eyes of the commune people, and them that be ignorant, yet
to good warke men / and to them that have beholden many parfecte pieces, and
delyted therein, the imperfeccyon of the warke is shortly perceived: even so
knowledge / wherein is wisdom / being ones truly had, if it be well set
furthe with eloquence and raison / it shall the better please and profit the
herers. But if he that speaks / do lack that knowledge / how so ever the
beautye of his words and rayson shall content the ears of them that be
ignorant, yet thereof shall come to them but litell profit. And to them that
have tasted some thing of that knowledge / the error or lack shall sone be
espied. But now what supposest thou is the knowledge, which we have all this
while talked of? and that wherein that wisdom is / for the which king Dionise
desired to se me / and to here me speak, and the which according to my
profession / apparaile / and countenance, and to the expectation that he had
of me / I declared unto him?


ARI. I wot not Plato, therefore I pray the tell me to shorten our
communication.


PLA. I am content / but yet with a condition / that is to say, when I
demand of the any question / thou shall speak even as thou think, without
inforcinge any raison to maynteine therewith thine old opinion.


ARI. Thereto I assent for this time, sens there be no mo here but we two, for
our servants be now out of heringe.


PLA. Thou remembrest, that it is agreed by us both, that neither the knowing
of good catell from bad / or how to plant well and to make a fair orchard /
ne the deuisinge of fair houses, and buyldinges / nor the increasinge of
goods or possessions, or the optayninge of great offices or dignities, or the
sharp wit and quickenes in raisoninge: is that knowledge / wherein is
wisdom? What say thou to other sciences or crafts, which are not
rehearsed?


ARI. I suppose the same of them al generally. For of eueriche of them I have
known some men to be littell better than natural fools / and out of the
feate / which they daily exercised, uneath perceyuinge that / which we call
commune rayson.


PLA. Ye, and that wars is / living bestly and out of all order, which is the
greattest and most evident token of ignorance, which is contrary and
ennemie to knowledge. But now Aristippus, for as much as long disputation
provoke tediousenes, me seems / if we brought in some variety or change
in the order of our communication, it should refresshe both our wits.


ARISTIP. What menest thou thereby? Take heed that we run not out of our
matter.


PLA. No, doubt thou not thereof, I shall provide well enough therefore. But
herke I will tell the now / what I mean. We have hitherto spoken of knowledge,
wherein is Sapience: but what or wherein hit is, we yet perceive not, but be now
in seeking.

What, and if we now used the way of a cunning paynter, which in making an
image of a very fair woman naked / to the intent that he will set out the
figure perfaictly / and (as I might speak like a warkeman) by prospectiue:
that it may seem to the beholders thereof most lively / and therefore the bodi
and members should show to them as round and fulle, as it were imbosed and
wrought in timber, metal, or stone? he makith the ground of his warke of the
depest black color that he may come by, which the more intentifly that a man
does behold it / the more liueli or quick shall the fresshly color of the
image apere to the eye / and the proportion seem more round, and in the form
of a body lyuinge. In semblable wise I intending to set out a parfeict
figure of knowledge, if I treat first of Ignorance / and making that to be
well perceived / I suppose it shall not be inconueniente: but the true
proportion of knowledge afterward, when I shall go about to declare it /
shall be more apparaunt and easy to be understand / and the variety in our
communication shall make the matter more pleasant.


ARI. In good faith Plato thy devise likes me wonderful well. Wherefore say
on a gods name.


PL. Is Ignorance any other thing Aris. than lack of knowledge?


ARI. No surely.


PL. Tha^ nothing is so co^trari to knowledge as ignorance.


ARI. Nothing.


PL. Is a brute be inferior to mankind by any thing so much as by ignorance?
For in bodily strength, long life / agilitie and swiftnes, there be diverse
bestes which fer do excede him / only by ignorance they be all inferiors unto
him.


A. Thou were wont also to say, that bestes lacked the soul that man has
which is i^mortal.


PL. That is true. But thou must remember, that the soul with the body makes
the man. For if the body lacked a soul, though it had life, yet were it no
man but a be. And that the figure makith not a man / it aperith by those
bestes, which be callid satiri / fauni / hipoce^tauri / and diverse other /
which be founden in Affrike having some the visage / some the hole figure of
man's bodi. And in the same soul, which makes the man, and without it man is
not, nor may be, has nothing less in him than ignorance, and if a man seem
to be ignorant, it happens never a whitte of the soul, but of the grosnes of
the body, which is bestiall, as of the same matter and substance that brute
beasts be of: which will not let the soul, that is of a divine substance,
to show the effects and disposition of her nature, which is only knowledge:
the lack whereof being caused by the object or let of the bodi, is nothing
but ignorance. Likewise as a thick and great cloud coueringe the son /
will not let him to send furthe his beams on the earth, whereby the earth
lacks light / and that lack is called derkenesse. Now lay aparte all arts
and sciences, which (as thou know well enough) were founden by man's
Invention and experience, long after that man was created: and set man in the
same astate that he was in before the said arts and sciences were invented:
yet were he than a man as he is now, And lacks not any thing, whereby he is
named a a man. Wherein now does appear the diversity between him and a brute
beast? Tell me now as thou think?


ARI. What else but in the same thing / for the which beasts be surnamed
brute.


PLA. Thou say truth: but yet lest I be deceyuid by the diversity of our
two understandings: I pray the tell me in few words, what by the said
word, brute, is signified.


ARI. Mary agreed: I take that signifies gross, insensate / lacking capacity
of knowledge / finally it amounreth to as much as ignorant.


PLA. By the faith of my body thou haste made an exposition very compendiouse
and elegant. Than be we both agreed, that ignorance makith the diversity
between a beast and a man. But what Ignorance I pray the? Ignorance in building
of houses, making of cloth, or warking of metal, or peradventure ignorance in
gra^mer, or logike, or making or versis / or else playeng on the shalmes or the
lute? Does ignorance in any of these cause the diversity?


AR. It seems nay. For thou did presuppose, that a man were in the same
astate, that all men were in / or ever any arts or sciences were founden / and
than of that thing that is not / it were folly to suppose any ignorance.


PLA. Thou speak not much a mysse. But yet for an other cause / Ignorance
in any of the said arts or sciences does not make the diversity that we now
speak of.

For if it should so do / tha^ who so ever lacked any of the said arts or
sciences: it should follow that he were ignorant, and therefore he were no man
but a beast. And also bees, silkewormes, and spydars should not compare with us
only, but should seem also to excede us in knowledge. For as much as without
any instructor or teacher, they at the first without loss of any thing / can
perfectli make wax / honey, silk and copwebbes: which no man can do like, nor
by none invention can attain to the knowledge, how it ought to be done. And
as for the be and the spynner, who so ever studiously do behold their warke /
he shall se therein such order / that beside the office of nature he shall
wonder at the equalite or iustnes of proportion / so exactly observed / that
none artificer can amend it. But now Aristip. sens this is not the Ignorance
/ that any of us both have mente hitherto / I pray the what Ignorance
supposest thou it is, that makith this diversity?


ARI. I suppose hit be this, that a beast has not the knowledge of him self
and of other, in the diversity of their kinds. For my horse knows not that
he is a horse / no more he does that he is a beast and I a man: neither the
be / at whose industry thou haste so much wondered, when the hiue is broken:
he knows not whether it be a man or a beast that takes his honey combs, and
puts him out of his lodgyng, whereon he has bestowed so much labor.

Nor the spainell that is so ialouse over his miaster, has not the knowledge
whether his master be a man or else a beast as he is. Contrary wise, a man
knows that he is a man, and knows also every other beast in his kind.


PLA. Thou co^mest nigh to the point Aristippus. But beware that thou be not
deceived, if after Pythagoras doctrine / when men be dead their souls enter
in to horsis / lions / and swine.

And after many years trauaylynge they return again to be men:

Than there might be in thy horse the soul of king Sardanapalus / whereby thy
horse moughte know what thou art and him self to.


ARI. Thou aduauncest me highly Plato / when thou supposest me to ride on a
king, and on so greatte a king as Sardanapalus was / which reigned over
Assyria and Babylon.


PLA. Thou art worthy to have no worse horse Aristippus, sens by thy profession
thou art demed prelate of all voluptie or wanton appetites: unto whom much
greater princis than Sardanapalus was / have been known to be servants.


ARI. Mo peradventure than of thy sower and unpleasant virtues would gladly be
folowers.


PLA. But now that I remember me, thou nedest not to be aferd Aristippus, for
thou art never the more deceived. In good feythe thy horse has yet no more
knowledge than a very horse has in deed.


ARI. What meanest thou thereby?


PLA. For when Sardanapalus lived, and was king of Assyria / he than knew not
him self. For abandoning not only the majesty of a king / but also the
office of a man, he left the company of men / and sat continually with his
concubynes atyred in the form of a woman / spinnynge in the rock / and cared
for nothing, but how he might excel all his wenches in wa^tonnes. Now sens
he than being in the form of a man / so much forgot what he was, think
thou that there be in him less ignorance now that he is in the form of a
horse?


ARI. Nay in good faith, but much more. And because thou say so Plato / I
have even the fondest horse that ever man rode on. For when he was young, he
was so mare wode / that no man might ride him. And now that he is old, and
that I pitieng him do use to ride on him some small iournaies: by my troth when
we be in the broad highway, if he se. iiii. miles of, a raze of mares / he will
in spite of my tethe leave the way and go to the^ when he is not able to ren,
nor bridell nor sporre may hold him. And yet wha^ he comes thider / saving
only neyenge and kicking / he can do nothing. And therefore it may well be (if
Pythagoras do trine be true) that the soul of Sardanapalus is in sorel my
horse. But if I knew it for certain / by god I would have the fairest mares that
any where might be gotten for him.


P. Now on mi faith that is merrily spoken. But in deed Arist. the said sentence
of Pythagoras ought not to be taken as it is written without any other
exposition no more tha^ his mistical cou^sailes called Simbola. As / cut not the
fire with a sword / Lepe not over the balance, Taste nothing which has a
black tail, and such other like, which thou have often times herd of: but
there in is a more secret meaning / and approchinge nere unto rayson. As in
mine opinion / by the translation of man's soul, whereof we have spoken, from a
man to a beast, and finally estsones unto a man again: It may be well
understand in this wise. That men being in the state of Innocence have than
the figure of man, the soul having the hole preeminence over the body. But
after if^ it happen that the appetites and desires of the body so much do
increase, that they have the hole possession of the body / and that the
affections of the soul, that is to say / virtues be suppressed or put to
silence / than the life becomes beastely: than look in what beasts the said
appetites be most vehemente: he / in whom is the semblable appetite, may be
said has his soul in that best enclosed. As he that is lecherous and wanton,
in such a horse as thou spakest of while ere. A cruel man or Tyrant in to a
tigre or lion, a glotton or drunkarde in to a wolf or a swyne, and so furthe
of other. And if one man happen to be possessed of many vices / than is his
tra^sformatio^ more diverse / and as I might say more monstruouse. Also being
in that beastly astate, and the soul with her affectes being hyd and not
showing her puissance, what any other thing is more in them thanne ignorance?
Which being a thing beastly, is as propre to them as beastly appetite. But if
god so willinge after long travailing in ill affections, the soul recouereth
her might / and vanquished ignorance / making the body to know his misery,
than the beasts hyde by littell and littell falls a way as knowledge
increases, and finally man resumeth his very figure and proportion lyuinge
after the rule of the soul, and so continues perpetually. How say thou
Aristippus to this exposition?


ARI. It seems to me to stand with good rayson: for ever me thought that
Pythagoras sentence, which was a man of incomparable wisdom / had such a
meaning.


PLA. Also it appears by the said sentence / that Ignorance makes a man
beastly, and that knowledge puts away beastlynes, and restores a man to his
dignity.


ARI. Ye verily.


PL. And it seems by that, which is rehearsed that Ignorance that we call
beastly, is in that, that bestes do not know what they the^ selfs be / nor
between them and men what is the diversity. Also that men know the diversity
between them and brute beasts / it happens of the soul, having preeminence
over the body / that is to say while the soul does hold the senses of the
body under due rule and obedience.


ARI. I wot not, how to answer the. For I have affirmed so much before,
that I can not reply now with mine honesty.


PLA. For they keeping of touch Aristippus I can well praise the. But how
say thou? Have we not of ignorance spoken for this time sufficiently?


AR. Yes I suppose / and we have now passed two miles in our iournay:
therefore return where thou leftest to speak of knowledge. For thou haste
laid a good ground on thy table to set out thine image.


PLA. I se thou forgettest nothing that I have spoken. Therefore let us assaye
to express that Image, that is to say, declare what is that knowledge, wherein
lies very wisdom, which peradventure king Dionise hoped to find in me /
when he first desired to se me.


THE SECOND DIALOGVE.
PLA. THou do remember Aristippus, that we be agreed, that knowledge is
contrary to Ignorance? And I suppose also they be so contrary / that they may
never accord / or in any part be mingled together: but always where the one is,
the other lacks.


ARI. Ye surely it must needs follow.


PLA. Than when Ignorance is ones put away clearly / knowledge only remains.


ARI. Ye so I trow: or else I wot not what it is, that abides / except I
would call it nothing. And yet now I am advised, that same, nothing / is
Ignorance. For of nothing can be no knowledge.


PLA. Thou speak truly / and as it besemeth the scoler of Socrates. Now
thou know that Ignorance is of bestes / which therefore be named brute: and
that knowledge is only pertaininge to man. And that the Ignorance / whereby
beasts be most unlike unto man, is Ignorance of them selfs, in as much as
they know not / that they be beasts. Than it follows, that the knowledge,
which makes the greattest diversity between man and beast / and whereby man
has preeminence in dignity over beasts / is the knowledge of him self:
whereby also he knows other.


ARI. Ye, supposest thou so? Does a man by knowing him self know other also?


PLA. No doubt thereof, and that shall thou se prouid in the order of our
communication / by the same raison that shall make him to know him self. But
yet left thou be deceived, I will by the way demand one question of the.
Thou saydest while ere Aristippus, that a beast has not the knowledge of him
self and of other in the diversity of their kinds, I pray the what
vnderstodest thou thereby? Any other than thou dyddest declare by the example of
the be and the spaynell?


ARI. None other: Why, think thou Plato / that I said not well?


PLA. Thou came (as I said) nigh to the point, but yet thou hittest it not.
For peradventure thy supposell may be in some part false, although thou have
not c^pied it. Do thou not behold, that beasts, which be savage, as they be
diverse in kind, so do they couayt to be together, and will sever them selfs
from other? And in the act of generation will accompany with none other beast,
but such as is of his own propre kind: notwithstanding that there be diverse
of the^ one so like an other: that uneath a man can discern the diversity. As
wolfes and mastyfes: foxes and curres, hares and conyes, and many other beasts
/ which were tediouse to be rehearsed. And as touching the be, that we spoke
of, be there not diverse flies like unto him? And for all that he will company
with none of them / nor yet suffer them (if he be of power to resist) enter in
to his hyue / but at the first sight will withstand him. Moreover all the
said bestes, when they perceive a man coming toward them / they will not
abide, but flee sooner from him than from any beast. Moreover among an infinite
nombre of people, a dog will know his master / although there were a thousand
men, in personage, fascion, and color of garments very like unto him. And if
thou would say, that the dog does discern that by sent of smellinge. Yet
would I demand of the again, how it happens / that a dog taken up at
Olinthum, and brought unto Athenes / which be distant. xl. miles one place
from the other, and is a very diffuse way to keep, and littell trauayled, yet
after that the dog have been retained at Athenes by the space of six months
/ when he has been at liberty he has returned again home to his masters
house, how would thou answer me Aristippus?


ARI. How else? But even as thou thy self did suppose that I would say,
that the dog found the way by sent specially, adding to peradventure some
part of his syghte.


PLA. But perchance or he come to Olinthum his master has forsaken the
house that he dwelled in / when he was with him, and is removed in to an other
house: do thou not think, that the dog will go to the house, where he left
his master, and not to the house where he dwells?


AR. Yes in good says.


PLA. And yet percase he shall find his masters steps in the street toward
his new house. And notwithstanding as soon as he espieth the other house / he
passes forth, and goes straight to it. But when he comes in, and fyndeth
not his master there, yet he lays him down as he were at home, trusting that
his master will shortly come in: does he this by sight or by smellinge?


ARI. Thou make me doubt Plato, whither he does it by any of them.


PLA. What if it happen, that his master not knowing him to be there / standing
nigh to the window talks loud with his neighbor / so that the dog hereth
him: think thou not / that he will rise suddenly / and with great have come
ioifully until his master?


ARI. Yes / I have seen that in experience.


PLA. Does he that by savor or by sight?


ARI. By neither of them, but only by heringe.


PLA. And when he comes to him / he straight leapeth upon him without any
smelling.


ARISTIPPVS. I am yet in dout / what I may say.


PLATO. Only by cause thou will not grant contrary to thine assercyon,
that a beast has knowledge of him self and other in the diversity of their
kinds. But whatte will thou say / if it shall appear unto the / that bestes
have yet an other knowledge among them selfs tha^ by their senses? haste not
thou seen, when men have preparid them selfs to go on huntyng, and to that
intent have brought forth their leshes, colers, and lyams / or else their
hayes and pursenettes, that the hounds espienge these things / have rejoiced
and lept about the house / as if they knew that they should go on hunting?
Likewise when they here the hunter blow his horn / they do all rise, and
with one voice do make a greatte noise, as if they consented to goo to that
solace.

And if they herd one blow in a shalme or a trumpette / they would not do so.

The coursar / which is used to bataylle / as soon as he herethe the
trumpettes blown / he snorteth and brayeth, and taking to him his courage, he
tredith high, and praunceth / and with such bragges declares him self ready
to set forth in bataile, supposest thou, that these beasts have this knowledge
only by the senses, whereof we have spoken?


ARI. No, her semethe to me now, that they have an other knowledge than only
by senses, but what her is / or whereof her procedethe / I can not discuss
except I should name it natural influence, diuersely disposed more or less,
after the grosenesse or capacity of the body, whereunto it sloweth.


PLA. By the faith of my body, and that definition is not to be dispreised /
if thou add thereunto the senses. But by this that thou and I have now spoken
/ it seems, that beasts have knowledge of them selfs and other in the
diversity of their kinds, contrary to thy first division. And if it be so,
than be they equal to men / and without cause we do call them ignorant or brute.


ARI. I wot not what to say to the.


PLA. Abide Aristippus / despair not / thou haste spoken more wiseliar than
thou art ware of.


ARI. Trowest thou so Plato?


PLA. Ye / and that shall thou perceive if thou will here me.


ARI. Go to than I pray the.


PLA. Let it not be tediouse unto the to have some things repeted, which
thou have spoken.

First if thou remember thy self, thou would not deny, but that wisdom
was knowledge. After ward thou grauntiddest also, that Ignorance was none
other thing but lack of knowledge, which concluded, that Ignorance could be
no wisdom. And than dyddest thou raison / that the diversity between man and
beast was only ignorance. And that Ignorance dyddest thou suppose to be the
lack of knowledge of them selfs / and other in the diversity of their kinds.
This was very well gathered of the, in mine opinion. And the raison that
followed by the example that thou dyddeste put of thy horse / the be / and
the spaynell, was not unfit to the purpose, if thou would have abyden well
by it. But by our merry digression in to Pythagoras regeneratio^s / thou were
brought from that argument / sooner than thou should have been: which happened
unto the / as it does ever to them, which like unto the / do follow the
concupiscence and pleasant affectes of the body. For like as they be unstable,
so the folowers and lovers of them be ever in constant: as well in their
opinions as in their acts. But if thou being sometime the herer of Socrates as
well as I was, had followed directly his doctrine / according as he spoke it
/ and also practiced it by his example of living / and had not as a truant
pycked out of his arguments such matter as thou supposiddest might only
maynteine thy sensual appetite / thou should have perceived what thou thy
self had mente, which thou do not now / it varieth so much from thy
profession. And peradventure the knowledge that we now seek for, should never
have comen between us two in question. But it should have suffised to have told
to the, what I said to king Dionise, and how he delte with me. And thou
should sone have iuged / if he had according to mi merits intreted me. But
now Aristippus to the intent thou may take some comfort of the seeds of
Socrates doctrine / which remain in the, but they will not spring / in such
wise as thou may see them / except I do water them with my declaration.
First remember that of all that which bears the name of a thing / there be
two kinds, one has no body and is ever steadfast and permanent / the other
has a body, but it is ever moveable and uncertain, The first, because it may
be understand only / it is called intelligible. The second, because it may be
felt by sensis it is called Sensible. The way to know the first is called
raison, and the knowledge thereof is namid understanding. The way to know the.
ii. is called Sense or feling / the knowledge thereof is named Perceiuinge. More
over of that which is called Intelligible there is the first and the second.
In the first is that portion of divinity, which is in man, whereby he is made
to the image and similitude of god. In the other be noumbres and figures. Of
this beasts have no part, neither of the first nor yet of the second: of
the first I suppose thou will grant me, and as for the second experience will
prove it? for I dare say / thou never hardest of beasts / that could skylle
of nombrynge.


ARI. I wot nere, I never called any yet to a reckenyng.


PLA. And though an ape or other like beast / seem in taking of things to
observe an order, as it were in nombrynge / yet if it be well considered / it
shall appear that it is by an imagination engendered of custom, and not by
nombrynge. I have seen a man, which was borne blind, and used to be ladde to
three or four houses in the city, which has been a great distance a sondre,
at the last by custom has known so well where they stood / that without
any man or dog leadynge, or any man telling him / he has gone directly unto
them. Whereat first I meruayled with many other, and when I communed with him,
I have perceived that he never observed nombre, but that only custom had set
the distance of the places in his imagination. Like may be spoken of figures.
For that whereby beasts do discern one thing from an other / is not
understanding / that is to say though they discern in quantite the more from
the less, yet they understand it not, as round, quadraunt / or triangle / or
in other like figure: but the simulacre or image / whereby they pecyue the said
diversity / is only by custom, formed and imprinted in the principal sense,
which is the heart. And wha^ the thing self is removed out of sight / that
impression that remains is called imagination / who co^mittith it forthwith
unto memori, which undoubted is not only in men but also in bestis, for they
discern the time present and that which is passed, but the time to com they
know not, and Memory is only of the time passed. And therefore the bestes that
thou spakest of / do perceive the diversity of things by imagination and
Memory, conceiuynge and reteyninge in the heart, which is the principal
sense or fountain of senses, the image of the thing that is sensible. And
thereby the dog perceyuethe his master / and fetches his glove / which he
has been before taught for to do / and goes to the places where he has seen
his master been a littell before. But that he knows not whether his master
be a man or a horse / Plato or Demosthenes, a philosopher or an orator, it is
evident enough. For although my dog had abyden ten years continually with me,
and had herd me every day speak of Demosthenes / and name him an orator /
and herd the call me every day Plato, and name me a philosopher: yet if thou
would deliver unto him anithing, and bid him c^ry it to the orator / he
would strayt bring it unto me, and not to Demosthenes. Also if I would cast a
lofe unto my spaynell / and bid him carry it to my horse, I suppose he would
forthwith eat it himself, and lie down wha^ he has done / without seking for
mi horse / though he stood by him / is it not so?


A. Ye in good faith me thinkith thou say truly.


P. And likewise may be raisoned of al other bestes be they never so wily / if
their actis be depely considered.


A. It appears so.


PLA. Thanne thy saying is not to be reproved, that a beast lacked knowledge
of himself and of other.


ARI. No, as it semethe.


PLA. And that lack of knowledge is ignorance.


ARI. Ye truly, and so said I also.


PLA. And that ignorance made the diuersiue between man and beast.


ARI. Ye and the same to.


PLA. Than thou wylt conclude / that man has knowledge?


AR. Ye that I must needs thou know well enough.


PL. And what call thou that knowledge? suppose^t thou it is where a man
knowethe him self and other?


ARI. Ye so I said, and thou haste also affyrmed it.


PLA. So I did in deed, but yet good Aristippus / suffer me to demand of
the a few questions / we shall the sooner find out the knowledge that we seek
for. Is it in figure and nombre that knowledge rests?


ARI. Ye so it appears.


PLA. Nay, if thou remember the. Perdie thou saydest thy self, that thy horse
knew not, that thou were a man, or that he was a horse.


ARI. So said I indede.


PL. Thou co^siderest also, that it was agreed by us both, that the figure
made not the man, but it was the soul with the body / that caused the manne to
be so named: and that without the soul, not withsta^dyng the figure of man,
yet were he no man but a brute beast.


ARI. It must needs be so, I can not deny it.


PLA. Than is there somewhat more that makethe the said knowledge besides the
figure / which is contained in the second part of that / which we called
Intelligible?


ARI. So me thinks. But what hit is I can not remember.


PLA. It is no marvel, thy wy^tes be so inuolued in carnal affections, that
this clean and pure doctrine can not enter in to them without great
difficulty, and wha^ they be ones in, they can not long abide / thy memory
is so occupied about wanton and beastly fantasy. But yet will I ones again
reherce unto the that, which thou haste so shortly forgotten. Did not I say,
that in the first part of that, which is named Intelligible / is that portion
of divinity in man, whereby he is made to the image and similitude of god?


ARI. Yes I remember well that.


PLA. And is that form printed in any other thing than in man's soul, which
is immutable and of one proportion and figure?

All though it lies bounden in the body / as it were in a prison /
consideringe things diuersely: as the substance and qualities of the body
suffers him to take light: being deceived by the judgment of the senses or
wits, estemynge things as they be se^sible and visible: where that / which
the soul by him self does consider, is intelligible and also invisible.


ARI. I doubt me what I shall say. But supposest thou Plato, that the image and
similitude of god is not in the body of man as well as in the soul?


PLA. Have thou so sone forgotten that, which I have so often rehearsed? That
if the body of man were without a soul, he were than but in the nombre of
brute beasts, which have se^ces as well as he / and some more sharp and
quicker. And no man that will affirm that god is / will presume (as I trow) to
say expressly that the image of god is in Satires / and other beasts and
fysshes / which have form and shappe like unto manne. And to speak to the
meryly without reproach unto gods majesty, If that which is in every man's
body / were the image of godde, Certes thanne the image of godde were not
only diverse, but also horrible / monstruouse, and in some part ridiculouse:
that is to say, to be laughed at. For every man has not in visage and
personage, one proportion or figure. Some have a plain and equal visage, some
look as they laughed / other as they wept / diverse as they were ever angri,
many have in the quantity of their bodies or members excess or lack.
Wherefore to think that all these be like unto god (which as he is the
creatoure of them all / and may make and do what he lysteth, so it agrees
with all raison^ that he incomparably excels them all in every perfection
and consequently in beauty) it were of all other the greatest madness.


ARI. Thou aunswerest me raysonably / but now I pray the declare to me as
plainly, how the image of god is in the soul / as thou supposest.


PLA. Thou will not deny, that god is without any body / invisible and
immortal, whose form can not be deprehended with the eyes of mortal me^ / nor
described by any sensible knowledge?


ARI. No truly.


PLA. And the same I trow thou will confess of the soul?


ARI. Ye verily.


PLA. Also god is in power in all and every part of the world: And by his
providence all thing is governed and moved. And he him self is of none other
moved nor governed / but is the first incomprehensible mouer.


ARI. I can by no raison deny it / except I would deny, that god is / and that
I may not / sens that the order of al thing that is visible / declares that
there must needs be one principal cause and beginnynge, which we call god. And
also that order can not be without providence and one perpetual governance.


PL. Yet thou say well, and as it besemeth Socrates scoler. But now
Aristippus, for as much as god is the first and principal cause. And as he is
one in beginning / so is he ever one in governance: And therefore having in
him al sufficiency and powar, will thou not grant me, that he is of an
absolute and full perfection?


ARI. Yes that must I needs.


PLA. And is not perfection / in that it is perfect / good also?


ARI. No man will deny it.


PLA. Ye per adventure the same perfection is goodness / sens goodness is
always complete, profitable, and without any lack. And goodness and evil
the one is contrary and ever repugnant unto the other: How say thou? is it
not so?


ARI. Ye that is true.


P. Tha^ is there ever varia^ce between them?


ARI. So it appears.


PLA. But in god can never be variance, which of his nature is ever one, and
may never suffer division.


ARI. I grant the.


PLA. Than in god nor about god can be none evil: therefore all evil is far
from god.

But yet me seems we have spoken somewhat less of god than we should do.


ARI. What meanest thou thereby?


PLA. For sens we both have agreed, that he is the first beginning and
cause: we should have also concluded / that all goodness proceeded of him / and
that he was the fountain and principal goodness.


AR. I admit al to be true that thou say.


PLA. Than thou grauntest, that cuyll is contrary to god?


ARI. Ye verily.


PLA. And all thing that is ill, is contrary to that thing / which is good?


ARI. Ye surely.


PLA. Those things that be contrary one to an other / be they like in that,
wherein they be contrary?


AR. No truly.


P. Than it seems / that they be unlike?


A. So it appears.


PL. That / wherein things be like or unlike one to an another, do we not call
it an image or similitude?


AR. Yes undoubtedly.


PLA. Hitherto we have well agreed. Now let see Aristippus, Sens thou haste
confessed / that the soul is invisible and immortalle how say thou? shall
it suffice that therein only he be like unto god and in all other thing unlike
or contrary?


ARI. No: for than should he be in part like / and in part unlike: And than
were hit not well spoken to say / that man was made to the image and
similitude of god / without ioynyng thereto distinctly and particularly in what
thing he was made to the said image and similitude: As if one would say /
that in thy son / were thy propre image and similitude. If thou thy self
dyddest perceive that he were like to the in favor, proportion of body and
conditions, thou would hold the pleased and say nothing. But if thou
beheldeste / that in his personage he were like the / but in some part of the
visage as in the nose, the eyes, or the mouth he were unlike the, Also in
liberality he followed the, but in lechery he did degenerate from the: should
thou not than be constrained to demand of him that spoke, wherein thy son is
like to the / or in what part of him thine image should appear to be most?


PLA. Now on my faith Aristippus thou speak very well and wisely. Lo, see,
how by our long co^muning thou art drawn from thy wanton affections and
fantasyes / whereby the sparkis of wisdom, that thou gatist of Socrates
lessons / like as fire hid under asks and deed cooles, when they be removed
is found sindrynge in little imbres: so thyn affections being withdrawn
wysedom does begin to glyter and show / which if it would abide kend lynge, and
not like unto imbres remove and fle away with eueri puff of wi^de, I doubt
not but for the sharpnes of thy wit, of al Socrates scolers thou should^st be
at the last one of the most wisest and excellent. But I will speak thereof no
more / lest thou shuldist suppose I did to the that I would not do to king
Dionise, I mean flater the.


A. No no, I peciue wherabout thou go: thou woldist with psuasion, wherein I
know thou art meruaylous, withdraw me if thou moughtist from my, pfessed
opinion / but that is now no part of our matter.


P. Yet I suppose thou art deceyued^ for thou shall find it otherwise, or we
be at an end of our communication: but where left we? Thou did affirm (as
I remember) that for as much as man was made to the image and similitude of god
/ he ought to be like unto god / not in part / but in all universally.


A. In all such lykenes as that which is creatid may be most like unto his
creator, without comparison of equality. For god that is always one may suffer
no pere / or like in equality of substance.


P. That is verily well said Arist. Al though that was ever meant in our
raisoning: for I never supposid, that thou haddist so litell lerning / to
think that god made men equal unto him / or so ignorant that thou knew not,
what an image or similitude is, in respect of that where unto it is wrought.
By that which we before have affirmed, that god is the first cause and
pri^cipal goodness / it arguith that al thing which is not the self god / is
inferior unto him. Wherefore the image or similitude of god / al though it be an
imitatio^ or following in liknes of that whereunto it is made and resembled / yet
is it inferior to god: who by the virtue of his unity has ever a preeminence,
and souerayntie. Therefore we will stycke no more thervppon, but now I will assay
to declare / how we may understand, that the similitude of god is imprinted in
manne: wherein the knowledge that we began to treat of / perchance shall appear
unto us. Wherefore Aristip. I pray the as thou have done hitherto^ here me
patiently, and when I shall demand of the any question, answer me simply
without cauillatio^.


ARI. Contented. But be short than I pray the^ for me thinks hit long or we
come to an end of our matter.


PL. Ye so I suppose. For as I said, the littell sparks of wisdom that
appeared in the, will never be brought to be a good fire / they be so mengled
with asks of affection: whereby they be made so inco^stant, that they will not
abide the end of my raiso^ / where by percha^ce they might be caused to kendel
and wax more. But sens thou have promised to here me patiently / I will go
forth with this matter: and d^ubte not but that I will make an end / or we
come to the cite.


ARI. Go to than. For I am now prepared to here the.


THE. III. DIALOGVE.
PLATO. SEns we have treted some what of god / and of man's soul (but not
sufficientli / for that would require a much lengar time, and also that both
thou and I had our minds more clean pourged with prayer and pure sacrifice)
Now let us see as much as we may be suffered / what it is / wherein they
most do resemble.

First all that is in god is perpetualle and immutable, and by none occasyon
or for any cause may be appayred, mynysshed, or corrupted. That which is in
the soul, part is perpetualle and immutable / part is not perpetualle, and
is also mutable. For that the soul is Immortalle and invisible, that is
perpetualle and may never be changed. But understanding / which I did
put to: the knowledge of that, which was Intelligible, and named hit a
portion of dyuinitie, is not perpetualle in the soul, as hit is in godde, nor
all ways immutable: but during the time that hit is conserved by contemplacy
on of the divine majesty, hit is perfect and makethe man's soul like unto
god. And when hit is joined unto corporaile affectes / hit is made thanne
imperfect / and the form of the soul, is in a part ^ecayed from the
right symilytude of god. But if the soul being dedycate to vices / be ones
fallen from the possession of rayson / thanne understanding is vanysshed
away / and the soul remaynethe with the body transfourmed, as we spoke of
before.

And thanne that Immortalytie, which being joined to understanding, made the
soul like unto god / being now separate from hit, shall be to the soul
confusion and tourmente.

The majesty of god, in beholding whereof the said understanding or knowledge is
conserved and kept in perfection / is all his goodness / whereof I have spoken /
and his prouydence, which procedethe of the same goodness. In beholdynge the
goodness of Godde / manne does perceive, that thereof procedethe virtue. In
considering his prouydence, he fyndethe that nothing is made without cause /
or (as I moughte say) at a venture: but that all things be made for a
purpose, profitable, and also necessary / and so to the respect thereof al
things be good.

Now I will demand of the Aristippus one question. Do thou not remember /
that thou thy self saydest late / that hit were not well spoken / to say
that man was made to the image and similitude of god: if he had in him no mo
things like unto god, but only that he were invisible and immortal? and that
dyddest thou ratify with a good and familiar exaumple.


ARI. It is not so long passed sens I spoke it ^ but that I may well remember
it.


PL. And thou dydst not deni / but that the pte Intelligible of man is a divine
substance, wherein is understanding?


ARI. No, nor yet will I.


PLAT. Than it seems / that in understanding manne is like unto god. And the
same understanding is knowledge: but is man like to god in any other knowledge
trowest thou, than in contemplacyon of the Dyuyne majesty?


ARIST. I pray the rehearse that more plainly unto me.


PLA. By my truth thou art very dulle in perceyuinge. I say in beholding
perfectly the providence and goodness of god: did I not declare to the but
even now / that therein was gods majesty?


ARI. Well, now I perceive the. It seems verily Plato, that therein is the
knowledge, wherein as thou haste affirmed, is a portion of divinity.


PLA. By that same knowledge also he knows that virtue is good / because it
proceeds of goodness.


AR. Ye.


PLA. Does he not also know that evil is contrary to good?


AR. Why not.


PLA. And he knows that vice is contrary to virtue.


AR. Ye that is true.


PLATO. Thanne knowethe he that vice is ylle, by cause hit is contrary to that
which is good?


ARISTIPPVS. I agree also there to.


PLATO. By the same rayson does he know, that he which is vycyouse / that is
to say, he which is possessed with vice is ylle: and he that is virtuous /
is good.


ARISTIPPVS. Ye truly.


PLATO. Thanne he that is vycyouse is contrary and unlike unto him that is
virtuous.


ARISTIPPVS. It must needs be so.


PLATO. In any other thing but that he is ill?


ARISTIPPVS. In none other thing.


PLATO. And he that is virtuous / is he like unto god, which is all goodnes^,
for any other thing but for that he is good?


ARI. No I suppose.


PLA. Than see how he that is virtuous is like unto god. And that he which
is possessyd with vice, is contrary and unlike unto him.


ARISTIPPVS. I must needs agree to thy rayson.


PLATO. Now in considering the prouydence of godde, which also belongethe to
understanding, Order in every thing is perceived to be / which order like a
streyghte line issues out of prouydence, and passethe directely through all
things that be created. And therein be degrees, wherein those things being
set / one has preemynence over a another in goodness.


ARISTIPPVS. So it appears.


PLATO. Did not we call that goodness while ere necessary and profitable?


ARISTIPPVS. Yes that I remember.


PLATO. Unto whom / supposyst thou, be things profitable?


ARI. Unto whom else but to them / which do use them?


PLA. And to them that do use them most / be they most profitable?


ARI. Ye so hit follows.


PL. But if they fall from the degrees of the said line, wherein they were
ordained and set / by the said providence: and change their order, than
those things do cesse to be necessary one to an other / because they be out
of their right places, where god had ones set them for to be necessary.


ARI. In deed so it seems.


PLA. And where order lackethe, there is disorder.


ARI. Ye that is true.


PLA. Also either order is good and disorder ylle, or else contrary.


ARI. No but as thou say dest first.


PLA. And that which is good is also profitable: and contrary wise that which
is ill / is also unprofitable.


ARI. Ye verily.


PLA. Than thou will grant me, that order is good and profitable / and
disorder is ylle and unprofitable?


ARI. That must I needs do.


PLA. Than what sayfte thou, be not all things / wherein is order or disordre,
either good and profitable or ylle and unprofitable in using one an another?


ARISTIPP. Yes doubtless.


PLA. And to them that do use them?


AR. So it appears.


PLA. More or less as they be much or little used?


ARI. I can not deny it.


PLA. I am very glad Aristippus / to see how seriously and truly thou
kepest tacke with me, sens thou did dest promise me / that thou would answer
according as thou thoughtist, without leaning to any particular opinion. And
in that appears in the a token of more wisdom: thanne is in all the residue
of thy profession.

But now remember well what thou haste spoken: And show me if thou think
that any other creature has so much use of all things that be created as
manne has, reuolue them well in thy mind or thou speak / consyderinge what
commodity one thing may have by using an other. And of how many things
one thing may receive any commodity. How say thou, have thou now well
advised the?


ARI. Me seems Plato that only man has the use of all things that be
created, and may receive of eueriche of them a commodite. Other things do use
sometime one an other / but not so generally.


PLA. Than it seems also / that all things were created for him specially.


ARI. What meaneste thou thereby?


PLA. For man does use or may use / all thing that is / but not contrary:
for the horse / the ore / or the sheep, likewise other things lyuinge, or
growing can not use manne nor receive of him any thing but for man's propre
commodity.


ARISTIPPVS. Me thinks thou say truly.


PLA. Ergo we be agreed, that Man uses things most of all other?


ARI. Ye surely.


PLA. Than be they to him either best and most profitable, or else warste
and most unprofitable.


ARISTIPPVS. Thou speak merualously.


PLA. Why say thou so, sens this is but comune raison, and (except I be
deceived) to every manne easy? but that the said things be to manne best
and most profitable / it happens of order: that they be warst and most
unprofitable / it comes of disordre.


ARI. So verily hit seems.


PLA. More over the preeminence that man has, being in the highest degree of
the line that we spoke of, augmenteth also the quality / that is to say makes
the thing that he uses better or wars. As by example. A fat sheep having
much wolle on his back, for as much as a man may be fed with his carcaise,
and clothed with his wull, is better tha^ a lean and poor sheep, whose wul
being ^orne al of with the brembles / the ^arkais will only feed dogs:
which gnawynge on the boones and bowelles will therewith be nourished. Likewise
herbs in that (...) be medicinable and holsom, in (...) or restoringe health
unto (...), be much better, than for that they feed catel or beasts: so that
for the benefit that every creature brin (...) unto man / it is the better in
his kind and more profitable. But sens it seems / that for man, specially al
things were created and that unto him they be either best and most
profitable / or else warst and most unprofitable / I would now know wherein they
be unto man good and profitable / or ill and unprofitable.


ARI. What meanest thou? Did not thou declare it even no we thy self, wha^
thou saydest that it happened by order and disorder?


PLA. I can the thank, thou art now of a good remembrance. But do thou
perceive Aristippus / what I meant there by?


ARI. Dyddest thou not mean, that some beasts were ordained for man to eat,
some to cladde him with, some to till his land for corn / other to ride on:
likewise herbs and fruits, sum serve for meat and nourisshynge, diverse for
medicine, stone and timber to buyld with. And whiles they be used in this wise
as they be ordained / there always is order. But if they be used for any other
purpose, or one in the place of an other, there is disorder.


PLA. Abide Aristippus, thou have forgotten some thing behind the, that will
make much of the matter: Perdie there be some bestes / fowls / and fisshes /
which will serve to none of the purposes, which thou have rehearsed: As serpents
/ scorpions / and such other like: of birds the Egle / the dunkyte, the
Ospraye, and the Cormorant, which do rauyn and devour that, which is necessary
for man's living. Also crows and rookes may be brought into the same company:
And of fysshes that which in latin is called torpedo, or ever he comes out
of the water mortifieth the hands of the fysiher whiles he is drawyng up of
his net. An other fysshe called Remora / all though he be very little in body,
yet will he stay and reteyne a greatte ship being under saylle, and let
him that he shall not pass forth in his voyage. And diverse other both
fysshes and birds there be of semblable malice: how wylt thou bring them into
the order that thou haste spoken of.


ARI. Mary as thou say Plato, I can not well tell what to say thereto.


PLA. I believe that well enough. For thou art so nosilled in carnal
affections, that thou kepist nothing in remembrance, but only that / which
is commodious and pleasant. But I will help the forth / as well as I can.
All be it I know well enough I shall not bring these things in order
sufficiently. The providence of god is so inserutable that it can not all be
comprehended by man's imagination / not withstanding by my demanding and
thine aunswerynge / I trust we shall find therein matter competent enough to
help us to that thing that we go about, that is to say, to find out
knowledge / wherein wysedom lies hid. First Aristippus thou will agree / that
all creatures in the final cause of their creation be good: That is to say,
having respect to that they be made for?


ARISTIPPVS. Ye, that have I granted all ready.


PLA. Therefore to that respect they can not be ill?


ARI. That is troth. PLAT. But malice is contrary to good, and also takes
his denomination of evil?


ARI. That I know well enough.


PLA. Than spoke I not well when I said that diverse beasts fysshes, and
birds, were of semblable malice as they were, of whom I had spoken?


AR. It seems so.


PLA. For as much as by their creation, they be al good?


AR. Ye for the same cause.


P. Of the said bestes, birds / and fishes / there be some parts / which by
physicians, and them that seek for the natural propreties of things, be
founden remedies against diverse sicknesses.


AR. So it has been affirmed by Democritus, and his disciple Hippocrates. And
I my self have seen meruailes, when such things have been practiced.


PLA. And for as much as goodness came of them / thou dyddest judge all such
things to be good?


ARI. Ye in good faith.


PLA. Thou did therein judge truly / and as it was. But when thou knewist any
man to be stungen with a serpente / or Scorpion / whereby the man perished,
did thou suppose tha^, that the Scorpion or serpent was ill, or good still as
he was wha^ he served for a medicine / and preserved man from the death?


AR. I am not so mad to suppose that to be good / whereby man is destroyed.


PLA. I suppose thou art not: But sens we have affyrmed al thing to be good in
his creation / having respect to the end wherefore it was created. For as
much as the said beasts / birds / and fyshes received in their creation the
disposicions before touched, which thou supposest to be ylle, by cause thereby
manne may peryshe and dye. Let us consider the cause fynall, wherefore those
dispositions were put by God of nature into the said creatures, wherein I will
as briefly as I can declare to the mine opinion or sentence. Foresene always
that thou remember, that the providence of god is above man's capacity to
comprehend holly: But I doubt not, some part of it shall serve (as I said) to
the sufficient declaration of that thing that we purpose.


THE IIII DIALOGVE.
PLATO. Shall we need Arist. to make any playner declaration / what thing it is,
for the which all other things lackyng the use of raison were created?


AR. No, for it appears to me sufficientely, that it is man: as thou have
already declared.


PLA. And we be agreed long agone / that man is of body and soul?


ARI. Ye no faylle thereof.


PLA. And to the body the senses or wits be joined, as understanding is
joined to the soul?


AR. According.


PL. Also the body is sensual and mortal / the soul is Intellectual and
immortal.


A. So it seems.


PL. The first is in common with bestes, and therefore it is bestly, the other
is a portion of divinity / and therefore it is divine and godly.


ARIS. That have thou long agone proved: wherefore I will not now replye therein
again the.


P. I am glad that I find the so raisonable. But do thou also remember, that
I said, that the divine portion, during the time that it is co^serued by
contemplation of the divine majesty / it is perfect and like unto god, and
when it is joined unto corporal affectis, it is vn^fecte and vanyssheth away?


AR. Ye I remember it well.


P. Now here me out pacie^tly, and we shall come shortly to an end of this
matter. Thou know well enough Aristippus, that the body, and consequently
the senses or wyt^es that do perteyne thereunto, is the habitation or vessel,
which receives the soul. Also affectes or affections al though while ere I
named them corporal, yet in very deed they be first in the soul, as intencions
be in the warke manne before he does warke: And when the soul does exercise
them / having his chief respect to understanding / whereof we have so much
spoken: than be they virtues. But if they being mixed with the senses, be all
ruled by them in having only respect to the body, than be they vices, and
the soul by the excludyng of understanding being made subject unto the
body, they may than be well called corporal: as that ought to be called the
goods of the vaynquysshour, which were the prisoners before he was taken: or
the goods of the bondma^ be called the lords. Now so it is that god, of
whose majesty we have spoken, and be yet in speaking, when he has put the
soul (accompanied with affectes as her perpetual servants and ministres)
into the body / as into her propre habitation, he gives to her the senses, to
be as her slaucs or drudges. And committing to her for a chief counsayllour
understanding / he leaves with her also, Free will to be her Secretarye.

Now if she might always keep her habitation and company in that astate, as
they were left unto her: than should men be as goddis. And those things which
brought any anoyance to men, should always be ill, and be made by nature in
vayn. And also god should seem to do ylle in the ordeynynge of them. Or else
that in things there were no providence. But sens of so many men as now be,
have been / and shall be in the world / the bodies in the principal humors,
whereof they be comp^cte (which as thou knoweste is blood, read coler ^^me,
and black co^er called Melancoly) be of diverse temperatures. Therefore be they
in ^ondry wise ^^lyned in the operation of their senses or wits: As some to
acts veneriall and highness of courage, other more to get possessions and
richesse / diverse for every little displeasure to be cruelly revenged. Many to
employe all their study and labor in ill craft and deceyte: other do abhor
all travail as well of mind as of body / de^yrynge only (as the block
which Jupiter did send down into the water to have rule over the
paddockes) to lyestyll and do nothing. As soon as any of the said
inclynations be conceived in the senses / the mind begins to have
dilectation therein / and offreth it to us, as it were good pleasant and
profitable: than if our affectes / by whom we be meued to do any thing, do
consent to the said dilectation, and than immediately will is corrupted / so
that she as false and disloyal, writes in the heart of man (which is the
souls book, wherein all thoughts be written) that she said Inclination meued
and set forth by the said affectes, is profitable and good. If the soul
hastily without asking cou^saylle of understanding, do approve the said
persuasion, bileuing will, without any other inuestigatio^ or search: Tha^ she
being abandoned of understanding, loses her dignite, and beco^mith ministre
unto the senses / which before were her slaves / who usurping the preemine^ce,
and having the affectis and Will holly at their co^mandment^ do possede the
body as their propre mancion, leaving nothing to the soul, but to use only
her powers after their sensual appetites. And so Man bireft of that portion /
where in he was like unto god, is become equalle or rather inferior to brute
beasts, for such causes as I before have rehearsed. Now Aristippus, when Man
is ones brought unto this astate / do not thou suppose, that he forgets
now or knows not what he is? or to express more plainly to the what I mean
/ Is he not ignorant / that he is transformed from a man to a beast? And
supposes still that he is like unto god, and in the order that we spoke of,
superior unto al other creatures and do n^^ator over them al?


AR. Ye that is true, he believes so verily.


PLA. But yet it is not so. For when understanding was excluded by the soul,
and that she was subdued or maistred by the senses, than the similitude of god
/ which was in understanding / vanysshed from him. And when he left his own
place of preeminence / and did participate in carnalle affectes with
creatures, which were to him inferiors, he brake the line of order / and lost
his superiority: and consequentely brought him self and other into disordre,
which as we have agreed is euylle and contrary unto good, and by the same
rayson is enemy unto god / Which is only goodness. For no man will deny,
but that thing / which is so contrary unto an other, that in no part they
may accord / but be always repougnaunt: they be mutually enemies one to an
other.


ARIST. I suppose it be even as thou say.


PLATO. Now call to thy remembrance^ that we were agreed that al creatures
were made for man, and that he had the most use of them all. Also they all
were good in the order of their creation / and that to man they were best and
most profitable as long as they continued in the said order / And being in
disorder they were also to manne warste, and most unprofitable.

Moreover all though some beasts, souls, and fyshes seem to have in them a
malice, whereby man may be hurt or anoyed: yet having respect to the cause
fynalle / wherefore they were made / they were / not withstanding necessary
unto man specially.


ARISTIPPVS. I thank the hartly Plato for this repetition: whereby thou haste
well revived my remembrance, which was well nygh oppressed with the abundance of
matter, wherewith thou have as I moughte say infar^id this communication.


PLATO. I know well inoughe Aristippus, that in matter of great importance /
to men that be sensual, having their minds engrossed with carnal
affections, there is required a plain and sensible form of raisoning, broken
now and thau with often repetitions: which all though to froward herers it
seems to make the matter tediouse, yet if they can abide it / they shall thereby
retain some seeds of knowledge, like as in a land that was never well
husbonded, corn will grow and spring in ere / when men little looked, for to
have gotten such fruit by their ylle husbondry. But now set up thyn ears
Aristippus / and dyligentlye here the misterye of the wonderful goodness and
providence of god, which shall be declared in the said cause final: which I
intend now to express and open unto the without further delay.


ARI. Go to now Plato I have al my hole mind setlyd and prepared to here the,
and I shall not wyllyngly let one word that passes from thy mouth / eskape
me.


PLA. Thou have all ready granted / that a counning Artifycer foreseethe in his
ymagination the figure of the thing that he warketh, and to what effect it is
wrought, which is properly called the cause final.

And when it is made / he delyteth in the beholding it. And the more perfect
and excellent that the warke is / the more he therein reioycethe, and prepares
some mean to preserve it from brekynge or other destruction. But there is none
Artificer to be compared unto god, either in foresyght / or in care to preserve
that which he him self wrought. Nor there is any man's warkemanship like to
his in perfection. Wherefore he most excellently reioicith in his creatures. And
by cause he consyderith / that Man is the most wonderful of all his warkes,
he reioiceth therein most and incomparably. Also because he made him to his own
similitude, he loves him / according to the commune proverb: All thing
loves that, which is most like to him self. And therefore he is most
circumspect in the preservation thereof. Wherefore considering that by Will,
perchance corrupted, as I late declared, Man might declyne from that
perfection, wherein he was made / and by the part sensible induced to rebelle
again his own creatoure / thinking that of his own power he has all other
creatures under his subjection / and that all that he wylleth is good / not as
understanding would instruct him, but as his affections deceived by his senses
do falsely persuade him. This eternal and incomprehensible goodness / which we
call GOL, louinge man as his image incomparably, has provided to sytte in the
way, whereby WILL shall pass many sundry obstacles and lettes to cause him to
tarry / that in his course he ^all not heedling in the botomlas pit of
Ignorance, while he is in the way to rebel again his maker and most merciful
lord. These necessary lettes be diseses and siknessis, whereby bodily strength
is abated, and therewith carnal affectis oppressid or minished / Aduersite,
vexatio^ and trouble wherbi stordy courage pride and ambition, and other like
mala^ders of the mind may be curid / or at the lest ways reformed. And
besides these, be other obstacles, whereby man shall be war^id of his arrogance
/ when he to much presumes on his propre power, knowledge, and industry. And
therefore he will freely use all things at his pleasure / wherein his senses have
dilectation, and his appetite moves him. These things god foreseinge (as I
said before) most louingely and wisely prouydynge for his most dereste
creatoure, against the said peril of forgettefulnesse, like as he made
manne of soul and body, so with things necessary and profitable to the body
he ordaynid things also necessary and profitable unto the soul, sowinge
among the herbis, that be wholesome or pleasant, other noysom and venomous. In
the grene bank lies the serpente hid / ready with his trembling tunge to
stryke mortally them which do approach him. The scorpion wou^den in the grene
grass / lies watching with his forked tail in a redynes to styng the^ / which
look not down to their fete. The bodi infected or wounded, finds in pain and
anguishe his own, propre ignorance / in that / that he so much esteemed
dilectation and pleasure / which in so short a momente vanysshed away. Also
sens a little herb / which is inanimate, may change pleasure in to pain /
and health into syckenes / or a little vile worm at one stroke may bircue him
of all dilectation and pleasure, and fylle him with so much anguysshe and
dolor, that the life / which he desired ever to continue becomes to him
tedious and lothesome / he shall thereby not only remember / that he is
passible / and therefore no god, but also perceive and consider of how little
importance or valor is than his strength / authority / or puis^ance, were he
never so mighty a champion or so puisant a king or Emperor. And with that
remembrance the part sensible being rebuked, understanding eftesoones
resorteth unto the soul, and helps her to reform all her holle householde /
setting eftesones every thing in his propre place and office, as it was before
free will was corrupted. And if than the soul be circumspecte / and do
restrain VVIL of her liberty, compellynge her to be subject and so obediente
to raison, that without her consent she shall dare to do nothing: than the
craftye persuasions of the sencis shall no thing avail, but they them selfs
will they or no, shall be constrained to be still drudges unto the soul as
they were ordained. But if manne do forgette to set Will under the
governance of rayson / and with a circumspect deliberation, to appoint unto
her limits and bonds which she shall not be so hardy to pass or excede.
After the body is eskaped from aduersyte, or is delivered of vehement peine and
anguisshe, forth with the senses do prepare the^ selfs eftsoon to rebel. And
affectes which as wanton girls be flexible or ready to inclyne to every
motion, do prepare them with wanton countenance and pleasant promyses to
allure eftesones Will to their appetite: whereby the soul shall be ageyn in
danger to perysshe / onelasse she retaynynge still with her understanding, in
considering her propre state and condition, and reuoluinge what she before
had suffered / do put Will in to the prison of Dread / under the streyte
custody of Remembrance and Rayson. And in this wise as I have rehearsed / not
only he that suffers, receives commodite of this wonderful providence: but
also other which do behold him that sufferith, or hereth it sufficiently
reported may and ought there by examine the state of his own person / and as
mortal and passible and no god / but the image of god by understanding,
endeavor them self to keep that in perfection, having in good awayte, that
they let not affectes become to malapert / but that the soul have
understanding always at her elbowe, which shall bydde raison correct Will, if
he be conuersaunt with these affectes. And than shall man stylle remain
without any of the said transformations that we before spoke of: and use every
thing according to the effect that they were first ordained for him: which
is the cause final, whereof I have spoken / and promisyd to declare unto the,
wherein shynethe the wonderful prouydence, whereby god is best known. How
say thou Aristippus? do thou bear away and perceive what I have all this
while spoken?


ARI. ye that I do Plato, all though hit be meruayllous: but yet me seems
thou haste omitted somewhat / which should make of all that which thou
spakest a perfect conclusion.


PLA. Trowest thou so? Mary I pray the tell me what lacks, as thou do
suppose, and I will amend that gladly / for I would be loath that in that,
which we go about / should be found imperfection.


AR. I remember / thou haste affirmed through al thy resoning, that al^hinges
in respect of their creatyon be good / and that all was created for man: More
over that some things, which do seem to be ylle, in very deed be not so, but
be all good in their order of their creatyon.

And for proof of that thou dyddest induce by example, that aduersite / and
syknesse, did cure or mitigate affectes and vanites of the mind. Also that
venomous herbs, serpents, and worms / which seemed to have in them nothing
but malice only, by anoyinge of men that were sensual, following their
affectes, and forgetting their state / with pain and anguysshe, birefte them
their pleasure, wherein they delyted, and made them remember / that they were
passible: and by that consideration to reform the^ selfs according to their
first perfection / where in they were ordained. And so did thou conclude /
that adversity, syckenes, venomous herbs and bestes were good to that
respect. And therefore necessarily provided of god to the use of man. Now for
as much as all men be not sensual / nor ladde with carnal affectes or
vanities: but some men keeping the senses in their propre office or duty /
also keeping Will (as I moughte use thy words) within the precinct prescribed
to her by understanding: need not so sharp a monytion, as thou haste spoken
of, where adversity / syckenes, venomous matter / or bestes do as sone and
grievously anoy or hurt those good men / as them that be vicious: how dareste
thou affirm them to be good? or declare them to be a part of providence,
whereby the goodness of god is expressed? These things considered me thinks
Plato, thy conclusion (as I said) is yet insufficient.


PLA. In deed Aristippus it seems, that thou haste diligently herd me: but I
fear me, that for the old controversies between us thou markest more what I
say, to take me with some l^cke / than to bear away and observe any thing
that may profit the to know, in as much as my conclusion / which thou
reprouest is not so insufficie^t as thou do suppose. Thou know that
Scammony given where need is, and in a due and convenient proportion, heals
them which be vexed with melancoly, but excedyng his measure / or taken where
that humor does not abound / in the stead of health brings mortal
sycknesse almooste incurable. The same does Thapsia, Agaricus, and diverse
other / which do pourge the body of superfluous humors. The fruits named
Millones and Cocombres aswageth the inordinate heat that procedethe of colere:
yet in them which either by nature or occasion have their belyes cold / they
procure intolerable torments or frettinges. Mandragora / and the iuise of
Popie, called Opium, to them which by some innaturall cause be let from
sleep / do profit much, if they be measurably taken: contrary wise if they be
taken by him that is much fleumatike, and of nature disposed to sleep very
soundly, and also the medicine excedeth his portion / he bringethe the patient
in to so deep a sleep / that he never awakethe. But all though these things,
which I have rehearsed if they have not joined unto them Opportunity and
measure, do bring either damage or death to them which receive them: yet no
man do account them for ill: but being put in the nombre of medicines,
whereby man's body is cured^ they be called good.

Is there any thing among men better or reputed more profitable than laws:
And yet was there never law made by any man so perfect, but that diverse have
thereby sustained detriment, ye some that wyllingly never offended. Also some
laws by addyng to sundry opinions, be so inuolued or wrapped in doubtis, that
they which ones were and ought to be open and plain to the people / which
lives under them, and be bound to obey them, may not without long debatynge
and great chargis / be declared sufficiently And yet who is so much displesed
with any law, but that he will affirm, that laws be good / ye and all though
it happen sometime that they be ill executed.

Like wise the venomous herbs / beasts and fysshes to that end and purpose,
which I have declarid / whereunto they be ordeinid, be good / which thou do
not deny me.

And than by the examples that I have rehearsed / my conclusion in declaration
of providence is good and sufficient. For if thou thynkest, that I should have
proved those things to have been so absolutely good / that they might not be
to any respect il, than thou lackest that natural wit, which all this while I
supposed had been in the. For I would have thought that thou had known,
that nothing is in this world so good / but that hit may bring damage to
some man. Finally that under the region of the Moon is nothing so good that it
is not mixed with some ill / but remaynyng in their propre degrees of order /
whereof I have spoken, one is better than an other, and be never ill but by
disordre: and there also one is wars tha^ an other, by the degrees, I do mean
the causes wherefore they were ordained. As by example to declare it more
plainly: do thou remember Aristippus, when we were speaking of order and
disorder, that thou saidest, that some beastis were ordained for manne to ^ate,
some to cladde him with, some to tylle his land, other to ride on, likewise
herbs / fruits, and trees / some to serve for nouryshyng, diverse for medicine
/ and other to build with?


ARI. Ye I do remember that well.


PLA. Now mark well Arist. The Ox, which tilleth the land, bears befe /
wherewith man is noryshed / and his hyde serves to make shoen to save men's
feet from cold and other anoyance. The sheep bears wolle to cladde with the
body of man commodiously. And his flesh is good to be eaten / and where he
lackethe puissaunce to draw the ploughe or the wayne / instead thereof he
goinge and lyinge on the land with his ordure and pysse / compasses the
ground, and makes it fertile and able to bear ple^tie of corn. Wherefore these
two be set in one degree in the line of order. The horse and all other
beasts / which be like to that kind, will draw or carye. And also their
hydes will serve to that purpose / that the ox hyde does. But their flesh
is not apt to be eaten of men. Wherefore they be a degree under the other: And
so consequentely all things as they be profitable more or less unto man / if
he do use them, so be they higher or lower in degree in the said line of
order.

And if an Ox or a sheep have much flesh on him and sweet, he is named
therefore a good ox or a good sheep. If a horse or a mule will bear a great
weight, and go far iournayes, he is named a good horse or a good mule. And
although a man advisedly or unadvisedly do eat more beoffe or mutton than his
stomach will bear, and therewith is sick / the ox or the sheep ought not
therefore to be called ylle. Nor if a man take away thy money or garments /
and lay it on thine own horse or mule, and carye hit away with him: this
lets not, but that thy horse or mule shall be called still good. But if thou
will ride by post on thine ox / or thy sheep, or roste thy horse or thy mule
to banquet with thy friends, to those pourposes thou canste not call any of
them good. For they be out of their propre degrees or placis in the line of
order: and therefore they be now ylle. Semblably if in to thy potage / wherewith
thou intendest to be nourished / thou do cause to be put such herbs as
do serve for violent purgations: or into thy salade chyppes of ooke, or of
mapull, or buyldeste thy house with stalks of fenell or malowes / or couerest
it with the leaves of letis or beetis: these herbs or trees so used do cease
to be good, and may to these pourposes be now called ill. So there is nothing
that is perfectly good but god only / and all other things the nerre they
approach toward his similitude / the more do they draw to that perfection /
and the higher be they in the line of order / whereof I spoke at the beginning.

This that I have now said Aristippus, if thou do well reuolue in thy mind
and consider, thou shall not find that lack in my conclusion, that thou haste
objected. But yet to satisfi the thoroughly, that in no part thou shalt think
my raison vain or unprofitable / wylt thou see / that I shall sufficiently
prove / that syckenes, adversity / matter, or bestes venomous, being in their
degrees in the line of order, be never ylle: but to that end and purpose that
they were made for, they be always good?


AR. I think, to prove that it shall be impossible.


PLA. Perchance nay. But forgette not that I protested, that the hole
providence and judgments of god be to man, while he is mortal inscrutable /
and far above his imagynation or knowledge: yet of his infinite goodness he
holds him contented / that with due reverence we shall measurably search for
them / only to the intent thereby the more to know him, honor him, and love
him: and after that manner do I now endeavor me with the help of his spirit
to prove, that his providence is excellent and most to be wondered at / in that
thing wherein thou and many other do suppose that providence lacks.


AR. If thou canste bring that well to pass, I will than say that the same
and renome of thy wisdom / that is spronge through out Greece, is well
employed. And I will affirm also, that king Dyonise, when he gave the to
Dolidis / was more liberal than wise. For he had been better to have given
to him six the best cities in Sicile, than to have departed from such a
counsayllour.


PLA. Well I trust to verify thy good opinion. But now alyttel while answer
to such questions as I will demand the.

Be not we agreed that man is of soul and body, And that the soul is
immortal and intelligible, but the body is mortal and sensible?


ARISTIPPVS. Yes, no doubt thereof.


PLATO. We be also accorded, that all other things in this world were made
chiefly for manne.


ARI. Ye so god help me.


PLA. And I trow thou wylt not deny, that god is all goodness, and that he
made man unto his own image and similitude.


ARI. No verily.


PLA. If god made any thing to the intent that it should be ylle unto man,
which is his propre similitude, it should than seem that there should be some
malice in god / which were not only untrue / but also to affirm horrible and
unlawful. Wherefore the contrary must needs be true, that god made every thing
to the intent that it should be good unto man: But how that may appear in such
things as thou haste rehearsed, which seem to be ylle / thereon restethe our
question. Now take heed Aristippus. The soul of man being immortal never
dies or cesseth to be / but after that it is joined with the body / the body
living / hit lives also / showing thereby her operations. And when life
departith from the body, the soul also departith immediately notwithstanding
she afterward lives. Than if when she was joined to the body / she retained
the sencis and affectes in due obedience, not sufferynge them to excede their
duty or offices, And have until the separation of her from the body,
ensued always the counsel of Understanding and Rayson, and so have continued
in the form of a man, Surely after her departing from the body, according
as by her operation the body abounded in virtues so is she than immediately
with god, whose similitude she so well has kept, and there is promoted to joy
and pleasure perpetualle more or less after her merits.

And that pleasure being intellectual / shall more excede the dilectations of
the body, which only be sensual / than perfect health does excede
syckenes, or the greattest reioysinge of the mind that manne might possible
have of a sensual motion, might surmount the grettest discomforte or
henynesse. God desyringe that all souls moughte come to this joy / to warn
them of their office whom he sees neelygent, he sufferith the body, wherewith
they be joined (as I said before) to be touched with sondrye aflictions, to
the intent that they perceyuinge how unable they be, the lechor to execute
his bestly pleasure in the fever dowble tertian or ^^thyke, the proud man to
advance him self above other, being infected with lepry, or the lowsy sycknes
callid phthuta / is, or stungen with the little and feeble scorpion / he that is
cruel and fierce how little he may prevail again the colike passion the
stone or the gout / or the falsehode of the adder / which as soon as he has
stunge the man, he glideth forthwith in to the hedge, and eskapith the fury of
him, which being hurt is not able to follow him: The couaytouse merchant with
his ship curtith the sees, and with his sayies and steerne presumes to enforce
the wyndes to bring him in to those costs from whens he may bring home that
my serable trafike / whereon he will consume al his study and wit, and at the
last leave it to be consumed by other while he is in the mids of his iornay
under all his sails the wind blowynge a good koole, and having therewith a
fair water, comes the fyshe called Remora / lyttel more than a gurnard / and
kleuing fast to the kele of the ship makith her tarry, and holds her still
without me^ing until some time risyth a pyrry and breaks all the tackelinge,
so that the merchant is feign if he will save his life / to flee away in a boat, and return home again without money or marchaundyse. Among those
things Adversity, or as it is more commonly called, froward or contrarious
fortune, countreuayleth as much as all this, whereof we have spoken, and
proceeds to the same effect.


AR. But what say thou, if he that is sick / hurt with venym / or vexed
with fortune / do in nothing reform his living / but in his peynes or trouble
do blaspheme god and when they be withdrawn from him he is as ylle / or
perchance wars than he was before, shall we than suppose that thing to be
good or profitable, whereby he not only is not reformed, but also made w^rs
than he was erste?


PLA. I (...) aylle that thou will demand any such question. I pray the is
the art of a surgion good and profitable or ylle and unprofitable? Answer me
thereto.


AR. Good and profitable, who will deny it?


PL. And he which in that art is counnynge and perfect, is to that respect
good: and therefore is called a good surgion.


AR. Ye that is true.


PL. Than thou do admit, that a surgion is good, and that his art is good
and profitable. But is his art declared by any thing else but by his
medicines, or instruments wherewith he does cut / perse, or cantherize / as
necessity of the wound or soore does require?


AR. Yes / there requires also / that he know the nature and cause of the
wound or soore / and that he can well order his playsters and oyntementes, and
also use handsomely the said instruments.


PLA. O Aristippus thou art now importunate / and would put me to more
business than needs, sins I rehearsed that surgion, which in his art is
counnynge and perfect, what meueth the to put to this addition / which is
vain and superfluous? as if that in him which is profect / might any thing
lack, or that in perfect, thou would set degrees of comparison. But admit
for the case that our surgion have all thing that in that art may be
required, and also that he be thy natural father, which above all other and
with great affection loves the, suppose also now for this time that in
euery^he of thyn eyes grew a fistula, whereby thou art in icoperdie to lose
thy sight, and also to have thy visage thereby defourmed. If thy father
desiring to have the healed, and knowing (as thou spakeste) the nature and
cause of the said fistula, would prepare such remedies as were most
expediente to cure the: would thou refuse him for thy good father, and
account him thyn enmy?


AR. Nay I trow, than were it alms to hang me.


PL. That is heartily spoken Aristippus I make god a vow: therefore I commend
the. Than wylt thou love him better than thou dyddest before?


AR. So ought I. For to that natural benefit, that I received of him by my
generation, he adds to much humanity and kyndenes in helping that I lose
not my sight, whereby I should be deprived from all worldly comfort / and be
also deformed in my visage / which blemysshe should cause me^ that were
honorable to adhorre my presence.


PL. Thou speak raisonably. And therefore see that thou change not herafter
this good opinion. Now thy father does perceive by his cou^nyng / that this
disease requirith sharp medicines as those which be mordicatife or biting,
abstersife or cleansing / or perchance cantherization / that is to say, that
the place corrupted be skorched with a hot bournynge iron: which if thou
will patiently suffer / and use ever after such order in diet as thy father
appoyntethe the / thou shalt always have thy sight sound, and thy visage
sause and vndeformed, which shall be not to thy self only / but also to thy
father and surgion that cures the, greatte joy and comfort. But contrary
wise when thou felest the medicine warke sharply, freting and gnawynge in the
flesh that is putrified / or else art touched with the fire which is in the
hot glowyng iron, wherewith he does cantherize the soore: If than thou do
strive again thy surgion and father / that goth about to hele the / murmuryng
against him with all disobedience and words of villainy, dispising his
humanity and kyndenes, and re^usynge to be cured by the said remedies, either
thou rubbest thine eyes and remeuest the medicine from the soore into all the
sight of thine eyes, or else strugglynge contemptuously again the wholesome hand
of thy father / do wylfullye thraste the bournynge iron into thyn eyes: than
what maruaylle is it, if that which thy father ordained to cure the, now by
thine impacience and disobedience, turn to thy damage: that is to say as
well put clean out thy sight / as also deforme thy visage for ever? which
thing hapnynge, may thou Aristippus by any rayson / blame therefore thy
surgion?


AR. Nay in good faith to say truly.


PL. What the medicine or instrument which by thyn impacience and folly thou
dyddest convert from the place where they should have wrought for thy health /
and dyddest thraste them into thyn cien / whereby insued to the more grefe and
peril / shall we judge the medicine or instrumente therefore to be ylle? And here
remember well Aristippus the cause final, and the degree and place in the line
of order which I have before sufficiently declarid.


ARI. In good faith I will not dissemble, I see nothing here / that ought to
be callid ill, but I my self / if I were in the case that thou have now
purposid.


PLA. If thou hold the there, we shall soon be agreed. Also if now thou
being blind / and the fistula growing every day gretter and greatter, the
deformite of thy visage more and more / thou not only refusest to receive any
medicine, but also do murmr against thy good father cursynge, him for his
medicine gyuyng, which through thyn own folly and wilfullnes is converted from
remedy unto thy damage. If than thy father beholdynge the to be incurable, and
also maliciouse toward him without hope of amendmente did exclude the out of
his company, refusing the for his son, supposist thou that for this he
should be callid an ill father or surgeon?


AR. No in good faith: saying that every thing that he does is with good
Justice and raison.


PL. But he is stille good as he was before / and also that which he does now
for the due punishing of a dissobedient and unnatural son, is as well good, as
that which he did before / to the intent to cure him of his malady / if he
would have been patient and suffer those medicines which were prepared to hele
him.


A. Ye in good faith.


PLA. Well said Aristippus. Now wylt thou see what I mean hereby? Is any so
proprely thy father as god which is the first / the chief / and immediate
cause of thy generation? or is any surgeon so counnynge as he, which sees
more plainly the original motion and cause of every disese of the soul, that
is to say of vicious affectes, than any man can see the outeward sore or skurfe
of the fistula? And more perfectely knows the best remedy therefore / than
any surgion knows how to heal a small whelke in a chyldes fyngre.


AR. No surely in that thou say truly.


P. Now sens ones thou have granted to me / that vice is ill, because it is
contrary to virtue / which thou affyrmiddest to be good^ suppose vice to be
the sycknes of the soul as it is in deed: and for as much as it brings in
ignorance / which is ennemie to rayson and knowledge / who be as the eyes of
the soul, and if it grow much it deformeth the soul and puts clean away
understanding / which is the visage, wherein (as I said) is the similitude of
god / therefore resemble it unto the fistula. Which foul and dangerous
disease God as a loving father and good surgion espyinge in the / and desyryng
to heal the thereof, does his cure more spedyly and quyckely / he uses sharp
medicines / touching the with sickness (wherein I reckon as well diseases
growyng in the body, as also hurt or griefs by outward occasion or chance)
or with Adversity, by wrongefull imprisonment / death of assured friends,
towardly children, or of a wife, constant and pacient, loss of thy princis
favor, or great authority / possessions / or moveable richesse, or other like
temporal benefit. If thou sufferynge this patiently do thankefully receive
thy fathers kyndnes and industry in curing of the / and exactly observe the
diete, whereto he does appoint the: that is to say do live in the custom of
virtue, eschuynge vicious communication, ill counsel, and flatery / which be
the unwholesome and quaysy metes of the soul, whereby is engendered the venomous
humor of ylle opinion, whereof comes vice / which I have resembled unto the
fistula: thou shall be cured and have the sight and visage of thy soul
preserved pure and clean: Contrary wise if thou mourmour or grudge at the
said remedies / estemyng the^ as grefes and no medicines, blaming or
repriuynge god as vndiserete or cruelle in the ministration of them and
stryuing there against / with the powar of thy sencis, using them dishonestly
in some pleasure voluptuouse / thou tournest them from the sore / whereon they
should warke, and with them do thou put out rayson and knowledge, the eyes
of the soul: And than for thy folysshenesse, impacience, and blasphemye / God
sufferinge thy soul to be both blind with Ignorance, and defourmed with
vice, sens thou haste utterly lost his glorious symylitude, he will from
thens forth abiecte the, and for thine unkindness commytte the to
perpetualle prisone / there to be punysshed in derkenes, where thy foul
defourmed visage shall never be seen / to the reproach of him, unto whose
similitude thou were created. Now Aristipp. sens thou did approve that
which was done by the carnal father and surgeon to be good, because he did it
with Justice and raison / what say thou to that which god ordayneth and does
who so far excels in those two qualities: that the justice executed among
me^ that be mortal / in comparison of his Justice / is wrong: and that which
we take for raison, in regard of his wisdom is folishnes and fa^tasi, not
because it is not justice and reso^ that we have: but because that which is in
god is ever one and perfect / without any division or mixture?


A. In good faith Plato, I wot not well what to say to the. Finally I am
compelled by that argument that thou haste made, to agree / that such things
which before seemed to me to be ill, be to that respect which thou have
reher^ed / good and profitable: that is to say / in the refourmyng of ma^s
soul where it is curable / and in the declaration of the Justice of god, where
man is incurable. But what say thou to that which h^u have so lyghtely
passed over? I mean where the said diseases and afflixions happens to him,
which is allredy good / and needs not so sharp reformation?


PL. Why Aristippus, supposest thou that ever any manne was so good / that in
him were never vicious affection? Perdic our may ^ier Socrates, when he was
young, and wroughte in a Masons shop with his ^ather, was not so pure from
affectes as he was after that he had been the herer of Anaxagoras: by whose
doctrine, and also being continually vexed with poverty / sundry reproaches,
and sometime stripes of malicious and quarellyng persons: Also with the
continual and never cessing brauling and chiding of his most cursed wife
Xanthippa which he callid his domestical exercise / he by the gentle virtue
of patience became a good man as he was called and taken. But to the intent
that thy mind may be satysfied, Let us now admit / that men which be good
/ or at the left have such abundance of virtue, and so lyttel do inclyne to
vicious affectes / that hit requires not, that they be purged with such
sharp afflixions, as we have spoken of. How say thou? supposist thou that
unto them the said afflixions be ylle and unprofitable?


AR. Ye verily. And also if it were leful to speak it / me seems that therein,
god dealith not with all men indifferently.


PL. Surely Aristippus that is not only unlawful to speak, but also to think
it, hit is greatte presumption and folly. And that shall I well prove if thou
will attentifely here me.


AR. Speak on hardily.


PL. In all the train of our communication hitherto, sens we began to speak
of providence, it has always appeared, that god is father to man by creation,
and loves man above all his creatures: But what say thou / Is there any
more token of love than when the father with all his study and power endeuoreth
him self to bring his son to great honor which if he may bring to good pass
/ there is nothing may cause him so much to rejoice?


AR. Suerey nothing.


PL. And to the intent that his son may be demed of all men worthy to be
promotid to honor he accustometh him to travail either in learning and
study, or else in corporal exercise, the one to make him wise / the other to
make him strong and valiant in body / whereby he may declare him self
worthy to have promotion. And wise fathers the better that they love their
sons / the more diligent be they, And as I mowghte say the more importune in
keeping them in continual exercise, thynkyng that thereby the strength and
delyuernesse of the body increacith / and if hit be in study of mind / wit is
augme^ted: like as contrary wise by sluggardy and idelnes the said actiuite is
apalled and the wits consumed: whereby men be made unapt for the life which
is actife or politic.


AR. I suppose that hitherto thou haste said truly.


PL. If the son be of gentill disposition / and like to his father /
perceyuinge his fathers honest desire and purpose / and therewith being inflamed
with desire of glory / he will not only content him with labor, but also if
his father do bring him unto any great tournament or wrastlynge, he will
prepare him self to refuse no man, which will offer to assail him. And when
he beholdith one come again him, which is of such puissance / that in his
sight has vaynquished or over thrown men mo than a hundred / all though
nature somewhat touchethe him with fear, yet remembrynge that his father
beholds him, who has so tawght him and given him comfort that he shall not
be vaynquished except he will / and that his heart fail him, considering
also the price of the bataile or wrastlinge, which is honor less or more
after the estimation of his prowess in vanquyshynge the most strong and
daungerouse champions, will he not troweste thou abide sternely his adversary /
and receive his assaults ioyousely / without any shrinkynge? And awayte when
his adversaries strength does decrese / or his breath failith that he than
inforsynge his might ioininge thereunto polycie may overthrow him. And so with
much gladenesse and commendation of all the beholdars / of whom some
perauenture at the beginning judged him foolehardy, he shall receive the
honor that he has deseruid: to his own comfort and to the incredible joy
of his good father / who above all things wisshed to see this conclusion?


AR. This accords well / and standithe with good rayson.


P. Now has he that thing / wherefore his father brought him up so
delygently. And the which he him self being like to his father, of his
natural inclynation desired.


AR. Ye verelye.


PL. Had he it given to him for any thing else but by cause he approved him
self to be valiant and hardye / whereof honor was the price and reward?


AR. No I suppose.


PL. Wherewith did he approve him self in such wise to have won that
ho^oure? By any other thing than by overthrowing or van quishinge his
puissaunte adversary?


AR. No truly.


PL. Than it seems that without a puisant aduersarye^ his hardynes and
prowess could never have been proved?


AR. No, that well appears.


PL. And without prose^ hardynes or strength is a voice vayn and of none effect
or profit?


AR. That is very true.


PL. For as much as prose is the operation / whereby the said qualities,
hardynes and strength be expressed / is it not so?


AR. Yes verily.


PL. Yet am I glad, that thou art so raisonable: It may perchance turn the
to some commodity. But Aristippus, as we remembered while ere, in those
exercises which be commonly called games / be diverse prices one more than an
other, and they be given to men according to the strength that they have
employed, which is iuged by the comparison of their strength whom they have
excelled: to some the first game or price / to an other the second / and so
in order.


ARI. And that is but rayson.


PL. And do thou not think these exercises to be good and profitable /
whereby thou shalt win a reward, and also worship, with comfort also
unto thy father, and increase of his love and favor toward the?


AR. Yes in good faith.


PLA. And also thou would love him better tha^ ever thou dyddeste, If often
times he brought the to that / whereby thou should receive such profit and
worship?


ARI. Ye I were bound so to do.


PLA. Aristippus wotest thou where we be now?


ARI. What is that Plato?


PLA. We be now at that conclusion, the which thou haste so long gaped and
looked for. That is to say? It shall plainly appiere unto the / that the sundry
afflixions that do happen to good men, come not without providence / and the
goodness of god / ne be ylle and unprofitable to them that do patiently suffer
them. Therefore I pray the Aristippus, while I declare to the patience / do thou
patiently here me, And I shall sooner than thou wenest / set out to thine eye
/ that we two have sought for: I mean that knowledge wherein wysedom is hid. And
than like as the mynar / which after he has found the place where the vain
of gold lies / labourethe busyly to dygge up the Oore / and after cesseth not
to try it from the stones / and with contynual travail to find out the pure
gold: so shalt thou ones having the said knowledge, never cesse to trauaylle
in the exercise of thy life, to find out wisdom.


AR. I am very well content and desirous to here / how thou will bring to
pass that meruaylous conclusion.


PLA. Thou remembreste Aristippus, that we were agreed long agone / that for
as much as God, is perfectely good, and the fountain from whense all goodness
proceeds: All that is ylle is contrary and enemy to god?


AR. Ye, I am not so short witted but that I remember all that thou have
spoken, if thou in this wise do eftesones rehearse it.


PL. That is well said. And thou have not denied / but that he is the first
mouer, and without him nothing is moved / or done.


AR. No I will not deny it.


PL. Sens good and ill can not proceed from one fountayn, god never moves to
ylle, nor does any thing that is ylle: what say thou thereto?


AR. I must needs grant that, except I will repugne unto raison.


PL. We were also agreed, that god created the serpent, the scorpion, the
venomous fysshes and herbs, as well as them / which were commodiouse and
wholesome: and that he made all thing for man, whom he loved above all his
creatures?


ARI. Ye that is truth.


PLA. Also nothing happens without him which is the first and principal
mouer, either health or sickness, prosperity or adversity / riches or poverty
/ and he bears the kais of life and death, for he that made and did put the
soul in to the body, has the power to pluck it out: supposist thou that any
other has with him equal authority?


AR. No. I grauntid long agone, that as he is one in beginning / so is he
ever one in governance / and may suffer no ptere or like in equalite.


PLA. That is remembered very well of the Arystippus. Now by that we two have
gatherid / it appears (and if thou look well) that nothing is made ill of
god. And tha^ need we no further argument, But s^ns god made al things for
man, whom he loves / what exterior thing so ever happens to any good man,
it is good. And therefore sickness, adversity, and death if they happen to a
good man be good.

And therefore hit should suffice to a good man if he suffer any of the said
afflixions / to think and say to him self: God which sent to me this, is
all good, and has in him none ill / nor any ill proceeds of him, and I am one
of the nombre of those creatures, whom he loves best: wherefore this that he
has sent me / is good and not ylle, sens hit is necessary that I be therewith
contentid / and take heed that with mine opinion I make not that ill which is
good.

But although this were sufficient to satisfye a good man, who would not labor
to seek any further in the providence of god: yet to the Aristippus who being
long nosyllyd in wordly pleasures, wilt not admit that any thing, which is
thereunto contrari, may be expedient or necessary unto a man that is virtuous /
and lacks such vice / which requires sharp admonition, and therefore thou
requirest a more ample and large declaration: I will set out a more plain
proof in applieng my raysons to the examples and similitudes / which I have
already induced.

God who made manne unto his image, and louethe him with more fervent affection
than any carnal father loves his child, brings us up in the exercise of
the commune imbecilitie or feblenesse of our nature, as hunger / thirst /
cold, werynes after labor / annoyaunce, displeasures / which do happen in
the society or lyuinge of men together, diseases wherein is no ieoperdie / and
such other littell incommodities / incident to mortality: of all the which no
man may be quite, declaring unto us by Understanding / that in this life we
must of necessity travail and suffer / therewith giving us comfort / that who
so ever by this exercise waxes strong and hardy, hereafter being brought
where he shall prove his strength against puissaunte and mighty adversaries /
that is to say anguisshe and peine / sharp and perillouse sickness / cruel
adversity in any thing that fortune seems to rule / loss of children /
friends / or favor of princis / prisonment / or exile / and like other
tourmentes / and vexations of body and mind: if he valiantli do resist and
with fortitude which is the strength of the mind, do subdue and vanquisshe
those adversaries, he shall have the reward that belongs to good men / which
no time can consume, no powar can minisshe / none evil can deface. And to
whette the courage of man to desire this e^terprise / god gives to him this
comfort, that these things which shall so sharply assail him, be ordaynedde
only to prove his strength, and that they be inferiors unto him, if he put
out his strength to the vttermoste / sens god which louith him above all his
creatures / has ordained nothing to the intent to distroy him, but to his
benefyte, if he do employe his power and will thereunto, according as he has
receyuid them.

Now if the soul have in the body entire domynion and rule, And that man be
in his right fascion (as I said long ago) that is to say like to his father:
of his noble nature he desyrithe to win that in comparable price, which is
promised to them that shall be so happy to get the victory, wherefore in this
wise he armith thereto his courage / First he consydereth that his father is
good, and that he most tenderly louethe him. Also that he brought him not up
from the first time that he lived, in those littell exercises of natural
infirmity in vain or without any purpose. But to the intent that thereby he
shall feel (as it were) the sent of more greuouse afflictions, whereof they be
but the shadows, and by a little labor and sufferaunce / he shall prepare
him self, to sustain and contempne a more greater travail and patience. He
reuoluith also in his mind, that every man which in his heart desires honor,
couayteth some honest occupaion or labor, and is prompt and always forward to
do his office or duty in every peril or daungier. For / to what wise and
dylygente man is it not a peine to be idle? And yet where idelnes is not, needs
must be labor. And where an adversary lacks, prowess lies hid and
unknown. What a man may or may not patience declares. The fathers bedeth
their children to apply them ernestly to study or labor / and will not let
them be idle although it be holy day, and do constrayne them to sweat and
often times to weep.

Where the mothers would set the^ on their lappes, and keep them at home all
the day in the shadow for burning their white. God has toward good men and
women the mind of a father and best does love them: and therefore he vexith
the^ with sundry busynes, griefs, and damages, that they may thereby gather a
substa^cial strength, sins they which be fra^kid up in Idelnes do becum unlusty
and with their own burdon be shortly suffocat. It is to men no little pleasure
to be hold a young man that with a good courage receiver (...) on his spear a
wild bore or a great heart coming upon him: or without fear abides with
his swor^^ in his hand the fyerce lion, whic^^ comes to assail him. But
the^^ are not the things where to go^ daynethe to turn ones his lok^, being
but tryfles and only pleasures of man's vanity and litenes. For the sight
which is worthy to have god the beholder thereof / is to se the creature, which
he louith best to try his strength with fortune or anguishe, if he be
chalengid / for thereby strength which is a virtue and part of that divine
portion, whereby man is like unto god, is prouid, the other strength as it is of
the body, so is hit as the body is, commune with bestes: and as it is more
fra^^ and uncertain than the self body, in like wise the price or reward
that it deseruith or rather lokith for, is uncertain and also inconstant.

But look to the other fortitude or strength, which is a pacient resiste^ce
of such things, which opinion does set forth, with a terrible visage of
damage or grefe. It thou be sick, the humors whereof thy body is made do but
their nature / col^r contendeth with fleume / bloudde with melancoly: the one
couaiteth to vanquysshe the other: that which is hot refuses to be cold,
moisture and drowthe will not abide in one place, by this variaunce they haste
them to their dissolution, If this contention be curable, hope makes hit
tolerable. And if the warste fall, death shall dissolve it / for it is not
for aye or perpetual.

Adversity is not so grievous, because it is out of the body, and nothing
compels us to suffer but our own wylles. For if we were content with that
which only our nature has given us, we should not be constrained to know
what that word Adversity mente, But sens we contempne her as nedy and
miserable / and sue to come in to the service of fortune / whose nature is to
be always mutable and ever inconstant, nor gives any thing, but lendethe hit
only. If we receive any thing of her mocky she hand what shall it grieve us to
pay that again which we have borrowed? why should we either be ungentle
creditours / or be angrye that we can not turn the nature of her that will
not obey or follow any man's commandment or counsaylle / but may be subdued
with patience, where she can never be vanquysshed with raison? Moreover god is
content that we shall excelle him in that that he may not suffer ylle, and we
may by sufferaunce subdue hit. For he is in more estimation that has ouercom
a puisaunt and valiant enemy, than he which has none enemy at all. Thou
receyueste of thy father this comfort, that no man lives so poorly in the
world as he came into hit. And he has need of a little that measures
abundance by natures necessity / and not by superfluity of ambicious desire.
Grefe shall dissolve or else be dissolved. Fortune has not so sharp a weapon
that it may byte on the soul. And whom she lengest supporteth and with most
abundance of all thing, them for a general rule god little favors: sens
there is no reward, where lacks merit. Contrariwise the end of trauaylle
is ease: And the father which beholds his son labor mightily / rejoices
thereat, and prepares that after his labor he may live pleasantly. Who,
knowing a great hepe of gold to be hid on the top of a rough hylle /
would not crepe up through thorns and brembles to fetch it? and although
his visage and handis were scratched, and his body and legs grievously
prycked, yet would he not cesse until he came to the top. And if any man
which beheld him thus trauayllynge, would call him wretched and foolysshe: he
saying nothing, would think how happy and welthy he shall be, when he has
opteined that thing / wherefore he laboreth, And does laughe at the ignorance
or folly of them / which for a pain that dureth not long, will for bear to
goo with him and to be partners of that, whereby they shall ever after be welthy.

Gold is a coruptible matter, and shall ones be consumed, but that tresure,
wherefore man's soul ought to labor / may never be wasted / or in any
quality or quantite appayred or minysshed: that is to say, it shall ever be
like good and like much. Wherefore what pain so ever be taken about the
getting thereof, it is not grievous, having respect to the gain. Nor he that
trauayleth therefore may be named miserable or wretched: sens Miserye is the
priuacion or lack of all manner of comfort. For in hope of victory if thou
faylle not thy self, comfort is ready, if thou do not refuse it. In so
much as nothing is miserable, but if thou do so think it. For all Fortune
is good to him that constantly suffers. And who was ever so fortunate, that
when he was subdued with impacience / did not desire to change his astate?
Suffiseth it not to the that he that vanquyssheth is demed honorable, and he
that is recreant is wretched and miserable? How shall it be known / on what
part thou standist without an experience? If thou have always good will,
strength never fails the: but if by the puisanee of fortune thou be set on
thy knee / have a good heart, for god stands at thyn elbow / and if thou
think on him, he will set the up and make thy strength double as much as
it was. Wylt thou learn one good point of defense, which may perchance do the
ease agein some dangerous assaults?

Fortune has taken from the that, which she had lent to the. Reuolue than
in in thy mind, that either those things were not good in deed as they were
supposed to be / or else man is in better astate tha^ god is him self, for them
/ which we have, god uses not, as carnal dilectation, pleasant and deintie
meatis / orient iewelles / or great treasure of money / these perteyne not to
god. Than is it to be thought that either god lackith those things / that be
good / and tha^ lackith in him beatitude or perfection of joy: or else hit is a
(...) argument that those things (...) not good, that god will not use, (...)
is contented to lack. Finally (...) be very goods that be within (...) given
by raison. For they be sure (...) during / nor can not decay or (...)she for
any occasion. They that (...) without us / lent only by fortune (...) be good
by opinion only / And ^^ough they participate their name (...) the other / yet
is there not (...) them the propretie or nature of (...)odnes / for they be not
durable: and (...) they be oftentimes the occasion (...) evil: Wherefore they
be for the (...)ore part with ylle men as most (...) for their nature. And
few good (...) have them, or they do continue (...) a little time with them /
by the just ordinance of god lest the mo (...) using of them should bring
di(...)tation into the senses, whereby they might be provoked to rebel. And
Understanding / which is occupied in co^templation of the divine majesty
might be suddenly expelled, And the soul lacking counsel should give place
to carnal affections and appetites. Thou reme^brest Theognides verses.

God gives to yffe men good fortune and substance.
Which be not the better to them self nor their friend:
There is ay lack, where is inconstance.
But honor of virtue does endure without end.
Finally there is no gretter comfort to him that is good, than to be seen in
the company of good men. If thou sekeste for a good carpenter or a good
Smythe, as thou goeste through the city, thou harkneste where is most hewyng
or betynge with hamers, and there thou go in and supposest to find him,
that thou lokest for. Semblably if thou wylt have a good man, go look him out,
where thou herist that sharp sicnes raineth / or where injustice governs /
will rules, great power oppresses: there shalt thou find him that thy
heart desires. Thou may well account him for a great fool, that to live
double his natural life / would not abide to be ones or twice launced in the
most tender part of his body / or would not beg his bread for one twelve
month to be a king afterward during his life. Stand boldly again sickness
and fortune, the one is natural the other is casualle / In the first is
necessity / which will thou or no, thou must suffer: If thou do hit
wyllyngely, thou knoweste the price / If thou addest to anger / thou doubleste
thy pain. In the second is no necessity, for thou moughteste always refuse
hit, as well when it was prosperous, knowing it to be unstable / and
burdaynous / as also when hit is adverse or contrarious, considering that
hit was never ^oo much thine own / that thou haddeste any right to reteyne
hit: sens it was ordained for other as well as for the. And Fortune which is
the disposer thereof / never made bargayne with the / that thou shuldeste
stylle keep hit: And if she did / bring forth thy records. She lackethe
not witnesses innumerable to prove that she has been ever inconstant. Defye
her malice: for when she has done her warste, yet shalt thou have more
than thou broughteste with the. And that which abounds / shall comme of
thine industrye, and not of her false liberality. And if thou do boldlye
resyste her, thou shalt have that aduauncemente and richesse given the of god,
wherein she shall have no powar or authorytie, which shall be such as the
hundred thousand part thereof, shall sourmount all that ever she gave sens she
was first called Fortune.

Now how say thou Aristippus / be those things / which thou dyddest
suppose to be annoyances and incommodities, iniustely sent unto good men? or
having respect to order and the cause final, that is to say to the end
whereunto they were ordained, which I have declared / be they unto them
necessary and most expedient?


AR. Now in good faith thou have brought me to that point, that I wot not what
to say to the.


PL. But yet keep thy promise / and tell to me what thou thynkist in this
matter.


AR. Me seems by thy raison / that pain and adversity be as expedient to
them / which be good, as labor and busynes are to them which be industrious.


PLA. And wherefore? Go to Aristippus, be not asshamed to confess the truth /
though it be contrary to thy profession.


AR. In deed thou haste almost made me change mine old opinion. But sens
thou haste gotten me into such a strayte, that I can not sterte from that I
have promised: I will now confess / that the cause why the said afflixions
be expedient for good men, is for as much as thereby they be not only
preserved still in their right image or figure: but also for their constaunce
in trauaylle, they shall receive that inestimable reward, which thou saydest
was ordained for good men.


PLA. Ah good Aristip. Now I perceive that the seeds which Socrates had sown
in thy mind, do begin now to spring with this little waterynge: whereunto if
thou wylt add to thy diligence in pluckynge up the weedis of wanton affections
/ as soon as they begin to appear in thy mind: thou shalt shortly perceive
the fruits of wysedom (for the which we do seek) spryng abundantly, with whose
most dilectable ^ruition thou shalt never be saciate.

But now sens we have treated of sundry matters / sith we first entered into
communication, lest hereafter thou may repute me for one of them which do
speak of many things and conclude upon none, and so account me but for a
babbler: Let us examine if our matter have hitherto hanged well together / or
if there have been any vain digression / which served nothing to the purpose
that we first intended: or what thing lacks now, which may make to our
communication a sufficient end or conclusion. And I pray the think not the
time tedious / that is saved from ydelnes, and we have now little more than
two miles to ride. And I trust so to moderate my self / that we shall at one
time arryue both at the city, and at the conclusion of our matter that we
have pourposed.


ARI. Shall I tell the truth Plato, her is less grief to me to abide the
residuall though thou woldeste talk two days continually / than hit was at
the beginning to abide herynge one hour / such swetenes I feel now in thy
raisonyng. Therefore do what thou wylt / for I have both my neares and my mind
wide open to receive all that thou speak.


PLA. I am glad thereof. Therefore prepare now thy memory ready / or if thou
haste any thing forgotten, call it again with thy remembrance.


ARIST. I will do as thou byddest me, therefore say on Plato and spare not.


THE. V. DIALOGVE.
PLATO. THe first enter into our disputation Aristippus, (if I be not
forgetful and unlike to that I was wont to be) was that thou beheldest me in
this pore astate and apparaylle, the occasion whereof I declared to the in the
form of a story: which although it seemed to the to be more than in the
answer of a Philosopher was expediente / which should use in few words
much matter and quycke to the purpose: yet examinynge diligently every thing
therein included, it shall well appear unto the / that nothing thereof might have been omitted, the words which we spoke before / with my profession being well
ponderid.


AR. Me thinkith thou say truly, now that I have consyderid every thing
depely.


PL. But yet Aristippus as I do consider, me seems to that purpose that we
go about, the argument which I have made lacks yet some what to make her
perfect.


AR. Trowist thou so? In good faith I do not perceive her, for as me semith
thou haste touchid every thing hansomely.


PL. I am glad that it does so well please the. But Aristipp. thou do
remember that we were both agreed that wisdom is knowledge?


AR. Ye that is truth, and so have I herd it always defyned.


PL. But se whyther that knowledge only makes one to be callid a wise man. Is
not wisdom good? What say thou thereto?


AR. Why thynkest thou that I am such a fool that I will deny it?


PL. No so I trow. Now admytte that a man knew all that we have hitherto
talked of, concerning the goodness and providence of god, but in deed he lereth
his sencis and affectis have the rule over his soul / and in his acts abuses
the said goodness and providence. If thou pecyuiddest him to do this / would
thou suppose him to be a good man.


AR. No verily.


PLA. Thou would say perchance that he were ill / because that his acts were
co^trari to good, but to his knowledge thou would take little regard.


AR. In good faith thou say truly.


PL. If a man named to be a tilar would tell the that thy house were ill
tyled, and that the mortar was ylle tempred, by reason that the lime was to
hot, and the holes of the tyles were made to wide for the pinnes, and that the
lathes were rent in the nayling / and thou foundest all that he said to be
true: thou would suppose him to be a good tylar. But if coming to his own
house thou should find it neclige^tly couerid by him, his tiles and lath so
set out of order, that the rayn and snow did beat into eueri place, whereby the
beams and rafters of the house were decayid and rotten / and thereby all the
house in ieoperdy to fall down every hour: would thou call him than a good
tylar or no?


AR. Nay in good faith, I would call him but a prater.


PL. Because that where he ought most, he did not practice his cu^nyng, which
he had often aua^ted.


AR. Ye in good faith.


PL. And that were but raison. Tha^ ^ seems that knowledge is indifferent to
good and to ill: but although goodness being in knowledge / makes that knowledge
to be good, yet he which has that goodness is never the more ^ good ma^^
except by the exercise of the same goodness the thing that is good apperith in
his act. For that is manifest, and declares what the man is / knowledge is
secret and brings forth no fruit but by operation. And thou art agreed,
that wisdom is good. Wherefore no more tha^ knowledge of goodness makes one
to be named a good man, No more does knowledge of wysedom only cause any
person to be named a wise man. And that was affirmed by the in the beginning
of our communication: where it was agreed that king Dionise desired to see me,
to the intent that he moughte behold, if in my countenance, speech, or form
of living I did express that thing, wherefore he herd me commended, which
was nothing but wysdom. Than if I were a wise man / it ought to be declared by
operation, which is not in man without knowledge precedynge or going before /
whereof proceeds election, which lacks naturally in other beasts. Wherefore
all though wisdom be knowledge, yet by knowledge only none may be called a
wise man, but operation of that which is in knowledge called wisdom /
expressing the wisdom, makes the vser or exercisar thereof to be justly
named a wise man.


AR. Now on my faith Plato thou art a wonderful fellow, for by the subtle
persuasio^s brought in by induction, which form of arguing I know is most
naturalle, thou compellest me to assent always to thy raison. For now me
thinks that none may be called a wise man, except unto that knowledge, wherein
is wisdom, he joins operation: but for what purpose I pray the haste thou
brought in now this last conclusion?


PL. Art thou so dulle wytted Aristip. that all this while thou do not
perceive hit? Perdie the occasion of all our long raisoning did rise of that
/ that I assayed to prove that if I were a wise man in deed / mine answer to
king Dionyse declared me to be so, according to his expectation. And therefore
first as rayson was / I sought for wysedom And in our communication it appeared
to be in man only, and not in beasts: and that it was in knowledge of him
self and other. And that knowledge was in this wise declarid. First to know his
own preemine^ce and dignity over al other creatures, her was remembered that
he was of body and soul, whereby he was man, and was made to the image and
similitude of god, and that all other creatures were made only for him and to
his use principally. The said similitude was expressed to be in the soul as
well for that it is visible and immortal / as also in understanding, whereby
she has souerayntie and rule in the body, as god has over all universally.
Moreover that the senses / affectes / and will, be he servants and
minystres: which if she do keep in such obedience and order / as she received
them, she shall ever remain in authorytie. But if she let them to have more
liberty than perteyneth to them, that is to say / to delight in things which
be corruptible, they will than conspire and rebelle again understanding, and
drive him from the soul / and than should man be transformed from the image
of god until a brute be / being governed and ruled only by sensis. The
second part of the said knowledge was opened by the description of the
goodness and providence of god. In describynge his goodness, was declared his
powar, his perfection / and love that he has unto man / as unto his child
more tha^ natural. In setting out his providence appeared his i^scrutable
wisdom / magnificence / prudence, and policy in his wonderful order /
wherein were his creatures in their sondrye degrees higher or lower, as they
did participate in goodness more or less. In the top whereof above a^l
other, Man was set next unto god, from whom order proceeded.

Moreover by the said providence her was declared, that nothing kep^nge his
place in order / showed to man by understanding / might be ill unto him, but
always profitable, all though to the senses some things did some to be ill
and unprofitable. And last of all it was proved in a few sentences, that
aduersite was sent by god unto a good man, nor iniustly or cruelly, but for a
good (...) (...)ion and louyngely / as of a good father / which with an
in(...) parable charity desyryng to advance his son to perpetual ho(...)
and dignity / by such manner of exercise proves his virtue.

Now Aristippus reuoluyng all this in thy mind / which in a short
Epilogation I have endeavored my self to reduce unto thy remembrance, Consider
well both me and king Dionise / as we were at that time, when we were
together. Thou know well that from the time that I was.xx.years old I always
continued disciple of Socrates, until that he dyed. Who (as thou knowist) the
answer of god determined to be of al mortal men the wysest. And that which I
learned of him was wisdom: which as he ever affirmed was included in these
two words, Know thy self. And by that doctrine (as thou may remember) he
abated the presumption of diverse, which supposed them self to be excellent
wise men. Also revoked many that were dissolute and resolved into vice, and
made them to ensue virtue. And by his exaumple of living he provoked men to
contemn fortune, and to have only virtue in reverence. And also thereby, last
of all, when he was iniustely condemned to death he constantly and joyfully
sustained to have the mortal body dissolved / that the soul might be at
rest and have her immortal reward. which example given of him was the
corroboration of al his doctrine / and no less part of lerning unto his
scolers, but rather much more than his often disputatio^s or lessons. Imagine
Aristippus, that I was so studious and industrious about the said lerninge /
that I most curiously and (as I might say) superstitiously obseruid every
point of the said doctrine. And that therefore all men in Greece, and also king
Dionyse had conceived of me an opinion, that I was a wise man. And that the
same king sent for me, only to that intent (as I said at the beginning) to
see and here / whether I were according to his expectation.

Consider also on the other part, that my coming into Sicile / was narro
serve king Dionise, or to receive by him any commodity / but only to
augmente wisdom by addition of knowledge. And that he desired to have me with
him for the cause that I before have rehersid. wherefore it semith that he had
need of that, which by saying and hering of me / he trusted to know, that is
to say wisdom. For no man couayteth that thing, which he all ready has /
or whereof in his own opinion he has no need. Now I knew partly by common
report / partly by thinformatio^ of Dion / which is a just man and an honest /
that king Dionise was a Tyra^t, that is to sai common to that dignite by
usurpation and violence, and not by just succession or lefull election. Also
that he was a man of quick and subtle wit, but therewith he was wonderful
sensual, unstable, and wandering in sondrye affections. Delytinge sometime in
voluptuous pleasures, an other time in gatheryng of great tresure and richesse,
oftentimes resolved into a bestly rage and vengeable cruelty / About the
public weal of his countraye always remysse, in his own desires studious
and diligent. And all this I perceived very well or I spoke to him any thing.
Only I exercised my self with the Aristippus, Dion, and other, in such part
of Philosophy as might induce you unto the laid knowledge, whereof I have
spoken, approuynge always my doctrine with the form of living by the example
of my master Socrates: Abiding opportunity to speak, which might rise of
some special demand of king Dionise. In the mean time to such lyte
questions and problemes as he did purpose, concerning natural causes /
Rhetorike / or poetry / or of the duties and manners of private persons / I
resolved them so as he held him contented / and delyted not a little in the
form of my raysonyng.

At the last (as I have told to the at the beginning) he required me to
declare openly, the state and preeminence of a king / which ruled over other.
Thereat I rejoiced, wenyng to have found the opportunity to speak that I so
long looked for. And than forth with I considered that the sentence, which I
should pronounce, should either commend and approve me for a wise man / as I
was supposed to be: or else co^de^ne that opinion that king Dionise and other
had of me / as false and untrue, I declarynge my self unworthy to have it. I
remembered also, that like as ignorance and knowledge / or ylle and good may
never accord: no more may falsehoode and truth be joined in one. And what so
ever appears other wise than it is in deed, it is other tha^ truth: and that
which is not truth must needs be falshod. More over as truth is good / so
falshod is ill. wherefore what so ever is other tha^ truth, can not be in a wise
man, who by the consent of al me^ is good. Having still in my mind this
consideration / I described a king, not percha^ce as he would have had me / but
as truth and the trust that he had i^ me compelled me. Therefore by the said
knowledge, of the which we so long have disputed / I set out and expressed
such a man, in whom the soul had intiere and full auctorite over the sensis,
and always kept the affectis in due rule and obedience, following only the
counsel of Understanding, and by that governance was most like unto god.
This man I called a king / although he had no more in his possession tha^ had
Crates the Theban. And if that such one were by the free consent of the people
/ chosen or received to be a principal ruler and governor / governing the^ in
like manner as he does him self, tha^ is he a great king or Emperor / and to be
had in reverence and honor above any mortal man, saving to god that excellent
honor, that is due to the creator and first cause of al thing. Not only for the
preemine^ce given unto him by a co^mun consent / but also for as much as by his
knowledge / example / and authorite the people shall daily receive of him an
incomparable profit and benefit / being allured and provoked by him to set
their souls in the said astate and authorite, as they may also be kings, and
be ever like unto god. More over this king by that knowledge that he has of
him self, he also knows other men: for by the operation which proceeds of
their affectes / he perceyueth how far they be removed from their right
place in the line of order / that is to say, leauyng knowledge and rayson /
whereby they were in the highest top of the line / they descend to the places
of brute beasts by participatyng with them in sensual appetites. And than
will he endeavor him self by all good means to restore them again (if he
may) to their propre place in Order.

Also such a king stablysshed in the said knowledge, can never be deceived
by his most pernicious or mischeuous enemies / which be flatterers and
glosers, by whom princis be devoured alive / and their souls utterly consumed
with most mortal pestilence, wherewith their countries and people be also in
perile to be lost and destroyed. For as soon as either in their cou^sailes /
or in their praises and dispreises / or in their own order of living / he by
the said knowledge perceyueth and notes / to what affectis they be i^clined, he
awaytith them / and by auoydinge their company eskapeth their snares.

Finally to the intent that the excellency of such a king should be more
evident / like as I did set out while ere knowledge by Ignorance (for every
thing shows most perfectly, and after the common proverb of marchantis,
best to the sale, wha^ ^t is joined or compared with his contrary) I began to
describe a tyra^t, which in every thing, and (as I might ^ay) by rule /
repugneth and is most unlike unto the said king / whose ^oule rulith not /
but excludinge from ^^r, Knowledge and Raison, suffers ^ir self to be governed
by the sensis / and obeyeng to the folishe affectis le^^th them lead her out
of her high ^lace in the line of Order, i^to a more ^ase degree, and to be
made equal or ^nferior to beastis, and to lose the figure or image of God /
wheri^ she was ^reated: and by that transformatio^ she loses also
Understanding / so that a Tyrant, is wyllyngly taken in the said snares,
which a king does escape, and perceyuethe not that he is deceived, until he
sensibly feleth some grievous damage. And if any man expert in the said
knowledge / of a sincere love that he bears toward him, would warn him of the
said snares, and perchance show them unto him, as they be laid: yet
knowledge and Rayson the two eyes of the soul, being put out with
affections, And Understanding her chief counsailour being excluded, the man
gives no credence, but rebukyng perchance his most assured friend that
warned hym^ suffers gladly him self to be taken in the snare of Hipocrisye or
Dissimulation, where for lack of liberty he shall be constrained to abide all
dangers, which moughte hap^en unto him. And he that is such one / how poor
so ever he be, he is a Tyrant, and if he have rule over other / the more is he
unlike unto god, sens by god / man is made and preserved, by cruelty and ylle
exaumple manne both in body and soul is distroyed.

This description king Dionyse might not abide to here, but thinking the
time lost that I had spente for his profit, said that these were but
words of ydell dotardes / whereby her seems that he understood not my words /
for if he had, he would have thanked me, for declarynge that thing so
plainly unto him, which he had so long desired to here / that is to say
wysedom / which (as we two be agreed) consysteth in knowledge. Or else he
required some act of me to be ^hewed, which agreinge with my words should
approve me to be a wise man, acording to his first opinion. How say thou,
was it not for one of these causes, that he spoke those words unto me?


AR. Yes in good faith, I suppose that verily.


PLA. We were agreed while ere, that he had need of me, when he sent for me,
and therefore he desired to se me and to speak with me: but when I was with him
/ although I endeavored my self to satisfy him of that which he had need of /
and so much desired / yet if he did not understand what I said, in deed my
words were in y^le. I put case Aristippus / that one of the philosophers of
Inde or of other countrayes speaking no greek had come unto him / whom he would
have required by an interpretour to have taught him wisdom, how should he
have instructed king Dionise to have satisfied his gentyl desire?


AR. How else but by an Interpretour.


PLA. What if zeno Eleates after that he had byt of his own tongue, and spyt
it in the face of the tyrant that tourmented him, had been sent for to king
Dionise, whom he would have desired to teache him wisdom, how should zeno /
which lacked his tongue, satisfy / the request of so good a prince and so
well disposed?


AR. I know not how, except it should be by signs and tokens. Which were a
diffuse way to instruct a man in so high ^ learning.


PL. Yes / he might do it sooner by writing.


AR. Ye that is truth. But I meant the answering his demand without any tarying.


PLA. Yet than perchance, he should also have need of an interpretoure, that
knew his tokens, lest king Dionyse, which had not been used unto them,
should not understand what he meant by them. But supposest thou Aristip. that
any man can better i^terprete an other ma^s sentence / either spoken in a
strange language, or signified by tokens, than I could expound mine own
intent or meaning:


AR. Nay surely. For every wise man is of his own sentence the best
expositour.


PL. And if it be expouned sufficiently in a few wordis, it is the more
commendable.


AR. Ye that is sure.


PL. Might I have used any playner and shorter way / than in fewer words
than king Dionise reproved me with to remember him^ that in his own wordis he
might deprehende that thing that he sought for / sens that which I spoke
before was in his own language, and therefore he understood the words
sufficiently? and if there were any thing which he understood not, it was in
the sentence.


ARIS. What meanest thou thereby?


PLA. Mary I will tell the. In the definition of a king I instructed him how
he might be in the hygheste dignity next unto god / and also in most
perfect surety, which was no small benefit of so poor a person as I am
to give to a prince.

Wherefore if the eyes of king Dionyse soul, Knowledge and Rayson, had not ben
out, he should sone have perceived the said benefit, and like a noble manne
have given to me thanks, which I well deserved. And in the description of a
Tyrant I warned him of al dangers / whereby he might lose the said dignity.
In the which two declaratio^s was holly comprehended all that / for the which
he so much desired to se me. And all this while I knew not, but that he had been a good manne, because he desired to know that / which thou haste granted
is good, that is to say / wisdom. Now when he gave not to me condign
thanks, as my benefit deserved, but accounted me to have be^ idle, whiles I
instructed him, than it seemed / that Understanding was abse^t and fled from the
soul, and that he rulid not as a king but that he was rulid by his affections:
Wherefore his ingratitude declared his words to savor of tira^ny: which I
rehearsed unto him to the intent that he perceiving by my words in what peril
he was in / might by the remembrynge of my first instruction concerning a
king, revoke (...) understanding, and subduynge the affectes, be e^tesones
restored unto his dignity. How sayste thou, considering well all that,
which is before said, were my words ylle as they were spoken?


AR. Nay, as thou haste declared them, but yet me seems they were very sharp.


PL. wotest thou what makethe the to think so? because they were short. But
thou must consider, that he that lacks, in that (...) he does lack / he is
inferior to him of whom he desires it / wherefore in as much as king Dionyse
to have benefit of me, became my herer / he was inferior unto me. And therefore
respect ought to be always had to that, whereunto the raison extends, and
not to the astate of the person that hereth. And that I always considered. And
therefore spoke I as I did to king Dionise. Yet did I it with such a
tempera^ce / that if he had not been a Tyrant in deed / he would never have
been discontented. For I did not call him a tyrant or reproched him of any
tyranny: But only said that his words sauored of tyranny.

I put the case thou gave to me wine out of a vessel / and when I had
drunk of it, I would say that it had a sent of mustynes / it argues not that
the vessel in musty. For perchance within five or six days that sent will be
gone, and the wine will drink clean and gentilly. And therefore I suppose for
my words thou would not be angry. What if that king Dionise had desired me
to teache him Rhetorike: And when I herd him declame, or saw his writing, If I
fyndinge any fault in his words would warn him in this wise. Sir your words
do favor of to much arrogance, or that they sauored of sewet and payntinge,
or be like unto apples of the deed so / which be delicate in color without but
within there is nothing but coals and powder unsavory. Reuokynge him thereby to
such rules as I had before radde unto him, whereby if he would be diligent, he
should bring the form of speaking and writing into a perfection. Supposist
thou / that this manner of instruction should provoke king Dionyse to be angry
with me?


ARISTIPPVS. No, For her were no rayson.


PLATO. Than has he not so sharp a wit as thou haste supposed, sens he
perceyuethe not, how much the learning of wisdom, excedeth the learning of
Rhethorike. And therefore he that techeth wysdom ought to be of a greater
authority, than he which techeth Rhetorike. And therefore sens thou do
confess that king Dionyse in lernyng Rhetorike would take in good worth / what
so ever I would say, in correctyng his words concerning eloquence: How much
more ought he thanne to take in good perte those wordis that I spoke, in
correctynge his words, whereby he seemed to refuse wysdom / which a little
before he so much couaited to here declarid? And one thing might have
co^te^ted him: that all that I had spoken was at his desire and for his
co^modite. Where if I had purposed to have gotten any thing by him, my wit
was not so sengle, but that I knew how to speak words as well as thou,
which should delight him. But when he demed me to be a wise man, he with that
opinion bound me that I could not deceive him.


AR. In good feithe and that is very well spoken. But per adventure thou
spakeste to soon. And if thou haddi^t forborne a day, two, or three, until his
fume had been passed, and that he had used e^tsones with the some familiarity:
peradventure thy words would have been more easily taken, and thereunto thou
shuldist have fou^den more opportunity.


PL. But take one thing with the Aristippus, In the office of a wise man, that
word (Peradventure) is never herd spoken: (...) ^eradue^^ ^re, had ^ wyste.
No more than in the end of his works these words, Had I wist. For he has
alwey the three times in remembrance, Time present, time passed, and time to
come. And referringe all thing to necessary causes, or (as I said long a
gone) unto Providence / reputeth nothing to Fortune. Therefore the deferringe of
time should have nothing auayled / but rather should have been the cause of
much damage.


AR. How so I pray the?


PLA. Take heed / and I shall tell the. Thou have granted al ready, that king
Dionyse desired to se me, to the intent that in beholding and hering me / he
might perceive, whether I were a wise man or no: and than desiring me to
describe unto him the excellency of a king, supposist not thou that he made
that request unto me for some laudable purpose?


ARI. Yes doubtless.


PL. Thinking that by no question he might either prove me more sooner to be a
wise man / or else that he might learn more wisdom.


ARIST. I think both for the one and the other.


PL. Thou have not denied hitherto, but that wisdom, which king Dionyse
supposed to be in me / is in the knowledge that I have declared: what remained
than to prove me to be a wise man? do not thou remember that we were agreed
while ere that her was operation?


AR. Yes mary do I.


PL. And that operation was part of that which king Dionyse desired to know,
and not only part but also the principalle portion.


ARIST. It has hitherto agreed so with rayson.


PLA. If I had hold my pecae, and said nothing, after that king Dyonyse
had spoken / what should have insued of all mine instruction?


AR. I suppose nothing. For he would have let the depart without thank or
damage, and that which thou had spoken should have been lightly forgotten.


PLATO. And than his words had been verefyed / that my words had been
ydelly spoken. But how say thou / supposeste thou that he said trewely?


ARIST. Nay in good faith. For me seems that thy description of a king was
wonderful true and necessary, and also therein was the knowledge, whereof thou
haste treated compendiously / and plainly declared. And me thinks that the
wordis that king Dionise spoke, besemed not a king, but were much rather the
words of one that lacked that knowledge, wherein is wisdom.


PLATO. Now I am glad Aristippus, that I find in the so much conformity in
raison. Tha^ sens these ungentle words of king Dionise besemed not a king to
speak it appears that they besemed him that was contrary unto a king / which
is a Tyrant. And being the words of one that lacked knowledge / it accordethe
also that they were the words of one that was ignorant / and Ignorance is
most contrary to wisdom / and as I have said tra^sformeth a man into a
beast or a monstre. But what ignorance is it / that thou supposiste by the
said words was declared to be in king Dionise?


AR. what other but that ignorance, whereby he knew not him self.


PL. And what supposist thou that he was / wha^ he spoke (as thou have grantid)
words that be seemed a Tyrant?


ARIS. what else but as thou have rehearsed.


PL. what a Tyrant Aristippus? thou spekest now more plainly than I did. God
forbid that I should suffer so gentle a prince to be transformed in to such
a monstre / if I could help him. But I pray the / which benefit woldist
thou prefer / either that which is given or employed furthwith / or that
which is longer differred?


ARIS. what question is that? That kindness or benefit that is most prompt
or sonist employed, is to be chieffely ei^emed.


PL. Than if furthwith and as soon as I perceived the transformation of gentle
king Dionyse, I endeavored my self to make him to know by his own words
what he was, whereby if he would, he might by the expellynge of Ignorance have been not only restored unto the form of a man: but also have been made a great
Emperor by the well using of his dignity. Supposest not thou that I did as
it be came me? and for that benefit so soon offered, was I not worthy a great
gramercy?


AR. Yes if he would have so taken it. But or thou came to him, thou kneweste
by credible report, that he was obstinately inclyned to all vicious affections
/ and therewith impatient and cruel, wherefore when thou dyddest perceive that
he contemned thy doctrine, thou should than have ceased / and not have
offered thy self to peryle without hope of benefit.


PL. That advantage only thou have of me Aristippus: for thou that do
profess pleasure, moughtest have done so lefully, but I that have professed
wisdom and virtue might by no menes have done it. For if I had not re(...)
unto him, I had left that (...) declared, which he required to (...),
which by his own worcester(...), as by an example in other artis or se(...)ces was
plainly set out and expressed. And like wise as I knew that he was impacient
and cruel.

So more certeynely I knew that he had no power to indamage my soul, by whose
operation I was called a wyle man. And if I should have holden my peace than,
it should have been for fear of damage, which might happen by his impacience
and cruelty toward my body, than should I have proved my self to have been a
fool and no wise man / that I had not holden my peace at the beginning / and
thanne should king Dionise have found no cause to have taken displeasure. But
sens he desired to know, if I were a wise manne, and for that opinion that he
had in me / he favored me, and also thou do confess that my description of
a king by his definition / and also by comparyng him to his contrary /
contained that knowledge, wherein is wisdom: now remained nothing but
operation to prove me to be a wise man. Wherefore co^temnynge or little
regarding that vain fear, to bring king Dionise to knowledge, which he
desired / declared that my mind was not subject to corporal passions, and
consequently not to sensual affections, which might have incensed or stered
me to speak that thing that might have pleased king Dionyse appetite, which
was corrupt and vicious, hopyng to have had thereby preferment and singular
favor: and herein began the operation which agreed with my said knowledge.
And afterward by taking liberty from me, and making me a slave, he more
declared mi wordis to be true, and thereby had the larger example, whereby he
might the better have known him self. And after when he herd (as I doubt
not but that he has) how constantly I contemned the peryle that I was in / of
my life at Egina: he might well perceive that operation in patience to agree
with my knowledge. And thereby he had fully all that knowledge of me, wherefore he
desired to se me. where contrariwise, if I should have holde^ my peace, as well
my coming to king Dionise had been frustrate and vain, and his gentylle
desire had been unsatisfied, as also by my silence being thought (as raison was
that I should be) to be subdued either with fere or affection: I should seem to
condemn min own doctrine, wherefore I should be demid vnworthi that good
opinion, that king Dionise had of me.


AR. Well Plato in such experience of wisdom I will not follow the.


PL. Therefore when any adversity shall happen unto the, as I suppose thou
haste not fortune locked fast in a cof^er no more than had Cresus the rich
king of Lidia / for all that he thought that all gods and men were his
friends, and yet was he openly bourned by Cyrus, whom he little fered, Thou
shall feel both adversity and grefe, and also make thy soul subject unto thy
senses, whereof what does follow, thou do yet remember what we have already
discussed. Where I or any other by the said knowledge and operation thereunto
joined, shall be so armed again adversity, that what so ever the body feleth,
yet the very man which is the soul fealeth no disease / or as I might say is
never inquieted, but is ever intiere and in his true proportion and figure:
that is to say like unto god. And also shall have the price that he has
deserved, by vanquysshynge of his aduersarye, that is to say corporal disease
or adversity.

But now Aristippus / sens by any thing that has happened I never fell from
that place in the line of order / wherein god had set me, but my mind was ever
in one state and condition / and there as it was at my coming into Sicile /
there it has hitherto ever continued, may thou raisonably say, that I was
ever lost / in so much as I was never transformed or out of that astate, where
in a wise man ought always to be?


ARI. No in good faith as it now seems.


PL. What say thou than by king Dionise? Whom instructinge to know him
self I thus much displeased, and instead of thank and prefermente has
rewarded me with danger and bondage?


ARI. On my faith I think that he has both lost him self / by refusing
the said knowledge / whereby he should have been delivered from the said
transformation, and also he has most folishly lost the Plato, in putting the
from him, which by thy counsel shuldist have been to him so royal a tresure,
and the same do I think also of Polides the ambassador, and of the Egenites.


PLA. Gramercy Aristippus for thy gentylle audience: now be we come to the
town / and have made a good end both of our iournaye and also of our
communication.


AR. Farewell Plato, and for my part I would not have lacked it for the horse
that I ride on. And to say the truth it has made me to change some what of mine
old opinion.


PLATO. The next time that we ^ete I will make the to change all / if thou wylt
here and abide rayson.


FINIS.

