Actis made by diverse our most noble progenytours kings of this realm against
unlawful games.
WHere as in the statute made at Caturbery the xii year of the reign of king
Rychard, amongst other things it was accorded and assented, that the seru^^es
and laborers of husba^dry and laborers and servants of artificers, and of
vytaylers should have bows and arrows, and use the same the sondayes and other
festiual days, and utterly leave playeng at the ^ailes, as well handball as
foteball, and other games called coytes, dyce, bowling, and kailes, and other
such ^othryfty games, and that the sheryffes, mayres, baylyffes, and
constables, shall have power to arrest all that does contrary, as in the said
statute is more fully contained: It is ordained the.xi. year of king Henry the
iiii. that the said statute be firmly holden and kept: Ioynyng to the same,
that every such labourer or servant, that does contrary to the same statute,
shall have imprisonment by.vi. days. And the mayres and sheryffes, or the
mayres and baylyffes of cities and boroughes, and the constables in other
towns shall have power to put this statute (...) execution from time to
time: and if they do not thereof execution, the same mayres and sheryffes, or
mayres and baylyffes aforesaid shall pay to the king for every defaut.xx. s.
and the constables or constable of every town, that does not like execution of
this statute, shall pay for every their or his defaute.vi. s. iiii. d. And that
the Justices of assizes shall have power to inquire in this case in their
sessions from time to time of them that do contrary to this statute, and thereof
to certify in the chauncery.

Item it is ordained the.xvii. year of king Edward the.iiii. that after the
feast of Easter next coming, no person governor nor occupier of any
house, tenement, gardeyn or other place within this realm, shall willyngly
suffer any person to occupy or play any of the said games called closhe,
kayles, halfbowle, handin and handout, or quekbord, or any of them, within any
of their said houses, tenementes, gardens, or any other place, upon pain to
have the imprisonment of three years, and to forfayte and lose for every offense
xx. li. The one half thereof to our sovereign lord the king, to be applied to
the use of his house, in all such places where such forfayture shall happen
to fall, other than where any person ought to have the forfayture of the goods
of felons and fugitives, by any lawful grant, auctorytie of parlyament, or
otherwise. And it is ordained by the said auctorytie that al such persons
their heirs and successors, which ought to have any such forfaytures in
such places, shall have all such half as shall be hereafter forfayte by any
of the premysses: And the other half thereof to him or them that in this
behalf will pursue by action of debt at the common law. In which action
like process, trial, judgment, costs, damages, and execution shall be had
as is used in other actions there pursued. And that no person from the said
feast of Easter, shall use any of the said games, called closhe, halfbowle,
kayles, handin and handout, or queckborde, upon pain of two years
imprisonment, and to forfayt for every defaut.x. li. The one half thereof to
our sovereign lord the king, to be applied to the use of his house, in all such
places where such forfayture shall happen to fall, other than where any person
ought to have the forfayture of the goodis of felons and fugityues by any
lawful grant, auctoryte of parlyament, or otherwise. And it is ordained by the
said auctoryte, that al such persons their heirs and successors, which
ought to have any such forfaytures in such places shall have al such half
that shall be hereafter forfayt by any of the premises: And the other half
thereof to him or them that in this behalf will sue by accion of debt in like
manner and form to be had, tried, ruled, and ordered as is aforesaid.

Item it is ordained and enacted the.xi. year of the reign of the most noble
king of famous memory Henry the.vii. that none apprentyse ne servant of
husbondry, labourer ne servant artificer play at the tables from the tenth day
of Ianuarye next coming, but only for meat and drink, ne at the tenys,
clashe, dyce, cards, bowls, nor any other vnlaufulle game in no wise out of
Christmas, and in Christmas to play only in the dwelling house of his master,
or where the master or any of the said servants is present, upon pain of
imprysonement by the space of a day in the stocks openly. And that the
householder where dycynge, cardynge, tenys playenge, bowls, clashe, or any
other unlawful game before rehearsed shall be used, otherwise than is before
rehearsed, and that laufully be presented before the justices of peace, the
mayre, sheryffe in his turn, or steward in his let, or by examination had
before the said Justices of peace, that process be made upon the same as upon
enditement of trespass against the kings peace. And that the said mysdoer be
admytted to no fine under the sum of.vi. shyllynges.viii. d.

Item it is ordained and enacted the.xix. year of the said most noble king
Henry the.vii. that none apprentyse ne servant at husbandry, laborer ne
servant artificer, play at the tables from the feast of Ester next coming,
ne at tennys, closhe, dyce, cards, bowls, nor any other unlawful games in no
wise, out of the.xii. days at Christmas, and than to play only in dwelling
houses of his master, or where the master or any of the said servants is
present, upon pain of imprisonment by the space of a day in the stocks
openly. And that the householder, where dysynge, cardynge, tennys playenge,
bowls, closhe, or any other vnlaufulle game before rehearsed, shall be used,
otherwise than is before rehearsed, and that laufully ben presented before
justices of the peace, mayre, sheriff in his turn, or steward in his let, or
by examination had before the said justice of peace, that process be made upon
the same as upon indytement of trespace against the kings peace, and that the
said mysdoer be admytted to no fine under the sum of.vi. s. viii. d.

GOD SAVE THE KING. Tho. Berthelet
regius impressor excude^^^ CVM PRIVILEGIO. Proclamation by Henry Vll. against
unlawful games at Christmas, A. D. 1500.

