THE PRIVILEGES AND PRACTICE OF PARLIAMENTS IN ENGLAND. Collected out of the
Common Laws of this Land. Seen and allowed by the Learned in the Laws.
COMMENDED To the High Court of Parliament now Assembled.

Printed. 1640.

The principal Contents of this ensuing Discourse.
1. THe Originell of Parliaments. 2. The Saxons denominations of Parliaments.
3. The French and Germane denominations of the same. 4. The great difference
betwixt our Parliaments and the Court of Parliaments in France. 5. The King may
call a Parliament by his Deputies, or Lieutenants, though he himself be
absent in transmarine parts. 6. The King may call and hold a Parliament before
his Coronation; as also in his Minority or None-age. 7. An Usurper of the
Crown may call a Parliament. 8. The penalty of the Sheriff, for making false
returns of Knights or Burgesses. 9. The remedy of Penalty for any Archbishop,
Bishop, Duke, Marquis, Earl or Baron, if summoned by Writ and not coming
through Sickness, etc. 10. Knights and Burgesses of the Parliament m^ take the
Oaths of Allegiance and Supremacy, 11. The Clergy of the Convocation,
though necessarily to be Summoned, yet no part or member the Parliament. 12.
The particular Privileges of the Parliament men of Upper and Commons. House,
after summo^ and Election. 13. The form of a true Protection. 14. Concerning
the due placing of the Lords in (...) Upper House. 15. The sitting of the
principal Officers of State i^ the Upper House. 16. Concerning Voices of the
Upper and Common House. 17. The Bishops have no Voices in Parliamen. 18. The
King cannot change the Laws without co^ sent of Parliament. 19. The Judges or
Justices, have no Voices but (...) expound the Law. 20. An Abstract of some
Memorable things done by Parliaments in England.
A discourse of the Privilege and practice of the high Court of Parliament in
England, collected out of the Common-Lawes of this Land.
THe most Common and best means for the preservation and Conservation at well
of private as public Tranquillity and Society used in all Ages, and by all
Nations, is by way of lawful Assembly, and Consultation, which we call
Parliament, to look into the necessity of public Condition, and so to
foresee seasonable remedy.

Where no Counsel is, the people fall, But where many Counselors are, there
is health, Prou. 11. and 14. Tully says. Communis vtilitatis de relictio
contra naturant est. The Saxons called this Court Miclegemot, the great
Assembly, and Witenagemot, the Assembly of wise men; The Latin Authors of
those times called it Commune Consilium, magnacuria generalis conventus, etc.
But WILLIAM the Conqueror as it seems changed the name of this Court, and
first called it by the name of Parliament. But manifest it is, that the
Conqueror changed not the frame or Jurisdiction of this Court in any point;
yea, the very names which are attributed to this Court before the Conquest are
continued after the Conquest to this day. And where some do suppose, That in
the Parliament holden at Westminster in the 3. Ed. 1. called Westminster the
first, the word Parliament first crept in where it is called the first general
Parliament by the assent, of the Arch. bishops, Bishops, Abbots, Earls,
Barons, and all the Communaltie of the Land summoned to the same; yet it is
manifest that the name of Parliament was long before that time, and for proof
thereof note: 21. Ed. 3. fol. 60. and in Sir Edwards Cokes Preface to his 9th.
Book, where it is fully proved; That the Conqueror himself did hold this
Parliament, and other his mediate Successors. Although in the books of
Statutes mention is not made of any Statute before Magna Charta, in the 9th.
year of Hen. 3.

And this is not that Court, which in France bears the name of Parliament,
for they are but ordinary Courts of Justice; But this is that Court which both
England and Scotland agrees in naming it Parliament, which the French call,
Assemble de estates, or Les estates. And the Germans, A Rikes Daggh, or Diet.

Of this Court it may be said, Si vetustatem spectes est antiquissima, si
dignitat em est boneratissima, si jurisdictionem est copiosissima. And as Sir
Edward Coke observes in his Preface to his 9. Book. This great and Honorable
assembly has a Three fold end; First, that the Subject might be kept from
offending, that is, that offenses might be prevented, both by good and
provident Laws and by due execution of them. Secondly, that men might live
safely in quiet; And thirdly, that all men might receive Justice by certain
Laws and holy Judgment. To the end that Justice might be the better
administered, That questions and defects in Law by this high Court of
Parliament: be explained and brought to certainty and judgment.

Our Sovereign King Charles in his late Proclamation calls it, The Great
Counsel of Us and Our Kingdom.

And for so much as this great and principal Court is the Kings Court, and the
Court of the Kingdom, whereof the King is supreme head and Governor. neither
the Lords nor the Commons can summon it nor appoint any certain time or place
for the Assembly of the Parliament; For that only does appertain to the King
to do, See the Statute 21. Ric. 2. Ca. 12. And in the Kings name only such
summons must be made as an absolute Perogatiue incident to his Crown and
Dignity. Like as diverse things do solely belong to the King, whereof the
Subject has nothing to do: as foedere Percutere to make leagues, or bellum
indicere, 9. Ed. 4. fol. 6. The King only without the Subject, may make
letters of Denisation, to whom and how many he will. And the King by his
Proclamation; may make any Coin lawful money of England: And many other
things do appertain to the King as special flowers of his Crown.

And if the King happen to be in any foreign part, yet the Parliament holden
in this Realm in the Kings absence must be sommoned in the Kings name under
the Testo of the Kings Lieutenant, as by the Statute 8. Hen. 5. Ca. 1. may
appear.

Bracton says, Parliaments have been holden by the Kings Lieutenant
Procurator or Deputy, as in the 13. Ed. 2. the King constituted Adomarum de
Valentia Comitem Pembrociae custodem, regni sui, and locumsuum tenendum quamdiu
Rex in partibus transmarinis moram jecerit.

And the Kings of this Land have constituted as their Lieutenants or Deputies
to summon the Parliament 3 or 4 in a Commission as in the 24, of Hen. 8, at his
being at Callice a Parliament was holden by Commission as follows:

Henricus 8 Dei gratia Angliae, Franciae, Rex fidei defensor: Dominus Hiherniae
Reverendissimo in Christo Patri Edwardo Archiepiscopo, Eborac. Predolicto and
sideli suo Thome Audeley Militi, duo custodi Magni Sigilli, ac Charissimo
consanguieno suo Roberto Comiti Suffex salutem: Cum Presens Parliamenium
nostrum apud Civitatem nostram London 3. die Novembris Anno regni nostri
vicessimo primo in Choat, and vsque Westminster. Prarogat, and ibidem post diuersas
continuationes and Prorogationes idem Parliamentum nostrum apud Westminstr. 14,
diem Novembris apud Westminstr, etiam Prorogat-fuerat. Ibidem tunc tenendum nos
idcirco considerante absentiam nostram a regno nostro Angliae apud Calice
existent iu causis vrgentissimis nos and rem Publicam regni nostri, concernent
alijsque Considerationibus nos specialitur moventibus ac de fidelitate,
integritate, industria, and circumspectione vestris Plemus confidentes, de
aduisamento and assensu confilij nostri assignamus vos and duos vestrum Dantes
vobis and duobus vestrum plena^ Potestatem, facultatem, and authoritatem, hac
instante die lune ad and in quartum diem Februar. Prox, futurum vsque Westminster.
Predictum Proragandum and continuandum ibidem tunc teneudum. Et idio vobis
mandamus quod circa premissa diligenter intendatis, ac ea informa predict,
effectualiter expleatis, Damus autem vniversis and singulis Archiepiscopus,
Episcop, Abib. Prior-Duabus, Marchionib, Commitibus, Vicecommit. Baronibus,
Militib, Ciuibus, Burgensib, ac omnibus, aliis quorum interest, aut intere
potent in hac part: in mandatis quod ipsi omnes, etc. Singula in premissis
omnibus singulis faciendum and exequendum intendentes fuit consulentes and
obedientes prout decet. In cunis rei Testimonium has liter as nostras fieri
fecimus Patentes, Test me ipso apud Westminster. 4. Die Novembris, anno regni nostri
vicesimo quarto,

Penals.
And a King in possession of his Kingdom during his reign may before his
Coronation summon his Parliament as taking one example in a case so clear for
all: King Hen, 6, was not crowned until the 8 year of his reign, and yet in
his 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, and 6, year of his reign diverse Parliaments were holden,
(as also our gracious Sovereign King Charles called a Parliament Anno, 1.
before his Coronation). And summoned by him Hen. 6, as in the Statutes may
appear: For it is clearly resolved by all the Judges of England, that
presently by descent he is absolutely and compleately King without any
essential ceremony or act to be done ex post facto, and that Coronation is
but a royal ornament or outward solemnization of the descent, And the King is
as absolute and complete a King both for matter of Iudicatorie as Graunrs,
etc. both before his Coronation as he was after.

Also the King being within age, may as well summon his Parliament as if he were
at full age, as by the example was seen in the said Hen. 6. and Ed. 6. and
observe the case of the Duchy of Lancaster in Plowdens Commentaries, 221. 6.
Where it is agreed, that the person of the King is not infeebled by his nonage,
for his person does always remain of full age, as well to make gifts and
graunts as in administration of Justice.

And the diversity of Sex makes no difference a^ by the Statute made in the
first year of Queen Mary holden by Prorogation Cap. 1. is declared.

Also a King being in possession of his Kingdom whether by rightful Title or
by wrong as an Usurper. He is a person able Ipso facto to summon a Parliament,
as by the example holden by Hen. 6. before and after the redemption of his
Crown being removed there from by Ed. 4. wherein the said Edward was in his
Remitter as is to be seen in Baggots assis^, in the 9. year of Ed. 4. fol. 1.
6. and sequentium whereby it is said, that Hen: 6. was King in possession. And
it was necessary that the Realm have a King under whom the Laws may be holden
and maintained. And therefore though he was but usurpation, yet every act
Judicially done by him, which does concern his Jurisdiction Royal shall be
good, and bind the rightful King his regresse, and diverse other Examples there
are hereof. See 1 Hen. 7. fol. 3.

In ancient times after the King had summoned his Parliament to be holden at a
certain day and place, Innumerable multitudes of people did make there access
thereunto, pretonding that privilege of right to belong to them, and not only
to the Lords spiritual and Temporal but also to the Commonalty being
Freeholders: But King Hen. 3. having had experience of the mischiefs and
inconveniences by occasion of such popular confusion, did take order and
restrained that over great access. So that none might come to his Parliament
but those who were specially summoned, which his son Edw. 1. did carefully
keep and observe, according to that ancient saying, Ad Consilium ne
accesseris antequam voceris. And so ever since this special manner of summons
of Parliament now used has been put in practice. The usual form of summons
for the Parliament for the Commonaltie, is not special, but a general Writ is
directed to the Sheriff of every County or Shire in England and Wales, in this
form.

Rex vice. N. Salutem quia de advisamento and assensum Consilij nostri
quibusdam arduis and vrgentibus negatijs nos Statum and defensionem Regni
nostri Angliae, and Eccles. Anglicane concernent quandam Parliamentum nostrum
apud Civitatem nostram Westminster. 17. die Martij Prox. futurum teneri ordinavimus
and ibidem (...) Prelatibus magnatibus and proceribus dicti Regni nostri
colloquium Habere, and tractare, Tibi precipim^ ^rmiter iniungentet quod facta
Proclamacione in Prox. com. tuo post receptionem hujus brevis nostri tenendum
dio and loco Predicto, duos Milites, gladijs tinctis magis idonios and
discretos eum predict. etc. Et Electionem illam in pleno com. tuo factu^
dissincte and aparte, sub Si^gillo tuo and sigillis eorum qui Electioni illi
inter fuerunt nobis in Cancellariam nostram ad dictum diem and locum certifices
indilate, Test meipso, etc. vide Statut. 23. H. 6. Ca. 15.

And concerning those of Wales to be summoned the Parliament, read the Statute
thereof 27, Hen, Hen, (...) cap. 26, Entitled, an act for Laws and Justice to
be ministered in Wales, in like form as it is in this Rea^ And also that other
Statute made 35, Hen. 8, cap. 11 Entitled an Act for the due payment of Fees
and wage of Knights and Burgesses of the Parliament, in wage And thereof see in
Plowdens Comitaries 120, Sir Richard Bulkleyes Case and in Dyer 13.

And concerning those of the County Palatine (...) Chester, and of the City of
Chester in this behalf, so the Statute made 34, Hen. 8. cap. 13.

In Anno 1, of Queen Mary a great doubt (...) moved amongst the Justices and
Sergeants, If the Queens writ of summons of the Parliament in which the Style
or Title of Supremum Caput Ecclesiae Anglicanae were omitted, were good and
sufficient or utterly void, etc. Because the said style is united an^ annexed
by the Statute made the 26, and 35, Hen. 8 to the Imperial Crown of the
Realm, but the greater opinion was, such summons is good enough, so they said
that Supremum Caput is not parcel of the Queens name, but an addition, and
the words in the Statute are only in the assirmatiue and not negatiuely; That
the Style shall be of necessity so written of the Queen. And this doubt was by
Queen Elizabeth again moved in the first Parliament and was advised and
resolved by great advise and deliberation (vt supra) see the Statute 1, and 2
of Phil. and Ma. cap. 8, And in Master Foxes Acts and Monuments so: The
argument of John Hales to the contrary, cujuscunque potessima Pars est
Principium, which Rule is expressed in Sir Edward Cokes 10. part 49. 1. but
ibidem fol. 161. a the ancient rule is cited, qui libet potest renunciare luris
Prose interducta,

At every County after the delivery of the Parliament writ to the Sheriffs,
Proclamation shall be made in the full County of the day and place of the
Parliament, And that all men shall attain for election of the Knights for the
same County for the Parliament, The which Knights must be resident within the
same County, whereof they are to be chosen the day of the writ of summons of
the Parliament, whereof every one ought to have 40, S. of Freehold within the
said County beyond all charges. And such who have the greatest number of the
said Electors, shall be returned Knights for the same County, see 7. Hen. 4, cap.
12, 1, Hen. 6, cap. 1, 8, Hen. 6, cap. 13, and 10, Hen. 6, cap. 7.

The Sheriff may examine every one of the said Electors upon the said
Evangelists how much he may dispend by year if he doubt of the value thereof,
8. Hen. 6, cap. 15.

The said Election shall be made in the full County between the hours of 8,
and 9, before noone; 23, Hen, 6, cap. 15.

The said Knights shall be returned into the Chancory by Indenture sealed
between the Sheriff and the said Electors, 8, H. 6, Cap. 7, 7. H. 4, cap. 1,
23, H. 6. cap. 6. vt patet per breue supra.

Every Sheriff who does not make a true return of such election of Knights to
come to the Parliament recording to the Statute in that behalf made, that is
to say, The Statute 8, H. 6, cap. 7, shall forfeit 100l to the King, and 100l
to the Knight so chosen, who shall Commence his action within 3. months after
the Parliament commenced. And if he so do not and prosecute his suite in
effect and without fraud: Any other man who will may have the said suite, for
the said 100. as the Knight had, and costs of fuit also shall be awarded to the
said Knight or other who will su^ his behalf, 23. Hen. 6. Ca. 15.

No Sheriff shall be chosen for a Knight of the Parliament nor for a Burgess,
see the book of Entries 411. And at a Parliament holden 38. Hen. 8. It was
admitted and accepted that if a Burgess of the Parliament be made Mayor of a
Town, or have Judicial Jurisdiction, or another is sick, That these are
causes sufficient to those others. And so was done by the Kings Writ out of the
Chancery, comprehending this matter which was in Commune ^mo Parlia menti, 7.
and 38. Hen. 8.

In every writ of Parliament directed to the She riffe, this clause shall be
insorted: Electionem tuam in pleno Com. tuo factum distinct and aperte sub
Sigillo tuo and Sigillis coram qui electioni illi inter fuerunt nos in
Cancellariam nostram ad diem and locum in breue Content certifices indilato:
Hen. 4. Cap. 15.

The Sheriff after the receipt of the writ of Election, etc. shall deliver
without fraud a sufficient precept under his seal to every Mayor, and Bayliffe
or Bayliffes where no Mayor is, of City and Borough within his County,
reciting in his precept the writ of Parliament, commanding them by the said
precept; If it be a City to those Citizens for the same City by Citizens, And
if it be a Borough then Burgesses, by Burgesses of the same to come to the
Parliament, And that the said Mayor, or Bayliffe, or Bayliffes, where no Mayor
is, shall return lawfully the said precept to the Sheriff: and those who made
the Elections, and of the names of the said Citizens and Burgesses by them so
chosen; 23. Hen. 6. Cap. 15.

The Sheriff shall make a good return of his writ, and of every return of
the Mayor and Bayliffe or Bayliffes, or Bayliffes where no Mayor is to him
made. And if the Sheriff do contrary to this Statude made for the election of
Knights, Citizens, and Burgesses to come to the Parliament, he shall incur
the pain of 100. pounds to the King, and shall be imprisoned for one whole
year, without Bail or maine-price. And the Knight for the County returned
contrary to the said Ordinances, shall loose their wages by the Statute, 8.
Hen. 6. Cap. 7. And the Sheriff shall loose 100. pounds to every Knight,
Citizen, and Burgess, chosen in his County to come to the Parliament; And not
duly returned, or to any other who will sue in his default by action of Debt,
with costs expended in that case: In which suite, the Defendant shall not wage
Law, nor be essoyned, Anno 23. Hen. 6. Cap. 15.

If the Mayor, and Bayliffe, or Bayliffes, or Bayliffes where no Mayor is, do
return others, then those who be chosen by the Citizens and Burgesses of the
Cities and Borough,, where such Election shall be made, he shall forfeit to
the King 40. pounds, and so much to the Citizen or Burgess chosen to come to
the Parliament and not duly returned by the Mayor or Bayliffe; or Bayliffes
where no Mayor is, or to any other person who in default of such Citizen or
Burgess so chosen, will sue for it by action of debt with costs expended. And
they shall have a writ of debt for the said 40. pounds, in which the defendant
shall not wage his Law nor shall be essoyned, 23. Hen. 6. Cap. 15.

Every Knight, Citizen, or Burgess, chosen and not returned, shall Commence
his action within 3. Months next after the commencing of the said Parliament.
In which he must proceed effectually without fraud, And if he so do not, any
other who will sue for it, shall have the said Action for the said Forfeiture,
and costs in the same expended: in which the Defendant shall not wage Law, nor
shall be essoyned; Anno 23. Hen. 6, cap. 15,

If any Knight, Citizen, or Burgess, that shall be returned by the Sheriff to
come to the Parliament, be after such return put out, and another put in his
place, he that is in his place so put out, if he take upon him to be a Knight,
Citizen, or Burgess, shall forseite to the King 100. pounds, and so much to
the Knight, Citizen, or Burgess, returned by the Sheriff: and so afterward
put out, and the same Knight, Citizen, or Burgess, so put out, shall have an
Action of debt against him so put in his place, his Executors and
Administrators, and shall commence his action within 3. Months after the
beginning of the Parliament: and if he sue not as before, any other who will
shall have the said suit; in which the Defendant shall not wage his law, nor
shall be essoyned; so that such Knights of the Parliament chosen, be a Knight,
or such Esquire or Gentleman of the same County, who may be a Knight, and none
to be such a Knight, who stands in the Degree of a Yeoman; Anno 23. Hen. 6.
Cap. 15.

All persons and Commonalties who shall be summoned to the Parliament, shall
come as it has been accustomed of the Ancient time: And he that comes not
having no reasonable excuse shall be amerced, and otherwise punished as of
ancient time has bin used, 5. R. 2. Statut. 2. Cap. 4.

If any Archbishop, Bishop, Duke, Marquis, Earl or Baron, be summoned by the
Kings writ to come to the Parliament, and thorough sickness or any other
infirmity he cannot make his appearance at the said Parliament, he must
procure from the King his Warrant of absence, as in like case was granted to
the Abbot of Eusnam in the 23 year of Hen, 8. in form following.

H. 8. By the King.
Trusty and welbeloved. We greet you well, and albeit you have monition among
other Prelates of our Realm to be present at our high Court of Parliament to
be holden: yet nevertheless we of our especial grace considering your
debility and age, be content and by these presents License you to be absent
from our said Parliament during the continuance, prorogation, or adiournment of
the same: The said Monition, or any other writ directed to you, or Commandment
given by us to you notwithstanding under our Seal, signed at our Manor of
Greenwich, The 6. of January in the 23. of our reign.

To our trusty and well-beloved in God, the Abbot of our Monastery of Eusham.

And it appears to be true which Fortescue says in his 18. Cap. Fol. 40.
That Acts of Parliament and Statutes in England, are not made only by the
Princes pleasure, but also by the consent of the whole Realm: So that of
necessity they must procure the Weal of the whole Realm, and in no wise tend
to their hinderance. And it cannot be otherwise thought but that they are
replenished with much wit and wisdom, seeing they are not ordained by the
advice of one man only, or of a 100. wise Counselors, but of more then 300.
chosen men, which agrees with the ancient number of ancient Senators of Rome.

No Baron, Knight, Citizen or Burgess, who shall be chosen to come to the
Parliament, shall not depart until that Parliament be ended or prorogued if he
have not license of the Speaker, and of the Commons assembled in that
Parliament, which license shall be entered in the Book of the Clearke of the
parliament appointed for the Commons House, upon pain of losing their wages,
whereof all Counties and Buroughs shall be discharged, 6. Hen. 8. cap. 16.

Concerning the due leauying of Knights Fees and wages for attendance at the
Parliament, see the Statute made 23, Hen. 6. Cap. 11.

Knights and Burgesses for the Parliament must take the Oath of Allegiance, and
so shall Citizens and Barons for the Five ports, for the parliament before they
do enter into the parliament house Anno 5, Eliz. Cap. 1. and they must also
take the Oath of Supermacie, made 7, Iacobi cap. 6. Which two Oaths shall be
taken before the Lord Steward for the time being, or his Deputy or Deputies.

Memorandum in the Statute made, Anno 25, Hen. 8, Cap. 19. entitled an Act
concerning the submission of the Clergy of the Kings Majesty, is contained,
that the Convocation is and always has bin and ought to be assembled by the
Kings writ, The form whereof is thus set down by Doctor Cowell in his
Interpreter Verbo Proclam. First, the King directs his writ to the Archbishop
of each province, for the summoning of all Bishops, Deanes, Archdeacons,
Cathedral and Collegiate Churches, and generally all the Clergy of his
province: after their best discretions and judgments, assigning to them the
time and place in the said writ, Then the Archbishops proceed in their
accustomed course one example may show both. The Archbishop of Canterbury upon
his writ of summon received, directs his letters to the Bishop of London as
his Deane provincial. First citing him peremptorily, And then willing him to
Site in like manner all the Bishops, Deanes, Archdeacons, Cathedral and
Collegiate Churches, and generally all the Clergy of his Province, to the
place and against the day prefixed in the writ, but directs withal: That one
Proctor sent for every Cathedral or Collegiate Church, and two for the body of
the inferior Clergy of each Dyocesse may suilice, and by virtue of these
Letters, Authentically sealed. The said Bishop of London sends the like
Letter; severally to the Bishops of every Diocese of the Province, cyting them
in like manner, and commands them not only to appear, but also to admonish
the said Deanes and Archdeacons, personally to appear, and the Cathedral and
Collegiate Churches, also of the common Clergy of the Dyocesse, to send their
Proctors at the day appointed in the Writ: And also will them to certify the
Archbishop, the names of all and every one so summoned by them, in a schedule
annexed to their Letters Certificatorie. The Bishops proceed accordingly, and
the Cathedral and Collegiate Churches: as also the Clergy make choice of
their Proctors, which done and certified to the Bishop, he returns all
answerable to his charge, (Cave lector) for the Clergy of the Convocation
house, are no part or member of the Parliament: as you may see resolved by the
Lord Richard Lord Windsor, and others; in the beginning of the sixth Examination
of Master Philpot, in the beginning of the reign of Queen Mary: in Master
Foxes book of Martyrs, Fol. 1639. contrary to the opinion of Doctor Cowell,
vbi supra. Nevertheless it is enacted by the Statute 8. Hen. 6. Cap. 1. That
all the Clergy called to the Convocation House by the Kings writ, and their
servants and familiars shall have and fully use every such liberty and
defense, in coming, abiding, and going, as the Great men and commonalty of the
Land (to be called to the Parliament of the King) shall have.

And because mention is here made of the Privileges appertaining to those of
the Parliament house; take here a word or two thereof. The Words of the
Statute made the 11. Hen. 6. cap. 11. are as follows: The King willing to
provide for ease and tranquillity of those that come to his Parliament: Has
ordained and established, That if any assault or affray be made upon any Lord
Spiritual or Temporal, Knight of the Shire, Citizen or Burgess, coming to
the Parliament, or the Council of our Sovereign Lord the King. That then
Proclamation shall be made, in the most open place of the City or Town where
the affray was so made, by 3. several days, That the party that made such
affray and assault, yield himself before the King and his Bench, within a
quarter of a year after the proclamation so made, if it be in the time of the
Term, or otherwise in the next day in the time of the Term following the said
quarter. And if he so do not, that he be attained of the deed, and pay to
the party greeved his double damages, to be taxed at the discretion of the
Justices of the same Bench for the time being, or by inquest if it be needful:
and make Fine and Ransom at the Kings will, and if he come and be found guilty
by inquest, examination or otherwise of such affray or assault, then he shall
pay unto the party greeved thereby, his double damages found by the Inquest,
or to be taxed by the discretion of the Justices, and make Fine and Ransom at
the will and pleasure of our Sovereign Lord the King.

Every Knight, Citizen, Burgess, Baron of the Five Ports or others, called to
the Parliament of the King; Shall have privilege of the Parliament during the
Sessions of Parliament, so that he that does arrest any of them during that
time, shall be imprisoned in the Tower by the Nether House, of which he is and
shall be put to his fine and the Keeper also, if he will not deliver him when
the Serjant at Arms does come for him by the commandment of the house whereof
he is: See Dyer, 60.

The servants attending upon their Masters during Parliament who are necessary,
and also such Officers as be attending upon the Parliament, as the Sergeant at
Arms, the Porter of the door, Clearkes and such like, and in the same manner
of their chattells and goods necessary, so that they shall not be arrested nor
taken by any Officer, if it be not in case of Felony or Treason, in the same
manner, as the Judges and Ministers of other Courts shall have for their
servants, goods and chattells necessary, see Cromptons Courts, fol. 11. a.

But the Parliament does not give privilege Tempore vacationis sed Scedente
curia. See Brooks Title privilege, 56. It appears that in the Parliament 31.
Hen. 6, in the vacation, the Parliament being continued by prorogation, Thomas
Thorpe the Speaker was condemned in a Thousand marks, damages by an Action of
Trespass brought against him by the Duke of York, and was committed to prison
in Execution for the same, and after when the Parliament was re-assembled the
Commons made suite to the King and Lords to have Thorpe their Speaker,
delivered for the good exployte of the Parliament: whereupon the Dukes Council
declared the whole cause at large, whereupon the Lords demanded the opinion of
the Judges, whether in that case, Thorpe ought to be delivered out of prison
by privilege of Parliament; The Judges made this answer, that they ought not
to determine the privilege of that high Court of Parliament: But for
Declarations of proceedings in Law, Courts in case where writs of Supersedias
for the privilege of the Parliament to be brought unto them, they answer; That
if any person that is a member of the Parliament be arrested in such case as it
be not for Treason or Felony, or for surety of the Peace, or for condemnation
had before the Parliament. It is used that such persons be released and may
make Attorney, so as they may have their freedom and liberty freely to attend
that Parliament: Hereupon it was concluded, That Thorpe should still remain in
prison according to the Law. Notwithstacding, the privilege of Parliament, and
that he was the Speaker, which resolution was declered to the Commons by Walter
Moile one of the Kings Sergeants ^t Law, and then the Commons were commanded in
the Kings name by the Bishop of Lincoln, in the Absence of the Archbishop of
Canterbury then Chancellor, to choose another Speaker.

It has been much doubted whether one taken in Execution during the
Parliament, may b set at liberty by writ of Parliament, as is to be serne in
the first of Eliz. 4. Fol. 8. a, Dyer, 6^. But at this day the Law is explained
in that case by the Statute made, 1. lacob Cap. 19 Entitled (...) a^t for new
execution to be si^ed against any who shall here after be delivered out of
prison by privilege of Parliament. And for discharge of them out of whose
custody such prisoners shall be delivered.

The form of a Protection to be made by any person of either House of
Parliament, unto such of their Servants as may stand in danger of Arresting in
time of Parliament.
Whereas by the ancient Privileges Laws and Customs of this Realm
heretofore used and approved. The Lords Spiritual and Temporal, the Knights,
Citizens and Burgesses of the Parliament, have always had their servants and
followers privileged and free (...) any molestation, trouble, arrest or
imprisonment, for some certain days, both before the beginning and after the
(...) of the same. And where is at this time a (...) is summoned where myself
being a Baron and Peer of the Realm (or Knight, or Burgess) (...) to make my
appearance, I understand not, (...) that you or some of you have now in your
(...) (...) (...), Writ or (...), to modest, ar^, (...) (...). B. my (...)
(...) in ordinary, whose attendance I have special cause to use and employ in
matters which do much concern and import my estate, and other occasions to be
followed and solicited by him during this Sessions of Parliament. These are
therefore to Charge and Command you, and every one of you, both to withdraw the
same Process, Writ or Warrant, if any such be; As also, if thereby you or any
of you, have molested, arrested, or imprisoned him the said J. B. within the
Compass of the foresaid days of privilege; That the^ upon sight hereof, you
presently set him at liberty, as you or any of you will answer the contrary.
Given under my hand and Scale the 16. day of Februa, ry, 1627.

To all Majors, Sheriffs, Bayliffes, Sergeants, Knights, Marshals-men, and all
other his Majesty's Officers.

R. S. The form of a Letter directed to the Sheriff of I. for discharge of a
Servant that is Arrested upon Execution, and during the time of the Parliament
notwithstanding his Protection.
Mr. Sheriff, whereas I was to be attended to the Parliament, I wanted one of
my household servants, a Gentleman of mine, called B. to whom I had given a
privilege for this Session of Parliament, to prevent any arrest or
imprisonment for his debts, to the end he might wait on me and prosecute my
business with more diligence and less danger of Interruption in that kind. But
I now understand he is in the Custody of the Sheriff of Middlesex, within the
days limited upon an Execution of 1000. pounds, And that he does detain him
and will take no notice of my privilege under my hand and Scale, although it
has been showed him: I have chosen rather to write to you then to take the
Ancient privileges and liberties of the uppermost House of Parliament, and the
honor of a Peer of this Kingdom into your friendly consideration, then that
I would be offen sieve to any of your subordinate Officers, in sending for them
and the Plaintiff by a Serieant at Arms, or to convent them before the Lords
for their contempt. And Mr. Sheriff, I am further given to understand, that
the Deputy is brother to the under. Sheriff, and that he did execute the
Office the last year, which is a plain defrauding of the Law, not being three
years betwixt them, being well known that his brother does not intermeddle in
the Office at all, nor takes any notice at all what warrants are made forth
in his name, or of what writs are brought to his hands, for his Deputy does
take the whole benefit of the place into his own hands. And by this means the
under Sheriff being in Glocestershire, he has a color as his Deputy not to
take notice of our privileges being directed to the Sheriff; herewith I
thought good to acquaint you, expecting your answer and the release of my
Servant, otherwise, I purpose not to loose the privilege of a Peer of the
Realm. whilst it concerns our honor. And is no Indemnity to the
Plaintiff, whose Judgment and Execution is in as much force and strength, by
a late Statute to take hold of B. afterward us it was before.


Concerning the upper house of Parliament: first it is observed, that thither
comes all Lords of the Parliament as well Spiritual as Temporal, and they
are summoned by the Kings writ also, but Separatim, and not by a general writ
to the Sheriff of the County, as the Commons are summoned who are of the lower
house of the Parliament, the form of which writ is as follows.

(...), etc. Charissimo consanguineo suo comiti (...) (...) de aduisamento and
assensu confilij nostri, Pr^ (...) (...) and vrgentibus negotijs nos Stat, and
(...) (...) Regni nostri and Eccles. Anglicanis con^ (...) quandam Parliamenium
nostrum apud Civitate nostrum West^ 1^. dic Mar^, Prox. futur, (...) (...)
(...), and ibidem vobisc^ ac cum Prelatibus (...)^ and proctrivus dicti Regni
nostri Col^ habere and tra^are; vobis sub side and legeancij quibus nobis ^num
^iter injug^nius Mandamus quad considerationem ^rum negotiorum arduate and
pericults in mentibus (...) executione quicunque dic^ die and (...)
personaliter intersitis nobiseum, ac cum Prolatibus magnatibus and pre^bus
supradictis negoti^ (...) vestrumque consilium impensur. Et hoc sicut nos and
^norem nostram, and rempublicam, and saluati enum, and defensionem Regni and
Ecclesiae, predict expedetionemque negotiorum dictorum diligitis nulla te^
(...). Test me ipsu apud Westminster. 18. die January Anno Regni nostri, etc.

At the first day appointed by the King for the Parlia meant usually the King in
person does ride thither as it were to open the door of their Authority,
attended by all the Lords Spiritual and Temporal in their Parliament Roabes.
But if the King be let per E(...) or by other Causes, his Majesty may command
the adjornment of the Parliament to be held at some other day at his pleasure,
as was done at the first day of the Parliament holden the first year of the
late Queen Eliz. as appears in Dyer, Fol. 20. 3. a. When Parliament was
prorogued by writ Patent, under their entire great Seal and (...) with the
hand of the Queens: by which Book the printed Book of the Statutes may be
corrected.

And the King may under his great Seal assign 2. or 3. of the Lords of the
Parliament to supply his place in Parliament, if he be sick, or will not come
for any other cause, vt sactum fuit, Anno 31. Eliz, At which time the
Archbishop of Canterbury, The Lord Treasurer of England, and the Earl of
Derby, were Commissioners, under the great Scale appointed and assigned to
represent her Majesty's person in Parliament,

And they do sit ono space lower from the Cloth of Estate in the Parliament
House, See Cromptons Courts. Fol. 12. a.

By the Statute made Anno 23. Hen. 8. Cap. 21. It is thus defaced, the Assent
of the King by his Letters Patents under the great Seal of England, and signed
with his hand and notefied in his absence to the Lords of the Parliament, and
Commons assembled in the higher House, is and ever was of as good force and
strength as if the person of the King had bin there present; and had assented
openly and publicly to the same. And such Royal assent as is aforesaid shall
be taken, for good and effectual to every intent without any ambiguity of
Custom or usage to the contrary notwithstanding.

In this Court is attending, The Lord Chancellor of England, or the Lord Keeper
of the great Seal, or some other ^ge man as the King shall choose. By whom the
King does show his mind to the Lords. And he does put them in remembrance of
those things whic are to be treated there before the Lords, who if he be no
Baron, or Peer of the Realm, sits near the King behind the cloth of
Estate, And is as the Speaker of the upper house of Parliament.

In the 31' year of Hen. 8. Cap. 10. Entitled an Act concerning placing of
the Lords in the Parliament Chamber, and other assemblies and conferences of
Counsel. It is enacted as follows. For as much as in all great Counsels and
Congregations of men having sundry degrees in the Common wealth, it is very
requisite and couenient, that an order be had and taken for the placing and
setting of such persons as are bound to resort to the same; To the intent that
they knowing their places, may use the same without displeasure or let of the
Couneell: Wherefore the Kings most Royal Majesty, although it appertains to
his Prerogative Royal to give such honor, places and reputation to his
Counselors and other his subjects as shall seem best to his most excellent
Majesty, He is nevertheless pleased and ^ented for an order to be had and
taken in this his most high Court of Parliament, That it shall be inacted by
authority of the same, in manner and form as hereafter follows.

First, it is enacted by authority aforesaid, that no person or persons of what
estate, degree or condition soever he or they be of (except only the Kings
Children) shall at any time hereafter attempt or presume to sit, and have place
at any side of the Cloth of State, in the Parliament Chamber, neither of
the one hand of the Kings Highness, nor on the other: whether the Kings
Majesty be there personaelly present, or absent, And for as much as the Kings
Majesty is justly and lawful supreme head in Earth, of the Church of
England, under God. And for the exercise of the said most royal Dignity and
Office, has made Thomas Lord Cromwell, and Lord privy Seal, his Vicegerent,
for good and due ministration of Justice to be had and used in all Causes and
Cases touching the Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction, and for the godly reformation
and redress of all Errors, Heresies, and abuses in the same Church. It is
therefore enacted by authority aforesaid, That the said Lord Cromwell, having
the said Office of Vicegerent, and all other persons who shall hereafter have
the said Office of the grant of the Kings Highness, his heirs and Successors,
shall sit and be placed as well in this present Parliament, as in all
Parliaments what soever hereafter to be holden, on the right side of the
Parliament Chamber; and on the same form that the Archbishop of Canterbury
sits upon; and above the said Archbishop and his Successors, and shall have
place in every Parliament to assent or dissent, as other the Lords of the
Parliament.

And it is enacted, that next to the said Vicegerent shall sit the Archbishops
of Canterbury and York, and then next him on the same form and side the
Bishop of London, and next to him on the same form and side the Bishop of
Duresme, and next to him, on the same form and side, the Bishop of Winchester:
and then all the other Bishops of both Provinces of Canterbury and York shall
sit and be placed on the same side after their ancienties, as it has been
accustomed.

And for as much as such persons as now have, or hereafter shall happen to have
other great Offices of the Realm, That is to say, The Office of the Lord
Chancellor, Lord Treasurer, Lord President of the Kings Council, The Lord
privy Seal, The Great Chamberlain of England, The Marshall of England. The
Lord Admiral, The Grand Master or Lord Steward of the Kings most honorable
Household; The Kings Chamberlain, and the Kings Secretary, have not beretofore
been appointed and ordered for the placing and sitting in the Kings most high
Court of Parliament, by reason of their Offices, It is therefore now ordered,
and enacted by authority aforesaid, That the said Lord Chancellor, Lord
Treasurer, the President of the Kings Council, and the Lord privy Seal,
being of the degrees of Barons, or above, shall sit and be placed as well in
this present Parliament, as in all other Parliaments hereafter to be holden in
the left hand of the Parliament Chamber, on the higher part of the form on the
same side, above all Dukes (except only such as shall be the Kings Son, the
Kings Brother, the Kings Uncle, the Kings Nephew, or the Kings Brother or
Sisters Sons.

And it is also ordained, and enacted by authority aforesaid, That the great
Chamberlain, the Constable, the Marshall, the Lord Admiral, the Grand Master
or Lord Steward, and the Kings Chamberlain shall sit and be plated after the
Lord privy Seal, in manner and form following, That is to say; every of them
shall sit and be placed above all other personages being of the same estate or
degree, that they shall happen to be of; That is to say, the Great Chamberlain
first, the Constable second, the Marshall third: the Lord Admiral fourth: the
Grand Master or Lord Steward sift, and the Kings Chamberlain the sixth.

And it is also enacted by authority aforesaid, That the Kings chief
Secretary, being of the degree of a Baron of the Parliament, shall sit and be
placed above and before all other Barons, not having any of the Offices before
remembered, and if he be a Bishop, That then he shall sit and be placed above
all other Bishops, not having any of the Offices above remembered.

And it is also ordained and enacted by authority aforesaid, That all Dukes not
before mentioned, Marquisses, Earls, Viscounts, and Barons, not having any of
the Offices aforesaid, shall sit and be placed after their ancientic, as it
has been accustomed.

And it is further enacted, that if any person or persons which at any time
hereafter shall happen to have any of the Offices aforesaid, of Lord
Chancellor, Lord Treasurer, Lord President of the Kings Counsel, Lord privy
Seal, or chief Secretary, shall be under the degree of a Baron of the
Parliament; By reason whereof they have no interest to give any assent or
dissent in the said house: That then in every such Case, such of them as shall
happen to be under the said degree of ae Baron, shall sit and be placed at the
uppermost part of the Sackes, in the midst of the Parliament Chamber, either
there to sit upon one form, or upon the uppermost Sack: The one of them above
the other in order as (...) above rehearsed.

Be it also enacted by authority aforesaid, that in all trials of Treason by
Peers of this Realm: If any of the Peers that shall be called hereafter to
be Tryers of such Tredson, shall heppen to have any of the Offices before said,
That then they having such Offices, shall fit and be placed according to their
Offices, above all the other Peers that shall be called to such trials, in
manner and form as is above mentioned and rehearsed.

And it is also enacted by authority before said; That as well in all
Parliaments, as in the Starchamber, and in all other Assemblies, and Conferences
of Councoll: The Lord Chancellor, the Lord Treasurer, the Lord President; the
Lord privy Seal, the Great Chamberlain, the Constable, the Marshall, the
Lord Admiral, the Grand Master or Lord Steward, the Kings Chamberlain, and
the Kings chief Secretary, shall sit and be placed in such order and form as
is above reharsed, and not in any other place, by authority of this present Act.

And in Sir Edward Cokes 11. part, fol. 1. The cause concerning priority of
place in the upper house of Parliament was as follows, at the Parliament held
the 39. Eliz. The case was thus:

Thomas Lawarre Knight, Lord Lawarre, son and heir of William, son and
heir of George, Brothe and heir of Thomas, Son and keire of Thomas Lord
Lawarre, exhibited his petition to the Queen to this effoct, That whereas
Thomas the Great-grand-father was called to Parliament by Writ of Summons, 3.
H. 8. and afterward this Thomas the Great-grand-father dies; After whose
death, Thomas his son, was called to diverse Parliaments by Writ of Summons.
And afterward by act of Parliament 3. E. 6. for diverse causes in the said act
mentioned, it was enacted. That the said William during his life, should be
disabled to claim or enjoy any dignity or superiority, in any right, estate,
etc. by descent, remainder, or otherwise. And afterward the said Thomas the
son of Thomas dies; after whose death the said William being disabled, was
not called to any Parliament, by writ of Summons, ^ill Queen Elizabeth called
him to Parliament by writ of Summons, and sits as youngest Lord of the
Parliament: And afterward lie dies, and now the said Thomas his son being
called to Parliament by writ of Summons, ^th to the Queen that he may have
place in Parliament, of his Great-grand-father (that is to say) between the
Lord Berkley and the Lord Willoughby of Eresby: And the said petition was
indorced in these words; Her Majesty has commanded me to signific to your
good Lordships, that upon the humble suite of the Lord Lawarre, Shoe is pleased
that the matter shall be considored and determined in the House.

Robert Cecill.
Which petition being read in the upper house of Parliament: The consideration
of this was referred and committed to the Lord Burley, Lord Treasurer of
England, and diverse other Committees, who at his Chamber at Whitehall heard the
learned Council on both sides, in the presence of the two chief Justices, and
diverse other Justices: And two objections were made against the Lord Lawarre:
first, insomuch that his Father was disabled by act of Parliament to claim the
dignity: The petitioner may not convay by him who was disabled, as heir to his
Great-grand-father, and by consequence he may not have the place of his
Great-grand-father.

But it was resolved by all the Judges, That there was a difference between a
personal and a Temporary disability, and absolute and perpetual disability:
As whereas one is attainted of Treason or Felony; this is absolute and
perpetual disability by corruption of blood, for any of his posterity to
claim any hereditament in Fee simple, either as heir to him, or any other:
But disability by Parliament without any Attainder, to claim the dignity for
his life; That is Personal disability for his life only, and his heirs after
his death may claim as heir to him, or any other Ancestor above him: The
second objection is, that the said William has accepted new Creation of the
Queen; which dignity newly gained, discendeth to the petitioner which may not
wave: and for that the Petitioner may not have other place then his Father had.

To this it was answered and resolved, that th'acceptance of a new Creation by
the said William, may not hurt the Petitioner, because the said William was at
that time disabled, and in truth he was no Baron, but only an Esquire; so that
when the old and new dignity descended together, the old shall be preferred:
which resolution was well approved by all the Lords Committees, which was
accordingly reported to all the Lords of the Parliament, and allowed by them
all: whereupon it was ordered by the Lords, that the Queen should be acquainted
with this by the Lord Keeper, which was done accordingly.

Whereupon at the said Parliament, the Lord Lawarre in his Parliament Robes,
was by the Lord Zouch supplying the place of the Lord Willoughby, within age at
that time; And the Lord Berkley also in his Robes, brought into the house, and
placed in his said place (that is to say) next after the Lord Berkley, Garter
King at Arms attending upon him, and doing his Office.

In the upper house of Parliament does sit the Justices upon sacks of Wool, in
medir Camere; who are called thither by the Kings Writ, quod personaliter inter
sitis nobiscum ac cum ceteris de consilio nostre predict is negotiis, tractat
vestrumque consilium impensurum: And this negotia be Ardua and vrgentia negotia
Regni, etc. And their oath amongst other things is, that they shall counsel
the King truly in his business, but they have no voice among the Lords.

If the Reader be desirous to see particular cases happening in Parliament,
wherein the opinion of the Judges there had been recreated: And how their
opinions delivered in Parliament ought to be regarded, he may read at large in
Egertons post^nati. fol. 16. and sequentum.

If a Writ of Error be brought in Parliament upon a Judgment given in Kings
Bench; The Lords of the Higher house only, without the Commons are to examine
the Errors, and that is by the advice and counsel of the Judges, who are to
inform them what the Law is, and so to direct them in their Judgment, and if
the Judgment be reversed, then commandment is to be given to the Lord
Chancellor to do execution accordingly. And so was done in the 7. of R. 2, in
a Writ brought in Parliament by the Deane and Chapter of Litchfeild, against
the Prior and Covent of Newport Pannell, as appears by the Record. And if the
Judgment be affirmed, then the Court of Kings Bench are to proceed to
execution of the Judgment, as appears in Howerdewes case, 1. H. 7. fo. 19.

But it is to be noted, that in all such Writs of Errors, the Lords are to
proceed according to the Law, and for their judgment therein, they are
informed and guided by the Judges, and do not follow their own opinions, or
discretions. See Egertons post^nati fol. 23.

There does also sit the Secretaries of estate, who are to answer such Letters
or things passed in the Council whereof they have the keeping; And with them
the Master of the Roles; But they have no voice in Parliament, if they be not
of the degree of a Baron.

Note by Kirby, Clerk of the Roles of the Pariliament: It is thus in the
Books of the Law, the 33. H. 6. cap. 17. If a Bill come first to the Commons,
and they do pass it; then the use is to indorse it in this form, Soyt Bail
a seigneures: And then if the Lords nor King do not alter the Bill, then it
shall be inroled by the Clerk of the Parliament: and if the Bill pass, then
it shall be Inroled, but if it be a particular Bill, then it shall be filed
upon filaces, and that shall suffice, unless the party whom it particularly
concerns will sue to have it Inroled, that it may be Inroled to be sure.

If the Lords will alter a Bill, sent to them from the Commons house, in a
thing that may stand with the Bill, they may do so without remanding to the
Commons. And if the Commons do grant damage for four years, and the Lords
will grant it but for two years, this Bill shall not be delivered again to
the Commons: But if the Commons do grant but only, for two years, and the
Lords do grant it for four years, then the Bill must be remanded up to the
Commons, and in that case the Lords must make a Scedule of their intent, or
else indorsed in this form, Les seigneures se assent pur durar pur quater
anne: And when the Commons have the Bill again, if they do not assent to it,
then it is no Act or Statute; and if the Commons do consent, then they do
indorse their answer upon the Margent within the Bill in a certain form.

And then it shall be delivered unto the Clerk of the Parliament, vt supra.

If the Bill be first delivered to the Lords, and the Bill does pass them,
they use not to make any indorsement, but to send the Bill to the Commons, and
if it ^sse them also, it is used to be thus indorsed, Les Com^ones fout
assentant, etc. And therefore if John at Style lie attainted of Trespass by
Parliament, if he do not come in by such a day, he shall forfeit such a sum.
And the Lords do give a longer day, if it do not come to the Commons again,
it is no Act or Statute, because it was not remanded again to the Commons
after the enlargement of the day given by the Lords.

Every Bill that does pass the Parliament in both Houses, shall have relation
to the first day of the Parliament: And the use is, not to make mention what
day the Bill was delivered into the Parliament: If no day be specially
appointed by the Statute, when it shall Commence: As if one Parliament be
holden by diverse prorogations, Plowdens Commentaries fol. 79. a. 6.

If a Parliament do Commence before Penticost, and has continuance after
Penticost, and the Commons do agree to a Bill after Penticost, and in the same
do give day till Penticost next coming; and the Lords do so also, because
the Bill shall have no relation the first day of the Parliament. Therefore if
it be not prevented, it shall be taken for that Penticost that is past at that
Sessions, whereas th^intent of the Lords and Commons was, that it should be a
future Penticost after that Penticost mentioned in the Bill. See Brooks
Prerogatives and Parliaments. 4.

The Barons in the upper house of Parliament may (...) some cases give their
voices by procuracie, not so (...) the Commons house, and those Procters must
be Barons, and of the Higher house of Parliament. But in the Commons house of
Parliament it is otherwise, for the Clarke of the Parliament take the notice of
the most ^ands or voices sounding at once. And therefore if (...) their assent
be issuable, the Clergy may say Per majorem-numerum generalis. So in case of
Election of Crowner or a Knight of the parliament. See Plowdens Commentaries.
126, a.

All the privileges which do belong to those of the Commons house of
parliament: a fortiori do appertait to all the Lords of the upper house; for
their, persons are not only free from arrests during the Parliament, but
during their lives, nevertheless the original cause is by reason they have
place and voice in Parliament: And this is manifest by express authorities
grounded upon excellent reasons in the Books of Law.

And if a Baron, Viscount, Earl, Marquess or Duke, of England bring any
action real or personal, and the defendant pleads in abatement of the Writ,
That h^ is no Baron, Viscount, Earl, etc. And thereupon the demaundant or
plaintiff pleads in abatement of the Writ, and takes issue; This Issue
shall not be tried by a Jury, but by the Records of the Parliaments wh^ there he
or his ancestors, whose heir he is, were called to serve there as a Peer, or
one of the Nobility of the Realm, See sir Edw. Cokes 6 part. 53. and part.
fol. 17. a.

In the ancient Britanes and Saxons Kings days, the Archbisheps and Bishops
were called to their Parliaments, or other assemblies of State; which was
do^not so much in respect of their tenures, for in those days all their
tenures were Francki Almonage, but especially because the Laws and Councels of
Men were then most current and commendable, and had a morblessed issue and
success, when they were ground upon the fear of God, the root and beginning
of wise dome. And therefore our wise and religious Ancestor called thither
those chief and principal persons (...) the Clergy, who by their place and
possession, by the^ gravities, learning and Wisdom might best advise them,
what was the law of God, his acceptable will and pleasure: That they might from
their humane Laws answerable, or at the least not contrary or repugnant
thereunto. Nevertheless shortly after the Norman Conquest, the Conqueror
altered the tenure of the Bishoprics, not without some complaint and grief
of the Clergy, as it is mentioned in Matthew Paris, Anno 1070.

And in the Constitutions of Clarendon, in the time of H. 2. Anno 1164. It is
expressed in the eleaventh Article.

Thereby we see the presence of the Bishops in Parliament, in respect of their
Baronies, quousque Perueniatur addimiaicionem, etc. for so even unto our times,
when question is had of the Attainder of any Peer, or other in Parliament; the
Archbishops and Bishops depart the higher house, and do make their Proctors;
for by the decrees of the Church, they may not be Judges of life and death.
Ever since the Conquest the Archbishops and Bishops have no title to have place
and voice in Parliament, but only in respect of their Temporal Baronies.

And it is to be observed, that although of latter times the use and manner of
pening of Satutes, is that it is enacted by the Lords Spiritual and Temporal,
and the Commons in the same assembled: yet the ancient form was not so, which
you may see exemplified in Sir Edward Cokes 8. part. fo. 19.

And good Acts of Parliaments may be made, though the Archbishops and Bishops
would not consent thereunto: for a Statute was made Anno 1196. by the King, the
Barons, and the Commons (Clero excluso:) And this was at a Parliament holden at
Saint Edmundsbury, in the reign of E. 1. as it is reported by Jewel Bishop of
Salisbury against Harding. fo. 620. And in the province of Mirton, in the time
of H. 8. 1272, a matter was moved of Bastardy, touching the legitimation of
Bastards, borne before Marriage; where it is said, That the Statute did pass
entirely with the Lords temporal, against the wills of the Lords spiritual:
which Statute is in the Books in the 20 year of H. 8. 3. c. 9.

And in the 11. year of R. 2. cap. 3. It is enacted, that the Appeals,
Pursuits, Accusements, Processes, Judgments, and Executions, made and given in
this present Parliament, be approved, affirmed and established; as a thing
duly made for the weal and profit of the King our Sovereign Lord, and of all
the Realm, notwithstanding that the Lords Spiritual and their procurators did
absent themselves out of the Parliament, the time of the said Judgment given,
for the honesty and salvation of their estates, as it is contained in a
protestation made by the Lords Spiritual; and their procurators delivered in
this present Parliament.

See Kelbaucyes Book, fo. 184. in the 7. H. 8. The Justices did say, that our
Sovereign Lord the King may well hold his Parliament by him and his Temporal
Lords, and by the Commons also, without the Spiritual Lords, for the
spiritual Lords have not any place in the Parliament Chamber, by reason of
their spiritualties, but only by reason of their Temporal possessions.

The Sovereign power of this high Court of Parliament is this; That albeit the
Kings Majesty has many great privileges and prerogatives, yet many things
there are, not effectual in Law, to pass under the great Seal by the Kings
Charter without Parliament: as upon this point it was resolved by all the
Judges in the Princes case, That the Dukedom of Cornwall, etc. did not, nor
could pass from E. 3. by his Charter made in Parliament; That his Son and
heir apparent, and to his heirs inform, as it was intended and made in Anno
11. of his reign. But of necessity it was, and so was done by authority of
Parliament: which Case is notable and worth the reading. See Sir Edw. Cokes 8.
part. fo. and his 7, part. fo. 7. a. The King by his Letters Patents may make a
devision but cannot naturalise him to all purposes, as an Act of Parliament may
do; for the Kings Charter cannot make any hereditable, in this case, that by
the common Laws cannot inherit. And herewith agrees the 36. of H. 8. Denizon
Brook.

Bracton in the beginning of his second Book, says; Nihil aliud potest Rex in
terris cum sit dei minister and vicarius quam quod de jure potest: and a little
after, Itaque Potestas sua est Iuris non injuria and sicut sit author Iuris non
debet inde Injuriam nasci occasio vnde jura nascuntur.

And it appears in Fitzharberts natura Breuium 222 in the Writ ad quam
damnum, that every grant of the King or gift, has his condition expressed or
employed, as by the Law annexed to it; Itaque quod per adonationem illam patria
magis solito non overetur sui grauetur.

And therefore it was resolved by all the Judges 4. Iacobi, that they who dig
for Saltpeter, may not dig within the Mansion house of any Subject, without
his assent, for the manifest inconveniences that thereby may grow to the owner
of the house. See Sir Edward Coke 11. part. 82.

Also the Commission to be made, the purveyers for Timber, for the Kings. use;
yet they cannot by that authority make Timber Trees growing upon any man's
Freehold: for that is prohibited by Magna Carta ca. 21. nos necballi^i
nostrinec alij capemus boscum alienum ad castra vel ad alia agenda nostra nisi
per voluntatem cuius boscus ille fuerit.

A Commission was awarded to take singing Boys in Cathedral Churches, or in
other places where such are instructed for the furnishing of the Kings Chap.
pell; these general words by construction shall have a reasonable
understanding: That is to say, such children who be taught to sing, thereby to
acquire or get their livings, such may be taken for the Kings service; But the
son of a Gentleman, or any other, who is taught to sing for his recreation,
ornament, or delight, may not be taken against his will, or against the will of
his parents, or friends, and so it was resolved by all the Judges, and whole
Court of Star Chamber 43. Eliz.

If a man be attainted of Felony or Treason, by Verdict, Outlary, Confession,
etc. his blood is corrupted: which is a perpetual and absolute disability for
him or his posterity, to claim any hereditament in Fee-simple, either as heir
to him or any Ancestor Paramount him, and he shall not be restored to his blood
without Parliament: and the King may give to any attainted person his life, by
this Charter of Parliament. See Stamfords pleas 195. For the King cannot alter
the CommonLaw, or the general customs of the Realm, such as the descent of
Gauill kind, Borough, English, or such like, without Parliament. See Brooks
Prerogative 15. and 11. H. 4. c. 73.

And it is set down for a rule; That if a King have a Kingdom by descent
there, seeing by the Law of that Kingdom he does inherit that Kingdom, he
cannot change those laws of himself, without consent of Parliament.

Fortesough also says in his 9, c. fo. 25. 6. If the power of the King over
his Subjects were Royal only, and not politic, then he might change the
Laws of the Realm, and charge his Subjects with Tallages and other Burdens,
without their consent. And such is the dominion of the Civil Law purports, when
they say, quod priueipi placuit legis hahet vigorem. But by the laws of this
Kingdom, the King cannot by his Proclamation alter the Law; But the King may
make proclamation that he shall incur the indignation of his Majesty, that
withstanding it. And by his absolute authority, the King may commit any one to
prison during his pleasure, see Stamford 72. But the penalty of not obtaining
his proclamation, may not be upon pain of forfeiture of his goods, his Lands,
or his life without Parliament. see Cromptons Courts 14. a. and 16. 6. sed
omnes non capit hoe verbum: for they of another profession in Law say, that of
these two, one must needs be true, that either the King is above the
Parliament, that is the positive law of the Kingdom; or else, that he is an
absolute King, Arest. leb. Plict. c. 16. And therefore though it be a merciful
policy, and also a polliticke mercy; not alterable without great peril, and
to make Laws by the consent of the whole Realm, because no one party shall
have cause to complain of a partiality, yet simply to bind the King to or by
those laws, were repugnant to the nature and constitution of an absolute
Monarchy.

In some special cases there sometimes may be liking of Subjects without land
of possession, as in the government which Moses had over the children of
Israel; in the Wilderness, and in the case which Sir John Popham, the late
Lord chief Justice, did put in the Parliament, If a King and his Subjects be
driven out of his Kingdom by his Enemies, yet notwithstanding he continues
still King over his subjects, and they still are bound to him by their bonds of
allegiance, wheresoever they be: But he cannot be a King without Subjects, for
that were Imperium inbellans and Rex and Subditae sunt relatiua,

I believe Solomon that says, per me reges regnant and Principes insta
dicerunt, and I make no doubt, but as God ordained Kings, and has given Laws
to Kings themselves, so he has authorized and given power to Kings to give
Laws to their Subjects, and so Kings did first make Laws, and then ruled by
their Laws, and altered and changed their Laws from time to time as they saw
occasion, for the good of themselves and of their Subjects.

By the Premises it appears, that Acts of Parliament and Statutes are made
in this high Court of Parliament by the King, with the consent of the Commons,
or by the greater part of them, for so says Littleton in the 15. E. 4. fo. 2.
a.

In the Parliament, if the greater part of the Knights of the shiere do assent
to the making of an Act of Parliament, and the lesser part will not agree to
it, yet this is a good Act or Statute, to last in perpetum: and that the law of
Mayor pars is so in all Counsels, Elections, etc. both by the rules of the
Common law and the Civil, and Common Law also.

In this Court of Parliament, they do make new positive Laws or Statutes, and
sometimes they enlarge some of them, as unto them seems good: and it is good
counsel, that in making of laws, quod eius fieri p^ssit, quam plurima legibus
difinientur quam pacissima vera ludicis arbitrio relinquantur, Yet for so much
as every considerable circumstance cannot be foreseen at the time of the
making of the law, for, rerum progressus ostendunt multa quo in mitio Preeaueri
seu proderi not possunt. Therefore by the very intent of the makers of the
Statute, they do many times leave to be supposed by the discretion of
th'executioner of the Law, that thing which was not conveniently comprehended
before hand, by the wisdom of the Authors of the fame: for the expounding of
the Laws does ordinarily belong to the reverend Judges, and in case of
greatest difficulty of importance, to the high Court of Parliament. See
Plowdens Commentaries, sol. 363. a. 364, and 365.

And the Judges do say, that they may not make any interpretation against the
express words of the Statute, where th^intent of the makers of the Law do
appear to the (...), and where no inconvenience by the Statute shall ensue:
for in such cases A verbis legum non est (...).

But to exemplify all the several kinds and forms of penning them, and the
words of them taken and construed, sometimes by execution, sometimes by
restriction, sometimes by implication, sometimes by disjunction, sometimes a
disjunctive for a copulative, sometimes a copulative for a disjunctive, the
present tence for the future, the future for the present, sometimes by equity
out of the reach of the words, sometimes taken in a contrary sense, sometimes
singularly, as Continens pro content, and such like, will ask a volume by
itself, and in my opinion is not incident to this discourse of the
Jurisdiction of high Court of Parliament.

Hereunto is annexed A brief Abstract of the worthiness of, and some
memorable matters done by PALIAMENT in this Kingdom of ENGLAND.
By Parliaments all the wholesome fundament^ Laws of this Land were and are
established an^ confirmed.

By Act of Parliament the Popes Power and (...) pre^acie, and all superstition
and Idolatry are (...) gated, abolished and banished out of this Land.

By Act of Parliament Gods true Religion, wor^ and service are maintained and
established.

By Act of Parliament the two famous vniver^ties of Cambridge and Oxford have
many wh^ some and helpefull Immunities.

By Parliament one P^erce Gaveston, a great ^vorite and notable misleader of K.
Edw. 2. was (...) moved, banished, and afterward by the Lords e^ecuted.

By Parliament Empson and Dadley, two n^rious Polers of the Common wealth, by
exacting ^all Laws on the Subjects, were discovered, and afterward executed.

By Parliament the damnable Gunpowder-Treason (hatched in Hell) is recorded to
be had in eternal Infamy.

By Parliament one Sir Giles Mompesson, a Modern Caterpiller and poler of the
Common Wealth, by exacting upon Inholders, etc. was discovered, degraded from
Knighthood, and banished by Proclamation.

By Parliament Sir Francis Bacon, made by King James Baron, Vera^m and Viscount
St. Alb^nes, and Lord Chancellor of England, very grievous to the Common
wealth, by bribery, was discovered and displaced.

By Parliament Sir John Bennit Judge of the Prev^gatiue Court pernicious to the
Commonwealth in his place, was discovered and displaced.

By Parliament Lyonell Cra field (sometimes (...) Merchant of London) made by
K. James Earl of Middlesex, and Lord Treasurer of England, hurtful in his
place to the Common wealth, was discovered and displaced.

By Parliament one Sir Francis Mitchell, a jolly Justice of Peace for Middlesex
in the Suburbs of London, another notable Cankerworme of the Commonwealth, by
corruption in exacting the penal Laws upon poor Alehouse-keepers and
Victuallers, etc. was discovered degraded from Knighthood, and utterly disabled
for being Justice of Peace.

By Parliament Spaines late fraud was discovered, and by Act the two Treaties,
with that persidious Nation, for the match of the Prince, our now gracious
King; and restitution of the Palatinato were dissolved and annihilated: both
which had co^ the King and his Subjects much money, and much blood. We may
remember that that sage Counceller of State Sir William Cecill Lord Burleigh
and Lord Treasurer of England, was often times heard to say, He know not what an
Act of Parliament might not do: which sage saying was approved by King James,
and by his Majesty alleged (...) oneof his published speeches.

Which being so, now the face of Christendom being at this present so torn
and ^ably ^serated, and the Christian World stra^ the Gospel in places, almost
persecuted, both Ch^h and Commonwealth where the Gospel is (...) (...) places
beyond the Seas, lying a ble^ding (as we may say) and we our selves at home
not without fear and danger. To conclude, what good may we not hope and pray
for, by this present and other ensuing Parliaments: the only means to
rectify and remedy matters in Church and Commonwealth much a ^asse. Amen.

Vivat Rex

Flore^t Reg^m

Benevaleat Parlamentum,

FINIS.

