THE ARMS OF THE TOBACHONISTS,


How the Arms were first found,
I Lately did most diligently look,
F^ om end to end quite through a Harralds book
Whereas I saw the arms of Monarchies,
Of Empieres, Kingdoms, Principallities,
Of Nobles, Gentiles, and of Corporations,
Devised with many thousand variations:
And amongst all these honorable Crests,
I found no Arms for the Tobaconists:
Jask'd the Herrald why they were forgot,
He answered me that they belonged not
To heaven, or earth and that he knew right well,
They must derive (...) Herraldry from hell:
And that there is n(...), or Whore all most,
Or Pander, Broaker, (...) Knight of the post:
A Roarer, or an ordinary Gull,
But could imblaze their Arms unto the full.
I gave him thanks, and kindly bad adue,
And went and sought, and found the smoaky crew:
With oaths and smoke, all in a room close sitting.
With huffing, puffing, snuffing, spawling, spitting:
After a slauering haulke, and drisling hem,
One bouldly asked what I would have with them:
I told him my request, he straight stepped out,
And courteously he thus resolved my doubt.
The Arms emblazoned.
A Man reuerst proper improperly,
In a field Sable mounting up on high,
His fair posteriours whilsts, his head and hands
Are pendant to his legs whereon he stands;
Out of his mouth two pipes a Cheueron makes,
From whom the precious vapor that he takes:
He at his back side, very freely vents,
As sweet as sugar carrion to the sents:
Above two furies claws a match has got,
Or else a halter with a riding knot.
The Crest a Mores head gardant on a wreath,
Of party Sable Argent underneath:
The Helmet a full Tavern looking-glass,
The Mantells smoke, which from the nostrill pass:
Inuellops round the scoucheons on each side,
By which it is Adornd and Clowdifide,
The tassells that unto the mantells hang,
Are liquors that will make their Noses twang:
As Ruby, water Whorehound, Cloue or Hum,
Hot Nutmeg, fair Angellica, and Mumme
The two supportes (cleanly all to keep)
Are French Babounes, whose note is chimny sweep:
But now to give the reader some content,
The mortal tells what in the Arms is meant.
The Morroll.
THe Sable field resembles hells black pit,
Whereas the Devils in smoke and darkness sit:
The man reuerst shows men, or beast indeed,
That doat to much upon this heathen weed,
Who smoke away their precious Time and Chinke,
And all their profit is contagious stink:
The pipes and fume unto us does disclose,
How it leads coxcomes daily by the nose;
The match or halter in the goblines paws,
Portends the fatal period of the laws:
That those that wast themselves in air and smoke,
May to the hangman leave both coat and cloak,
The Moors head shows, that cursed Pagans did,
Devise this stink, long time from Christians hid:
The Topfull pispot shows the vain excess,
Of men orecharg'd with fume and drunkenness.
The Mantells shows these fellows mighty skill,
That can turn money into vapors still:
The Tassells at the end depending here,
And have these virtues very hot and dear,
Are like to Whores that often hang upon,
Tobaconists, till all their mony's gone:
By the Supporters, wisdom wisely notes,
Tobaconists wants sweeping in their Throats.
LONDON, Printed by Richard Shorleyk^r. 1630.


