Le franc Discourse.

A Discourse, presented of late to the French King, in answer of sundry
requests made unto him, for the restoring of the Jesuits into France, as well
by their friends abroad, and at home, as by themselves in diverse Petitionarie
Books.

Written in French this present year, 1602. and faithfully Englished.

Printed Anno. Domini. 1602.

To all true Catholics and other her Majesty's loving Subjects.
THE Printer says, we must be short: briefly therefore thus. The reports
which the Jesuits give out amongst their adherents: do in some points not much
displease us. Though we cannot have (if they prove true) what we desired: yet
have we so much, as makes their hearts to groan. We are (as they say) acquit in
Rome from schism. Burn then your book Ma. Lyster: which you writ against us.
Tichborne, Hadddock, Array, or whosoever gave information, that we were
condemned in Rome for Schismatics, to speak plain English, lied. And you R.
Archpt Garnet, Jones, and all the sort of you, blush for shame: (it is some
sign of grace) in that you were so peremptory, to lay so false an imputation
upon us. It appears now, that you showed therein neither judgment, nor
learning: but what spite, and malice, let the world judge. But more
particulerly to you Ma. Archp: Is it not reason, that you should with tears
bewail your rashness: in condemning the censure of Paris? It is something, that
you have so gross a foil: but that is not sufficient. What injury also have
you done to your Canonists, whose testimonies you perverted triu^phantly? Could
neither your own reading, nor your dear Fathers illuminations, their
familiarity with GOD, the companions of Jesus, better direct you? Behold
(good Readers) your Apostles, your Masters, your Pilots, your Leaders.

Our faculties are judged (as we also hear) to have been validae ab initio,
sufficient from the beginning, that first we received them. Repent then in like
manner Ma. Provincial. Your words were blasphemous, when you writ: that it was
sin to entreat us, or help us to say mass: and that they, who should receive
the Sacrament at our hands, seemed to receive povson. How ridiculous also have
then your featherlesse bolts been (Ma. Archp:) which full blindly (God
knows) you have shot about in every corner at us? Many Edicts, and
prohibitions you have published Magistraliter to vex us: but with more
boldness, then discretion, as now you may see. And for you Ma. Parsons: has he
so indeed? Durst his holiness check you? Could not the Spanish Ambassadors
prevent such a disgrace? But hold up your head man. Though our Archp: shall be
no more bound (as they say) to depend upon your lips: yet you know him to be a
trusty Roger unto you, and your crew. What he was before commanded to do,
he will now perform of his own accord. As good never a whit, as never the
better: as long as he sits at the helm.

Yea, (but say you) my Masters: who must still govern the Seminaryes? We
hope we shall curb you well enough. Besides, my children, or subjects, the
fellows of Jesus, shall remain amongst you in spite of your hearts. Good
words Father, Christ Jesus, and your brood, fellow and fellow-like? Good
fellewes, we assure you. But must you govern still our Seminaryes? Keep the^
your children from them, dear Catholics: except you intend purposely to have
them trained up in treason, if they may have their wills. You must remain
amongst us. We are heartily sorry for it: and that in two respects. First,
because you are their mediate head: and such a head, as we suspect is either
mad, or lately become addle. Why man: what mean you, by the Propositio^s sent
us lately out of France? You have forsooth a Reformation in hand: whereunto the
Counsel of Trent must yield homage. All must be squared to the Apostles times.
It is well said good Friar. The apportioning of every Clergy man's part, to
live upon: comes within the Rules of your new discipline. And what then
shall become of his holiness estate? Must he have no larger a portion, to
maintain him with, then S. Peter had? Blocks (you will say:) I only speak of
England. By your good favor Ma. Friar, you also affirm, that after you have
done your pleasure in England: all other churches elsewhere, must conform
themselves to ours. Certainly, the man is either not well in his wits: or else
we shall have R. P. shortly transformed into T. C. But of these points, you
shall hear more before it be long. Secondly: how many Jesuits of your humor
in England, so many vassals and sworn friends to the King of Spain: and
consequently so many enemies to her Majesty, her state, and kingdom: nay we
know not, how many else we may join with them, Iesuited seculer priests, lay
Jesuits, and all other Catholics, that will be advised by them, and follow
their precepts. But must you remain here? tell us truly: Indeed we feared
as much. And therefore we thought it our duties, to acquaint both you (good
Readers) and all the rest of her Majesty's true subjects (be their religion
otherwise how it shall) with the Jesuits Catechism (lately published) and with
this present Treatise: that seeing we cannot prevail, to have them all called
hence, we might make it apparent to all (that will not hoodwinke themselves
wilfully) what is to be looked for at their hands. A Jesuit is a Jesuit,
wheresoever he become. Neither may England expect less, then France has felt:
if they continue amongst us, and be not better hamperd, then yet they are. We
wish, and desire with our hearts, that all true hearted Englishmen, and
especially they, who are in authority, will be pleased to consider seriously
of the things, which we have written tending to this purpose: and withal (for
this time) to read and observe (if not this whole discourse yet) the 85. 86.
87. 88. 89. pages thereof. GOD preserve this Realm from their Spanish
designements: her Majesty from their Clements, Barrieres, and Ehuds, of the
Jesuitical inspiration: the good estate of the Catholic church from their
frantic deformations: us poor secular priests from their malicious
practices: and you all true Catholics from the leaven of such Pharisees. Amen.

Yours to do you faithful service in our functions.

The Errata.
PAge 44, line 8, for of our Nation, read of their Nation.

Page 82, line 25, for Bull, read Libell.

Page 85, line 6, for Spaniard, read Sauoyan.

Page 108, line 1, for prove, read procure.

Page 112, line, 21. read gloried in it, and since their banishment also, as
has etc.

Page 130, line 23, read have of the murder of our late, etc.

A free, and faithful Discourse, written to the King, touching the Restoring
of the Jesuits, which is so earnestly sought, and sued for at his hands.
THE many Petitions sundry wise presented unto your Majesty in favor of the
Jesuits, and the many reasons alleged unto you against them, cannot but breed
in your mind much doubt, and distraction. Upon this ground I conceived, that
it might be some contentation to your Highness, to see in brief what I have
laid down on either part, stepping over many points of small moment, and
insisting only upon such as are of weight, and able to move the heart of a
mighty Prince in a cause of high importance, and requiring present and speedy
resolution.

It is most true (my gracious Sovereign) that by restoring the Jesuits, you
shall give great contentment to a number of Catholics within your Realm, who
esteem them men of special use and service for the rooting up of these New
opinions in Religion, and moreover bind and assure unto you, the greatest part
of my Lords the Cardinals, who much favor, and affect them as for sundry
other respects, so especially in regard of their exceeding travails
undertaken for the spreading, and enlargement through the whole world as well
of the Catholic Religion, as of the power, and authority of the Holy Sea.
They are men fit for action, industrious, vigilant, and valiant, to whom the
Pulpit rests greatly indebted for coming in so dangerous, and troublesome a
season.

These are the main, and principal reasons, which may sway your Majesty on
the one side; as for that point, which is alleged touching their Instructing
of youth, it deserves not almost to be thought upon: in as much as (all things
rightly weighed) they have in truth done more hurt, then good to learning. My
reason is this in a word.

Before their coming into France, all the wits of best hope, all the youth of
best breeding, were always brought up in the University of Paris, where were
seen continually twenty, or thirty thousand students between French and
Forrainers. This famous multitude drew thither all the excellent Scholars, all
the notable men of Europe, some to show themselves, others to benefit
themselves. The public Lectures founded by Frauncis the first, were for ten
years before their coming sued for, and supplied by the worthiest Scholars
of those times. At that time were read in the College of Cambray alone, more
excellent and learned Lectures in one month, then have been since in a whole
year throughout all the University, taking the Jesuits also into the number.
Who finding means to plant themselves by degrees in all the chief Cities of
the Realm, have thereby intercepted and cut off the springs, from whence
issued this great multitude of students, and therewithal quite extinguished an
other essential good, which spread it self to all the young fry, that were
brought up at Paris, who grew to more purity of speech, civility of manners,
and conformity of mind to the geneall state and government, then since that
time they have done, never setting foot out of their several Countries.

One point more, I must not forget, which was likewise noted by the University
of Padua, in their Complaint exhibited in anno 91. against the Jesuits, before
the Signiorie of Venice, at which time they were inhibited to read to any, but
those of their own Society: the point is this. That the maine scope of their
own studies being Divinity, they use to substitute over all their Forms
(the first only excepted) none but young Punies, fitter (God wot) to be
taught, then to teach: insomuch as our youth continuing until 15. or 16. under
the hands of such raw, and ignorant fellows sildome or never grow to be of
any eminent note, or attain (as we see) to any excellency in their
professions. This was apparently proved in anno 94. what time the University
preferred their Complaint against them. They endeavored to find out some worthy
Lawyer, of their own Scholars, to whom they might commit the Defense of their
cause: (which might perhaps have been some help to their matter) they found
out a number as well young practitioners, as ancient Pleaders, who had been
trained up in their schools, but not a man of them all thought able to
sustain the burden of so weighty a cause: and in the end, they were feign to
have recourse to another, without doubt, an excellent Lawyer, but never any
Scholar of theirs. They bring up their Scholars, rather to contemplation,
then to study, and action. Likewise for Physic, a learned profession, and
full of deep knowledge, how many rare men do we see of this profession, that
have been their Scholars? As for Humanity, and the mystery of the tongues,
therein are they less conversant. Will you have the truth, their proper
element is Divinity, that is their Faculty, that is their field: therein are
they expert: and to that purpose they cull out in the very bud, the most
pregnant and sharp wits, and look who once comes under their fingers, hardly
gets away again: by means whereof, their Order becomes a confusion of
several nations: moreover, they take a course to help and further one
another, and by conference to have use of one another studies: In conclusion
all the world must acknowledge them to be kings in this Faculty, the Queen of
all Faculties.

In saying that they are not skild in the depth, and mystery of the Tongues,
my meaning is not to deny, but that in their number may be found men of some
reasonable knowledge in Humanity, but this I say, that we may not look to
find amongst them any, comparable to those four ornaments of France, the
peers of learning, so acknowledged, and confessed over the whole world, of whom
there are three yet living, and the fourth also suruiues in his better part.
All the Jesuits that ever were, are scarce worthy to be accounted so much as
Scholars to any one of these four, and I am certain the wiser sort of them
will confess as much: mary their answer will be, that it is not their study;
and that the mark they aim at, is Diuimtie, as in truth it is.

Furdermore we are to observe, that those amongst them, who attain to any
extraordinary knowledge that way, busy not their brains any longer with the
Instructing of youth, but presently betake themselves to the study of
Divinity, wherein being prompted, and assisted by the best pains of the
greatest men amongst them, they fall a practizing with their pens: and do
good service (we must confess) for the maintenance of our Catholic Religion
against the writings of our Adversaries.

And certainly this plentiful number of theirs, has yielded some one or two
excellent in this kind, who flourish in an elegant phrase, a confident style,
lofty passions, good method, and a thousand pleasing points of Art: in
conclusion (if I be able to judge) the two Petitions by them presented to your
Majesty, are two exquisite pieces, wherein whatsoever our great Masters of
the Art of Rhetoric, have left in precept, is carefully put in practile. To
give the^ their due, I see not how their cause could have been better
defended.

As then it cannot be doubted, but that their painful endeavors in the study
of Divinity, have incensed those of the pretended Reformed Religion against
them, so can it not be denied, but that there are diverse things not in their
actions only, but even in their doctrine it self, which make them odious to
many good Catholics, every way as sound, and zealous as themselves. I will
insist only upon one point (for I may not abuse your Princely audience) but
such a point as is well worthy your audience, none more worthy, in as much as
your whole state depends thereon.

It may please your Majesty to understand, that amongst the Sorbonists there
have stepped forth at times, yet but sildome times, some who being ouerswayed,
and carried away by the colorable reasons of those, who at Rome have published
Treatises touching the power of the Keys, have assayed to set this doctrine on
foot, That the Pope had power to excommunicate Kings, and absolve subjects
from their oath of allegiance. But such Positions have been no sooner broached,
but presently condemned, as schismatic, as well by the whole body of the
Sorbone, authorized generally by the Church of France, as also by the Decrees
of your Court of Parliament, the two chief safegards of your predicessors to
shield them from all practices, intended against them.

The Popes are for the most part (as at this present) men of great integrity,
and well affected to the Realm of France, in remembrance of those great
benefits, which the Holy sea has heretofore received from your Majesty's
Crown: Nevertheless, there happen such to be chosen otherwhiles, as do
wholly incline in affection to the Spanish party.

If this mischief should happen, and that the people were persuaded in
conscience, that their King might be lawfully excommunicated, and themselves
discharged of their oath of allegiance, questionless our Kings would be in
great ieopardie, to see themselves quite dispossessed of their sovereignty and
state, and should in truth hold their Crowns but by courtesy and favor,
depending upon the pleasure, or displeasure of whomsoever it should please my
Lords the Cardinals, to promote to the Sea; the most part whereof are possessed of
rich benefices in the Duchy of Milan, in the kingdom of Naples, and moreover
in Spain it self. This were not to be an imperial King, but a Viceroy, a
king in name, but in effect a Lieutenant General, such as were those petie
Kings, whom the Romans were wont to crown, and vncrowne at their pleasure. All
that ever lived since Christianity first set footing within this land, have
evermore detested this opinion, as the most pestilent that could be infused
into the minds of Subjects, and the most repugnant to the word of GOD, who
tells us, that his kingdom is not of this world. Upon which text Saint
Augustine has John. 18
these words. Hearken ye Jews and Gentiles, Transl. 115. in loan.
harken all earthly kingdoms, I prejudice not your sovereignty in this world.
And S. Luke, Chap. 12. One of the company said Master, command my brother to
divide the inheritance with me; and he said unto them, Man who made me a
Judge, or a deuider betwixt you?

Upon which place Saint Bernard comments in this manner. They which maintain
^^b. 1, de consid.
that opinion [speaking of the contrarie] shall never be able to show, that any
of the Apostles did sit at any time as a Judge, or vmpire, or a deuider of Land
between man and man. To conclude, I read that the Apostles have been judged
by others, but that ever they sat to judge others, I never read. Erit illud,
non fuit, that may be in time to come, but never yet has been.

Upon these infallible grounds, and infinite others (which for breuity I omit)
has the Sorbone, and in the Sorbone the whole Church of France, evermore
concluded this Position to be schismatic: That the Pope had power to
excommunicate our Kings, or any way to proceed against their Most Christian*
Majesty's. And John Tanquerel was in the year 1561. adjudged by sentence of
the Parliament to make open submission, and to ask forgiveness of the King, for
presuming to insert the said Proposition amongst his Theses, (abeit he openly
protested, that he did it not but by way of disputation) and escaped very
hardly from being condemned to die for it. It fell out happily for him, that
the King was but eleven years old, had he been but 14. it had certainly cost
him his life.

When I say that the Sorbone has ever condemned this Position, I mean, ever
until such time as the Jesuits had trained and bred up a great part of the
students in their Lectures of Divinity, which they read daily in their
College. For to say truth, in the year 1589, when the Bull of excommunication
against the late King was brought into France, and the question propounded in
the Sorbone, Whether the Pope had power to excommunicate the King or no,
presently the most ancient Doctors as Faber the Syndic, Camus, Chabot, Faber
the Curat of S. Paul's, Chauagna^, and all the rest of the elder sort, men of
the soundest heads, and hearts stoutly opposed, and withstood it. But the pack
was made sure. For the younger crew, who had all of them been the Jesuits
auditors in Divinity, as Boucher, Pigenat, Varadier, Semelle, Culli, Aubour,
and a number of others, carried it by voices, both against the word of GOD,
and all the ancient Canons of France.

That it is the opinion of the Jesuits, that the Pope has power to
excommunicate Kings, to free their subjects from the oath of allegiance, to
deprive them of their scepter, their crown, and state, it cannot be denied:
inasmuch as they themselves being by the University of Paris, charged with
this pestilent and pernicious doctrine, are so far from denying it, as that in
their Apology, written with deliberation, in the year 1595, by the general
advise of the whole Society, entitled La verite Defendue, that is, The
defense of the truth against the Pleadings of Anthony Arnald, in the 70. page
they use these very words. Thou need not to prove that Kings are, or ought
to be sole temporal Lords in their own Realms, seeing that the Pope (as I
have said) pretends no title to this sovereignty, except it be to reform, as
a Father, nay as a Judge, those who otherwise would be pernicious to the
Church. For in this case he not only may, but ought to show himself their
Superior both for their good, and the good of the Realm. This Exception I
know, makes thee half mad: I see it goes mightily against thy stomach, yet
there is no remedy, it must down with thee, and thou moreover must
acknowledge thy self to be void both of sense and conscience in denying it.
For first of all it is for the behoof and the good of Princes, who for the
most part are sooner bridled, or brought to their duties for fear of their
temporal estate, which they evermore hold dear, (although they be wicked)
then of their spiritual, whereof they make light account, unless they be
religious, which is not universally seen in them all. For this cause did God
menace the Kings of Israel if they disobeyed his commandments, rather to
deprive them of their temporal Kingdoms, then to exclude them from eternal
life, which he confirmed by practice upon the first King, whom he bereaved of
his scepter and kingdom.

The Jesuits perceiving that all the Canons of the Church of France, and all
the Decrees of your Majesty's Parliament, are directly opposite to this
pernicious doctrine, which they by little and little instill into the minds of
the people, (being therewith in former times altogether unacquainted) they are
driven to this plunge, to say that the histories of our Kings, which we bring
for instance, are but examples of disobedience, or Rebellion against the Holy
sea. These are their words. Art thou so ill La verite defend. page 64. 65. et
66. of the first impression.
advised, art thou so unworthy a child of thy mother France, as to cite out
of the French Chronicles, examples of rebellion, blemishing thereby the glory
of our Kings, and of our common mother?

And about two pages after, Jn a King whatsoever is, is eminent, be it good, or
evil, if he employ his power to do ill, there is no way to bridle and
restrain him, but by an eminent power: for which cause has this sword been
practiced, and put in ure in the person of diverse Kings, and in diverse
kingdoms: and albeit the practice have not always succeeded, yet might it
always have done, If the subjects had been well disposed, or prepared
aforehand.

Was ever any thing more plainly delivered, and yet was ever any thing more
flatly repugnant to the word and will of God? Gods will is, when he sends us
virtuous Kings, that we render him thanksgiving, when he sends us bad and
wicked Kings, yet that we praise his Name notwithstanding, being certainly
persuaded, that he does it for the best, to weane us thereby from the love of
the world, that we may with the more willingness and alacrity depart Baruc.
1.
therewith. 1. Pet. 2.


It is God only, who seateth Kings in their thrones, it is he only, who by
taking them to himself (at his own good pleasure) is able to remove them. The
Keys which he committed to S. Peter, and to our Holy Fathers his successors,
have relation only to the kingdom of heaven, and no way to terrestrial
kingdoms. Himself while he soiourned here upon earth, did he ever, out of
his omnipotency, offer to chastise Kings, and to tread upon their Diadems?
No: quite contrary, his whole life was but an opend book, and story of
humility, neither has he put any other sword into the hands of his
Apostles, to plant his faith withal. He said unto them, The Kings of the
Nations bear rule over the^, and they which exercise authority among Luke, 22,
them, are called Gracious Lords, so shall it not be amongst you.

It was no part of Gods will, that either S. Peter, or our Holy fathers his
successors, should take more upon them, then himself had done: neither in
truth did the ancient Bishops ever attempt it. If others of later time take a
contrary course, they do therein abuse their authority, and are in no wise to
be obeyed. This has ever been the judgment of the Church of France,
excommunicating all those that avouched the contrary, as authors of a
barbarous and most accursed doctrine, which endeavoring by impiety to make men
religious, does evermore beget a world of murders, firing of houses, rauishment
of wives, rapes of virgins, making whole Cities desolate, and whole Countries
desert. This is the gulf of gulphs, the sea of abominations; we have tasted
it to the utmost.

And yet for all this do the Jesuits grow daily more obstinate in this
opinion, persuading us (if at least we will be persuaded) that the Bulls of
Rome, have power to depose all the Kings of the earth, and to deprive them of
their temporal state and sovereignty.

Agreeable thereunto is that which Father Bellarmine a Jesuit, now Cardinal,
writes upon this argument: In regard of 1. Controu.
the persons, (says he) the Pope, as Pope, cannot 3. li. 5. ca. 6.
(though there be just cause) by his ordinary power depose civil Princes in
that manner as he deposes Bishops, that is, as their ordinary Judge: but as a
supreme and sovereign Prince in cases spiritual, he may (if need so require
for the saving of souls) translate kingdoms, take them from one, and give them
to another, as we will prove. And in the eight chapter, for proof hereof he
alleges all their violent, and tyrannous proceedings directly opposed to the
word of God, and through all histories detested, and abhorred: the sequel
whereof plainly shows that the chief strengthening, and establishment of the
Turkish Empire proceeds from the outrageous civil wars amongst the
Christians, caused by such usurpations, which have made Europe on all sides
from East to West, to bathe herself in the blood of her own children.

S. Ambrose kept himself far enough from touching (so much as in thought)
the scepter, crown, or temporal estate of the Emperor, or from discharging
any subject whatsoever of his oath of allegiance: neither in truth could he
have done it, without flatly impugning the commandments of God. That which
he did, was but a sharp admonition or reproof, to signify and make known the
grievous quality of the trespass.

Furthermore, I must not forget to note, that the same 1. Controu. 3. lib. 5.
ca. 7
Bellarmine, and the same Jesuits, in their aforesaid La very. desend. page
42. of the last impress.
Apology, do uphold, and endeavor to approve the common Extrauagant, viz.
vnam sanctam, de maioritate et obedientia, which has been heretofore
condemned in France. By virtue of which Extrauagant, though the Pope
forgetting himself should swerve from justice, and attempt more, then he had
warrant to do, yet are men bound, to yield obedience thereunto, and God only
may judge of his doings. Insomuch as in case the Pope should injuriously and
contrary to all right, shoot his thunderbolts against a King, (as we have
seen the like practiced in anno 89, in the person of our deceased Master, a
most devout Catholic) yet, if we believe the Jesuits, no man living may
enter into judgment of the matter, as being forbidden us, and reserved only
to GOD: In the mean time must this King in the view of all his subjects, nay
by his subjects themselves, be dispossessed of his crown and state, and into his
throne may step any other, who^ it shall please that Supreme power to assign,
which is authorized by Bellarmines vvarrant, to translate kingdoms, to take
them from one, and to give them to another. The very terms used by
Tanquerell, (Regno et dignitatibus priuare potest: he may take from them their
crown and dignity) which were condemned by that famous sentence of the
Parliament. Yet was not Tanquerell so audacious to avouch, that the Pope having
taken it from one, might give it to another.

Father Bellarmine the Jesuit goes a step further. For he peremptorily
affirms, In the Tractat: de exemptione clericorum. Printed with the Treatise
of Indulgence. 1599
that all the Clergy of the Realm, are exempted from being your subjects. A
position as flat contradictorie to the express word of God, and to the Canons
of the Church of France, as the residue that has been spoken. Yet does he
stoutly maintain it, laboring by mere Sophistry to avoid that saying of S.
Paul, Let every soul be subject to the higher powers, for there is no Romans 13.
power but of God, and the powers which are, are ordained by GOD. And a little
after. Therefore we must be obedient, not only to avoid their anger, but
also for conscience sake. For this cause also you pay tribute, for they are the
ministers of God, appointed to that end. Whereupon S. Chrysostom notes, that
those words are not spoken only in regard of the Laity, but likewise of the
Clergy, of religious persons, nay of the Apostles themselves.

Moreover, the same Father Bellarmine strives to defeat those words of S.
Peter. Submit your selves to all manner ordinance of man, for the Lords sake,
whether it be unto 1. Pet. 8.
the King, as unto the superior, or unto governors, as those which are sent
by him.

Whereunto Bellarmine amongst other things answers: that at that time it was
necessary with all diligence to admonish the Christians, to perform obedience
to their kings, for fear least the preaching of the Gospel might otherwise
have been hindered.

What is this, but to make our Christian Religion, a religion of mere
Impostors, a Religion of Matchiauelists, pretending at the first, that our
kingdom is not of this world, all of us, as well of the Clergy, as other, live
in obedience to Kings and Governors: But afterward having once gotten the
wind, and seized the Sword into our own hand, then to change our note
clean contrary, and in presumptuous manner to arrogate to our selves, that
which almighty God has reserved as his own prerogative over the Kings of
Israel, and all other whatsoever. Indeed this is right the Jesuits religion,
these be their policies, this is the path they tread, to insinuate or get
footing within a Realm: but Christian religion keeps a far other course, it
speaks sincerely, and unfeignedly, without cloaking, without coloring, without
dissembling: it neither withdraws, nor embezeleth any subject whatsoever from
his Prince, as does the religion of the Jesuits. For mark I beseech you,
Bellarmines conclusion, in the 271. page of the said Tractat: De exemptione
cleric: You will say perhaps, this were a wrong done to Princes, if against
their will they were deprived of their right, which they had over Clergy men,
before they were of the Clergy. Whereunto I answer: that there is no wrong
done them: inasmuch as a man in using his own right, does no man wrong. But
who so chooses that calling, which he judges most fitting, and agreeable to
his disposition, he uses but his own right, although it follow accidentally,
that the Prince is deprived of his subject.

This is not to stand long hammering about the matter: This is to make short
work, and to tell you in a word, that look how many Clergy men your Majesty
has, so many subjects has the Pope in France. And to that effect in the 255.
page he has these very words: The Pope has exempted all the Clergy, from the
subjection of their seculer Princes, whereupon it follows, that as
concerning the Clergy, they are not Sovereign Princes. This is (my liege) in
good French, to erect another state within the state, and another kingdom
within your kingdom. For proof of which doctrine, flatly repugnant to
Christian religion, he frames a Simile, in the same place, and tells us: This
is all one, as if a King should make over some part of his Realm into the
subjection of another, and in so doing, either by the law of arms, or some
other just title should forfeit a part of his Sovereignty. Adding withal,
that the establishing of this his Position, is of more dangerous consequence to
Princes, then the loss of a maine battle, or of an entire Province might be.
And he says truly, for the malady is within our bowels, and they that are
already lost, do by their close confessions many times draw and inueigle
others; to the subversion of that Monarchy, under which they were borne. And
whereas (says he) we are sometimes fame to stoop to the civil Magistrate,
it is Page 268. de exemp. cler.
but perforce, as being constrained to strike sail: but this case infers
no consequence. They affirm moreover, that the constitutions of Princes,
although they co^taine nothing repugnant to the scripture, nor to the Canons
and sacred Decrees, yet do they not bind the Clergy, farther then ad
directionem, non ad coactionem, to inform them, but not to enforce them. They
be their own words, page 269, agreeing with that which follows page 271.
that subjects after they are entered into the Clergy, are no longer subjects to
the seculer Prince, who forthwith loses and forfeits them. And in truth it is
a clear case, that he is no longer a subject, who can no longer be inforst to
yield obedience to the Laws.

These heresies (my Liege) were once wholly rooted out of your Realm of
France, but these fellows begin to sow them thick again, and have found
the means cunningly to convey this De exemp cleric.
Treatise into France, together with that of Indulgences, shuffling it in
amongst the prease, that it might pass unregarded.

Of this Position, viz. That those who are entered into the Clergy, are no
longer subjects, follows a strange consequence, to wit, that they may
conspire and practice against their King, and yet not incur the guilt of
treason. This is delivered in express terms, in the Aphorisms of confession,
written by the Jesuit, Emanuel Sa, upon the word Clericus. The rebellion of a
Clergy man against his King, ^s not Treason, because he is exempted from being
the Kings subject. And upon the word Princeps they do more manifestly declare,
how far they disagree from the word of God, who enioyneth us with patience to
tolerate evil Princes, being seated Pet 2.
in the throne of their ancestors, as being given us by his own hand. But
what say these men? A King may be deposed by the State in case of tyranny, or
if he govern not as he ought, or for any other just cause, and another may be
chosen by the greater part of the commons. Howbeit some are of opinion, that
he may not be deposed but only for Tyranny.

Where first of all we may note their bad meanings, to leave a point of that
consequence at large, and undetermined, and yet who knows whether they do it
in policy, or no, that they may be at choice to hold either the one or the
other part, according as shall best fit their desires, and designs. Secondly,
what is more dissonant from Christian religion, then to leave it to the
liberty of the people, to judge of the good, or ill government of their
Prince, and to make them believe, that without peril to their conscience, and
offense to God, they may, either depose him from his crown, or deprive him of
his life? provided always that the greater part be of that mind. A clause most
important, for if the lesser part were of that brainsick opinion, then might
they fortune to perish in the attempt; and what pity were it to loose a
company so well disposed to Iesuitisme, that is, to hunt their Lord and
Master out of his proper inheritance, crying after him, Atyrant, Atyrant? And
this is the reason, why Pardo the Inquisitor of Anwerp, in the very end of that
book dated 1597, allows it this commendation, that it was like to yield
great fruit, and commodity, and God knows whether it were not in his
thought, that the greatest commodity it could yield to his Master, was to
help forward the destruction of your kingdom, with whom at that time he was
at mortal wars. Furthermore, the same Jesuits, in those Aphorisms of
Confession, (which they daily beat into the minds of the people) add
hereunto upon the word Tyrannus, He which governs tyrannically a kingdom,
whereof he is rightfully possessed, cannot be deposed, but by authority of a
Parliament: but sentence being once given, the next at hand may execute it. And
he may be deposed even by those his subjects, that have sworn perpetual
obedience to him, in case, after admonition, he do not reform himself.

I leave it to your Majesty's consideration whether this doctrine touch you
neerlie, or no. Certain I am it imports not so much to the whole world
besides, as it does to you alone, and to your posterity. France is your own
inheritance, which you hold only by God and by your sword. If the world
should continue ten thousand years longer, and your posterity as long (as we
are to wish it might) it ought in right to reign continually over France,
neither shall any Pope, (as some of them may fortune to be enemies to your
house) ever have authority to absolve so much as one Frenchman, from that
allegiance, which he shall owe to your succession. But if these Positions may
once creep in amongst us, then shall your posterity wear the Crown, and
enjoy the scepter so long, as shall stand with the pleasure of the Holy Sea,
and no longer.

Out of this first principle is deduced a second, whereupon I see much
written on both sides, but none comes near the mark. Some affirm that the
Jesuits counsel men to murder Kings, but they do them wrong. For they (God
wot) clean contrariwise serve and obey Kings, and many times also with hearty
affection: but mark their distinction. They hold that, such as are
excommunicate by the Pope, are no longer Kings, but Tyrants, and what they
comment upon the word Tyrannus, your Majesty has already heard. In brief,
grant but their first proposition, and the second will follow of necessity.
For allow the Pope power to intermeddle with the scepters and temporal
estates of Kings, (according to the Jesuits doctrine) then is it clear that a
King, (being once by his Holiness declared excommunicate) remains a private
person, and no longer King: and if he offer obstinately to continue his reign,
he is to be held a Tyrant. Whosoever will yield them the former proposition,
shall be drawn perforce to the latter. That Libell written by John Guignard a
Jesuit with his own hand, (as he acknowledged in the open Court of Parliament,
both the chambers being assembled) contained both these Propositions, but
under most insolent and outrageous terms. For among other things, he breaks
forth into these words, That cruel Nero, was slain by a Clement, and that
The late king used many times to go on procession in the habit of a Munck.
counterfeit Muncke, was dispatched by the hand of a true Muncke. This heroical
act performed by James Clement, as a gift of the holy Spirit, (so termed by our
Divines) was worthily commended by the late Prior of the Iacobins, Burgoin a
Confessor and Martyr. The Crown of France, may and ought to be translated
from the house of Bourbon, unto some other: and the A term given the king that
now is, by the Leaguers for that he was borne at Biarne, a town in Gascoine.
Biarnois (although converted to the Catholic faith) shall be more favorably
dealt withal then he deserves, if receiving a shaven crown in exchange, he be
recluded into some strict Covent, there to do penance for all the miseries he
has brought upon France, and to render thanks to God, that had given him
the grace to acknowledge him before his death. And if without arms he cannot
be deposed, let men take arms against him, if by war it cannot be acco^plisht,
let him be murdered. Your Majesty may see the original copy, it is well
worth the sight.

Moreover, Ambrose Varade was Rector of their College at Paris, chosen by
themselves, as one of the honestest men in their Order, and is at this day in
as great credit amongst them, as ever he was. Yet if your Highness please but
to send for a copy of Barrieres arraignment, you shall there read, that this
Varade was the man, who (the next month after your Majesty's happy conversion)
did animate the said Barriere, to go and sheath his two-edged knife in your
breast, binding him thereunto by the Sacrament, and assuring him by the living
God, that he could not do a more meritorious act, and that he should
therefore be carried by Angels into Paradise. If this be not true, Varades
might do well to come in an clear himself in Court: he was in this town what
time your Majesty entered it, and some few days after, but he lay close all
the while, and stole away disguised; taking his course to Rome, where now he
lives in as high estimation among the Jesuits, as is possible. It is an easy
matter to deny any thing in words, but deeds are of greater validity, and
confute words.

Varades then being detected of this cruel and detestable crime, should have
been brought unto you piniond by the Jesuits themselves, to receive due
punishment, for examples sake, if they had not been all of his mind. But when
as quite contrary, they honor him (as you see) more then ever they did, and
stick not at this day, to register his name among the worthiest persons of
their Order, we may conclude that in respect of their wish, will, and
affection, they did all of the^ encourage Barriere, by the mouth, and mediation
of Varades, and that this parricide was not particular in him, but general in
them all. It is a practice grounded upon their maine principle, from the
execution whereof they expect their chief credit, and commendation, as
hereafter shall be showed.

If you ask me, where it is that Varades is by them yet at this day recond for
one of the worthiest persons of their Order, I must refer you to the Of the
first ^mpression.
265. page De la verite defendue, published a whole year after Varades fled.
What have not many worthy persons of this society endured? Who knows not
(to speak of our country of France) the indignities which have been offered,
and the slanderous reproaches which have been uttered against John Maldonat,
Aimond Augier, Claudius Matthew, James Tyrius, and at this present against James
Commolet, Bernard Rouillet, and Ambrose Varades? Where by the way we must note,
that these men are with them extolled for notable Martyrs, as having suffered
marvelous afflictions. This is as proper, and as charitable a speech, as when
they term the Complaint of the University of Paris against them in the year
64, a cruel persecution. A strange abuse of the word. It were a far more
proper speech, to call those outrageous, and bloody wars, which were by the
Jesuits kindled through all parts of the Realm, The persecution of all the
good subjects of France.

But if Barriere had been a scholar of the Jesuits, nuzled, and trained up in
their doctrine, he would hardly have been brought to appeach Varades. For they
believe it to be present damnation, to reveal to the Magistrate, who they were
that wrought or incited them to such attempts. And this is a third Proposition,
which follows out of the first, and second. For if the Pope may lawfully
excommunicate Kings, and that being excommunicate, it is a good, and
meritorious deed to murder them, then does it follow of congruence, that the
party ought constantly to endure martyrdom therefore, and not to procure
their death, who set him the ready way to everlasting life. These Propositions
are linckt and combined together, they hang all by one thread. And this is the
reason, why Chastell forbear to accuse any one of the Jesuits in particular;
For, having resolved, to stab you in the throat with his knife, and believing,
(as he professed) that the act was lawful and meritorious, it follows, that he
believed, he should be certainly damned, if he discovered the party, who (in
his erroneous opinion) had directed him the way to Paradise. And yet see how
God, the Protector of Princes, is wont to draw the truth from out of their
mouths, that most of all endeavor to cover, and conceal it. For these are the
very words of Chastels examination, whereof your Majesty may see the
Original, which shall be avouched and justified for true, by more then thirty
of my Lords the Presidents, and Counselors of the Parliament, whose testimony
is a thousand-folde of more validity, then whatsoever the parties can allege
in their own cause.

Being demanded, where he learnt this new divinity? he answered, he learned
it by Phylosophie. Being demanded if he studied Philosophy in the Jesuits
College. He answered he did, and that under Father Gueret, with whom he had
been two years and a half. Being demanded, if he had not been in the
Chamber of Meditations, into which the Jesuits used to bring the most notorious
sinners, there to behold the pictures of many deiuls in diverse terrible
shapes, under pretense to reduce them to a better life, in truth to affright
their minds, and incite them by such terrors to do some notable service. He
answered, that he had been oftentimes in the said chamber. Being demanded, by
whom he had been persuaded to kill the King. He answered, that he had heard in
diverse places, that it was to be held for a most true principle, that it was
lawful to kill the King, and that they, who said it, called him a Tyrant.
Being demanded whether this argument of killing the King, were not ordinary
with the Jesuits. He answered, that he had heard them say, that it was
lawful to kill the King, and that he was out of the Church, and that he was
not to be obeyed, nor held for King, until he were absolved by the Pope.

Again being demanded in the great chamber (my Lords the Presidents and
Counselors thereof and of the Tournelle being assembled) he made the same
aunswers, and did in especial propound, and maintain that maxim, viz. that
it was lawful to kill Kings, and in particular, the King now reigning, who was
not in the Church (as he affirmed) because he had not the Popes approbations.

Whosoever should read the Peticions, which the Jesuits have presented unto
your Majesty, would suppose that Chastell never touched, or accused them at
all: so confidently do they stand in denial of the truth. But I know not,
what greater accusation can be devised, or what waightier crime they can be
charged withal, then to have bewitched and possessed the tender souls of young
youth, with so desperate a doctrine, as carries them on to the slaughter of
their Prince.

With this agrees that which we read in the Confession of William Parry,
made at his death, that Benedetto Palmio a Jesuit, first caused him to
undertake that resolution for the murder of the Queen, and that afterward
one Wats a Priest, to whom he imparted it, dissuaded him from the attempt,
telling him the act was damnable: vvhereupon, seeing this contrariety of
opinions, he repaired to Anniball Codretto a Jesuit, to be confessed, who told
him, it could not be but this Wats was an heretic: for the true Church made
no question, but that Kings, excommunicated by the Pope, were ipso facto,
Tyrants, and therefore ought to be slain. Likewise the Commenter, upon that
book, which is called the Epitome of Confessions, otherwise the 7. book of
the Decretals, page 308, after he has commended the Jesuits, all he can, (as
they have many commendable parts, we must confess) at last, for the close and
vpshot of al their praises, he adds this, They assault tyrants, they weed the
cokle out of the Lords field.
Tyrannos aggrediuntur, lolium ab agro Dominico euellunt. Your Majesty may
read the book, you will easily make construction of this piece of Latin, I
have heard you interpret much harder in my days.

To be short, there is no man can doubt, but by this weeding the cockle out of
the lords field, (wherein he commends them to be so expert, and so resolute)
is meant the dispatching, and making riddance of those, who by the Bulls of
Rome, are declared excommunicate, whom they term all by the name of Tyrants,
what religion so ever they profess.

And certainly all the world can witness, that the late King was always a most
earnest Catholic, and no man but knows, how well (and that by many
particular benefits) he deserved of the Church; yet after the sentence of
excommunication was at Rome declared against him, Father Co^molet, and Father
Bernard, (both which are by the Jesuits in their aforementioned Apology even at
this day extolled and deified) and generally the whole company of the Jesuits,
never affoorded him better title to his dying day, then the names of Tyrant,
Holofernes, Moab, Nero, and such like, which practice suteth very fitly with
their definition of a Tyrant above specified.

At Christmas in 1593, your Majesty was converted Catholic, yet
notwithstanding at Bartilmewtide following, the same Commolet, used these words
in the Pulpet. We stand in need of an Ehud, be he munck, or soldier, or
shepherd, it matters not, but we stand in need of an Ehud. And not long
after, having advertisement that the matter was informed against, he secretly
conuayd himself away. This can be no more denied, then the fact of Varades,
which yet they labor to cover and disguise, affirming that Barriere indeed
disclosed his intent unto him: mary Varades made him answer, that he, being
a Priest, might not give him any counsel in the matter. Say there were nothing
but this, was not this in other words to say, You should about it without more
talk, let your words be fewer, and your deeds more?

But if your Majesty please to send for the trial and confession of
Barriere, you shall there find, that Varades, Rector of the Jesuits, confirmed
him, encouraged him, and bound him by the blessed Sacrament, to strike the
stroke resolutely, and courageously. Once certain it is, your Majesty never
escaped a greater danger in your life. And what wonderful triumph would they
have made, think you, at your death, who showed such excessive joy at the
slaughter of the late King, proudly insulting over his Hearse, by letters
dispersed into al parts of the world, and for the greater glory, printed by
them at Rome? These are inserted amongst their solemn, and annual Letters,
page 305, and are thus translated. The same day that the King expelled us out
of Bourdeaux, was he expelled out of his life. The report was, that he sent
us to A Town in Guienne, 5. leagues distant from Bourdeaux.
S. Macaries, with an intent to cut all our throats there, had not his own
been cut first. The report of this news, struck our adversaries into a
wonderful amazement.

I never was possessed with greater admiration in my life, the^ when I read this
branch of their Letters. For who could ever have believed, that Christians,
much less Religions persons, would have openly professed such rancour, such
enmity so immortal, as death is self could not determine? Nature teaches us
to have remorse, and commiseration of our enemies, when we see them lie
breathless upon the earth: they cease to be enemies, when once they cease to
be. But to tread upon the dead corse of their Master, of their liege-Lord, of
their King, of the foremost King of Christendom, and thereupon to sound victory
and triumph, can there be, or be imagined any impiety, any inhumanitie, any
cruelty co^parable to this?

It is true, the poor Prince had no feeling of this outrage, neither indeed
was it done to him so much, as to your Majesty, and to any whatsoever he be,
that bears the name of a Frenchman: this I am sure, he felt and tasted a
deep portion of that poison of the League, which was tempered by Claudius
Matthew, a Jesuit, who died in Italy about the end of 88, being surfeted with
his continual travails into Spain, Italy, Swizzerland, Germany, and the
low Countries also, (after the death of Mounsieur) for the contriuing,
knitting, and fortifying of this great, and horrible confederacy against the
late King, and the whole line, and family of Bourbon: Guignard a Jesuit has
written it, and your Majesty has read it, That the crown of France, might
(...) ought to be translated from the house of Bourbon to some other.
Furthermore, they that understand the whole secret of the League, spare not
with open mouth to speak it, that the Father Jesuits, were the true Fathers and
founders of the League, and consequently aunswerable for the death of all
those, who were swallowed in that vast gulphe, by the^ set open: I will recite
you a brief story, which shall clear this point of all controversy.

There is no man but knows, the purpose and designement of the Sixteen
governors chosen, during the rebellion by the seditious multitude within
Paris, to rule the city.
Sixteen, who by a Letter, which was intercepted, made tender of the City of
Paris to the King of Spain. And whether go these Sixteen to choose them a
President of that their bloody counsel? Went they not directly to the
Jesuits, who commended unto them Father Otho Pigenat? This is confessed by
themselves in their Apology, printed at Paris: mary they pretend, it was to
mitigate and allay the humor of the Sixteen. Some man perhaps would answer,
that this was, to quench fire with oil, to turn a Jesuit among a crewe of
seditious persons. For my part I say not so, I say the Sixteen did in truth
need a bridle, and not a spur, and that the only course to bring their
designs to the mark they shot at, was to temper their extreme and outrageous
violence. But in the mean time, who sees not a wonderful correspondencie,
and agreement between these Sixteen executioners (for by what fitter name can
I call them? seeing with their own hands they hanged up the chief President of
the Parliament, the only President that remained at Paris) who sees not I say,
a singular correspondence of those Sixteen, with this society of Jesuits,
since they desired to have a Jesuit for their President, above any other of the
Clergy, or Laity?

Moreover, who knows not that from the beginning of the year 85, their
Colleges both at Paris and elsewhere, were the common retreits for all those
that labored the advancement of the Spanish affairs. Thither were the
packets addressed, there opened, and from thence dispersed: that they had daily
intercourse with the Spanish Ambassador Mendoza, and those that succeeded him
at Paris, and generally with the Agents and Factors for king Phillips causes,
in all the good towns where they remained. Your Majesty knows it, no man
better.

The troth is (my liege) they allege, that you are now united in so straight
a league of amity with the king of Spain, as that these objections ought
rather to make for them, then against them, inasmuch as your Majesty affects
none more entirely, then those who bear a hearty and entire affection to the
Spaniard. This speech may happily come now in season, but I assure you, I
thought it strange to hear this speech following, to fall from their pens at
that time, when we were in the chief heat of our wars with the Spanish
king. Jn La very. defend. page 129. of the first impress.
Charles the ninths days the Spaniards were not spoken of but in the better
part: but the heretics in hatred, not of our nation, (for then ought they to
carry a deeper hate to the English and to the Almaines, who have heaped more
mischiefs upon France, then any other Nation) but of their Religion, have
endeavored to make them odious under pretense of the state. This me thinks was
something too much, to discover and unmask, their love to the Spaniard, at
such a time, when upon the borders of Picardie, thousands of Frenchmen perished
by their swords. Me thinks their Fatherhoods should not suffer themselves to be
so much transported either by their own affection, or by the general vow of
their Order, as to forget in what place they were bred and borne, and not to be
touched with the least feeling of the woeful calamities of their Country,
especially they being catholics, who^ the Spaniards thus slaughtered in great
multitudes, without all remorse, or respect either of age, or sex.

This (me thinks) savors of a heart too sauadge, and degenerate, to speak so
largely in defense of them, who at the same instant were bathing their hands
in the blood of our countrymen, and those Catholics also. What though the
Spaniards give these Fathers respect, honor, and reverence above ordinary,
though they bind them by many special benefits, and singular favors, though
they entitle them by the name of Apostles (as they themselves do publish in
their writings) yet ought they not for all this (especially in France) to use
the same style of them in the heat of war, as in the time of peace.

In the Petition which they afterward preferred to your Majesty, they have
dilated this argument, though with greater liberty of speech, yet with more
reason, then at that time. Their words are these. And whereas they challenge
us to be Spanish: that was an accusation, fashioned in the forge of of time,
and it bare a good test in that season, (only in respect of the season) that
is, while the war continued between France, and Spain. In those days it
was an odious name, a name full of suspicion and hate: but now, that that your
Most Christian majesty has knit the fast knot of a sacred peace with his
Catholic highness, and that the French is brother to the Spaniard, and the
Spaniard to the French, now is this challenge out of date, it is unseasonable,
it is unreasonable.

And yet (my liege) to tell you true, this I observe (besides the too evident
proof, which we have formerly had thereof) that through out all these glorious
and painted speeches, they still discover their hearts to be mightily engaged to
the king of Spain. The troth is, they have an earnest desire to deliver your
Majesty of all jealousy, and distrust thereof, and to that purpose employ the
utmost of their art: yet notwithstanding, a man shall perceive, they would not
at any hand, but your subjects should take notice, that they remain true
devoted servant to king Phillip, presuming that this opinion, makes greatly
to the advancement of his affairs. Which when I compare with the sentence of
the Inquisition, disannulling the Determination of the Sorbone pronounced
against the Jesuits in anno 54, (as themselves are wont to vaunt:) as also
with their first foundation erected by a Spanish Captain: and moreover with
those words, which are contained in the Vita Ignatij. Printed at Anwerpe in
anno 1587, page, 403.
Legend of their said Patron: We ought earnestly and incessantly to pray to
his heavenly Majesty, that it would please him in health, and happiness, long to
prosper the Catholic king Phillip, who by his hereditarie, and incomparable
piety, and devotion, his singular wisdom, his incredible vigilancie, his
puissance, infinitely exceeding any Princes, that is, or ever was in the world,
stands as a Bulwark for the defense of the Catholic Religion. And this he
does, not only by his forces, which have ever been invincible, but by the means
also of his Famous Court of the Inquisition, which studieth day and night for
the good of the Catholic religion.

When, I say, I compare all these points together, it makes me sorely to
mistrust (I must confess it to your Highness) that if misfortune should
kindle any fresh coals of war, betwixt your Majesty and the Spaniard, you
should have these false brethren ready, underhand to perform you all the lewd
and bad offices that could be devised. In the mean time, be sure, they are not
idle; but continually pursue the advancement, and increase of their doctrine
above mentioned, wherein they professed, in the year 89, they had taken mighty
pains with aunswerable profit and success. [And we find it too true] For such
a Bull as the last, had it been addressed against The late kings father.
King Henry the second, it could not have shaken the least Town in France:
which notvvithding, by the help of the Jesuits, and their almost thirty years
travails, procured the death of his son, who would have made it but a
mockery, as his predecessors had done before him. Is it not wonderful, that
an army of two hundred thousand men, could not have been able to effect so
much against our late King, as about two hundred Jesuits have done, by
disposing his subjects, that is, by drying up their natural sap in such sort,
as the fire took at the first touch: whereas before that time, al France was
an Ocean, whereinto these kind of thunderbolts no sooner fell, but they fell
out.

True it is, that as long as your Majesty and your successors shall continue
in good terms with the Holy sea, the maine fruit and effect of this doctrine
will not appear. And you are to hope, that you may always so continue, but
times to come can promise no assurance, and that's the reason, that in time of
peace, you set men a work to fortify your frontire Towns. It is almost
impossible, that the Keys, for three successions together, should escape the
hands of a Spanish partaker, there being so many such in the number of the
Cardinals: if that should happen (give me leave to tell your Majesty freely
and without dissimulation) your crown, scepter, and kingdom, would come to
this iumpe: if there fortund more of your subjects to cleave to the Jesuits
opinion, then to the contrary, if their faction were the stronger, the^
farewell crown, and kingdom: if theirs were the weaker, you should indeed
continue ^n your Sovereignty, but not without the confusion of many your
subjects, and the effusion of much blood, as well sound, as corrupt.

Furdermore, your Majesty is to consider, that this doctrine of
Excommunication, carries with it at this present, more danger, and perrill to
our Realm, then in former times, when we had Sicilie, Naples, and Milan, which
have sometimes been subject to the French king.
territories, and sorces in Italy: by means whereof we wear at hand to
succor the Pope, in case he might be forced to do any thing to our prejudice.
But as now the case stands, a Viceroy of Naples, with the Spanish partakers,
that are within Rome, hold the Holy Fathers neck under their girdle, who
might be thrice besieged, and sacked, before we could come half way to the
rescue. Another inconvenience is, that Rome was never able to sustain it
self, but by the supply of come from Sicilie, their granarie.

And amongst the rest, this point deserves special observation, that the
Jesuits, being guilty to themselves, of what peril their doctrine is to the
state of Princes, are careful and wary not to discover it, when first they
creep, and insinuate into a State: but having once got firm footing, then do
they spread it by degrees from hand to hand amongst the people, who are by
nature ouer-apt, and prone to receive this poison. For what can sound more
plausibly to the minds of a multitude, then to be released of that bond of
subjectio^, whereunto they are by their birth tied, and engaged? I know that men
of understanding forget not that excellent saying of the Philosopher, That for
a man to live in subjection to his Prince, is true, and perfect liberty: and
the laws both of Nature and Nations, do teach and tie us to serve, and honor
that Prince, under whose government we first enjoyed the light of the Sun: and
that no flesh and blood is able to dispense us, for that obedience, whereunder
God himself has bound and concluded us: but for one well disposed mind, that
is thus persuaded, you shall find three that are of a contrary opinion, and
the mischief is, that commonly the stoutest, the most resolute, and desperate
fellows, are soonest carried down this steep, and headlong descent; and a
small number of such stirring spirits, prove too hard for a multitude of
others. Have we not had experience hereof? I am verily persuaded, that when
the late king was first proclaimed Tyrant in Paris, upon pretense that he was
excommunicate by the Pope, and therefore to be expelled his kingdom, the city
affoorded two for one, that were of a contrary belief, and would gladly have
seen him reign peaceably in the Louver, and a dousen of those rebellious
malcontents hanged at the The place of execution within Paris.
Grieve. But they stood staring one upon another: they wanted courage, they
wanted not strength. So have three thieves many times by surprisal robbed half a
score Merchants. They that keep the beaten road, and continue in their
natural obedience, take their rest in the night, and follow their business in
the day: whereas contrariwise, such as labor to exchange their old master for
a new, such as study to ouerturne the State, they have their assemblies by
night, hold their secret parlies, increase their strength daily: they have no
business else to entend, (for they live in the mean time upon their secret
pensions) so that in the end, they suddenly surprise the contrary side. He
that first lays hand on his weapon, has the advantage.

This then being so, that the Jesuits, firmly uphold these dangerous Positions,
and scatter the^ throughout the world (as has been shown) I assure your
Majesty, the danger of suffering this doctrine to take root, seems to me (I
must confess) to ouer-ballance all those considerations, that may be alleged
to the contrary. For as for overthrowing the New opinions in Religion, we may
say, and say truly, that as during the first fifty years, the opinions of
Luther and Calvin were stoutly proposed, preached, and published, so for these
five, and twenty, or thirty years, they have been notably confuted, both by
word, and writings, such as for depth of learning, have by infinite degrees
exceeded all, that ever were set forth by men of former times. And our selves
can testify, that the best, and most sufficient amongst them, are daily
reclaimed into the bosom of the Church: A matter that (in my opinion) should
work in us all, exceeding comfort, and contentment. For these blessed
conuersions are not forced with the Rack, with tortures, or with terror of
death: as is the manner of the Spanish Inquisition, (unto which, and to the
forces of Castile, the Jesuits wholly attribute the preservation of the
Catholic religion, as has been formerly declared:) but by the sword of the
spirit, and the everlasting word, mildly delivered by our Doctors, Pastors, and
reverent Bishops, whom I esteem no whit inferior, for learning, to the
Jesuits, although they sometimes borrowe their arguments, which are in truth
very sound and substantial.

And albeit the Jesuits have sometimes furthered such conuersions, yet this I
will say, that they are not (in my judgment) so fortunate herein, as are the
Bishops, and Doctors of our Church. Their carriage is so austere, and so far
different from the nature of our French Nation, as it difasteth men at the
first encounter. They converse and company so much with Spaniards, and withal
frame themselves so precisely to the imitation of their Paetron (a Spaniard
born) that their looks, their presence, their fashion, and behavior, carry
with them too great asemblance of severity.

Who so desires to cure a sick person, must apply himself to his humor, and
call about him such Physicians, as the patient can fancy and affect. Such are
not the Jesuits to Frenchmen: They have in so furious manner thundered out such
intolerable blasphemies against the deceased King, as the horror thereof does
to this day retain an impression in men's minds. Frenchmen have a certain
inclination by nature, to love their Prince: and that causes their hearts
suddenly to rise, and start within their breasts, when they hear such
outrageous speeches uttered against their kings. I once sent them word, (for I
once loved them well, if not too well) by a close copartner of theirs, with whom
I had talk about their doings: that I was sorry to see them so furiously
enraged against a dead man, and that the services, which this unfortunate
Prince had performed to the Church in his life time, having in her quarrel so
often times, in such a number of battles, in so many sieges, adventured his
dearest blood, might (me thought) deserve at least to have his memory spared,
when he was dead: They made him answer, there was some reason in that he
said, but the time required another course, for now or never was the season,
to settle and establish the Catholic religion quite through France. I soon
aimed at the meaning thereof, to wit, that they were determined, to work the
people into a dislike with the present government, under which they had so long
lived, persuading them to change their natural Lord for a new, and utterly to
extirpate the race and family of Bourbon. And when I afterward, beheld the
Received into Paris by the Sixteen, where they remained 3. years.
garrisons of Castilians, and Neapolitans within Paris, I took that to be an
entrance to the accomplishment of their former answer: and to be plain (my
liege) I made reconing, the game had been at an end, and that your Majesty was
never like to set foot within Paris; judging that the smaller towns would be
feign in the end to strike sail to the greater.

But God who has always had a singular care of this kingdom, the first
Christened kingdom in the world, has otherwise disposed it, and has by plain
miracle, in despite of your enemies, seated you in quiet possession of all
this spacious Empire, and to heap up the measure of your happiness, has given
you a beauteous, a noble, and a virtuous Princess, and within ten months,
(fore-stalling both our wishes, and our expectations) a true and lively Image
of your self.

The care for this young Prince, more then for your own person, exciteth your
Highness, with mature deliberation to consult of all the important affairs of
your State, in which number, this point touching the Restoring of the Jesuits,
may vvorthily claim a place.

In this consultation, one of these three courses must be resolved upon; either
to yield the Jesuits absolute contentment to their desires, or to make them
yield absolute obedience to your Decrees: or else to That is, neither to
restore them wholly into France, nor to remove them out of Bourdeaux and
Toulouse, where they yet remain.
let matters rest in such condition as now they are.

I will first enter into examination of the last branch, because it bears at
first sight the most plausible show, yet is in truth the least questionable: it
being a clear case, that the Jesuits are, either wholly to be restored, or to
be enforced, wholly to yield obedience to your Decree. If it be just, and
commodious for your state, that they be permitted to stay, then is it reason
they should remain as inhabitants, and not as exiles: if otherwise, then let
them be gone, and not be suffered, by their co^tumacie to give example of
rebellion, as they have done too long. The Lacedemonian state, was wont to
direct out but a small scroule of Parchment, less then your little finger, and
their command was instantly to be put in execution. It is a matter of absolute
necessity, that your Highness be obeyed as well at Bourdeaux and Toulouse, as
at Paris and Fontaine-bleau. You want no servant in those places, and
whatsoever you shall command, like a King, and absolute Lord, will be
executed, make you no doubt.

If the Jesuits be incommodious to your state, then suffer the^ not to take any
deep root in those two Provinces. The Tree which this year may be plucked up
with one hand, will the next year ask both: and the third, will need a
mattock, and an axe. This neighboring upon Spain, gives us just cause of
suspicion and jealousy. They have been always charged to be Spanish; they
have declared it in the whole course of their actions, the older this complaint
has been, the truer, and (...) it seems to be. They have been ch^sed out of
the residue of the Land, and do you not see, how they entrench themselves anew
in those two Provinces, adjoining unto Spain, from whence they had their first
original? what example of lowlines and obedience call you this?

If in any part of your realm, they should be least suffered to fortify, it
is in such a frontier, as is situate far from our Sun, and near to the climate
of Madrill: A man would judge, that Spain sets in, to back them: or that they
retire thither of purpose to barricado, and strengthen themselves against your
Majesty, as who should say, You have driven us out of Paris and other places,
but your arms are too short to force us any further. Can this be borne? I
cannot tell how certain Of Bourdeux and Thoouse.
Bourgomaisters (so reputed) who have been sometimes trained up under their
discipline, and fitted to their humor and appetite, and who now so stoutly
undertake the matter on their behalf, I know not (I say) how they conceive of
it: but they must know, that they owe as much obedience to your Majesty, as
the meanest vassal in Paris, none excepted. This is too high a presumption,
this is to open a contempt. Your want of issue has hitherto made them hold
you in neglect, (to use the words of an ancient Emperor) now make them know,
that they shall owe their allegiance to you, and your posterity for ever, and
it will make the proudest of them all to tremble. The remembrance of a
trespass done to the Father, never dies in the son.

It remains then (my liege) that either the Jesuits must yield obedience to
your Decree, or else that your Decree must be disanulled: behold the Gordian
knot, of this co^sultation. Many will rejoice at the first, and many likewise
at the second. To speak my opinion, your Majesty is not (as I think) so much
to respect, what will be pleasing to this, or that particular humor, as what
is just, and commodious to the whole. You cannot so carry your self herein,
but that you shall glad many, and grieve many: yet must you resolve one way,
and not always floate, and waver between both. What safer anchoring can a man
rest upon, then commodity, and justice: wherein also honesty is comprised?

1. As touching justice, God has committed it into the hands of Kings: The
Kings your predecessors (my liege) have from all antiquity here of
disburdened themselves upon the conscience of their The high Court of iu^tice
at Pa^is, (as the Kings bench ^s with us, and ^ot as our ^arlement, ^he
assembly of the 3. e^tates) wher^n there sit ^s Judges, ^n weighty ^auses, 12.
^eeres, six Ecclesiasti^all, and six ^emporall: ^^ ordinary ^ases there ^re
other ^udges sub^rdained. In several Provinces.
Parliament of Paris, and since for the multitude of causes, they have ordained
(b) seven other Parlements. But the Court of Peers, has ever retained (as it
was meet and requisite it should) the power, and prerogative, to decide all
matters, that concern the general state. This Bench is furnished with many
worthy persons, and such as are infinitely practiced in all sorts of causes,
but above al, in the determination, and judgment of matters criminal. For if
any men living do proceed thereunto, with exact and ripe knowledge of the
whole cause, without doubt it is they: And there was never man vet called in
question, but if he knew him self to be clear, would crave them for his
Judges before any other. Your Majesty can partly testify as much.

The whole proceeding of ^he Parliament of Pa^is against ^he Jesuits.
It is not since last day, that this Parliament has received Complaints against
the Jesuits: for in the year 64, they heard no less then ten Lawyers pleading
against them al at one time: amongst whom he that was Advocate for the state,
(a very worthy man, and a most loyal servant to his Master, as ever was any)
did at that time, (a strange, and wonderful thing to tell) prognosticate, and
foretell, all their actions and proceedings, which since that time have in our
knowledge been verified, and accomplished. When men afterward saw al those
things fall out true in practice, which he had prophesied; as first the
overthrow of the University, being by them brought down from thirty to
three thousand scholars, (as before was showed) and that the subjects began by
little, and little, to shrink from the obedience due to their natural Prince,
and to fix their eyes upon a new Loadstar: it made them begin to murmr, and
say thus to themselves (for the Jesuits had by this time made their faction
strong and were grown terrible amongst us) all this was foretold us by
Mesnil, the kings Advocate, but we would neither believe him, nor the Sorbone,
which at the same time also prophesied, that this Society was ordained for
destruction, not for edification, and was like to breed great trouble and
annoyaunce to temporal Princes. They are the precise words of the Decree: Your
Majesty if you please, may see the Original.

But when they beheld all order of government overthrown, the reins of
obedience cut in sunder, the Magistrates imprisoned, and some of them
massacred, the multitude like Lions broke loose, making spoil and hauock of
all honest people, and then these holy Fathers sounding the trumpet to this
multitude, and here Commolet, there Bernard, vomiting out a world of
blasphemies against their King, against their liege Lord, and on the other side
glorifying the King of Spain, declaiming in his praise, setting him forth for
the mightiest Monarch in the world, of greater puissance, of larger dominions,
then the Romans ever were: that he would never forsake them, he held them
(forsooth) so dear, only they should take courage, and know their own
strength: being confident, that his succors for men, money, and vittailes
should never fail them: Then in truth all well minded subjects, who had any
impression of the Flower de luce remaining in their hearts, began to be touched
with deep repentance, that they had not in time given ear to these
Cassandraes: but repentance came too late.

When your Majesty had reduced Paris under your obedience, it was expected of
all hands, that you should instantly have hunted out all those bad seruitors,
who had with their enuenomed cups, poisoned a great part of your subjects, and
with open face declared themselves sworn enemies to the King deceased, and
your self. But your Majesty, in your singular wisdom, thought it good, to
let the matter remain in the handling of the Court. The University, which
(not without just cause) imputed their overthrow in particular, (besides the
general ruin of the State) to this Society of the Jesuits, preferred their
Complaint into the Parliament, in May 94. The seculer Clergy of Paris did the
like. The cause was pleaded in Court, a huis clos*
but yet privately, which was no small benefit to the Jesuits: for if the
doors had been set open, the greatest part of that, they were charged
withal would have been witnessed by the whole Assistants; and fresh supply of
matters, was like daily to have come in, during those many days, that the
cause was in hearing.

In this mean time, happened that stroke which God turned away from your
throat, and used your teeth for a defense against it. No man made question,
from whence this stroke was sent, especially after knowledge, that the actor
was a scholar of the Jesuits nurturing, of whom he learnt (as himself
confessed) that the King was as yet out of the bosom of the Church, and
therefore ought to be slain, as appears by his deposition in open Court. And
in truth, this desperate, and accursed resolution, could spring from no other
root, but from those barbarous, and savage Positions before remembered. Such
co^ceptions are not ingendered by the ordinary course of nature, especially in
the hearts of Frenchmen, who are far remote from Africa, and never saw any
Monsters, before the Jesuits were scene in France. Our soil produces no such
venomous plant of it self, it cannot be, but some, or other has sown it
amongst us.

Upon this confession they sent to the Jesuits College, where amongst other
things, was found a discourse, pend by Father Guignard, and written with his
own hand; containing in it, the sap and marrow of all this barbarous, this
bloody, this prodigious doctrine. This whole practice iumpt with that which
had been prophesied, but not believed in anno 64, and with other predictions
the^ newly foretold. The court proceeds, to a full, and solemn trial (in
the assembly of the two chambers.) Guignard openly acknowledges this to be
his own hand writing, and Chastell likewise confessed it, in presence of the
whole Bench, to be the Jesuits ordinary and familiar talk, that the king was
still out of the Church, (albeit he were turned Catholic,) in as much as the
excommunication stood still in force: and that therefore he ought to be slain:
which in all points co^curred with that which Guignard wrote, if without force
he cannot be deposed, then let men take arms against him: if by arms it
cannot be accomplished, then let him be slain.

Upon these proceedings, what milder course could the Parliament advise on,
then to assent to the Request of the University: God himself seeming by a
kind of miracle, to show himself as Judge in the cause, by setting forth
(without further mischief) to the view of the world, the truth of that which
had at several times been prophesied against that Society, and which their
cunning slights, their smooth glosings, and their fained pretense of piety and
zeal, had charmed us from apprehending so steadfastly, as to take a speedy
course for their riddance from amongst us.

Thus upon full knowledge of the cause, the Parliament of Paris, pronounces
Sentence, by which they are awarded to depart the whole Land, and your subjects
prohibited to send their sons to any of their Colleges without the Realm:
Which is a clause of special importance: the execution whereof not being
looked unto, your Majesty shall reap but half the benefit of this Sentence.
For how studious and careful will they be, to ground such children, as shall be
sent them, in these dangerous principles, and to impose it, as a charge upon
their conscience, to season others with the same licquour? You are borne in
hand (my liege) that it is a matter merely impossible, to enforce the execution
of this branch, and that men cannot be kept from sending their children out of
the Land unto the Jesuits: it is not so; you shall find it a matter of the
easiest performance in the world. For let there be a penalty of a thousand
crowns inflicted for the first time, (the one mo^^ie thereof to accrue to the
informer) and the same to be doubled, as often as the Decree shall be broken,
you shall not see a man that will dare to transgress it. And is not here a
matter of wonderful difficulty, that it should deserve to be accounted
impossible?

By an other Sentence, is Guignard adjudged to die: his horrible blaspemies
against the deceased King, whose subject and vassal he was, and his brainsicke
doctrine against your Majesty, would not permit his life be spared, without
the hazard and pertill of yours. This Edict carried, in all men's opinions, so
great a weight of justice, so great a force of necessity, as it was no sooner
published, but Anno 1594
put in execution through all jurisdictions, save only in In Languedoc.
Toulouse and In Guienna.
Bourdeaux. For Toulouse there was reason, it standing as yet in terms of
disobedience with your Majesty, not being reduced until April in 96. As for
In Guienna.
Bourdeaux, it was at that time replenisht with most devout Catholics (but
most vowed enemies to the Spaniards, and the Jesuits, their vpholders) who
thirsted after nothing more, then to see the^ hunted out of Guienne, as they
had been out of all other parts of the Realm. But the Jesuits, having speedy
intelligence of this Edict, given out against them, had soon (as their wonted
manner is) by means of their co^federates, raised a mighty, and a strong
faction in Again, and Perigueux, where the embers of the fire of rebellion, were
as yet burning hot. There they caused to be framed diverse inuectiue Libels,
but in so insolent, and intolerable a style, as is not possible for any man to
conceive, that has not been aforetimes acquainted with the pen of a Jesuit.
For in brief, all the Courts that had adjudged them to exile, what were they
but a crew of heretics, that had ouer-ruled your Majesty to publish this
Edict? You shall hear the^ speak it. The enemies of the Cathelicke,
Apostolic, and Roman religion, have possessed your Majesty, with false, and
famed suggestions, to bring them into hatred, and jealousy with you, and with
your State: and without form, or shadow of trial, or entering into any due
examination of the cause, have condemned them to exile, and banishment. Did the
Parliament of France ever receive so foul, so unworthy, so slanderous an
imputation, such a vile indignity? and not content with this, they proceeded
further, and brake out into threats, telling us in their Peticions, that we
should see an alteration in our state for this gear: and that we must not
think such an earthquake could be, without some change upon it.

In Frauncis the firsts days, such a Peticion I will not say (for who durst
once have entertained a thought of such a one) but one that had come near it
almost in a word, would have cost him his life, that should have been so
audacious, as to present it. This extreme presumption, this insolency, these
braues, these outrages, proceeding from them, and their brood, infected with
their poison, (the effect whereof is, to set light by Princes, and by their
laws, and Magistrates) gave marvelous offense to your Majesty's servant,
who were thoroughly resolved, to take such order, as your Majesty should be
obeyed: and not to suffer your Edict to be contemned, and controlled. But the
great number of Towns, which as yet stood out, and were supplied by the City
of Toulouse, caused them in wisdom to have patience for a time. They found,
that the rage, and fury of your enemies, who as yet bare their swords drawn
against you, was not able to hold out for any time, inasmuch as they grew
scanted of their means, and that then order would be easily taken, for the
execution of this Sentence: howbeit as we see, sundry respects, and occurrences
have delayed, and put it off till this day: And this (my liege) is the plain,
and vndisguised truth of the whole carriage of this matter: this has been the
proceeding, and judgment of your Court against the Jesuits, executed in part,
and in part pretermitted.

It is not unknown to your Majesty, that the strength of all States,
consists in the maintenance, and execution of such Edicts, as are concluded
in their Supreme Courts. When we take in hand to reuerse them, it behooves us
to proceed therein with great aduisement and circumspection: it is a work of
high attempt, and of no small, nor slender consequence. All Edicts bear your
name in their forehead, they cannot be violated, without wounding the Majesty
Royal, whose judgments ought to be irreuocable, and unchangeable.

Besides all this (my liege) in this assembly of both the Chambers, (whom they
challenge for heretics) they are not able to name so much as one man, that is
not a most sound Catholic, without the least suspicion to the contrary. They
have been these seven years in sifting, and searching into their lives, let
them say, were they ever able to challenge any one of them? Then what a sely,
and frivolous allegation is it, to say, they of the new opinion hate us? I
grant it to be true, but what were they of the new opinion able to do in this
assembly? As much as in the Consistory of Rome: I speak it confidentlie, not
a jot more.

Yet they will not so give it over: they say the whole Parliament hated them. I
would know the reason? Is it, because they came not to The Parliament of Paris
was removed to Tours in 1589. during the rebellion.
Tours? How could they hate the Jesuits for that cause, when as the best part
of the Being detained for fear of the Leaguers, insomuch as the King was feign
to appoint new to supply their places at Tours.
Presidents themselves, never stirred foot out of Paris? Is it because the
Jesuits are sound Catholics? Much less: inasmuch as the Judges of the
Parliament, are every way as sound as they, and without touch, or taint of
heresy. Then what is the cause they should thus malice you? Assuredly, you are
able to supply no answer, that may bear the least color in the world,
except you say they hate us, because we were the fountain of all the miseries
and calamities that have fallen upon France. Let that be true, yet I say that
this allegation of hatred, can stand you in no stead. If Catiline had been
apprehended, should he not have found any at Rome upright, and impartial
enough to be his Judges? without question he should. And yet I dare say, the
whole Senate, and all good Common-welths men besides, counted him the
firebrand of their Country. Belike we should set up a new Court of Peers,
to sit in judgment upon Traitors, and those that further the practices and
attempts of strangers.

Where by the way (my liege) I will give you this Item (which you will allow
me, I know, to be most true) that if all your subjects had borne good
affection to the Jesuits, or had they borne the like affection to your
Majesty, as the Jesuits did, the Jesuits had not at this time presented you
with so many goodly Peticions as they have done, you had never come within the
Louver. Have they the face to deny this? If they have, yet will not your
Majesty conclude with me notwithstanding? Their last shift (and that a
strange one) is this: that not knowing what to pretend against the justice of
this Sentence, they are driven to say: If Chastell did charge us with this
matter, or if we were guiltic, and culpable therein, why were we not put to
death? I answer; They measure other men's hearts by their own. For having
themselves sat Presidents in that bloody Of the Sixteen, whereof a Jesuit was
President.
Counsel, which to make their tyranny dreadful, put an infinite number of
persons to death, they judge that, measuring it by their own courses, they
were worthy a more severe and rigorous punishment. But will you know the
cause, why they were not put to death? It was, because they had neither
Spaniards, nor Jesuits for their Judges, who at the Terceras in one day, and
upon one scaffoid, cut off the heads of eight, and twenty Esquires, and two
and fifty Gentlemen, all Frenchmen, and hanged up 500. gray Friars, or such
like religious persons, for preaching in the behalf of the King of Portugal.
We in France hate and detest those cruelties, we ever sway and incline to
pity, so it be not cruel pity. To take the lives of so many persons, had
been cruelty, and to harbor those amongst us, who had caused, and committed so
many barbarous outrages, (beating their brains indeed about nothing else) had
been another extreme cruelty. What third course then remained, but to banish
them? It is an excellent saying of Tacitus. My Lords, if you consider the
monstrous villainies of these men, hanging were too easy a punishment for them:
but I can advise you a means, how you shall never repent you, for having been
either too remiss, or too rigorous: Banish them all.

Moreover, the Jesuits not having what else to exclaim against this Sentence,
so behoouefull, and necessary for the state of France, break into this
speech, (mark I beseech you, how far their rage, and phrenzie does transport
them) La very. def. page 183.
The Parliament of Paris, is no longer at Paris. Where is it then? Where is
this famous Parliament of Paris, so much renowned, so much admired through all
France, through all foreign countries? Is it at Madrill? Is it thither that
you will appeal from the King, and his Parliament? Is it there, that you will
triumphantly overthrow this notable Edict, as once you did the Decree of the
Sorbone, in anno 54?

Mark (my liege) note I beseech you, the peremptorines, the insolency, the
intolerable presumption of these men, to dare to avouch in France, that the
Parlelement of the Peers of France, is no more in France, the Parliament of
Paris, is no longer at Paris. But how can we expect, that these men should
spare this Court of Sovereign Justice, since they subornd Barriete.
villains with two edgd knives, to work the destruction of their Sovereigns
themselves?

Upon these premises I conclude it to be just, most just, yea justice it self,
to enforce the execution of the sentence of the Parliament. You cannot err in
following this path, a path beaten by all your predecessors, who have been
jealous of nothing so much, as of the execution of the Decrees of their
Parliament. Otherwise, what assurance could they build, that their children,
which they have left sometimes in the cradle, sometimes in the womb, should
command after them over so many large Provinces, without the power of their
justice, which is the arm, and stay of their scepter, the support of their
crown, and the prop, and pillar of their succession. Therefore whatsoever he
be, that shall advise, or move your Majesty to weaken the Edicts of your
Parliament, upon an important matter of your State, did never duly ponder the
consequence, the weight, the sequel, of such a deed. You must never look to
have any thing firm, or stable in the world, after you have once dejected,
disabled, and overthrown, this the greatest support of your greatness: your
maine and strongest sortresse, both against the rebellio^s of your subjects,
and the attempts of strangers. So much for the justice of this act, let us now
come to the commodity and profit thereof.

2. Who is so blind, as not to see, that this Sentence, ought to be reconed as
one of the special blessings that God ever bestowed upon you? If their
Seminary or nurserie, Chastell wounded the King nine months after his entry
into Paris.
were able in nine months to yield an instrument, to act their murtherous
plots, how many was it like to have produced in the space of seven years?
There is great ods between the going of a hundred paces, and of eight hundred
miles. When From the Jesuits College to the Louver.
a man has leisure to ruminate, and to advise with his pillovve, he
oftentimes relenteth, and changes his purpose: one good minute is sufficient,
and there be (as the proverb goes) four, and twenty hours in the day: But
when in the same heat of blood, in the self same fury, issuing forth of that
hellish Chamber of Meditations, he may in an instant be in your bosom, there
lies the danger (my liege) this is an apparent, All this has relation to
Barriere: vide les. Cate. lib. 3. cap. 6.
and imminent perrill. He needs not lodge at any Inn by the way, there can no
advertisement be sent from Lions (your Majesty knows what I mean) he cannot
be descried by his tongue, nor described by his apparel: there will no
intelligence come, no pictures will be sent you from any place abroad: the
resolution is no sooner taken, but performed in an instant: And who doubts but
such a mischief, the nearer it is, the more it is to be feared? To go one step
further, let us conjecture by their former carriage, what fruit we may expect
from them in times to come.

In the first place (my liege) it seems most reasonable, that your Majesty
assent to that branch of their Peticion: viz: That the The saying of Jews the
12. first duke of Orleans, and after King of France.
King of France, revenge not the quarrels of the Duke of Orleans: that is, of
the King of Nauare. This demand is full of equity: for whatsoever they have
wrought against your Majesty, by the commandment of the late king, ought not
to be co^strued to their hurt: nay I will go further, it ought to make for
their good: they did it in regard of the service of their king you were not
their King at that time. Neither to say truth, was this matter ever mentioned
in their accusations. But this is an ordinary trick with them, to feign
monsters to themselves, and subdue them when they have done. It was never
laid to their charge, and had it been, yet would it have had no hearing in
your Parliament. No, they took a clean contrary course: for amongst a
multitude of other matters, they entered into particular examination, how the
Jesuits had behaved themselves toward the late King: concluding, that if they
had well, and faithfully served him in his extremity, and distresses, albeit
it had been against his own son (if he had had a son) they deserved praise
and commendation for their labor. The late King, was no king of Navarre, he
was no Duke of Orleans, he was king of France: I will not add that he was
besides their kind benefactor, and their special favorer in all their causes,
(little suspecting, God wot, what horrible mischiefs, they in the mean time
complotted against him) for in saying he was King of France, I conclude all:
He was their Sovereign, they were his natural subjects, and tied in
allegiance to him, what soever he had been, (and yet lived there ever a more
gracious Prince?) but let us see, have they acquitted themselves of this
allegiance? have they served him loyally, or have they not lewdly betrayed
him? this is the pith of the controversy: here you must close, and not
trauerse aloof off, seeking out large fields of plausible common places,
therein to display the colors of your Rhetoric: you must come to the point
of this Objection. Listen well what I say, my masters; it is not a Duke of
Orleans, or a King of Navarre, that I speak of, I speak of your own King:
Let us hear, have ye acquitted your selves of your duty, to this your
sovereign Prince, your kind Sovereign, your gracious King, who held you in
such high estimation, who ever used you with such exceeding courtesy, and
kindness, both in word, and action? I am wisely occupied, to ask them this
question: they will answer me at leisure: and to say truth, what can they
answer, which your Majesty shall not be able of your own knowledge to
control, and convince? I appeal no further for witness, then to your
highness, what words the late King uttered of them. I dare say it, there was
never Prince complained more, nor more cause had to complain of the treasons
of his subjects, then this good King. And did he not, howsoever of a mild,
gracious, and too too gentle disposition, did he not (I say) cause them to be
expelled his city of In anno 1589, but they afterward repla^ted themselves.
Bourdeaux: the only men amongst all his subjects, whom he ever proceeded so
so severely against. An intallible sign, that they had beyond all mean, and
measure prouokt, and incenst him. But how can any man make question hereof?
Have we already forgotten, that it was justified unto him by good evidence in
writing, that the Jesuits were the original founders of the League. They were
the men, who by their Sirens songs, had hereunto be witched men of all
conditions, from the highest to the lowest, who knit, and contrived this
co^federacie against the State; and at Rome labored the Excommunication tooth,
and nail against your Majesty, and afterward made the brute of that
thunderbolt to be heard in France, having thereunto prepared the minds of your
subjects with this accursed persuasion, that the King was liable to the
sentence of Excommunication, and that being excommunicate, he was no longer
King, but a Tyrant, and Usurper, and they discharged of their oath of
allegiance? And who is so blinded with prejudice, but that he plainly sees,
that if James Clement had not tasted of this poisonous doctrine, he would
never have given way to such a thought, as to undertake the murder of his
Sovereign, of his liege Lord, of his natural Prince? Was it not this
damnable opinion, settled, and engrafted in his heart, which encouraged him to
sheath his knife in the belly of the Lords anointed, which gave strength to
his arm, to redouble the blow, he being certainly persuaded, that this
Heroical act, (as Guignard terms it) would bear him directly into Paradise?
Is it the stone, or shaft, that co^mits the murder, or is it he, that sends
it? Who is (I say) so wilfully, or ignorantly blinded, but he knows and must
confess, that when the Jesuits first set footing in this Realm, the hearts of
all our Countrymen were so far estranged from these heresies, (for I can call
them no better; and to speak truly, what heresies can there be more dangerous,
then these?) as that it was hard amongst a million of men, to find one, who
would ever have entertaind so much as a thought that way? Contrariwise, our
Ancestors marched over the Mountains, and made passage thorough Italy, to
^^^iface the 8. for exco^municating Phil. le bell.
take him prisoner, who offered to excommunicate the King of the Flower de
luce, and enjoined that presumptuous Prelate, to open shame, and submissio^,
who scattered the first sparks of this fire amongst us. To conclude, before the
Jesuits came to nest in France, the hearts of our countrymen were most
estranged from these accursed Positions.

The Wherewith the Jesuits are charged.
Apology of James Clement (say they) is fathered by Boucher. It may well be so.
Boucher knows, he shall never come at Paris to answer it: (the sentence of
death given against For saving amongst other things, that the king might be
excommunicated, which Boucher also, with other Sorbonists, determined, page 15.
of this book.
Guignard, implies his condemnation) the Jesuits live in expectation daily to
be received, Boucher then does but the part of a friend, to take it upon
him: and a faster, and more assured friend then Boucher, the Jesuits never had:
and there was reason for it, he passed the whole course of his studies in
Divinity under the^: as all the University can witness. But not to dwell
longer upon that point, let us take a view of the Bull it self, let us open
this damnable Apology, and examine the ground, and subject thereof, what is
it, but this, that the King may lawfully be excommunicate, and his subjects
freed from their oath of allegiance? And what else do the Jesuits preach, what
other string do they harp upon through all their books, before alleged?
Furdermore, what is the last close of this book, but that we labor to find
out an Ebud? and who taught him that lesson, but Before pag^ 38.
Commolet and Guignard: who writes thus, If without force he cannot be
deposed, let men take arms against him, if by war it cannot be accomplished,
let him be slain. And a little before, this heroical act performed by James
Clement, as a gift of the holy Ghost, (so termed by our Divines) has been
worthily commended. etc. Let us take a better surueigh of these words our
Divines: who may these Divines be? Is it S. Augustine, or S. Bernard, or those
other fathers, men spotless in life, and matchless in learning? No such
matter: I have showed you the contrary. Who are they then? They are forsooth,
the reverend Fathers the Jesuits: men of a higher rank (I wisse) then they.
These are Before, page 45, and Ies. Catechi. lib. 1. cap. 9.
Apostles, they are received into the society and company of Jesus: alas the
other, which I named ere-while, are but his poor, and humble servant, not
worthy to unloose the latchet of his shoe: And for an vpshot, this Father
Guignard, who wrote these Positions, with a pen of steel dipped in the blood
of our Kings, is by them Page 266. of the Apol. of Iac. Clement.
lamented, as a great loss: and what does this Defense of murderers contain
in it, more sauouring of madness, and lunacie, then these points I have named?
But let the Jesuits answer me to this: if they did not give allowance to
that Apology, would they suffer it to be sold publicly in Douay? would they
allow it current passage in that place? For my part. I would not give counsel
to touch the life of the King of Spain, sooner would I lose mine own: no I am
so far from it, as I maintain, that whosoever shall attempt against the life
of a King, shall undoubtedly receive damnation for his hire. It is an attempt
against the majesty of God, who has established him as his Vicegerent.

Indeed we must confess, the Jesuits cannot bar this Apology from being
openly sold in Douay, and carried about from Inn to Inn, to be put away to
Frenchmen which travail that way. Alas, these poor religious persons can bear
no stroke in such towns, as are subject to the house of Austria: they are not
reconed of in those places (God wot.) I will tell you a strange thing, and it
is true. There is no man but knows, how hard it is for a Frenchman to get
entrance into the Castle of Milan: and when all is done, he must pass under
the name of a Spaniard, and at his peril to, if he chance to be discovered.
Yet this I will say, that let all the French Jesuits, that remain at this day
in Guienne, and Languedoc, present themselves before the gates, and let but one
Jesuit of Milan avouch them of his knowledge, to be Jesuits, they shall
presently have the bridge let down, and the great gates set wide open to
receive them. Such a singular virtue has the die and tincture of Iesuitisme,
as that it drownes all natural colors whatsoever. And in truth, to what
persons living are the Spaniards more indebted, then to this Society? who have
undertaken such toils, and travails for the advancement, and increase of
their Empire, as they, whom only they have to Union de Portugal fol. 197. ^.
thank for the kingdom of Portugal, as their own history does acknowledge?

But from whence proceeds this wonderful affection of the Jesuits unto
Spain? The cause is twofold. The first taken from their original, which was
Spanish, and that was it, that first ingrafted in them this ardent affection,
wherein they have been by tradition from hand to hand, nou^risht, bred, and
traind up. Secondly, they set it down for a principle, that the Turkish
Empire, can never be brought to final overthrow, but by some Monarche of
Christendom, and casting their eyes round about, they see none in their
opinion comparable, for wealth, puissance, and possessions, unto the house of
Austria, in whose hands it the whole Empire, part of Germany, and the Low
Countries, the better half of Italy, all Spain, and the East and West
Indies: besides that they esteem the king of Spain the only man, able to
reduce all Christendom to the Catholic religion.

No man knows better, then your Majesty, how far the designs of the house of
Austria tend and aspire, who promise to themselves no less, then the Jesuits
vvish them. Three The King of Spain, the Duke of Sauoy, and the Archduke.
Brothers by alliance, do enclose and compass you on all sides, from of
Bayonne to Calice, they represent a A King Spain fained to have three bodies,
told by Hercules.
Geryon: but so long as their close co^federats, who win them into the good
opinion of your subjects, so long I say, as these be sent packing out of your
realm, you shall have no cause to stand in fear of the former. Geryon was
King of Spain, but he met Hercules Gallicus, or Ogmius: Lucian in Here.
with a Hercules of Gaul. Your Majesty knows, that the fable of the Toiane
horse, was invented to no other end, but to teach us first, that fifty close
enemies in a State, shall be able to effect that in one night, which fifty
thousand open enemies cannot atchieue in ten years. And secondly, that there
are evermore some, that perceive La^^oon, and Cassandia in Troy.
these close enemies, but their admonitions are never regarded.

This has been hitherto truly verified in our state: for there was never any
thing foretold, touching the Jesuits, and their designements, but has justly
fallen out: yet was there never any of those predictions believed, until the
blow was felt.

But to win new credit to their cause, they allege two things: 1. that they
are a great number: 2. that they have done great service to certain Princes.
For the first, I understand not to what purpose this muster of their numbers
may serve, unless it be to scare, and affright us. And I protest, I am afraid
of them within the Realm: but out of the Realm, I do not fear, that their
great numbers, will ever come to besiege Bayonne: provided there be none of
them left at Bourdeaux, to deprive us of our sense, and of the use of our
hands.

Perhaps they will pretend, that this fruitful increase of their number, is an
argument of Gods blessing upon their Society: but this were both a dangerous,
and an absurd consequence. For it will be a long time, ere they come to equal
the number of the Sent into France by their king a Pagan, to muther S. Jews:
whence all martherers have been since called Assasins. Ies Catech. 3. lib.
Annal de Fran. fol. 1236. b.
Arsacides, or Murderers.
Assasins, men of their own stamp: to omit the Arians, the Albigenses, the
Jews, and Mahumetans. This is the common argument of the Lutherans, which the
Jesuits have refelled, and will they now draw it in, to serve their own
turn? This were an incongruitie.

As for their services performed to certain Princes; there was never question
made of their wit and ability: but what is there more dangerous in the world,
then an extraordinary wit bent upon mischief? Then whereto serves so many
great words of their sufficiency, did ever any man say, they were fools? They
are able to do good service, who doubts it? but it must be to those, who
shall have the good hap to continue always in grace and favor with the Pope:
and to have no difference with the house of Austria: for in this case,
whosoever put his trust in the Jesuits, let him be sure at first, or last, they
will show him a iugling trick.

If your Majesty please to read but the Orations of the Polonian Gentleman
made in their Senate, you shall there see an Iliade of tumults, and civil
wars, amongst the Christians, which inhabit those large and vast See Ies Cat
lib. 3. ca. 1:
Countries (extending from the North to the East) stirred and excited by the
only means of the Jesuits, who have there caused of late more battles to be
fought, then had been in five hundred years before. Your Majesty has some
experience of their doings in this point, if you please to call them to mind:
once certain I am, we need not go from home to seek examples, we our
selves may serve but too well for example to other nations. I would to God we
had not such just cause to complain, and fear, as we have: which yet we
cannot but double, when we consider the Constitutions of their Order, and the
tenor of their Bulls, by virtue whereof they are sworn to obey they General,
Summa co^stit. pa. 307
per omnia et in omnibus, as to Christ, himself, if he were here in person.
Answer me then, if God himself should command us any thing, ought we not
to do it, though it were for Abraham to kill his own son Isaac? Who sees
not, that when a poor selie wretch, that has been bred up in these Positions
of the exco^municaton of kings, shall be shut up into this chamber of
Meditations, and a second Varades bring him a commandment from his General,
to murder his Sovereign, being near at hand: who sees not I say, but he
will undertake it, steadfastly believing, that otherwise he should be damned,
and his soul be cast into utter perdition, for disobedience to his General?
But admit, that ten, twenty, or thirty refuse it, there needs but one to
accomplish this woeful and lamentable act. Assuredly (my liege) it seems very
strange to me, that these men, who are so earnest with your Majesty in their
behalf, should not set before their eyes, what themselves have seen and
tasted heretofore: or weigh with themselves, that if a second misfortune
should happen, both they, and their whole race, should for ever be infamous
throughout France. I would wish them to think upon it, and to remember, that
nothing is so easily hid from sight, as a lewd purpose, and that it is not in
the power of man, to sound the heart, and inward thought, God having reserved
that secret to himself; and why will they then put it upon so desperate a
plunge?

If notwithstanding all this, any of them shall obstinately continue their
importunity, (as my trust is they will not) yet consider I beseech you, that
their faces never felt the Jesuits knives, that they were not the mark
Barriere shot at: weigh with your self, that some of their solliciters may
be engaged in the cause, having many ways to employ the Jesuits in those
places where they live: some also there may be that think France would
continue too long without civil wars, if these trumpets, and firebrands of
fedition were not called home again. All of them have an eye to their
particular ends: every man respects his private good. It stands your majesty
in hand to assure your estate to your self, and your posterity, against all
manner of storms, tempests, and thunderclaps whatsoever.

Yea but (say they) the Pope is become a mediator in this behalf, he desires
it, he would have it so, and will you deny him that request, being so many
ways beholding to his Holiness? I answer diversely heereunto. 1. First of all,
that his Holiness will not subscribe to their doings, that shall endeavor to
persuade your Majesty, to a matter so hurtful to your state, pretending for
their reason, his request, at whose hands you have received so many
extraordinary favors. For what greater burden, then a bes^^e, (says an
ancient Writer) if it bind me to do that, which may harm my estate? And
another more elegantly: If a man in respect of his former benefits, have
required me to do any thing, that has turned to my hurt, he has not only
forfeited his due thanks, but moreover, has given me just cause of complaint.
A King of France were reduced to a miserable condition, if he had no means to
acknowledge a pleasure, but by setting his state and Country on fire. 2.
Secondly, I precisely deny, that his Holiness, would have is so. He wishes
France too well, he knows that himself must depart the world: but this
Society, shall by succession be continued to all perpetuity, so that when
they shall break forth upon us, he shall not be here to rescue and relieve
us.

The Philosopher says that to know whether a man will a thing, or no, it must
be in his power not to will it. And who sees not, that the Pope has not
power, to deny the Jesuits, whatsoever letters they shall sue for at his
hands? Else what would my L. the Cardinals say, who favor the proceedings of
the Spanish king, from whom some of them receive yearly pensions? Would they
not in bitter manner complain, that such men (forsooth) were forsaken in their
need, who undertake so wearisome travails for the advancement of the Holy
sea? I conclude then that his Holiness is constrained to sign all their
demands, and will forced, is no will. 3. I will go one step further, admit the
Pope would have A town of the French Kings, in Daulphine near to Auignion.
Valentia joined to the County of Which be longs to the Pope, sometimes the
sea of the Papacy
Auignion, I demand, whether it would be granted, or no? Assuredly it would
not. And does not that, which touches your general State, import more, then
ten Valentias? 4. Fourthly, I have been taught, that the Decrees of our
Parliament frustrate all such Bulls, as may prejudice the liberties, and Canons
of the Church of France, or the Edicts and Ordinances of our King, or the
Decrees of our said Parliament, but I never yet learnt, that the Popes will
might reuerse the Decrees of our Parliament.

What course is then to be taken in this matter? The course is plain and
easy: that his Holiness be fully informed of those weighty reasons, which
enforce an absolute necessity of putting the aforesaid Sentence of the
Parliament in execution. Amongst which there is one very memorable, not
heretofore remembered: that indeed other companies, and societies, did in
those times, afford here and there a man, who behaved themselves in vile, and
outrageous manner against their Sovereign, and therein matched the Jesuits to
the full. They marched (I say) hand in hand with the foremost of them: if the
one strained his throat with thundering against the King, the other spared not
his: whereof now the Jesuits can well remember us, they play the Orators
therein, they retch that string to the highest noat; their books and Petitions,
contain wholly discourses of that subject; the sum whereof is, if we had a
deep hand in those undutiful actions, be you sure there were of other Orders,
who came not far behind us. But yet in all this they come not to the point: no,
they will none of that, that is slipped over in silence: that in all other
Orders, though some there were, who bare a vehement affection to Spain, yet
there were others, which did worthy service at Tours, Caen, Renes, Angiers,
Chalon, and those other few Towns of note, which remained under the obedience
of our late King. These good men, woorthily deserving the name of Christians,
of Catholics, of Religious persons, ceased not in their pulpits, (the seats of
truth, and not of leasing, of comfortable instructions, and not of contumelious
inuectiues) to confute, and overthrow, that mischievous doctrine of rebellion,
which the Jesuits, built and set up in their daily Sermons within the revolted
Cities. But this is wonderful, this is that memorable point, that in the
whole troop of the Jesuits, there was not one found, (one is a small number)
and yet I say again there was not one, that from When the rebellion began
against the last king.
89 to what time the king that now is, entered Paris.
94, was heard to let fall one word, that might be strained to the good of his
Prince, or country: but evermore vehement in behalf of the Spaniard, and to
qualify the hard conceit of his government. What can any man reply hereunto?
Who can deny this to have been a general, a terrible, a monstrous, a hellish
conspiracy? and now having mist their mark, they take us belike for
marvelous sely sots, if they hope, we will keep them still in store, that at
the next opportunity, having taken better aim, they may destroy both us and
our State together.

True it is (my liege) that to rid you of all fear, and feeling, they frame
two allegations: One is, that they are mightily reformed, they are not the men,
they were, when your Majesty saw them, they are none of those, that wrought
you so many displeasures. Secondly, it is alleged, that if they were willing
to harm your Majesty, yet they want force to effect it.

For proof of the first, they make ostentation of a solemn 1. Ies. Catech.
lib. 3. ca. 13.
Decree concluded amongst them, that they shall no more intermeddle in matters
of State. But let us see, what date this Decree bears; they say of anno 93.
Has your Majesty then already forgotten, that since that time, they have
practiced twice against your life? Behold the performance of this glorious
Decree, Do not we know the general exception of all their statuts: Unless it
be for the good of the Church, an exception, that extends as far, as they
list to strain it? But will you understand, how they are resolved, not to
intermedle any more with the State, and the good respect thy carry toward it?
Do but peruse their aforesaid Apology, given out under the title of The
defense of the La very. def.
truth, and in the 229 page you shall meet with these words. But what kind of
creature is this same State? Let us behold her face, that the Jesuits may no
more intermedle in her affairs, and thereby incur the heavy displeasure of
her jealous friends, and favorites. And in the 231. page, Let these good
Catholics be advised, what they say, accusing the Jesuits for intermedling in
too many matters, and let them take heed, that they themselves overthrow not
the state, by making so light account of their religion, and that in seeking
the quiet, and peace of the earth, they both miss of it, and lose besides the
peace of heaven.

Is it possible, in a more insolent, and presumptuous manner, to profess, that
they will continue more then ever heretofore, to work the ruin and overthrow
of the State, whose face they say they know not? And they have reason, for they
never harbored in their hearts any other project, but the subversion of States,
disauthorizing of Magistrates, and seducing of subjects from their allegiance.
Moreover, you hear how they proclaim themselves sworn enemies to all that
are friends to peace. Neither must it be forgotten, that in the very same page
229. to make odious to the people, all such as wish the safety of your state,
your crown, and Scepter, they have framed a new term, calling them Estatiens.
Statemongers. During their tempestuous reign, they termed us Politicians,
they dare no longer meddle with that word, it has been too often By the
Edict of Pacification.
called in: they coin a nevve of the same stamp. An ordinary trick with
their Fatherhoods.

Your Majesty sees then, in what sort the Jesuits accomplish this painted
Decree, which notwithstanding they oppose as a shield against all Objections
what soever. But who ever heard, that any man was so simple, to build upon such
promises, or to ground assurance upon the like Decrees, or resolutions? It
would bear as likely a show, if the Pirates should send word to the Merchants,
that they have in a general Synod, concluded to roue or rob no more, and that
they may now safely give the^ leave to sail in consort with them. A pretty
tale to tell a child. And who is so ignorant in the course of matters abroad,
as that he knows not, how the Jesuits are as great, if not greater
entermedlers, then ever they were? We need not go far for instance: In some
towns in the Low countries, as Douay, Valencienne, Turayne.
our very next neighbors groan under their tyranny, and study for nothing
else, but how to be delivered of them.

But to digress no farther from our purpose, I would feign know, if the
Jesuits were admitted into these quarters again, who should be their
controller, or ouerseer? who could have intelligence what messengers went to
and fro to their Colleges, what secret assemblies were there holden, what
counsels were there given: who sees not, that they must forthwith have the
raines as loose, as in the year 88? I will yet say more, albeit men should
discover their close packing against the State, yet who, think you would be
forward to detect the^ to the Magistrate? who would not rather fear to see the
year 89 return again, and himself once more subject to their importable
yoke, especially seeing them restored after their banishment?

But when they find it so difficult a matter to persuade your Majesty, that
there can be any want of ill will in a Jesuit, they fly to the second point,
that their power will not serve, to harm a Prince of your puissance. And the
better to dispose your Highness to the belief of this Article, they are not
forgetful throughout all their Peticions, to extol and sound out your
victories, and to that effect they translate into French, all the ancient
Panegyrics, that be. Men are naturally delighted to hear their happiness,
their puislance, the assurance of their State, and their childrens, and in a
word, to hear their whole praises spoken. And in truth, when I hear such, as
hold you as deer as their own lives, such as love you, with an unfeigned
zeal, and affection: it rejoices me, I say, when I hear such men advance
your Martial atchieuements, and your victories above the clouds. It is the due
of virtue, it is her food and nourishment, it is her first foundation, it is
her fairest recompense. But let us be wary (my liege) let us be jealous, how
we lend our ears to the enchaunting praises of our enemies.

Ancient Writers have recorded, that the most subtle kind of Sorcerers,
bewitched by praising. Let us take heed of these Sirens, that tickle the ears
with their sweet harmony, thereby to bring the sailors asleep, while their
Bark splits upon a rock. Do you not (my liege) when you hear such sugared
words flow from their mouths, do you not (I say) call to your remembrance the
wound which you received in your own mouth by a graft of their Seminary?
When you see these flowers of eloquence proceed from their pens, are you not
thereby put in mind, that by force thereof, their Rector confirmed, and
encouraged Barriere. Oh my liege, they can well set out in their Petition, how
the famous Orator of Rome, extolled (the clemency, I will not call it, which is
so long commendable, as it is joined with discretion, otherwise i^ it no
virtue,) but the foolish lenity of Julius Caesar, how (I say) he extolled it
above his two, and fifty victories; but they leave out the conclusion of the
story, they tell you not how Tully with his pleasant language, rockt Caesar so
fast a sleep, as that in the mean while, he called about him from exile, all
the deadliest enemies he had, who soon after slew him with their poiniards,
whom neither Mars, nor Bellona, nor millions of armed soldiers, were able to
annoy. Suffer your self to be trained in like manner, and they will spare you
no more, then the other did Caesar. And then will they be as forward to sound
the triumph, as the same Orator was, who afterward exclaimed: A few have
strooken Caesar with their weapons, but all have slain him with their wishes.

Your Majesty (I know) will reply, that this great Emperor was an Usurper: I
answer again, that one skin of Romish parchment (according to the Jesuits
doctrine) is able to make you a Tyrant: a doctrine which they profess, and
glory in at this day, neither will they deny it hereafter, unless their
General, (a Spaniard borne, as his 4. predecessors have been) allow them a
dispensation ad cautelam, to cover their doctrine, thereby to work their
return into France. But very hardly will they be brought, so much to bite in
their tongues, as to say, the Pope has not power to excommunicate, and censure
Kings, and to discharge their Subjects of their oath of allegiance, ^^r how
shall they then reconcile their writings? These co^tradictions would supply
matter of fresh accusation, and new evidence against them.

But to return to our purpose. It is alleged (my gracious Sovereign) that
you are so surely seated in your state, so feared, and redoubted, as all things
tremble under your might, and alas what hurt can you take from this poor
Society? This bears a fair show, and so much the fairer, being as it is for
the most part true, to our exceeding joy, and contentment, and to their grief
and deadly discomfort. But first of all (my liege) weigh this, that these men,
who so highly set forth your power, have maintained, and kept their footing in
two Provinces of your Realm, in despite of your power of your Edict, of the
Decrees of your Parliament. I know, of late they have had a kind of discharge,
but it was long ere they had it. Furdermore, it may please your Majesty to
remember, that in May 84, the late King was firmly seated in the inheritance of
his Brother, his Father, and his Graundfather, he was supported and
strengthened by a Brother, that had store of men at command; and yet within
four years after, the Jesuits drove him out of the Louver: I say the Jesuits,
the rest were but the arms, and the legs; they were the head; they guided the
Bark; who knows it better then your Majesty?

And yet (my liege) freely to utter what I think; though I would be loath to
add to your just fears, as neither would I diminish them at all (howbeit of
the two, the latter is the more dangerous: for distrust is a wholesome drugge in
matter of a State, you have often tried it, and it has proved well with you)
therefore (I say) freely to acquaint your highness with my thoughts, I do not
believe, that in your days, (the number whereof God increase, to equal those
you have already past) the Jesuits shall have free scope to play their parts
on open stage: and yet I think, (and I make no doubt, but your Majesty will
join in opinion with me) that it lies not in your power, nor the power of all
your Parlements to hinder them, but that in all places, where they come, they
will with a light, and charie hand (as if they touched it not) sheade into the
hearts of your subjects their poisonous opinions, concerning the point, and
power of excommunication. This then is one Hurt, which you may take from them,
and that no light, nor mean one, but of great, nay greatest import: for what
greater can there be, then that which in less perhaps then four years, may
lose your Highness a million of subjects? O what a dangerous infection is this?
This I say is a mischief, which will happen in your own days, during your
own reign, how vigilant, or circu^spect an eye soever you bear upon their
actions, you shall not be able to prevent it, think upon it I beseech you.

Their Agents propounde certain cautions, and I wot not what restraints, or
limitations: their Agents abuse you. Let us see what these cautions be, show us
the^, lay them down upon the Carpet. What? shall not the Jesuits be allowed
conference with any? Shall they be recluded from the sight and company of men?
To what use shall they then serve? Shall they not instruct our youth? And yet
this is the only color which their chief spokesmen are wont to pretend:
albeit in very truth, they have half eclipsed the beams of learning, which
great king Frances, the patron of all good literature, restored in France,
(and there is no remedy for this evil, but by taking away the cause thereof
throughout the Realm.) They shall have our youth then under their tutoring: If
be admitted, how can we think to hinder them, from seasoning their scholars
with all those pestilent documents, whereof we have spoken?

But admit, they be not restored to the liberty of a College, yet can you not
abridge their ancient consorts (the dregs and sink of cities) from coming at
them. And God knows, what strange effects novelties breed in France. God
knows what trumpets, what forerunners are already com, God knows how they
would sound victory, and advance their ensigns again. Shut up their gates you
will not, to bar men from all recourse unto them: the pretext of piety will
never be to seek: moreover, with what importunity is your highness like to be
daily assaulted, as well from within, as from without your Realm, for the
calling in of these Orders, and restraints, which are now proposed only for a
color, to make way for their entrance. They that now so busily offer these
conditions, will be the first that shall open their mouths, for the reuoking of
them, and for the entire restoring of the Jesuits. This is it, they whisper
into the Jesuits ears, accept of this onward, get but your selves in again,
let us once make a breach in the Edict, and take you no thought for the rest.
How many sollicitors will they find in their presence, who have such a number
to sue for them in their absence? And then shall your Majesty want the maine
shield of that Decree of Parliament, which would be kept inuiolate: for what
fairer excuse can you have, to answer all importunity withal? and this shield
being once broken, what shall you have then to allege, why they should not be
restored to as ample liberty, as they enjoyed in 88? unless peradventure you
say, they be dangerous people. Oh my liege, why do you not now say it? Have
you not in fresh memory, examples enowe of their doings? If you have not, do
but look out at your window, you can hardly be in any part of your realm,
whence you may not behold infinite ruins of houses, which they have brought to
ashes, innumerable Orphans, which have reduced to beggerie. Does not this move
your heart? I know it does: your heart (...) tender, not to feel the touch
hereof. But their Agents hold you fast by the throat: have you no arms to
free your self? Oh my liege, this is but a hundredth part of the mischief,
they are like to prove, even in your days. If your Majesty lose this leaf of
paper in some corner of your Closet, and fortune hereafter to find it again,
you shall then witness whether I have spoken truth, or no.

But grant, they will not dare to mutter, so long as they shall behold your
face, ought the wisdom and forsight of a Prince, to extend no further, then
his own time, especially having issue, to succeed him? Men in time of health
(my liege) feel not many blind infirmities, which in sickness grieve and pain
them. So fares it with great States, and policies: for when by such accidents,
as pleases GOD to send, they come to be distempred, a number of sick, and
crazed humors, then break forth, which during the health, and flourishing
estate thereof, were never perceived. These are the times, these are the
opportunities, which the Jesuits shly await, and attend: and never fail to lay
hold on them, when they fall. If they be not able at the first assault to force
the place, they double their strength at the second, and again redouble it at
the third. Perseverance caries it in all things. The defendants have not
always the same spirit, and courage to resist.

What more dangerous disease, then a relapse, which yet is the more
inexcusable, being occasioned by our own default, but most of all, when we
knew before hand, by what means this mischief was like to grow, and had no
care to prevent it. God grant I may prove a false prophet, but my heart
presageth, that the Jesuits will in the end, reduce this whole Country into
ashes: we have once already seen it on a light fire, they kindled it, they
brought it to so terrible a blaze, as that it was seen from Asia. We had then
as it fortuned, a Prince of rare perfection, exceeding courageous, an expert
soldier, wonderful vigilant, all iron to endure labor, all steel in
warlike encounters, who for that time, smotherd those flames: but GOD gives
not at all times such worthy Princes, especially, in the vigor of their years.
And who sees not that at the first sunne-set of this reign, that fire ill put
out, will break forth anew into greater flames, then ever before, and utterly
destroy, and consume our children. Ah my poor infants, it is your case that I
lament, as for my self, my declining age does exempt me from this fear.

Me thinks (my liege) I hear one whisper in your ear to this effect: It is
true, these allegations are avouched to your Majesty under writing, and carry
no small probability with them, yet can I not conceive, how the Jesuits
could make so large offers of service to your Majesty, if their doctrine
were such indeed, as we hear it said to be. And it may be, he that speaks
this, speaks it from the truth of his heart, and out of an honest meaning, as,
I am persuaded, the most part of those, that appear in their cause, know not
the truth of these matters, which I have recited; for if they did, they would
be as earnest suitors to your Highness, to co^mmaund the absolute execution
of the Edict, as now they are importunate solliciters to have it infringed.
Behold then the clear manifestation of the simple truth.

When the Jesuits, presented to your majesty those Peticions, so gloriously
set forth, so full of smooth insinuation, so fraught with alluring persuasion,
so flowing with sweet and elegant phrase, you stood at that time, in good
condition with the Pope. What reason might then dissuade them from offering you
their service? What had they else to say? was it their course, still to
proclaim themselves your vowed and capital enemies? Was that the way to
Paris? But do you not observe this (my liege) that in the whole volumes of
their Peticions, (though otherwise unreasonable long) they have not launced, no
not so much as touched this point of the question, this knot of the
controversy, this doctrine so pernicious, to wit, whether they do not believe,
and accordingly teach, that the Pope has power to excommunicate kings, and to
enter-meddle with their crowns, which is the ground, and foundation of all
the murders that have been either acted, or attempted in Europe, and the
spring, and fountain, of all the calamities, which we have endured, since this
damnable doctrine began to be so currantly dispersed amongst us. This is the
point (my Masters, you that frame those elegant Orations) this is the issue,
wherein you are to join, and not to tell us a story, what obedience subjects
owe naturally to their Prince. A strange novelty forsooth! but have you not
your exception at hand? And what is that? Mary that [we owe obedience to Kings]
so far forth as they be not excommunicate by the Pope, who has power to
unloose all their subjects from their oath of allegiance. This is the hindge of
the whole cause: answer us hereunto directly, without equivocation: is it
true, that you bring this exception, or are you wrongfully charged
ther-withall? But why do I loose time, in demanding what they hold in this
point? You have their books, they are laden with this doctrine, they call, and
beat upon no other point but this. From what fountain have issued all the
miseries which we have endured, if not from this? Are we senseless, trow you?
Who caused the Excommunication against the late King to be received in France
in 89, which without the Jesuits help, had taken no better effect, then the
other of Against the King that now is, which was condemned by the Par^ement
then holden at Tours, to be ^u^nt open^y by the executioner.
91 did in Tours, where there were no Iesuitical spirits, no hearts engaged to
the Spaniards? Do we not see that they are, and ever have been so far from
denying this doctrine, as that co^trariewise they have gloried in it, as has
been declared in the beginning of this discourse? But do we take them to be
so void of judgment, as in their Petitions, to touch this string? It should
then appear, they had not well learnd their Rhetoric, which teaches to
ouer-slip in silence those objections, which we are not well able to answer:
the reader does not alwais give such heedfull attention, such a matter is soon
forgotten: if we answer any thing near it, it suffices. And had ever Orator
better proof with a point of art, then the Jesuits with this? Who did ever
give your Majesty notice, that they past over the maine point of the cause? or
had you ever this caveat given you, that the Jesuits bring their words but
half way out, that they speak not plain French, that they gloss with you,
now you are in terms of amity with the Pope; but tell you not, what they
would do, if God should so afflict us, as to call the Pope that now is, and to
raise up in his stead, a Who excommunicated Philip de bell.
Boniface the eight, a Who interdited Charles the 6. and his Realm.
Bennet the 13, or a Who excommunicated Jews the 12.
Julius the second, to send forth the like excommunications, as were by them
thundered out against our Kings, the most Christian, the most Catholic, and
the most ancient Kings of Christendom? We have sufficient knowledge (my
liege) by all their writings, by the whole course of their actions, and by
their open profession in the pulpet, that at one such clap (if their words
might carry credit) they would make you, or any of your successors, a king
without subjects, a Lord without land, a private person, accursed, and given
over, a spectacle of misery, an outcast, and an exile, in a word, such a one,
as they were once in good hope to have made, and indeed had made you, and the
late King, if all the Catholics in France had been sound Jesuits, such as you
are now counseled to make them, by recalling these Apostles, thoroughly to
instruct the Fathers, and deeply to imprint into the minds of their children
this article of belief, that you, and your whole posterity, may with one
Bull, be for ever removed from the throne of From who^ this King is descended.
S. Jews.

But what shall I need to insist upon reasons, when I can instance by
examples, such as may touch your Majesty to the quick? I know (my liege) you
have learnt and gone through a number of histories, (you have in my hearing
recounted many, which some that went for great Clarks, had never heard tell of)
but though you had never learnt more then this, yet this I am sure you have
learnt, which I will briefly recite, for it cannot be thought, but that you
have quite forgotten it. In the year 1512, Katherine, Queen of Navarre, had
nine and twenty years enjoyed her kingdom, descended unto her by the death
of Fraunces Phoebus, her brother, and successively from a number of Kings her
ancestors: she had been eighteen years crowned with John d'Albret, the
king her husband, in The chief city of Navarre.
Pampelune: God had given them issue, one son, and three daughters: their
realm was in so flourishing estate, and of such puissance, as evermore it put
the Castilians and Arragonians to the worst. At this time they were in firm
league with them both, and in fast, and ancient alliance with the crown of
France, exceedingly beloved of Jews the twelfth, a mighty King, and a
gallant Warrior, to be short, all Europe, to any man's judgment durst not have
thought of making any attempt upon the^: notwithstanding, in that year of 1512,
did the Julius Secundus.
Pope, in malice to the French Nation, shoot forth his bolt of
Excommunication, against these Princes, absolved their subjects from their oath
of allegiance, and abandoned their realm for a pray to him that could first
seize it: as is the ordinary style of their Excommunications. By force of the
same Bull was Jews the twelfth.
our King jointly excommunicate, as In anno 1510.
before time he had been. But what sequel had it? For the French, there was
not one man of them that did so much as stagger in their allegiance; but clean
contrary (mark I beseech you my liege, the good disposition we had by nature,
until our teeth were set on edge with the Jesuits doctrine: the observation
hereof, will give you the better light, to judge how great a wound they
have made in your Realm) clean contrary, I say, all our ancestors then
living, not one excepted, doubled their resolution, to serve and follow their
King, mauger the malice that Pope Julius bare him, and did so inflame their
zeal and affection toward their Prince, as they were in a manner fond of his
sight, calling him, their Father, their Protector, their good King, to be
short, the title of Pater patriae, is to this day annexed to his name, and so
shall continue for ever.

On the otherside what ensued in Navarre? The King and Queen called a
Parliament, at Tudelle: there did the subjects firmlie resolve to abide in their
allegiance to the death, notwithstanding the Popes thu^derbolts. But within a
while after, there stepped forth a crew of seditious fellows, discontented
persons, men of a shipwrackt and desperate estate, and thirsting after change,
who notwithstanding have evermore at hand the mask and pretext of religion, so
as, to hear them speak, you would take the^ for the only Catholics in the
world: these fellows, I say, began to sprinckle amongst the people, the
doctrine before mentioned, which since that time we have seen powered out in
France by the ministration of the Jesuits. But what was the issue hereof in
Navarre? This: that this seditious crew, struck all the residue of the
subjects into a dead Palsy, took from them the use of their arms, and
legs, some by force of Religion, some by fear of their threats, and menaces:
insomuch as these Princes (your Majesty's great grandfather, and grandmother)
were When the King of Spain, came to invade them, by warrant of the Bull.
left in the midst of their subjects without subjects, in the midst of their
servant without servants, in the midst of their army, without soldiers. To
conclude, there was never revolt heard of, never treason committed, so foul,
so shameful, so miserable: the poor Princes being driven, with their four
infants, (from one of which your Majesty is descended) to fly for safeguard
into France: a skin of parchment having effected that in the space of an hour,
which all Arragon and Castile, were not able to atchiene in a thousand years.
For a Prince to be driven out of his Realm, having been first broken and
discomfited in three, or four maine battles, is a case which affoords
variety of example, and thereby supplies some comfort; but to see himself
driven by force out of his kingdom, and not a subject of his, once to draw his
sword in his quarrel, and all under the shadow of religion, this exceedes all
the sorrows, all the discomforts, all the miseries, which either the world can
exemplify, or man's wit can imagine.

The year following, viz. 1513, our king, touched with a just compassion to
see a King and a Queen, for his sake, clean thrust out of their kingdom,
prepared an army, which marched over the Pyrenaean mountains, directly to
Pampelune, charging the same so close, as that Lisle, Villiers, and Cannay,
advanced their colors upon the walls, but it was defended with such
resolution within, as they were forced to retire, without doing any good.
About eight years after, at the instance of the said Albret king of Navarre,
king Fraunces sent a second Army, which by force possessed Pampelune, but it was
soon after regained by the Spaniard. In this service, Jgnatius Loyola, one of
the Captains of the Spanish companies, behaved himself very valiantly,
albeit his valor Vita Ignat^^ in the beginning.
cost him at that time one of his legs, besides that the other was grievously
wounded.

This Captain is the Patron and founder of the Jesuits, and mark (I beseech
you my liege) whether the disciples have not at an inch followed their Masters
footsteps: whether they have not continued their fervent affection toward the
kingdom of Castile, and their vehement hatred toward the Realm of France.
Their Patron was a great means to retain the Nauarrians under the Spanish
yoke, and his followers have set the liberty of France upon the desperate
chance of one battle: I say of one: for we could not have lost one
battle, without loosing your highness, inasmuch as you would never fly to
any other retreit, but to the standard of the Flower de Luce: and then loosing
you, who sees not, that France, had been in the same condition, that
Navarre, is, remaining like a Gally-slaue under the yoke of Spain, working at
their Ores, and fettred in their chains?

Let us proceed one point further. Their Patron was a chief Commander in the
Spanish garrison within Pampelune: and his followers likewise planted, and
vpheld for the space of three years, a Spanish garrison in Paris. But all this
is nothing to that, which now I come to touch. The disciples of this Loyola,
foreseeing out of their sharp, and percing judgment, that the The King hat
now is.
grandchild of this King, and this Queen, (so miserably turned out of their
inheritance) would one day become the terror of Spain, have left nothing
undone, which could fall into the imagination of the most vowed, and mortal
enemies in the world, for the extirpation of this young branch. And seeing him
in despite of their malice, mounted into the throne of S. Jews, they have
redoubled both their fear, and their practices against his person and State,
pouring out in full measure upon his people the same poison, which had before
times been the principal mean of the loss of Navarre, and which could never
have been brought into France, but by these politic, and presumptuous
Mountebanks.

No part of these proceedings is unknown to this heir of Queen Catherine, and
yet notwithstanding, I know not what influence, or maleuolent aspect, as fatal,
and inevitable to France, as to Navarre, has in a manner ouer-wrought him to
harbor these sectaries of Loyola in his Realm, out of which, by solemn
sentence of his High Courts, they have been banished, and expelled. Can any man
believe so strange a story, that a Prince, after he has so many years
encountered the Lions skin, should in the end suffer himself to be surprised
with the Foxes case?

But the world yeeldes not every day a Julius secundus. True. Neither affoords
it every day a crown to lose. But there needs not every day a Julius, one will
suffice for all, provided he find the French as well prepared, and disposed as
he did the Nauarrians. O my gracious Sovereign, enter (I beseech you) into a
serious consideration, of this which now I shall deliver. The Against Jews
the 12.
Excommunication of Julius, could not make one town in France to shrink: the
Against the late King.
excommunication of Sixtus, caused a revolt in Paris, Lions, Roane, Toulouse,
Marseilles, Amiens, Narbonne, Orleans, Bourges, Nantes, Troyes, Digeon, and
infinite others.

How think you by the Jesuits? Are they not worthy Champions? Are they not
gallant fellows? If in thirty years space, they have profited so well, what
would they have done in continuance of time, having already shaken, and
weakened so many consciences, having seasoned with their doctrine such a number
of young students, who daily grew into charge of souls? Whence is it, that in
all societies, the ancienter sort have been for the most part your loyal
subjects, and the younger almost all your professed enemies? Whence is it, that
we have so often seen the son directly opposite in opinion to his Father, but
that the ancient sort did never suck this milk of Iesuitisme?

But will your Majesty believe, that they can be so audacious, as to glory and
vaunt, how great, and ghastly a wound they have made in the hearts of your
subjects, which they enlarge, tear wider, and make bigger from day to day? I
need but to make recital of those words, which I formerly copied out of their
Apology. And therefore we see that this sword has been practiced, and put in
ure in the person of many Kings, and in many kingdoms. And albeit the practice
has not always succeeded, yet might it alwais have done, if the subjects had
been well prepared thereunto. Does this need an interpreter? does he not tell
you: Frenchmen were not in ancient times well prepared to revolt from their
Kings at the first thunderclap of excommunication; but contrariwise, they
redoubled their love, and allegiance toward them; but in thirty years space
we had wrought and prepared so great, and so good a number of them, as we were
in a near possibility to obtain a full conquest. If by our policy, and the
mediation of our many friends abroad, we can but maintain our footing in
France, we will so thoroughly dispose and prepare their minds, as that the
next time we doubt not to sound an absolute triumph.

Surely your Majesty's posterity shall stand greatly bound unto you, if you
so miserably inthrall, and in danger them to the lust and humor of the next
Spanish partaker, that shall be advanced to the Holy sea: by restoring those,
who are so hardy, and presumptuous, to sow this schismatic doctrine, and
which is more, to glory in it, to proclaim it openly, to publish it commonly,
and thereby to keep the maine business continually on foot. To what purpose
does your Majesty so cherish that young infant in the cradle, if in the mean
while you bring in these Masons, to raise strong forts within his realm, that
at the first sound of the trumpet, all his subjects may be strooken into as
great an amazement of their senses, into as great a numnes of their joints, in
a word, that they may be found as well prepared or disposed, as the Nauarrians
were in 1512? Is it not enough that this doctrine has lost him Pampelune,
unless it rob him of Paris also?

True it is, that the Jesuits in their Petitions offer sureties, to warrant,
and secure you, and yours, from all danger whatsoever. I must tell your
Majesty, I never yet heard, that sureties have been taken in case of a
Crown: and to speak uprightly, before what Judges shall he sue, or convent
them, being himself driven out of doors, and destitute of all place of
refuge, and abode? But we must apply our selves to their conditions. Well
then, let us accept of their sureties, provided they be of substance, and
ability to acquit the forfeiture, else is their offer frivolous, and to no
purpose. Let us see, what these sureties shall be. Amongst your subjects, it is
impossible to find any of wealth sufficient: for their estate cannot be the
thousanth part of the whole, which is to be secured. Amongst strangers whom
can they nominate of worth, to counteruaile the realm of France? I
understand their minds (my liege) the pledge, and surety which they will
tender your Majesty for their faith, and allegiance, must be the King of
Spain, who is ready to become bound for them, body for body. He is of
infinite wealth, he is mighty in possessions, he is deeply in love with
France, then what exception can you take to him?

So then we are through for the security, let us now think of the residue. How
will your Majesty dispose of that Pillar, which stands before your Palace, in
whose marble sides, is recorded to posterity, the affection of this populous
nation of the Jesuits toward their good King, toward their great King,
their Deliverer, who the selfsame year had freed their necks from the Spanish
yoke? A Pillar more honorable, and more glorious, then those of Traiane, and
Antoninus, which stand in spite of time, sacred to immortality. Will you
leave it standing, and yet do contrary to that which your self have decreed
by the Sentence, therein engraven? What will the world say, when they shall
read the contrary, to that which they see? Is this that famous Parliament of
France? their Decrees are written in Marble, but in effect they are set at
naught, they are trodden in the dust. Surely this were too too dishonorable.

What is the^ to be done? The first work you do, you must race down this
Pillar. How? race it down? Lives there a man so impious, as to suggest this
damnable counsel? Your self to destroy the monuments of your worthiest, and
most renowned victories? to taint your name and memory with the blot of fear,
and faint heart? that as we celebrate one of our famous Kings, for the first
which brake in sunder the yoke of the Roman Empire, under which the
miserable Gauls had many years languished: so clean contrary, our Chronicles
may point you out to all afterages, for the first, which bowing to the beck,
and command of Rome, shall with your own hands, rend of your Laurels, wither
your garlands, and miserably deface the memorials of your prowess, and
honorable deserts toward your Realm, toward your city of Paris, the seat
of this large Empire, the glory of Europe, and the wonder of the world.

Oh my liege, what could the General of the Jesuits wish for more? If a maine
army of Spaniards under the leading of his Subjects, and the rest of the
Sixteen, their associats, should enter Paris by the breach, would they not
begin with the defacing of this Pillar? Shall France then under your reign,
and by your command receive the foulest infamy, and most shameful foil,
that it could suffer from the insolency of the Spaniards?

If the day following your Majesty's happy conversion at S. Denis, there
should have come an Angel from heaven, and have used this speech to you: The
Jesuits, and the Spanish garrison, which they have placed within this great
City, (pointing to Paris) and which they therein maintain and continue, by
preaching them into the love and favor of the people, are the only lets that
bar thee from entering it. All true Frenchmen wish thy entrance, and enter thou
shall, in despite of these recreants, and that speedily. Nine months after,
these fellows will attempt thy death, but they shall not be able to effect it;
that great God of heaven, will put by the blow, and cause the murderer to
confess, that the accursed Lectures of the Jesuits, and their ordinary
speeches against thee, did violently bear and spur him forward to strike
this stroke: which his confession GOD will have to be verified, and confirmed
by their own hand writings. For this cause shall they all be banished, but
after seven years, thou shall restablish them again, to the subversion of
thy Realm, and confusion of thy whole race.

If, I say, an Angel from heaven had fore-tolde you this, would your Majesty
have believed it? Assuredly you would not: the latter point, depending upon
your own will, would have seemed so strange, and improbable. And yet
notwithstanding, consider (if you please) in how near terms you have stood
to the fulfilling, and accomplishment hereof: having so soon forgotten, what
mischief these men have wrought you, and are in possibility to work you
daily; who spare not to call our ancient Kings rebels, because they have not
thrown their diademes, and scepters to the ground, upon the first brute of an
excommunication sent forth against them: and who by consequence of this their
brain-sicke doctrine, have made an infinite number believe, that our king
deceased, was a Tyrant, and a Rebel, which persuasion was undoubtedly the
cause of his death.

O my gracious Sovereign, do you not in your imagination seem to behold the
tall, pale, heavy, and sorrowful image, of that great Prince, your dear
brother, such as he was, when grievously wounded, and all begored in blood, he
witnessed toward you the affection of a Father, until the very last gasp of
his life, holding you fast embraced in his arms, in the midst of his army,
which was bedewed with tears, and inflamed with revenge? He is in heaven, he
is in blessed estate, he gave his life for the liberty of his country, and to
free his children from the yoke of strangers: he beholds your actions from
above. And will you cancel the Decrees of his Court, established against these
particides, Before, page 80. and 81.
who occasioned him to be stal^d, when he lived, who have wounded him since his
death, by sounding out this acclamation in all parts of Europe: the same day,
that he expelled us out of Bourdeaux, was he expelled out of his life. The
report was, he sent us to S. Macaries, with an intent there to cut all our
throats, had not his own been cut first. It is not one Jesuit alone, it is
the whole body of the Jesuits in gross, that by their annual, and solemn
letters, proclaim this triumph over all Europe: (what speak I of Europe?)
over all the world, where they have their colonies: there they show at this
day, the woeful effects of their dangerous Positions; there (I say) they hang
forth as an ensign of their victory, the bloody shirt of our slaughtered
king, the proud spoils of the foremost king in the world, strooken dead with
those thunderbolts, which they caused to break forth in France, where, before
their coming, they never had power to do hurt. And would your Majesty take
from us the only comfort, which remains to our selves, and the only
monument, and remembrance, which our posterity shall have of our late King, of
our deceased master? Alas, my poor master, my unhappy Sovereign, though by
other means I be not able to express my zeal, yet at the least will I pour
over thy hearse, these latest tears, these last lamentations, of thy most
humble servant, of thy most faithful subject. Peradventure they may be
assisted with the sighs of a million of Frenchmen, who will vouchsafe to read
me, if not in this age, yet in times to come. For why should not these
sobbes, why should not these groans of mine continue, as long as there shall
any true Frenchmen remain in the world?

If our forefathers had swallowed this poisonous doctrine of excommunicating
kings, and of the power to translate kingdoms, this great succession had never
descended to your Majesty, it had long since been wrested out of the hands of
your predecessors. The banishment of the Jesuits is the death of this accursed
doctrine, and the death of this doctrine, is the life, glory, and beauty of
your Royal house. They which shall tell you the contrary, would see it
willingly ouerthrown: your Majesty knows it, and knowing it, if you do not
prevent it, you undermine the foundation of your own State, in steed of
strengthening and assuring it.

The magnanimity, and noble courage of a The king that now is, at the battle
of Ivry.
worthy King, does not only shine in the field, in the head of a dangerous
battle, lending courage to his nobles, and covered over with a plume of
feathers, to make himself a mark for the enemy, bidding defiance to their
valor, and to their forest of pikes, whereinto he breaks like a slash of
lightning; but is as much, and much more seen in consultations of the
weighty, and important affairs of his State, wherein prudent circumspection
ought to bear sway, but so as there be banished all doubt of displeasing, all
fear of offending. Such weakness is vnsuting to your Majesty, it is
unworthy a King of France, though not of your prowess. A King of France is
subject to no control, but to Gods only. Let your Majesty respect, what is
just, and commodious, for your self, for your succession, for your state, and
aim at nothing else.

It is just, that the Decrees of your Parliament, of your high Parliament, of the
Parliament of France, should be executed, and accomplished in France: therein
consists the principal strength, and sinews of your State. Who is it then,
that would persuade your Majesty, your self to cut off your own right arm?
Will you know the truth? It is King Phillip, under borrowed names, that
desires, that pursues, that persuades it. He is your brother, it is true,
but he has a dangerous counsel: he is young, he is ambitious, and he is
powerful: he knows right well, that he wrongfully detaines from you, the The
late King of Spain, by his testament restored Navarre to the king of France.
inheritance Navarre.
of Queen Katherine: this worm did gnaw his fathers conscience upon his
deathbed. In his life time he flattered himself with the authority of Pope
Julius: but when he saw that he was going to appear before his great
Master, before the great Judge, the horror of it made his hair stand upright
on his head: then could neither the slatteries of his Inquisition, nor the
soothings of the Jesuits, secure him against his own knowledge, and
conscience, he could not but utter it, he could not but confess it by his
testament, thereby to give ease, and appeasement to that hell, to those flames,
to those torments. But so far is his son from performing his Fathers will,
as that he harbors a world of incredible designs to the contrary: France
is the only rub in his way. Then what an advantage were it for him, to have
always within the heart of this great kingdom, men so fast and firm to him,
so ready, and resolved to execute whatsoever he can wish, how dangerous
soever? How great a furtherance were it to his designements, to retain amongst
us such espials, so vigilant, so aduenturous, and withal, of such notorious
secrecy, as whosoever shall incline to practice against the State, be he
French or Stranger, he will never doubt to have recourse unto them. In other
societies a man may mistake one for another, and so miscarrie: so did Barriere.
For had he discovered himself to none but to the Jesuits, without all doubt
your Majesty had been surprised. What did the Templers ever in France, or the
Humiliati in Italy, or the Covent Friars in Spain like unto this?

The power and might of a King, is infinite great, I grant it, under prouiso it
be accompanied with wisdom and foresight, (the chief virtue that can reign
in a Prince.) Great and maine ouer-sights once committed, do very hardly, or
not at all, admit any cure. What man will hereafter undertake any matter
(think you) against the Jesuits, let the^ conspire never so much against your
State, or person. Who will ever be their accuser? who will give evidence: who
will be Judge against them?

For the first time there be perhaps that will oppose, lewd and dangerous
persons: but when they see themselves forsaken, when they see these serpents
lurking about their houses, which are one day likely to destroy and devour
their children, this makes their hearts to faint, this quails their courage: so
as within a while, men by little and little frame themselves to the times,
every one applies and disposes himself thereunto. (A most dangerous word
for Princes.)

If the late King were now amongst us, he were able to say somewhat to this
point, this great Of harboring the Jesuits.
oversight, has sent him where now he is. Oh my liege, make use of his
example, take pattern by your neighbor Princes. Mark whether ever Charles the
fifth, or his son, those famous politicians, those notable Statesmen, would
see their seruitors discouraged, or dismayed: Mark whether ever they drove them
to sue for the favor of those, whom they had made their enemies for the
behoof of the State. See if ever they entertained any, whom they had reason to
mistrust.

If your Majesty did but call to mind the first foundation of the Jesuits,
their original, their increase, the place from whence they sprung, me thinks
you should presently conceive a detestation of their sect. But having tasted
these cruel fruits of their Seminary, fully aunswering the wishes of your
deadliest enemies, and now being delivered by a solemn Sentence of your
Parliament, from this perilous and pernicious faction, what show of reason,
what color can you have, your self to restore murderers into your State,
sedition amongst your subjects, factions, and partialities into your Provinces,
which since the banishment of the Jesuits, have seen more quiet, and peaceable
days, then they had done in thirty years before?

God loves not to be tempted, his hand has twice protected your Majesty, from
their bloody attempts: he has furnished you with so many good Prelates, and
Doctors on all hands, with so many learned, and devout Religious of all Orders,
men full of piety, knowledge, duty, and loialtie toward your majesty, a
thousand times more fit for the advancement of our Catholic religion, then
they that are infected with this dangerous heresy, grounded upon the power to
change kingdoms, and to take them from one, and transfer them to another: and
why will you so slenderly regard the favor, which he out of his heavenly bounty
has extended toward you, snatching you out of the very grave, and out of the
arms of death? a death by them much desited, wished, and practiced, wholly
endeavoring to bury France, together with her two last Kings, all in a Tomb?
Do you not fear (my liege) to provoke his wrath, who will be admired in his
providence, and praised in his bounty, and protection? Do you not believe
that he sat as President in the midst of that honorable assembly, of that
great Court, the most sacred Court of the world, being met in consultation of
matters, that concerned the life of their Prince, and the preservation of his
State? And will you cancel this their Decree? Oh (my liege) what do you
know, whether you owe your breath to that Decree? what can you tell, whether
GOD has used it as a mean to preserve you alive until this present? whether
he has made it a wall between you, and the assaults of your privy enemies?
Are you able to search the depth of his judgments? can you sound the bottom
of his counsels? know you not that they are unsearchable, that they are
bottomless?

The mighty God, who from above beholds the deep dissembling, the smooth
hypocrisy, and the secret venom, which the Jesuits foster within their
breasts, this great God (I say) who knows their ancient purpose, essentially
rooted in their veins, which is, to deface the glory of this Realm, and
Monarchy, give your Majesty grace, rightly to discern and distinguish the
friends of Alexander, from the fautors of the Jesuits: and by giving
commandment for the absolute execution of that your solemn Edict, to let all
Christendom know, that you are as skillful by wisdom to safeguard your self
from the subtle practices, and secret underminings of your enemies, as you are
able by valor to break, scatter, and confound their armies, and open
hostilities.


