Where the kings hyghnes is enfourmed, that diverse and (...) ^^^^ngs and
books, as well (...) specially one book imprinted comprisyng a sermon (...)
yther late Bishop of Rochester, who (...) the laws of this realm was
executed (...) and sundry manifest and detestable high treasons by (...)
against the kings highness* his crown and (...) are dispersed abroad in this
realm, and ben (...) to the hands of diverse of the kings subjects in which
writings and books many open and manifest errors and sclaunders are (...),
not only in derogation and diminution of the dignite and auctorite roial of the
kings majesty, and of his imperial crown, but also directly and expressly
against the good and laudable estatutes of this realm: by reason whereof the
kings said subjects having such (...) writings and books might happen by
the keeping or reding of them to (...) in to great perilles dangers and losses
or their lives lands and goods. In consideration whereof the kings most royal
majesty, who of his most noble and gentle heart more desi^^th the reformation
of his loving subjects, by gentle warninges and monitions, than by rigor
and extremytie of his laws, trusting that every humble loving and honest
subject, being admonyshed of their offenses, whereby they can pretend no
ignorance, will take more regard and respect of their duties of allegiance that
they owen to bear to their sovereign lord, orelles they may well think that
his hyghnes, taking just occasion by their obstinacy, will proceed to their
reformation and punishment according to his laws after their merits and
deserts, without any ministration of his mercy in that behalf: does therefore
straitely charge and co^mande, that al and every person and persons, which
have, or here after shall happen to have any of the said books, containing the
said sermon of the said late traitor, or any other writing or book, wherein
shall be contained any error or sclaunder to the kings majesty, or to the
derogation or diminition of his imperial crown, or of any auctorite knytte to
the same, or repugnant to his statutes of this realm, made for the suerte of
his graces succession, or for the abolycyon of the usurped power of the
bishop of Rome, shall within.x^. days next after this his graces
proclamation, bring and deliver the said books and writings to the lord
Chancellor of England, or to Thomas Crumwell esquier the kings chief
Secretary, and master of his Rolls, as they will avoid his most high
indignation and dipleasure, and the perils and dangers of his laws and
statutes provided for the same, which his highness entendeth to execute
against the offenders of this his graces proclamation, according to their
offenses, without any pit or mercy to them to be given by his majesty in any
behalf. And furthermore the kings hyghnes straytely charge and commands
al and singular Justices of peace, Mayres, Shyryffes, bayliffes, Constables,
and all other his loving subjects, that every of them shall put their good
and effectual endeavors for the finding aspienge and bringinge in of the said
books and wrytinges, according to this his graces proclamation, as they will
avoid his most high displeasure and indignation, and answer for their
doing contrary hereof, at their vttermooste perils.

And over this, where his majesty is also informed, that diverse and sundry
light persons, called pardoners, go daily abroad in this his realm, declaryng
and publishing to his people, as well in paryshe churches as else where, diverse
indulgences and pardons, corruptly and deceitfully opteyned of the bishops of
Rome, and by color thereof exact and gather of his subjects great and
innumerable sommes of money: and the most part of the said pardoners being
confederate with the great erraunt thieves of this realm, by going about epsy
where the rychest and most substancyall men inhabyte and dwell, to whose houses
many times they gyde and bring the said thieves their confederates, to rob
and spoil. And also the money unlawfully by them exacted of the pore innocent
people* by color of their indulgences, they spend in rybaldry and carnal
vices, carienge about with them drabbes hoores and cut purses, to the great
sclaunder of the realm, and to the damage deceyte and empoueryshinge of the
kings good loving subjects. For repressynge whereof, the kings most royal
majesty, who daily studieth to extincte vice and exalt and encreace virtue in
this his realm, to the glory and honor of god, and quie^nes of his people,
considering that by occasion of such corrupt and deceytfull indulgences many
of his loving subjects have been more encouraged to commytte sin, and to
withdraw their faith hope and devotion from god, and have be the more
negligente to fulfylle his precepts and commandments, which all christen
people are bounden to observe, does therefore straytly charge and command, that
no person or persons from hen^forth take upon (...) or them to send or go
about in this his realm, to publyshe any such perdon or indulge^ce, nor
declare publyshe use or practyse (...) such pardon or indulgence in any
monasteries churches or places, nor by color thereof exact give or receive any
so^mes of money (...) peynes comprised in his laws in that case provided, and
as they will answer for doing contrary hereof to his majesty at their
uttermost perils. And if any person or persons go vagaraunt in any part of
his realm, as pardoners, taking (...) any (...) to publisshe such
indulgences and pardons, or by color thereof exact any sommes of money, that
then his hyghenesse straytely charge and commands all and singular
Justices of peace, Mayres, sheryffes, bayllyues, constables, and all other his
loving subjects, that they shall apprehende from time to time such
offenders, and cause them to be ordered and (...) to the act provided for
valiant beggars and vagaboundes, not faylynge thus to do, as they will avoid
the (...) pleasure and indignation, and also the peryls of the peynes contained
in the said act.

GOD SAVE THE KING.

