A proclamacion, ordained by the Kings majesty, with the advice of his
honorable counsel for the Bible of the largest and greatest volume, to be
had in every church. Devised the. VI. day of May the. XXXIII. year of the
Kings most gracious reygne.
WHere, by Injunctions heretofore set forth by the authority of the Kings
royal majesty. Supreme head of the church of this his realm of England. It
was ordained and commanded amongst other things, that in all and synguler
paryshe churches, there should be provided by a certain day now expyred, at the
costs of the Curates and paryshioners, Bybles containing the old and new
Testament, in the English tongue, to be fyxed and set up openly in every of
the said paryshe churches. The which Godly commandment and iniunction was
to the only intent that every of the Kings majesty's loving subjects,
minding to read therein, might by occasyo^ thereof, not only consider and
perceive the great and ineffable omnipotent power, promise, justice, mercy and
goodness of Almyghtie God. But also to learn thereby to observe Gods
commandments, and to obey their soueraygne Lord and high powers, and to
exercise Godly charity, and to use themselves, according to their vocations:
in a pure and sincere christen life without murmr or grud gynges. By the
which Iniunctio^s the Kings royal majesty intended, that his loving
subjects should have and use the commodity of the readyng of the said
Bybles, for the purpose above rehearsed, humbly, mekely, reverently and
obediently: and not that any of them should read the said Bybles, with loud
and high voices, in time of the celebracion of the holy Mass and other
dyuyne scruyces used in the church, nor that any his lay subjects redynge
the same, should presume to take upon them, any commen dysputacyon, argument
or exposicyon of the mysteries therein contained, but that every such lay man
should humbly, mekely and reuerentlye read the same, for his own instruction,
edificacion, and amendment of his life, according to gods holy word therein
mentioned. And not wythstandynge the Kings said most godly and gracious
commandment and Iniunction inform as is before said. His royal majesty is
informed that diverse and many Towns and paryshes within this his realm have
negligently omytted their duties in the accomplishement thereof whereof his
(...) not a little. And minding the execucion of his said former, most godly
and gracyous Injunctions does straytlye charge and command that the Curates
and paryshioners of every town and paryshe (...) his realm of England, not
having already Bybles provided within their paryshe churches, shall on (...)
side the feaste-of Alsayntes next coming, bye and provide Bybles of the
largest and greatest vo(...) the same to be set and fyxed in every of the said
paryshe churches, there to be used as is aforesaid: according(...) the said
former Injunctions: upon pain that the Curate and inhabitauntes of the
paryshes and towns, (...) lose and forfayte to the Kings majesty for every
month that they shall lack and want the said Bible(...) the same f^ast of
Alsayntes forty shyllynges, the one half of the same forefayt to be to ye
kings m(...) other half to him or the^ which shall first find and present
the same to the Kings maiestyes counsel. And finally, the kings royal
majesty does declare and sygnifye to all and syngular his loving subjects,
that to thentent they may have the said Bybles of the greatest volume at
equal and reasonable pryces. His (...) by the advise of his, counsel has
ordained and ^ared: that the syllers thereof, shall not take for any of the
said Bybles unbound, about the price of ten shyllynges. And for every of the
said Bybles well and sufficientlye, bound, trymmed and clasped not above
twelve shyllynges, upon pain, the seller to lose for every Bible so the
contrary to this his hyghnes proclamacion forty shyllynges, the one m^yre
thereof to the kings majesty: (...) the other moyte, to the fynder and
presenter of the defaulte, as is before said. And his hyghnes streyghtly
charge and commands that all and synguler ordinaries having
ecclesiastical iurysdiction within this his church and realm of England and
the dominion of Ways, that they and every of them shall put their
effectual(...) that the Curates and parish^oners shall obey and accomplish,
this his maiestyes proclamacion and (...) dement, as they tender the (...)and
godly purpose in that behalf, and as they will (...)

(...) THE KING.

