WHere the ale brewers and beer brewers of this realm of England have used
and daily do use for their own singular lucre profit and gain to make in
their own houses their barrels, kylderkyns and firkyns of much less
quantity content rate and assise than they ought to be, to the great hurt
prejudice and damage of the kings liege people, and contrary to diverse acts
statutes ancient laws and customs heretofore made had and used, and to the
destruction of the poor craft or mystery of coupers. For reformation whereof,
be it enacted by the king out sovereign lord, the lords spiritual and
temporal, and the commons in this present parliament assembled, and by
authority of the same, that no bear brewer, nor ale brewer, that shall brewe
to sale bear or ale, shall from hensforth occupy by him self, nor by any other
to his use in his house nor else where, the mystery or craft of coupers, nor
make any barrelles, kylderkyns, fyrkyns, or other vessels by him self, nor
by his or their own servants, whereby they shall put their beer or ale to
sale, but that all such barrelles, kylderkyns, and other vessels of wood,
wherewith they shall put their bear or ale to sale, shall from henseforth be
made and marked according as hereafter shall be expressed, by the common
artificers of coupers exercised and practiced in the said occupation upon pain
to forfaite and pay for every such barrel, kisderkin, firkin, or other
vessel, hereafter to be made contrary to the tenor of this act. iii. s. iiii.
d.

And be it also enacted, that every artificer of the craft or mystery of
coupers, that will exercise or practice to make any of the said vessels for bear
or ale to be put to sale, shall make the same vessels, and every of them, of
good and seasonable wodde, and put his propre mark upon every of them. And
that every barrel for bear shall conteyne. xxxvi. galons, every kylderkyn for
bear. xviii. galons, and every fyrkyn for bear nine galons of the kings
standerde gallon. And that every barrel for ale shall conteyn. xxxii. gallons,
every kylderkyn for ale. xvi. galons, and every fyrkyn for ale. viii. galons of
the kings standerde gallon. So that they shall be of good and just measure,
or else above and not under. And that no couper shall make any other vessel
for bear or ale to be sold within this realm of any greatter or lasser number
of galons than is abouesayde, onelesse he shall cause to be marked upon every
such vessel, that he shall so make of greater or lesser number of gallons,
the true and certain nombre of as many gallons, as every such other vessel
shall conteyne, to thentent that every person may know the content thereof.

And that no such artificer of coupers shall enhaunce the prices of any such
barrels, kilderkins firkins, or other vessels in the sale of them to any ale
brewer or bear brewer, or other person, but keep the rates of such prices as
hereafter ensues, and not above, upon pain to forfaite for every barrel
kilderkyn and firkyn defective or enhaunced in price in any point contrary to
this act. iii. s. iiii. d. That is to say, for every beer barrel. ix. d. For
every bear kylderkyn. v. d. and for every beer firkyn. iii. d. And the ale
barrel. xvi. d. the ale kylderkyn. ix. d. and the ale fyrkin. v. d.

Also be it further enacted by the said authority, that no bear brewer nor ale
brewer at any time after the feast of Lammas now next coming, shall put their
bear or ale to sale to any person or persons to be spent and occupied within
this realm in any other barrels, kylderkyns, firkyns, or other vessels of
wodde, other than shall be made and marked by an artificer of coupers
abouesaide, whereof every barrel for beer shall conteyne and hold. xxxvi.
galons every half barrel or kylderkyn. xviii. gallons, and every fyrkyn. ix.
galons. And every barrel for ale shall conteyne. xxxii. gallons, every
kylderkyn. xvi. gallons, and every fyrkyn. viii. galons of full and just
measure, or above, and not under that measure.

And that any bear brewer or ale brewer shall not take over and above for any
such barrel, kylderkin, or fyrkin of ale and bear, but after such prices and
rates, as shall be thought convenient and sufficient by the discretions of the
Justices of peace within every shire, where such bear brewer and ale brewer
shall dwell without any city borowe or town corporate, where no head officers,
as Maires, bayliffes, shireffes, and other head officers, have none authority
nor rule, and in every city borough and town, where there be Mayres
Sheryffes, or other head officers, the same rates and prices to be named and
sessed by them and every of them by their discretions. And that the said ale
brewers or bear brewers at any time hereafter shall not sell their bear nor ale
at any higher rates or prices than shall be to them assigned, after the form
above rehearsed, upon pain to lose and forfaite for every barrel so put to
sale contrary to this estatute. vi. s. for every half barrel or kylderkyn.
iii. s. iiii. d. and for every fyrkin. ii. s. and for every vessel conteinynge
greatter number of galons. x. s. and for every other vessel conteynyng lesser
nombre of galons. xii. d. The one half of all the which penalties and
forfaitures to be to the king our sovereign lord, and the other half to him
that will sue for the same by action of debte, byll, playnt or information in
any of the kings courts: In which actio^ and suit the defenda^t shall not wage
his law, nor any essoin protection or privilege to be admitted.

Be it also further enacted by the said authority, that al manner of soap
makers within this realm of England, which shall put to sale any soap by
barrel, half barrel, firkyn, or other vessel, shall from Lammas now next
coming, make or cause to be made their barrels, half barrels, firkins, and
other vessels, according to the rates contents weightes and assizes of old
time used and accustomed, that is to say, every empty barrel to hold and
conteyn. xxxii. galons or above, and to be in weight. xxvi. pounds, and not
above, of full and just measure, and every half barrel empty to be in
weight. xiii. li. and not above, and to hold and conteyne. xvi. galons or
above: and every firkyn empty to weye. vi. pounds and an half, and not
above, and to hold and conteyne. viii. galons or above, upon pain of
forfayture for every such barrel half barrel fyrkyn or other vessel
hereafter to be made had or used contrary to this act. iii. s.. iii. d.

And also be it enacted by the authority aforsaid, yt the warde^s of
thoccupatio^ or mystery of coupers with in the city of London from hensforth
at al times hereafter when they shall think convenient and expedient, taking
with them an officer of the Mayres, shall have full power and authority by
virtue of this act, to search view and gage all maaer of such barrels
kilderkins, firkins, and other vessels to be made or occupied for ale beer or
soap to be put to sale within the city of London, and suburbs of the same,
and within two miles compass without the same suburbs, to view and se that the
same barrels kilderkins firkins and other vessels as well within liberties as
without, be made and marked well and sufficiently, and bear and co^tein their
true contents rates and mesures, according to theffect of this estatute: And
also to mark every such barrel kilderkyn firkin and other vessel by them so
viewed and gaged, bearing and co^teining their true co^tentes, with the sign
and token of a seint Antonies cross. The same wardens to have for the search
and gaging of every such barrel, kilderkin firkin and other vessel by them
so serched viewed gaged and marked one farthing, and not above, of the owners
or makers of the said vessels. And shall and may have authority by virtue of
this act to reteyne every such vessel as they shall so gage search and mark,
unto such time as they shall be satisfied thereof. And in case they shall find
any of the said vessels defective, not bearyng their true contents, that than
by authority of this act, they may sease take and reteyne every such vessel,
and cause the same to be marked or amended, accordying to the true content, or
else cause the same to be brenned. And also the party owner of such vessel to
lose and forfayte for every such vessel not being of the full contents
after the rate above expressed. xii. d. to be recovered and employde as is
above said.

And be it further enacted by the said authority, that in all other cities,
borowes, and towns, wherein no such wardens of coupers be, that the Mayres,
Sheryffes Ba^^^stes, Constables or other head office^s in such Cities, borowes
and towns shall have power and authority to search, view, and gauge all such
barrells, kylderkyns, fyrkyns, and other vessels to be made hereafter any such
city borowe or town, and to have and take all such auantage thereby and in like
manner and form as the wardens of coupers within the city of London or other
persons by this act should or may have or take on every behalf.

Provided always yt every bear brewer may keep in his house one or two
servants of the mystery or crait of coupers to houpe and amend his barels,
kylderkyns, fyrkyns, and other vessels, wherein they shall put their bear to
sale from time to time, this act or any thing therein contained to ye contrary
in any wise notwithstanding.

(...) it further enacted by the said authority, that if any person at any
time after the said feast of Lam (...) coming, do mynyshe or cause to be
mynished any manner of barrel, kylderkyn, or fyrkyn to the ^^^eyte of any the
kings subjects by reason of taking out the head of any such vessel, or
taking out of any staff out or from any such vessel, that then every such
vessel to be brent, and thoffender to forfayte for every such offense. iii. s.
iiii. d. the one moytie thereof to be to the king our Soueraygne Lord, and
the other moytie thereof to him or them of the kings subjects that will sue for
the same, to be recovered in manner and form above rehearsed. And the party so
offendynge to be further punisshed by the discretion of the head officer or
officers, before whom such default shall be presented.

It is enacted by authority of this present parlyament, that notwithstanding
any thing contained in this act of brewers and coupers, whereunto this Cedule
is annexed, it shall be leful to every alebrewer mentioned in the same act to
have and retain in his service one person of the mystery or craft of
coupers, to exercise in his service the craft of a couper, only in byndyng,
houpyng and pinning his masters ale vessels, recited by the said act, and in
none otherwise to use or exercise any making of vessels concerning the craft or
mystery of a couper, whiles that he is in the service of any ale brewer. Also
it is enacted, that every couper, which hereafter shall make any ale vessel
specyfied in the said act, shall from the feast of Penthecoste next coming
make every such vessel according to the assise specifyed in the treatise
called Compositio mensurarum, that is to say every barrel for ale shall
contain. xxxii. galons of the said assise or above, of the which. viii.
galons make the common busshell to be used in this realm of England every
kylderkyn for ale. xvi. galons of the said assise or above, and every fyrkin.
viii. galons of assise or above, upon pain of forfayture of iii. s. iiii. d.
for every of the same vessels by him untruly made contrary to this act: the
one half of the same forfayture to be to the king, and the other to him that
will sue for the same, by action of debt, byl, playnte, writ or otherwise:
In which action none essoin, protection or wager of law shall be allowed.

And be it also enacted, that every couper mark his vessel with his own
mark, upon pain of. iii. s. iiii. d to be levied and recovered after like
manner and form as is above said. And that no manner of person in the search
making for the true gaugyng of any such vessels, shall put out the ale of any
such vessel. whereby the same ale shall be ye worse. And that it shall be laweful
to every ale brewer to bring, carry, and cause to be brought and carried their
ale to the householdes of our soueraygne lord the king, the Queen, the princes,
and to every archbyshops, bishops, dukes, markesses, Earls, barons, or other
honorable men's houses in tonnes buttes, pypes, hoggeshedes, or other vessels
of greater or larger quantity than is expressed in this present act, as
before time has been used in that behalf. And also it shall be lawful to the
said ale brewers to bring carry, or cause to be brought conueyde or carried their
ale to every man's house in barrels, kylderkyns, and fyrkyns bearyng and
holding their true contents, according to the purport and effect of this
present act, any thing contained in the same act to the contrary hereof
notwithstanding.


