HEnricus octauus dei gr^a Anglie and Fra^cie rex, fidei defensor and dn^s
Hibernie, Maiori and vicecomitibus Lo^don^ saltm^ vobis ma^damus quod imediate
post receptione^ presentiu^ in singl is VVardis perochiis and aliis locis infra
Ciuitate^ nr^am Lo^don^ and libertates eiusde^ vbi magis expedie^s videritis
expertenr^a publics proclamaro^es fieri fac^. i hec verba.
WHere at this present parliament begone at London ye third day of Noue^bre in
ye.xxi. year of the riegne of our most dred souereyn lord the King, and from
thens adiorned to westmistre, and there holde^ and proroged by diverse and
sundry prorogations, and yet continued. It is ordained and provided emonges
other thiges that Bochers should sell by weight beeff / and Porke / for a half
penny the pound, and Moton and Veale for a half penny and half farthynge the
pound, as by ye same act more at large is contained For as much as the
Bochers of the said City of London and of the suburbs of the same, can not so
co^uenyently utter and sell their vytayles, at such pryces as Bochers
inhabyted in other parts of the realm may do, by reason that the said
Bochers, of London and of the suburbs of the same, as well for meyntenaunce of
their houses and servants, and berynge lottes and skottes, by the ordres and
customs of the said City, as for hyrynge of grounds, lyinge nygh ye same
City for the preseruacyon of their catelles till they be killed, at such high
fermes and rentes: ben daily put to much more hyer, greater and excessyue
charges, costs, and expenses then Bochers inhabyted in other parts of this
Realm been.

The king our most dred souereygne lord therefore being aduertysed of the
premysses, consyderyng also that in the same season of winter catels are much
more derer the^ they be in the somer time when they are norisshed and fed with
plenry fulness of grass, and willing that the Bochers of his said City and
suburbs of the same being his loving subjects, should have and take such
reasonable garnes, by excersyse of their mysteryes as they might honestly live
withal according to their behauyours, and to give them courage that his said
City, as well at ye assemble of this his present perlayme^t now to be holden as
at all other times, should be plentyfully furnysshed with good vytaylles, is
pleased and contented by the advise of his counsel, that the Bochers of his
said City of London, and suburbs of the same, from the date of this his
graces Proclamacyon, unto the feast of the Natyuite of saint John^ Baptyst
next coming, shall and may sell Beeff, and Porke, for a half penny and half
ferthyng the pound, and Motton and Veale, for halfpenny and ferrhynge the
pound. And that this his most gracyous letters of proclamacyon shall be to
every of the same Bochers of his said City and suburbs, suffycient warrant
and dyscharge against his hyghnes and all other, for sellyng of flesh at the
pryces before lymytted in the same, any thing contained in ye same act to ye
contrary thereof notwithstanding. Provided always that the said Bochers se his
said City, well and plentyfully provided and furnysshed with good and wholesome
vytalles.

And ferthermore his hyghues straytly charge and commands the Mayre and
Sheryffes of his said City, that now is and herafter shall be, yt they from time
to time, survey and se ye same to be effectually done, as they will answer to
his magesty at their vitermost perils in that behalf. And over this the
kings hyghnes straytly charge and commands that as well all Bochers
inhabyted in other parties of his Realm, as also all Gracyers, Fermers,
Broggers and Breders of cattle, shall utter and sell their cattle at
reasonable and conuenyent pryces, and in such manner and form as by ye said
statute and by diverse other statutes here tofore made is ordained and provided,
as they will answer at their uttermost perils for the same. In wytnes whereof
we have caused these presents to be sealed with our great scale.

At westmynster the.xxiii. day of Octobre, the.xxvi. year of our reygne.
God save the king.

