A PROCLAMATION concerning eating of white meats, made the.III. day of
February, the.XXXIII year of the reygne of the kings most royal majesty.
FOR AS MUCH as by diverse and sundry occasyons, as well hearryng, tynges,
saltfysh, samond, stockfyshe, as other kinds of fyshe, ben this year skaut,
and also enhanced in price^ about the old rate and comen estimation of their
valor: so that if the kings loving subjects should be enforced only to bye
and provide hearrynge and other salt store of fysshe, for the necessary and
sufficient sustentation and mayntenaunce of their housholdes and families, all
this holy time of Lent, according as they have been wont in times past to do,
and should not be by some other convenient means releued therein, the same might
and should undoubtedly redounde to their importable charge and detryment. And for
as much as his highness considers, how this kind and manner of fasting,
that is to say, to absteyne from milk, butter, eggs, chese, and all other
white meats, is but a mere posytiue law of the Church, and used by a custom
within this realm, and of none other sort or necessity, but the same may be,
upon good considerations and grounds, altered and dispensed with from time to
time by the public auctority of kings and princes, when so ever they shall
perceive the same to tend to the hurt and damage of their people. THE KINGS
highness therefore most graciousely considering and tenderyng the wealth and
commodity of his people, has thought good, for the consyderations above
rehearsed, to release and dispense with the said law and custom of
absteynynge from white meats this holy time of Lent, And of his especial grace
and mere motion gives and grants unto al and singular his subjects within
this his realm of England, Wales, Cales, Guy^es, Hammes, and in all other his
graces dominions, free lyberty, faculty, and license, to eat all manner of
white meats, as milk, eggs, butter, chese, and such like, during the time
of this Lent, without any scruple or grudge of conscience: any law,
constitution, use, or custom to the contrary notwithstanding. Wherein never
the less his hyghnes exhorts, and in the name of god requires, all such his
faithful subjects, as may, wol, or shall enjoy this his said grant or
faculty, that they be in no wise scruple or doubtefull thereof, nor abuse or
turn the same in to a fleshly or carnal liberty: but rather endeavor them
selfs to their possible powers with this liberty of eating of white meats,
to observe also that fast, which god most specially requires of them: That is
to say, to renounce the world and the devil, with all their pompes and works,
and also to subdewe and repress their carnal affections, and the corrupt
works of their flesh, according to their vow and profession made at the
font stone. For in these points specially consists the very true and perfyt
abstinence and fasting of a Christen man.

GOD SAVE THE KING. Tho Berthelet
regius impressor excudebat. Cum priuilegio ad imprimendum solum.

