Mense Iunii Anno regni metue^dissimi dn^i nr^i regis Henrici octaui.xxii.
A proclamation made and diuysed by the kyngis highness* With the advice of his
most honorable Counsel, for punisshinge of vacabundes and sturdy beggars.
THe king our most dradde sovereign lord, having always in his most
blessed remembrance, as well the cure and charge of his dignite royal, as also
the present astate of this his realm, and his subjects of the same,
considers, that in all places through out this his realm of England,
vacabundes and beggars, have of long time increased and daily does increase
in great and excessive nombres, by the occasyon of ydelnes, mother and root of
all vices: whereby have insurged and spronge, and daily insurgeth and springs
co^tynuall theftes, mourdres, and other sundry heinous offenses and great
enormities to the high displeasure of god, the inquietation and damage of his
true and faithful subjects, and to the disturbance of the hoole common weal
of this his said realm: And where as many and sundry good laws statutes and
ordinances have been before this time devised and made, as well by his hyghnes
as also by diverse his most noble progenitors kings of England, for the
most necessary and due reformation of the premysses: yet that not
withstanding, the said nombres of vacabundes and beggars, be not seen in any
part, to be mynyshed / but daily to be augmented and increased in to great
rowtes and companyes. Which his grace evidently perceyueth to happen, for as
much as his said laws, statutes, and ordinances be not from time to time put
in effectuell execution, according to his gracis expectacion, pleasure, and
commandment: His highness therefore willing to declare to all his subjects,
his most godly and virtuous purpose, and perseverance in the persecution
correction and reformation of that most damnable vice of ydelnes, chief
subuerter and confounder of common weals, Eftsoon wylleth and straytely
commands all Justices of the peace, maires, sheryffes, constables,
bursholders, tethynge men, and other his mynysters, as they will avoid his
high indignation and displeasure, that if they or any of them, shall after two
days next ensuynge after this proclamation publisshed. happen to find any
vacabunde or mighty beggar (be it man or woman) out of the hundred where he or
she was borne, or out of the town or place, where he or she last dwelled in,
and continued by the space of three years next before, and that upon knowledge
of the said proclamation, he or she has not demanded a Byllet, to convey
them self to the said hundred or owellynge place, and so be in their journey
thetherwarde, within the said two days, that than the said Justices and
minysters and every of them, shall cause the said vacabundes and beggars and
every of them, to be stripped naked, from the priuey parts of their bodies
upward (men and women of great age or seek, and women with child only
except) and being so naked, to be bounden, and sharply beaten and skourged.
And after that they be so beaten in form before said, that there be delivered
to them and every of them so whypped or skourged, a sedule or byllet, the form
whereof appears in the end of this present proclamation: And that the said
sedule or byllet be signed with the hand of the Justice of peace, mayre,
sheriff, constable, bursholder, tethinge man, or other minister, by whose
commandment the said vacabu^de or beggar was whipped or skourged. And in case
that any of them can not write, than the same byllet to be signed, by one of
the best and most substantial inhabitants next adioynynge. And if it happen
the person beaten in form aforesaid, to be eftsoon fou^den in the said place,
as a vacabunde or beggar, that than he or she to be taken and eftsoon beaten
and skourged as is before said: And so from time to time, and as often as they
shall happen to be taken out of the place to them lymitted, for their abode by
the statute. More over, if any of the said vagabundes or mighty beggars,
whipped in form aforsayd, do after the said whippinge, make their abode in any
place longer than a dinner time, or the space of one night, until they be come
to the said place of their habitacio^ appointed being not verily seek or
hurt) that than they shall be eftsoon whypped, and ordered as is before
written. Semblably if any vagabunde or mighty beggar being taken, will affirm
that he was late whypped, and can not show forth a cedule or byllet signed,
as before is mentioned / he shall, not withstanding his said affirmacion, be
stripped naked and seen by the Justice, or some of the ministers before named.
And if it may evidently appear unto them by the tokens on his body, that he
has been al ready skourged or beaten, they shall than suffer him to depart
without other harm, with a byllet signed by them, me^cionynge where, and at
what time he was beaten. And if they find no tokens or signs of skourgynge or
beatinge on his body, than they to se him to be whypped or skourged, and
further ordered as is before written. And more over, the kyngis highness
commands al Justices of the peace, mayres, sheriffs, co^stables,
bursholders, tethyngmen, and other his said ministers, that al vain pity and
other excuses laid aparte, they endeavor them selfs with all their power,
study, and diligence, to put this his said ordinance in effectuell execucion,
without any delay. And also that they endeavor them selfs to keep their
marches and serches, according to the laws and statutes of this realm, and
according to the instructions before this time made and divised by his highness
and his honorable counsel, and by his grace to them sent, to be put in due
execution: As they will answer to his highness at their vttermoste peryls.

God save the king.
The form and tenore of the sedule or byllet above mentioned.
(...) the county of D. as a vagabunde, without a cedule or token of
skourginge, and therefore whypped at C. afore^^^^ (...) day of the month of
(...) the (...) year of the reign of our sovereign lord king Henry the
eight, in the pres^^^^ (...) and other of the inhabitants of the same town.

Tho. Bert^e^etus
regin(...)

