A PROCLAMATION that strangers shall pay like custom and subsydie as the
kings subjects.
FOR AS MUCH as it is the office and duty of chief rulers and governors of
all civil co^mynalties, to study devise and practice by sondrye ways and
means, to auaunce set forth and increase their common welthes, committed to
their cures and charges, and to maintain and observe such ordynaunces and
orders, as by them should be devised for the same, if by the experience of
them, such goodness profit commodity and benefyte succeed thereof in and
among their civility, as they intended, and if not, then to revoke repeal
and refourme their said ordynaunces and orders, and establyshe new from time
to time, as the necessity of their common welthe should require: The kings
most royal majesty, HENRY the VIII. by the grace of god king of England and
of France, defendour of the faith, lord of Ireland, and in earth supreme heed
of the church of England, of his most excellent goodness, depely ponderynge
and considering his kyngely office and charge, and that although in the time
of his most gracious reygne, a great multitude of laws ordinances and
orders, have been devised made and ordained by his most excellent wisdom and
polycie, for auauncement and increase of the commonwealth of his realm, and
the great profit and commodity of his loving subjects of the same, yet his
most graciouse highness, like a most godly and worthy ruler, not minding to
cease, but daily to travail and labor in deuisynge and setting forth orders
and ordynaunces from time to time, as his grace by his most excellent wisdom
may perceive just occasion of necessity in his common welthe, and now
among other things calling to his most graciouse remembrance, that all be
it his highness is justly and laufully entytled in the right of his imperial
crown, to take and perceive for Custom and subsidy of merchants estrangers
conueyenge or transportynge, into this his realm or out of the same, their
wares, goods, and marchandyses, greatter and larger sommes of money, than of
his own loving and natural subjects, and being in good hope and confydence,
that although the moderation thereof should tend to his gracis own detriment
and loss, that yet it shall be a great occasion, to have more plentiful resort
trafyke and commutation with in this his gracis realm, with and among his
loving subjects of the same, for their enrychynge welthes and commodities.
Taking therefore more respect to the auauncement of his gracis common welthe,
than to his own syngular profit, and like the most godly and most worthy
chief ruler of this realm, minding to prove and assaye, whether by the
attemperaunce and moderation of the said custom and subsydie of strangers,
goodness, profit, and commodity, shall succeed, increase and grow to the
common welthe of this his realm, according to his gracis hope and expectation
in that behalf, Is therefore, and for other considerations, mouyng his highness,
pleased and contented for the experymente thereof, that from the. vi. day of
Apryll, in the. xxx. year of his gracis reygne, during the full and hole term
of.vii. years, from thense next following, no person or persons, being
strangers or denysens, conueyeng or transportynge any goods, wares, or
marchandyses into any port creke, or other place of this realm, or out of the
same, shall for and during the same time of.vii. years, pay any other more or
larger custom and subsidy, than the kings own loving and natural
subjects, have used and ben accustomed to do and pay at this present time
(custom and subsidy for wolles only excepted.) And his highness straytely
charge and commands all and syngular Customers, Comptrollers, and other his
mynisters, having charge of receyte of his customs and subsydie, that they ne
any of them, by any manner of color or means, during the said time of seven
years, shall exact take or receive of any stranger or denysen, any other more
or larger custom and subsidy, than is above especified in this his gracis
proclamation, upon pain of forfayture of their offices, and making fine at
his gracis will: And over that upon pain to yield and render to the parties
grieved, ten times so much as they shall exact and take, contrary to this
present proclamation. And his highness also charge and commands, as well
the Treasourer Chancellor Chamberlaynes and Barons of his exchequer, and
every of them, as all other his Auditors, having charge to take accomtes of
his customs and subsidies, that they, ne any of them, from the said syxte
day of Apryll, during the said time of.vii. years, from thens next
following, shall charge any the said customers, comptrollers, and minysters of
any other further or more custom and subsydie, for strangers or denyzens,
then above is expressed, as they woll answer to his highness at their
vttermoste perils. Sygnifienge and declarynge, as well to the said treasorer
chancellor chamberlaynes barons and auditors, and to every of them, as to
all and synguler the said customers comptrollers and mynysters, that they
following and ensuynge this his gracis proclamation, the same shall be to them,
and to every of them, their heirs and executours, and to the heirs and
executours of every of them, a sufficyent warrant and discharge against his
majesty, his heirs and successors for the same, without any other byll,
warraunt, writ, or other commandment to be sued in this behalf.

Provided always, that this present proclamation, ne any thing therein
contained, shall not extend, to give license or liberty to any person or
persons strangers or other, to convey or transporte into this realm or out
of the same, any goods wares or marchaundises, contrary to the form and
effect of the laws and statutes of this Realm: But that it shall be
understand taken and expounded alonely, that custom and subsidy of
strangers and denyzens, shall be agreeable and equal with the custom and
subsidy of the kings own natural subjects, and not above, during the time
of.vii. years before lymitted.

Yeuen at our palace of Westim^, the XXVI. day of February, in the. XXX. year
of our Reygne.
GOD SAVE THE KING.
Tho. Berthelet Regius Impressor excu. CVM PRIVILEGIO.


