A PROCLAMATION (...) to be used in due form in the Church of England, and
the kings most (...) contained in the same.
THE KINGS MOST ROYAL (...) the late proclamation made in the month of
November last past, commanded, and straytely charged all (...) loving
subjects, and all other resiantes within this his gracis realm, to observe
and keep the Ceremonies (...). Holy Water Procession knelyng and crepynge on
good Friday to the Cross, and on Ester day, setting by of lyghtes (...)
heatyng of Candels upon the day of the purification of our lady, Ceremonies
used at the purifycation of women delivered of ^^^^de and offering of their
^ryson^es, keeping of the four offryng days, payment of tithes, according to
the old custom of the realm, and al other like laudable ceremonies
heretofore used in the church of England, which as yet be not abolyshed nor
taken away by his highness, so as they shall use without superstition, HIS
MAJESTY, for the tender zeal, which his highness has borne, to the good
instruction of his people in truth, and being desirous, that the said
ceremonies should be observed and used in their right use (all ignorance and
superstition clearly taken away, straytely charge and commands, that in
such places, and all such days as the said ceremonies shall be chiefly
celebrate, the bishop, deane, curate, or paryshe priest, for that time the
mynister, shall trewly and plainly instruct the people, the good and right
use and effects of such ceremony, as is used that day, by which knowledge,
the people so using and observing the same ceremonye, may be fruitfully
edified in renuynge and styrynge up spiritual cogitations and godly thoughts
of such things, as those ceremonies well understood, were ordained to preach
unto us. Wherefore every sunday it shall be declared, how holy water is
sprinkled, to put us in remembrance of our baptism, and of the blood of
Christ, sprinkled for our redemption upon the cross: And that gyuynge of holy
bread is, to put us in remembrance of unity, that all christen men be one
mystical body of CHRIST, as the breadde is made of many graynes, and to put
us also in remembrance of the howsell, which in the beginning of Christis
church men did oftener receive, than they use now to do.

ON CANDELMAS DAY it shall be declared, that the bearing of Candels is done
in the memory of Christ, the spiritual light, of whom Simeon did prophecye,
as it is read in the church that day.

ON ASH VVENISDAY it shall be declared, that these ashes be given, to put
every christen man in remembrance of penance at the beginning of Lent, and
that he is but earth and ashes.

ON PALMESONDAY IT shall be declared, that bearing of palms renueth the
memory of the receiuynge of Christ, in like manner into Jerusalem before his
death.

ON GOOD FRIDAY IT shall be declared, how crepynge of the cross, sygnyfieth
an humblynge of our self to Christ, before the cross, and the kissing of
it a memory of our redemption, made upon the cross. And at four times in the
year at the least, to declare the sygnification of the other ceremonies.

AND SO it shall be well understood and known, that neither holy bread, nor
holy water, candels, bows, nor ashes hallowed, or crepynge and kissing the
cross, be the workers or works of our salvation, but only be as outward
signs and tokens, whereby we remember Christ and his doctrine, his works and
his passion, from whens all good christen men receive salvation, which is the
undoubted Truth and the sincere understanding of the catholyke doctrine. And
as the word does no good to him that abuses it, nor worthilye receives it,
so is not the ceremony fruitful to him, that would superstitiousely abuse it,
or by his own malice withstand the good use of it: wherein every man's fault
shall work his own detrymente. And to the hole body it shall be greatly
profitable, each one to se other, and all together to see the hole congregation
under the kings majesty's governance, so to profess and outwardly to declare
a loving and charytable obedience, as all instructed by one true doctrine,
set forth by his majesty, and in their hearts consenting to the same, do
likewise in their several acts and manners, in their preachynges and
teachynges, their words and writings, and ioyntely together with their
devout behauoure in rites and ceremonies laudable, and by the kings majesty
approved, make euydent demonstration of a concord and agreement, in one god,
one redemer, one spirit, one teaching, with an humble and meke heart to be
obedient to one governor, and ruler, the kings most excellent majesty,
supreme heed of the church of England, always submyttyng their iugementes,
and showing them self ready and gladly to obey that, which for the time shall
be by his hyghnes commanded.

AND THEREFORE his majesty, having thus, as above is declared, taken order, how
to have his people taught the right use and understanding of rytes and
cerymonyes, like as his grace did in the foresaid proclamation, made in
Nouembre last past, straytly charge and command his people, to observe the
rytes and ceremonies aforesaid: So now eftsoon his hyghnes charge and
commands all and synguler his loving subjects, and all other resiauntes
within this his gracis realm, to observe and keep all and syngular the rytes
and cemonyes before mentioned, and all such other like, as have been laudably
accustomed in the church of England, not yet abolyshed, so long, and unto
such time as the same rites and ceremonies, or any of them, shall by his
hyghnes be taken away or altered. And that in the mean season none of his
highness subjects, nor other resiaunte within this his highness realm, do
neither by deed word ne behauyour despice these ceremonies before mentioned,
nor supersticiously abuse them, nor any of them, as they woll avoid his
majesty's most greuouse indignation and displeasure.


