A PROCLAMATION concerning eating of white meats, made the.IX. day of
February, the.XXXIIII. year of the reygne of the kings most royal majesty.
FOR AS MUCH as by diverse and sundry occasions, as well hearryng, lynges,
saltfysh, samond, stockfish, as other kinds of fissh, ben this year skant, and
also enhanced in prices above the old rate and common estimation of their
valor: so that if the kings loving subjects should be enforced only to bye
and provide hearrynge and other salt store of fyshe, for the necessary and
suffycyent sustentation and mayntenaunce of their housholdes and families, all this holy-tyme of Lent, according as they have been wont in times past to do,
and should not be by some other conuenyent means relieved therein, the same
might and should undoubtedly redound to their importable charge and detriment.
And for as much as his highness considers, how this kind and manner of
fasting, that is to say, to absteyne from milk, butter, eggs, chese, and all
other white meats, is but a mere positive law of the Church, and used by a
custom within this realm, and of none other sort or necessity, but the same
may be upon good considerations and grounds, altered and dispensed with from
time to time by the publyke authority of kings and princes, when so ever they
shall perceive the same to tend to the hurt and damage of their people. THE
KINGS highness therefore most graciously considering and tendering the wealth and
commodity of his people, has thought good, for the considerations above
rehearsed, to release and dispense with the said law and custom of absteyning
from white meats this holy time of Lent, And of his especial grace and mere
motion gives and grau^teth unto all and singular his subjects within this his
realm of England, Wales, Cales, Guynes, Hammes, and in all other his graces
dominions, free lyberty, faculty and license, to eat al manner of white meats,
as milk, eggs, butter, chese, and such like, during the time of this Lent,
without any scruple or grudge of conscience: any law, constitution, use, or
custom to the contrary not withstandyng. Wherein never the less his highness
exhorts, and in the name of God requires, all such his faithful subjects,
as may, wol, or shall enjoy this his said grant or faculty, that they be in
no wise scruple or doubteful thereof, nor abuse or turn the same into a fleshly
or carnal liberty, but rather endeavor them selves to their possible powers
with this liberty of eating of white meats, to observe also that fast, which
god most specially requires of them: That is to say, to renounce the world and
the devil, with all their pompes and works, and also to subdewe and repress
their carnal affections, and the corrupt works of their flesh, according to
their vow and profession made at the font stone. For in these points
specially consysteth the very true and perfyte abstynence and fasting of a
Christen man. This to endure and continue from year to year, till the kings
hyghnes pleasure shall be by his majesty's proclamation publyshed to the contrary.

GOD SAVE THE KING
Tho. Berthelet regius impressor excudebat. Cum priuilegio ad imprimendum solum.


