CERTAIN ARGVMENTS TO PERSUADE AND PROVOKE THE MOST HONORABLE AND HIGH COURT
OF PARliament now assembled, and also all other in any high authority, or in
any grace, and credit with them that are in high authoriy, to promote and
advance the sincere Ministry of the Gospel; as also zealously to speak for
the Ministers thereof now degraded, deprived, silenced, or admonished, or
afterward like to be called into question, for Subscription, Ceremonies, strict
observation of the book of common prayer, or for other conformity.

1 Samuel 2.30. Them that honor me I will honor: and they that despise me, shall
be despised.

Math: 12.30 He that is not with me, is against me: and he that gathers not
with me, scatters.

Therefore,

1: Cor: 16.13. Watch ye: stand fast in the faith; quite you like men, and be
strong.

Imprinted 1606.

TO THE CHRISTIAN READER, Honorable, Worshipful. etc.
TOuching these arguments following, my humble petition to the Christian reader
(of whatsoever sort and condition) is this, that they may not be taken as
proceeding from one suspecting any religious Noble man or gentleman of the
Parliament house, but rather from one as with all thanks to God, acknowledging
the godly forwardnes of many in both houses, so also earnestly desiering to
quicken the zeal of the best, and to provoke all other, to take the cause
here handled to heart, not only as the cause of poor distressed men, but as
the cause of God; yea, to account it also the maine cause of the whole land, of
your selves and all your posterity, and therefore to prefer the same
(according to the daily most godly prayer of your selves, in your house of
Parliament) before all other causes whatsoever, either concerning any
particular persons, or the whole common wealth.

Whereas I have persuaded them to whom I have directed these reasons to use all
means they may for the doing of any good; I desire that my words may not be
uncharitably construed of any other means then such, as are suitable to the
cause, viz. of good honest, lawful, peaceable and agreeable to every man's
calling. The like charitable construction I crave of any other words, which
some parhaps may maliciously wrest against my self and the cause.

Whereas also some may seem to pretend fear of his most excellent Majesty's
displeasure to hinder their zeal and courage; such I entreat to consider, how
dishonorable (if not disloyal) it is, in good causes to fear the displeasure
of a Prince, who besides his most Christian education from his infancy, has
long time publikly given so many worthy testimonies of his piety and godliness.
Love thinks no evil of any, much less of such a Christian Prince, It
beleiveth all and hops all of every brother, much more of a religious King.
It is the glory of a King not only to find out the secrets of other, but also
sometime to co^ceale his own. Therefore it is not meet by present words or
deeds, (whereof sometime there may be a deep reason) always to judge of the
mind. Iehu pretended one thing (when he proclaimed a sacrifice for Baal) but he
intended another: Joseph a long time dealt roughly (both in word and deed) with
his brethren; yet in the end he sheewed himself most lovinge and kind unto
them. Our Savior (for the trial of the woman of Canaan) seemed a long time to
repel her suit, for her daughter, first by silence, 2. by a sharp reprehension
of his Disciples petitioning in her behalf: and 3. by a more sharp answer to
her self. At the last notwithstanding, he did most graciovsly open the
treasures of his rich compassion toward her, and sent her away with a bundant
comfort. Constantius the Father of Constantine the Great (as Evsebius
reports lib. 1. de vita Constantini, cap. II.) at his first entrance into the
Empire, made solemn proclamation, that all which served him in his Court,
should either worship Devils, (after the manner of the Heathen) or give over
their places of dignity and honor, and so to be bannished from his Court. But
by this means when he had tried them that were faithful, then (to the far
greater honor of his Princely wisdom and piety, then if he had plainly and
simply at the first professed the Christian religion,) He disgraced those that
had so revolted from God, and rebuked them with a most Princely and religious
rebuke, saying, That they were Traitors to God, and unworthy the service of an
Emperor. For how (quoth he) can they keep faith vnviolat toward the
Emperor, which are manifestly convinced to be unfaithful to the most
excellent and mighty God. On the contrary, those that for conscience had
forsaken their places, and given over their honors, he most highly graced, as
those that would be faithful to the Emperor, because they had been so unto
God: yea, he pronounced them worthy to be reckoned among the chief and
principal friends of the Emperor, and to be worthily much more esteemed, than
Treasuries full of great riches. Therefore also he preferred some of them to
special attendance upon his own person, and other some he advanced to the
chief government of the Empire under himself.

I leave the application of these things. Only I wish such consideration of
them, that men may not be rash (upon any supposed apparances) to judge
Christian Princes, especially who in fromer times have many ways testified
their sincere religion: yea I wish less censuring of them, and more earnest
praying for them in secret before him that sees insecret and has promised to
reward openly yea as David blesed the Lord God of Israel, and the counsel of
Abigail, and Abigaill her self, for keeping him from sheading innocent blood, 1 Samuel 25.32. andtc. so (to omit what thanks you may have from his most excellent
Majesty) who also knows, how even they, that for the present do most resist
the matters hereafter pleaded for, will in the end bless God and your
counsel, and your selves for staying them from their proceeding in their hard
courses against the ministry of the Gospel, and the salvation of the people
depending thereupon?

Finally, albeit I could have added many other arguments to these that I have
here written for the further wheting of the zeal of those to whom these causes
principally appertain yet seeing these do a rise to such a quantite; I thought
it best to spare the further pains of my self, and of the reader: hoping that
these which I have written, shall be sufficient so to kindle the zeal of them
that love the Lord Jesus and his truth, that they shall be so full of matter (as
Elihu speaks of himself Job 32.19) that their spirit within them, shall
compel them, and that their bellyes shall be as the wine which has no vent,
and like the new bottles that burst, that so they may speak to take breath,
and open their lips for answer of them (if any such do sheew themselves) that
do oppugn, or shall oppugn the sincere ministry of the gospel. In which
hope I commend them to God, and to the word of his Grace.

Errata
page 10. lin: 28. repreesing for repressing page 12. lin: 9 put in, it, at the
end page 11 lin: 1 thines for things page 13, lin. 19 after suckling make a
comma ibid: lin: 26 for swear read swear page 14 lin. pen: for agd, read and
ibid: lin: vltim: for mounks, read monks page 16 lin: 11 for raady read ready
page 17 lin: 5 for wouds read words page 19 lin: (...) alination for alienation
ibid: lin: 19 inmitating for inmitating page 15 lin: 20 for use read use.

CERTAIN ARGVMENTS TO PROVOKE THIS PRESENT HIGH COURT of Parliament to zeal,
for the Ministers now silenced.
For the ground of all that follows (to omit without long discourse that
principal point that the Gospel is the power of God unto salvation (as that
which I hope is doubted of none) It is to be considered that the Ministers in
particular above mentioned, If ye were of the world (says our savyour) the
world would love his own, but because ye are not of the world but I have
chosen you out of the world, therefore the world hates you. Ioh. 15.19.2. By
their vnbla^eable life in all other things, the matter only of Conformity
excepted. This has bin and daily is acknowledged by those that are Judges
against them for the said Conformity. And albeit contempt, singularity, and
ambition be objected unto them, yet how unjustly this is objected, does
evidently appear by the manifould reproaches, the great molestations, loss of
living, to the undoing of them selves their wives and Children, and many other
wrongs, iniuryes, and indignities which they have suffered and daily do suffer
3. As by their gifts wherewith they are furnished for their callinges, and by
their pains and diligence accordingly in their callinges, so especially by
the blessing of God upon their said pains and diligence in the knowledge and
obedience of the people in such places where they live, and in the mutual love
and peace of such people among them selves: whereas in other places men for the
most part are ignorant of all duty to God and man, and therefore profane,
irreligious, contentious, and apt to sedition and rebellion as all experience
teaches us. This argument iustificth their calling. For how could they so
preach to such effects of knowledge, godliness, loyalty, peace and love except
they were sent Romans 10.15. That which the Apostle says to the Corinthians in
the like behalf touching his Apostlship, may also be said in this touching the
ministry and calling of these men unto those people where they are and among
whom the Lord has so blessed their ministerial labors, Are ye not my work in
the Lord? If I be not an Apostle to other, yet doubtle I am unto you: for yea
are the seal of my Apostleship in the Lord 1. Co 9.1.2. And again, ye are our
Epistle written in our hearts, which is understood and read of all men in that
ye are manifested to be the epistle of Christ, ministered by us and written not
with ink but with the spirit of the living God, not in tables of stone but in
fleshy tables of the heart 2. Cor. 3.2.3.

Since it is so, not to speak and put forth your selves in behalf of these men
is to spare speech and pains for God him self and for Christ Jesus. Exodus 16
2. 1. Sam. 8.7. Luke 10.16. If they are said to deny bodily food aparrell and
lodging unto Christ himself, that deny these things to the least of his
elect, Math. 25.40. May not they much more be said to spare speech and pains
for Christ, that spare their speech and pains for the everlasting salvation of
many thousand souls. yea this cannot be denied, since all the Godly have put on
the Lord Jesus Gal. 3.25. And are flesh of his flesh and bone of his bone Ephe.
5.30.

Finally let this argument the more prevail with all men in regard of all that
Christ Jesus (whose cause this is showed to be) has suffered and done for us.

2 It is also to be considered that the ministry of the Gospel, is not only
for earthly men, with their faces toward the Mercy seat. Exodus 25.20. as
looking and listening after the Oracles of God that should be geiven from the
mercy seat to the Church, so it is not only somewhat obscurely said
concerning those things that are showed by them that preach the Gospel by the
holy Ghost, that the Angels do desire to behold the said things, 1. Pet.
1.12. But least any man should think that to be understood only of the
accomplishing of the matters preached in the final, and perfect salvation of
the elect and whole Church; it is also plainly and most perspecuously written,
that one chief end, purpose, and intent of preaching the said Gospel, and the
unsearchable riches of Christ in the Gospel contained, and of making clear
unto all men the fellowship of the mystery of the Gospel, was this, that now
unto principalities and powers in heavenly places, (that is unto Angels) might
be know by the Church (not the great salvation of the Lord) but the manifold
wisdom of God. Ephesians. 3.10.

To speak therefore for the Gospel and for the sincere ministry and Ministers
thereof, is to speak not only for God, but also for the Angels. To spare
speaking and other pains taking for the Gospel and sincere ministry thereof,
is to spare speaking and taking pains for God himself and for his blessed
Angels: and so consequently, to provoke both the Lord himself of heaven and
earth, and also the whole host and army of heaven against us. For, what else
may be hoped for where there will not so much as earnst words be spoken for
God, or for his Angels?

3 As Joseph having interpreted the Dream of Pharaoh his chief Butler
touching his reconciliatio^ again to the grace of Pharao, Pharao, desiered him
to have him in remembrance when he shohold be so reconciled and restored, Genesis
40 14. So it is recorded by the holy Ghost, and acknowledged by the said
Butler, as a great fault, that he had not remebred Joseph but forgotto^ him
Genesis 40.23. and 41.9. If it wereso great a fault in Pharao his Butler, not to
remember and speak for one Joseph, that had interpreted one dream touching
his reconcilement to a mortal Prince: and the recovery of an earthly
preferment, (nether of which notwithstanding he knew not how long he should
enjoy, at the most he could not enjoy them any longer then during only
natural life) how great then is the fault of all those, that neg lect to
speak for many ministers of the Gospel, that have not once but often, and
daily interpreted many mysteries of God, toucing their reconciliatio^ with God
himself and their everlasting advancme^t in heavenly places Ephe. 2.6. To
walk in white with Christ Jesus, yea, to sit also with him in his throne, as
he himself sits in the throne of his Father? Apoc. 3.5. and 21. Yea verily,
as the fault of the Butler was the less, because being enlarged he had none to
remember him of that duty, so the fault of those shall be the greater, that have
many daily to put them in mind thereof, and to provoke them thereunto, and yet
for all that do hold their peace.

4 The whole Army of Israel spoke with great courage in behalf of Jonathan
thus, Shall Jonathan dye who has mightily delivered Israelle? God forbid. As
the Lord lives, there shall not one hair of his head fall to the ground, for
he has wrought with God this day. 1. Sam. 14.45. Were this common people that
lived under the Law, and which had not had so plentiful and clear instruction
as is now revealed by the gospel, were this common people (I say) so zealous
for Jonathan in regard only of a bodily deliverance, from bodily enimyes,
whereof he had not been the author, but only an instrument of God; and shall
not this high Court of Parliament now assembled, being the chief flower of
this whole Realm of England, and representing the whole Realm, be zealous and
earnest for many whom God has used as his instruments, and who have wrought
with God and daily would so work with God (if they may have liberty) for the
spiritual deliverance of many thousands from spiritual enimyes, even to
turn them from darkness to light, and from the power of Satan to God, that
they may have forgiunes of sins, and inheritance among them that are
sainctified by faith in Christ. Acts 26.18?

5 It is not to be frogotten, Nchemiah spoke for the material Jerusalem to
Artashasht an heathen and profane King Neh. 2.2. etc. as also how most
virtuous and noble Q. Esther, being indeed provoked by poor Mordecai,
adventured her self to speak to the like conditioned King Ahashuerosh, in
behalf of the old people of God the Jews, for preventing of their bodily
bloudsheed, notwithstanding she had not been called unto the King in 30 days
before, and notwithstanding there were a law of the King, that whosoever man or
woman should come unto the King in the inward Court not called, should dye,
except such as to whom the King should have held forth his golden rod. It is
not (I say) to be forgotten, but religiously to be remembered, how
notwithstanding the foresaid danger and her former fear and weakness in that
respect, yet at the last she promised Mordecai to adventure her self saying,
If I perish, I perish: and how also after prayer and fasting of her self and
her Ladies, and of the rest of the Jews in Shushan for her, she entered to the
King and spoke for her people: and what gracious success she had,
notwithstanding the power and might of their chief adversary, and his great
grace and favor with the King. Did these persons so adventure themselves to
speak before such Kings, and did the God of heaven give such gracious success
in their attemptes? And shall Christian Noble men and gentlemen now assembled
in high Court of Parliament, where they may speak, and other in other places
of authority and grace and favor with christian Princes, fear to speak for
the people of God, to a christian King, whose education from the Cradle in all
pyety, former reign and government, and religious profession hitherto, do give
better encouragement: God forbid? And far be all such fear and cowardlines
from all that profess and know the Gospel of Jesus Christ. Yea, if there by
any so fearful and cowardly, let them seriously consider the second words
and message of Mordecai to Ester. Think not that thou shall escape in the
Kings house more then all the Jews: For is thou houldest thy peace at this
time, comfort and deliverance shall appear to the Jews out of another place,
but thou and thy Fathers house shall perish. Who knows whether thou art come
to the Kingdom for such a time. Ester, 4.13. Let them (I say) wisely and in
the fear of God consider this message, to provoke themselves to the more zeal
and christian bouldnes, with all humility and modesty. Let them not think
that they by their greatness shall procure a better ministry of the Gospel to
themselves and their houses then other have. If it be restrained from other, as
of late it has been, they shall not long enjoy more liberty thereof then
other. Yea, if they at this time and in that place where there is such fredome
of speech hold their peace, and do not with all their gifts and graces of
knowledge, wisdom, zeal, compassion, modesty, and humility that may be, put
forth themselves in furtherance of the sincere ministry of the Gospel, and
removing the lets and impediments thereof: suerly help may come in these
things unto the Church by some other means, but let the^ take heed that the
Lord of hosts call them not to an account and other reckoning for this their
fearefulnes. Further to ad one other example briefly, If fearful Joseph of
Arimathea went boldly to Pilate and asked the body of Jesus, And if Nicodemus
(before as fearful as the said Joseph) joined with him in the honorable
burial thereof when Christ was dead, and the whole state being enimyes unto
him, had now prevailed and gotten that which long they had labored for against
him, yea, when all the Disciples had forsaken him, and some of the chiefest
Champions had denied him, Oh how dishonorable with men, and inexscusable and
unanswerable before God shall it be, that so many having learned more of Christ
then either Joseph and Nicodemus, or all the Disciples themselves had then
learned, and having also before boldly professed and promised much for him, and
living in a kingdom professing Christ and maintainying his Gospel, and under
a most gracious and religious King, and being in place of freedom of speech
and now also assembled cheifely and principally for that end (for what are all
statuts for the Common wealth without regard of the Church) how dishonrable (I
say) with men, and how inexscusable and unanswerable before God and his Son
Jesus Christ when he shall come to judgment shall it be, that such persons in
such a kingdom, under such a King in such a place, at such a time, shall not
dare to speak for whole Christ Jesus, risen again from the dead, ascended
into the heavens, there sitting in all power, glory and majesty? Yea finally
being ready to come to judge both the quick and the dead, both men an Angels?
Oh therefore ye that love this Lord Jesus, Christ, take heed of such
fearefulnes, yea, fear so to be a fraide of speaking for him, for his Gospel
and for his servantes.

6 Let the great heavines of many Congregations, Hagar, and reprobate Ishmaell
in the want of the water of this life. Genesis 21.16. He graciously respected the
poor women that complaining of the cruelty of their Husbands in forsaking
them, and vexing them by taking other wives, had covered his Altar with their
tears. Malac. 2.13.14.

The Lord Jesus also pytied the people, yea, his bowel; yerned within him, to
see them scattered as sheep without shepherd: Math. 9.36. Mar. 6.34. yea he
did graciously respect the petitions of many touching the bodily miseryes of
their children, friends, and servants, yea the suits of some for bodily comfort
of their children though themselves were not of the children of Israel but
Heathen and Cananits, and little better in that respect then Dogs. Math. 15.22.
How then should the spiritual miseryes of many thowsands, partly already
deprived, and partly like to be deprived of their faithful Pastors, who have
broken the bread: and powered out the water of eternal life unto them, and
performed the duties as it were of loving bands, and who by such Pastors and
Preachers, have been turned from darkness to light, and delivered from the power
of Satan unto God, and who now therefore in the want of them, do cover the
Lords Altar with tears, and make lamentable moan (as the Turtle Dove, that
has lost her mate) for help to themselves and theirs, against the present and
future spiritual calamities, how I say ought all these things to wring and
wrest, pity and compassion fro all in authority to wards them? O therefore let
not their moan and lamentation be neglected.

7 To regard these Ministers hitherto spoken of, is to regard the whole land.
For it is not to be doubted, but that it may be spoken of them: as well as of
some other, that, they are the Chariots and Horsemen of England, as the like is
acknowledged for Israel, not only of Elia by Elisha, 2. king 2.12 but also of
Elisha by Ioash a wicked King of Israel, 2. King. 13.14. If God be with us who
can be against us; Romans 8 31. And if the Almighty be our defense (as Eliphas
speaks to Job, Job 22.25.) We cannot but be in peace and safity.

Now God has not promised to be with any for their defense, but such as
receive his Gospel. In the Ministry also of the Gospel, consists the
wealth and honor of every people, Pro. 3.16. Psa. 46.12. And the glory of every
kingdom, as the glory of Israel did in the Arc. 1. Sam. 4.21.22. And the
peace of Nations. For therefore as well as for other respects, the Gospel is
called the Gospel of peace Ephe. 6.15. compared with Isai. 2.4. and 11.6. and
65.25. Finally, the whole outward prosperity of all Kings and kingdoms
consists principally in the pure worship of God, and the menaes that commends
the same 2. Chro 14.14.17.10.27.6.24.26. 2. King. 18.7. Therefore they cannot
be faithful to Kings and kingdoms, neither to themselves that neglect the
true worship of God and the means thereof. Therefore also as Ester said of
those that provoked Ahashuerosh against the Jews, so may it be said of all
those that persuade the suppression of the Gospel and of the ministers
thereof, Such adversaries cannot recompense the Kings loss Ester 7.4.

If therefore ye will not respect the state of Ministers, their wives and
children, yet respect your selves, your wives and children, yea, our King and
whole kingdom, even touching the outward estate of your selves and yours, of
King and kingdom. And if ye love the safitie, peace, wealth, and glory of
King, and Kingdom, and of your selves and youres, then speak and do, what
you all, and every one of you may, for the Gospel and ministry thereof.

8 It is the duty of all Princes and Magistrates, to execute justice and
judgment in the mornning, and to deliver the oppressed etc. Ier. 21.12.22.2.
especially to do justice toward the souls of men. Therefore this especially
does belong to this high Court of Parliament as being the highest Court we have
for justice and judgment upon earth. As Abraham therefore said unto God, Shall
not the Judge of all the world doertght Genesis 18.25. so say I to this present
court, shall not the highest Court of all this, Kingdom do right? Yea this is
the more at this present to be considered, because this justice that now I
speak of, is not only the Justice of God, but also of this Land. For it is
abundantly of late proved, that all the late proceedinges, against the
ministers, in repreesing of their ministry, and in depriving them of their
free houldes, is contrary to the laws of this kingdom, both to Charta Magna,
and also to many statutes.

The same is to be understood of the oath ex officio of many of the late
Canons, and of diverse other thines. It is also against reason, that the besest
Cobbler and Tinker cannot be eiected from his free hold of but ten shillings by
the year, but by a Jury of 12 men, and before some of his Majesty's Judges in
sollemnte form of law, and that the ministers and Ambassadors of Christ
Jesus, in the mat ters of eternal life, should be case out of their free
hold, of what worth foeuer, by one man only, and not only without any Jury,
but also without any complaint or accusation against them.

If it be objected that this that I have said to be the justice of this
kingdom, is but the opinion of some private persons, let the ministers find
favor with this high Court of justice, to have the former canses in the said
Court debated, as many the like have bin hearetofore and daily are. Shall
private causes be resepected by you, yea shall matters of purveyors and such
like of small moment for the common wealth, come before you, and be so largely
discussed and handeled by you, and shall not so many public causes of so
many, of such quality, and for the Church be regarded? yea not the cause of God
him self? shall God and his son Christ Jesus, in the cause of his Gospel
and ministers thereof, stand as it wear at your parliament house door knocking,
and craving to be let in, and to have their cause^ heard, and shall not your
door be opened? Beware of this, least ye knock also at heaven door, and there
be none found to open, or to answer unto you.

9 May if further please them to whom this present writing is directed, to call
to mind the promises made to them, that show any kindness to any of the
Children of God and disciples of Christ, especially to any Prophet in in the
name of a Prophet Mat. 10.41. As also to consider that God is not unrighteous,
that he should forget such work and labor of love. Heb. 6.10. but that he is
faithful that has promised. Heb. 10.23. and that God is not as man, that he
should ly neither as the son of man, that he should repent: has he said it
and shall not he do it? and has he spoken, and shall not he accomplish it?
Numb. 23.19.

He that made Saul, (though unnatural to his own children, 1 Samuel 14.49. and
a cruel murderer of the priests of the Lord. 1. Sam. 22 18.) to show mercy to
the Kenits, (as were the rock to yield water) 1. Sam. 15.6. For the kindness of
Iethro, (otherwise called Keni, Judge. 1.16) toward the Israelits, in giueing
only good counsel to Moses, for the better outward government of the
Israelits, 400. years before Exodus 18.17. Shall he forget, the kindness, that
shall be showed to the Ministers of the Gospel, and to the people committed
unto them, and depending upon them, for the food and salvation of their souls?

Was the kindness of the Shunamite, toward one prophet Elisha, plentifully
recompensed; 1. by the gift of a Son after long barrennes; 2 by restoryng
her said son to life being dead, 2. Kings 4-16.3 by forewarning her of a
famine to come, and admonishing her, to provide for her self Chap. 8.1. 4 by
directing her, by God his gracious providence, to come with petition to the
King, for restitution of her lands (that had been seized in her absence to the
Kings use) at that very instante, when Gehazi was telling the King the great
acts of his M. Elisha, and particular ly how he had raised this woman's son
from death to life: (by which her coming in such a season she present ly
obtained, not only her lands, but also all the mean profits that in time of
her peregrination, had been taken by the Kings receiver:) was (I say) such
little kindness of this woman, to one prophet, so plentifully recompensed; and
shall not the favor that is showed to many Ministers of the Gospel, (the
least whereof, for office is greater then John the Baptist, who notwithstanding
was greater then any prophet, and then whom there was not a greater, among the
sons begotten of weomen, Math. 11.9.) shall not (I say) such kindness toward
such Ministers as are in so great reckening with God, be remembered and rewarded?

10 On the contrary consider, who has said, Touch not mine anointed, and do
my prophets no harm: psalm. 105.15; As also what is threatened, to them that
do the least harm, to the least children of God, even in their outward
states, Yea, what God commanded to be written against the Amalikits, and swear
to perform, only for resisting his people, in their journey toward the
earthly Canaan, which was but a type of the heavenly. Exodus 17.14.15. And what
also afterward (even 400. years after the premises) he caused to be executed
by Saul against them, without any pity or compassion, toward any man, woman,
infant, or suckling Ox, Sheep, cattle, or Ass 1 Samuel 15.3. Was it so
heinous before the Lord, to hinder his people in their journey toward the
earthly Canaan, and shall it be a light thing with men now, not to further the
elect in their means of, and journey unto, the heavenly Canaan, tipically
prefigured, by that earthly?

If the Lord did also swear, by the excellency of Jacob, that suerly he would
never forget the cruelty, that was excercised by the rich men of Judea,
against the poor of the land, in their outward state, yea, that the very land
should tremble, and that every one should mourn that dwelled therein etc. For
the the said sin. Amos 8.7. Will the same Lord then, which is always the
same in Justice, as well as in mercy, lightly pass by any cruelty toward the
souls of his people?

Let not the states assembled in this High Court of Parliament, or in any place
of authority, grace, and favor, where their word spoken in his place, May be
like unto Apples of gould with pictures of silver, Pro. 25.11. Let them not (I
say) wash their hands of this argument, because they have no hand in any
proceeding against the Ministers, or in restrainying of their ministry: fith
it is all one so to proceed etc. And not to heelp them that are so proceeded
against by other especially when power is in their hands to help. For it must
never be forgotten, which is written for an everlasting truth, and a perpetual
instruction, (Curse ye Meroz: (said the Angel of the Lord) curse the
inbabitant thereof, because they came not to heelp the Lord, to heelp the Lord
against the mighty. Judges 5.23. In which place this is likewise worthy the
observation of all men, that they are esteemed not to help the Lord, that came
not out to help his people. If there were so fearful a curse pronounced by
the Angel of the Lord against them that did not help his people, against the
mighty enimyes of their outward state, may they think themselves secure and
with out danger, that heelp not the Lord and his people, against the mighty
that oppugn the everlastying salvation of their souls?

11 Pharao in the time of dearth, provided at his own cost for the Idolatrous
Priests of Egypt, that they might not fell their land: Genesis 47.22. Shall then
so christian a king dome, as this long time has been, in the time of plenty
proceed so hardly against the painful ministers of the Gospel, that they,
their wives and children shall weep agd mourn for want? And will no man open
his month in their behalf? Were the Mouncks and Friars at the dissolution of
their Idolatrous houses, (in the twilight of the Gospel,) provided for duringe
their lives, though they never had done any good? And shall the ministers of
the Gospel, that have converted many to God, and spent themselves, and wasted
their patrimony, first, in fitting themselves for the work of the ministry,
and after by their sufferings and troubles, so that they have nothing left for
their comfort in their age, be neglected? Though this has not been regarded,
by those that deprived the^, yet far be it, from this most Honorable Court,
that any heart would be found therein so hard and stony, as not with
commiseration to pity them.

12 Much also may the prayers of such ministers for this Court of Parliament,
and for every state and degree there of, and for other, be regarded: for the
prayer of the righteous avails much if it be fervent, James 5.16. And the
prayers of the Saints are compared To Harpes and golden vialls full of odours
etc. Apoc. 5.8. God would have Abimelech King of Gerar, to make such account of
this argument, that for the same he would have him to uso Abraham the better,
Gen 20.7.

Nether did the Apostle Paul only; for this cause, most earnestly crave the
prayers of the meanest christians, in those Churches to which he wrote: but
also wicked Pharao did eanestly desire the prayers of Moses and Aaron, Exodus
8.8. Darius also, though an heathen King, did therefore command all things
necessary, for the building of Jerusalem, to be a boundantly ministered to the
Jews, that they might pray for the Kings life, and for his sons, Ezra 6 10.
How much more then ought such christian assemblies as this present High Court
of Parliament is: to labonr the more, for the comfort of God his children,
especially his faithful ministers, that thereby they may be encouraged to
prayer the more earnestly, for them and theirs.

13 Suerly (says our Savior) The harvest is great, and the laborers are few,
pray ye therefore the Lord of the harvest, that he would thrust forth laborers
into his harvest. Math. 9.37.38. Will our Savior, have all to pray the Lord of
the harvest, that he would thrust forth laborers into his harvest, and may any
men then, by head and shoulders thrust laborers out of his harvest? It would be
accounted madness, for a man to thrust laborers out of his own harvest, when
his harvest is raddy for the sickle, and he has not laborers enough; But it is
impiety to thrust laborers out of the Lord his harvest, especially such, as
whom himself had before thrust forth into his harvest, furnishyng them with
sickle and all other things necessary? And lastly, such as had done good
service in his harvest? Again, will our Savior, have men only to pray the
Lord of the harvest, for thrusting forth of laborers into his harvest, and will
he may they think, that they are only to pray for their daily bread, and
that they need to do nothing else for the getting thereof.

14 Whosoever (says our Savior) shall be ashamed of me and of my words, of
them shall the son of man be a shamed, when he shall come in his glory, and
in the glory of the father, and of the holy Angels: Lue. 9.26. Is this to be
understood only of the time of persecution, and not also and much more, of the
days of peace? Or are not they a shamed of Christ and of his words, that will
not speak for him and his word? Nay let the contrary branch of the opposition
touching the promise, made by our Savior for the confessing of them before his
Father which is in heaven, that shall confess him before men, suppress this
vain imagination: Lastly touching this point will they not be a shamed of
Christ, but confess him and his words before Tyrants, in the time of fiery
trial, that will not show themselves zealous for Christ and his wovds, before
a State favourig and professing Christ and his words, in the days of peace?
Truly God by his almighty power, and rich grace may mightily strengthen such
men in the days of trouble, (notwithstanding their present fear and weakness)
but certainly in reason this is little to be hoped for. Let no man therefore
flatter or deceive himself with any such poor, simple, and shiftfull conceit.

15 Your zeal touching the Papists for more security against them hereafter,
before mentioned, were not enough, sufficiently to furnish every Congregation,
what will the paucity be. when from those, so many hundreds as able as any
other shall be detracted.

16 Touching the matters of trouble, Scotland; and what has been written by
one part (especially by the conformable part) in disgrace and reproach of the
other. But especially, great has been the contention and controversy here at
home: much more indeed for and about these things, then for or about any point
of Doctrine.

This is evident, not only by most bitter invectiue sermons, private raylings,
and public disgraceful books against them: (the most Co^formitans thinking
that they never preach, speak, or write any thing well, except in their
preaching, talk and writing, they scourge those who^ they call Puritan,
prescise, scismaticall, and refractary ministers) but also by the actual
severitie against them. For it may be truly said, that in one year, and in
one Diocese, more have been for these causes suspended and deprived, then in
full 46 years throughout the whole Realm of England, either for
insufficiency, or for any matter of sca^dall: albe it it cannot be denied,
that in some one Diocese, their are more ignorant and scandolous ministers
worthy of deprivation, then there are conformable ministers in all Diocesses.

By this controversy and contention among the ministers, there has been no
less dissension and alination of minds and hearts, betwixt other of his
Majestiessubjects for the same things: yea, much separation of many from their
ministers, as likewise betwixt themselves. Now how dangerous this is for his
Majesty and the whole land, as it does appear by the increase and courage of
the common adversaryes the Papists, according as the ministers and people for
those causes have been molested and disgraced, so it is further evident by
reason. Because as the concord, peace, and good agreement is a principal part
of the strenght of a King and kingdom, so their discord and contention, cannot
but be dangerous for King and kingdom. For our Savior himself (speaking
according to the common speech of other) says, That a kingdom divided against
it self, cannot stand. Marc. 3.24.

What is therefore to be done in this case? How may these controversies and
contentions be well pacified, and best compounded? Verily by inmitating therein
God himself, the God of peace. For as he is and must be acknowledged best of
all, so heerin also, he has given us the best president, the best pattern.
What is that? When he faw the great division and hatred betwixt the Jews and
the Gentiles, he took away the partition wall betwixt them, which was also
called by the name of hatred, because for it the Jews had hated the Gentiles,
and the Gentile likewise the Jews. What was the partition wall? The law of
commandments standing in ordinances, that is in Ceremonies, which he
himself had given to the Jews. Ephe. 2.14.15 For thereby, cannot be
understood the moral law, which from the beginning had as well concerned the
Gentiles, as the Jews; But the Ceremonial law being that, in respect whereof,
the Jews in pride had contemned the Gen tils, and for which the Gentiles
likewise, in no less malice had envied the Jews, as having such a law by
themselves as for the which, they neither would not might communicate with the
Gentiles in their heathenish worship: the Lord therefore did altogether remove
the same, that so not only they which were once far from God, might be made
near by the blood of Christ (whereby the partition wall was broken down) but
that they also that had been before twain, might be made one (as it were two
houses made one, by breaking down of one wall, or two feildes laid into one by
taking away of one hedge) that so there might be peace.

The Lord might have communicated the Ceremonies of the Jews unto the Gentiles,
or geiven new unto both. But since he made this peace only by removing those
Ceremonies together, that himself had once instituted, and did not ordain any
in their place, then consider I (beseech you) in your godly wisedo^es, how much
more it behooves all those Ceremonies and ordinances, which were only invented
by man, to be utterly removed, having especially no necessary use, but being
rather bones of contention betwixt brethren, and children of the same Father
and Moother, and coheyres of the same inheritance: as also people of the same
Nation, and subjects of the same King and Sovereign. Yea consider (I beseech
you again) the more seriously, how necessary it will be, thus to make peace,
not only because this. peace will be exceedingly beneficial (as has been
showed) to King and kingdom, (especially the common adversaryes so now
combining themselves against us) but also because it will be a work most
acceptable to God. For Blessed are the peace makers for they shall be called
the children of God. Math. 5.9

17 In the next place (that I may heap up many things to geather, made heaps
upon heaps. Does the Lord chastise particular persons, that he may teach them
in his law, Psalm. 94, 12. Draw them nearer unto him, and make them more
plentifully partaker of his holiness? Heb. 12.10. Yea, and that they may be more
zealous and amend. Revel. 3.19 And are not these as well the ends, why he
chastises whole States, Churches and kingdoms, as the sins of whole States,
Churches and Kingdoms, are the causes that first move him so to chastise them?
Yea, is not this the more to be considered, because this rod of God does still
remain and linger, as here in London, so also in diverse other places of the
land? For does not the Lord hereby intimate unto us, that yet that is not
performed by us which he looked for from us?

Again, is it altogether to be neglected, that he has so mittigated this his
severity toward us as he has? And that he has in part commanded his Angel
to put up his sword, and not to sinite so many as before he had do^e. And does
not the Lord by smyting us in such sort, thereafter that if for all this we
show no better fruits of amendment, he will plague us yet scaven times worse?
Levit. 26.18. By healing us also in part, does he not admonish us, that if we
do not yet repent, but conrinewe still to sin against him, a worse thing
shall come unto us? John 5.14.

O ye that do now represent the body of this land, consider of this matter.

What shall I here speak of our late great danger, by the late most bloody,
horrible, unnatural and monstrous conspiracy of the Papists; as against all in
general, so specially against you that are now assembled, in this high Court
of Parliament? Would the Lord have every person to provoke his own soul, to
praise the Lord, for redeeming his soul from the grave Psa. 103.4. And would
he not have the whole land, and specially you that are now assembled in high
court of Parliament representing the whole land, and in special manner
delivered, to enter into serious consultation and deliberation with your
selves, what to render unto the Lord, for all his benifits toward you? psa.
116.12

Though Hezekiah having recovered health, went first into the house of God, and
made there a psalm of thanks givinge for his recovery, which yet remains in
holy writ, as an everlasting moniment of his thankfulness; yet because in other
things, he was not generally so circumspect and careful, of all obedience to
God as he should have been, but his heart was lift up with in him, it is said
that he rendered not unto the Lord, according unto the reward bestowed upon
him; and that therefore wrath came from the Lord against him, aganst Jerusalem,
and against Judah. 2 Chro. 32.25 So let this be considred, that ye may provoke
yourselues to the more public testimony of thankfulness, for our late public
delivera^ce. And because mercy (even toward the bodies of men) is more desired
then sacrifice, and that therefore mercy toward their souls, is much more
acceptable unto God, (for which cause it is there said, that the Lord does also
more desire the knowledge of God, then burnt offerings. Hos. 6.6.) Therefore also
as God his goodness toward the whole land is known to all the world, so let
all the world know, and let all ages to come be witnesses, of our thankfulness
for the same, by your present mercy toward the Church. He that bids us to
call upon him in the day of our trouble, and promises to deliver us, requires
also that we should glorify him. psalm. 50.15. How much more then ought we to
glorify him, being in the day of our trouble delivered, before we called upon
him?

Verily (most Honorable assembly) in this respect our deliverance is the
greater, then the deliverance either of the Jews from the bloody intent of
Haman, or of our selves in the year 1588. For the Lord did not work those
deliverances with out the means of prayer and fasting: but this, his own
right hand has brought to pass, before that ever we did open our lips unto
him in that behalf. Yea, herein is our deliverance also the greater, because
though the mischeife plotted against us was but bodily, yet the mischeife
plotted against our and all posterity was spiritual, even to have reduced
them, to the former bondage of popish blindness, superstition, and Idolatry, so
to have perished everlastingly: and therefore we that should have been consumed
touching our bodies, and outward states in this intended massacre (if it had
proceeded) should have been much better, then they that should have lived. As it
be-longeth therefore to all at all times to glorify God for this great
deliverance, so specially it be-longeth to you that are now assembled in this
high-Court of Parliament.

The Lord cares not for any observation of a day only in remembrance of his
mercyes, nor for bate words in commendation and celebration of his goodness,
except that otherwise we do dispose our way a right: For this is the best
praise whereby he is glorified. psa. 50.25. Yea even now, and at this Session,
does the Lord require this of you. For has not his hand of sickness in many
places continued, and does it not still hoover over us, from before the first
summoning of this Parliament, to this present Session? And did not God reveal
his mercy revealing the late treason, and delivering us from it, immediately
before the last Session, that your meeting might be proroged, whereby in the
time of Interim, ye might have the more leisure, the better to deliberat and
consult, what at this your assembly might most make for the glory of his name,
and the good of his Church? And will ye now dissolve your met ting without
doing of further matter in that behalf, then yet ye have done.

Again, are not many of you ancient, and in that respect never again to be
of any other Parliament? which also of the youngest and lustiest of you
knows, either that he shall live to an other Parliament, or to another
Session of this Parliament? Or if he shall live to another Parliament, that he
shall be chosen to be again thereof: Or livyng to another Session of this
Parliament, that he shall have health and strenght to be present thereat. Are
not some worthy men, that were at the former Sessions of this Parliament, now
at rest with the Lord? Yea are not some other that were livyng and in health at
the time of the last Session, now also (before the beginyng of this Session)
gathered to their Fathers.

Yea further, because diverse of the minsters deprived and silenced (being
partly very aged) and partly consumed with godly grief, (not so much for the
own troubles, (as for the desolation of the Churches, both presently seen,
and for future times by the present to be prognosticated, in as much as many
most unworthy persons are thrust into their places, (in which consideration, as
Elisha wept, by me spirit of prophecy, to fore see the miserable havocke that
Hazeel should make of the people of Israel, touching their bodies, 2 Kings
8.11.12. So what christian heart can refrain weepyng and bleeding, to fore
think of the spiritual spoil, that will be made in the Church by blind
guides, corrupt teachers, and careless: yea wicked and ungodly Pastors) because
(I say) many faithful ministers deprived and silenced, partly by age, and
partly by godly grief, are so near the finishing of their raze, that the
ground for their grave is in a manner all ready measured, therefore ye that are
the Lords worthies now assembled in this High and Honorable Court, do that,
that is to be done by you, for the glory of God, and comfort of his Churches
and Ministers, with the more speed and expedition, that such servants of God as
are so near their end, may yet be somewhat revived and comforted before their
end, and bless you and yours before they dye, and so take their leaves also of
you and yours, with the more peace and joy to their own souls.

As your house of parliament at the last Session thereof, should passiuely have
been the house of blood, yea the fountain (in some sort) of blood, that even
from thence should have flowed streams and rivers of blood through out the
whole land, so let it at this Session be actiuely the house of comfort, yea a
fountain of comfort, that from thence may flow a river (as it were the river
of God) and a floude of spiritual comfort, joy and gladness to all the land.
To all the land? Yea to all Nations that know the Lord and call upon his name:
yea to all posterity. As the 26 first day of the last Session should have been,
a day of darkness and of blacknes, a day of clouds and of obscurity (as Joel
speaks chap. 2.2. (...) let the last day of this Session be a bright and
clear suneshine day, a day of light, a day of comfort and refr^^ing from the
Lord. As the Lords enimyes, the blood and mercyles papists (merciles to them
selves in mur^^ing themselves heertofore and of late, and therefore (...) more
mercyles unto other) as these men would ha^^ made themselves, as a fire to
devour all before the^ ^^^d as a flame to burn up all be hind them. Joel 2.3.
So be you at are the children of God, and should therefore be mercif^^^s your
Father also is merciful Luc. 6.36. Be ye (I say) as there the rain; even as
the first and the latter rain, Joel 2.4. As their wrath should have been like
the roaring of a-Lyon, (as Solomon speaks of the wrath of a King) so let your
favor be (as Solomon speaks of the favor of a King) like the dew upon the
grass. Pro. 19.12.

By this mercy that hitherto I have (as it were at the bar of your Justice)
pleaded for, and provoked you unto, ye shall not only treasure up comfort to
your selves against the day of your death, when ye shall most stand in need of
comfort, but ye shall also make your old age the more honorable; yea after your
days hear ended, your name and memory will be honorable with all posterity.
Wherefore did Deborah say that Iael the wife of Heber should be blessed above
other women, yea blessed above other women dwell ling in tents? Judge. 5.24.
Because with an hammer she had driven a nail so deep into the head of Sisera
sleeping in her tent, that he did never a wake.

If such a sentence of blessedness were prophesied of Iael, for making away
only an outward enemy of the out word state of the Church, how much more shall
ye be blessed, yea blessed above many former Parliament men, if as some have
made a beginning of the desolation of the whore of Rome in these lands, so ye
shall make perfect that beginning, and utterly take away whatsoever of her
ornaments yet remaining, wherewith she and her priests were wont to be decked,
and are yet decked, and wherewith also her Idols were wont to be worshipped, and
are yet worshipped? And if as other have already (in some sort) begun to
drive the nail into the head of the Archenimy (next under Satan himself) of
the spiritual state of the Church, so ye shall also drive the same further?
Yea if likewise as the Papists comforted themselves touching their contrived
and hoped for destruction of our persons, and of our religion, saying (in
dreaming sort) among themselves, as Moses said to the Israclits, these men and
this religion which ye have hitherto seen, ye shall never see again, so
likewise ye by the sword of the word of the Lord, and of your authority, (as it
were by the sword of the Lord and of Gidcon, Judge. 7.20.) if (I say) ye shall
so cut of the tail of the said whore of Rome, and (as it were) her bra^ch and
rush, that there shall be no more hope left to her lovers here amongst us, of
ever committing the like spiritual fornication with her hereafter, that
heretofore they have done: that so we may co^fortably apply the former words of
Moses to our selves and to our children, touching the Romish religion and all
the appurtinances thereof, which we have seen, that we shall never see them
again Exodus 14 23

Yea let the late conspiracy of the papists before mentioned, provoke you so
much the more carefully, and firmly to abolish their whole religion, to the
least hem, of every garment and Ceremony thereof, as also the more suerly to
establish the Gospel with all things appertainning thereunto, and every holy
means for the best supporting thereof, by how much more, the cursed fruits
thereof, h^u^ proclaimed it and daily do proclaim it, to be odiou and
abominable in the sight of God. Lastly, though the were then disapoynted, yet
your wisdom is such, that ^^ope ye need not be admonished, either not to
think that they will hereafter be idle, and give over their occupation, of
wicked and treasonable imaginatio^s, or not to neglect by all good means
possible, to prevent whatsoever nature treachery and conspiracy, yet they
shall in their darkness, further practice against us.

18 To conclude therefore, whilst ye have time, and whilst it is called to day,
fear that ye shall never hereafter have the like time and opportunity that now
ye have; and therefore as Bathsheba said to her most princely son Lemuell,
Open thy mouth for the dumme, and in the cause of all the (...) of destruction,
open thy mouth, judge righteously, and (...), afflicted and the poor, Pro.
31.8.9. So say I, to all them that by their place may any way do good to the
Church of God, and to any afflicted and poor members thereof. Yea as the said
Queine Bathsheba says before, give ye strong drink, to him that is ready to
perish, and wine unto them that have grief of heart, that he may drink, and
forget his poverty, and remember his misery no more, Pro. 31.6.7. So (...)
w^n all them that are of any authority, or in any (...) of grace and favor,
especially this present high Court of Parliament, to give a plentiful boll of
the strong d^^ke of their comfortable favor, yea an whole flagon full of the
wine of their grace, that they that are now poor, and have been long heavy
hearted for the corruptions and ruins of Syon, and that in the grief of their
hearts are ready to perish, may drink so deeply thereof, that they may forget
their poverty, and remember their misery no more.

Job said, that he had not contemned the judgment of his servant, neither of
his maid, when they contended with him. Job. 31.13. How much less then is the
judgment of the ministers of the Gospel, yea, of the mother of us all (the
Church of God) yea, of God himself, of Christ Jesus, of the holy Angels, of
our selves and our posterity, and final lie of King and kingdom (as has been
sheewed) to be neglected? As Haman said of the Jews to Ahashuerosh, that they
were a people scattered and dispersed among the people in all provinces of his
kingdom, having laws diverse from all people, and not observing the Kings
laws, and that therefore it was not for the Kings profit to suffer them.
Ester. 3.8. So I am not Ignorant that these ministers of the Gospel, of who^ I
have now in these Arguments made so often mention, are charged as enimyes to
the state, perturbers of the Church, seditious, schismatic etc.

But if it were lawful and free for these men to expostulate with the state
touching the former matters, as David did with the Lords annoyntrd Saul, they
might not only say with David, wherefore do ye give ear to men's words, that
say, behold David seeks evil against you? 1 Samuel 24.10 But they might also
plead their innocence, as David does his verse 12, Understand and see that there
is neither evil, nor wickedness in us, neither have we sinned against you. But
in the mean time, this they may boldly say, that as the former has been an
old accusation in all ages, even against the best friends of the Church and
state, so it is answered by the D. King in his 42. lecture upon Jonas page 171.
out of Augustine, that such accusations are rather by consiction the by
conviction. And therefore as our most gracious Queen of most happy memory
Queen Elizabeth, before she was Queen, in her distress, in the days of
Queen Mary, wrote with her Diamond in a glass window at woodstoocke,

Much suspected by me,
Nothing proved can be.
Even so may these men both speak and write, the same of themselves.

As for such accusers as are always provoking all men, especially Princes, and
Nobles against them, I wish them to take heed of that fearful curse,
wherewith David, cursed those children of men before the Lord, that had sturred
up Saul against him, and that by that means had cast him out from abiding in
the inheritance of the Lord, saying go serve other Gods, 1 Samuel 26.19. For my
part I pray, that God may give them a better mind, that so they may rather be
the blessed of the Lord.

Touching other also that have been or are forward, in silencing, depriving, or
otherwise molesting of ministers, for omission of Ceremonies, not observing the
book of Common prayer in that strict manner that they do urge the same, and
for other conformity, (though in other things they do and cannot but justify
them) I am so far from wishyng the least evil unto them, that I do heartily
pray the Lord (who has the hearts of all in his hands) to work such a
gracious change in them, that they may by all means as much further the work
of God, as by their former dealing they have hindered the same. That so they may
have all true honor in this life, and be eternal ly blessed in the life to
come. Finally concerning our most gracious Sovereign, I have prayed, I do
pray, and whilst I live I will pray for him, as Solomon prayed for himself,
1 Kings 2.45. Let King James be blessed, and let his throne be stablished
before the Lord forever: yea, so I pray the Lord to bless him, with our Noble
Queen and all their Royal issue, that their earthly kingdom being ended,
they may have the heavenly, and there reign with Christ Jesus, the King of
Kings for ever, and ever. To this prayer, let all the people say Amen.


