Tertio die Nouembris anno.xxi. Henrici.viii.
The act agayns kyllyng of calves.
FOr as myche as of old time great multitude of cattle was yearly increased
by weynyng bryngyng up and rearyng of calves thorowowte this realm whereby the
number of oxen kyen and steeres were in such haboundaunce and plenty that beffe
and all other vy^tuall was then good chepe and sold to the kyngys subiectys at
reasonable pe^ny worthes and pryces until now of late years passed that the
breders of such calves of their covetous myndy^s have vsyd to sell their
calves yo^g suckyng to bouchers / waynyng / rearyng and bringyng up few or none
/ whereby thencrease of old catell and also thencrease that should or might have
comen and grown of the same is maruelously mynyshed and decreased in such
wise yt greatderth of catell and other vyctuall has and does daily spryng grow
contynew and arise thoroughout this realm not only to the great enhaunsyng of
the pryses of beffes and all manner vyctuall but also to the great mynyshyng and
enpayreng of good hospytalyte and extreme undoing of the Kyngys poor and nedy
subiectys within y^ same which inconuenyence and great scarcytye is like to
ensue and increase more and more if spedye remedy be not provided in that
behalf. Be it therefore ordeynyd and enactyd by the king owre sovereign lord
the lords spyrytuall and temporal and the comyns in this present parlyament
assembled and by the auctoryte of the same y^ no manner parsonne parsons being
bouchers or other inhabytyng within this realm wales or the marches of the
same shall from the first day of January next coming during three hole years
then next folowgkyll or cause to be kyllyd any manner yo^g suckyng calf or
calves to be sold or put to sale to any parso^ or parsons hole or by retayle /
which calfe or calves so hereafter to be kyllyd shall happen to fall or to be
calued between the said first day of January and the first day of May in any
of the said iij. hole years upon pain of.vi. s. viij. d. for every calfe
fallen or calued between the said days and kyllyd and put to sale contrary to
this act / to be paid and forfaytted by every such boucher or bouchers and
other which shall kill or cause to be kyllyd and put to sale any such calfe or
calves so falling and to be calued between the said first day of January and y^
said first day of May during the said.iii. years The one half of every such
for fayture to be to thuse of our sovereign lord the king and the other half to
the party that will sue for the same by byll accyon of det or informacyon in
any of y^ kyngys courtys wherein no wager of law esson nor proteccyon shall be
allowed.

Provided always that every lord marcher have the forfaytys proffytys and
auauntagys only of every such offender and offenders against the purueyeng
of this act with in their seygneouryes lybertyes and fraunchessys royal.

The act lymytyng the pryse of hattys and cappys brought from beyond the sea.
THe king our sovereign lord by the assent of the lord spyrytuall and
temporal and the comyns of this present parlyament assembled and by the
auctoryte of the same has ordained establyshed and enacted for ye come^ wealth
of y^ subject of this his realm / yt no manner parson or parsons what so ever
he or they be from the feast of ye puryfycacyon of our lady next coming do sell
or cause to be sold within this his realm to any parson or parsons any woollen
hattys or bonett^ or woollen hat or cappe made or to be made in any place or
placys out of this realm of England in any of the parties of beyond the sea
over or above the prycys under written / that is to say no such cappe or bonet
to be sold above the foam of.ii. s sterlyng and no such hat to be sold above
the some of ten pence / and no such syngle crown cappe nor syngle night
cappe to be sold above the some of.vi. pence upon pain to forfayt for every
such bonet cappe or hat at any time after the same feast to be sold over the
price above said contrary to the tenor of this act.xl. s. sterlyng / all
which forfeture shall extend only to the loss of the seller or sellers
thereof and to no another / The one half thereof to be leueyd and recoueryd to
the use of our said sovereign lord and the other half to the party that will
sue for the fame in any of our sovereign Lord the kyngys courtys by accyon of
det byll informacyon or other wise in which accyon or suit no proteccyon wager
of law nor esson shall be alowedor admyttyd.

And be yt forther enacted by the auctoryte above said / that every parson or
parsons being or weryngany such bonet cappe or hat made out of this realm may
lawfully at all times hereafter use were and deteyne any such bonet cappe or
hat cappes or hatt^ without seasure of the same or any danger loss or other
for fayture or penaltye to be had or suffered for the same / any matter clause
or other thing conteynyd or expressyd in this present act or actis heretofore
made to the contrary not wythstandyng.

God save the king and preserve the co^myn wealth.

