Ordinances decreed for reformation of diverse disorders in printing and
uttering of Books.
1 THat no person shall print, or cause to be imprinted, nor shall bring, or
cause, or procure to be brought into this Realm imprinted, any Book or copy
against the form and meaning of any ordinance, prohibition, or commandment,
contained, or to be contained in any the Statutes or Laws of this Realm, or
in any Injunctions, Letters patents, or ordinances, passed or set forth, or
to be passed or set forth by the Queens most excellent Majesty's grant,
commission, or authority.

2 That whosoever shall offend against the said ordinance, shall not only
forfait all such Books and Copies, as shall be so printed or brought in; but
also shall from thencefoorth never use or exercise, nor take benefit by any
using or exercising of the feate of printing, and shall sustain three months
imprisonment, without bail or mainprise. And if he be not before such offense
bound with sureties, in form hereafter expressed, then he shall also forfait
for every offense. x. li.

3 That no person shall sell, utter, put to sale, bind, stitch, or sow, any
such Books or Copies, so printed or brought in, contrary to the said
ordinance, upon pain to forfait all such Books and Copies, and for every
Book. xx. s.

4 That all Books to be so forfaited, shall be brought into the Stationers
hall in London, and there the one moitie of all such forfaitures of money shall
be reserved to the Queens Majesty's use, and the other moitie shall be
delivered to him or them that shall first seize the same Books or Copies, or
make complaint thereof to the Wardens of the said Company. And all the Books
so to be forfaited, shall be destroyed or made waste paper, by the discretion of
the said Wardens.

5 That it shall be lawful for the Wardens of the said Company for the time
being, or any two of the said Company, thereto deputed by the said Wardens,
as well in any ports, as other suspected places within this Realm, to open
and view all packs, drifats, maunds, and other things, wherein Books or Paper
shall be contained, brought into this Realm: and also to make search in all
workehouses, shops, warehouses, and other places, of Printers, Bookesellers, or
such as bring Books into this Realm to be sold, or where they shall have
reasonable cause of suspicion: and all the said Books to be round against the
said ordinance, to seize and carry to the said Hall, to the uses abouesaid,
and the parties therein offending, to lead and present before the Queens
Majesty's hie Commissioners in causes Ecclesiastical.

6 That every Printer, Stationer, Bookeseller, Merchant, and other person,
using any trade of Books, printing, binding, selling, or bringing into this
Realm, shall before the said Commissioners, or before any other persons
thereunto ^o be assigned by the Queens Majesty's most honorable privy
Council, enter into several recognisances of reasonable sums of money to
her Majesty's use, with sureties or without, as to the said Commissioners shall
be thought expedient, that he shall truly observe all the said ordinances,
well and truly yield and pay all such forfaitures, and in no point be
resisting, but in all things aiding to the said Wardens and their deputies, for
the true execution of the premises.

We under written think these ordinances meet and necessary to be decreed
and observed.

Matthew Cantu^.
Edm. London.
Amb. Cave.
David Jews.
Thomas Yale.
Robert Weston.
Thomas Huicke.

Upon the consideration before expressed, and upon the motion of the
Commissioners, we of the privy Council have agreed these to be observed and
kept, upon the pains therein contained.

At the Star Chamber the xxix. day of June. Anno. 1566. and the viij. year
of the Queens Majesty's reign. N. Bacon. C. S.
Winchester.
R. Lecester.
E. Clinton.
Amb. Cave.
E. Rogers.
F. Knolles.
W. Cecill.
God preserve our most gracious Queen ELIZABETH.

