THE ARRAINMENT OF THE WHOLE SOCIETY OF IESVITS IN FRANCE, holden in the
honorable Court of Parliament in Paris, the 12. and 13. of July. 1594.

Wherein is laid open to the world, that, howsoever this new Sect pretends
matter of Religion, yet their whole travails, endeavors, and bent, is but to
set up the kingdom of Spain, and to make him the only Monarch of all the
West.

Translated, out of the French copy imprinted at Paris by the Kings Printer.

AT LONDON Printed by Charles Yetsweirt Esquire 1594.

CVM PRIVILEGIO.

THE PLEA OF M. ANTONIE ARnauld Counselor in Parliament, and heretofore
Counselor and Attorney general to the late deceased Queen Mother, for the
University of Paris plaintiff, against the Jesuits defendants, the 12. and
13. of July. 1594.
The Subject of the Plea.
THe Jesuits having borne out themselves against sundry complaints of the
University, by the support of such as used their service in executing of their
great and mischievous enterprises, became at length after the blocking up of
the town imperious co^mau^ders in Paris, and kindled the fire of sedition in all
the chief towns of the Realm, using blasphemous raylings without ceasing in
their sermons and confessions, against the memory of the late King, and
against the kings Majesty that now reigns, whom they wounded and stonge
with their venomous tongues, and the most slanderous words they could by any
means devise: And to heap up the full measure of their impieties, attempted
to murder the King by the hands of one Barriere, who was executed at Melun,
and confessed it at his death. Which was the cause of the first resolution,
taken and agreed upon by the University of Paris, since the town returned to
the obedience of the King, to be humble suitors that the Jesuits might be
banished. To which end and purpose, a supplication was presented against them
to the Court of Parliament, the authority of which Court, though they kicked
and spurned against for the space of certain days, yet in fine being enforced
thereunto (by an order set down on thursday the 7. of July 1594. the tenure
whereof was, that upon the Monday then next ensuing their default of appearance
should receive judgment, without any more delay) they brought in their Counsel
that day into the great chamber, before the Court was set: which Cou^selor gave
the Court to understand, that in way of defense of his Clients cause he should
be constrained to utter much matter, which would be very displeasing to many
which were now become Servants to the King, and therefore prayed the Court,
that the doors might be shut, whilst the matter was pleaded. This was a
subtle practice of the Jesuits, to secret from the people, (whom they had
to this day bewitched with their sorceries and enchantments,) their illusions
and dangerous practices, whereby they labored to subject all Europe to the
thraldom of Spain. Notwithstanding, this cunning-plat of theirs took so good
success, that order was taken by the Court, that the doors should be shut
whilst the matter was in pleading. Master Antonie Arnauld pleaded for the
University, Master Jews Dolle for the Curate of Paris, who joined with the
University, Master Claud Duret, for the Jesuits, Monsieur Seguier for the
Kings Attorney general.

The plea of Master Antonie Arnauld Counselor in Parliament for the University
of Paris plaintiff: against The Jesuits defendants, the 12. and 13. of July.
1594.
IT may please this Honorable Court, I will begin this action with an other
manner of protestation, then our adverse parties have used: for whereas they
gave out yesterday to the world, that the doors should be shut whilst this
matter was in pleading, by reason of the threats which they had cast out of
speaking against many, which had now submitted themselves to the Kings
obedience, and were content and forward to hazard their lives daily in the
wars for his service: I protest on the contrary, to offend no man neither in
word nor thought, but such as stand and remain metamorphosed Spaniards.

The reason of the diversity of these two protestations is apparent enough.
The Jesuits can not do a greater piece of service to the King of Spain their
Master, then in this place to slander such men, as have, in sort as the world
sees, sharpened his edge, by putting so strong and important towns into the
hands of his greatest and most dangerous enemy.

And on the other side, the University of Paris, (the Kings eldest daughter,
for whom I speak,) can not do his Majesty a greater service, then to keep
inuiolably the Law of Forgetting; which is the original and fountain of the
peace which we now enjoy, and that we are and hope to enjoy from hence forward.

I remember that I have read, that at what time the battle of Pharsale was
agreed on by the Generals and Leaders on both sides, and the Trompetters were
commanded to sound their Trompets, certain of the best of the Romans, and
some Grecians (that were then present in the field, but not within the
battle) seeing the state of both those huge and mighty armies so near to
danger, began to consider with themselves to what point the forces of the
Roman Empire were brought. For their armor was all one, the setting and
ordering of their battles was all alike, their Ensigns were without
difference, resembling the one the other in all points, the very flower of all
the valiant men of one self same City, and a mighty strength now upon the
instant to ruinate it self: giving a notable example how blind, raging and
furious the nature of man is, when it gives it self over to be carried away
with any violent passion. For if they would have ruled and governed that which
they had wholly conquered, the greatest and best part of the world both by land
and sea, had bin in their subjection, and under their obedience.

In like sort, whosoever that knows our state well, will consider to what
point of greatness, of happiness, of honors, of riches, and mightines, the Crown
of France had now attained unto, had it not bin for our wars more then
civil, and that the flower of so many valiant men (which might now have bin
alive, had not our civil diffentions bin) had but more then sufficient to have
gone and assailed our old enemy even within M^^ill, and have brought him to
parle and compromise for his treasures (...) it wels, especially under the
happy conduct of so great and excellent a Leader, who has the hearts and arms
of Navarre, of Aragon, and Portugal stretched out unto him as their hoped for
deliverer out of the hands of this horrible tirannie of Castile: whosoever, I
say, will consider these things, can not hold himself from entering into just
choler and extreme indignation against them that have bin sent in amongst us
to blow the bellows, and kindle the coals of this great fire, without ceasing
and intermission, wherewith this Monarchy has bin almost wasted and consumed

That these instruments and firebrandes of the world are the Jesuits, there is
no man that doubts, but only two sorts of people: the one, which are of
nature so fearful, that they think they are still within the clutches of the
Sixteen Murderers, and the Jesuits their counsel: and the other which are of
their brotherhood and congregation, and have secretly executed the most
dangerous point of their vows, as a whole town may be Jesuitical.

But these men speak but softly, as not daring to be heard. And on the
contrary side, we see a great and universal consent of all honest men, as
well of such as departed out of this town during the wars, as of them that
tarried behind, and with so great zeal and stout courage opened the gates of
the Capital to their King, (For we can not all of us but fear alike, desire
alike, and hate alike.) We see, I say, so great an affection of all the
hearts that are true French, and unfeignedly desirous of the greatness and
increase of this Crown, that they are ready (upon a grounded hope they have
upon an infallible assurance of your Justice and devotion to his Majesty's
service) to hunt out all those murderers of Kings, these confessors, and
eggers on forward of such parricides: to hunt them, I say, out of France, and
from amongst all them that are under the obedience of the Flower de Lys,
sworn enemies to these monsters, that have bereft them of one of their dearest
children, and are now come to the watch to hear of the like news of the King
that now reigns, whom they have already murdered, as much as in them might
lie by aid, counsel, and burning desire, and at this day strive with tooth
and nail wholly to subvert and break in a thousand pieces the pillar
whereupon the Scepter rests, which they have shaken many a day: which they
have shaken, I say, in the sight of all men of understanding, that foretold it
in this great Oracle of France, not when the doors were shut, but when they
were full open, and with as great resort of people, as is now in this great
hall, desirous to come in. That foretold it, I say, not doubtfullie and in a
cloud, but clearly, and with all the circumstances which we have seen:
foretelling us of all the miseries which we have felt, and the calamities
which have brought us within two fingers breadth of our utter ruin. But their
foresights, their aduertisements, their protestations, were no less fruteles
then true, true Cassanders,

Tongues by the ordinance of God never believed of the Teuerians. And why so?
whence came this so great and dead sleep? and how comes it to pass that
these miseries could not be remedied, which were so prouidently foreseen? The
cause is very manifest. The Gold of Spain had gotten a passage into the
purses of the greatest favorites, that daily maintained and set up these
Trompets of war, these firebrands of sedition, these tempestuous and stormy
winds, which can do no other but daily and howerly vex and disquiet the
calm of France

As for such as in great sincerity rejected this gold of Spain, the greatest
part of them notwithstanding became faint hearted, and cast downe-countenanced,
and feeble handed, when the time came wherein it behooved them to strike this
main stroke for the liberty of the Gauls, and to exterminate these traitors
which have bin sent in amongst us by herdlems.

Few were found that joined courage, force, and resolution with honesty, and
yet such as they were, the enemy found the means to rid his hands of them,
all credit and authority was taken from them: But yet at the length, the
feeble handed received strength, and we may not only without fear, but also
with honor and reputation speak against these wicked enchanters, that have
given the wine of rebellion to the people to drink, and have fostered them
with a most dangerous kind of food, sowring the dow of France with the leven
of Spain.

Think not, you spials of Castile, that you shall be able to break this blow,
of the heat of France, and send us back to your accustomed too too long
delays of judgments, and framed for guilty persons, as you did in the year
sixty four. At what time, men spoke of your actions but as in way of
prophesying: and for one man that perceived a right the thing that was futurely
like to come to pass, there where always ten that did not so much as dream
of any such matter. But at this day, what man is there, that in his body, in
his goods, in the loss of his parents, or of his friends, has not felt the
horrible effects of your conspiracy, and the violent executions of the
commandments, which you gave to the people in pulpites, places dedicated to
truth and piety? which you have filled with fire, with blood, and horrible
basphemies, making the people believe that God was a murderer of Kings, and
attributing to heaven, the stroke of a knife forged in Hell.

Henry the third, my renoumed and redoubted Prince (who have this contentment
in Heaven, to see thy lawful and noble successor, having marched upon the
bellies of all thine enemies, to reign now peaceably in thy house the Loure,
and upon the frontier, to break, scatter, and put to flight (an accident a
thousand times more dishonorable, then the loss of ten battles) the Spanish
armies, and thunder with thy Canons, against the rebellious Cities that stood
out to the last, accompanied with six thousand Gentlemen boiling with
impatiencie to continue the glorious revenge of thy death,) assist me in this
cause, and representing continually before mine eyes thy bloody shirt, give me
force and strength to make all thy subjects feel the grief, the hatred, and
indignation which they are bound to bear against these Jesuits, who by their
bloody confessions, by their frantike sermons, by the secret Counsels with
the Ambassador of thine enemy, poisoner of thine only brother, have bin
causers and seedsmen of all the miseries which thy poor people has endured,
and the end of thine own life.

My good Lords, Charles the fifth, and Philip his son, seeing them selves full
fraught with the gold of the Indes, not yet drawn dry, have conceited unto
themselves and embraced no smaller hope, then to make themselves Monarks and
Emperors of the West, and to set up the house of Austria in like greatness in
Europe, as the house of the Ottomans is in Asia.

These great men of State were not ignorant, what force the scrupules of
conscience were of in the hearts of men, and how deeply and bottomlesly they
pearce into men's breasts.

The compassing of the greatest part of the Court of Rome was but a trifle to
them, by means of their great pensions, and of the rich benefices of Millan,
Naples, Sicile, beside the livings of Spain, which were wonderful rich.

But because the charge that is in this great City is heavy, and burdensome,
they wanted light and stirring fellows to be placed in all quarters, to
execute whatsoever might tend to the good and advancement of the affairs of
Spain. These are the Jesuits which are scattered abroad in huge and mighty
swarms: for there are between nine and ten thousand of them, and have already
founded two hundred and four score Spanish Colonies, they possess in revenues
above two thousand millions of gold, they are Lords of Erledomes and great
Baronies in Spain, and in Italy, and attained already to ye dignity of
Cardinals, ready to be made Popes: and in case they should have continuance
but thirty years more in all the places where they have nestled themselves
already, it would be without doubt the richest and mightiest company in
Christendom, and would wage Armies, as already they begin to contribute.

Their principal bow is to obey their General and Superior (who is always a
Spaniard, and chosen by the King of Spain) every way and in all things. This
appears true most manifestly by experience. Layola their first General was a
Spaniard. Laynes the second a Spaniard also. The third Euarardus was a
Flemming, a subject of the King of Spain. Borgia the fourth was a Spaniard.
Aqua Viua the fifth, living at this day, is a Neapolitane, subject to the King
of Spain. The words of this fourth vow are strange, yea horrible: for they
go thus far, In him they must acknowledge Christ present, as it were, If
Jesus Christ should command to go and kill, they must do so. If therefore
their Spanish General command them to go and murder, or cause the King of
France to be murdered, they must of necessity do so. Their History compyled
by Peter Ribadenaire a Jesuit, imprinted at Antwerpe in the year 1587. under
the title, De vita Ignatij, shows that their institution has no other end
but the advancement of ye affairs of Spain, where they were received long
time before they were received in any other part of the world. Mark, these are
the words written in the page 146. of that Book. For this Society, not yet
borne in their Author Ignatius, was first allowed of in Spain, and after that
it was borne, was mightily resisted in Italye and France. Moreover they are not
bound so strictly to any thing, as to pray day and night for the prosperity of
the wars, and for the victories and triumphs of the King of Spain. Behold
the words of the page 169. We are bound day and night to appeace and weary God
with our prayers, to protect and defend Philip the Catholic King in all safety
and happiness, who of his ancient and exceeding piety, singular wisdom,
and wonderful watchfulnes, of the mightiest power of al Princes that ever were,
sets himself as a Wall for the house of God, and defends the Chatholique
faith. A matter which he does not only with his invincible power, but with
those scout-watches of the holy Fathers, which have the rule and government of
the Senate of the Catholic faith. So that we may not find it strange, that so
many honorable personages do assure us that they have heard them pray for
Philip our King. For there is not a Jesuit in the world, that does not once in
the day pray this prayer: and as the affairs of Spain require, wheresoever
they become, they make their vows for him either publikelie or secretly.

And on the contrary side, it is well known to all men, that they never pray in
any sort for our King, to whom also they have no oath of obedience, as whereof
they are not otherwise capable, because their corporation is not allowed in
France, and being liege vassals, and wholly bound as well to their General as
to the Pope: which point does manifestly discover their conspiracy, and
shows evidently, that their vow tends to the subversion of the state. For
within the compass of almost sixteen hundred years (wherein the Christian
Religion was watered with the blood of Christ, and his Martyrs) there has not
a Sect bin heard of, that has had such strange vows as this sect has.

So far of is it, that the Clergy of France has ever bin spotted with the
like, that on the contrary side, whenever the Popes combined themselves
without cause with the Enemies of this Crown, and would have employed the
authority and power which they have from God to edify withal, would have
employed it, I say, to the destruction of the most flourishing state of
Christendom, and whom they may thank for their temporalties, they have found
great and holy Parsonages, who with a common consent of the whole Church of
France have manfully resysted such enterprises.

But in this later age, one part of the Clergy is found to have sucked of this
poisoned milk, and this doctrine of the Jesuits, that whosoever had bin
chosen Pope, (notwithstanding that from time to time it had bin well known
that he was a Pentioner and Partisan of Spain, and a sworn enemy to France,)
yet might he notwithstanding make the whole Kingdom a pray, and discharge the
Subjects from their obedience which they owe to their Prince.

This schismatical and damnable proposition, directly contrary to the word of
God, which has wholly separated and put a difference between the Spiritual
and Temporal powers. This proposition which would make Christian Religion, as
contrary to ye maintenance of States and Kingdoms, as in truth it helps to
establish them: This proposition, I say, having taken place in the hearts of
some Frenchmen, has brought us these rages, these crueltyes, these murders,
and horrible confusions which we have seen.

In the year 1561. John Tanquerel Bacheler of Divinity was condemned to
recall his error in being so bold and hardy as to set down amongst other his
disputable questions, this for one, that the Pope might excommunicat Kings. In
January 1589. at what time there was a question put forth in the Divinity
schole called Sorbonne, whether subjects might be freed from the obedience of
the King: Faber the Chauncellor, Camus, Chabot, Faber the Curate of Saint
Paul, Chauagnac and the most ancient Divines withstood it stoutly, but the
great number of the Scholars of the Jesuits, Boucher, Pichenat, Varadier,
Semelle, Cueilly, Decret, Aubourge, and many other carried it away with
plurality of voices against all the maxims of France, and liberties of the
French Church, which the Jesuits call abuses and corruptions. These are the
goodly fruits of their lessons in Divinity.

The Kings of France are the eldest sons of the Church, sons which have
deserved as much as may be, withstanding and suppressing the incroching of the
Kings of Castile, Aragon, and other that went about to take away the right of
the Church of Rome. Look when the Pope will acknowledge the King, for his
eldest son, and chief king of Christendom, then will the Frenchmen
acknowledge him for their holy Father: but as long as he plays the part of a
Father in law, and not of a Father, of a Partisan, and not of a mediator, as
long as of a malicious stomach he shall bestow his might and main to dismember
France, to purchase unto himself a sovereign commandment there, and to
tread the Flower de Lys under his feet, or to join them in way of triumph to
the arms of Spain, which are far different from them, Let our Sea banks be
opposite unto theirs, and our surges unto their streams, let our armies be
against theirs, and let the Nephews themselves fall together by the ears.

Thus have our fathers lived: in the time of Lewys the gracious, Gregory the
4. would needs intrude himself to come to excommunicat the King: the Church
of France willed him to return excommunicate himself: the like befell in the
time of Charles Chauue against Pope Adrian.

O brave and invincible Church of France! in those days, thou wastfull of
French courages in deed, Christians in deed, Religious in deed, whose
principal vow was every way and in all things, to obey Gods commandments
which are always just, and not all the insolences and enterprises which Rome
or Spain would make against the French: but since that thine enemies have
combined themselves together against thy greatness, they have sent to thee these
new Colonies of Castillians, these conuents of Murderers, bound by their
solemn vow to obey their Spanish General as Jesus Christ come down upon the
earth, and to go and murder Kings and Princes, or to cause them to be
murdered by others, to whom they recommend their raging fury, Since that
time, I say, where are these brave resolutions of the Church of France?

As we read of certain twins, that the death of the one, was the end of the
other, in like sort this law, which binds us not to start from our obedience
dew to the King, what excommunication soever come from Rome, this law, I say,
is so firmly knit to the state, and the state to it, that even as the day of
their beginning is one, so must and ought their end to be. It is this sincere,
perfect, and absolute obedience, that wins battles, that scattreth our
enemies, which aduaunceth the desert, and crowns the labor, without which
nothing can prosper, nothing can be durable. This is the true bond, the
ornament, and strength of all things. Kingdoms can bear no felowships, nor
lights with lights agree* if there be two suns, all the world will be set on
fire. So though the Primates, Archbishops and Bishops have the principal charge
of religion in France, yet notwithstanding before and above all things, they
must give their oath of fidelity to the King, so far are they from having a
contrary vow to obey the Pope absolutely.

Holy Jews set himself stoutly and with great sharpenes against the bulls of
Rome, as may be seen by his placarde, the Popes of Rome had wrought a good
revenge, if they could have rooted out all the race of that good and valorous
King. Whereabout the Cardinal of Plaisance labored mightily being sent into
France under the title of Legate, who employed all the means he had, all his
greatness, and all his forces to subvert the Salique law, the true Palladion of
France, and without which, the Flower de Lys, could never have mounted to so
high a degree of honor and glory, as even at this day makes them to glister
and shine maugre the beardes of all the practices, of all the treasons, of all
the underminings of Spain, far above all the proudest and topsailed in the
world.

Let us go on and see how these fellows may abide in France, which have this
fourth and principal vow of absolute obedience every way and in all things,
to their Spanish general, and to the Pope (commanded and daily menaced by
King Philip, who has his foot upon his throat by means of Naples and Sicile,
and of his partisans within Rome it self) To the Pope, I say, who maintains
in the Chapter, Ad Apostolicae. de Sentent. and re iudicata. in 6. and in the
extrauagant Commu. vnam sanctam. de Maioritate and obedientia. That it is
necessary for every man, if he will ever be saved, to be subject to the Bishop
of Rome. And because the world may not think, that this saying may be salued
by the distinction of Spiritual and Temporal, behold how namely and expressly
he declared himself to be head, superior, and absolute master both in
Spiritual and Temporal things, over all Kings and Princes of the earth,
mainteyning that he has power to judge and depose them: So then both the
swords, that is to say, both the Spiritual and the Material are in the power of
the Church: but the one is to be used for the Church, the other by the Church:
the one by the hands of the priest, the other by the hand of Kings and
Soldiers, but yet at the beck and sufferance of the Priest, and the one
sword must be under the other: and the Temporal authority be subject to the
Spiritual power: for as the truth witnesses, The Spiritual power may institute
and judge the earthly power, if it be not good. So is the prophecy of Hieremie
verified upon the Church and Church power: Behold I have appointed or placed
thee this day over Nations and Kingdoms, etc. as follows there. Therefore,
in case the earthly power stray out of the way, it shall be judged of the
Spiritual power: but if the Spiritual power stray out of the way, the lesser
shall be judged by the greater: but if the highest go astray, that is to be
judged of God only, and not of man, as witnesses the Apostle, The Spiritual
man judges al things, and himself is judged of no man.

If these propositions be not erroneous and Schismatical, what follows but
that al we that obey the King are excommunicate, that the whole kingdom of
France stands interdict, accursed, and a pray to Satan? But how did our
ancestors (whose virtue even at this day supporteth our faults) behave and
carry themselves in such accidents, and in such rencounters? Philip the fair
sent to Boniface the eight, that he had no authority at all over the Kings of
France, and that they that said to the contrary were fools and madmen. Read
Belannin, hear all the Sermons, all the confessions of the Jesuits, they
send all such propositions to the bottomless pit of Hell together with Philip
the fair, and all those that burnt Pope Boniface his bull openly at an
assembly of the states of this town of Paris, declaring the seat of Rome
vacant. This Belarmin a Jesuit mainteineth, that the Popes have power to put
down the Kings and Princes of the earth, alleging for his reason, certain
tirannous attemtats and enterprises.

Pope Benedict the 13. would needs follow Boniface, but his bull containing a
diffamatorie libell against the authority of King Charles the sixth, was openly
torn in pieces, and they that brought it, were put to their fine, and
committed to prison.

Jews the 12. surnamed Father of the people, was as much hated in Rome as he
was loved in France: he had bestowed on Julius the second many towns in
Italy: in acknowledgment whereof, Julius stirred up the Spaniards, Almaines,
Suisers, and Englishmen against him: but in the year, 1510. the King caused a
Council to be assembled at Towers, where it was decreed and enacted, that
war should be made upon him, which was also confirmed in an other Council
holden at Pisa. Whereupon the Pope took upon him to excommunicate the King and
the kingdom, giving them absolution from all their sins that could kill a
French man. Thus you enlarge one man's territories, and take from an other,
other some you make tributaries, you increase, you diminish, you give, you take
away kingdoms, who gave you this power? For as for God, he has said, that
your kingdom is not of this world.

This great excommunication could not make a breach in France, but it gave a
blow to the kingdom of Navarre, which was allied to us, where the subjects
were not surely grounded against such enterprises: and Fardinand King of Aragon
seized upon the best part of the state of Navarre, while John of Albreat great
grandfather to the King that now is, was in the army of France.

God grant that some revenger may rise out of our bones. Here am I forced to
speak a word or two, touching the beginning of the Jesuits, but I will do it
shortly, because my matter calls me away.

In the year 1521. the Frenchmen undertook to restore one to his inheritance
which he had lost by their means. They besieged Pampelune, and beat it with
such a fury, as they carried it away, and wanne it. Ignatius Layola Commander
of one of the companies of the garrison of Castile, was more heddy in defense
of it, then any of the rest, and there had his legs broken, which accident
caused him to follow the wars no more, but vowing within himself, an
unreconcilable hatred against the French, no less then Hannibal did against
the Romans, through the help of the Devil, he hatched this cursed
conspiracy of Jesuits, who have bin the causers of such ruin as France has
received.

Foresightfull Nature has made the cruellest and most murdering creatures,
least fruitful: the Lioness brings forth but one, and but once whilst she
lives. If they were as fertile, as other beasts, the world could not possibly
be inhabited. But it is a strange thing to see, how this wicked race borne to
the ruin and desolation of mankind, has multiplied in a few years: being
grown from the number of three soore persons, which was their first
foundation, unto ten thousand. In so much as that if they should continue to
increase in like proportion, they would become within thirty years space more
then twelve hundred thousand, and would make whole kingdoms, all Jesuits.

Had they come into France with displayed enssignes, they had passed from the
birth to the grave: but they stily crept into our University of Paris, and
took up lodgings in little chambers, where they continued a good while,
lurking as Fores for a pray, and playing the spies, receiving directions from
Rome, and very peremptory letters of recommendation to such as were the
greatest favorites in France, and hunted after credit and honor in Rome
(which sort of people was always greatly to be misdoubted for the affairs of
this Realm.) So that by this sly and forly manner, having vnderminingly crept
in by little and little, and in fine having gotten the Cardinals of Tournon and
Lorraine for their Presidents and Judges, they procured a Decree, made at
Poissy touching the receiving of their college which had bin oftentimes
rejected before, to be confirmed and signed in their behalf (the University
not being admitted to speak for themselves against them) with this prouiso,
that their profession should be banished, and that they should abandon the name
of Jesuits.

They desired no better entrance then this, making full account, that by little
and little, and stylie without any perceiving at all, to gather unto themselves
such a number of Jesuitical conuerts by their confessions, sermons, and
instructions of the youth, that in conclusion they should not only be masters
of their desire, but also ruinate their adversaries, and have a sovereign
commandment over the state. As in deed they effected it to the sight of all
the world, from the time of the shutting up of this Town, until the happy
reducing of it to the obedience of his Majesty.

What tongue, what voice is sufficient to express the secret Counsails, the
most horrible conspiracies, more dangerous then the conspiracy of Catiline,
which were holden in their College in S. James street, and in their Church in
S. Antonies street? where did the agents and Ambassadors of Spain, Mendoza,
Daguillon, Diego, Diuarra, Taxis, Feria, and others hold their secret meetings
and assemblies, but among the Jesuits? where did Louchard, Ameline, Cruce,
Crome, and such like notorious manquellers, and murderers build their
conspiracies, but amongst the Jesuits? who made that bloody answer to the
Catholic Apology, but the Jesuits? who employed all their studies to speak
against the parson, and right of his Majesty that now reigns, as false and
slanderous matters as possibly their wicked heads could devise. What are they
that from the year 1585. would give no absolution to the Gentry of France,
unless they would vow and promise to band themselves against their
Sovereign being a most Catholic King, and such an one, as against whom they
could make no exception, but only this that he would not die so soon, as
their Magiciens had foretold he should? who were the causers of the loss of
the town of Perigeux, but the Jesuits, which went and made a tumult even in
the town house? who were the causers of the revolt of Rhennes, which continued
but eight days, and was as much as all Britanie was worth, but the Sermons of
the Jesuits, as they themselves had caused it to be delivered out in Print even
in this City? Who were the causers of the loss of Again, Tholose, Verdun, and
generally of all the Towns wherein the y have gotten footing, Bourdeaux only
except where their traitorous purposes were prevented, and Neuers, where the
presence of Monsieur de Neuers and the weakness of the walls appalled the
courages of them whose hearts they had empoisoned?

Where did the two Cardinals, which termed themselves Legates in France,
assemble their Counsels but only amongst the Jesuits? where was it, that
Mendoza the Ambassador of Spain upon Alholen day in the year 1589. at what
time the King had entered the Faurburges, held his Counsel of sixteen, but in
the College of Jesuits? Where was it, that the year following the resolution
was taken, rather to famish the nienth and tenth part of the inhabitaunts of
Paris, then to yield up the town to the King? who was it that lent the enemies
Wines, Grain, and Otes for their horses upon Mortgage of the Jewels of the
crown, but only the Jesuits, as they were found by Lugoly, seized thereof the
morrow after that the King came into this town? Who was president of the
counsel of those sixteen Murderers, but Comolet, Bernard, and Father Odo
Pichenar the cruellest tygre in all Paris, who took it so much to heart, to see
things go otherwise then he made account of, that he became mad, and remains
to this day in chains, within their College of Bourges? An ancient writer
said, that if it were possible for man to look into the hearts of the wicked,
he should behold there, both rents and strokes: for as the bodies with wounds,
so are the minds of the wicked rent and torn in sunder with cruelty, lusts,
and wicked counsels.

When K. Philip by the persuasions of the Jesuits, had brought in his Spanish
garrison into Paris, and would have that which he held now by force, colored
with some fair show, whom sent he, but father Mathieu the Jesuit, carrying a
name like to the surname of an other Mathieu a Jesuit, the principal
instrument of the league that was made in the year 1585. This Mathieu, during
his short abode in this town, being lodged in the College of Jesuits, caused
there a letter, to be written and signed, whereby those noble masters, that
termed themselves the Counselers of the sixteen quarters of the town of
Paris, gave not only the town but the whole kingdom to King Philip, which
thing will appear better by the letter it self, then by any other discourse
that may be made.

SIre, where as your Catholic Majesty has bin so gracious unto us, as to
give us to understand by the most religious and reverend Father Mathieu, not
only his holy intentions toward the general good of Religion, but in
particular his great affections and favors toward this City of Paris. And a
little after. We trust in God that before it be long, the armies of his holiness
and your Catholic Majesty's being joined together, will deliver us from the
oppression of our enemy, who has hither unto, by the space of an year and
half shopped us upon al sides, so that nothing can come into the town, but
with hazard, or by force of arms, and would press further, stood he not in
fear of the garrisons, which it pleased your Catholic Majesty to send us.
We may boldly assure your Catholic Majesty, that the vows and desires of all the Catholics, are to see your Catholic Majesty hold the Scepter of this
Crown, and reign over us, as we most willingly cast our selves into your
arms, as into the arms of our Father, or that your Catholic Majesty would
be pleased to appoint some one of his posterity. And if it shall stand with his
good pleasure to appoint us any other beside himself, that it may please him
to make choice of a Son in law, whom we will receive as King with all the best
affections, all the devotion and obedience that a good and loyal people can and
are bound to yield to their liege and Sovereign. For we hope so well of the
blessing of God upon this alliance, that what we have already received of this
most puissant and most Christian Princess Blanch of Castile, mother of our
most christian and most religious King S. Loys, we shall receive it, yea to the
double of this great and virtuous Princess daughter of your Catholic
Majesty, upon whom for her rare virtues, the eyes of al men are fixed and
set, as a most pleasing object, and in whom most gloriously shines the blood
of France and Spain, to no other end and purpose, but by a perpetual alliance
to fraternise and join in one brotherhood as it were these two great
Monarchies under their government, to the advancement of the glory of our
Lord Jesus Christ, the beauty of his church, and union of all the inhabitants
of the world under the Enseignes of Christianisme, As your catholic Majesty,
with so many notable and triumphant victories by the favor of God, and his
^ide has mightily prevailed and adua^ced the same, so we most heartily pray to
God, who is the Lord of battles, to continue your proceedinges therein with
such acco^plishment, that the whole work may be consummate and perfited in all
poincts: to which end and purpose, that it would please him, to prolong your
catholic Majesty's days in perfect and blisseful health, accompanied with
daily success of victories, and triumphs over al your enemies. From Paris
this 2. of Nouemb. 1591. And beneath on the one side. The reverend Father
Mathieu this bearer, who has greatly comforted us, fully instructed with the
state of our affairs, shall satisfy your Catholic Majesty in all things
which may seem defective and wanting in our letters, beseeching your Majesty
most humbly to credit him in whatsoever he shall report unto you from us.


The date of this Letter is infinitely to be considered, for it was written the
second of November 1591. and 13. days after, they that wrote the Letters, and
understood by father Mathieu King Philips purposes, they, I say, that started
not from the Jesuits, ne went to any other men's confessions but theirs,
executed this great and horrible cruelty, most butcherly murdering (after the
manner of Spaniardes, and without form or figure of process) that man, whom the
day before they reverenced as their Lord chief Justice, to wit, Monsieur
Brisson. These Spaniards, Jesuits, and sixteen Murderers, or rather sixteen
hangmen and their adherents, being of opinion, that this tragical and hideous
spectacle which they presented to the people in a great assembly at the Grieve,
would hearten them, and inflame them to bath themselves in the blood of all
honest men that could not abide to taste of the Spanish tirannie. But God, that
abhors such and so execrable enterprises, disposed the matter otherwise, and
so wrought, that ye fearful day, which they thought should have bin an assured
establishment of the Spanish co^mandarie within Paris, was the ruin and
overthrow of it, Then was Troy taken. The most drousie and sluggish spirits
began to be awake, the most dastards to change their dread into desperatenes,
and they that were most bewitched by the sermons of the Jesuits, to know that
the Empire of Castile, which had bin painted out unto them full of meekenes,
joy, and happiness, was nothing but an heap of most barbarous cruelty.

This Letter written to the King of Spain, and intercepted near to Lions by
the Lord of Chasseron, and sent to the King: the original whereof was seen
and is to be seen daily, gives us clearly to understand, that the Jesuits
and other traitors to France, have no other mark to shoot at during all
these wars, but to make the King of Spain Monarch of all Christendom. The
common Proverb of these hipocrites is, one GOD, one POPE, and one KING of
Christendom, the great King Catholic and universal.

All their thoughts, all their purposes, all their actions, all their sermons,
all their confessions, have no other white they aim at, but to bring all
Europe under the subjection of Spanish government. And because they see no Sea
wall so strong as the French Empire is, to keep of this great inundation, they
busy themselves about nothing so much, as to break insunder, to dismember, to
ruinate it by all manner of seditions, divisions, and civil wars, which they
cease not daily to kindle in it, laboring with might and maine especially to
extinguish the Kings house, which they see brought to a few Princes. And
indeed, who was it that of purpose, to make the race of Monsieur the Prince of
Conde Loys de Bourbon, (in which rare consists the most part of the blood
royal) execrable and abominable to all Frenchmen, published amongst us, that
he caused himself to be crowned King of France, but the Jesuits? who were so
impudent and shameless in a matter notoriously known to all the world to be
false, as to write in the life of Ignatius page 162. that the Prince had caused
French crowns to be coined with this inscription: Lewis the 13. by the grace of
God the first Christian King of the French, which is a most arrogant
inscription, say they, and injurious to all the most Christian Kings of
France. They say not, ought to be, as of a matter doubtful, but, is, as of a
matter certain.

O you noble Princes, children of such a Father, why do you not with our own
hands execute these deceivers of the world, which seek to ingraue as it were,
and imprint upon your foreheads the foulest and most shameful mark that may
be thought of in the world.

But what do I stand upon? upon reproaches done to the dead? alas, their
purpose and burning zeal is to murder the living: was it not in the College
of Jesuits at Lion, and also in the College of Jesuits in Paris, that the
resolution was last taken to murder the King in August 1593. Are not the
depositions of Barriere executed at Melun, notorious to all the world? and do
not those depositions make all true French hearts tremble and quake, all them I
say, that have not built their plottes and hopes upon the death of the King?
was it not Varade principal of the Jesuits, so chosen by them, as the
honestest and best Jesuit, that exhorted and encouraged this murderer,
assuring him that he could not do a more meritorious work in the world, then
to murder the King though he were a Catholic, and that for this deed he should
go straight to Paradise? And to confirm him the more in this mischievous
resolution, did he not cause him to be confessed by another Jesuit, whose name
can not be known, and may happily be in this Town lying in wait for like
occasions? what more? Did not these impious, godless, and execrable murderers,
give this Barriere the Sacrament, employing the most holy, most precious, and
most sacred mystery of our Christian Religion, toward the murdering of the
chiefest King of Christendom? But how glad would they be, to be guilty rather
of the fact committed, then of the fact intended?

The shop of Satan, wherein are hammered and forged all the murders that have
bin executed or attempted in Europe, within these forty years: the right
successors of the murderers that murdered Raimond Earl of Tripoly, Conrard the
Marquis of Monferrad, Edward son of the King of England, and many other great
Princes. Their Bishop also whom they worshipped (as the Jesuits do their
General, always a Spaniard) caused a Pollarful of two edged sharp knives to
be carried before him, and the minister that carried it, cried: Get you back,
fly away before him who holds the death of Princes in his hands.

There was a murdering Jesuit taken of late in Flanders, who deposed at his
death, that there was another sent out of Spain to murder the King. Helas,
what can we tell whether he be now in the College of Jesuits or no, waiting
his fit opportunity, until the king come hither? For to show that the Jesuits
can not disauow their companions of such enterprises, and that the highest
point of their Honor stands in executing such murders, terming them Martyrs
which have spent their lives therein, there are above three thousand persons
that know, that Comolet preaching at Christmas last in Saint Bartholomews
Church, took for his theme the third chapter of the Book of Judges, where it
is reported that Ehud slew the King of Moab, and escaped away, and after that he
had discoursed at large upon the death of the late King, and exalted and placed
amongst the Angels, this Tigre, this devil incarnate, James Clement the
murderer, he fell into a great exclamation: We have need of an Ehud, we have
need of an Ehud, were he a Friar, were he a Soldier, were he a Lackey, were he
a shepherd, it made no matter: Needs we must have an Ehud, one blow would
settle us fully in the estate of our affairs, as we most desire.

Behold my good Lords, behold again and again, behold, I say, to how high a
degree, our blockishnesse, or rather our negligence, (pardon me I beseech you
for my so saying, grief and anguish of heart forces me to it) caused the
boldness, the pride, the rashness, the impudency of such traitors, of such
spials of Spain, of such murderers, to clime, and to mount up, as to be so
bold as to use the Pulpit for a place to sound out the murder of Kings in.
This is their pure doctrine. Allyn head of the College of Seminaries at
Rhemes, has written a book expressly of it. And to this effect, when William
Parrie was executed, he confessed that Benedicto Palmio a Jesuit had informed
him, that it was lawful to kill and murder all Kings and Princes excommunicate
by the Pope. Upon which point having afterward had conference with a learned
Priest called Vates, he told him, that it was a false proposition, and that he
should be damned if he did so: And in this doubtfulnes and contrariety of
opinions, Parry went to confession to one Annibal Codreto a Jesuit dwelling in
Paris, (this is the man that wrote in a book imprinted at Lions, that their
Society took their name hereuppon, because God had given them for companions
to his Son Jesus Christ, and Jesus had accepted them for his companions) this
Codreto told him, that it could not be but Vates was an heretic, assuring him,
that he could not do a more meritorious work, and that the Angels would carry
him into Heaven.

You Kings and Princes of the earth, what assurance can you promise your
selves of your lives within your Palaces, and in the midst of your Gardes, if
this deuillish proposition, vomitted out of the bottomless pit of hell, do once
seize the hearts and minds of your people, as the Jesuits cease not daily and
hourly to beat it into their heads by their cursed confessions, whereunto
also they are bound by their rules: Let them lay hands upon tirants, and pluck
up darnel out of the Lords field. They have an article in their Bulls and
Statutes, which tends to no other end. They stay not for any year of
probation, but receive all fish that comes to their net, that are ready to
take their vows, which being once done, though the party be very simple, yet
without repeal forever, the Votarie that has given his word, is bound to the
General, and yet may the General displace him at his pleasure, until he be
professed: a matter that falls not out sometimes in the space of 25. or
thirty years after.

How comes it to pass, that the condition of these men, is so strange, so
extraordinary, so unequal, that this contract between them cannot be
reciprocal? To the end that when a man has bin holden in suspense sometimes
for the space of 25. years amongst them, if any inheritances fall unto him,
then will they take him in, but if none befall him, they may remove him,
unless he undertake to execute whatsoever they will command him: so that, he
that has spent all his youth amongst them, seeing himself on the one side
brought to beggerie, and on the other side fed with fair promises of assured
Paradise, will easily resolve with himself either to be a murderer himself,
or to exhort, confess and minister the Sacrament to all murderers that come.

As often as I call to mind into what extremity of miseries, both every one of
us in particular, and the state of France in general should have bin brought,
in case this murder so cunningly persuaded, so lively imprinted in Barrieres
heart by Varade principal of the Jesuits, had bin executed, the horrible
servitude that France should have bin in at this day, the insolent pride and
triumphs of the Spaniards, and the miserable estate of this great City, where
the infant of Castile would have proudly commanded, I must needs confess,
that choler and just indignation, makes me as it were besides my self, to see
that yet these traitors, these wretched caitifes, these manquellers, these
murderers of Kings, continue amongst us, live amongst us, enjoy the benefit
of the air of France: And how live they? They are in the Palace, they are
made much of, they are supported, they make leagues, they make factions, and
all sort of new alliances and associations. What? Alas, if God so permit that
within these few days some Jesuit, or other set on work by them, be
apprehended, as he of Melun was, think you, how many soever you be that
support them in your discourses, wherein you think your selves wise,
considerate, advised, and to speak in a word, Spaniards, think you, I say,
that you shall be in safety amongst us? No, no, in all other matters, man
cannot be too modest, and of good stay of himself: but when the life, the
safety, the preservation of this so sacred a person, so necessary for France,
as without whom the state would be undone, would be eclipsed for ever, and
forthwith become one of the provinces of Spain, comes in question, herein, I
say, a man can not be too hot. He that is cold, he that is modest in this case,
is a traitor: virtue in such cases stands in excess not of affections only,
but of passions also. Though the might of all nations were conspired against
us, though all the world were in an uproar about us, though the Seas were full
of Nauies, though monstrous and strange beasts were brought in upon us, yet
would thou keep us unconquered, O most unconquerable Sovereign: but who
can promise that this Pillar and Star of France shall continue for ever, in
case that these wretched caitifes that do nothing but practice daily against
his life, if they that receive these murderers sent from Lions whilst it
rebelled, and now from Spain: if they, I say, that make the hearts of the
religious desperate, that daily sharpen the edge of the peoples hearts against
his Majesty, be maintained and preserved in this state.

But they instruct the youth, what to do? to desire and wish for the death of
their Kings. Far be it from us to mollify and sweeten the punishment due to
the Jesuits for their heinous crimes, because they instruct some youth: Nay
rather, this ought to be a motive to induce us to aggrauat and augment it an
hundred fold. For it is this goodly instruction of your youth, it is these
cursed propositions which they still into their tender minds, under a pretense
of teaching of them learning, (as poisons are not given, but sweetened with
sugar, and vices deceive not but under the show and shadow of virtues) it is
these bold confessions, (where, without witnesses they paint not the faces but
the hearts of their scholars with the tincture and painting of rebellion
against their Prince and Magistrates) that has filled so many places, and so
many dignities with Spanish hearts, enemies to the King and his state.

The tender age of Children drinks up error with the first milk. Some of
their scholars have rejected their persuasions, and they do hate them a
thousand fold more, then such as never knew them: but where one has resisted
them, a thousand have bin marred.

We read in the 52. of Dion, that Maecenas showed Augustus, that there was
none so good a way to establish a peaceful state to himself and people, as to
cause the nobility of Rome to be taught and instructed by such Scholemasters,
as loved the state of a Monarchy. For the world alters and changes in short
time, and this youth shall forthwith be advanced to great offices. In like
sort, nothing can be more dangerous, then to have our youth taught by these
Spanish spialles; who above all things hate the French Monarchy.

It is a very easy matter to imprint such an affection as a man will, in these
weak minds: and nothing harder then to disroote them. For the precepts that
are learned in our tender years, take deep root. It was not the river of
Eurotas that made men warlike, but the good institution of Licurgus. It is not
the river of Seine, or the river of Garonne that has made so many wicked
Frenchmen: but the colleges of the Jesuits at Paris, Toulouse, and Bordeaux.
Since such Scholars came to charges, the manors of our auncesters fell not away
by little and little: but ran down headlong like to violent floods, and raging
streams.

Christian religion has all the marks of true Justice and profit, but none so
apparent as the exact and precise charge of due obedience to Magistrates and
preservation of government: and these people, which term themselves the
fellowship of Jesus, have no other matter they shoot at, but to turn all
lawful magistracy vpside down, to establish the tirannie of Spain in all
places: and to this end do they frame and fashion the minds of youth,
committed unto them to be instructed in good literature, religion, and piety.

Oh Lord, what nightish darkness possesses the hearts of men even for the
very bent to wickedness. Tereus is taken to be godly, and reapeth praise by
lewdnes.

The Carthaginians sacrificed their children to Saturn, their Fathers and
mothers being constrained to be present and assisting to the sacrifice, with
cherefull countenance. It is a strange thing that we have seen the time, when
a man was not accounted a Catholic, unless he put his children to schole to
a Jesuit: and such as ben brought up in this College, had their pasports to
go whither they would, no man was to make inquiry what condition of life they
were of. So that Parents framing themselves to the time, were constrained to
lose their Children, which were either charmed, or very often utterly murdered,
as it were, if they found them to their vent. There are too many miserable
examples hereof, known well enough to every man, and publik complaints left to
posterity for this wickedness, against these cruel manstealers that bereave
Parents of their Children, and oftentimes spoil the^ of the supporters and
pillars of their houses, as it befell to Airault the Sheriff of Angers, who
having eight small Children in his old age, was by the Jesuits robbed of his
eldest Son, who might by this time have succeeded his Father in his rome, and
become a father to his younger Brethren and Sisters. They stale him from him
when he was about foreteene years of age, and kept him in Italy and Spain,
so that he could never hear news of him, notwithstanding all admonitions, and
ecclesiastical censures that he could procure against them, which they make
but a mock of, contenting themselves with an absolution sent them from their
Spanish general.

In the mean while, when Airault shall come to die, the Jesuits will put in
foot for the right of the eldest son in his goods and living: for they never
bring any of their nouices to the vow of poverty, until they have no hope of
any succession: and before they become professed, they give all their goods to
the College. So nothing goes out of their clouches, all comes in: both by
Intestates and by wills which they hunt after every day, on the one side fearing
the weak minds of such as are at deaths door with the terrors of Hell, and
on the other side, promising them open Paradise if they give any thing to the
Fellowship of Jesus. As Maldonat did to S. Andre president of Montbrun, drawing
from him by a confession full of covetousness and masked iugling, all the
moueables and gains he had gotten by his many years travail and service, of
which monstrous abuse and treacherous fraud Monsieur Pibrac complained of in
full Court. The world knows what a manner of Testament and Will they caused
Gondran the president of Dijon to make, by which Will and Testament he gave
half a Crown to his sister his only heir, and seven thousand Franckes in
land a year to the Jesuits. It is well known how they robbed the house of
Bollons, one of the richest houses in all Bordeaux. And of late, how they
received for the right of inheritance of the house of Monsieur de Largebaston
president, the land of Faiolles, which they sold for twelve thousand Crowns,
and sent the money into Spain, to be put into their Treasorie there: for they
keep nothing in France, but only the immoueables which are bequeathed them
without power of alienation.

It is also notoriously known, how they stole away the only brother of the
Marquis of Canillac, a Gentleman at this day of eight thousand Francks of
revenue, and heir apparent to above five and forty thousand, whom they keep
with good advise from entering into the vow of poverty, because they stand in
good hope to become Lords and Masters of the succession of his elder brother,
who is unmarried, and one that daily hazardeth his life in the Kings wars for
his service, and is his Liuetenant in Auuergne. And without doubt, if that
noble man fail, if they have no worse success in their judgments then they
have had hethervnto, they will become Marquises of Canillac, and so pull down
this house, which is at this day one of the greatest, and mightiest, and of
greatest honor in all Britanie.

Our nation has bin always charged with want of wisdom. As for justice,
liberality, valor and courage, we have enough; yea too much: but too too
little wisdom. What a careless stupiditie is this, that such Caterpillars as
these are, under a color of disdain to take a couple of sous, and other
usual auailes that are given to Scholemaisters for instructing men's children,
have gotten within these thirty years two hundred thousand Francks of revenue.

In our University, there was never any thing taken of the poorer sort: but if
a Gentleman's son give four or five crowns to his Reader, for his years
travail, is this any great matter? Is it not reason, for him that has spent
his years in learning to have some little maintenance to buy him an handsome
gown withal: To deny this, were not only not to recieue a poor student,
but utterly to sink him. Heretofore poor young men found the means to be
entertained of the richer sort till twenty or two and twenty years, and so
began to get something: which caused every year a thousand more to give
themselves to study, then otherwise would have done. But since the Jesuits
have drawn all scholars to themselves, men are become out of heart: for take
away reward of studies, and learning fails.

All the greatest and most excellent personages of ancient time were of opinion
that it was reason, that such as took pains in bringing up their youth in
learning should be recompensed: and besides reason, they thought it very
requisite and necessary.

And yet notwithstanding these fellows following the steps and practice of
cunning impoisoners, (which always mix their drammes of poison finely and
subtly with some sweet and delicate ingredient) have devised none so fit a
way to draw away al scholars unto themselves, as the refusing of these simple
and small contributions or allowances. For licencious youths had rather spend
the money their parents send them in dishonest houses, then give it to their
Tutors, that all the year long travail for them.

Yet this were nothing, were it not for the inchantements and sorceries
wherewith they bewitch youths. But as the Romans were very careful to bring
up the nobility of France at Authun, where they trained them up to the love of
the Empire, and to forget the ancient liberty of France: even so the tyrant
of Spain has his Jesuits dispersed in France, to imprint the love of his name
and of his government in the tender minds of our children. God has planted
heavenly seeds in the bodies of men, which if a good husband have the
cultifying of, the fruit falls out answerable to the seed: but if an evil
husband have them in hand, he deddeth them, as barren and marish ground does;
and so for good corn reapeth nothing but weeds. And take we what pains we
can to weed out such opinions, our labor is but cast away, and our time lost.
For the stomach being once distempered by a disease, it alters the nature of
all the meats it receaueth. So that we have no other remedy but the fear of
Laws, and enforcements, as great hatreds must be bridled with great dreads:
but that obedience is always more loyal and more acceptable, that proceeds
from love, then that that is grounded upon fear. They that are stong with the
Serpent Dipsas, have a continual drouth, through the force of the poison
scattered through all the veins and drying up the store of blood, in so much
as the sick man does nothing but drink, and yet his thirst can never be
quenched: In like sort they that have once tasted of this venomous and
pestilenciall instruction of the Jesuits, thirst continually after the
disquieting of the repose and quiet state of their Countries, and the
advancement of the government of Spain.

The history of Portugal is well known: K. Philip had an eye upon that his
neighbor kingdom a long time: but bring it to his subjection he could not
unless he procured the Kings death, and the death of the greatest part of the
Nobility. In this service he employed the Jesuits which were about King
Sebastian, who call themselves in that Country, Apostles: these fellows
having by their sly and subtle practices berest him of all his old servant,
especially of Peter of Alcassonne his Secretary, and persuading him to go
over into Afrike against his enemies, ten thousand times stronger then all the
power he had or was able to make, caused him to undertake the voyage, where he
lost his life, and the lives of all the Nobility almost of Portingal. During
the regiment of the Cardinal, which was not long, the Jesuits bestirre
themselves so well with their practices, that incontinently after the Cardinals
death, and Antonie received and acknowledged King by all the states of the
Country, he was forced to sly the land, (all his Maritime and port towns
being fallen from him in one day), and save his life by travail on foot more
then four hundred miles. The Isles of Tercere held out yet for King Antonie,
which was a good footing and stopped all the trafficque of the Indies, the
Frenchmen took part with them, under the conduct of the Commander of Chattes.
All the inhabitants of the Islands, all the Monks, and Friars, and the rest
showed themselves most loyal and affectionate to their King, and sworn
enemies to the Castillians. But on the contrary side the Jesuits which had
bin the instruments of the revolt of the kingdom, began to thunder against
the French, and exalt King Philip. What did they then? In lieu of casting them
into the sea, or at the least, of driving them out of the land, they were
conte^tonely to shut them up with in their cloister. All this is largely
discoursed in the History imprinted at Gennua, by the commandment of the K.
of Spain, and is wholly to his advantage. Moreover all that is there set down
touching the Jesuits, is set down for their reputation and honor, as men
that had bin the principal instruments of the union of Portingal to Castile:
as their travail at this day is to no other end and purpose, but to unite the
kingdom of France to the crown of Spain.

What did the Jesuits? when they saw their time, in a night they brake down
the wall that rampired up their gates, and carried the sacrament of the Altar
before them, making but a scorn of God in abusing his mysteries to raise
seditions withal: and began to conjure the people so well, that they appalled
and cooled their courages, so that the French conducted thither by the Marshall
Strossy could have no aid nor assistance from them, which was the cause of his
discomu^ture. And here you are to mark how the History reports that four
score Noble men, and two and fifty French Gentlemen were boucherly put to
death by a Spanish decree in one day, upon one scaffolde in Ville franche, and
a number of Soldiers hanged. The same history reports, how that during this
war, five hundred Friars, or other Religious persons which had preached or
spoken for King Antonie, had bin put to death. Behold the precepts of the
Jesuits. Kill, murder, hang, play the Bouchers: We see also in France, that
they that go to their confessions, and be norsed at their breasts, are so
cruel, that they kill one another.

Marcelin in his 27. says, that about the River Euxinus there was a people
called Odrisae, which were so accustomed to shed the blood of man, that if they
had no store of enemies, they would in their feasts and bankets lance their
own flesh. These fellows murder one an other, though they have enemies enough
in the field.

Go too then my Lords of the Nobility, follow these disciples of the
Jesuits, to the end they may recompense your services at their best leisure
and pleasure with stabbes of daggers: and for your best avail make some corner
of France a province of the Moors, and from Baetica receive your laws. How
much more honorable were it for you, with your common loyalty and mutual
assistance to save and recover this kingdom.

Therefore take hearts unto you and be of good courage, you brave and
vndoubtable Nobility of France, hold on to conioyne your selves in one army.
God the protector of kingdoms, God that has always cast his eye of
commiseration upon France in the greatest afflictions it ever sustained, will
plant amongst you without doubt, love and concord. He will make your
countenances fearful, your arms strong, he will send his Angels to
strengthen you, that within few days you may root out of France all these
infected, and proud Castillians.

Alexander said that Antipater was outwardly clad with white, but inwardly was
altogether read: So there are a number that in utter appearance are the Kings
servants, and are skilful enough to make their profit of his good fortune: but
within, they are altogether blood read, wholly Spanish. These men that can not
but use the Jesuits to execute their mischievous enterprises, dare not say
openly that it were good to let them continue in France, (for to use any such
speech, and to wear a red cross is all one) but they can say, it is no time
now to rid them from out amongst us, and allege respects wherefore, which I
mean to answer. But first of all it is expedient to beat down their
chiefest bulwark, which stands in the referment to counsel set down in
the year 64. To which I will bring five answers, the least whereof is more
then sufficient.

The first is, that this instance of 64. is failed, not only three, but
thirty years ago. And whereas they say, that the failing of the instance,
has no place in Parliement, that is not so, but when the process is not
discontinued. And as for this matter which is now in question, so far is it
from having bin used, that on the contrary side, the copy of the pleas and
bills have not bin so much as taken out, which is the first act whereby the
party, that is referred to Counsel, receives his first instruction.

The second answer is, that the instance of 64. differs wholly from that
that is tendered at this present: first the qualities are diverse: for the
Jesuits were then plaintifes, and be now defendants. Secondly, the question
was, whether they should enjoy the privileges of the University or no. And now
the question is, whether they are to be cast out of France or no. At that time,
to appoint them to counsel, was to deny them their demand. Now it were as
much as to put to Counsel whether the King should live or no, if in the mean
while, we must entertain these murderers amongst us, that desire nothing more
earnestly then his death.

Thirdly, there is great difference between the year 64. and the year 94. In
64. that mischief was feared, which is fallen out and many would not be
persuaded to conceive it, being deceived by the sugared and honied words of
these hipocrites. Who would have thought at that time, to have seen Spanish
dead paies in Paris, the Spaniardes march up and down in those fair and large
streets, their arms a kenbow, their staring eyes, their frowning foreheads,
their maiesticall and solemn march as soft as foot can fall.

In the year 64. Barnard and Comolet were not heard to call the King,
Holofernes, Moab, and Nero, mainteining that the kingdom of France was
elective and that it belonged to the people to establish the Kings, and
alleging this text of the old Testament, Thou shall chouse thy brother for
King, thy brother, say they, that is not to say, of the self same lineage, or
of the self same nation: but of the same religion, as this great Catholic
king, this great king of Spain. Comelet was so impudent and bold as to say,
very blasphemouslie, that under these words, Deliver me O Lord out of the
mire, that I may not stick in it, David understood prophetically the rooting
out of the house of Bourbon. During these wars they would have erected a
College of Jesuits at Poitiers, saying that a rich and religious Lord would
give eight hundred crowns of revenue for the foundation. And when they had bin
instantly pressed a great while, to discover who this great Lord was, being not
able to name any other, they were constrained maugre their beardes to confess
that it was the King of Spain, who will never think it much to be at such a
charge to entertain such a pernicious and dangerous vermin amongst us as
these Jesuits are. And this was witnessed by all the deputies of Poitiers,
which put to their helping hands to reduce that town to the obedience of the
King.

In 64. the Jesuits had not as yet the Book of life amongst them, wherein
they have sithence kept a record of all that, that they learn by their secret
shriftes of all houses and families, informing themselves by children and
servant, not what their consciences are, but what speech and talk their
parents and masters have commonly in their houses, whereby they may know what
disposition they are of. Comolet preaching at the Bastile before the Gentlemen
that were then prisoners in the beginning of the year 89. said unto them after
a thousand impudent blasphemies, that he that had bin their King was not their
King, plotting from thence the murder which they executed afterward. When
Trouue, and Captain Aubrey were imprisoned in the Bastile by Bussy the Clerc,
the Counsel of the forty, could not get them out: but only Comolet, as an
Orpheus of his own authority, set them at liberty, such was the dependencie
of the sixteen Murderers upon the Jesuits. At what time there came news of
the Popes election that is now, Comolet being come out of the pulpet, went up
again, and began to cry out, Hear thou Politician, I will tell thee news,
we have a Pope, what manner of Pope? one that is a good Catholic? What more?
one that is a good Spaniard. Go and hang thy self thou Politician. The
Jesuits used no such language in the year 64. an ancient writer says, Young
Serpents deceive: when one has passed his natural bigness and is grown to a
monster, when it has infected the fountains, and by breathing burns which
way soever it go, men seek to destroy it with some shot or other: evils
springing may escape, but great are met withal. Titus Liuius says
elegantly, It can not be, but the diseases must be known, before their
remedies can be found out: so did evil motions break out in men, before laws
were made to bridle them. Plato in the beginning of his first book of Laws
says, that Minos, went once in every ninth year to know of Jupiter what
Laws he should give to the Cretensians: because that time bears such a sway
in the change and alteration of al things, that what seems good at one
season, is hurtful at an other. We find by experience, that good Laws, and
honest examples, draw their original from others offenses: for faultiness
goes before punishment, in time: and amendment is the younger brother to
offense.

Speak to the Marquis of Pisany, he will tell you that since the year of 64.
when he was in Spain and Italy, as Ambassador about the affairs of France,
he found no matter of weight, wherein a Jesuit had not an oar. Speak to
them that had the decifering of all the letters of importance, which were
intercepted during these wars, they will tell you, that they never read any
pernicious point, where a Jesuits finger was not. And even lately at Lions,
since the Town yielded to the King, a Jesuit that had begun to say his Mass,
perceiving a Gentleman in the church with a white scarf, ran out of the Church
being full of people of a purpose to raise a sedition: a matter yt they
attempted since, and will no doubt be the loss of that Town being of great
importance, if they be not speedily banished out of the Country by your order
and decree.

Fourthly, who so breaks the modifications and conditions whereupon a grant
is made unto him; is worthy to loose the benefit that he might receive by the
grant. Now since the year 64. the Jesuits have directly broken the conditions
of their advise of Poissy, which is the only allowance they have had in
France. First they have broken them herein, that they have retained their name
of Jesuits, which they were expressly charged not to do, because this glorious
name is particulerly reserved to the only Savior of the world: and there was
never any amongst the Christians to this day found so transported with pride,
as to dare to attribute this name either to himself in particular, or to other
and himself in common. They alone have bin so impudent, as to take this name
in their propositions, by which (through their housed intising and sugared
speech, carrying one thing secreated in their hearts, and another ready at their
Tongues ends) their meaning was within three months to flatter them, whom
they would with all their hearts see instantly plu^ged in the depth of the
Inquisition of Spain. Secondly, they have broken the advice of Poisy, whereby
their College was received, and their profession rejected. For they have bin
so bold as to plant it in way of triumph in the midst of Saint Antonies
street, where they are at this day so impudent, as to have in their cappes the
full arms of France, with a Cardinals hat above, to let us understand that in
despite of ye King to whom they are not bound by oath of fidelity, and whom
they sought and will seek daily to murder: they acknowledged one Charles the
tenth to have bin King of France, under whom they hopes to have wrought with
this Kingdom, as they wrought with the Kingdom of Portingal under another
Cardinal. Thirdly, their advise of Poisy purporteth expressly, that they may not
procure any Bulls contrary to these restraints set down by this act: and in
case they do procure any, they shall stand as none, and of none effect nor
value, which is verifyed upon this very condition. But now they have procured
Bulls so contrary to this advise of Poisy, that whosoever make any
limitations or restrictions against their privileges and institutions, are by
virtue thereof excommunicate with the greatest excommunication, yea whosoever
shall dare to dispute or reason the matter, though it be but only to seek out
the truth. Hear the very words of their bull of 84. And obey their Gouerners
in all things and every way, and be immediately subject to this Sea, and
clearly exempt from the subjection of all ordinaries and delegates whatsoever,
or of any other Judges, as by the virtue of these presents we do also exempt
them. A point directly contrary to this clause of the advise of Poissy. Upon
condition, that the Bishop Diocesan shall have all superintendancie,
jurisdiction, and correction over the said Society and Colleges. And
consequently their advise of Poisly is become void, as well by the course of
law before alleged, as by the clause expressly set down to make it void by
the said assembly. They shall renounce expressly and in plain terms all
privileges given by their Bulls, which are contrary to the points and
articles aforesaid. Otherwise and in want hereof, or in case they do hereafter
obtain any other, they shall be as none, and of none effect nor value. But see
yet a more strange clause set down in their Bull of 84. by which, both we that
speak against them, and you my Lords that are the Judges, and they of Poissy
also, which made the advice, are al excommunicate. We command therefore (upon
their holy obedience and under pain of excommunication of the sentence given,
and of disabling, to all seculer offices and benefices, and reguler of al
orders whatsoever, forthwith to be incurred without further declaration,
reserving to our selves and to our successors only, the absolution from the
same,) that no man of any state, degree, or pre-eminence whatsoever, be so
hardy and bold as either directly or indirectly to impugn or gainsay any
institutions, constitutions, or these presents touching the said society, or
any of them, or of all the foresaid Articles, or any other matter concerning the
same, though it be done in way of disputation only, or to seek out the truth.

Fifthly, and lastly, and to speak plainly without flattery in a matter of such
weight, and a speedy issue whereof all honest men do earnestly desire, who
knows not, how that in Anno 64. there was not a man within this place so
hardy as durst speak freely against the conspiracy of Spain? All good men
were afraid, and speachlesse: when as it was a miserable case to speak what a
man would not; and full of danger to speak what he would willingly speak. The
wheels, the gallowses would not have bin sufficient punishments for them that
durst to have bin so hardy: What think you the^ you Spanish spials you may
allege for your selves at this day to maintain your selves? Will you say,
because you have bin suffered heretofore, nay that is reason sufficient to
banish you out of France, to wit, your force, your violence, your tyranny, and
the tyranny of your supporters, of your Spaniards, which have bound our hands,
which have stopped our mouths, which have made you so courageous, which have
made you speak so proudly, which have set you so hie: you I say, most wicked
varlets with your bloody hands, most pestilent and proud through your
insatiable covetousness, you that have no regard of loyalty, you that are void
of God and all honesty, to be short, you that make your gain of all things
be they honest or dishonest.

But they be not wicked varlets alone, there is a point that makes them worse:
for if they only had bin wicked themselves, our misery had bin the less. The
great number of Frenchmen whom they have marde, has bin the cause of our
miseries. And yet now they seek to throng themselves amongst this press of
people, and hide their heads, thinking to lessen their fault through the
fellowship of many offenders, as though in this their wicked lewdnes they did
but keep the Kings high way, doing as other men do. But it fares far
otherwise; for the greater the number is of lewd and evil affected subjects,
the greater is the harvest of the Jesuits, for these are their fruits; And why
is not this whole sink of Sixteen and their adherentes, upon their way to
Spain? Why are they not banished for ever out of the air of France, which
they have poisoned this long while? What do these Jesuits here still? what do
they? See we not well enough what they do? What vndermininges, what violences,
what corruptions, what seditions have they not already committed and done?
Believe me my Lords, they lose no time; such busy heads, most sharp in
devising, most impudent in attempting, most vigilant in effecting, are not
unprofitable: they receive packets daily from Spain, and from all corners of
France, and deliver them at Soissons: they carry their Packets out of the town
themselves, (for to rifle and search a Jesuit, were to commit high treason
against God himself, neither was there ever any Captain that durst to this day
attempt such an act,) they receive into their chamber of counsel all that will
devise or contriue any thing against the state of the town; if only they will
but make a show to resort to their Churches, or confess to their Jesuits what
practice is intended by any man against any of the Sixteen, which do nothing
but practice our destruction? Shall we still suffer our selves to be abused by
these hipocrites? Shall we be still like to the Barbarians, that made but a
scoff of the fortifications which the enemies made against their walls,
until they found their walls beaten down about their ears, and their Town
foolishlie lost? Shall we suffer our enemies to gather together the pieces of
their shipwrecke? Shall we suffer the Jesuits to fasten the knots again of
their practices, and frame a new their faction in the consciences of the
people, which are always the greatest number?

In all this action, this is the strangest point to behold and consider, what
delays, what formalities of Justice have bin used, and how upon the sudden,
and even at a very instant, taking not so much leisure as to breath
themselves, they could defend by briberie and corruption, what they committed
by mischievous wickedness. We have not banished them as they did at Bordeaux,
which was the brauest and most honorable act that the Mareshal of Matignon ever
did, though he stand renowned and highly thought of, and so will in the memory
of al posterity for many noble victories achieved by his hands. But this
blow of resolution which he gave, was a means of the preservation of Guyenne,
which otherwise had bin lost, and would have drawn after it even at that
instant, the loss of all the rest.

O brave and noble Mareshall, thou fearedst not the reproaches, the wicked
tongues, the stinking vomits of these amongst us, that falsely terming
themselves the Kings servants, do foster, do maintain, do support, and
favor his most cruel, most detestable, most coniured enemies: Howbeit in the
end they shall all come to naught, and that most shamefully together with their
Jesuits, notwithstanding their goodly and colorable pretenses, the chiefest
whereof is this.

What will they say at Rome? Oh, what do they speak of Monsieur the Marshall of
Matignon? will you know what they say at Rome: Let us distinguish the speakers:
The Spaniardes will say, that they which banished the Jesuits out of France,
are all of them Heretics. Have they any other talk in their mouths? I will
not speak only of our selves that have followed the King and his fortune, but
also of them that tarried here in the Town, and yet courageously, and with
evident peril of their lives, opposed themselves against the abolishing of the
Salique law. Did not the Spaniards say, that they were all Lutherans and
Heretics?

On the other side, they that are at Rome and in Italy, and are not
Spaniardes, they I say, will say, that this is the time wherein the French men
will show themselves to be French men in deed, frank and free, and sworn
enemies to the Spaniards. This is the time wherein they manifest to the world,
that they are quick of sight, and look into their state aright, by driving
out from amongst them these spialles of their enemies: to be short, this is
the time wherein they mean to live in strengthfull and assured health, now
that they purge these melancholic and ouerburnt, and most malicious humors out
of the body of their common wealth. But though the Jesuits be dangerous to
France, yet at the least they have wrought mighty wonders amongst the Indian
people. True it is, and such wonders indeed, as we have good cause to take
knowledge of: for they have caused twenty millions of those poor souls, as
their own history reports, and terms them lambs, to be consumed by fire
and sword of the Castilians. They have weeded out the paganism, not by
converting the Pagans, but by playing the bloody bouchers with them. Their
manner of dispeopling of the Island called Spaniola, is much to be marked. They
put all the men a part to work in their mines, and the women they forced to
cultify the earth: so that keeping them from generation, and using all the
cruelty they could against the living, in less then 12. years they inhabited
the whole Island which is not small, with Castilians. In Peru they have public
places of torture within the marches, wherein they may put a thousand at once,
and there the Soldiers and the Lackies torment these poor people, thereby to
make them confess where their treasure is. And if any of them escape out, they
go and hang themselves in the mountains and their wives by them, and their
poor children at their feet. These monsters of tirannie, do as ordinarily
hunt after men, as we do after the Bucke and Stagge, causing their dogs to
devour the^, and their Tigers, when they send them to seek honey and wax,
and also by their Tuberons when they cause them to go a fishing for perles in
the most dangerous parts of the sea. If they carry out any of these poor
people to war with them, they give the^ nothing to live on, but constrain
them to eat their enemies, so that the Spanish armies are very boucheries of
the flesh of man. And yet we maruail at the cruelties which they use in these
parts of the world, which are but fleabitinges, or honey soppes rather in
comparison of that that they can do. Their covetousness was so extreme, that
they laded their ships with thrice as many more of these poor silliones then
their ships could bear, or they had victual for, in so much, that they cast so
many of them over board, that to pass from ye Isle of Lucaies unto Spaniola,
which is a good distance, a man needed not any compass, but only the trace
of these poor Indians dead floting upon the sea, where they had cast them.

O ye Frenchmen behold, again and again, behold I say; the great favor of
God toward us in drawing us out of the slavery of this monstrous and
prodigious nation: Chains and Irons should have bin your best intertainment,
full Argoses of you should have bin carried to the Indies to work in their
mines, whilst they had placed Colonies in your Towns, and given your houses
in the country for a reward: And yet notwithstanding, this murdering and
casting in chains and Irons, all the true Catholics, and to leave none in
France but Atheists, robbers, murderers, incests, and pensioners of Spain,
should have bin termed nothing but the planting of the Catholic Religion.

But if the Jesuits be so wicked, why is there not an indictment framed against
them? I answer you, that Monsieur the Kings Attorney general knows how to
prosecute that which he thinks best, but the matter which the university,
(the Kings eldest daughter, who can not hold her tongue from crying out against
them that would murder her father) calls upon, is, that all the rest may be
banished out of the realm, whilst the other be arrained that are in hold: the
danger that we are in, will not well abide slow working medecines and lingering
Physicians. The history of the humble Friars, and of the Cardinal Bouromee is
very notorious and fresh in memory: one of these Friars would have murdered
the Cardinal. Upon the instant that old order was put down, and all that were
of it banished out of Italy by Pope Pius the fifth rightfullie so called, for
that he most occupied himself in making leagues against the Turk, whereas
others busy themselves in making leagues against France. And shall not the
Jesuits at this day be bani^hed, that would have murdered the K. of France,
and for letting Varade that murderer break prison, and sending him away? They
that defend this proposition, make more account of the life of a Cardinal,
then of a King of France, the eldest son and protector of the Church.

By the civil law, all the issue of that man that practices ye death of the
Prince, even to the very child that sucketh the mothers breasts, are
dishenherited and brought to misery: so fearful is the example of treason,
and shall we preserve the companions of Varade, ye have vowed the self same vow
that he did, that have the same desire and purpose that he had, that holy him
away. Whenever one Jesuit, shall attempt ye murder of one of our Kings, shall
he only be banished? This is a good proposition, and well worthy to be
maintained, that it is better that twenty Kings of France be murdered, then
all the Jesuits should be banished France. They that are of this opinion, care
not how many Kings we change.

If they were to be executed as the Templers, their inditements would be
framed. But what say the Jesuits? That they came into France for our good:
yea but experience has showed us, that they have caused our ruin. What
needs further indictment? seeing they advance our enemies so greatly. There
is an excellent saying in Tacitus to this purpose. O noble Counselors, if we
look no further, but consider with what vile language they have abused men's
ears, prisons and gallowses are too good for them. It is time you hasten to
judgment, that neither they may escape scotfree, nor you repent your selves of
your severity mixed with clemency: let them be dispatched with fire and water.
Behold a good judgment for the Jesuits.

Moreover, happily before the year 85. this formalising might have bin
tolerated, for until that day their lewdness and treachery was shadowed
with a goodly mask, but now they go so open faced, that we need neither
letters nor witnesses. Quintilian says finely. There be some crimes of
treason against the commonwealth, which may be sufficiently condemned by the
view of the eye.

And Seneca to this purpose in the tenth book of his controversies says,
whether the common wealth be hurt or no, it is not to be proved by arguments,
the hurt of the commonwealth appears forthwith. He that should have laid
hands on Julius Caesar, had there bin any need of confro^ting of witnesses to
prove that he had passed the Rubicon, that he had entered into Italy with an
army, and taken the treasure of the commonwealth? The painters and Poets give
a naked sword to Justice, to give us to understand that we may not always
stand upon doubts and tract of time: neither play the part of evil
Chirurgians, who for want of healing the sore in due time, protract the cure so
long, till the strength of the patient be utterly cast down and not possible
to be restored.

But what call we notorious? All our Doctors define it in one word, to be
that, that is done before the people. And I would to God that the crimes of the
Jesuits were not so great, so certain, and notorious as they are, then should
we not have suffered so much misery as we have.

O that I might plead, and not overcome?
O wretch that I am, why is my cause so good?
But they have left nothing to the Counseler for him to break his head
withal: for, to deny matters, that are as clear as the Sun, increases the
fault, and confuteth it not. Philo the Jew, writing upon the ten
commandments, speaking of the voice of God, gives a good reason why we are
said to see the word. Because says he, that that which God speaks is not
only a bare word, but a work. It is an usual and common Proverb amongst
us, the voice of the people is the voice of God, whereby is meant the voice of
the best sort and not of the multitude. Because they speak of such things as
they know, of things which have bin seen, and wherein they can not lie.

But some will say that the Jesuits are not all strangers: as though the
Spaniards by adoption, and by oath, had not done us more harm then the
natural Spaniards. I will rather take them for Citisens, which are borne in
the remotest place of all Scythia, and yet think well of France, then they
that are borne of Paris and brought up there, and employ themselves most
unnaturally and wickedly, to destroy the place, liberty, and honor of their
country wherein they were borne. Comolet, Bernard, and such like, are they not
Frenchmen borne, and yet are there any of any nation that have so impudently
vomited out all sorts of blasphemous speeches against his Majesty, and the
memory of the King that dead is, as they have done? Are there any men in the
world that have travailed so much as they have done to turn the state vpside
down? for if a man make a show of religion, he may do what he will under that
pretext, his penny is good silver: to murder or cause Princes to be murdered,
which are excommunicate by the Pope, is the chiefest part of their sending.
Varade himself, the encourager, and pusher on forward of that Murderer of
Melun was he not a Parisien? Oh sir, the Jesuits would have bin banished out
of France long ago, had there bin no other Spaniards amongst us but such as
are natifes and borne beyond the mountains of Pirene. The pleasures and
exceeding great favors, which King Philip bestows upon the Jesuits, makes
it notorious enough, how that he makes account of them as of his good
subjects, and instruments of his soueraintie. The great Jesuitical Argosee,
which fetches their gold and Marchandises from the Indies, (for they draw from
all parts of the world, to increase their treasure in Rome and Spain withal)
this great vessel, I say, pays no fifth to King Philip. A matter of more
value to them, then two hundred thousand crowns a year. For their part of the
conquest of Portingal, he gave them the present which the kings of the East
Indies paid from three years to three years to the King of Portingal, which
is worth in Gold, and Pearls, and Spicerie, more then four hundred thousand
crowns. In recompense of which bounty, they speak of him, as of the greatest
Prince that ever was in the world, far surmounting the force of the Romans,
and having more countries under him then all the Kings of the world.

Go on ye Spanish souls to praise and magnify the forces of the King of
Castile, he will make you all Cardinals, as well as Tolledo the Spanish
Jesuit. They will no small benefices, (and yet for the better maintenance of
their table, they unite and knit many Priories and Abbeys together) but they
will be Cardinals; to the end they may be Popes, this is good fish for their
nets. Who was it that brought that bold and proud message to Monsieur of
Neuers, but this Jesuitical Spanish Cardinal? Who was not ashamed to say to
him in January last, that the three Prelates, which were present at his
Majesty's conversion, should be made to come before the Cardinal of S. Seuerin
chief of the Inquisition, for absolution for that fact. What a shame, what
blasphemy against God and his religion, to demand absolution, for the best
work, the holiest work, the profitablest work, and most necessary work
that could be done in Christendom? But because it was discommodious,
damageable and hurtful to the King of Spain, the Jesuits will ever condemn
it, and judge it worthy penance and absolution. Hereupon it came, that at the
first brute of his holy conversion, they sent Du Puy from Paris to Rome, at
this day their Prouincial, to persuade the Pope that it was but a fained matter.

But now it irketh them that time is so far spent and so many darts plucked
out. How can we doubt to banish these Murderers, seeing that since the year
1550. (as Monsieur the Counseler of Mesnil has well observed it in his plea)
when the Jesuits presented their letters, signed in the presence of the
Cardinal of Loraine, and grounded upon their admission in Spain, (a goodly
consideration surely) these letters were simply and absolutely refused by the
Court, assembled the two half years. And four years after, upon a second
instancie by the Jesuits, the Court would know the opinion of the Sorbone,
which being assembled by four days space together (the holy Ghost no doubt
being their director and president) moved as it may seem by an instinct from
above, rejected them, counting them a most dangerous and most pernicious
company, for the state of the Kingdom and for Religion, and such as would
cause many quarrels, divisions and dissentions amongst the French nation. And
because it may be apparent, that we add nothing of our own heads, behold the
very words of the decree of Sorbone, which in few words, sets down the
misery that we have received by this new and dangerous sect.

This new fellowship, challenging unto it self the unwonted name of Jesus, so
losely and unadvisedly without any discreet choice receiving into their
fellowship tag rag, be they never so lewd, wicked, and infamous, carrying no
difference from seculer priests in their outward habit, in shauing of their
crowns, in saying their canonical hours privately, or singing them openly in
the Church, in cloisters and silence, in difference of meats and days in
fastinges, and diverse other rites and ceremonies, (whereby states of religion
are severed one from the other and mainteyned) endowed with so many and sundry
privileges, licenses and freedoms, especially in the administration of the
Sacrament of penance and Eucharist, and that without difference of places, or
parsons, also in the office of preaching, reading and teaching, in prejudice of
Ordinaries, yea of Princes and te^porall Lords, against the privileges of
Universities, to the great burden of the people, seems to be against the
honesty of monastical religion, it weakeneth the studious, godly, and
necessary exercise of virtues, abstinencies, ceremonies, and austeritie of
life, yea that more is, it opens a gappe, to a general Apostasy from other
religions: it withdraws from Ordinaries that subjection and obedience that is
due unto them, it spoileth as well the Lords temporal as the Spiritual of
their rights and Jurisdictions, it brings in a confusion into both policies,
many quarrels amongst the people, many strifes, discordes, contentions,
emulations, rebellions, and sundry schisms. These things therefore diligently
weighed and considered, this fellowship seems to be a dangerous thing for the
matter of faith, like to be a worker of the disturbance of the peace of the
Church, and an utter overthrow of monastical life and tending rather to the
pulling down then to the building up of the Christian faith.

Before the effects of their conspiracies were known, we maruailed much in our
University, saying what manner of people are these? Are they regulers or
seculers? for we have no third sort. They are not seculers, because they live
in common, have a general, and to be short, make a vow of poverty, and yet
have the whole managing of the goods of their Colleges. Again, they be not
regulers: for they have no rule, nor fasting, nor distinction of meat, neither
are bound to any certain services, and may succeed, though they can not rid
themselves of their oath. They have four or five sorts of vows, Simple,
Compounded, Solemn, Secreete, Public. To be short, they make a hurly burly
and turn all things vpside down, and if you ask them what they are, they
answer you, As you see.

We marueiled greatly, I say at that time, but now we leave. And why so?
Because in a word, they be nether secular nor regular. What than? Nothing but
very spials of Spain, you may term them as you please, they will not read,
if you will not have them; they will take what oaths you will, only with this
prouiso, that you will let them alone, to betray at their pleasure, to play the
spials, to raise false bruites amongst the people, and now for the advantage of
the Spaniard, kindle and blow the fire of our dissensions. This is all they
demand, this is their vow, their profession, their rule, their plottings,
their greatest hap that can befall them.

It is not the Sorbone of Paris only that has condemned them; but in Rome it
self, the honester sort perceiving the plotting of Ignatius the Spaniard,
opposed themselves against this sect. Behold what they themselves do write of
this matter in the life of their Ignatius, page 149. And afterward, upon the
request of Ignatius, that his institution might receive confirmation, the
matter was committed by the Pope to three Cardinals: who labored greatly, that
it might not be received, especial the Cardinal Bartholomaeus Guidicionus, a
godly and learned man, and one that did not like that there should be such a
multitude of religions in the Church of God, as there be now a days, moved
thereunto perhaps by the decrees of the Laterane and Lion Counsels: which two
Counsels do restrain and prohibit the multiplying of new religions, or
peradventure by reason of the decay of discipline which was much altered and
worn out in some of the^, which he thought were more fit to redress, then to
devise and make new. And thereupon it is reported that he wrote a book. So
that he being of this opinion, sharply withstood ours, and of all men, was the
greatest adversary, that our Society had, some few other joined their
endeavors to his. How than came it to pass that it was received, all these
impediments notwithstanding? The promise of the fourth vow of express
obedience to the Pope above all the Princes of the earth. See what they
themselves write of this matter in the self same Page 144. Whose religion,
should be the religion of the reguler clerks, but their purpose is to be at
the Popes commandment, and to frame their lives wholly according to that
rule, which he had long before devised and set down. Which thing the Pope did
willingly give ear unto. the 3. of Sept. at Tibure. Anno 1539.

So that, they were rejected both in France and Italy by all the greatest
Catholics which were no Spaniards: unless peradventure they and their
adherents be so impudent as to say, that the Sorbone was an heretic in the
year 54. when they made that decree against them. As they are so impudent to
publish amongst the women of their congregation, that all they which pursue
this cause, are heretics that come from Geneua and England. And were it not,
that I, that, now speak had not bin known from my childhood, brought up in
the kings College of Navarre, and my profession so notorious, and my
preferment to public and Honorable charges ever the since the year 80. and
85. did not exempt me too too manifestly from their illusions they would
happily imagine that I was sent from some one of those places of purpose to
plead against them. But who shall be counted a good Catholic, that speaks
against the Jesuits, seeing they haus caused the Sorbone to be pronounced
Heretics by the Inquisition of Spain. We learn this of themselves who make
their vaunts, that when they saw this decree of Sorbone against them, they
betook themselves to the Inquisition of Castile, to cause the Sorbone of Paris
and their Decree to be condemned. See, (my good Lords) who should be able to
escape out of the hands of this brutish, barbarous Spanish Inquisition, the
snare laid for all men that oppose themselves against the greatness of Castile,
the bloody shop of all cruelty, the scaffold of all the most tragical,
hideous, and horrible slaughters that can be devised in the world: who, I say,
should be able to escape out of the hands of this Inquisition, seeing the
Sorbone of Paris is condemned amongst them? But where is this condemnacion?
Behold here it is reported in the life of their Ignatius page 403. Furthermore,
because the Decree of Sorbone was against the authority of the Sea Apostolic
which has allowed and confirmed our religion, the Inquisitors of the faith
have by their Decree forbidden it to be read in Spain, as a thing that is
false, and offensive to godly ears.

You may not marvel that the Inquisition is so careful for the Jesuits, for
these two foundations have no other mark they shoot at, but to establish the
tyranny of Castile, over all Europe.

And shall we still continue cold in banishing them, that make provisions in
Spain, against all that we can do in France? To banish them that give all the advice they can to our enemy, that kindle all treasons, corrupt the minds of
all youth, and have no desire in the world, but to murder the King? what will
you look for more? weighty enterprises, must have speedy dispatches, no
delays must be used. Every man is justly provoked against them, the wound of
the miseries which they have wrought us, is yet fresh before our eyes. Either
this Audience shall free France of these new Monsters engendered to dismember
it, or if their subtelties, their crafts, the bruites which they cast abroad,
do maintain them, I tell you plainly and as loud as I can, though they have
found so much favor as to have the doors shut, yet my voice shall pearce
through to the four corners of the Realm, and I will yet consecrate it to the
posterity that will judge without fear, and without passion, who are best
Frenchmen, and most desirous to leave it such a liberty, as we have received
from our fathers, I tell you plain, (and I will stretch out my voice, as loud
as I can) they will do us yet more harm, then ever they did. And I know not
what will become of our strength, whether it will be dismembered or no, I know not
whether our goods and our lives shall be ransacked once again or no.

I conceive nothing in my breast but heavy news. The affairs of the world
pass, and run away in a moment, the idle Mariners tarry a shore, while the
weather is fair. That Judgment is the best, that uses no delays. And to
what purpose are these delays? To give them leisure to come to the mark they
shoot at, full of alarames, yea full of the blood of the best sort. Tigres and
Lions never leave of their cruelty, sometime they will lie still, and when thou
look not for it, their mitigate frowardness becomes worse. O that we
might be so happy all together, as to enjoy our Country freed from all these
miseries, with no less fervent affections and zealous piety, then I am moved
to be earnest in this cause without hatred to any man. My mind can never be of
from this murderer of Melun, and my heart will never be at rest as long as I see
these shreeuing Jesuits and eggers on of such murderers remaining in France.
If they might once be banished, then should I be assured, then should I see all
the mischievous practices of Spain, broken a sunder in France. All the
Brotherhoodes of the name of Ihesus, of Cordon, de la Vierge, de la Cappe, du
Capelet, of the little Collet, and a thousand others would be put out. Then
could not the Traitors, that practice against the State, know to whom they
might address themselves. For, to go to the Ambassador of Spain there is
none amongst us: to go to a suspect person, that would quickly be discovered;
and besides, the papers and writings of private persons, fall after there
death into the hands of the Magistrates, but this Society dies not: and
moreover, under pretense of devotion, the assembly of this Council is always
covert. To be short, of an hundred, that shall repose any confidence in them,
you shall not find two amongst them, that will discover themselves one to
another:

No man shall know this but thou that only art privy to my vows. Even as
therefore the Phisitia^s leave nothing in ye sick bodies, that may be hurtful,
so it behooves us to cut of all whatsoever it may be that may be an impediment
to our liberty. And let us not be like to them that are sick of choler, that
will in no wise take a medicine to rid them at once of that humor, and to
make them whole: but content themselves to take away only some part of the
humor, that does distaste them, and in conclusion pay for it with usury of
extreme grief and anguishes that cut deep into them. As there are certain
sauors which cause them that have the falling sickness come quickly to
themselves again, but yet heal them not, they are good for a while, and are
no remedies for the grief but impediments. No more can the Jesuits be taken
to be within the compass of the Kings declaration, which has this exception
in proper terms? Forprise and excepted the attempt and fellonie committed upon
the person of the King, our most honorable Sovereign and brother, and the
enterprise against our own person: which can in no wise be referred to any
other but to the Jesuits, which sent the murderer first from Lions, and then
from Paris. Moreover the self same Edict of the 4. of April in Anno 1594.
pardons none but such as renounce all leagues and associations as well within
the Realm as without. Now the principal vow of the Jesuits being to obey
their General, who is a Spaniard, in all things, and the Pope, they can by no
means renounce this association which is the strictest in the world, unless
they renounce their society. To be short, they can not be Jesuits, and receive
benefit by the Kings edict, which says in an other place, that such
renouncinges and oath of fidelity must be done within a month. Which the
Jesuits have not accomplished unto this day, neither ca^ they show any act, to
serve for an inducement for us to think, that they had any such purpose: as in
very deed they be not capable of it, for no man can be liege vassal to two
Lords.

There is an old writer says very elegantly, What avails it to be valiant
in the field, and to live lewdly at home? Whiles the King is on horseback to
ruinate, defeat, and put to flight his enemies, and to force towns that hold
out headdily against him, whilst he endures the heat of the So^mer, the
could of the Winter, and indangereth himself daily in the Wars for our
liberty, shall we suffer the Jesuits in all his principal Towns, which do
nothing daily with their confessions but stir up a thousands of new enemies,
and hold secret counsels of rebellion, and all sorts of treasons? As it
avails not against the plague, to be careful of a man's health, for it seizes
one as well as another: So is it to small purpose for Magistrates to be
careful to torment themselves, to trot up and down every way, as long as the
plague continues in the midst of the Town and University, we shall loose our
people by thousands on a plunge.

The Jesuits had never a fairer day in France, then they had in these last
wars, which they could willingly call the golden world, as Commodus did: for
they saw all other Colleges be pestered with their strange garrison, and
spoiled every day by them, they saw all the Scholars with them, and the whole
University brought to the only College of Jesuits, as it is almost at this
day. A man would not believe what slaughters they made in the minds of these
young youths, speaking of nothing in all their discourses and in all their
Themes, but of reasons why it was lawful to murder the King. And yet the
mischief that they have done in Paris, is nothing in comparison of that, that
they have caused to be wrought in other towns.

To think that the interest of the University of Paris is bounded within the
enclosure of their walls, that were to shoot at a wrong mark, and not to
consider the truth of things as they are: For if you stop the springs, which
make great rivers when they be once joined together and come into one, they
must needs dry up. Suffer the Jesuits in all the Provinces, what will become
of your University of Paris think you? And in deed if we compare the high
degree of reputation, which you my Lords, have seen our University in, with
the continual decay thereof since the Jesuits came into France, and settled
themselves in all Towns from whence Scholars came, and the extreme poverty,
misery, and want that it is now brought unto, ready to yield up the Ghost, if
by you, my Lords, her Children, she be not succored in this extremity: is it
not apparent, what just cause she has to complain, and with what regard you
ought to hear her in the request, she now presents to you?

If the day of our preservation be as well welcome to every one of us, as the
day of our birth is to our parents, surely the day wherein the Jesuits shall be
banished out of France, will be as fair and joyful a day as ever was the day of
the foundation of our university. And even as Charles the great after that he
had delivered Italy from the Lombards, Germany from the Hungarians, had made
two iourneies into Spain, and oftentimes subdued the Saxons; erected the
University of Paris, which has bin for eight hundred years space the most
flourishing in the world, in all arts and sciences, and has bin a refuge to
learning banished out of Asia, decayed in Greece, Egypt, and Afrike: So Henry
the great, having chased out the Spaniards by the force of his arms, and
banished the Jesuits by your decree, shall set up our University in her
ancient brightness, and in her former glory, and his name and praise shall for
ever be sounded forth upon our Theaters: His triumphs, his victories, and his
high exploits of arms, shall be for ever the subject of our verses and of our
Panegyriques.

And you, my Lords, that have this good hap, this rare and wishfull bliss,
to be judges of this great and important cause, lift up your cogitations, I
beseech you, stretch them out even to the world to come, your name, your
memory shall be for ever engraven in Letters of Gold, not only in our
University, but in the hearts of all honest men, and in the hearts of all
true Frenchmen.

Thou golden Clio, thou suffer nothing to perish, thou suffer no famous
thing to die, reserving the monument of old ages, to be laid up in future
Books. The titles of labors that would wax old, thou repairest with the
flower of during youth, for thy sake virtue warfareth, at thy beck faults
become appalled.

Therefore, seeing this occasion is offered you, hold it: and bear in mind,
that you are Princes of the most honorable council in the world. Doubt you
not but your decree shall be speedily executed every where. The report thereof
shall no sooner come to other towns, but they will upon the very instant,
banish from amongst them all these Spials of Spain. They that say, that the
Parliament can not make them to depart further then out of the limits of their
jurisdiction, they know not how far the jurisdiction of this Court stretches
in such cases. It has no other bounds nor limits, but even as far as the
point of the Kings most victorious sword, who will cause your decrees of
council to be executed eue^ to the midst of Piedmount, where his good
fortune has already planted the Flower de Lys, so far forth as all the
Canons of Spain can not shake it.

The King does greatly desire it: can you think that he loves them that cease
not daily to make attempts against his life? and that have bin the causers of
all the miseries, which his poor people endures? If you had once set down
your decree, an hundred thousand men would not be able to empeach thexecution
of it: his Majesty will have you pertakers in some sort of his triumphs.

And following the examples of his Ancestors, disgesteth the factes of the
Empire by the hands of his Counselors and Judges. He has chased the armed
and open garrison of Spaniards out of Paris: chase you, my Lords, the covert
and secret garrison, chase that which brought in the other, that caused it to
stay so long, and would have doubled it, if they could have had but one passage
upon the Oyse, at what time they came as far as Beuuais. The time is come
though it be latter than is for the honor of the reputation of France, but yet
it is so seasonable, as it may not be differred.

Consider if it please you, my Lords, how far you are come, you have
pronounced the Duke of Mayenne guilty of treason, and the tyrant of Spain, and
his mainteiners which join arms with him, common enemies to Christendom. It
is well done, play the men, and see how far you are gone: you have taken the
town of Paris from them, which they thought to have subjected to their
Soueraintie for ever. Nothing in the world greeueth them so much, as that they
took not away all your lives. Now they make little account of all of you: if
you fall into their hands again, the Bastile shall not be your prison, but
your grave* and yet I cannot tell, whether they will vouchsafe you so much
favor. God has this day put power into your hands to make a clear dispatch,
and to break in sunder for ever all their practices, and all their
intelligences: It will be as good as the loss of two battails unto them, when
they shall understand that all Jesuits are banished out of France. O my
Lords, let not slip this fair, this ready occasion of delivering your selves
from them, which make no other use of their learning, then as Caracalla did, to
be a fit instrument to do mischief. Chase away this kind of people, which
have no fellows in all sorts of wickedness: so sharp witted, so ready, so
bold, so crafty, so watchful in mischief, so diligent in wickedness. Against
whom when you shall arise, my Lords, to give judgment, remember I beseech you,
how easy a punishment banishment is to them that have so great riches in
Spain, in Italy, and in the Indies: whereas in the year 1530. they had but a
small pension sent them out of Spain, as they themselves confess. Remember
also, if it please you, the loss of your parents, of your friends and of
your goods: of the desolation of so great a Country, of the loss of so many
great Captains, of so much brave Nobility, of so many brave Soldiers carried
away with the fury of our wars, which they always blowed ye coals of, as
they do yet at this day. And doubt not a whit, but if you rid France of this
poison, it will fare with it, as it does with bodies, which become more
healthful by long diseases, which give them a more perfect and clear health,
then they took from them. And in case their Counsel commend unto you the
magnanimity and clemency of the King, remember you, my Lords, that it is
this King, whose blood they have every day in their vows, his death in their
prayers, his murdering in their detestable and execrable Counsels. Remember
ye, that it is this King from whom they have labored even from their very
founder Ignacius, to take away part of the Crown of Navarre, and now labor
after nothing else, then by might and maine to take away from him the Crown of
France, which their desire is to subject and unite to Spain, as they have done
Portingall.

Sire, you have borne too long: you have too much endured these traitors, these
murderers in the midst of your Kingdom. For your own part, your fame and
glory is gone to the uttermost Empires of all the world: there is no talk nor
speech, but of your victories, and of your conquestes: and you have gotten the
Surname of Great for ever, and so shall it be eternized: your wonderful feats
of arms, have filled your hands with palms, treading under the foot of your
authority, the rashness, the disloyalty, and the spoils of all your enemies.
But, Sire, you are not in the world for your self alone, consider, if it
please you, how greatly the glory of your name would be weakened, if it
should be found read in Histories, that want of smothering these Serpents, or
at least, driving them out of your Kingdom, turned in the end to your loss,
and to the loss of all your poor subjects after you. Sire, you have to do
with a patient and froward enemy, who will never leave of his hope and
plottinges against your state, but when his life must end. All the rest of his
sleights have failed him, and are found to weak. The last remedy that he has,
is to cause you to be murdered by these Jesuits, seeing he can not otherwise
stop the stream of your good fortune. He will have patience, he will dissemble,
but still his eye shall be upon his mark, and as long as his colonies of
Jesuits remain in France, or his aduoises, and his packets may be received,
or his murderers exhorted, confessed, houseled, encouraged, nothing will be too
hard for him. Sire, if your princely courage will not suffer you to be afraid
for your own person, at the least wise, take some apprehension of it for your
poor servants. They have left their wives, children, goods, houses,
commodities, to follow your fortune: the rest that remained in ye great towns,
have exposed themselves to be bouchered by the Sixteen, to the end they might
open the gates unto you: And now, Sire, will you have no care of your life, to
preserve theirs that is inseperably joined to yours? will you have no pity of
so many women, so many poor children, which should become slaves for ever to
the Spanish pride and cruelty? Sire, you have open enemies enough to fight
withal in France, Flanders, and Spain, defend your sides from these domestical
murderers: so that you remove them far enough of, we fear not all the rest.
The Spaniard can not make us slaves, but by marching through your blood: the
Jesuits his creatures, will never be at rest in France, until they have shed
it. Hitherunto the care of your faithful servants has stopped the course of
their parricides. But, Sire, if they be let alone amongst us, they may always
send you murderers, which these fellows shall confess and housell as they did
Barriere, and we, Sire, cannot watch always. It cannot be, but they that shoot
so long at one mark, will hit it at the length: their bloody minds, all to be
smeared yet with the blood of the death of the late murdered King, whose
murdering was plotted and resolved upon in their College, and their thirsting
after the atchiuing of their attempt upon your life, gives them no rest
neither day nor night: but they go always musing, always turning, always
travailing to come to this last point, which is the full cup of their desires,
and of the desires of all the Jesuits. Sire, the considerations which they
that have no apprehension of feeling of your death, represent unto you on the
contrary side, are so many evident and manifest treasons. When you have
assured your own life, when you have assured the state of so many great and
mighty Cities by banishing the public counsel which your enemies have yet
within them, by means of the Jesuits, then shall you be feared on the other
side the Mountains: And then, Sire, shall you have that Honor and respect
done to you, that is due to the greatest King in all Europe: to the King that
has upon his head the Crown of glory and liberty to be the greatest King
of all Christian people. But as long as some have hope to dispatch you and all
true Frenchmen, through the practices, sleights, and confessions of the
Jesuits, you shall have those indignities done to you, that never any King of
France did yet endure. Sire, you are the eldest son of the noblest, of the
worthiest, the auncientest house that is upon the face of all the earth, all
the course of your life is nothing but pillars of victory, but triumphs, but
bay trees, but victories which you have gotten of all them that durst lift up
an hand against you: All prophecies call you to the seigniorie of the world,
and now what are these people, who are these traitors, who are these bastards
of France, that go about to put into your head fears to offend a stranger, to
the end you should retein these murderers, that cease not to practice against
your life. Sire, the Kings of France have bin accustomed to give laws to
others, and not to take any. The great God of battles, that has led you by
the hand hitherunto, preserve you to far greater things then these are: But
Sire, despise not the good aduertisements which he gives you, and banish with
these murdering Jesuits, all those, that building their fortune upon your
Tomb, will labor by all the means they can to keep them still within your
Kingdom.

I conclude, that it would please the Court, to cause the request of the
University to be recorded, and to Decree that all the Jesuits of France void
and depart the realm, territories, and Countries under the obedience of his
Majesty within fifteen days after notice given, which shall be done in every
one of their Colleges or houses by speech to one of them for all the rest.
Otherwise, and in default of so doing, and in case any of them be found in
France after the said time, that forth with, and without any formalitie of
process, they shall be condemned as guilty of Treason to the highest head, and
having enterprised against the life of the King. And call for the charges.

The resolution of the University, solemnly and lawfully assembled the 18. of
Apr. in An. 1594. to be humble suitors, that the Jesuits might be utterly
banished.
IN the year of our Lord one thousand five hundred nientie four, upon Monday
the 18. day of April, the University of all sorts and degrees of this famous
study of Paris, being assembled together in S. Mathurins Church for a general
precession to be made from the University to the holy Chapel of the Kings
palace in Paris, to give thanks to the most high God for the happy delivery
of this famous City out of the hands of the Spanish enemies, for the
prosperity, and most happy success of the most Christian and most victorious
King Henry the 4. King of the French and Navarre our most dread and liege Lord,
for the preservation of the City under the government and protection of our
said liege Lord the King, and for many other respects touching and concerning
this University, and for the humble supplication presented by Laurence
Bouceret doctor of Arts, that the Jesuits might be called in question and be
utterly banished out of the Realm, the said University, as their manner is,
duly assembled at their accustomed hour, with a whole consent of all the
Doctors and Masters of all the four faculties, and with the consent of the
four Procurators of the nations, no one man gain saying, ordained, decreed,
and determined, that the said supplication of the said Doctor Bouceret was to
be allowed, and therefore that the Jesuits were duly and orderly to be called
in question, and to be wholly banished out of the Realm. To which end and
purpose, it seemed good to the said University to make choice of certain
select men out of every faculty to prosecute the cause, whereupon the Divines
named Master Adrian d' Amboise President and rector of the Kings College of
Navarre, and such an other Doctor as the said d' Amboise would think good to
make choice of: the Canonistes allowed well of this proceeding, and because
there was then present but one only Doctor of that faculty, to wit D.
Dauidson, he promised to name some other of his Doctors: the Physicians, D.
James Cousinet: Lastly, the faculty of Arts named D. Laurence Bouceret, and
D. George Criton. And so with one consent it was agreed and concluded, no man
gain saying, by D. James d' Amboise, Chancellor of the University, and by the
whole University, the day and year above written. Thus signed, du Valle. And
on the side. Seen by us, James d' Amboise Chancellor of the Vniuersiie. And
sealed with red wax.

The Pleading of M. Arnauld The request of the University to the same end.
To our LL. the Court of Parliament.
MOst humbly beseechen the Chancellor, Deane, and Faculties, Procters of the
Nations, Ayders and Scholars of the University of Paris, saying, that whereas
they have of long time complained to this honorable Court of a great disorder
fallen out in the said University by a certain new sect, sprung up as well
in Spain as in other places thereabout, taking upon them an ambitious title,
of the Society of the name of Jesus, and have from time to time, and namely
since these last troubles showed themselves partakers with the Spanish faction,
and their instruments, to the utter undoing and desolation of this state, as
well in this town of Paris, as elsewhere throughout the realm of France and
other Countries, a matter forseene even from the beginning of their
advancement by your said Suppliants, and namely by the Decree of the faculty
of Divinity which was at that time made against them; purporting that this new
sect was foisted in, to break all order as well politic as Ecclesiastical,
and specially the order of the University, as appeared by their refusing to
obey the Chancellor, Archbishops, Bishops, and Curates, and other superiors of
the Church. And whereas the Impes of the said pretended society of Jesus, about
thirty years ago, not having as yet then spued out their poison in all the
other towns of France, but only in this town, presented a supplication to be
incorporate into the said University; and that being considered upon was
referred to Counsel, and order set down that in the mean season, all things
should stand in that state they were, which was in effect, that the Jesuits
should not meddle in any thing to the prejudice of that order, which
notwithstanding they obeyed not, but that more is, beside their pernicious
purposes, intruding themselves and meddling with matters of State, served as
instruments and spials in this France, for the advancement of the affairs of
Spain, as it is well known to all the world, and their request as aforesaid
referred to Counsel, was not orderly pursued, nor the pleas taken out on
either side, whereby it came discontinued. In consideration whereof may it please
your good LL. to ordeine that this sect may be banished, not only out of the
University, but also out of the whole realm of France, calling to your
assistance in this behalf the Kings Attorney general, and so shall you do
well. Thus signed. Le Royer. and on the side, D' Amboise Chancellor of the
University. And sealed with red wax.

FINIS.

