A DECREE Lately made in the High Court of Star Chamber, after consultation
had among the Judges, and Certificate of their opinions in diverse things, etc.

And also a Confirmation of that Decree by His Sacred Majesty; together with
His Majesty's Command that the same be Printed, Published, and put in due
execution.

Imprinted at London by ROBERT BARKER, Printer to the Kings most Excellent
MAJESTY: And by the Assigns of JOHN BILLL. M.DC.XXXIII.

The Contents.
(...) Ordinaries, that none exceed two shillings the Meal.

5 That Ordinary-keepers, Tauerners and Victuallers keep not houses of Gaming.

6 For the present Rates of Horsemeat, and for regulating for the future.

7 For suppressing in convenient time of Pettie-Ostryes in corners, kept by
such as are neither Victualers, nor Jn-keepers, not answerable for the Goods of
their Guests.

A Decree of Star- Chamber.
CHARLES by the grace of GOD King of England, Scotland, France and Ireland,
Defender of the Faith, etc. To all to whom these our Letters Patents shall
come, greeting.
Know ye, that We have seen a certain Decree made by Our Counsel in Our
Court of Star Chamber, the thirteenth day of November, in the ninth year of
Our Reign, which remains of Record among the Records and Remembrances of
that Court, containing diverse Ordinances; which Decree follows in these
words, Jn Camera Stellata coram Concilio ibidem 13 o. die Nouembris, Anno Nono
Caroli Regis.

His Majesty's Attorney general did this day inform this honorable Court,
that it having been presented to the Lords of His Majesty's most honorable
Privy Counsel, that as well the prices of all sorts of victuals, as also of
Horsmeate were grown to excessive rates, and that instance thereof was given
in particular by His Majesty's Officers of the Greencloth, in several
provisions made for His Majesty's house, whereby the weekly accounts of the
household were much increased.

It was thought fit and ordered that his Majesty's Attorney General, as well
upon conference with such of the Judges, and such of His Majesty's learned
Counsel as he should think fit, as upon perusal of all such Laws, and
Statutes, as are in force concerning the settling of prices of victuals, and
horsemeate, should make report unto the Board of his opinion concerning the
same, as by their Lordships Order of the ninth of October last past appears;
And declared that according to the said Order he had at several days
attended his Majesty's Justices of the Kings Bench, and Common Pleas, and
Barons of the Exchequer, who made Certificate of their opinion in writing
subscribed by them; which Certificate, the said Attorney presented unto this
Court, and follows in these words.

Master Attorney, we send you here enclosed our opinions of these things which
were propounded, and though fit to be reformed at our last general meeting.

Thomas Richardson. Robert Heath. Humphrie Dauenport. John Denham. Richard
Hutton. William Jones. George Crook. Thomas Treuors. George Vernon. Robert
Barkeley. Frauncis Crawley.
Touching Victuals, we find engrossing to be a great occasion to raise the
prices thereof, an offense utterly against the Common Law: And amongst
ingrossers, we find the Chandlers to be great offenders in buying great
quantities of all sorts of Grain brought unto, or toward the Market.

We also find, that Tauernes are of late exceedingly increased in their number,
in, and about London, and that they dress Flesh, and Fish, and utter the same
at excessive prices, to the increase of Riot, and other abuses; whereas by the
Law, as Tauerners, they are to sell nothing but Wine, unless it be Bread to
eat therewith.

We find, that Bakers do sell their bread, at fourteen, fifteen, and
sixeteene to the dozen, where they should keep the Assize, and not sell above
twelve, or thirteen at the most to the dozen; and this pincheth the poor.

We wish that Ordinaries in and about London may be regulated to a convenient
sum, not to exceed two shillings for a meal. And we wish that both
Tauerners and Ordinary-keepers may be wholly restrained from suffering
unlawful Games in their houses; for we find that this draws unthrifty
guests unto them, and is an apparent means to overthrow the fortunes of many
Gentlemen and Citizens.

Touching Horse-meat, upon hearing of diverse Justices of Peace of Middlesex and
Surrey, and of diverse Inkeepers of London, Westminster, Middlesex, and Surrey,
we are of opinion that the present prices of Hay and Oats considered, six
pence day and night for Hay for a Horse, and for Oats six pence a pecke
Winchester measure, is a competent Rate to be taken by Inholders, and to take
nothing for litter; and if they exceed these Rates, we hold them punishable by
the Law, as for exacting excessive and unmeasurable prices.

For Horses which come to Innes in the day time, we conceive it to be a
convenient Rate for the Inne-keeper to take a penie for a Horse for his
Stable-roome, only the Horse not being unbridled; if he be unbridled and have
Hay and go away the same day, to take two pence the horse and no more.

We find that of late years there are many petty Ostries set up in and about
London, which entertain Horses in by-corners, and receive Stable-horses, and
the Horses of such who are persons suspected, and these have no lodging for
travelers. By these Ostries great inconveniences happen to the Subject in
general, and much prejudice to the Inholders in particular, who by Law are
bound to lodge their guests, and to be answerable for the goods brought into
their charge.

We find also that there are diverse who unlawfully ingrosse great quantity of
Hay to sell again; these are ingrossers punishable by the Common Law; And
humbly moved this honorable Court, that the same might be here recorded,
and that the Court would be pleased for the good of His Majesty's people, to
Decree and Command, that the particulars thereof be strictly observed.
Whereupon this honorable Court taking the same into their serious
consideration, has ordered that the said Certificate be recorded in this
Honorable Court, And has Decreed;

First, for that it is notoriously known that engrossing is a great occasion
to raise the prices of victual, and also of Hay, and engrossing to inhance
prices is punishable not only by the Statutes, but also by the Common Laws of
the Realm; His Majesty's Justices of the Benches at Westminster, and Barons of
the Exchequer, the Justices of Assize; and Oyer and Terminer, and Justices of
Peace in their several places are required to cause diligent enquiry to be
made of all ingrossers of all sorts of victual and Hay, and see the
Delinquents herein be severely punished.

And His Majesty's Attorney general, is likewise commanded to cause such of
them as shall be brought to his notice, to be informed against in this
Honorable Court, that of them example may be made, to deter others from
like offense.

And it is Decreed, that after publication of this Decree in London, no
Chandler presume to buy Corn, Grain, Meal, or Flower to sell again, either
in Market, or out of Market.

And this Court concurring in opinion with the said Reverend Judges, and
considering the great excess and riot that is occasioned by preparing and
selling of Victual in Tauernes, and how the prices of sundry sorts of Viands
are hereby increased: Has decreed that no Tauernour or Vintner, selling Wine
by Retaile, do hereafter sell or make ready for sale, any sort of Flesh or
Fish, or other Victual, save Bread, nor to defraud this Ordinance, do by
himself or any other set up, or cause, or procure to be set up the Trade of a
Cook within the same house, or in any shop or room thereunto belonging, or in
any house thereto near adjacent, nor permit or suffer any Flesh, Fish, or
other Victual, except bread, as aforesaid, to be brought into his house to be
there eaten by any of his Guests.

And the Court taking into consideration, how the poor are oppressed and
pinched, when Bakers do sell their Bread to those that vent the same by
Retaile at the Rates of more then twelve to the dozen, in that the weight is
abated in every loaf, and the Buyer being some times but a Passenger, is not
able to make complaint of the Baker, whom he knows not; It is therefore
likewise ordered and decreed, that no Baker shall sell any Bread at other Rate
then twelve or thirteen at the most for the dozen.

And further it is decreed that none that shall keep Ordinary Tables, or other
Victualling Tables, shall take more of the Guests, then after the Rate of two
shillings the man for the Meal, nor more then eight-pence for each servant,
attending his Master; And that nothing be taken above that Rate for Wine or
other thing, or under color thereof, whereby the true intent of this Decree
may be deluded or defrauded; And that none of them, or Tauernours, or other
Victuallers, keep or suffer to be used, Games of Dice, Cards, Tables, or
other unlawful Games in their houses; Wherein this Court declares the
Licenses given by the Groome-Porter of his Majesty's house or others, for
licensing or permitting of any the said Games, are not of validity to excuse
the offenders.

Concerning Horse-meat, for that upon hearing of the said Justices of the
Peace, and Inne-keepers, the present prices considered, the Rates before
specified are competent;

It is for the present ordered and Decreed, that no Inne-keeper or Ostler,
within the Cities of London or Westminster, or in any place within the distance
of ten miles from either of those Cities, the Suburbs or Liberties of either
of them, shall take above six pence for a horse standing in his stable at Hay,
a day and a night, nor more then six pence for a pecke of Oats, of the measure
commonly called Winchester measure, without taking any thing for litter, nor
more then a penny for standing of a Horse in his Stable a day without meat,
nor above two pence for a Horse standing at Hay in the day, and going away
before night.

And that no Inne-Keeper shall exceed those Rates in any part of this Realm;
and where Grain and Hay are sold at lesser prices, there the Rates and prices
shall be accordingly. And this Ordinance shall continue, until in the County
of Middlesex, it shall be made to appear to the Justices of the Kings Bench,
and in other Counties and places to the Justices of Peace there, that because
of the increase of prices in the parts adjoining, greater Rates are necessarily
to be permitted. And thereupon other Rates shall from time to time be set,
which being set, are hereby commanded and enjoined to be strictly and duly
obseued, until the same by like Authority shall be altered.

And to the end that there may be from time to time moderate rates and prices
for Hay and Grain of all sorts taken by Inne-keepers and Ostlers, of
Passengers and their Guests, His Majesty's Justices of the Kings Bench are
desired, and the Justices of the Peace of other Counties and places, are
required yearly and more often, if there shall be occasion, to make diligent
enquiry of Hay and other Horse-meat, and to make declaration in writing fixed
in public places, what prices and rates for Hay and other Horse-meate are
allowed to be taken by Inkeepers and Ostlers, which the said Inkeepers and
Ostlers are commanded to observe.

And if any of them shall presume to offend therein, that diligent enquiry be
made of them, that they being presented may without conniuence receive severe
punishment, as oppressors of His Majesty's people, by taking excessive prices.

Moreover, the Court considering the great inconveniences that do arise by the
number of petty Hostreys and Ostlers that keep stables for Horses without
lodging for Guests, not liable nor able to make satisfaction for goods under
their custody that shall be stolen or imbezeled, yet taking consideration of
their poverty, and that it would tend to their undoing, if they should presently
be suppressed, before such time as die store which they have already provided
shall be spent; The Justices of the Peace of the City of London, Suburbs and
Liberties thereof, the City of Westminster, and Borough of Southwarke, and of
the Counties of Middlesex, and Surrey, are required with all convenient speed
to make enquiry of all such petty Ostreys within the said Cities, Boroughs,
Suburbs, Liberties, and all places not distant above two miles from some part
thereof, and what provision of Hay, Oats, and Prouender, remains in their
hands unspent; And to command them not to make any further provision;

And after that which is remaining in their hands shall be spent, no longer to
use or keep such Ostries.

And it is Decreed by this Court, that none after that time shall keep or use
any such Ostries.

And to the end that notice may be taken of this Decree, by all those whom it
may concern, and that none may excuse himself upon pretense of being ignorant
of the Contents thereof;

It is ordered, that the same be published in the Cities of London and
Westminster, and in the several Counties of this Realm, at Assizes, Sessions,
and other places of public Assemblies;

And all they to whom the execution thereof pertains are required, that they
see the same put in due execution.

Know ye that We taking into Our consideration that the said Decree was made
upon grave and sad advise, and upon the certificate of Our Judges, and that the
same is just and necessary to be observed, Have approved the same Decree, and
do ratify and confirm the same; and the necessity of these times requiring
it,

WE DO COMMAND that the same by all those whom it concerns to be obeyed and
put in execution, under the pains to be inflicted upon the contemners of Our
Command, and the Decrees of that Court.

And to the end that all Our loving Subjects, may be participants of the good
thereof, and may complain of those things wherein they shall be grieved,
contrary to the Tenor of the said Decree, and of those that in disobedience
shall contemn or neglect the due observance thereof;

WE do command Our Printer that he forthwith cause these presents to be
Printed and dispersed into the several Counties of this Realm, with
expedition, so that in every of those Counties, the same may be published at
the general Session of the Peace to be holden next after the Feast of the
Epiphany now next coming, that Our people of those Counties, may take notice
thereof.

And We do Command the Justices of the Peace, that at their said Sessions,
in every of the said Counties the same be openly read; And We do require Our
Counsel, in Our Court of Star Chamber, the Justices of Our Benches, Barrons
of Our Exchequer, Justices of Assize, and Oyer and Terminer, and Justices of
the Peace, That against all those that shall offend against the said Decree,
they proceed without conniuence, as they tender Our Service, and the good of
Our People.

In witness whereof We have caused these Our Letters to be made Patents.

Witness our self at Westminster, the fourteenth day of December, in the
ninth year of Our Reign. Per ipsum Regem. Willys.

God save the King.

