A LAMENTABLE COMPLAINT OF THE COMMONALTY, BY WAY OF SVPPLICATION TO THE HIGH
COURT OF PARLIAMENT, FOR A LEARNED MINISTRY.

In Anno. 1585.

TO THE READER.
BEcause our desire was, that this our complaint should be communicated to
every one of the honorable of parliament, and finding no other ways to
perform the same: we desired that it might be done by the way of printing.
And we pray, that this our request may be made known to her majesty, who in
all civil causes appertaining to this present life, is a myror of mercy, so we
trust that her bowelles of pity and compassion will abound and exceed in this
matter, that concerns the salvation of the souls of her loving subjects,
and that as she is the head and cheifest, so we trust that her hand will be
most forward in this sacrifice and service of the lord, which he requires for
all the benefits that he has most plentifully powered upon her majesty, and
upon us by her majesty's gracious government.

THE CRY AND COMPLAINT of the Commonalty of this Land, by way of Supplication,
to the right honorable assembly of the high court of parliament, to provide by
law a godly learned ministry.
IN most humble manner that we may, (most gracious Soueraign, and right
honorable assembly) we fall down before your feet, even in the dust,
presenting before you a most weighty petition. It is not much unlike that
petition, that HESTER made to the King ASSVERVS: saying, Ester. 7.4.
If I have found favor in thy sight, and if it seem good unto the King, let
my life be given me at my petition, and my people at my request. For we are
sold, I and my people to be destroyed, to be slain, and to perish. And when
the king demanded, who had done that deed, the Queen answered that wicked
HAMMON. In like wise, so many congregations of us, as be in this Land,
destitute of a godly minister, to preach unto us the word of Salvation (as
there be exceeding many) do entreat for our life, and the life of our
Neighbors. For we are sold to be destroyed, to be slain, and to perish
eternally, if by your gracious help, speedy remedy be not had. If question be
made, who has done this deed? we answer, the blind guides, and unlearned
Curates, that are set over us. In deed, we confess, that our sins, and the
sins of our forefathers are multiplied without measure, and grown exceeding
great, and have grievously provoked the Lords wrath, to strike us with such a
grievous plague as there is none greater under the heavens. As we read, that
the Lord threatened the Jews by the Prophet ZACHARY, saying: For, lo I will
raise up a Shepeheard in the Land, which shall not look for the thing that is
lost, nor seek the tender Lambs, nor heal that is hurt, nor feed that which
stands, but he shall eat the flesh of the fat, and tear their claws in
pieces. O Idol shepherd that leaves the flockel The like description is made
of will Shepherds, in the 34. of EZECHIEL, with a Woe pronounced against them.
By this, we trust it does appear, what we request; even, that it would please
God, to move you, to make a firm, and stable law, like unto the Laws of the
Medes and Persians, that cannot be altered; nay, rather to confirm God his
law, already established in his Word, that every Congregation of us may have
one, or two Godly learned preachers set over us, as every Congregation is
greater, or lesser, and these dumb Idols, the most pestilent enemies we have
in the world, removed from us as far as the East is from the West; And that
whosoever does violate that holy law and decree, let his body be drawn in
pieces, and his house made a Iakes; because he seeks the dishonor of the
mighty God, the king of all the earth, as by NABVCHADNEZER it was decreed. So
shall it appear, that you are not only careful for this present age, so to
provide that we may be taught the fear of God, but that our posterity may
know it also, and the children which are yet unborn, may stand up and declare
it to their children, that they may set their hope in GOD, and not forget the
works of the Lord, but keep his commandments. We confess that the greatest
part of us are the farthest of from the desire, and not so much as once think
hereof: the more we are to be pitied. Notwithstanding, since some of us has
tasted the good word of God, and how gracious the Lord is to those which know
and fear him, in tender love, and compassion, to our brethren, finding no
other way, we uncover the tiles of your house of Parliament, and let the^ down
with cords before you, to stir up your bowels of compassion toward them; as
the man which had the palsy, was brought before our Savior Christ. Concerning
the minister appointed to the house of God by his word, we find it written
(most noble Queen, and right Hon. assembly) in that sacred Book which you
have delivered unto us, as the true word of God, and so, with all thanksgiving,
we receive it: that he must be blameless in life, free from a great number of
vices (which S. PAVL to TIMOTHY and TITUS reherseth) and garnished with the
contrary virtues; and above all, he must be skillful, to teach the word of God,
able to exhort by sound doctrine, and to convince the adversary. Yea, he must
be that man of God, that is perfectly enstructed in holy Scriptures, to every
good work; not only to teach sound doctrine, and confute errors; but also to
reform manners and instruct in the way of righteousness, to cast down the proud,
to raise up the humble, to comfort the distressed; to encourage him that
walks in the right way, to reprove him that runs out of the way: and
finally, to declare to all men, as Princes, Magistrates, and all other
inferior persons, of what calling soever they be, their general and
particular duties out of the word of God. And therefore he is worthily
compared, in the Gospel to the rich householder, which brings out of his
treasury, things old and new. He is the Ambassador of the most high king unto
his people, to declare unto them the whole counsel of God. Afterward he is
mightily to divide the Word of God to the people, as the only food of their
souls, a disposer of the secreats of God, a father to beget us with the
immortal seed of the word, a mother to nourish us up in the same: a starr or
light, to cause the glorious Gospel of Christ to shine upon us, to be an
example to us, of an holy conversation: a guide and an eye, to direct us in the
way of eternal life, Salt, to season us with the fear of God: a builder, to
make a Temple of his people, which are living stones, for God to dwell in for
ever: a Warrior to cast down the proud imagination of man, as a strong hold
and to bring every thought to the obedience of Christ: a prophet, to speak in
such sort, as when the unbelievers, and unlearned come in before them, they are
rebuked and judged, and so the secrets of the heart are made manifest, by the
true repentance and faith. For the which, they acknowledge the gift of God,
with all submission, and say plainly, that God is in them: a skillful Shepherd
to feed God his flock with his Word. Necessary therefore, yea, more necessary
then food and clothing, is the most sacred office of preaching, an ordinary
and most excellent means of our salvation: which either to neglect, or to seek
for other means without it, to obtain faith in Christ, is to preiudicate the
wisdom of God, and to look for some extraordinarye working, which were to
tempt the highest, and procure his indignation upon us. And to prove the
necessity of preaching, the Apostle PETER affirms, that in the Epistles of S.
PAVL, there are sundry things hard to be understood, which they that are
unlearned and unstable, pervert, as they do all scriptures, unto their own
destruction. We therefore stand in great need of that man of God before
described, to open the Scriptures, with the key of knowledge: not only to the
enlightening of our understanding, and confirmation of our memory, but also to
the reformation of our sinful life. The truth whereof, the example of the
Eunuch, treasurer to CANDACES Queen of Ethiopia, does manifestly approve; who
being brought up no doubt, in better manner then we the common people of the
country, and deliting to read the holy scriptures, and especially the prophet
ESAIAS, at what time PHILIP the Evangelist demanded, whether he understood what
he red, answered directly, How can I, without I had a guide. If therefore this
noble man aided with better helps then the common sort, made it an hard thing
to understand the Prophet without an interpreter, how can we the simple silly
people understand it. For remedy whereof, the Lord having a provident care over
his Church, has given Pastors and Doctors for the gathering together of the
Saints for the work of the ministry, and for the edification of the body of
Christ, till we meet altogether (in the unity of faith, and knowledge of the
son of God) unto a perfect man, and unto the measure of the age of the
fullness of Christ. Much more we find in holy Scripture concerning the office
of Ministers, tendyng to show the excellency of their function, and the
wonderful skill and knowledge that is required at their hands. So that it
does plainly appear, that God had a special care to provide an evident and
plain law, that no unskillful man should be set over his flock, because he
is so plentiful in declaring their duty almost every where: so that
whosoever desires to be fit for such an office, desires a worthy work, to
who^ by good right appertains double honor, and of whom it may worthily be
said with admiration. How beautiful are the feet of them which bring glad
tidings of peace, and bring glad tidings of good things.

Having laid down our petition, and described in some manner a faithful
pastor; we crave leave to show after what manner we desire that this pastor
should exercise that his office among us simple people, to our better
edification. Neither do we desire this of our selves, but, directed by the
word of God; as it is written by S. PAVL to the Corinthians, saying: I could
not speak unto you as spiritual men, but as unto carnal, even as unto babes
in Christ Jesus. I gave you milk to drink, and not meat; for ye were not yet
able to bear it, neither yet now are ye able; for ye are yet carnal. Much
more may be said to us Englishmen, Ye are carnal, and therefore have need to
be fed with milk, and not with strong meat. This milk we take to be, not
only a familiar kind of Catechizing, in as short and plain terms as
possible may be (which we greatly long after) whereby we are made fit to
receive a more full declaration; as when we have learned our letters, we come
to spelling; but also a plain and familiar kind of handling of some portion
of scripture, by delivering the doctrine as the text yields it naturally
without any enforcement, which doctrine receives an edge by exhortation.
Contrary to this practice of S. PAVLE do they who either Catechize not at all,
or else do it in such exquisite manner, that it is made rather strong meat, then
milk. Some other take but one word for their text, and afterward run into
the mountains, that we cannot follow them; not knowing how they went up, or
how they will come down: whereas, if they had taken a good portion of the
text, and had naturally expounded, and pithily applied the same; by occasion of
that large text, we should have remembered a good part of the sermon long time
after; and without all contradiction he that will do us any good, must abase
himself as low as he can, to our capacity, as S. PAVL in the place before
alleged, and also in the 6. to the Romans does testify, saying: I speak
after the manner of men, because of the infirmity of your flesh. For we
countrymen are well content, that they spare to speak unto us in the Latin,
Greek, and Hebrew tongues, which we understand not; or to bring forth their
Poets, Philosophers, or Schole-points taken from the liberal Arts, to
approve their matter they have in handling, wherewith we are not acquainted:
For in these things many preach themselves, and not Christ Jesus, and study to
leave an admiration and fame of their learning behind them, whereat they
chiefly shoot, rather then a godly edification of the inner man, which is by
faith in Christ Jesus. But when by those helps before named, they have
attained to a fuller understanding of the scriptures, let them (in God his
name) in a plain and simple declaration of the truth, with known words,
setting apart the entising speech of man his wisdom, and flourishing
eloquence of those Corinthian preachers, deliver unto us the substance of
religion, out of a pure heart, with reverence as in the sight of GOD. So shall
they have PAVL for an example to imitate, whom FESTVS supposed, that much
learning had made him mad; yet writing to the learned Corinthians, he professed
to know nothing amongst the^, save only Jesus Christ, and him crucified.

To this plainness of teaching, there ought to be joined a continuance in
the holy exercise of the word, as S. PAVL says to TIMOTHY: Take heed to thy
self, and to doctrine, and continue therein. And in an other place: Preach the
word, be instant in season, and out of season. And for that cause, one chief
property of the minister is, to be vigilant over the flock, which though he
carefully perform, yet in many years, we come but to a small measure of
knowledge, and reformation of life. And no marvel, since the Apostles of
Christ, hearing their master preach so often, and so familiarly, by the space
of three years and more, yet for all his pains and travail in that time,
they knew not well the virtue of his death and resurrection. Yea, we hear say,
that many painful preachers both in towns and cities, exercising the word
three or four times a week, yet do they complain of the small profiting of
the flock. Then were it requisite, that double diligence were used amongst us
the rude people of the land, whose ignorance and dullness to learn, as also
stubburnnesse to obey, are so great, that they are only known unto God, to our
selves, and those few that have had familiar conference with us. And in truth
to speak plainly, we are children in understanding, and men in malice, and all
rude behavior. For why should we conceal from you the right honorable
assembly of Parliament, the grieuousnesse of our malady, unto whom we fly as
unto our parents, who only have power, next under God, to provide a falue for
our sore? Yea, it grieueth us that we have so long time concealed the miserable
estate wherein we stand, from them who if they had known it to be so great, as
we do feel it, would ere now have provided a remedy to redress it. But
touching these men, whom we so greatly desire to have, in our simple
judgment, we think it not fit, that any man (were he never so wise and godly)
should make choice alone of that man, that is to take a greater and more
precious charge upon him, then they that have the most costly Jewels and
treasures of Princes, committed to their keeping. How requisite were it, that
such a man as should have the bringing up and government of the sons and
daughters of the glorious king of heaven, (who loved them so dearly, that he
spared not his only begotten son, to redeem them with his most precious
blood) should rather come into a public place of trial, as it were into an
open Theater, that after public prayer and fasting, he might be seen and
viewed of all me^, that if the beholders had as many eyes as they feign that
Argos had, they should use them all, to sift and try out that man, whehe were
fit both in respect of his wisdom and understanding of the holy scriptures,
as honesty of life and conversation, to take that noble charge upon him.
Moreover, seeing we know that there be many subtle workers, transforming
themselves into Angels of light, who seek craftily to creep in to devour the
flock: is it not to be feared, that they will more easily slide in through the
hands of one then of many? Yea surely, the counsel and advise of mo then one
for trial, is thought needful to be used in matters of les importance. As when
any man takes on him the profession of Phisike (whose care is only to see to
the good estate of the body) notwithstanding, 11. of Henry the eight, cap. 3.
that he has spent many years both in the study of the liberal Arts, as in
the secrets of Phisike; yet is he to pass the hands of 4. approved Doctors of
Phisike to be tried, whither he has profited so much in the study of Phisike,
as is requisite for a man of that profession, least, if he should rashly take
upon him to intermeddle in that Science, without sufficient knowledge in the
same, the bodily health of man should sustain either damage or danger. Shall
then the spiritual Physician that takes upon him to cure the maladies of the
mind, (which are mo in number, more secret, and more difficult to be cured,
and more dangerous if they be cured) come less furnished in the knowledge of
his profession then the other? And is it not requisite, for the trial of his
knowledge, that the number of skillful examiners and their diligence, should be
multiplied and increased so much the more as the soul does excel the body?
Therefore seeing we are so provident, that we can espy the evils that happen to
the body by unskillful Physicians, and by good means prevent them: why can we
not see the palpable mischiefs that we suffer in our souls by unlearned
Curates, and by many skillful and vigilant eyes exclude them? And this election
many we find to be agreeable to the scriptures; as we read in the election
of MATHIAS, Acts. 1. of the Deacons Acts 6. Where the apostles and the church
were assembled together about that business: and of the election of the elders
in every church. Acts 14. PAVLE and BARNABAS, and JOHN, MARK with the Church
were assembled together with fasting and prayer. Likewise, Act 16. where it
seems that PAVL chose TIMOTHY alone, (when they of Lystra and Iconium
presented) yet in the first epistle of S. PAVLE wrote unto TIMOTHY, mention is
made, that he had imposition of hands by the Eldership, which consists of
many. It appears also in the same epistle, that there were many in the
election of the church officers at Ephesus: because S. PAVL exhorts TIMOTHY,
not to be partaker of the sins of others, that were fellow-choosers with
him, by yielding, his consent to the election of any unworthy officer, but to
keep himself pure, by denying his consent, and hindering the election, as much
as he might, which no doubt is the true sense of that place. The same is
proved, by the epistle to TITUS, where PAVL requires him to ordain elders in
every city, as he had appointed him: by the which saying: TITUS is restrained to
that order or election, which S. PAVLE had appointed him, and it is to be
thought that S. PAVL would appoint no other order to be observed, the^ he
himself had used act. 14 and in the election of TIMOTHY, which was practiced
by the apostles, act. 6. At the least if it were but to keep vniformitye
amongst them. And undoubtedly, if the ministers of the word had their calling
by many good and godly men, endued with gifts sufficient for the trial of
their doctrine and manners, then we should accept them as the angels of God,
even as Christ Jesus himself, then durst no such hedge-priestes, and
caterpillars, as are spread over the land in great number, once think to have
any entrance into the church of God to kill souls any more: when they should
understand that there were many vigilant watchmen appointed to keep the door
against the^. The^ should not they that can thrive in no trade of life, such men
as Job calls the children of fools, and the sons of villains, which are more
vile then the earth, have their vttermoste refuge, and resting place in the
ministry. But if any man that is without natural affection to us his poor
brethren, should give some allowaunce to these unpreaching ministers, which
we have: willing us to content our selves with them, as our lawful
pastors. In calling to our remembrance these dumb idolles which oppress us,
they renew our former grief, and make our hearts even bleed to think vpoon
them. For who are appointed to murder God his people, but they? How far are
they unlike these ministers whom before we have described? even as much as
the darkness is to light. For if the word of God be the rule of
righteousness, as it is in deed, and these men of whom we complain, are not
squared thereby; How can they auouche that they be sent of God? If not of
him, you know of whom. For if Christ had sent them, as his Ambassadors,
then, no doubt he would have put his Embassage in their mouths. Or if he
would have had them occupiers of the tale^t of preaching the word, would he not
first have given it them? For how can the judge of all the world call men to
accounts for the abuse of that they never had? Nay rather; he says to all the
Pastors of his flock before he send them, as he did to EZECHIEL. Eat that
thou find, Eat this book and go, and speak to the house of Israel.
Neither do we find in God his book which you have delivered unto us, any
other ministers of the word, except those which are called blind guides,
stars without light, unsavory salt, good for nothing, no, not for the
dunghill, clouds without water, idol shepherds whom the Lord has cursed
even from mount Ebal. Esa. 3.6, 7.
And certainly when the bishops went about to lay their hands upon them, and
unwarily said unto them, ye have clothing, let this ruin be under your
hands: they should have said, yea, rather sworn on that day to the reverend
fathers, saying, we can be no helpers, there is neither bread in our houses,
nor clothing, therefore make us no governors of the people. Or they might have
said every one of them, as we read in the Prophet ZACHARY: ^ach. 13.5.
I am no Prophet, I am an husbandman, for man taught me to be an heardman from
my youth up. O that they had been so wise, so to have done: But, if they
themselves will plead for the alowance of their ministry, and show forth
themselves as though they were workmen that need not to be ashamed, Let the^
prove it by their work as S. PAVL does prove his Apostleship to the
Corinthians, which was then called into question by the false Apostles most
unworthily; as we do call their ministry into question most worthily. He
brought not forth unto them his letters commendatorie from some great man; as
peradventure they will show the letters of their Orders: but he willed them to
call to remembrance their conversion to Christ, and the graces given them by
his ministry in the Gospel, and that was his epistle commendatorie, and the
seal of his Apostleship to be red of all men. What those graces were, it is
plain in the 1. Cor. 1. In all things ye are made rich in him, in all
utterance, and all knowledge; so that you are not destitute of any gift,
waiting for the appearing of our Lord Jesus Christ. So we pray you to try
these men, their congregations, which in some places are more then two thousand
souls, and see their work: move but these small questions to try their
knowledge, and you shall have the like answers for the most part. Honest man,
are you a sinner? Yea, the best of us all are sinners. Have you sinned in the
1. com. Thou shall have none other gods but me? I thank God my whole trust is
in him. Have you broken the 3. com. by taking Gods name in vain? I swear as
little as any man, I thank God. Do you not commit adultery, or steal? No, God
forbid, I perceue we shall find you no sinner at length. But what is the
punishment due for sin? As it pleases God. Then God has not already
determined of that matter. So it may be. But how shall you be saved from your
sins, tell me that? By my good works, and deeds I hope, and some better learned
will say, God is merciful. Through whom is God merciful unto you? I cannot tell
that, for I am not learned. Then I will tell you, God is merciful through
Christ. But what was Christ? A man, I trow. And was he no more? Yes, he was
more. What more? I told you that I am not learned to answer such deep
questions, I was never asked the like before. Are you not fully persuaded that
you shall go to heaven? No, for you cannot be certain of that your self, but I
hope well, and mean as well as the best of you scripture me^. Behold the nakedness
of our souls, have pity upon us, and help us to cover our shame. But all this
time while you reason with us of these matters, we think our selves in a
wilderness, or as a fish out of the water, and so glad as may be to be rid of
your company. And some will not answer at all, but shake you of as busybodies,
in great anger, willing you to see to your own souls, and let theirs alone. So
that not above 2. or 3. of 100. (we suppose) of us country people thorowout the
land where these blind guides be, can make any better answer to the purpose,
whereby you may probably conjecture that the seed of eternal life is sown in
our hearts. And the conversion of these few is not wroght by any thing done by
these silly ministers; but rather the providence of God has drawn us into some
other place by occasion of our calling, where we have heard the word preched:
or it may be, that God does bless some men's bare reading or hearing the
scripture red, or conference with godly men, by the working of his spirit,
where al other means fail the^. But if question be further made of the
practice of mortificatio^ of the old man, and the raising of the new man, of
the benefits of afflictions, of patience, etc. whereof the Corinthia^s were not
destitute by PAVLES ministry; we think we hear men speak parables, if
mention be made of the coming of our Lord Jesus, then we tremble. But many of
us, can say the belief, the Lord his prayer, and the ten commandments;
and yet God knows, without understanding or feeling. Nevertheless, we think
our selves to be in as good case, touching our souls health, as the best of
you all. This is that great perfection whereunto our idol-ministers have
brought us. Behold these laborers, that need not to be ashamed of their
work? Read these their Epistles to their high commendation. But by this, that
we have said, we think it to be plain enough, that these men entered not in at
the door into the sheepe-folde, but climed up another way, and therefore, by
the verdict of our savior Christ, they are thieves and robbers, whose coming
tends only to steal, to kill, and to destroy. First, what good can come unto
us by them, whom the Lord has not sent, and sanctified to the work of the
ministry? what good can they do to the building of God his temple, that bring
with them no tools to work with, but occupy the room of a Fig tree that
bear no fruit. Secondly, they which do not gather with Christ, according to his
own testimony, do scatter: but it is manifestly known, that these men are no
gatherers, but to satan. Therefore it is evident, that they do us much harm,
but no good at al. Thirdly, how can those be profitable unto us, and not rather
an intolerable burden, whom the Lord in his great displeasure has cursed and
laden with many woes, as in JEREMY 23. Woe be unto the pastors that destroy
and scatter the sheep of my pasture, says the Lord: and after promising to
set shepherds over them, that should feed them. He shows evidently that
they scatter and destroy, who feed not the people with the wholesome word of
life. The like we read in the prophet EZECHIEL cap. 34. where it is written,
after this manner. Thus says the Lord God unto the shepheardes. Woe be unto the
shepherds of Israel, that feed themselves: should not the shepherds feed their
flocks? Ye eat the fat and cloth ye with the wool, ye kill them that are fed;
but ye feed not the sheep: the weak have ye not strengthened, the sick have ye
not healed, neither have ye bound up the broken, nor brought again that which
was driven away, neither have ye sought that which was lost, but with cruelty
and rigor, have ye ruled over them, and they were scattered without a
sheapherd, and when they were scattered, they were devoured of all the beasts
of the feelde etc. How can the sheep be in worse case then to be in the
hands of such shepherds as regard them not, but scatter them to be devoured of
all the beasts of the feelde? In the which spiritual pouerishments the wrath
of the Lord does not stay it self, but his arm is stretched out still to afflict
the people of that kingdom where such evil shepherds be, with all manner of
bodily plagues also, as war and captivity, whereof we read, in the Prophet
ESAIAS, where the Lord provoke foreign nations to invade the land of IVDEA,
saying: All ye beasts of the feeld come to, and devour even all the beasts of
the Forest etc. The reason follows. Their watchmen are all blind, they have
no knowledge, they are all dumb Dogs, they cannot bark, they lie, and
sleep, and delighte in sleeping. Last of all hereby it appears that we are
worse by these Sheapheards, then if we had none, because their skill serving
them only to teach us to say by heart, the Lord his prayer, the belief, and
ten commandments, and peradventure some part of the Cathechisme: Which we know
full little what they mean, and to read the scripture unto us, which we hear
as a story that concerned the people of old time, with out any further
application thereof unto our selves: yet notwithstanding by this, we think our
selves to be in as good case, and as far forward in the way of salvation as
the best of them all, that have continually heard the gospel preached for the
space of these 26. years. This is the policy of Satan, with the show of
nothing, to make us believe, that we have al things, and when we are empty, to
make us think we are full. This is that chainshot, wherewith he slaieth
thousands upon thousands, and as it were, the iawbone of an ass; wherewith he
does make heaps upon heaps, as we read of SAMPSON, whereas, if we had none at
all, very shame would compel us, to go to the places, where preachers are, and
by the grace of God, we should hear them, even the secreates of our hearts
discovered and condemned, and the only means to be saved, to embrace our
savior Christ by faith. By whose help we should take such taste of the word
of God, that we should afterward never be in rest and peace before we had
procured a good pastor to be placed over us. So should not Satan deceive us
any more to cause us to stay upon these silly shepeheards, as upon a broken
staff of reed, upon the which if a man lean, it will go into his hand and
pierce it. But if further reply be made of those that tender our salvation but
a little, saying, you are sufficiently provided of preaching by your quarterly
sermons. We answer, that 4. sermons in the year are as insufficient ordinarily
to make us perfect men in Christ Jesus, (to which end Pastors and Doctors are
given us) as 4. strokes with an axe are unable to fell down a mighty oak, or
4. showers of rain of one hours continuance to moisten the hard dry earth,
and to make it fruitful all the year long. Yea, our children will as soon
learn the Latin tongue by going to school 4. hours in a year, as we that be
children in understanding the scripture, shall attain to a true knowledge and
reformation of life fit for a Christian man, by hearing 4. sermons yearly: by
reason, that the one is agreeable to nature, the other quite contrary. What if
these men which preach these quarterly sermons, be be the Pastors of an other
flock? How can we with a good conscience take those sermons from that flock
to which they belong, and deprive them of that which by good right does
appertain to them? That congregation which sows unto their Pastor all his
earthly things, will be loathe to be defrauded of the use of any of his
spiritual things; especially, on the Saboth day. And surely, if this injury
were offered in matters concerning this life, it would in no manner wise be put
up and digested amongst us. But admit it were lawful for the pastors to borow
so much time of their flock as to preach these quarterly sermons, yet if we
consider the small profiting of the Apostles of Christ in a long time, who were
often taught and after the best manner, by their master, and the incredible
dulnes and backewardnes of us country people, that are fallen into the last
and worst age; and the exceeding great inequality of our teachers in comparison
of our Savior Cstrist: it may easily move you to think, that 4. sermons were
far to little, and that 400. rather were more requisite (if it were possible
they could be attained unto) to bring us to the unity of faith, and
acknowledging of the son of God, which is the end of the ministry, as S.
PAVL writes to the Ephesians. But seeing we have the express words of the
same same Apostle to TIMOTHY, willing him, and in him al pastors to preach
the word, and to be instant in season, and out of season, and to continue
therein; as also the example of himself, which he recommended to the Elders of
Ephesus, and consequently to all Pastors to be imitated, saying: Watch
therefore, and remember that by the space of three years, I warned every man
night and day with tears; this controversy may soon be ended, yea the woeful
experience almost every where, which is the schoolmaster of fools, does make
open proclamation, that these 4. sermons are to slender a diet for us. But if
it were granted (will some say) that it is fit, yea necessary, that every
congregation should have a painful preacher or two, if it be greater; which we
take to be as clear as the light, and denied of none but of Papists and
Athists: yet were it pity (say they) to displace these unlearned Curates, and
to turn them and their family forth a begging. But were it not a greater pity
by far, to see these blind guides themselves to fall into the pit of hell, and
a multitude of souls in the la^d, that are almost innumerable to follow the^,
there to starve and pine away eternally, being deprived of all food that
should comfort them? Nay, seeing they did never sweat for the place which they
have invaded, nor entered in by the door, but climed up some other way by evil
means, and no good faith; and being entered, have made havoc of the Lord his
flock, and therefore most worthily are called thieues and robbers, by the
mekest man that ever was: they may think themselves very mercifully dealt
withal, that they may quietly depart away with bag and baggage, and return to
their old occupations again, from whence they came, without any further
punishment. But because it may be thought that they have committed this sin
ignorauntly, and that under the shadow of law, and seeing that Christian
charity does extend it self very far, we suppose that some little pension
might very well be deducted from the living of the BB. of the Sea where they
were ordered and be given unto them: and if that pention would not serve for
their maintenance, the rest might be supplied either by their old occupations,
or by exercising some inferior office in the church, and teaching of children.
So by this sparer diet, then heretofore they have used, and the hearing of the
Gospel preached diligently by a learned man, which had bin before precious
unto them because they had no manifest vision; as it fell out in the days of
ELIAS, as we read in SAMVEL, they may be brought to bewail the blood (whereof
they are guilty) of so many souls, as have perished in their manifold sins
and ignorance, within their parishes, by reason they have not given warning
from God, out of his word, as he requires in the prophet EZECHIEL; that if it
be possible one way, or other, God his wrath might be pacified in true humbling
of themselves; with many tears before the throan of grace, and they washed
clean from the blood of all men, by the rich mercies of God in Christ Jesus.
Were not this a better way by a thou sand degrees; for these men them selves,
though no regard were had of us, then to suffer them still to ad blood unto
blod, until such time as the Lord his wrath were so kindled against them, that
nothing but certain destruction, were to be looked to fall upon them from the
Lord, as we read of the wicked sons of ELIE? Let them therefore depart, and
give place to learned preachers, if some sacrilegious patrones will so permit;
for we have heard, that it has bin preached at Paul's cross, that in the two
Universities of Cambridge and Oxford, there are mo then 300. able men fit for
the ministry, beside many other in the country that cannot enter into any
church, or take any charge abroad, except in the first step they enter in, they
will commit both simony and perjury. How shall satan be conquered by such men,
as in the first conflict have received by him such deadly wounds? For even our
plough boys know it to be a common practice almost every where amongst
patrons, that either they take a great sum of money, or money worth, as it were
a fine, with such sleighty conueiance, as if they were iuglers, that no man
shall espy the^ or any law prevent them, or make some reservation of the tithes
and glebeland, as it were a rent, and many times all these practices be used
together, whose ravenous teeth, and also the payment of the first fruits and
tenthes, which the charge of their lawful family, which the papists never
knew, and also their tithes not paid them in so large a sise as heretofore has
been done, has brought the churchme^ unto such an ebb, that after their death
their executours do not bless them, except it be certain of the^ which have
sundry benefices. The consideration whereof, has abashed many of us so much,
that we have small regard to maintain our children in learning, in hope of any
honest preferme^t that way. Yea, we fear a further mischief to fall upon us
by these deuourers of holy things, of the which we hope there is none among
you: for we see them every day more diligent to compass sea and land, to find
out JEROBOAM priests for us (for they are the men that will be content to part
Christ his coat between them) and when they have found them out, they make them
two fold more, the children of the devil, then themselves; by causing the^ for
a little lucre sake, to betray men's souls to the devil. So that what by these
cormorant patrones, and JEROBOAM his priests, sin and iniquity is risen so
high, that it is now full sea: Ignorance, blasphemy, and contempt of the
Saboth day does reign in town and city: In pride and vanity, Satan has
wasted his fruitful wits, that he can do no more. In these days all are
become princes and nobles. The tire of women is lighter now, then of the stews
heretofore: so that, if the people of the former times should rise out of their
graves, and behold this present age, they would surely think that proud
strangers had invaded and conquered this land. Quarrels and strifes in law are
infinite. Whoredom is made but a sport. Craft and deceit is every where
practiced. Usury has made as much frie^dship between man and man, as was
between CAINE and ABEL. No town is emptye of the covetous which join house
to house, and land to land, whereby the poor is multiplied in great number.
But as concerning many patrones; the leprosy of spoiling of the church, has
so pierced their bones and marow so deep, that it cannot be washed away, with
any good law, be it never so wisely made: For the Lawyers themselves confess,
that by the help of Satan, some men are as cunnyng, to overthrow the meaning
of good laws, as it were to undo PENELOPE her web, as other are provident
by the good laws to prevent mischief. And therefore, the only way and remedy
to cure this cancker, is; to restore the presentations to the Church, to whom
by good right they do belong. Which thing as it is most undoubted by the word
of God, so also we hear that the learned are able to prove it by the civil
law: wherein it is said, that a privilege is frustrate and of none effect,
when it is abused, and that the people and other that had interest to present,
assigned their right to the patrones, when they endued the church with lands
and other prefermentes, it is plain: who persuaded themselves that the patron
would be careful enough to provide a worthy man, who would not spare his lands
and living to maintain him. But now the patrons neither endow the church but
spoil it, neither are they careful to provide godly preachers but on the
contrary, they labor tooth and nail to bring the caterpillars of Egypt upon
us. And therefore what right can they pretend to claim any privilege? Which
surely the godly will not contend for, when they shall see that restitution
thereof tends to the glory of God, and the building of his church. Will ye
hear what the papists mutter; yea they speak it plainly that we maintain our
heresies (as they term them) for advantage, and not for conscience; affirming,
that they cannot be persuaded, that we our selves are certified of the truth
of our religion or receive any comfort thereby: for then (say they) would ye
cherish and maintain the professors as we do, and not use them as sponges and
spoil them as ye do. O lamentable estate of the church! o pitiful sight to see
her thus lie in the dust. Come Jeremy, and fill thy head with tears, as with a
fountain, cease neither day nor night, but make lamentation for the slain of
the daughter of Sion! Let thine eyes cast out rivers of water for the
destruction of God his people! o that some Angel of the Lord would come unto
you, as it were from Gilgal to Bochim, and record in your ears the mercies of
our God, in delivering you from the captivity of Antichrist, as it were from
Pharaoh, and in giving you a fruitful and peaceable land, to who^ the Lord said
by his gospel which he delivered unto you: I will never break my covenant with
you. You also shall make no covenant with the papists, the idolaters of this
land, or any kind of their ungodliness, but destroy al their idolatry and
superstition whatsoever. But ye have not obeyed my voice in retaining idol
ministers, by whom Satan does hold his kingdom fast. Wherefore have ye done
this? At the hearing of which words, reproouing the Israelites for making a
covenant with the inahbitants of the land, all the people of the children of
Israel lift up their voices and wept. Of the which weepyng, the place took his
name Bochim, which in them was a true sign of earnest repentance. And further,
to assure them of God his mercies touching this fault, as also to bind
themselves more straightly to the reformation thereof, they sacrificed there
unto the Lord. The father of our Lord Jesus Christ, of his rich and abu^dant
mercy, grant, that in hearing the like sin; in suffering this idol ministry
amongst us, you may draw out of your heds buckets of water of repentance, and
join your selves with them in the like reformation. But let ESDRAS come in
also amongst you, and bewail a greater matter then unlawful marriages. Let him
rent his clothes and tear his garments, and pluck of the hair of his head, and
beard, and sit down astonished, and let all be assembled unto him that fear
the words of the God of Israel, because of the transgressions of this land. Let
them fall down upon their knees and spread out their hands unto the Lord God,
and say: o my God, I am confounded and ashamed to lift up mine eyes unto thee
my God, for our iniquities are increased over our head, and our trespasses are
grown up unto the heavens: from the days of our fathers have we been in great
trespass unto this day. And now, for a little space in the reign of our
soueraign Lady ELIZABETH, grace has bin showed from the Lord our God, in
causing a remnaunt to escape, in giving us a nail in his holy place, that our
GOD might lighten our eyes, and give us a little reviving in our servitude
Papisticall: For we were bondmen in Queen MARY her days; yet our God has not
forsaken us in our bondage, but has inclined mercy unto us in the sight of
Jesus Christ, to give us life, and to erect the house of our God, and to give
us a wall and defense in this land. And now our GOD, what shall we say? for we
have forsaken thy commandementes which thou have commanded by thy servant
the Prophets and Apostles, saying: The land whether ye go to possess, is an
unclean land, full of idolaters, and idol ministers: Now therefore shall ye
erect in GOD his house, an holy ministry, that ye may be strong and eat the
goodness of the land, and so to leave it for an inheritance to your sons
for ever. And though thou did punish us grievously in Queen MARIE her
days, and now in our days, by stirring up the papists to disturb the peace of
the land, for the neglect of this holy ordinance, yet haste thou punished us
less, then our sins have deserved. Should we still continue, to break thy
commandementes and permit this idol ministerye to remain among us? a people
of much abhominatio^s, whereby sin does flow, as a river, in the land:
would thou not be angry toward us, till thou had consumed us, so that
there should be no remain or scaping? o Lord God of Israel, in so doing thou
should be just: yet we are reserved to escape, as appears this day. Behold
we are before thee in our trespasses, our conscience does acknowledge the same:
have mercy upon us, for we cannot stand before thee, because of it. O that it
would please God to move you our most dread soueraign, after this manner to
go into God his house again, with ESDRAS and acknowledge this oversight with
tears! Then would a great assembly of all sorts of people of this land be
gathered about you with weeping and great lamentation. Then would your honorable
counsel come about you, as SECHANIAH the son of IEHIHEL came to ESDRAS, and
said, we have trespassed against God, by receiving a strange ministry; yet
there is hope concerning this. Now therefore let us make a covenant with our God
and put away this dumb ministry, and place in their room a godly preaching
ministry, according to the counsel of the Lord, and those that fear the
commandment of our God, and let it be done according to the law. Arise, the
matter belongs unto thee, we also will be with thee. Be of good comfort and
do it. But the means how this learned ministry may be established, are best
known unto your wisdoms. But if you will give us countrymen leave to show our
opinions with patience. Briefly we think, there must be a sufficient number of
workmen, and honest provision be made for them, as we read that SOLOMON, for
the building of the material temple, found out 183300 able men that were
occupied in hewing of stone and timber, and carrying of burde^s, which al were
maintained at the king his cost, yet we think that a less number of workmen
would suffice for the building of this spiritual Temple, which
notwithstanding, is far more glorious then SOLOMON his temple. If it be said
the small number of skillful men can not easilye be found, a lamentable
thing to be heard. What should we do? but first place all those worthy men,
that can be found, and erect more Colleges and seminaries of true religion, to
enlarge the kingdom of Christ: as we see Antichrist, whose talents are as hard
as brass, to hold fast whatsoever comes within them, and whose hunger is as
insatiable, as hell, yet does he spare no cost to build Seminaries of lies and
heresies, to advance the kingdom of the Devil, who by such means, has
greatly prevailed in this land: Should then the pillars of the kingdom of
Christ be more sparing, yea, more cold to provide all things necessary for
the Lords army, to be sent against these Idolatoures, with a two edged Sword
in their hands, to execute vengeance upon these and correction against the
people, to cast down imaginations, and every high thing, that is exalted
against the knowledge of God, and to bring into captivity every thought, to the
obedience of CHRIST? God forbid. For, if the enemy has increased his force,
Is it not meet, that we should doubt ours? Now for the provision of such a
number of able men as might come out of Colleges and other schools of
Learning, to take charge upon them; This Noble Iselande may not for shame
complain, of want: For the Lord his eyes are upon this Land Night and
Day, that it is as fruitful as the Gardene of EDEN, a Parragonne of all the
World, and the Storehouse for other Countries: The wealth whereof is so
great, that men, and Women can not deuyse to waste it vaynelye. Then when
the Lord says that he has need of mayntaynaunce for his Ministers; Shall
we say that we have it not? In the time of Idolatrye there was more then
sufficient by far. How then is it embeseled away, that there is not to
feed CHRIST, and too cloth him? How can we say, that we love him? no,
not so much as Antichriste loves the Devil: For Antichriste is bountiful,
to maintain his service. If the like liberality were used amongst us, without
all doubt, a great number would be stayed, from passing the seas to Rome or
Rhemes to become Jesuits.

What is then to be done? Give unto God that which belongs to God, and unto
CAESAR that which belongs unto CAESAR. What belongs to God, that is kept
from him? even that which appertains unto his church, to wit, presentations
and impropriations. That things pertaining to the church, do also belong to the
Lord, it appears in the prophet MALACHIE, cap 3. Where he him self does
seriously complain, saying: Will a man spoil his Gods? yet have ye spoiled me.
But ye say, wherein have we spoiled thee? in tithes and offerings, ye are
cursed, with a curse, for ye have spoiled me, even this whole nation? Has not
the whole nation of England spoiled the Lord in like manner, and rather more:
that a workman his hire is to be found in few places. Surely, this is written
for our learning, that we might know that things consecrated to GOD for the
service of his church belong unto him for ever: as the tithes which were
dedicated to the Lord, and his church by our forefathers with great equity
which by no right can be taken away as we read Leui. 27. Nothing separate from
common use, that a man does separate unto the Lord of all that he has,
(whether it be man or beast or land of his inheritance may be sold or redeemed.
For every thing separate from the common use is most holy unto the Lord. The
which law, is not ceremonial but judicial: the equity whereof endures to the
church for ever, and the violation of the same law has been horribly punished
in former dais, as we read that ACHAN who defrauded the Lord of silver and gold
consecrated to his treasury, was put to death with all his house in a fearful
manner, NABVCHADNEZER also spoiled the temple of the holy vessels, consecated to
the Lords service, which BALTHAZAR also abused by drinking wine in them with
his concubines turning holithings to profane uses, whose heavy judgment was
not deferred, the like we read of Ananias and Saphira his wife, who sold a
parcel of land, and dedicated the price thereof to God and his church. But
when they had consented to keep part of that which was consecrated, they
wersharply rebuked by Peter, and suddenly stricken to death. The like justice
can no man escape, either in this world, or in the world to come, that
co^miteth the like offense, for the Lord is not partial in judgment, neither
with him is there any respect of persons, but he that sinnrth shall die the
death, except he turn unto him with true repentance, and reformation of his
sins, and assuredly the sacrilege of holy things is committed even with
greediness in this Land. How can Christ in the last day, place these men
which commit sacrilege and make the church so naked of her own right hand,
and say: I was hungry and ye fed me, I was naked and ye clothed me; and not
rather thrust them among the Goats, on the left hand, saying, depart from me ye
cursed into everlasting fire, prepared for the devil and his angels: for I was
hungry, and ye gave me not mine own: I was naked and ye parted my garments
among you. For whatsoever ye did unto my poor ministers in defrauding them, ye
did to me. Yea let them take heed, least in the day of their death, the Church
do not appear in their consciences, as a mighty sea to ouerwhelm them, and
they say then: Come ye mountains, and cover us, that we may fly from the
fearce wrath of the Lord, and not behold his fearful countenance. For we must
make restitution to the uttermost farding. Repent threfore in time, and make
restitution, as the law requires. If any man by error has taken, that which
was holy to the Lord: Let him restore it, and put the fifth part to it
according to the law. Leui. 27. Then shall Christ his sacrifice be accepted for
him. Which restitution, we read that ZACHEVS practiced most straightly: as
appears by his own words. If I have done any man wrong, I will restore him
four fold, For repentance, without satisfaction if it be in thy power, is no
better then plain mocking of God. And to move them the more, let them
remember, what S. PAVLE wrighteth to the Corinths. Know ye not that the unjust
shall not inherit the kingdom of God? What greater injustice, then to defraud
God of his glory? the ministers of their right? and the poor people of their
everlasting life? But we trust, that if certain, that do neither regard God nor
his church, and therefore will not be willing to depart with any thing for the
maintenance of a learned Ministry, that the good prince NEHEMIAH accompanied
with so many worthy men, as are now assembled together, will disapoint that
profane man TOBIIAH, of his Iodging, in the chamber of the house of the Lord,
and make it clean for the Levites. And this injury if we feel, to be so
great, to take that from us, which we would consecrate to the food of our souls,
and yet we are utterly famished, that we think it not only manifest by the law
of God, but also by the light of nature; yea, if they them selves, which have
these impropriatio^s were deposed upon their oath, by their superiors, whether
in their co^scie^ces, they wrong the Church or no? they would first make many
excuses. But if they were urged with an oath, surely they would lay their hands
upon their mouth, and crave pardon. For the light of nature may be covered, yet
it cannot be utterly extinguished. Which light of nature shined most clearly in
king Pharao, who^ the great famine of the land, having brought all the la^d of
the people, was so far off from seeking of the ground belonging to the
priests, that to preserve it, of his bountifulness he gave them, an ordinary
alowance. If this heathen king had such a conscience, to preserve the state of
his superstitious priests, by releeuing them in the time of extremity, should
Christian estates make less conscience, to maintain the true servants of God,
which show unto us the way of salvation in the time of peace and prosperity.
We pray you (right honorable) to spare us to speak a little more: for we
plead for the salvation of our souls. It seems unto us that Christ the grand
captain of the tribe of Judah, as one awaken out of sleep, and as a strong man
after wine, does now offer him self to smite his and our enemies on the hinder
parts, and to put them to a perpetual shame, requiring of you a number of
expert soldiers, the maintenance for them, which are rights and roialties of
his kingdom, and therefore justly we cannot deny him. But if the patron say
that he will not lose his patronage, for then he should forgo his pillage, nor
the improprietary will diminish any of his impropriation for the service of this
war (of which disposition we hope that there is none among you) but that rather
they would entreat Christ to depart the country as the Gergesits did for the
loss of their swine: or more spitefully repel him as the phariseis, Who said
depart hence, or Herodes will kill thee. Might he not conceive such grief and
indignation against us upon this repulse, who came to deliver us from the
greatest bondage and slavery in the world, and to enfranchise us as the
citizens of his kingdom the basest of whom are Nobles and Princes? Might not
this unkind act (say we) so much kyndle his displeasure toward us, that he
might be moved to retire back with all his blessings, and turn them into
plagues, against such an unkind people? what injury then should he offer us?
Surely none at all. But to descend to some particular example of want of
maintenance, as where a church is endowed with half that provision which is
requisite to maintain a preacher, by reason of the impropriation, as it falls
out in many churches of this land, which injury was done by Antichrist in the
night, and now restitution might be made in the day: Yea, put the case that the
church is not endowed with value of 20. marks (as exceeding many churches have
less) how can we think that a learned man that has spent many years in good
letters, and in the holy scriptures, will seat him self there, almost to famish
him self, and not rather to employ his labor to the teaching of children? Then
by means of this impropriation, such a cleark as is correspondent to the
living shall be placed there, a man that can bring no glad tidings, and to be
plain an idol sheapheard: whereby of necessity it must fall out in that
congregation, that HAGAR shall be fruitful in bringing forth bondmen and
slaves unto Satan, and SARAH altogether barren. How then can that impropietory
seeing this, eat sauourly those holy things heretofore consecrated to the
saving of souls without salt tears trickling down his cheeks (except his heart
be as hard as brass) knowing that he is the man alone, that does shut the gate
against the preacher, and consequently defraud God of his honor in that place,
and kill the souls of a multitude of his poor neighbors, that would live and
not perish. And this slaughter of souls likely to be continued through all
posterities, except restitution be made thereof to give entertainment to a
preacher. And the which is more lamentable to be known, how many hirelings for
five or six pounds be in diners Congregations in this Land, especially in
the North parts, where there is two or three thousand souls of all sorts of
people both old and young, that come to one Church to be taught: where the
poor silly man is as one that has not filled his belly in many Weeks before,
or lately come out of Prison, with a sharp face, both pale and white, who has
less spiritual food to feed the people that flock about him, then he has
bodily nourishment to fill their bellies: so that in such a populous
congregation, there be 3. or 4. that are able to give an account of their faith,
it is very much, and yet that work is wrought by some extraordinary hand of
God, and not to be imputed to the seely body. And thus it falls out in many
places where there be farmers to her majesty of impropriations that as they
are careless for the peoples souls and their own, the like regard have they to
maintain the building of the cha^cels, which lie ruinous in sundry places,
quite contrary to her majesty's pleasure, and the good peniworth they have at
her gracious hands. These and other things cause us to remember the days of
HEEI; wherein there was no manifest vision. For the 2. sons of HELY, OPHNY and
PHINIAS who knew not the Lord were wicked men also, caused the children of
Israel to abhor the offerings of the Lord, and the service of their God. By
whose means the people trespassed grievously against the Lord in negligence,
or rather contempt of coming to the tabernacle to worship the Lord according
to the law. Of which disho nor of God, HELY being informed that his sons were
the occasion thereof, yet did not reform and redress that great mischief,
according to that authority and power, which he had being chief judge and
high priest of the people, but only gave the^ gentle admonition; whereas their
fault and offense deserved rather to be punished with death. For whose
remisnes or rather negligence to reform such a weighty matter, the Lord
threatened such a grievous plague and destruction to fall upon him and upon his
house, which was truly executed as the remembrance thereof does make ears to
tingle. So the contempt and corruption of the worship of God, remaining
unreformed, at last it came to pass, the sins of the priests and of the people
were grievously punished by a great slaughter, which they sustained of the
philistims, and the ark of the Lord taken away from the midst of them and
delivered into the hands of their enemies. In steed of Ophny and Phineas, we
have a swarm and multitude of ministers that neither in ignorance of the
Lord, nor in lewd behauior are inferior to them. By whose ignorance and
wickedness the admiration of the word and sacraments upon the saboth day is by
the^ greatly profaned, and of the people grievously conte^ned. Which
prophanatio^ of that sacred day, if it should not be reformed, it were to be
feared that by these idol ministers and we the people offending together with
them likewise, should fall into the hands of our enemies the papists, and the
word of God taken from us, which is more dear and precious unto us then was
the arc of the covenant unto the Israelits. But we trust that these evils
shall not come upon us, because that for the redres of this heinous corruption
of the service of God, we make our complaint unto the^ that have equal
authority with HELY, and greater zele to advance the honor of God, and to wipe
away the deformities of his church; whose hearts do tremble at the words of the
Lord, who as we are persuaded will not be pertakers with HELY in his sins, lest
they should also be pertakers with him in his terrible punishments. Therefore
since so many thousands of us be in such a streite by means hereof, not
possible for us by any means we can espy either now or hereafter to be
delivered without your gracious and mighty helping hands: have pity upon us
right honorable assembly, and let our souls be precious in your sight. Let us
not die that everlasting death like fools in Israel, but so work in this
Parliament, that you may say unto the people of the whole land: We take you
to record this day, that we are pure from the blood of al men, for we have
kept nothing back, but have established al such laws as are necessary for the
publishing of all the counsels of God unto you his people. For all the whole
land is at your commandment both of body and goods (with the consent of our
most gracious soueraign, who is full of mercy and compassion) to do as by law
you shall prescribe the^. And assuredly (right honorable) it were better for us
by far (if no other remedy could be had) to live with bread and water in the
wilderness with the Israelites all the days of our miserable life, with the
plentiful preaching of the word of God, then to have our welfare (which we
acknowledge to be great) a thousands time doubled with this great famishment of
the word, which we endure in the most places of this land: for then our misery
after a small time would end in felicity: where as now our mome^tary pleasure
will shortly be turned into weping, wailing, and gnashing of teeth, except the
Lord come down from heaven to visit us by your ministry. We pray you therefore
most pitifully (right honorable) that that voice may no more be heard amongst
us. The Lords house cannot be built in many places within this land for want
of provision: for that does kill our hearts altogether, as if you should say
unto us: There is no remedy but you must needs die in your sins and
ignorance, the second and everlasting death. O most doleful voice, able to
break the Adamant, and to resolve it into tears; which terrible voice the
Lord of his infinite mercy turn far away from us. But undoubtedly so godly
and religious an assembly, the fair flowers of this land, will never speak so
hardly unto us; but (we hope) the contrary saying. This house may be built in
those desolate places, and with Gods help and our sovereigns it shall be
built, and therefore poor people be of good comfort. Otherwise you should
bear greater blame then the poor Jews that came out captivity from Babylon,
and differred the building of the material temple, excusing the matter, that
it was not yet time to build it; and never said, that by reason of their great
poverty and multitude of their enemies that it could not be built at all. Thus
right honorable, we have bewraied our grief, made our petition known,
declared the impediments of a learned ministry, and showed that an honest
maintenance is necessarily required: Look upon us; lift up your eyes and
behold a great multitude gathered about you, which are in the wilderness and
have nothing to eat. Be moved with compassion toward us, for we are as
sheep wanting a shepherd. We are hungry and come from far; we come unto you
as children unto the parents and ask bread, we trust you will not give us a
stone; we crave a fish, will you in stead of a fish give us a serpent? we
desire to have an egg; surely you will not give us a scorpion. O let us live
and not diel and let not that lamentable weeping and howling be heard among us
in the country, which sometime was heard in Ramah. Let us not bewail the
spiritual death of our children and posterity, as RACHEL wept for the bodily
death of her children who could not be comforted, because they were not. But
let the silver trump of the Lord sound the law in our ears, to the casting
down of the old man, and the gospel to the raising up of the new man: Let the
Lords lights be placed in our temples, and then shall it be fulfilled again
which was spoken by the Prophet. The people which sat in darkness, saw a great
light; and to the^ which sat in the regio^ and shadow of death, light is risen
up. And therefore we humbly beseech you right honorable to stir up you tender
affections toward such a multitude of us simple people that are in this land
fleeting in the sea of sin and ignorance, and now upon sight of comfort,
making an outcry for the safety of our life. That it would please you to reach
forth your right hand of mercy, and by your godly wisdoms to establish the
means of our deliverance, for we are in your hands either to save or spil. And
therefore, if there should be some of you that would not further to the
uttermost this the weightiest cause of a thousand, concerning not only our
salvation, but more the glory of Christ. How could these men protest that he
loved him, seeing he has set over the trial of his love to the care of the
feeding of his flock? As he has manifestly declared in the person of PETER,
saying: Love thou me; feed my sheep, feed my lambs. And though you feed
them not in your own persons; yet ye feed them in procuring them to be fed:
for the which cause ye are called by the Lord, the Pastors and shepeheards of
the people. Moreover, if these men should have any suite to the father of our
Lord Jesus Christ, for any thing whereof they should stand in need; how could
they use Christ as a mediator and advocate, to bring their matters to good
effect, if they should neglect such a weighty cause of his, which he desires
so earnestly to be brought to pass, as appears when he says: First, seek
the kingdom of God, and the righteousness thereof, etc. Which is chiefly
performed by a learned ministry, and not rather be afraid to hear his voice.
They that honor me, will I honor, and they that despise me, shall be despised.
But be it far from us to think any thing but good of so honorable assembly:
for we hope that our mouth shall be filled with laughter, and our tongue with
joy, saying: The Lord has done great things for us, whereof we may rejoice.
When we remember your pitiful inclination upon complaint made, to redress
all manner of, yea, smallest injuries touching this life. How should we now doubt
to be sent empty away, when we come for matters concerning everlasting life. We
come therefore unto you in great bitterness of our souls, not able to express
half the grief we feel for the death of our sons and daughters, as the
Sunamite came to ELIZEVS for the bodily death of her son, praying you to send
ELIZEVS and the sons of the Prophets, to spread themselves upon us, and upon
our children, to breathe into us the word of life, and to make prayers and
supplications to God forvs; so by little there is hope that we shall be revived
again into a spiritual life: for surely GEHEZY by laying on us ELIZEVS his
staff, we mean these hirelings, by reading to us their Homelies, can do us no
good. For notwithstanding this staff GEHEZY may return answer, that we can
neither speak nor hear, which be evident tokens of want of life. We beseech
you in Christ his name to take our supplication as the man of Macedonia, which
appeared unto PAVL in a vision, praying you to send preachers into our country
to help us, and in so doing be you well assured that you pass not the bounds of
your vocation. Oh, that you were carried in a vision into some great high
mountain, and could behold the huge army of people of this land spiritually
slain of Satan more cruelly and pitifully then ever was slain, as we suppose
in the greatest battle that ever was since the creation of this world. Then
would you shed tears abundantly with our Savior Christ, who standing upon
mount Oliuet, beheld that stubburne city of Jerusalem and wept for them,
because they refused the doctrine of salvation then offered them. But our case
is to be bewailed and pitied, because the doctrine of salvation is not offered
us by the way of preaching, in so many several congregations, as hunger and
thirst after it. And therefore hearken what Bethsheba says to every one of
you. Open thy mouth for the dumb, in the cause of all the children of
destruction, so shall you be able to say with Job to your unspeakable comfort
after this manner. When the ear heard me, it blessed me, and when the eye saw
me, it gave witness to me, for I delivered the poor that cried, and the
fatherless, and him that had none to help him. The blessing of him that was
ready to perish, came upon me, and I caused the widows heart to rejoice: I
brake also the jaws of the unrighteous, and plucked the pray out of his teeth.
Now then there is no time of silence, your vocation will not suffer it, but
that every one of you without exception, all excuses set apart, is to extend
his voice, wit, authority and credit to the uttermost degree in the cause of
Christ and his church, pleding it (if need so require) so zealously until you
sweat and faint withal, seeing that in your cause Christ refused not to sweat
drops of blood. But as the Lord is kind to those that deal kindly with him: so
his displeasure is death, if he being elected or contemned. Know him therefore
and his cause, that he may know you as his friends in the day of his glory.
And remember that Christ that makes this request for a learned ministry,
(which by his authority he might command, but rather thorough love he
entreats you by us) is not more vile and contemptible, but glorious sitting
on the right hand of his father, and therefore is able, and will requite this
kindness done to him seven fold into your bosom: yea, the Lord will account
it to be kindness, although in all right and conscience, it is an homage most
justly appertaining to his roialty, by reason that we hold of him, all that ever
we have in Capite. And though you be willing to perform this service, yet let
us put you in remembrance that Satan will withstand you, with all his malice
and power, who is the prince of this world, and therefore will not suffice
himself to be thrown out of his kingdom, as appears in the deliverance of
the children of Israel, from under the hand of Pharaoh in reedifiyng of the
primative Church: so at this present day, he is not altered, either in might or
malice, that he will be content to resign his kingdom over unto Christ; but
as then, so now with all speed will he muster his men of war against those
that attempt to the abolishing of his kingdom. Then we are to know, that as no
victory is gotten without strife, much less noble victory without contention
in the highest degree: For it is to be feared, that the devil, the flesh and
the world, will all oppose themselves against you, which notwithstanding being
achieved, is far more glorious in the high court of heaven, the^ the
conquest of ten mighty kingdoms made tributary and vassals unto this land. This
therefore is a work worth the trial of your strength and magnanimity, joined
with the greatest honor that may be. So that if you prevail (right honorable)
as we trust your enemies shall fall down before you, otherwise we could see no
end of our grief and sorrow, the^ no doubt in the judgment of all wise me^,
you shall be counted comparable with the worthies of the world: yea, far
passing them in all true honor and glory. And seeing we have begun to speak to
the right honorable assembly, being but the base people of the land: Let it
not displease you that we speak yet a little more: But if any thing shall
escape our pen unfit to be spoken by us to so high and honorable a court of
Parliament, we most humbly beseech you upon our knees by the price of the death
and passion of the Lord Jesus Christ, and by his glorious coming to judgment
for our everlasting deliverance, to pardon us, imputing it either to the
grief and bitterness of our souls, which caused JOB to utter some foolish
words; or to the rudeness of our education, whereby in words and terms we
may fail against our will. For our purpose is (God knows) not to hinder our
suite by offending any, but by a plain and pitiful manifestation of the truth
to win the favor of you all in this weighty and long desirous petition, which
concerns the salvation of our souls. But to the matter. We have heard it
spoken by wise men, and it sinketh deeply into our minds, that if every one of
you were in policy comparable to ACHITOPHEL the Gilonite, whose advise for
the commonwealth in the days of DAVID, was taken as an oracle of God, yet if
you should devise many strong laws for the preservation of her majesty's
person (whom the Lord bless for ever) the peace and prosperity of this land,
and the subversion of our enemies the Papists and Jesuits, and pass over this
law for a learned ministry (by planting whereof we are sure to have a
perpetual league of amity with the Father, the Son, the holy Ghost and
mighty angels of heaven, who will be unto us a strong wall of defense, the^ that
wherewith Babylon was environed, which was very strong as the learned say: For
if God be on our side, who can be against us.) Then (say they) that those good
laws would be as weak and frail to bind fast the head strong papists and
Jesuits, as were the 7. green withs never dried, and the new ropes never
occupied able to bind mighty SAMSON. But being joined with that principal law,
they will be as sharp as a rasor to cut them clean of. But as in the greatest
mischiefs viz. by wasting by fire and water, as also by the invasion of the
enemy, the Proverb has place, Delay does make the danger greater: so
especially it holds in the invasion of the greatest enemy of all mankind,
who has already taken many towns and castles in this land, showing all kind
of tyranny wheresoever he comes. Therefore as when the bodily enemies enter
the land to waste and destroy the care full magistrates, set the beacons on
fire, whereby with all speed they leuy power against the enemy, least by
suffrance and daily victories, he should make himself so strong, that
afterward he were not able to be driven out of the country. So the like
expedition or rather greater, were to be used in gathering an army of worthy
soldiers to encounter Satan before he enlarge himself in the kingdom of
darkness by means of these Jesuits, least as we have seen with our eyes in
the days of Queen MARY, it might fall out by the just judgment of God for our
sins, that by tract of time he might possess the whole kingdom, as the
foresaid Jesuits, his faithful servants, do endeavor to bring to pass.
And therefore, as you love the Lord Jesus Christ, and his Church, which is as
tender unto him, as the apple of his eye, in the preparation of his warrefare,
deal not sparingly or niggardly with him, but honor him with your substance
as he requires, who has been so rich and bountiful toward you not only
in the treasures of the kingdom of Heaven, but also in the blessings of this
presentlyfe. So that the Lord has not set you below, but has placed you on
high: And if that which he has done for you be too little, he will yet
multiply his graces upon you, until you run over. O remember and forget not
that seeing Christ the Son of the living God, equal with his Father,
abounding in love toward you, did cast aside all honor and glory, and made him
self of no reputation, by taking upon him the form of a servant: yea, he
became a worm and no man: a very abject of the people, to raise from the dust,
and to lift you out of the dung, to cause you to sit with princes of his
people in the heavenly places in Christ Jesus: he also became pore, not having
whereupon to lay his head, to make you to abou^d in those most excellent riches,
which the eye has not seen, nor the ear has not heard, neither have they
entered into the heart of any carnal man. Ought you not with like recompense
of love toward him to lay your honor and riches at his feet to cover the
shame and nakedness of his desolate Church? if ye protest in word that love
him, and that ye are desirous to see the Church his spouse in her glorious
beauty, arrayed in robes of needle work: yea, clad with a vesture of Gold of
Ophire, and yet will not descend one step downward, or abase your self one
whit, nor open your purses to contribute relief, even to sustain her
necessities, but keeping back her ancient revenues, wherewith heretofore she
was furnished to all necessary uses: how can this feigned love escape the sharp
censure of the apostle JAMES, who says, if a brother or a sister be naked and
destitute of daily food, and one of you say unto them, depart in peace, warm
your selves and fill your bellies, notwithstanding ye give them not those
things, which are needeful to the body, what helps it, but we are fully
persuaded that these rich mercies of Jesus Christ cannot lie hid and rest in
the heart of any man living, but that they will kindle a flame of burning love
which will show it self bountiful and liberal to the advancement of his
Church and kingdom. And further whereas it has been provided by a good
statute, that a freedom from paymente of tithes for a certain time should be
granted to them that do convert barren and waste ground into tillage, to
give them a greater encouragement to take the toil in hand; and that ye have
likewise bin careful to provide for the tuing of Marshes, that have been
overflowed and surrownded with water: ought not then a far greater care and
diligence be used that a wise and sure Law might be established to bring the
Lords Feelde into Tillage which lies waste and barren of the fruits of
righteousness, and full of thorns and briars fit for nothing but for the
fire, and is likewise drowned with the flowds of sin and ignorance, as it is
pittifullye to be seen in the greatest part of this Land: which Law if it
should be neglected, seeing it concerns peace and prosperitye of our
souls for ever, should not just occasion be given to take up this Proverb
against you? They have strayned a Gnatte and swallowed a Camel: but we trust
that the Lord in his mercy will look upon us, and stir up in the hearts of
so grave Wise, and Godly a Senate, such a care and pity over us, that none
of the euilles which we fear shall fall upon us. For as we we read that when
DAVID had built him self an house in Jerusalem, yet swore he unto the Lord,
and vowed to the mighty God of IAACOB, saying, I will not enter into the
Tabernacle of mine house, nor come upon my pallet or bed, nor suffer mine eyes
to sleep, nor mine eyelids to slumber, until I find out a place for the
Lord, an habitatio^ for the mighty God of IAACOB. So if you all as one man, in
like godly zeal with DAVID, should swear and vow unto the Lord that you
would not not return unto those fair houses, wherewith the Lord has blessed
you, to take your comfort, and recreation therein, until such time, as you have
provided and procured, not that the Ark of the Lord, but that the Gospel of
Jesus Christ, which is a more sure token of his presence, should be brought
into his Temple, and placed between the Cherubins, which thing is performed
when the Gospel is committed to a faithful Ministerye of the Lord, to whom
all the people may resort, in doubtful causes to ask Counsel of God. But
contrariwise, nothing less is done when the Gospel of reconcilliation is
committed into hands of a dumb and idol ministry, who can neither open the
book nor shut it: neither by the authority thereof can either bind or loose.
Who are to be admonished not to meddle with that sacred book as public
persons, least the Lord make a breach into them as he did into VZZA. Assuredly
in this your service of the Lord, ye should do a work worthy of al posterities
to be remembered: so should it appear that ye are not only careful for the
Church in recommending her good estate by prayer unto the Lord: saying, peace
be within thy walls, and prosperity within thy palaces: for my brethren and
neyghbors sakes, I will wish thee now prosperity, but also by deeds, when ye
perform the same. As it is written, because of the house of the Lord our
God, I will procure thy wealth. Consider also that it was in the heart of DAVID,
to build a temple unto the Lord but because he was occupied in wars against
the enemies of the lord, the building of that house was committed unto his Son
SOLOMON: To whom the Lord promised peace from his enemies on every side: so he
brought the work, to perfection in the fourth year of his reign. Should we
not think, that seeing the Lord has blessed us with the peace of SOLOMON in
the time of the Gospel for the space of twenty seven years, that it had been
our duetye with like diligence and speed, to have set up the Spiritual Temple
of the Lord in a glorious beauty, so that hardly any default or blemish could
by this time have been espied in the same: yea, has not the Lord showed
himself angry against the whole la^d, and thretned a grievous punishment against
it when he has at sundry times offered danger unto her majesty, by the sons of
Beliall, as though he would quench the light of Israel? yet the Lord with great
patience has had mercy, not only on her, but also on us, still waiting, if now
at the last, we will reform and amend such grievous ruin amongst us. And we
beseech you to cast your eyes from Dan to Bersheba, and see if there be any sin
more detestable and odious in the sight of the Lord that reigns in this land,
then the permission of this idol ministry: whereby the people perish without
number, and God is defrauded of his honor. And if any man be wilfully ignorant
in these things, let him be ignorant still, for the Lord has revealed it unto
babes, yet if any man will now commend the state of the Church compared with
that time wherein the palpable darkness of Egypt covered the land
(peradventure to stay the proceedinges of the godly minded) we acknowledge it
with all thanksgiving unto God, to be excellent and singular. But if we
compare our Church by that which the Lord requires in his word, and we by duty
are bound to perform under a great penalty laid upon us, which the long peace
and quietness of this Land might have made easy to be performed and the
examples of the other countries have provoked forward, we shall find the church
to be in great weakness and desolation: So that we have great cause of
lamentation to see her thus lie in the dust. For we read in the Prophet Amos,
that the Lord brought a grievous plague upon the children of Israel, which
ought to have caused them to return unto the Lord, by withholding the rain from
the earth, so that it rained upon one city and not upon another, one piece was
rained upon and the pcece whereupon it rained not, withered: so 2. or 3. cities
wandered unto one city to drink Water, but they were not satisfied: has not
this plague twice doubled, fallen upon us cause us to turn unto the the
Lord, seeing he has restrained the dew of his Word, even the Water of
life, from falling upon many Towns of the Country, so that ten or twelve
of them should be compelled to wander unto one Town in sundry places of
this land, if they had that godly desire and thirst of the word which is
required: yet peradventure they should not be satisfied in that place. Then
seeing that the hand of the Lord lies so grievously upon us, ought we not to
humble our selves in deep repentance with many tears, that the fierce wrath of
the Lord may be turned away from us, least he add plague unto plague until we
be all consumed from the face of the earth. But if it be further provided
that hereafter men shall be admitted into the ministry, except those which
are able to preach the word of God, and that in the mean time we shall be
contented to suffer those idol ministers which are already entered into the
flock, to wear out their miserable days amongst us, then this mischief
perchance would drive us to these extremities, either to wish that we had not
as yet been borne in the world, or else that some untimely death suddenly fall
upon these idols, least the most part of us should be plunged in the deep pit
of hell, before their cursed days were ended. And therefore the occasion of
these unnatural desires ought not to be enforced upon us, neither is there the
like reason to make provision in the matters of salvation only, against the
evils and mischiefs which may happen after that time, as it is conveniently
done in the civil causes appertaining to this present life, for two weighty
reasons that may be alleged. First, in civil matters, the evils and
discommodities which are past, are such, as are intolerable, and may be
suffered, and time will wear them away. Secondly, the peace of the public
wealth is preferred, and no man has cause to complain that any right is taken
from him, but it is far otherwise in this cause that concerns the kingdom
of heaven: for this mischievous evil of a blind ministry, is every ways
intolerable, for it is written: If the blind lead the blind, they shall both
fall into the ditch, out of the which they can never rise again, where there
is weepyng, wayling and gnashyng of teeth for ever. For who is able to give a
ra^some to redeem their souls out of hell, and no length of time does wear
away their misery, but rather does increase and multiply the anguish of their
souls, neither is our peace disturbed by remedying these evils that are past.
For how can there be peace otherwise established before that this wickedness as
it were of ACAN that troubles all Israel be taken away from amongst us: And
these blind guides have lest of al cause to complain of injury offered them,
for by remoouing them out of their places, they should receive the greatest
benefit that could happen unto them: for they should be forced to cease from
murdering Gods people any more, and if it were possible be brought to
repentance for the giltinesse of that blood which they have shed upon the
earth, that their souls might be saved in that great day when the Lord shall
come to judgment: among which persons (with your patience) the non residents
are to be numbered. And therefore we pray you right honorable in the tender
mercies of Christ Jesus, to redress these evils that do presently hang upon us
and oppress us with intolerable bondage and slavery, no, not by the way of
imagination any way suffrable. And look round about you, and take for example
to imitate, so many as have bin zealous for the house of God, and liberal
toward the maintenance thereof. First, set God him self before your eyes, who
in mount Sinai provided a sufficient portion to be given to the Levites his
ministers to attend upon holy things. Remember that the Israelites in their
poor estate in the wilderness, gave voluntarily more then enough, to the
erectyng of the Tabernacle and furniture thereof. But to pass over many
examples which might be set before your eyes, let not EZECHIAS, JOSIAS,
NEHEMIAS, and the Princes of the people that be under them be clean
forgotten. Yea, CYRUS an Heathen king, and other Kings of Persia, were
bountiful to the Temple of the Lord. Of all which worthy men, the memory will
ever flourish and never dye. But especially, we beseech our gracious and noble
Princess, to match her self with DAVID the chiefest worthy of the world, and
not only consecrate the most just spoils of her enemies, but also give
bountifully of her own peculiar treasure to the mainteuaunce of the house of
GOD after his example, and taking upon her his person, to come into this
honorable assembly of Parliament, and say unto them: This spiritual Temple
is a great and mighty work, For this house is not for manne, but for GOD;
Now I have prepared with all my power for the house of my God: gold for vessels
of gold, and silver for vessels of silver, and brass for things of brass,
iron for things of iron, and Wood for things of Wood, and onix stones and
stones to be set, and carbuncle stones, and of diverse colors, and all
precious stones, and marble stones in abundance. Moreover, because I have
delight in the house of my GOD, I have of mine own gold, and silver, which I
have given to the house of God beside all that I have prepared for the house of
my God, I have prepared for the house of the sanctuary, even three thousand
talentes of of gold, of the gold of Ophir, and seven thousand talents of fined
Silver, to ouerlay the walls of the houses. The gold for the things of gold,
and the silver for the things of silver, and for all the work by the hands of
artificers, and who is willing to fill his hand to day unto the Lord. So the
princes of the Families, and the princes of the tribes of Israel, and the
captains of thousands and of hundreths, which the rulers of the king his work
offered willingly and they gave for the service of the house of God, five
thousand talentes of gold, and ten thousand pieces, and ten thousand talents of
silver, and eighteen thousand talents of brass, and one hundredth talentes of
iron. And with whom precious stones were found, gave them to the treasure of
the house of the Lord by the hand of IEHIEL the Gershonite. And the people
reioiced when they offered willingly: for they offered willingly unto the Lord
with a perfect heart. And DAVID the king also rejoiced with great joy. Therefore
DAVID blessed the Lord before all the congregation, and DAVID said. Blessed be
thou, o Lord God of Israel, our father for ever and ever. Thine o Lord is
greatness, and power, and glory, and victory, and praise, for all that is in
heaven, and earth is thine: Thine is the kingdom, o Lord, and thou excellest
as head over all. Both riches and honor come of thee, and thou raignest over
all, and in thine hand is power, and strength: and in thine hand it is to make
great, and to give strength unto all. Now therefore our God, we thank thee, and
praise thy glorious name. But who am I? and what is my people, that we should
be able to offer willingly after this sort? for all things come of thee; and of
thine own hand we have given thee: For we are strangers before thee, and
soiourners, like all our fathers: Our days are like the shadow upon the earth,
and there is none abiding: o Lord our God in all this abundance, that we have
prepared, to build thee an house for thy holy name, is of thine hand, and all
is thine. I know also my God, that thou triest the heart, and have pleasure in
righteousness: I have offered willingly in the uprightness of mine heart all
these things: now also have I seen thy people which are found here to offer
unto thee willingly with joy, o Lord God ABRAHAM, IZZAK, and ISRAEL our
forefathers, keep this for ever in purpose, and the thoughts of the heart of
thy people, and prepare their hearts unto thee. And give unto SOLOMON my Son
a perfect heart, to keep thy commandments, thy testimonies, and thy
statutes, and to do all things, and to build the house which I have prepared.
And DAVID said unto all the congregation. Now bless the Lord your God: And
all the congregation blessed the Lord God of their fathers, and bowed down
their heads, and worshipped the Lord, and the king. etc. So shall our most
gracious prince and her people, not only in contemplation behold this house,
as DAVID did the other, but with SOLOMON also, see it erected, in all
perfection, and rejoice wonderfullye in the glorious beautye thereof. How much
would this worthy work advance the honor of our Lord Christ? who no doubt,
would honor you all again in that great day, and make mention of this noble
act in that glorious assembly, to your unspeakable comfort. How much should
you make the angels of God to rejoice; who are glad at the conversion of one
sinner? How many that remain in their manifold sins and ignorance, would the
Lord convert, if these workmen were sent abroad to every place? For the
harvest is great, and the laborers are few. The^ should the Lord his eyes be
more vigilant to guard her royal person and the whole land. Then should all the
people be knit together in one true religion, and be of one heart, and one
soul, and not be carried away with the blast of every Jesuit, saying: Will you
forsake the religion of your forefathers? Lived they not well? Had they not
plenty of all things? For we think that nothing will destroy these vermin of
the land without the plentiful preaching of the word. But being enriched
therewith, we should earnestly despise the Pope his trash, and tread it under
his feet as dung, which is now very saleable in this land. Then should these
Jesuits be forced to cry as it were skrich owls not being able to abide the
clear light of the Gospel, and fly into desolate places, and mourn with the
dragons at Rome. Then should the prayers of the people which should be borne a
new by the immortal seed of the word, be as the sound of many Orators, for
the preservation of her majesty's person, the honorable counsel, the
inferior magistrates, and the peace of the whole land. Then, when the Lord his
way shall be known upon this earth, and his saving health among all this
people, then shall our land bring forth her increase, and God even our own
God shall give us his blessing. Then shall it be known that the Ministers of
the Word, are the chariots and horsemen of Israel. Most humbly therefore we
pray, and beseech our most gracious Sovereign, and you the right honorable
Counselors and the Nobility of this Land, you reverend Fathers of the Clergy,
you worthy Judges of the Law, and also you right Worshipful Knights and
Burgesses of the Lower House, not to shrinck away and wash your hands of this
work, but to raise up your selves, and as every one has received from Jesus
Christ greater wisdom, authority, and magnanimity then another, so to strive
and contend one with another, to strengthen the army of Christ, and (...) place
him in the royal seat of his king^^me. Which thing performed, as it would
be a glorious example for all Christendom to imitate, and a day of joy and
solemnity, more excellent then that day which the Jews held for their
deliverance from the conspiracy of HAMMON, not only in this present age, but
also in all posterities to come: so would it be the dolefullest day to the
kingdom of the devil and Antichrist, that ever was known in this land. Which
our most merciful father of his infinite mercy in Christ bring to pass: To
whose blessing, and direction of his holy spirit, in all your affairs, and
consultations, we commend you, with unfeigned prayers this time and ever. Amen.


