The manner of the sitting of the Lords Spiritual and Temporal, as Peers of
the Realm in the Higher house of Parliament, according to their Dignities,
Offices, and Degrees, with other Officers of their Attendance.


THe most reverend Father in God, Docto^ Abbot. Lord Archbishop of Canterbu^
his Grace. The right Honorable Sir Thomas Couentry Knight, Lord Keeper of the
great Sea of England. The right reverend Father in God, Docto^ Mathewes, Lord
Archbishop of York. James Ley Earl of Marlborough, Lord ^hig Treasurer of
England. H^nry Montague Earl of Manchester, Lord President of his Majesty's
most Honorable Pr^uie Council. The place of the Lord Privy Seal. George
Villars Duke of Buckingham, Lord high Admiral of England. William Paulet
Marquess of Winchester. Robert Bertue Earl of Linsey, Lord high Chamberlain
of England. Thomas Howard Earl of Arundell and Sury, Lord high Marshall of
England. William Herbert Earl of Pembrooke, Lord Steward of his Majesty's
Household. Phillip Herbert Earl of Mountgomerie Lord Chamberlain of his
Majesty's Household. They having several Writs of summons directed unto them
out of his Majesty's high Court Chancerie, do come and sit according to their
several creations. Robert Veare, Earl of Oxenford Henry Percie, Earl of
Northumberland Geoorge Talbot, E. of Shrewesbury Henry Gray, E. of Kent William
Stanley, Earl of Darby. Henry Somerset, Earl of Worcester. Francis Manors,
Earl of Rutland. Francis Clifford, Earl of Cumberland. Robert Ractliffe,
Earl of Sussex. Heenry Hastings, Earl of Huntington. Edward Borcher, Earl of
Bath. Thomas Writhiously, Earl of Southampton insia aetatem. Francis Russell,
Earl of Bedford. William Seymor, E. of Hartford. Robert Deuoreux E of Essex
Theophilus Clinton, E of Lincoln Charles Howard, E. of Nottingham Theophilus
Howard, E. of Suffolk Edward Sacuill, E. of Dorcet William Ceill, E of
Salisbury William Cecill, E. of Exeter Robert Cart E of Somerset John Egerton
E. of Bridgewater Robert Sidney E. of Leicester William Compton, E of
Northamton Robert Rich. E. of Warwick William Cauendish, E of Devonshire James
Hambledon, E of Cambridge James Steward, E. of March infra aetatem James Hay.
E. of Carlisle William Feilding, E. of Denbigh Ionh Digby, E. of Bristoll.
Lion^ll Cranfeld, E. of Middlesex Christopher Villers, Earl of Anglesey. Henry
Rich, Earl of Holland. John Hollis Earl of Clare. Oliver Saint John, Earl of
Bullingbroke, Francis Fane, Earl of Westmoreland. William Knoules, Earl of
Banbury. Thomas Howard, Earl of Barkshire. Thomas Wentworth, Earl of
Cleaueland. Edmond Sheffeld, Earl of Moulgraue. Henry Danuers, Earl of Danby.
George Carne, Earl of Totnes. Robert Carry, Earl of Monmouth. Edward Denney,
Earl of Norwich. Emanuell Scroope, Earl of Sunderland. William Cauendish,
Earl of Newcastle. Henry Carry Earl of Dover. John Mordant, E. of
Peterborough.
Viscounts.
Anthony Maria Br^wne, Vicount Mountague John Villars, Vicount Purbecke Finch,
Viscountesse Maydstone Richard Burke, Vicount Tunbridge William Fynes, Vicount
Say and Seal Edward Cecill, Vicount Wimbleton Thomas Savage, Vicount Savage
Edward Conway, Vicount Conway, principal Secretary Robert Perpoynt, Vicount
Newarke Paul Banning, Vicount Banning of Sudbury
Bishops.
The Archbishop of canterbury and York, the Bishop of London, the Bishop of
Durham and Winchester, have places in the higher house of Parliament in respect
of their Seas: all the Bishops of the other Dioces are called thither likewise
by writ, and sit according to their Consecrations. Doctor Mountain, Bishop of
London Bishop of Durham Doctor Neale, Bishop of Winchester Doct. Dove, Bish. of
Peterborough Doct. Godwine, Bish. of Hereford Doct. Thornbury, Bish. of
Worcester Doct. Harsnet, Bish. of Norwich Doct. Buckridge, Bish. of Rochester
D. Morton, B. of Couentry and Lechfield Doct. Baly, Bish. of Bangor Doct.
Carlton, Bish. of Chichester Doct. Howson, Bishop of Oxenford Doct. Bridgeman,
Bish. of Chester Doct. Field, Bish. of St. David's Doct. Williams, B. of
Lincoln Doct. Dauenant, B. of Salisbury Doct. Laud, B. of Bath and Wells
Doct. Wright, B. of Bristoll Doct. Hamner, B. of St. Ashaph Doct. Goodman. B.
of Gl^ucester Doct. White, B. of Carlisle Doct. Hall, B. of Excester Doct.
Murrey, B. of Landaph.
Barons.
They as Pears of the Realm, likewise summoned by writs, sit ac^rding to
their Creations. Henry Clifford, Lord Clifford Henry Neuill, Lord Abergaueney
Maruin Touchet, Lord Audley. Algernon Percie, Lord Percie. James Stanley, L.
Strange of Knocknig. Henry West, Lord Delaware. George Berkley, Lord Barkley.
Henry Parker, L. Morley and Mounteagle Richard Lennard, Lord Dacres of Herst
Stafford, Lord Stafford infra aetatem. Edward Sutton, Lord Dudley. Edward
Stourton, Lord Sturton. John Darcie, Lord Darcie and Menthell. Sands, L.
Sands of the Vine infra aetatem Edward Vaux, Lord Vaux. Thomas Windsor, Lord
Windsor. John Paulet, Lord Saint John of Basing. Thomas Cromwell, Lord
Cromwell. William Eure, Lord Eure. Phillip Wharton, Lord Wharton infra aetatem.
William Willoughby, Lord Willoughby of Parham infra aetatem. William Paget,
Lord Paget. Dudley North, Lord North. Brigges, Lord Chandois infra aetatem.
Spencer Compton, Lord Compton. Edward Wotton, Lord Wotton. Henry Gray, Lord
Gray of Croby. William Peter, Lord Peter. Gerrard, L. Gerrard infra aetat.
William Spencer, Lord Spencer. Charles Stanhop, L. Stanhop of Haringdon Thomas
Arundell, L. Arundell of Warder Dormar, L. Dormar of Winge, infra aetatem
Roper, Lord Tenham, infra aetatem Phillip Stanhop, Lord Stanhop of Shelford,
Edward Noell, Lord Noell Edward Montague, Lord of Kimbolton Fulk Greuill, Lord
Brook of Bacham Court Edward Montague, L. Montague of Boughton William Gray,
Lord Gray of VVearke Francis Leake, Lord Deincourt Henry Ley, Lord Ley Richard
Robarts, L. Robarts of Truro Horatio Vere, Lord Vere of Tilbury Oliver Saint
John, Lord Tregoze Dudley Carlton, Lord Carlton Imbercourt Nicholas Tufton,
Lord Tufton William Crauon, Lord Crauon of Hamsted Marshall, infra aetatem
Mountioy Blunt, Lord Munioy Thomas Belasses, L. Faulconbridge of Yarum Richard
Louelace, Lord Louelace of Hurley John Paulet, Lord Paulet of Hinton St. George
William Haruie, L. Haruie of Kidbrooke Thomas Brudnell, Lord Brudnell of
Stouton William Maynard, Lord Maynard Some Lords (as Prinie Councillors)
though not Peers of the Kingdom of England, such as the King shall be pleased
to call thither for their Assistance, and sit on the Wool sackes. The Officers
called to the higher house of Parliament for their Attendance, and likewise sit
on Wool sackes. The Master of the Rolls
Judges
Sir Nicholas Hyde, Lord chief Iustice' of the Kings Bench Sir Thomas
Richardson, Lord chief Justice of the Common Pleas Sir John Walter, Lord
chief Baron The Judges of the Kings Bench The Judges of the Common Pleas The
Barons of the Exchequer The four Masters for the Chancerie there attending,
according to the direction of the Lord Keeper of the great Seal of England The
Kings learned Council The Sergeants Sir Robert Heath, the Kings Attorney
general The Officers of the higher house of Parliament The Clarke of the
Crown The Clarke of the Parliament The Usher The Yeoman Usher.

