Ordinances decreed for reformation of diverse disorders in pryntyng and
vtteryng of Books.
THat no person shall prynt, or cause to be imprynted, nor shall bring, or
cause, or procure to be brought into this Realm imprynted, any Book or copye
against the form and meaning of any ordinance, prohibition, 1.
or commandment, contained, or to be contained in any the statutes or laws
of this Realm, or in any Injunctions, Letters patentes, or ordinances, passed
or set forth, or to be passed or set forth by the Queens most excellent
Majesty's grant, commission, or authority.

That whosoever shall offend against the said ordinance, shall not only
forfayte all such Books and copies, 2.
as shall be so prynted or brought in, but also shall from thence forth never use
or exercise, nor take benefit by any vsyng or exercysyng of the feate of
pryntyng, and shall sustain three months imprysonment, without bail or
maynpryse. And if he be not before such offense bound, with suerties, in
form hereafter expressed, then he shall also forfayte for every offense.x. li.

That no person shall sell, utter, put to sale, bind, stytch, or sow, any
such books or copyes, so prynted or brought in, contrary to the said
ordinance, upon pain to forfayte all such books and copyes, and for every 3.
book.xx. s.

That all books to be so forfayted, shall be brought into the Stationers hall in
London, and there the one moitie of all such forfaytures of money shall be
reserved to the Queens Majesty's use, and the other moitie shall be delivered 4.
to him or them that shall first seize the same books or copies, or make
complaynt thereof to the Wardens of the said company. And all the books so to
be forfayted, shall be destroyed or made waste paper, by the discretion of the
said Wardens.

That it shall be lefull for the Wardens of the said company for the time being,
or any two of the said company thereto deputed by the said Wardens, as well
in any ports, as other suspected places within this Realm, 5.
to open and view all packes, dryefattes, maundes, and other things wherein
books or paper shall be contained, brought into this Realm: and also to make
search in all workehouses, shoppes, warehouses, and other places, of Prynters,
Bookesellers, or such as bring books into this Realm to be sold, or where
they shall have reasonable cause of suspicion: And all books to be found
against the said ordinance to seize and carry to the said Hall, to the uses
abouesayde, and the parties therein offendyng to lead and present before the
Queens Majesty's hye Commissioners in causes ecclesiastical.

That every Stationer, Prynter, Bookeseller, Merchant, and other person vsyng
any trade of books pr^^tyng, byndyng, sellyng, or bryngyng into this Realm,
shall before the said Commissioners, or before any o(...) 6.
persons thereunto to be assigned by the Queens Majesty's most honorable privy
Council, enter into several Reconisaunces of reasonable sums of money to
her Majesty's use, with sureties or without, as to the said Commissioners
shall be thought expedient, that he shall truly observe all the said
ordinances, well and truly yield and pay all such forfaytures, and in no
point be resistyng, but in all things aydyng to the said wardens and their
deputies, for the true execution of the premises.

We under written think these ordinances meet and necessary to be decreed
and observed.

Matthew Cantuar. Edm. London. Amb. Cave. David Jews. Thomas Yale. Robert
Weston. T. Huycke.
Upon the consideration before expressed, and upon the motion of the
Commissioners, we of the privy Council have agreed these to be observed and
kept, upon the pains therein contained. At the star Chamber the.xxix. day
of June. Anno. 1566. and the.viii. year of the Queens Majesty's reign.

T. Bacon. C. S. VVynchester. R. Lecester. E. Clynton. Amb. Cave. E. Rogers. F.
Knolles. VV. Cecill.

