Here is a new Book, called the defense of age / and recovery of youth /
translated out of the famous Clarke and right expert medycyne Arnold de Noua
Villa / very profitable for all men to know.



Unto the noble and virtuous ^^y Lady Marget dowgses, Nice, unto the most
noble and christian, prince Henry ye. viii. king of England and of France,
defender of ye faith, and under god supremeheed of ye Church of England,
sister unto the most noble and thrysten prince James, king of Scotts
daughter, unto the noble cou^tie Archebald Earl of Anguysshe, Jonas D^lumde her
vmbse seruyt^r de^ueth grace and hesthe.
Sorry I am to offer unto your noble, and virtuous Ladyshyp so small a book,
were it not so that I am purposed to recompense your Ladyshyp, with a greater,
so that this may favorably be received (which to believe) the (...) noblenes,
and gentylnes that is in you, persuades me, also I hope that ye will consider
rather the heart of the gyuer then the gift it self which although it (...)
small in qua^tite, yet it is great in (...) and this done, I shall desire (...)
to preserve your Ladyshyps noblen^^^

THe co^seruacio^ of youth and withstandyng of age, consysteth in the
mayntenynge of the powers, the spyrites, and the natural heat of the body in
their state and temperancy: and in the co^fortyng and repayrynge of them
being defertyue. For so long as the powers, the spyrytes and the natural
heat of man's body are not debylitate nor wekened, so long (I say) neither
shall ye skin wrynkle, for the debylyte of ye natural heat de^lynynge to
coldenes and drynes through the which the fode and norisshement of the body is
corrupted and hyndered: is cause of rorrugacyon or wrynklyng of ye skin. For
the meat being first dygested in the stomach, and then shortly after sent
in to every part of the body, is dygested again of ye natural heat of the
same part, where it is received: than if that this natural heat be by any
occasyon corrupted or destroyed: the food also is sent to the same place,
shall be likewise corrupted, and then so ensues corrugacyo^ of ye skin, and
hoar hears, as ye may se in ye ancient and aged men, when they be cold and
dry, for horenes comes of ye defecte of natural heat, the which defends
the body from age, age properly does make man cold and dry, and therefore they
be of ly^el blood, and the powers and natural heat in them very weke, and
unable to co^coctyng and dygestyng of meat, wherefore there increace great
plenty of humidites and crude raw humors, and therefore the three sprytes and
the three digestions in age be decade, and in the^ rayneth ye debilite of
heat, and this follows with ye course of time, ye which course may be
somewhat let and defended by Physic, and by avoiding of such accidental
causes as do induce age, as sorrow, study, heaviness, desperacion, over much
venery, labor, traueyl, or rest, and when age by any of these causes is come,
then to amputat or cut away the cause by things apropriat. And for the
preseruacyo^ of the powers, is no better thing then a syrup made of wine and
sugar, myxte together. iii. parts of wine, and. ii. parts of sugar drunk
with fair water, or borage water. This syrup is both meat and drink, and in
it be two things confycte together, which are most friendly to nature, and
when the powers be weke they need such things as may comfort them, both
meats, drynkes, and other spyces, and moystynge medycynes, and this is a very
secret thing. Corrugacyon and revelling of the skin require such things,
as do cleanse and make plain and smoth skin, with certain oils, waters, and
oyntementes. Goodlynes and fresshenes of color, is by fedinge upon such
meats and drynkes, as do engender good and laudable blood, and are light of
dygestyon, and by such things, as do cleanse ye blood corrupted, and the other
powers is, ouermoch euacuacyon, or to often lettynge of blood, or such other
like things. These things may be amended with thus, earynge of chekyns, and
chekyn broth, with due rest and sleep, and also with sweet and odoryferous
things, and such other like.

Things engenderynge evil and rotten flume, be fruytes, fysshe, all things
made of milk, and such other, of the which be engendered watery humors, not
dygestyble in the members, and then in the same members it causes horenesse,
and wryncles. But among all other things there is nothing, the which so
strongly does cause a man to look oldely, as fear and desperacion. For because
in that passion and effectyon, all the natural hete of the body does resort
inward, and forsakes the outward parts, and yt most chefely, when the
man's complexyon is disposed to the same, and that is the cause that many
being ^os^e, turmoyled, and vexed, with this worldly storms so day^ly their
here wax hoar, or white.

Now things that do resyste or put away these causes, are chose^ the joyce of
Pomegranate, and chefely gold, and the joyce of Borage, and of fumytorye, and
specially grene and puryfyed, and ye virtue of the rote of Playntayne and such
other.

The rotten fleume is destroyed with the use of Myrabolaues composed, and Aloe
rosatum, and Agaryke, things to be had at the Apothecaries. And y^ where with
properly both melancolye and fleume be expelled out of the body, is Eleborus
niger, called in English Bears foot, prepared by a certain manner unto few
known. For in the rectifying of ye maly cyousnesse of this herb, stands all
the secret of his operacyon, for by him a man shall be altered from evil
complexion to good, and it restores youth again, but it is not conuenyent for
delycate bodies and noble complexyous, and therefore I will say little of him.
Beware ye never entermedle with this herb, without the aduysement and
cou^ceyll of some expert and well learned Physycyon.

Also ^^anthos composed with sugar, the which properly does consume the fleume
and melaneoly being in the heed, and it tarieth and lets the hoar here is
coroborateth and strengneth the censes, and prolo^geth the life, and chefely
when a qua^tite of it is disolued in aqua vita well and craftily made, and
sometime it is disolued in wine, and lies i^ it. ii. or. iii. days, and then
strayned, and so used conveniently, according to the cou^ceyll of a Physycyon.

Other things also there be, which quycken and makes lusty ye body, as
Diacameron, Mirabolany, Chebuly composed, which by their property do consume
and waste the flematycke super fluytyes of the stomach and do comfort him,
and do clarify the blood and be of great force against melancoly, and thuse of
those do comfort youth, and causes a man to wax young again, and defends
a man from hoar hears, also the decoction of seen with Diaboraginatum, and the
whey of gotes milk and such other. And one of the chief things, whereby age is
defended and youth prolo^ged, is once in a month to have a vomyte, to expel
the fleumatyke humor, and once in a weke to receive aclyster, and specially
that composed of the joyce of Mercury, walwort elder, and beat with half an
ounce of yeropegara, the which is a great secret.

And also subiction made with yeropigra, or Cassia fistula, and the joyce of
fresshe Roses, preparate with sugre, is a goodly easer of nature, mynystred
wisely, and it is a blessed medycyne to make a* man soluble, and therewith also
it comfort the pryncypal members in man, and alters the evil dysposicio^
of man to good, it opens opilatio^s or stoppynges. It comforts the heart,
and cleanses it, and to speak of the praise of this medycyne would require a
long process.

Other things also destroyinge and consumyng the humors, which cause age are
those temperate Spyces known to every body, Cloves, Cinam^me, Liquiryce, and
such other, but most pryncypally, when they are conficte and incorporate with
good wine, and so (being first somewhat watered) received and dronken.

Also it is not unknown, how that pylles made of myrtha, be of an excellent
goodness in the conseruacyon of health and life, for it withstandeth
putrefactio^ rectifieth and sincereth that which is ready to putrefaction,
wherefore this Myrtha is confycte with such things as dead bodies are incered
with all, to defend the corse from putrefactio^. And the fore said spyced
wine, when it is received of man, it spredeth it self abroad in ye parts of
the body and comfort all the parts of the body, and dries up the
superfluous humydyties of the body, also the powder of the same spyces used
with meat, profyteth wonderfully.

Howebeit, if the man be of a dry dysposycyon, then shall it be needful to
adioyne to these spyces, some more temperate thing, as the joyce of
Pomegranates, Rose water, Sugre, Lyckeryce, Resyus, and such like. Diacamero^
restores dygestyon, los^e and comfort it, and Trifera passes all
declynynge, somewhat more to calidite. The natural hete then and the meat
coming to the members being decayed or corrupted, which comes of putryfyed
color, furthwith ensues corrugacyon, and old lokynge as ye may se in such as
are scaby, in any part of their body, for that part being enfected, it
seems ryuyled and old skin. The infection being once departed again, the
skin shows it self fair, smothe, and yongly, and to those gold preparate
is s^uerayne, and the wine of Pomegranate, and this is specyal good for the
lepry. And this wine of granates taken and received how ye list, has properte
to extenate the humors, and to alaye the hete of the liver, and to comfort
all parts of man's body offended with heat, and it is good against wekenes of
heart, fortyfyeth the mouth of the stomach, and comfort the heart. Also
Mirabolani Rebul^ conditi be very good both in hot and cold dyseases they
comfort the stomach, and dries up the superfluous moystenes of the same, and
be sides this they help the melancolicke people, they clarefy and make clear
the blood, and the spyrytes, neither is there any thing more excellent for
that purpose then these.

Also borage wine made (in time that grapes be gathered and pressed) with must
is pryncipally good for mela^coly, faynte herted, and mad people, for it
cle^seth the blood, and takes away evil fantasies, and comfort all the
regetyue power, and encountreth all corrupcion. The electuarye also of the
Myrabolans used, is a thing right often proved and allowed, to the conseruacion
of health, and prolongynge of the life, and to wax young again, for it
comfort the stomach, and makes it apt and lusty, and co^sumeth ye wa
trynesse left of the fore fode, and the use of this electuarye withstandeth
age, and causes man to live long by the help of god.

Again certain suffumigations and savors made of conuenyent things, and
according as the man needs, is very profitable.

Bathing also temperatly without any great sweatyng so yt only the skin be
mundefyed and cleansed from fylthynes, is wholesome and profitable, for thereby ye
powers are opened, and the superfluous humidities lurkynge within the skin,
be wasted and dried up.

But the use of good wine in the which such spyces, as we have spoken of
before, have been steped, and the virtue of them in it resolved, temperatly
taken with a little water myxte therewith in due season, shall pass and enter
in to all the hid ways of the body, and it shall dry up all the evil
humydyties, and comforts all the inward parts, and perfectely does open all
manner of opilactio^ or stoppynge, the which is secret for the aparycyon or
opening of places opilat, or stopped, causes ye lively spyrytes to ru^ne
throughout every part of the body, and causes the natural heat for to wax
strong, and to be of great force, but opilacion or stopping causes the
contrary, for the natural hete being conculcate, or strangled, not having the
fre passage through every part, is thereby debylytate and wekened, and so not
suffycyent and mighty to separate the pure from the vnpure, whereupon the
superfluous humydyties rotten and putrefyed be in the body much increased, and
thereby consequently ensues wrynkelinge of the flesh and skin, and age at
hand.

An other also strong mean there is to defend age, and to recover youth
again, by abstynence, and conuenye^t for bearing of your quantyte of meat,
unto such time as the body be brought very low, and made very spare, and then
to restore, and norysshe it again with laudable, wholesome, and good fode,
which has a propertye, to engender clear and pure blood*

This point also do they observe the which make fat Oxen: whose flesh the
more it waxes lean and bare, ye more also does it be come tender and young,
and the better afterwerde do they like and batten, and ye may also se the
practyse of this in such as be lately recovered from syckenesse.

But to be short, he yt will refrain age, and conserve youth, let him not be
neclygent in chosyng of his meat, that it be such, as may bread good,
clear, fat, thycke and viscous blood, and then may he withstand well age.

And when that such humydytyes, or moystenesse, which are in the body, and
crude humors are increased in man, then has he need of such things which
do extenate and exiccat those superfluous moystenes, and such things as may
dygest the crude or raw humors, sincere and depure the hole body.

Among other things, such as wax aged, have great need of calefactyon, and
humystation, that is to say* warming, and moystynge, of both equally by
meats, and drynkes, and medycynes conuenyent, by exercise, and gladness.

Now that he may keep his body it such temperancy, that he may live with out
ye horrible danger of grievous syckenes, and the better able to serve almighty
God, to whom be all honor.

FINIS.
Imprynted by me Robert wyer / dwelling in saint Martyns parysshe / at the
sign of saint John^ Euangelyst / beside Charynge Cross.

printer's or publisher's device


