THE ORDER AND MANNER OF THE SITTING OF THE LORDS Spiritual and Temporal, as
Peers of the Realm, in the higher house of Parliament, according to their
Dignities, Offices, and Degrees, some other called thither for their
Assistance, and Officers of their Attendances.

AND Also the Names of the Knights for the Counties, Citizens; Burgesses for
the Boroughs, and Barons for the Ports for the House of Commons, for this
Parliament.

LONDON. Printed for Thomas Walkly, and are to be sold at the sign of the
Eagle and Child at the new Exchange. 1628.

The Parliament began at Westminster, the seventeenth day of March 1627 in the
third year of the Reign of our Sovereign Lord King CHARLES, etc.
The Higher House according to their several places as they now sit.
THe most reverend Father in God, Doctor Abbot, Lord Arch Bishop of Canterbury
his grace. The right Honorable Sir Thomas Couentry Knight, Lord Keeper of the
great Seal of England. The right reverend Father in God, Doctor Mathewes, Lord
Archbishop of York. James Ley Earl of Marlborough, Lord high Treasurer of
England. Henry Mountague Earl of Manchester, Lord President of his Majesty's
most Honorable Privy Council. The place of the Lord Privy Seal. George
Villars Duke of Buckingham, Lord high Admiral of England. William Paulet
Marquess of Winchester. Robert Bertue Earl of Linsey, L. high Chamberlain of
England. Thomas Howard Earl of Arundell and Surrey, Lord high Marshall of
England. William Herbert Earl of Pembrooke, Lord Steward of his Majesty's
Household. Phillip Herbert Earl of Mountgomerie, Lord Chamberlain of his
Majesty's Household.
Dukes. Marquesses. Earls. Viscounts.
They having several Writs of summons directed unto them out of his Majesty's
high Court of Chancerie, do come and sit according to their several creations.

Robert Veare, Earl of Oxenford. Henry Percie, Earl of Northumberland. George
Talbot, Earl of Shrewsbury. Henry Gray, Earl of Kent. William Stanley, Earl
of Darby. Henry Somerset, Earl of Worcester. Francis Manors, Earl of
Rutland. Francis Clifford, Earl of Cumberland. Robert Ractliffe, Earl of
Sussex. Henry Hastings, Earl of Huntington. Edward Borcher, Earl of Bath.
Thomas Writhiously, Earl of Southampton infra aetatem. Francis Russell, Earl
of Bedford. William Seymor, Earl of Hartford. Robert Deuoreux, Earl of Essex.
Theophilus Clinton, Earl of Lincoln. Charles Howard, Earl of Nottingham.
Theophilus Howard, Earl of Suffolk. Edward Sacuill, Earl of Dorcet. William
Cecill, Earl of Salisbury. William Cecill, Earl of Exetor. Robert Carr, Earl
of Somerset. John Egerton, Earl of Bridgewater. Robert Sidney, Earl of
Leicester. William Compton, Earl of Northampton. Robert Rich, Earl of
Warwick. William Cauendish, Earl of Devonshire. James Hambledon, Earl of
Cambridge. James Steward, Earl of March infra aetatem. James Hay, Earl of
Carlisle. William Feilding, Earl of Denbigh. John Digby, Earl of Bristoll.
Lionell Cranfeld, Earl of Middlesex. Christopher Villers, Earl of Angleseye
Henry Rich, Earl of Holland. John Hollis Earl of Clare. Oliver Saint John,
Earl of Bullingbroke. Francis Fane, Earl of Westmoreland. William Knoules,
Earl of Banbury. Thomas Howard, Earl of Barkshire. Thomas Wentworth, Earl of
Cleaueland. Edmond Sheffeld, Earl of Moulgraue. Henry Danuers, Earl of Danby.
George Carue, Earl of Totnes. Robert Carry, Earl of Monmouth. Edward Denney,
Earl of Norwich. Emanuell Scroope, Earl of Sunderland. William Cauendish,
Earl of Newcastle. Henry Carry Earl of Dover. John Mordant, Earl of
Peterborough.
Viscounts.
Anthony Maria Brown, Vicount Mountague. John Villars, Vicount Purbecke.
Finch, Viscountesse Maydstone. Richard Burke, Vicount Tunbridge. William Fynes,
Vicount Say and Seal. Edward Cecill, Vicount Wimbleton. Thomas Savage, Vicount
Savage. Edward Conway, Vicount Conway, principal Secretary. Robert Perpoynt,
Vicount Newarke. Paul Banning, Vicount Banning of Sudbury.
Bishops.
The Archbishop of Canterbury and York, the Bishop of London, the Bishop of
Durham and Winchester, have places in the higher house of Parliament in respect
of their Seas: all the Bishops of the other Dioces are called thither likewise,
by writ, and sit according to their Consecrations.

Doctor Mountain, Bishop of London. Doctor Mountain, Bishop of Durham. Doctor
Neale, Bishop of Winchester. Doctor Dove, Bishop of Peterborough. Doctor
Godwine, Bishop of Hereford. Doctor Thornbury, Bishop of Worcester. Doctor
Harsnet, Bishop of Norwich. Doctor Buckridge, Bishop of Rochester. Doctor
Morton, Bishop of Counentry and Lechfield. Doctor Bailey, Bishop of Bangor.
Doctor Carlton, Bishop of Chichester. Doctor Howson, Bishop of Oxenford. Doctor
Bridgeman, Bishop of Chester. Doctor Field, Bishop of St. David's. Docter
Williams, Bishop of Lincoln. Doctor Dauenant, Bishop of Salisbury. Doctor
Laud, Bishop of Bath and Wells. Doctor Wright, Bishop of Bristoll. Doctor
Hamner, Bishop of Saint Ashaph. Doctor Goodman, Bishop of Gloucester. Doctor
White, Bishop of Carlisle. Doctor Hall, Bishop of Excester. Doctor Murrey,
Bishop of Landaph.
Barons.
They as Pears of the Realm, likewise summoned by writs, fit according to
their Creations.

Henry Clifford, Lord Clifford. Henry Neuill, Lord Aburgaueney. Maruin Touchet,
Lord Audley. Algernon Percie, Lord Percie. James Stanley, Lord Strange of
Knocknig. Henry West, Lord Delaware. George Berkley, Lord Barkley. Henry
Parker, Lord Morley and Mounteagle. Richard Lennard, Lord Dacres of Herst.
Stafford, Lord Stafford infra aetatem. Edward Sutton, Lord Dudley. Edward
Stourton, Lord Sturton. John Darcie, Lord Darcie and Menthell. John Sands,
Lord Sands of the Vine infra aetatem. Edward Vaux, Lord Vaux. Thomas Windsor,
Lord Windsor. John Paulet, Lord Saint John of Basing. Thomas Cromwell, Lord
Cromwell. William Eure, Lord Eure. Phillip Wharton, Lord Wharton infra aetatom.
William Willoughby, Lord Willoughby of Parham infra aetatem. William Paget,
Lord Paget. Dudley North, Lord North. Brigges, Lord Chandois infra aetatem.
Spencer Compton, Lord Compton. Edward Wotton, Lord Wotton. Henry Gray, Lord
Gray of Groby. William Peter, Lord Peter. William Gerrard, Lord Gerrard, infra
aetatem. William Spencer, Lord Spencer. Charles Stanhop, Lord Stanhop of
Haringdon. Thomas Arundell, Lord Arundell of Wardor. Dormar,, Lord Dormar of
Winge, infra aetatem. Dormar,, Roper, Lord Tenham, infra aetatem. Phillip
Stanhop, Lord Stanhop of Shelford. Edward Noell, Lord Noell. Edward Montague,
Lord of Kimbolton. Fulk Greuill, Lord Brook of Bucham Court. Edward Montague,
Lord Montague of Boughton. William Gray, Lord Gray of VVearke. Francis Leake,
Lord Deincourt. Henry Ley, Lord Ley. Richard Robarts, Lord Robarts of Truro.
Horatio Vere, Lord Vere of Tilbury. Oliver Saint John, Lord Tregoze. Dudley
Carlton, Lord Carlton Imbercourt. Nicholas Tufton, Lord Tufton. William
Crauon, Lord Crauon of Hamsted Marshall, infra aetatem. Mountioy Blunt, Lord
Munioy. Thomas Belasses, Lord Faulconbridge of Yarum. Richard Louelace, Lord
Louelace of Hurley. John Paulet, Lord Paulet of Hinton Saint George. William
Haruie, Lord Haruie of Kidbrooke. Thomas Brudnell, Lord Brudnell of Stouton.
William Maynard, Lord Maynard.
The Parliament holden 1627.
Truro Henry Roll Esquire Richard Dannell Gent.

Bodwyn Robert Killegrew Knight
Helston Sydney Godolphine Esquire
Saltash Richard Buller Knight Francis Cottington K. and Bar.

Camelford. Francis Crossing Esquire Portipigham alias Westlow Edward Thomas
Esquire John Packer Esquire

Grampound. Henry Lord Carry Robert Pie Knight.

Eastlow William Murrey Esquire
Peuryn. Tho: Edmonds Knight. Treasurer of the Kings House. William Killegrew
Knight.

Tregony. Francis Rowse Esquire
Bossing.

St. Iues John Pain Esquire Francis Godolphine Esquire.

Fowey Richard Grenuile Knight Robert Rashleigh Esquire

St. Iermins. Benjamin Valentine Esquire
Michell Francis Buller Esquire John Spark Esquire

Newport. John Hearne Esquire John Werstenholme Knight

St. Mawes Hanibal Vivian Esquire Thomas Carry Esquire

Kellington John Roll Merchant
C. Cumberland George Dalfton Knight. Patrick Curwyn Knight Baron.

Carlisle Richard Barwise Esquire Richard Grayme Esquire

C. Cambridge shire. Miles Sandis Knight and Baronet. John Carleton Baronet

Cambrigde University John Coke Knight principal Secretary Thomas Eden Doctor
at Law

Cambridge Town Thomas Meautes Esquire Thomas Purchase Alderman

C. Cheshire Richard Grosuener Knight. and Bar. William Breerton Baronet.

Chester Town. Edward Whiteby Recorder John Ractliffe Alderman

D. Darby shire. Edmund Leech Knight John Fretchvile Esquire

Darby Town Phillip Manwaring Esquire Timothy Leuing Esquire

D. Devonshire John Bampfield Esquire Francis Drake Baronet

Exceister City. John Lynne Gentleman.
Tottnes. Edward Gyles Knight Thomas Prestwood Esquire

Plimmouth. John Glanvill Esquire Thomas Sherwill Merchant.

Barnestable Alexander St. John Knight. John Delbridge Merchant.

Plimpton. Thomas Hele Baronet James Bagg Knight

Tauistoke. Francis Glanvile Knight John Pyne Esquire.

Dartmouth Clifton

Hardness John Vpton Esquire. Roger Matthew Merchant.

Beretstone. William Strode Gentleman. Thomas Wyes Esquire.

Tiuerton John Bluet Esquire Peter Ball Esquire

D. Dorcetshire John Strangewaies Knight Walter Earl Knight

Poole John Cooper K. and Baronet John Pym Knight

Dorchester Densell Hollis Esquire John Hill Merchant

Lime Reges Christopher Earl Esquire Thomas Paramore Esquire.

Waymouth Hugh Pyne Esquire Lodowicke Dyue Esquire

Melcombe Robert Napper Iun. K. Henry Waltham Alderman

Bridport Francis Drake Esquire John Brown Esquire

Shaftsbury John Croke Knight John Thorowgood Esquire

Warham John Miller Knight Gerrard Napper Esquire

Corfe Castle Francis Nethersall Knight Gyles Grene Gentleman

E. Essex Francis Barington K. and Baro: Harbotell Grimston K. and Bar.

Colchester Thomas Cheek Knight Edward Alford Son. Esquire

Malden Henry Mildmay Knight Arthur Herrys Knight

Harwich Nathaniell Ruch Knight Christopher Herrys Esquire

G. Gloucester-shire Robert Pointz K. of the Bath Natha. Stephens Esquire

Gloucester City John Brown Esquire John Hanbury Esquire

Cicestor Gyles Estcourt K. and Baro. John George Esquire

Tewkesbury Baptist Hickes Knight and Baro. Thomas Culpeper Knight

Huntington-shire Capelt Beedell Baronet Robert Pain Knight

Huntington Town James Montague Esquire Oliver Cromwell Esquire

H. Hartford-shire William Lytton Knight Thomas Dacres Knight

St. Albons John Iennyns K. of the Bath Robert Kerkhame Esquire

Hartford Town Edward Howard K. of the Bath Thomas Fanshawe Knight

H. Hereford-shire Walter Pie K. Aturney of the Court of Wards Gyles Bridges
Baronet

Hereford City John ^^^^^ore K. and Bars. John Hoskins Serieant at Law

Lempster James Tomkins Esquire Edward Littelton Esquire

K Kent Thomas Finch K. and Baro. Dudley Diggs Knight

Canterbury John Finch Knight Thomas Scott Esquire

Rochester Thomas Walsingham Iun K. William Brook Knight

Maydstone George Fane Knight Francis Barneham Knight

Quinborough Roger Palmer K. of the Bath John Hales Knight

L. Lincolne-shire John Wray Knight and Baro. William Armine Baro.

City Lincoln Thomas Grantham Knight Edward Ascough Knight

Boston Richard Bellingham Esquire Richard Okeley Esquire

Great Grimesby Christopher Wray Knight Henry Pelham Esquire

Stanford Thomas Hatton Knight Edward Bash Knight

Grantham Thomas Hatcher Esquire Alexander More Iun. Esquire

L. Leicester Shire. Fardinand Lord Hastings. Edward Haretop Baronet.

Leicester. Humphrey May Knight Chancellor of the Duchy. John Stanhop
Knight.

Lancashire. Richard Mullenex Knight and Baronet. Alexander Ractliffe Knight of
the Bath.

T. Lancaster. Francis Binelase Knight. Thomas Fanshaw Knight.

Preston in Andernes. Robert Carre Knight. George Garrard Esquire.

Leuerpole. Henry Iermin Esquire. John Newdigate Esquire.

Newton. Francis Annesley Knight and Baronet. Henry Holcraft Knight.

Wigan. Anthony Saint John Knight Edward Bridgeman Esquire.

Clithero. Thomas Iermin Esquire. William Nowell Esquire.

M. Middlesex. Henry Spiller Knight. Francis Darcy Knight.

Westminster. Joseph Bradshawe Esquire. Thomas Morris Esquire.

London. Thomas Moulson Alderman. Christopher Clithero Alderman. Henry Waller
Esquire. James Bunce-Esquire.

M. Monmouthshire. Nicholas Kemys Esquire. Nicholas Arnold Esquire.

T. Monmouth. William Morgan Esquire.
N. Northamptonshire. Richard Knightley Esquire. Francis Niccolls Esquire.

Peterborough. Mildmay Lord Spencer. Lawrence Whitaker Esquire.

T. Northampton. Christopher Sherland Recorder. Richard Spencer Esquire.

Brackley. Thomas Waineman Knight. John Curzon Esquire.

Higham Ferrers. George Sandis Kn. of the Bath.
N. Nottinghamshire. Geruase Clifton Knight and Baronet. John Byron Knight of
the Bath.

T. Nottingham. Charles Cauendish Knight. Henry-Perpoynt Esquire.

East Retford. Henry Stanhop Knight. Edward Osborne Baronet.

N. Norfolk. Koger Townsheand Baronet. John Heueingham Knight.

Norwich. Peter Oleaue Knight. Robert Debney Esquire.

Linne Regis. John Hare Knight. William Doughty Esquire.

Yarmouth. John Wentworth Knight. Miles Corbet Esquire.

Thetford. Edmond Moundford Esquire.
Castlerising. Robert Cotton Knight and Baronet. Thomas Bancroft Esquire.

N. Northumberland. John Fenwicke Knight. William Carnaby Knight.

Newcastle upon Tine. Thomas Riddell Knight. Peter Riddell Knight.

Morpeth. Thomas Reynell Knight. John Banks Esquire.

Barwicke. Edmond Sawyer Knight. Edward Liueley Esquire.

O. Oxfordshire. James Fines Esquire. Francis Waineman Knight.

University of Oxford. Henry Martine Knight. John Danuers Knight.

City of Oxford. John Whistler Esquire. Thomas Wentworth Esquire.

Woodstocke. Miles Fleetwood Knight. Edmond Tauerner Esquire.

Banburie. John Crewe Esquire.

R. Rutland. Guido Palms Knight. William Bulstrode Knight.

L. Surrey. Ambrose Brown Baronet. Richard Ouslowe Knight.

S^uthwarke. Richard Yarwood Esquire. William Cox Esquire.

Blechingley. Edward Bish. Esquire. John Euellin Esquire.

Rigate. Thomas Bludder Knight. Charles Cokaine Esquire.

Guilford. Poynings More Esquire. Robert Parkhurst Esquire.

Gatton.

Heselmer. George Grimes Esquire. Thomas Canon Knight.

S Staffordshire. Haruy Bagot Baronet. Thomas Compton Esquire.

Lichfield. William Walter Knight. Richard Dyot Esquire.

Stafford. Matthew Cradocke Esquire. William Wingfield Esquire.

New Castle under line. George Gresley Baronet. Rowland Cotton Knight.

Tamworth. Thomas Puckering Knight and Baronet. Walter Deuoreux Knight.

S. Shropshire. Richard Newport Knight. Andrew Corbet Knight.

T. Shrowesburie. William Owen Knight. Thomas Owen Esquire.

Bridgenorth. Richard Shelton Knight Soliciter general. George Paul Knight.

Ludlow. Richard Tomlyns Esquire. Francis Goodwin Esquire.

Great Wenlocke. Thomas Lawley Esquire. Richard Bridgman Esquire.

T. Castri Bishop. Robert Howard Knight of the Bath. Edward Fox Knight.

S. Southampton. Henry Wallop Knight. Daniel Norton Knight.

City Winchester. Richard Titchborne Knight. Robert Mason Esquire.

Southampton. John Mayor Alderman. George Gallop Alderman.

T. Portsmouth. Owen Iennins Gentleman. William Towerson Gentleman.

Yarmouth. Edward Dennis Knight. John Oglander Knight.

Peterfield. William Vdall Knight. Benjamin Titchborne Esquire.

Newport alias Medena. Christopher Yeluerton Junior Knight. Phillip Fleming
Esquire.

Stock bridge. Richard Gifford Knight. Henry Whitehead Knight.

Heytesbury. Charles Berkley Knight. William Rolfe Esquire.

Westbury. Maximilian Petty Esquire. Charles Thinn Esquire.

Calne. John Maynard Knight of the Bath. George Low Sen. Esquire.

Vize. Robert Long Esquire. Thomas Kent Gentleman.

Chippeham. Francis Popham knight. John Air Knight.

Malmesbury. William Crofts Knight. Henry Moody Knight and Baronet.

Crikelade. Edward Hungerford knight. Robert Ienner Gentleman.

Bedwyn. Edward Kirton Esquire. John Treuor Junior knight.

Ludgershall. John Seldom Esquire. Thomas lay knight.

Old Sarum. Miles Ouldsworth Esquire. Christopher Keightly Esquire.

Wotton Basset. John Franklin knight. Anthony Rowse esquire.

Marlborough. Richard Digges Sergeant at Law.
W. Worstershire. Thomas Couentre esquire. Thomas Bromley knight.

C. Worster. John Cowcher esquire. John Haselocke esquire.

Droytwich. John Wild esquire. George Wild esquire.

Euisham. Robert Harley knight. Richard Cresheld esquire.

Bewdley. Ralph Clare knight.
Warwickshire. Thomas Lucie knight. Thomas Leigh knight and Baron.

Couentry.

T. Warwick. Robert Creuile esquire.
Y. Yorkshire. Henry Bellaces esquire. Thomas Wentworth knight and Baronet.

York. Arthur Ingram knight. Thomas Sauill knight.

Kingston upon Hull.

Knasborough. Richard Hutton Junior knight. Henry Benson esquire.

Scarborough. William Cunstable knight and Baronet. John Harrison esquire.

Rippon. Thom. Posthumes Hoby. knight. William Mallory esquire.

Richmond. Talbot Bows knight. James Howell esquire.

Heydon. Christopher Hildiard knight. Thomas Alured esquire.

Borough bridge. Ferdinando Fairefax knight. Francis Neuell esquire.

Thuske. Christopher Wandford esquire. William Frankland esquire.

Aldburgh. Henry Darley esquire. Robert Stappelton esquire.

Beuerly. John Hotham knight and Baronet. William Alford knight.

Pomfret. John Iackson knight. John Rainsden knight.

Barons of Ports.
Hastings. John Ashburnham Esquire Niccolas Euerfield Esquire

Winchelsea. William Twisden Knight. and Bar. Ralph Freeman Knight

Rye. Richard Tufton Esquire Thomas Fotherley Esquire

Rumney Thomas Godfrey Esquire. Thomas Brett Esquire

Hith Peter Heyman Knight Edward Scott Knight

Dover. John Hippesley Knight Edward Nicholas Esquire.

Sandwich. John Philpott Esquire Peter Peake Esquire.

Walls.
Anglesey. Richard Bulkley Esquire Bewmoris. Charles Jones Esquire Brecknock.
Henry Williams Esquire. T. Brecknocke Cardigan James Lewis Esquire T. Cardigan
John Vaughan Esquire Cayrmarthin Richard Vaughan Knight T: Cayrmarthine Henry
Vaughan Esquire Cayrnaruon John Gussith Esquire T: Cayrnaruon Edward Littleton
Esquire Denbigh. Euball Thelwell Knight T Denbigh. Hugh Middleton Baronet.
Flintshire Robert Jones Esquire T. Flint. William Rauenscroft Esquire Glamorgan
Robert Mausell Knight. Vice Admiral. T. Cardife Lewis Morgan Esquire Mereoneth
Richard Vaughan Esquire Pembroke John Wogan Esquire T Hartford West James
Perrott Knight T Pembroke Hugh Owen Esquire Montgomery William Herbert K. of
the Bath T. Mongomery Richard Lloyde Esquire Radnor Richard Jones Esquire T.
Radnor Charles Price Esquire
Officers of the House of Commons.
Clearke of the Parliament. Searieant at Arms.

