A PROCLAMATION CONCERNING BOVCHERS.
FOR AS MUCH AS THE KINGS majesty is credibly advertised and infourmed, that
beafes, muttons, and veales, are lykely to be more scarce and dear now against
this holy time of Ester, than in other seasons of the year, by reasone of the
charges of keeping of such cattelle with hey and other stouer, in the winter:
by occasion whereof the bouchers and other that shall sell such beaues muttons
and veales by retayle by weighte, can not bye them of the breders broggers
fermours drouers owners and feders of such cattle at such reasonable prices
in gross, as they may sell the same ayene by weight by retayle at such prices
as are limited in the act made fort^^ ^ynge of flesh by weight, onelesse it
should be to their utter loss and undoing: His highenes therefore willing,
that the same bouchers, and other sellyng flesh by retayle for the time
hereafter lymitted in this proclamation, should be so conveniently provided for
in the premissis, as they should not have any cause reasonable to forbere their
provisions for such vital to be sold by retayle against this holy time of
Easter, for relief and succor of his subiectis, in as ample manier as
heretofore has been accustomed: Is therefore contented and pleased, that from
henseforth unto the.xxiiii. day of June next coming, bouchers and all other,
that shall sell flesh of the kinds aforesaid by weyghte by retayle, shall
and may sell from time to time, unto the said.xxiiii. day of June next
coming, every pound of beef good and wholesome for man's body, for an
halfepeny and one half farthynge and no more: And every pound of mutton for
three farthynges only and no more: And every pound of veale for an halfepeny
and half farthynge, and no more. The said act of provision heretofore had
and made for selling flesh by weight by retayle, or any thing therein
contained, to the contrary hereof not withstondinge.

Provided always, that no bouchers or other shall kylle any calves to selle by
retaylle for the term of two years ensuinge, from the first day of Ianuarye
last, upon the peynes lymitted in the act made for killing of calves, this
proclamation not withstandyng. And his highness has ordained, that if any
boucher or other sellyng by retayle, do selle any of the kinds of vitalles
aforesaid, otherwise then by weight, or at any other prices than is before
lymytted, or refuse to selle according to this proclamation: then every
boucher, or other so offendynge shall suffer lose and forfayte all such peynes
and penalities, and also be ordered in all things as is contained and limited
in the act made for the premises. This proclamation in any wise not lettynge.

And furthermore the kings hyghnes straytely charge and commands all and
every the said breders broggers drouers fermours feders and owners of such
cattle, that they and every of them furnysshe the fayres and markettes with
such fat cattall as they have to selle from time to time, in as large and
ample manner as has been accustomed: And to sell their said catell at such
reasonable prices, as the said bouchers or such other, as shall retayle the
same ayene by weight, may utter and sell the same to his loving subjects, at
such prices as are above lymytted, as they will avoid his graces high
dyspleasure, and answer to the same at their vttermoste perils.

AND THAT after the said. xxiiii. day of June, the said bouchers and other
sellyng flesh by retayle, shall from thens forth sell by weight by retayle,
according to the pryces limited in the said act made and provided for the
same, upon the peynes and penalities contained in the said act, without any
abstinence or redress to be had thereof after the said. xxiiii. day.
Wherefore the kings hyghnes straytely charge and commands all and synguler
Maires, Justices of peace, Shireffes, bayliffes, constables, and other his
officers and faithful subjects, to whom it shall or in any manner of wise may
appertain, that they and every of them cause this his proclamation to be put
in due and effectual execution according to the tenor thereof, as they will
answer to his hyghnes at their vttermoste peryls.

GOD SAVE THE KING.
Tho. Berthelet. regius impressor excudebat. CVM PRIVILEGIO.


