To our very loving friends the Justices of Assize for the Counties of
Northampton, Warwick, Leicester, Derbie, Nottingham, Rutland, and Lincoln.
AFter our very hearty commendations. Whereas his Majesty was moved for
diverse just and weighty considerations, to grant forth his Letters Pattents
for a general Collection to be made within the Kingdom of England, and
dominion of Wales, toward the repairing of the ancient Haven of the Port
Towns of Dunwich, Southwold, and Walberswicke in the County of Suffolk:
which being likewise recommended by Letters from this Board, to your best
furtherance as a work of great consequence for the safety, and defense of that
Coast. Information is now made unto us, that there are diverse sums of money
collected in the several Counties of England and Wales: which are detained by
the Clerks of the Peace, Churchwardens, and Constables, unto whose hands the
same are come. And forasmuch as the foresaid work of repairing that Haven
being already begun, and with much labor and expense of great sums of
money put in good forwardness, will be in danger to be all lost, and washed
away with the Sea, unless some course be taken for a speedy supply of money
to perfect the same: We have thought good to pray, and require you, at the next
Assizes in each County throughout your Circuit, to give public and strict
Command to the Clerks of the Peace, High Constables, and all others to whom it
shall or may appertain, that they fail not, at their peril, to return, and
pay in, at Fishmongers Hall in London, all such moneys as are collected for
this service, together with all the Briefes delivered unto them for collecting
the same, between this and the end of Michaelmas Term next. Further, willing
and requiring, all Majors, Sheriffs, Justices of Peace, Bailiffes, and all
other his Majesty's Officers, to affoard their best assistance for the due
performance of these directions. Of the accomplishment whereof we purpose to
take such notice, as the necessity and importance of the service requi^eth.
And so we bid you very heartily farewell.

From Whit-hall this 12. of July. 1620. Your very loving friends, G. Cant. Fr.
Verulam Canc. E. Worcester. Th. Arundell. H. Southampton. Kellie. Robert
Naunton. Geo. Caluert. Fulke Greuyll. Iul. Caesar. Edw. Coke. Lyonyll
Cranfielde.


Printed at London by Robert Barker, and John Bill, Printers to the Kings most
excellent Majesty. 1620.


