THE Order of keeping a Court Leete, and Court Baron: with the charges
appertayning to the same: Truly and plainly delivered in the English tongue,
for the profit of all men, and most commodious for young Students of the
laws, and all others within the jurisdiction of those Courts.

By Jonas Adames.

Quicquid agas prudenter agas, and Respice finem.



Imprinted at London by Thomas Orwin and William Kirckham, and are to be sold
at the little North door of Saint Paul's Church, at the sign of the
Blacke-boy. 1593.

THE ORDER OF Court Leete, and Court Baron.
FIrst, there shall be a precept made by the Steward unto the Bayliffe, to
warn the Court by a reasonable time: that is to say, six or more days before
the Court be kept, in such form as follows: but it is the better, if
warning be sixteen days before, as it is in the Common Bancke.

The Precept.
A. B generos* Senescal. Blackforde.
Manerij praedicti Baliuo eiusde^ Salute^. Tibi praecipio pariter and ma^do,
quod diligenter praemonere facias omnes tenentes infra Manerium praedictu^, tam
residentes quam non residentes, atque omnes Tenentes Custumarios Manerij
praedicti, quod sint coram me in hac part sufficienter deputato apud Blackford
praedictam, die Iouis vicesimo sex to die Martij, proxime suturo post datum
huius, ad faciendum sectam suam, tam ad visum Franc. Pleg. quam ad Curiam
Baron. and omnia alia quae eis incu^bent, and pertinebu^t, and haec nullatenus
omittas, and habeas ibi hoc praeceptum: Datum sub sigillo meo, decimo die huius
mensis Martij. Ao. Regni Elizabeth Dei gratia Angliae, Franc. and Hiberniae
Reginae, fidei defensor. etc. Vicesimo quarto.

After that the Steward is set in the Court, he must first enter in writing
the title of the Court in the beginning of the Court Roll, with the name of
the place in such form as follows.

The entry of the Court Leete, and Court Baron.
VIsus Franc. Pleg. cum Curia C. L. Blackforde.
generosi Domini eiusdem ibidem tent. die Iouis, videlicet vicesimo sexto die
Martij, An. Regni Dominae nostrae Elizabeth Dei gratia Angliae, Franc. and
Hiberniae Reginae, fidei defensoris, etc. vicesimo tertio tent* per A. B.
Senescallum ibidem.

When that is done, the Steward shall cause the Bayliffe which serves the
Court, if it be in a Leete, to make proclamations, that is to say, three Oyes:
and if it be in a Court Baron, then but one, and after shall say as follows.

All manner of persons which had warning to appear here this day, to serve the
Queens Majesty for her Leete, and the Lord of the Manor for his Court now
holden, draw near and give your attendance, and every one answer to his name
as he shall be called, upon pain and peril that may fall thereof.

And after all be called, and those that are absent be marked to be amerced,
then the Steward shall cause again (if it be in a Leete) to be made other
three Oyes. Then after the three proclamations made, the Steward shall cause
the Bayliffe to say.

If any will be Essoynd, come in and you shall be heard.

And in a Court Baron, if any will be essoyned or enter any playnt, come in,
and you shall be heard, and then the Steward shall say, Essoynes and proffers of
suite and plee three times, and in the end Essoynes for this day.

Then if there be any person that has any lawful impediment that he cannot
be here as he is bound, let one ask an Essoyne for him (the Court sitting) to
save his default.

And then the Steward shall enter the Essoyne in the Court Roll in this manner.

The manner of entering the Essoynes.
A. B. per C. D. essoniatur de co^i. and sic de alijs. Look also if there be
any Tenant in the Manor that has any action, or cause of action, sithence
the last Court day, let him put in his playnt the Court sitting, and it shall be
entered.

Look also if there be any precepts, attachments or distresses hanging in the
Court Roles enquire of them openly in the Court, and know if the Baylie have
served them.

Also if there be any old playntes hanging in the Court Role before this Court
holden, cause the parties to be called, and before th'enquest be charged,
know if the plainte shall pass by the homage.

That done th'enquest shall be empanneled. Then bid the Foreman lay his hand upon
the book, and swear him in form following.

The Oath of the Foreman.
Cause the Baylie to hold the book unto the party or parties sworn, but the
Steward shall give the Oath.
YOu shall diligently enquire, and true presentment make of all such things as
you shall be charged with, concerning as well the Queens Majesty's Leete, as
the Lords Court of the Manor: you shall well and truly keep If the Court
Baron be kept by it self, there shall be omitted in this oath these words, the
Queens counsel, for that it is not the Queens Court, but the Leete is.
the Queens Counsel, your fellows and your own: you shall not conceal nor
hide any thing for favor, fear, promise, or affection you bear to any person
or persons, or present any thing for hatred or malice you bear to any man: but
you shall present and tell the truth, the whole truth, and nothing but the
truth, so help you God, and by the contents of this book. And this being
done, cause him to kiss the book.

After the foreman is sworn by himself, cause three or four of th'enquest to
lay their right hands together on the book, and give them their oath as
follows.

The Oath of the rest of the Jury.
AL such oath as A. B. has made before you on his behalf, you and every of you
shall well and truly keep on your behalfes, so help you God and by the
contents of this book.

And then cause every one that is sworn to kiss the book.

And so in like manner swear the rest.

After they be sworn, cause the Baylie to number them that be sworn, as the
Steward does read them.

The Proclamation after the Oath taken.
THen make proclamation and say thus. All you that be here sworn, draw near
and hear your charge, and all the rest keep silence, upon pain and peril
that shall come thereof. Before the charge, gather the common (...), which the
Tenants do pay every Leete, according to the custom of the Manor.

The exhortation to be given unto the Jury before the charge, to consider
their Oath.
MAsters, the charge which you have promised by your Oaths to observe, touches
and concerns diverse good laws and statutes made for the whole Commonweal of
this Realm, and also for the private wealth of every of you, which matters the
Lord of this Fraunches considering, and wishing your wealth and quietness,
willing also good orders to be observed and kept among you, and that right and
equity might be ministered to every of you, has caused therefore the Queens
Majesty's Leete and her Court to be sommoned and kept here as this day: I will
therefore by your favor, before I enter into the matters of your charge,
declare unto you by what authority you are brought hither, and wherein you are
bound to serve.

One cause is, for that the Queens Majesty and her noble progenitors have
given and granted unto the Lord of this Manor, a strength and power to keep
a Leete or Law day at two times in the year, which Leet or Lawday all the
Hed-borowes, Tythingmen and Desiners, and all other persons which be resident
or dwelling within this Leete, being of the age of twelve years or above, are
bound by the law of this Realm to appear: for that there they may hear the
Laws and Statutes opened and declared, that thereby they may know and avoid
the dangers of the same, and further to enquire of the breakers of the same:
and present them, that such offenders might be punished.

The other cause or authority is, for that you be the Lords Tenants, and are
bound by reason of your Tenure to appear at the Lord his Court Baron, when it
shall happen to be kept according to the law, that is to say, at every three
weeks end, and being here by these two authorities, you are bound to serve in
all such things, as you are jointly and lawfully charged withal, as well
concerning the Queens Majesty's Leete, as the Lords Court Barron.

And thus you have heard in brief, the causes whereby you are bound to come to
this Leete and Court Barron.

Also to the intent that this your Oath which you have taken, may be the better
known, I think it good by your patience somewhat to say concerning the same.

First in swearing, three things chiefly ought to be considered: The first is,
that you swear truly, that is, you must seclude all favor and affection to
the parties, not fearing the rich, nor pitying the poor, not considering the
simplenes of any person, nor the smalnes of the offense, but having the truth
only before your eyes, for love thereof say and speak that which you know to
be true, and no further.

The second is, you must swear in righteousness, that is, for the very zeal
and desire you have in the declaring of the truth, for the executing of
justice, for the observing of covenants, honest promises, Statutes, laws, and
good Customs, and having a respect in doing and performing these things, you
do that which is to the glory of God, the honor of the Queen, the
preservation of the people and Commonweal: and this manner of swearing is
commanded of almighty God Caput. 6.
Deutronomie, saying: Thou shall fear the Lord thy God and serve him, and
shall swear by his name. That is, we must serve God only, fear him and
confess his holy name, which is done by swearing lawfully. Swearing also in
many other places of Scripture is commanded, but the same conditionally, which
is, we must swear in truth, in judgment, and in righteousness, etc.

Thirdly, in swearing and taking an oath, you must do it with judgment, not
rashly nor unadvisedly, but soberly, considering what an Oath is: and to put you
in mind thereof, I will in few words declare what an Oath is. An Oath is the
calling or taking to witness of God his name, to confirm the truth of that we
say. And S. Paul says, Hebrews ^ verse. 16. 1^*
An oath for confirmation is among men an end of all strife. For in doubtful
and obscure matters, where the knowledge of men fails, we fly unto God, that
he which is the only truth, may give testimony unto the truth, and he which
uses God for a witness, does also call for revenge of perjury at his hands,
if he deceive and speak not the truth: also in laying your hands upon the
book, you do swear, truly to enquire and make a true presentment of those
things wherewith you be charged, and not to let from saying the truth, and doing
truly, for favor, fear, love or malice of any person: you must consider that
in the same book is contained God his everlasting truth and most holy word,
whereby we have remission and forgiveness of our sins and everlasting life.
Also in the Gospel book is contained God his plagues and threats to obstinate
sinners, perjured men, false witnesse-bearers, co^demners of innocent and
guiltless persons, so that if you willingly forswear your selves, you utterly
forsake God, his mercy and truth, the merits of our Savior Christ, his
nativity, life, passion, death, resurrection and ascension, the joys of
heaven and everlasting life, betaking your selves to the devil the author of
all lies, perjury and deceit: and by forswearing, and forsaking the truth, you
do forsake Christ, the light and truth it self. And although that perjury
do escape sometime unespied and unpunished, and be kept secret between some
of you and others, yet your hearts will judge and repute one an other false,
and be suspicious of each others doings: but God being faithful he will not
deny himself, and therefore he will not suffer the profanation of his name to
be unpunished: also at the last day, when the secrets of all men's hearts shall
be opened, then the truth and your own consciences shall accuse you, and
Christ the righteous Judge shall justly condemn you to everlasting death and
damnation. For this sin of perjury God by his Malac. 3.
Prophet has threatened to punish. Wherefore let us pray unto God that we may
use such oaths as be godly and lawful, that is, that we swear not rashly, in
trifles, or in matters of no weight, but when it is needful and necessary
only: also that we do consider the end, that our oaths may serve to the
honor of God, and to the boulting out and testifying of a truth. And thus
having put you in mind of your duties and Oaths, the which I trust you will
diligently weigh and consider in performing and doing the same, to the comfort
of your consciences: I will proceed no further therein, but declare unto you
the Articles of your charge.

The charge of Court Leete.
YOu must understand, that high Treasons, petie Treasons, and Fellonies, which
are against the Crown and dignity, are to be enquired of and presented in
Court Leete: but not punishable there, the which offenses ought to be set down
in writing and indented, the one part to remain with the Steward, the other
with the Jury, and the same must be delivered to the Justices of the Assizes
at the next Jail holden within the County.

First, you shall enquire of high Treasons, as if there be any among you which
do compass, imagine or entend the death of our Sovereign Lady the Queen:
or if any do utter the same by words or writing: or if any go about to make
war against her: or if any be adherent to any of her enemies. If any
counterfeiteth, clippeth, fileth, washes, or otherwise falsifieth the money of
this Realm, or the Coin of any other Realm, which is enhabled to be current
within this Realm: or if any counterfeiteth any of the Queens Majesty's
Seals, as the great Seal or Stamp: these are high Treasons. Also
counterfeiting of the Queens Seal is to take wax printed with the Queens
Seal, and to fasten it to a writing not made by the Queen. These are to be
enquired of here as Fellonies, and to be certified as aforesaid. Rastal.
Treason 26.

Also if any kill his Master or his Mistres: Petie treason.
or if a Priest, or other religious man kill his Ordinary, this is petie
Treason, and to be enquired here as Fellonie. 25. E. 3. cap. 2.

Also if any woman kill her husband, A woman to kill her husband is petie
treason.
it is petie Treason, and it is to be enquired of as Fellonie. 19. H. 6. fol.
47.

Also cutting out of a man's tongue, Fellonies.
and putting out his eyes of malice, is Fellonie, and to be enquired of here.

Also Murder is when any of malice purposes to kill another Felloniously,
Murder.
and it is to be enquired here as bloodshed.

Also Manslaughter as a trespass is here to be enquired, Manslaughter.
that is to say, when the place is not appointed to fight, but suddenly they
fight together, and the one kills the other as they meet by chance, also it
is to be enquired here for bloodshed.

Also if one kill another in defending himself, In defending himself and
killing by misfortune.
he shall loose his goods. The same law is where one kills an other by
misfortune, etc. Stamf. 15. A.

Also you shall enquire of Rape, Rape.
which is, it a man ravish any woman against her will, be she wife, widow or
maid, though she afterward consent unto it, it is Fellonie. You shall enquire
also of their ayders: for they shall be judged Rauishers, as well as he that
did the deed. 22. E. 4. fol. 22.

Burglars are those which in the time of peace, Burglarie.
or in the night time with a Fellonious intent to rob or kill, do break any
houses, Churches, walls or gates, and enter into them: this is Burglarie, and
here to be enquired of. Stamf. fol. 30. B.

Robbery is when a man takes any thing from any other person Felloniously,
Robbery.
though it were but the value of a penny: this is Fellonie, and to be enquired
of.

Also the burning of a house felloniously is Fellonie: Burning of a house or
barn
Also burning of Barnes in the night, is to be enquired of.

Also robbing of Churches or Chapels, Robbing of Churches.
and taking of any Ornaments out of the same felloniously, is Fellonie, and to
be enquired of.

If any rescue any which is taken for fellonie, Rescue.
this is Fellonie, and here to be enquired of.

Also taking of Doves in Douehouses with a fellonious intent, Taking of Doves.
is Fellonie, and here to be enquired of.

Also taking of young Pigeons, Young Pigeons and young Goshawkes.
or young Goshawkes in their nests, is Fellonie, and here to be enquired of.

Also taking of fish felloniously out of Ponds, Taking of fish
to be enquired of. But if the same be taken out of a River, there it is not
Fellonie.

Also the taking of tame Dear with a fellonious intent, Taking of tame Dear,
Signets, Swa^s, Peacockes.
is Fellonie. The same law is for the taking of Signets, Swannes marked, and
Peacocks, and the same to be enquired of.

Also if any receive a Fellones goods, Receiver.
knowing of the Fellonie which he has done, this is Fellonie, and here to be
enquired of. And note that all other Fellonies which be Fellonies by the Common
law, are here to be enquired of.

Accessaries are enquirable, Accessaries.
and that is if one procure or command another to do a Fellonie, but not
present when he does it: Accessory after fellonie done.
this procurer or commander is accessarie. Also accessarie after Fellonie is
done, is where one receives a Fellone, knowing of the Fellonie.

Escape voluntary is when one arresteth another for Fellonie, Escape
voluntary.
and after suffers him to go whither he will, this is Fellonie, and also to
be enquired of.

Escape negligent is when one is arrested for Fellonie, Escape negligent.
and after escapes against his will that arrested him, and if he be not
freshly pursued and taken, before they that do pursue, loose the sight of him,
he that keeps him, or his Jailer, shall loose a grievous fine, and hereof
enquire.

Petie Larcenie is taking of any thing with a Fellonious intent, Petie Larcenie.
under the value of xii pence: as Hens, Geese, Pigges, or small things out of
windows, and those things are to be enquired of. You shall understand that the
Lord of whom the Land is holden, Escheate.
shall have the Lands by Escheate, where their Tenaunts be attaynted of Petie
Treason, or Felony, and the King shall have a year, a day and waste, permagn.
Chart. Chap. 22. and therefore you must enquire what Lands and Tenements those
persons so offending have, and what goods for the King, except the Lord have
Fellons goods by the King his grant, 9, H. 7. fol. 23. Also you shall
understand that those matters in the charge aforesaid, are to be enquired of
and presented as aforesaid, but not punishable here, but they are to be
certified by the Steward in Sessions as aforesaid. But the rest of the matters
of the charge which ensue, are enquireable and presentable, and be also
punishable here in Leete, but not certified as the other were.

Those things which hereunder follow, are to be presented in Leete, and also to
be punished there.
FIrst you shall enquire if all your Constables, Constables, Hedboroughs.
Hedboroughs, Desiners, and all other suitors which owe any suite hither, be
here or not, and present all their names that make default.

Also if any have dwelt within the Lordship the space of a year and a day, Of
the age of xii. years.
and be of the age of xii. years, and not sworn to the Queen to be true and
faithful, this is inquirable.

Also you shall enquire if any of the Lords Villains be fugitive, Villainies.
and remain elsewhere out of the Lordship, and be not in the alegiance of the
King a year and a day, present the same.

Also you shall enquire if any Customs, Customs.
or services due to this Court be holden back, how, by whom, and in what
Baylies time the same was, and present the same.

Also you shall enquire if any Purprestures be made upon the Land,
Purprestures.
wood, or water, with blocks, stakes, ditch, hedge, or by, or with any other
thing done to the noysance of the people, that is to say, to the multitude, and
not only to one: also if any walls, houses, pales or hedges be made or
erected to the noyance of the people, this is to be presented.

Also if any common high ways, High ways, waters, ditches or paths.
waters, ditches or paths be turned out of their Courses, it is to be enquired
of.

Also you shall enquire if any encrochment be made on the Queens high ways,
Encrochment.
of any of the Lords soil, Common, or one neighbor upon another, and present
it.

Also if any Lastalles be made in high ways to the noysance of the people,
Lastalles,
or if any carryon be cast in the high way, Carrion.
this is inquireable.

Also if any commonly break the peace, Make frayes.
as making of frayes in disturbance of the people, this is enquirable.

Also if there be any common Barretors in the Lordship, Common Barretors
as scolders and brawlers to the noyance and disturbance of their neighbors,
Breakers of pound.
present their names.

Also if any break the common Pound, to take a distress out of the same,
present their names.

Also if any Outcries be made against the Laws in disturbance of the people,
Outcries against the law.
it is to be enquired of.

Also if any Rescous be made within the Segniorie upon the Sheriff or his
Bayliffes, Rescous made against the Sheriff or his officers.
or upon any of the Kings Officers, in disturbing of them to take any person to
be arrested, it is to be enquired of.

Also you shall enquire if any Euisdroppers which stand under walls or
windows, Euisdroppers.
by night or day, to hear tales and to carry them to others, to make strife
and debate between their neighbors, present their names.

Also if there be any common breakers of hedges, Breakers of hedges.
present their names.

Also if any keep and mayntaine any Baudry in their houses, Keeping of
bawdrie.
it is cause of breaking the peace and is a vice that corrupts the Common
weal, and for that cause it is here to be enquired of.

Also if there be any Vagabonds, Vagabonds.
and those which walk by night, Roberts men.
and sleep in the day, also if there be any that be common hunters of Tauernes
or Alehouses, having nothing to live upon, To go on message for Thieves.
they are to be enquired of.

Also if any go in message for thieves, it is to be enquired of.

Also you shall enquire if any person have watered any hemp or flax in any
River, For corrupting the waters.
running water, stream or brook, or in any common ponde where beasts do use
to drink, they shall forfeit for every time so doing, one pound, the one part
to the party grieved, or any other which will sue fo the same in the Leete, by
action of debt, Bill, plaint, information or otherwise, and present the
offenders.

Also if any have and use any measures of bushelles, False waights.
gallons, Yard or Ell, or false Balances, or pounds, they are to be enquired
of.

Also if any use double pounds, Double waights.
or measures, that is to say, one little or small weight to sell by, and a
greater to buy with, in deceiving the people, the same is to be enquired of.

Also you shall enquire of th'assise of Bread and Ale, Assise of Bread and Ale.
that the same be kept, that is to say, that every one sell according unto the
rate and price of grain, and that the same be made wholesome for man, and
hereof enquire.

Also if Tiplers sell by cups or dishes, or measures unsealed and not sealed,
Tiplers.
it is enquirable.

Also if Butchers, Butchers and al other victualers do sell wholesome meat at a
reasonable price.
Fishmongers, or other victuallers sell any corrupt victual, not wholesome for
man's body, it is enquirable: also that all other that sell victual, if they
sell the same at a reasonable price, and not to be excessive, having regard to
the prices how victualles be sold in places near thereabouts, and he that is
convicted, shall pay double that he has received to the party damnified, and
the same is to be enquired of.

Also that Hostelers do not sell Hay, Hostler for selling his Hay and Otes.
nor Otes but at reasonable prices, and that they do not take for the Bushel,
but a halfepenny over the common price in the Market, and that they take
nothing for litter, and this is enquireable.

An Hostler may bake his bread for horses in his house in any thorough fare
Town, Hostler may bake his bread.
which is no City where common Bakers dwell, and if he bake and not make the
same according to the prices of grain, it is to be punished in Leete.

Also if any Hostler or other person, Harboring any suspect person
harbor any suspected persons, perceiving them to be of evil behavior, it is
to be enquired of.

Also if Millers take any excessive toll, Millers.
it is to be enquired of: and he ought to take for toll but the twenty or 23.
grain according unto the custom, and according unto the strength of the
water. Also if the Miller within this Lordship change the grain which he has
ground, it is enquirable.

Also it is to be enquired if all the Artificers do make good work as they
ought, Artificers.
and if any make deceit in the same, in deceiving of the people, you ought to
present their names.

Also if any Constable, Misdemeanor of officers.
Ale-taster, Bayliffe, or any other officers within this Lordship, have well
and truly done their Offices or no, it is to be inquired.

Also no Purueyor shall make any purueyance for the King his house, Purueior.
of any thing, to the value of forty shillings or under, except he make ready
payment to the party, upon losing his office, and to pay the value to the
party grieved: and if he do the contrary, if the Steward or Tythingman, upon
complaint to them make no resistance to the Purueyour, they shall forfeit to the
party grieved, the value of the thing taken, and double damages and this is
the misdemeanour of these Officers, Peace and watch.
and of those misdemeauours, and of all others, the Officers are enquirable.
Also the Constable ought to see the peace and watch to be observed as it ought.

If any Treasure be found, that is to say, put in the earth, Treasure found.
and no man knows who hid the same, this is the Kings, except the Lord have
the same by special words, or by prescription.

If any Estraies be, they are enquirable, and that is, if any horse, Estraies.
pigges, hogs, cattle or Swannes, which have come into this Lordship and
have been there a year and a day, and not claymed, then the Lord may have the
property of the same by prescription, but the same ought first to be impounded
in an open pound, proclaimed in three markets next adjoining, and if none
claim them, then they shall be seized, and ought to be put into some several
land, and not in any covert or wood, where the owner cannot find them, for if
they be in covert the property is not changed, though they be there a year
and a day.

Also you shall enquire whether any Thief upon Waise.
hue and cry, or otherwise does waise his goods, that is to say, does leave or
forsake his goods, or any percell of them, which he has stolen, by reason
whereof the King is seized thereof or the Lord by the grant of the King: such
goods are called waifes, and therefore present the same: also if any officer
sease upon any Theefes goods, though there be no pursuit made in these cases,
the King or the Lord by grant or prescription shall have these goods, etc.

If any fly, He that fl^eth.
that is to say, if any be found by Indictment of murder before the Coroner,
or if he be indicted of Felony, and acquitted and found that he flies, then he
shall forfeit his goods to the king, and the Lord may have them by Charter, and
not by prescription, and this is enquirable.

If any horse or mare be put upon a waste ground, Horse or Mare scabbed.
and be scabbed, or having an infectious disease, he shall forfeit to the Lord
of the viz. Franc. Pleg. ten shillings and this is enquirable.

If any Exigent be awarded against one endited of Felony, Exigent.
by the keeping of his goods, they are forfeite, though after he be acquitted of
Fellonie, and the King shall have his goods, and the Lord by Charter, and not
by prescription without Charter, and this is enquireable.

If any be outlawed in debt, Outlawed.
Trespass, or other personal action, his goods be forfeited, and the King
shall have them and not the Lord, except it be by Charter, and not by
prescription, and this is enquireable.

Also you shall enquire if the common Fine have been here to be paid
according to the custom. Common Fine.
and whether the same be gathered according unto the usage, this is commonly
gathered by the Hedborough.

Note that every one that has view of Franc. Pleg. ought to have Pillorie and
Stocks to do Justice: Stocks.
also in every town where there is a Leete, there shall be stocks, and for
default thereof the town shall forfeit five pounds, and the same is enquireable.

Also you shall enquire whether any have used in any of their garments, Appare*
Velvet, Satin, Damask, Taffata, Sarcenet, Chamlet, or any furs, as Foynes,
Ienets, Martines, Squirrell, Fox, Graie, Conie, Hare, or other Furs growing
within this Land, or gold, or silver, in or upon any of their garments,
otherwise then the Statutes made in the 24. year of H. 8. and 1. and 2. of
Phil. and Marie do allow, you shall present the offenders.

Also you shall enquire whether any Baker, Victualle^*
Bruer, Butcher, Cook, Tipler, etc. do take excessive gain or no: also
whether they conspire, covenant, promise or make any oath not to sell victual,
but at a certain price, and present the same.

Also you shall enquire if any Artificers, Artificers.
workmen, or, laborers have conspired promised, or made any oaths that they
will not make or do their works but at certain prises, or not to finish that
which another has begun, or will do but certain work in a day, present them
for they shall forfeit certain penalties, 24. H. 8. Cap. 12.

Also you shall enquire if any man being the Queens subject not lame or maimed,
Archers.
not having any lawful impediment, being within the age of forty years, except
spiritual men, and Justices, do use and exercise shooting in long-bowes, and
whether the fathers of such as be of tender years, do bring up their children
in the knowledge of shooting, and whether every man child of six years and
upward, have a bow and four shaftes: if they have not, their governors shall
forfeit certain penalties: present therefore such offenders.

Also you shall enquire if the Buttes be made and continued, Buttes.
and if your Buts be not made and continued, ye shall forfeit for every 3.
months for default thereof xx.s.

Also you shall enquire if any Tanner have offered to be sold any hide of
Bull, Tanners, Curriers, and tanned leather.
Ox, Steer or Cow gathed or cut, whereby the same is deminished, he shall
forfeite for every one twelve pence.

Also no Currter ought to currie any leather in a Shoomakers house, Curriers.
and none ought to currie any leather evil tanned.

Also you shall enquire if there be any Crow-nets, if there be not, Crow-nets,
and Crow-neasts.
the Lord shall have the moytie of ten shillings, which shall be forfeited by
the Parish or Town for not having the same. Also if they destroy not the
Crow-nests when they begin to breed, they shall be amerced.

Also you shall enquire if any person by any means have taken and killed any
young brood Spaune or Fry, For the taking and killing of fish.
of Salmon, Eeles, Pikes, or any other fish in any Stream, River, Brook,
Floodgate, or in the tail of any Mill, and present the offenders. And further,
when any person has taken in any of the places aforesaid, any Salmons, or
Trowtes out of season, or any Pikes or Pikerels not being in length ten inches,
or any Barbell not being in length twelve ynces, or any Salmons not sixteen
inches: If any have done so, they shall forfeite certain penalties.

Also you shall enquire if any break by day or night the head or damme of any
Pond, Breaking the head of any pond.
Poole, or Moate, within which the Lord has fish, to the intent to scatter,
steal, and destroy the fish, he shall pay to the Lord treble damages, and
shall be imprisoned three months, and after find sureties for seven years of
his good abearing.

Also you shall enquire if any do hunt Dear out of the Lords land, Hunting
of Dear.
or kill any of his Dear, and present them.

Also you shall enquire if any person do keep or maintain any Common house,
Unlawful games.
Alley, or place of Bowling, Quaytes, Cayles, Tennise, Dicing, Tables, or
Carding, or any other unlawful games, and present them: if they do they shall
forfeite certain penalties. Also you shall enquire if any person do haunt the
said houses and places. Also further you shall enquire if your Constables and
other officers do make true search in such places which be suspected to be
frequented with any unlawful games, yea or no, if they do not they shall
forfeite certain penalties, you shall therefore present such offenders. 33. H.
8. Cap. 9.

No stoned Horse being of the age of two years, Horses.
except he be fourteen handfuls high, shall be put to pasture in any Common,
Forest, or Chase, upon pain of forfeiting the same Horse. Also the said lands
ought to be yearly driven at Michaelmas by the Lord, Tything men, Constables,
etc. or within fifteen days after, upon pain of forty shillings: and if
upon the same driving there be found any Mare, Fool, or Gelding, not able to
bear Foles, or not able to do profitable service, the same shall be slain and
buried. 32. H. 8. cap. 13.

Also you shall enquire if the inhabitants after Robberies and Fellonies
committed, Hue and cry.
do make fresh suite from town to town, or from County to County, or from
Hundred to Hundred, according to the Statute of Winchester. 13. E. 1. cap. 2.
For if a man be robbed in the day time, and the Thief escape and is not taken
within half a year after the Robbery, for lack of Hue and cry, the Borough
or Hundred shall answer to the party all his goods and damages. Also if any
person be killed in a Town in the day time, and the murderer or manslayer
escape, not taken nor arrested by those of the Town, then the Towneship shall
be amerced. 18. E. 2.

Also you shall enquire if your Constables and Churchwardens have appointed any
surueiour for the mending of high ways, For the mending of high ways.
leading to Market towns or no, and if any chosen, refuse the same office, he
shall pay twenty shillings. Also you shall enquire whether the same surueiours
have taken upon them the said office, and put the same in execution: and
whether the Parishoners have done their duties, and present all those that have
offended contrary to the same Statute, for the offenders shall forfeite
certain penalties.

Also you shall enquire if the ditches be scoured, Scouting of ditches and
cutting of hedges.
and bushes cut according to the Statute made in the first year of Q.
Elizabeth, for not doing of the same they shall forfeite ten shillings.

The moytie of all the forfeitures for these Statutes, Nota.
the Churchwardens shall have to bestow upon the high ways.

Also you shall enquire if any person have watered any Hemp or Flax in any
River, For watering hemp or flax
running water, Stream or Brook, or other common ponde where beasts do use
to drink, they shall forfeite for every time so doing one pound, the one part
to the party grieved, or any other which will sue for the same, and shall give
a remedy to sue for the same in Leete by action of debt, bill, plaint,
information or otherwise.

Also you shall enquire whether any refuse to come to Musters before any person
authorized to take the same, Musters.
he shall be imprisoned for ten days, except he pay to the King forty
shillings: and if any person appointed to take Musters receive any money to
release any appointed to serve, he shall forfeite ten times so much as that he
received. 4. and 5. P. M cap. 3.

If any person to the number of twelve, Ryots.
make an unlawful assembly, as in breaking of Banks, Enclosures, Parkes,
Fishponds, Barnes, Houses, and such like, and proclamation be made by the
Sheriff or Justice of Peace that they depart, and notwithstanding they remain
together an hour after proclamation made, every such attempt is Felony. Also
every Copyholder being a Yeoman, Husbandman or labourer, of the age of
eighteen years, and under threescore, not sick, nor having a reasonable
excuse, and being required by the Justice, Sheriff, etc. to apprehend those
persons aforesaid, and refuse, shall forfeite his estate during his life, and
his Lord may enter. Also the Farmer being a Yeoman, etc. refusing, is in the
same case to his Landlord. Also it is Felony if any person without compulsion,
bring, send, or deliver any money, harness, artillery, weapons, or victuals,
to any person assembled in such manner. Also the Justice of Peace or other
officer may raise a power to suppress them: and if any officer kill any such
rebellious persons, or maime them, they shall be free: and if any person know
of any such pretended rebellion, and do not openly declare the same within xx.
hours next after such knowledge, he shall be imprisoned for three months
without bail or maineprise, if he be not discharged by a Justice of Peace:
also he that lets or hinders that proclamation that the same be not made,
commits Felony.

Anno quinto Eliza. cap. 1. Of the Queen and assurance of her power.
If any extol or set forth the authority of the Bishop of Rome against the
form of this Estatute, he shall encurre the danger of a Praemunire, and this
Estatute is to be declared in Leete.

None may trace, Tracing of Hares.
destroy, or kill a Leueret in the night with dog, or otherwise, and he that
does it shall forfeit six shillings eight pence. 14. H. 8. cap. 11.

Also you shall enquire if those persons which do sell Wines be thereunto
licensed, Licenses for Wine.
according unto the Statute made in the vii. year of E. 6. etc. upon a
grievous pain and forfeiture, and for every day occupying or selling of Wine
without licenses. Also you shall enquire how many there are licensed, and
present them. Of this and all other matters and defaults you shall diligently
enquire and make a true presentment.

Then after the charge is given, the Steward shall command the Crier to make
proclamation, and after proclamation made three times, the Steward shall say.
IF any can inform the Steward or this enquest of any petie Treason, Felony,
petie Larcenie, Purpresture, breaking of Pounds, or of rescues, or of any other
thing done against the peace, or of any person of evil behavior within the
Leete, or of any Artificer that does make deceit, or of any other misdemeanour
of any officer, or other person here, or of any Waife or Stray, Treasure found,
or of any other thing here to be enquired of; come in and you shall be heard.

Then if any come in he shall be sworn to give evidence to the Jury, and
after that the Steward shall say to the enquest.
Go you together and enquire of the matters of your charge, and when you be
agreed I shall be ready to take your verdite.

Finis del Charge de Court Leete.
THE ORDER OF keeping Court Baron.
The style of the Court.
CVria Baronis M. L. ibidem tenta die Martis, Overstoy.
videlicet decimo quarto die Maij, Anno Regni Elizabeth Dei gratia Angliae,
Franc. and Hiberniae Reginae fidei defensoris, etc. 21. tent. per A. B.
Senescallum.

After the style of the Court entered, you shall cause the Bayliffe to cry
once Oyes, and then call the Jurors.

Examp. John Do, Richard Roe, John Den, Richard Fen, Walter Hellen Robert
Allen,
Iuratores. Rob. Dodge, Tho. Lodge, Adam Clark, David Park, Henry Lo, William
Croe.
Homage.

After the Jury is called, the Bayliffe shall cry an other Oyes, and then the
Steward shall say:

If any will be essoyned or enter any playnte, come in and you shall be heard.

And after the Essoynes be entered, and your plaints determined, then empanell
the Jury, and swear them.

After th'enquest is empanelled and sworn, make another Oyes, and say, you
good men which be empanelled, come near, and you and all other keep silence
during your charge.

An exhortation to the Jury.
MY Masters, you that be sworn, before I give you your charge in this Court
Baron, I think it good to declare unto you by what authority you are
commanded to be here, and for what cause. Chiefly you are appointed to be
here for that you be the Lords Tenants, and are bound by reason thereof to
appear at the Lords Court Baron when it shall be kept according unto the law,
that is to say, at every three weeks end being warned, and being by the same
authority there to end and determine Injuries, Trespasses, Debts, and other
actions, where the debt or damage is under forty shillings. And also that
nothing be done within the Manor hurtefull to the inheritance of the Lord of
the Manor, which ought to be enquired and presented for the Lord: and that you
be the more diligent and careful in enquiring and presenting the same, I have
ministered an oath unto you, which is the calling or taking to witness of God his
name, to confirm the truth of that you shall say and present, minding neither
fraud nor deceit, but only the truth, not partial, but seeking the glory of
God, the profit of your neighbors, and the common weal of God his people.

The Charge.
FIrst you shall enquire of the suitors which owe any suite to this Court
whether they be heirs or not, and present their names that make default, for
they which be absent ought to be present here as well as you, except they have
some lawful impediment to the contrary, for they hold their lands as well to
do their suite as to pay their rent, so that if they do not their suite they
shall be amerced, or the Lord may have good remedy for the same: otherwise you
shall understand, that every common suitor is bound to the laws to appear at
the Lords Court Baron at every three weeks end: The tenants are bound to
appear at every 3. weeks end at the Lords Court Baron
notwithstanding, the Lord for your ease, (which he esteems more then his
own profit suffers the same to be kept but seldom, as appears, for which
cause every of the Tenants ought the more willingly to come unto his Court at
such times as he does appoint for the same: for if they wilfully absent
themselves, then they render evil for good, and besides that they incur the
danger of perjury, for when they did their Fealty, they were sworn to be
true Tenaunts unto their Lord, and to pay and do all manner of suites,
customs, and services due for their Tenements, at their day assigned, and
therefore let every man remember his oath and duty, and do his suites and
services according to the same, or else he shall fall into the danger
aforesaid.

Next you shall enquire whether there be any Tenaunts dead sithence the last
Court day or before, What tenants is dead since the last Court.
whose death as yet is not presented, and you shall present the same: What land
he holds and by what service.
also what Lands and Tenements he holds of this Lordshippe at the time of
his death, and by what services, that is to say, whether it were by Knights
service, Socage, Tenure, or Copiholde, and what advantage the Lord shall have
by his death, as Ward, Marriage, Belief, Escheate, Fine, Herriot, etc. Also
who is his next heir.
and who is his next heir, and what age he is of, and in whose keeping, and
present it. You shall understand there be diverse manner of Tenures, but most
men do hold by Knights service, or Socage tenure.

Knights service is when the Tenant holds of the Lord by Escuage, Knights
service what it is.
that is to say, by the service of the shield, also to hold by Castle guarde,
that is to say, to keep a Castle, or Tower, or door, or other place of his
Lords upon reasonable warning, when the Lord hears ye enemies do come into
England, y^ is Knights service.

Also he that holds by Homage, Homage, fealty, and Escuage Knights service.
Fealty, and Escuage, holds by Knights service. Also he which holds of his
Lord to blow a horn to warn the men of that country when enemies do come
into England, holds by Knights service, Knights service is done by the body
of a man
and Knights service ought always to be done by ye body of a man, and that
service draws unto it, Ward, Marriage, and Relief: for when such a Tenant
dies, seysed, and his heir male within age, Knights service draws unto it
ward, marriage and relief.
and unmarried, the Lord shall have the land holden of him, and also the marriage
of him until he be of lawful age, that is to say, the age of xxi. years.
But if such a Tenant dies seysed, his heir female being of the age of xiiii.
years or more, then the Lord shall neither have the wardship of the Land, nor
yet of her body, for that the law entendeth, that a woman of that age may have
a husband able to do knights service: and if she be within the age of xiiii.
years and unmarried, then the Lord shall have the wardship of her land, and
also of her body until she be of the age of xvi. years. And some such Tenants
do hold by half a Knights service, and some by half a Fee, and some by more,
and some by less: and if such a Tenant dies which holds by one Knights Fee,
and his heir being of full age, then the Lord shall have Homage and Fealty,
and also five pound for a Relief, and of him which holds by half a Knights
Fee, ii. pound x. shillings, and he that holds by more shall pay more, and he
that holds by less shall pay less, you shall therefore present whether any
such Tenant died seized of any such lands and Tenements so holden yea, or no.

Also you shall enquire whether any Tenant which held by Knights service, made
any Feoffement to his heir, and after dyed, his heir being within age, yea or
no.

And whether any such Tenant made any alienation of any such land so holden to
any person by collusion, Alienation by collusion and holding by Knights service
to defeat the Lord of his Ward, or other profits, yea or no, and present
that: for in all these cases the Lord shall have the Ward and marriage of his
heir, and also of his lands, as well as if the said Tenant had dyed seysed of
the same land.

Also you shall enquire whether any such Tenant which held by Knights service,
Feoffement a son use, the land holden in Knights service
did make any Feoffment by deed to his use, or any Recognizance by fine to his
use, or suffer any recovery against him to his use, and after dyed, and no
Will by him declared, and present it: for in those cases also the Lord shall
have relief of his heir, being of full age, and other duties, as well as if
his Tenant had dyed seysed.

Also you shall enquire whether the heir of such Tenant, entered into any such
lands so holden, Enter for condition broken.
for any condition broken, being made by any of his ancestors, and present it.

And whether any such Tenant has entered into any house of Religion, Enter
into Religion.
and is there professed yea or no, and present it: for in these cases the Lord
likewise shall have such profits, as he should have had if his Tenant had
dyed seysed.

Also you shall enquire if any Tenant which held by Knights service, Disseisin
of the tenant, and death before any reentree.
was disseised of lands so holden, that is to say, put out of them by one which
had no rightful title to the same, and after dyed before any reentree, or ny
lawful recovery had, and present it, for the Lord shall have the wardship of
the body of the heir and of his land, as well as if his Tenant had dyed
thereof seized.

Socage Tenure is, as if the Tenant holds of the Lord by fealty and
certain rent for all manner of services, What Socage tenure is.
or by homage and fealty for all manner of services, or by fealty only for
all manner of services, or to pay a sum of money for escuage, or to pay a
certain sum of money for Castle guard: al such Tenures are Tenures in Socage:
and all other Tenures which are no Tenures by Knights service, are Tenures in
Socage: and where such Tenaunts dye seysed of any lands so holden, the Lord of
whom the land is so holden, after the death of his Tenant, can have no more
profit but only his fealty and relief, Relief is as much money as one
years rent.
that is to say, as much money and service as one years rent does amount unto.
As if the Tenant held by fealty, and ten shillings for a Relief, over and
besides the ten shillings which he shall pay for his rent, and in such case
after the death of the Tenant, such relief is due to the Lords maintenance,
so that the heir be of the age of xiiii. years, and he ought to tarry for
his relief until the day of payment of the rent, but he ought to have his
relief maintenant, and for that he may distraine immediately after the death of
his Tenant.

Also if a Copyholder dye sole seysed of any lands or Tenements so holden, A
Copyholder dies.
his heir being of the age of xiiii. years, then he shall pay a fine unto the
Lord and do fealty, and be admitted Tenant: but if the heir be within the
age of xiiii. years, then some Garden shall be admitted to occupy his
Copyhold, and to pay and to do his service due for the same, that is to say,
if lands descend from the father, then the mother or some of her next kin shall
have the occupation of the same lands, until the heir be of the age of
fourteen years, and they shall a little fine for the Gardenship, and the
heir at his entry shall pay the whole fine, you shall enquire thereof and
present the same.

Also you shall enquire whether any Tenant which held by Socage Tenure, did
make any Feoffment in fee to his use, and dyed seysed of the use, his heir
being within age, and no Will by him declared of the use, and present it: for
the Lord shall have his relief, as well as if he had dyed seysed of the same
lands.

Also you shall enquire whether any Freeholder has aliened or sold away his
Freehold lands or tenements, Whether any Freeholder has aliened any of his
freehold lands.
or any parcel of them, and present it: for he which has bought the land,
before he enter, ought to come and give notice unto the Lord that he has
bought the same, and so the Lord shall know his Tenant, and the service which
the former paid unto the Lord, shall be apportioned according unto the value of
the lands.

Also you shall enquire whether any which held by Herriot service, Herriot
service Herriot custom.
or Herriot custom, dyed seysed of any lands or Tenements so holden, and
present it, for their service shall be apportioned: also the Lord shall have of
every of their several parts diverse Herriots at their several deaths: also if
one man have two several parcels of lands holden by Herriot service, and by
two several titles, and dies seysed of the same, the Lord shall have after
his death two Herriots.

Also you shall enquire if any Copyholder dyed seysed of any lands so holden,
Whether any Copyholder dies seysed of any such lands
and present it: also whether any Copyholder has made any lease of his
Copyhold, or otherwise aliened or sold the same, and present it, for it is a
forfeiture of his Copyhold: for if a Copyholder will alien or sell away his
Copyhold, he ought to come into the Court and surrender the same into the hands
of the Lord, to the use of him which shall have the state, or else out of the
Court he ought to surrender it unto the Bayliffe, or to some of the Tenaunts of
the Lordship, How a Copyholder ought to surre^der his Copyhold
to the use of him which shall have the state, and they to whom the surrender
is made, ought to present the same at the next Court, and then pay his sine for
the same, and take it to his use in the Court, and do his endeavor to be
admitted, and if he be not at the same Court, then the Lord shall have the
mean profits of the same lands, all the rent services and reparations being
deducted, until he be amerced of his fine according to his duty.

Also you shall enquire if any Copyholder has made any surrender of his
Copyhold, Whether any Copyholder has made any surrender.
or any part thereof sithence the last Court day, or before, and present it,
and into whose hands it was made, and in whose presence, or to whose use: for
at every surrender the Lord ought to have a fine, and the party into whose
hands the surrender is made, ought to come to the next Court, and present the
same, and to yield up his right into the Lords hands, to the use of the
alienee, according unto ye trust reposed in him, or otherwise he forfeiteth his
Copyhold, except he have a reasonable excuse: for that he does as much as he
may to defeat the Lord of his fine, and also to defeat the other party to
whose use the surrender was made.

Also you shall enquire if any Tenaut of the Lordship have given any lands into
imortemane, Mortmaine.
and present it.

Mortemaine is if a man give or sell any lands to any house of religion, or to
any other which be corporate by the Knights grant: also if one make a
Feoffement upon trust to the use of an house of religion, or to the use of a
Guilde or fraternity Corporate, that is mortemayne.

Also if one exchange lands or Tenements with an Abbot or other body
corporate, this is mortemaine. Also if a man of religion or other body
corporate does hold of any man by Knights service, and he release unto him
this his mortemaine, and then the King or L. may enter, and shall have the same
by force, A statute made thereof that the king or Lord shall have the same.
you shall therefore present them that have given any lands or Tenements in
mortemayne.

Also you shall enquire whether any Tenant for term of life or years, or
any copyholder of this Lordshippe has made any waste, Waste.
or suffered any waste to be done upon their lands and Tenements, yea or no.

Wast is as when any Tenant for term of life, What wast (...) and how the
same is done
years, or any Copyholder pulls down any house, or cutteth down any
Timber, Trees, or suffers the house willingly to fall, being on their Copy
tenements, or if any of the Tenaunts plough upon any medowe ground, or if they
suffer any wall or pale which were covered to be uncovered, by reason whereof
the same wall or pale does fall in decay, or if any of them dig coals
chalk, or sand, or make any Mines in their grounds, then they make wast. Also
if they fell a tree to the value of three shillings four pence, this is
admitted wast: but if a man cut down Timber to repair the old houses which
stand upon parcel of the same ground, and therewith does repair them, then it
is no wast: but if he with the Timber build a new house, then the cutting
down of such timber is wast: Or if he cut down any timber to sell, to repair
such houses which are fallen in decay, such is wast. But if wast be done with a
Tempest, no Tenant shall be punished for such wast: but if wast be done by any
danger, the Tenant shall be punished for such wast. Also it is no wast to
fell in a reasonable time such trees as have been felled within twenty years
before: but if a Tenant cut down such trees to burn upon their Teneme^ts,
where they have wood sufficient, this is wast. Also a Copyholder may not cut
down wood to sell, but he may to burn, upon his Tenement, or to make
reparations as aforesaid.

Also you shall enquire whether any Tenant in possession or reuersion dyed
seized of any land or Tenements holden of this Lordship, Whether any tenant in
possession or reuersion dyed seized without any heir.
having no heir at the time of his death, yea or no, and present it, for then
the Lord shall have the land holden of him by Escheate. You shall understand
that none shall have lands in fee simple as heirs unto any man, unless he be
heir of the whole blood: for if a man have issue two sons by diverse women,
and dies seysed of the same land, and the eldest enters and dies without
issue, the youngest shall not have the land as heir unto the brother, because
he is of the half blood, but some other heir of the fathers side shall
inherit the same land, and if he have no heir on the fathers side, then the
next heir on the mothers side shall not have the land, but the Lord of whom
the land is holden shall have the land by Escheate, and so when land descends
on the mothers side, the heir on the mothers side shall enherite, and not the
heirs of the fathers side. Also you shall understand, A bastard may not
inherit.
that a Bastard can never be heir unto any man, nor yet have heir unto
himself: therefore if any Bastard, or any other Tenant have dyed seysed
without heirs, you shall present it.

Also you shall enquire if any Tenant was seysed of any lands or Teneme^ts,
Whether any tenant dyed being put out of lands which he had no right.
and was put out of his land by one which had no rightful title, and afterward
dyed without any heir, the Lord shall have his Escheate as well as if his
Tenant had dyed seysed.

Also you shall enquire whether any Tenant of this Lordship has committed any
petie Treason, Petie treason, felony or murder committed of any tenant, for
which he was hanged, or had judgment to be hanged.
Felonies, or Murders, for the which he was hanged, or for the which he had
judgment to be hanged, though afterward he paid his charge and was delivered
to the Ordinary, and present it. And whether any Tenant has committed any
petie Treason, Felony or Murder, for the which he has forsworn the Land, for
the which he was outlawed, or for the which he was beheaded, or for the which
he was overcome by wager of battle, or by death, and present it: for in all
these cases the Lord of whom the lands are holden, Whether there be any rents
lost, or services withdrawn.
shall have the lands by Escheate, and also the evidences concerning the same.

Also you shall enquire if there be any Rents, Customs or services withdrawn
from the Lordship, which of right ought to be done, and present it, and what
rents, customs and services they are, and by whom they are withdrawn, and
where the land lies, that the Lord may have the remedy for the arrerages
thereof. Whether the tenaunts do uphold and repair their tenements.


Also you shall enquire whether the Copyholders or the Farmers of this Lordship
do uphold and repair their Tenements, yea or no, and present the same. You
shall understand that every Tenaunts is bound to three things: first, that he
be true Tenant to his Lord: secondly, that he sufficiently repair his
Tenements: and thirdly, that he pay and do all suites, customs, and services
at his days assigned: for he took upon him so to do when he did his fealty:
and if he do not pay his suites, customs and services, the Lord shall have
good remedy and recover the same with his damages: and if he be a Copyholder,
and do the contrary, he does forfeite his Copyhold.

Also you shall enquire if any Tenant of this Lordship which is bound by reason
of his Tenure to do suite unto the Lord, Whether any tenant have withdrawn
his services.
will do the same yea or no, and present it: and whether any have used to
withdraw their suite from the Lord his Mill, in not grinding their corn there,
yea or no, and present it.

Also you shall enquire whether any Waife or Stray, Waife and Stray.
is, or was within this Lordship, and whether the Lord be answered of the
same, yea or no, if not, present by whom they are conveyed away: also you shall
enquire if any Herryot be conveyed away, yea or no, and present it, and by whom.

A Waife is if a thief upon hue and cry and pursuit after him, What a Waife
is.
or otherwise to ease himself of his carriage, without hue and cry does waife
his goods, that is to say, does leave and forsake his goods which he has
stolen, or any parcel of the^, by reason whereof y^ King, or any other Lord or
officer in his right, or in his own right do sease y^ goods, in those cases ye
goods so seized are called Waifes, and the same law is, if any officer take any
goods of a thief, suspecting that he has stolen them, though there be no
pursuit made, and in these cases, the King, or else the Lord by reason of a
grant made by the King, or by prescription shall have the goods so waifed, if
the owner of them do not make fresh suite after the Thief to attaint him for
stealing of the same goods: which fresh suite if he make, he shall have his
goods again, though they be waifed, but then he must sue an appeal, and so
have them.

An estray is as when any Horse, What an estray is.
Mare, Ox, Sheep, or other Beasts are in the Lordship, and no man knows the
owner of them, they shall be seized unto the use of the King, or to the Lord
which has such an estray by the King his grant, or by prescription, and if
the owner come and make claim within a year and a day, then he shall have it
again, or else after the year and the day the property thereof shall be to
the King, or else to the Lord which has the same by grant or prescription, so
that the Lord make proclamation thereof, according to the law, in the next
markets, and in the Church.

Also you shall enquire whether any person have made rescues against the Lord,
Rescous.
or any other officer, and present it.

Rescous is when the Lord distreyneth in the land holden of him for his rent,
or services behind, or if the Lord come upon the lands and would distreyne, and
the Tenant or some other will not suffer him, that is Rescous. Also if the
Lord distreine for service behind, or for damage fesaunt, and in driving
Cattle to pound, the Beasts enter into the house of the owner, if in such
case he that distreyneth does pray deliverance, and the possessor will not
deliver them, that is a Rescous, therefore you shall present it, if Rescous
have been made.

Also you shall enquire whether any person has broken the Lords pound, Breach
of pound.
that is, to have taken away a distress put in, yea or no, and present it. You
shall understand, that if the Lord do distraine any Tenant for Rent, or
service behind, he may impound the same distress in a common pound if he
will, or in his own ground, or in his neighbors if he will, by the license
of his neighbor, and all those places in which the Lord does impound any
Cattle, are called the Lords pound, but not always when another does impound
any distress in his own pound or in his neighbors: It behooves him to give
notice to the other party, for that if the distress be quick he may give it
meat, and then if the beast die for want of food, he that was distrayned
shall be at the loss, and then he that distrayned before may distrayne again
for the same Rent or duty.

Also you shall enquire if any Tenant of this Lordship, Whether any Tenant
has let any Farm fall to decay, viz. not maintained for husbandry as before.
has let any Farm or house fall into decay, which at any time sithence the
first year of the reign of King H. 7 has been let with twenty acres of land
being in tilling, yea or no, and present it, for if they suffer their houses to
fall into decay, the Lord may take and distraine for half of the issues and
profits of the same, and keep to his own use until such times as the houses
shall be sufficiently builded and repaired, that is to say, mayntayned again
for husbandry.

Also you shall enquire if any inhabitance or common have ouercharged the
common or high ways, or your common fields, by putting in more Cattle then
they ought to keep, and whether any of them has put their Cattle in any their
commons aforesaid, before the days agreed upon, and present it, for the Lord
as it seems may distrayne the surplusage, damage, Fesaunt, or else you may
make among your selves orders and laws for your own profit, that none shall
do upon pain of certain penalties, etc. and by such laws the inhabitants and
commoners shall be bound, etc.

Also you shall enquire if any person have made any pittes in the high ways,
Whether any pits be made in the high ways, breaking of hedges hogs vnyoked, or
vnringed.
and whether any person do commonly use to break hedges, and to suffer hogs
to got vnyoaked, or vnringed, to the annoyance of their neighbors.

Also you shall enquire whether any person has strained or stopped any ways,
water, ditches, paths, or turned any of them into a wrong course, Stopping
ways, waters, etc.
and present it.

Also if any have encroched any land of the Lords, that is to say, Land,
Medowe, Pasture, Wood, Heath, Moore, Whether any have encroched.
or any other vacant land without license of the Lord, by setting of his hedge,
pale, or otherwise, and present the same.

Note that all the vacant and waste land within the Manor, is to the Lord of
the Manor.

Also you shall enquire whether any person eared, Whether any have removed any
marks
plowed up, or removed away any Mere marks, baulks or limits between one
piece of land and another, and present it.

Also you shall enquire if any have stalked with a bush or beast to kill Dear
which is in the Lords Chase and Park, Whether any have stalked with bush or
beast.
and present it.

Also you shall enquire if any person has, or keeps away any Evidences,
Whether any have or do keep away any evidences
Charters, or Court Rolls, Customarie terres, or any other evidences which
concern the Lordship, or any parcel thereof, yea or no, and present it.

Also you shall enquire if any person have fished, fouled, hawked, Whether any
have fished fouled, hawked.
or hunted in this Lordship or Lords warren, and present it.

Also you shall enquire if any person have taken any Fesant, Whether any have
taken any Fesants, etc.
Partridges, with net, snare, or other engine upon the Freehold of the L. of
this Manor, and present it.

Also you shall enquire if any have taken away the eggs of the Lords Swannes
out of their nests, Swannes or swannes eggs.
and present it.

Also you shall enquire if any land of the Lords be kept back, Concealed
land.
or occupied by any without the license of the Lord: also what land it is, and
how much land has been so occupied, and of what value by the year the same
is, and present it.

Also you shall enquire whether the Lord have any villain within this Lordship,
Whether the L. have a villain within the Lordship.
and what goods, cattels, and lands he has, what estate he has, that the L.
may seize thereupon: also what other things he has: also if any villain carry
his goods out of this Lordshippe without license of the Lord, or if any freeman
espouse a wife without license of the Lord, you shall present the same. Note if
a villain purchase land, and does alyen the same to another before the Lord
enter, then the Lord after shall not enter: otherwise it is if the Lord enter
before the alienation of ye villain: the same law is of goods, but the L. may
not seyse of ye goods that ye villain has as Executor.

Also you shall enquire if any trespass be done in any of the Lords liberty,
Trespass in the corn, grass, etc.
viz. in his corn, grass, Meadows, pasture, woods, hedges, waters or ponds,
or if any take honey, swarms of Bees, or any Hawks, or eyrie of Hawks, or
such like trespass, and present them.

Also you shall enquire if any land be enclosed, For enclosing in seueralty
grounds without license of of the L. etc.
and the same kept in seueraltie which ought to lie open, without license of
the Lord and other freeholders, you shall present the same, for that no Tenant
of the Lordship shall loose the Common in the same.

Also if any Copyholder let his Copyholde land for longer time then a year and
a day without license, A Copyholder may not let longer then a year and a day.
except it be by custom that he may let for longer time, and if he do, it is
forfeiture, and present the same.

Also you shall enquire whether any Tenant of this Lordship has been outlawed
in any action of Trespass, Whether any be outlawed.
or other action and present it: and whether the L. be answered of his goods
and cattels, yea or no, and present ye same.

Also you shall enquire whether any Tenant for years or life, Granting greater
estates, etc.
have granted any greater or larger estate then they had in their lands or
Tenements, yea or no, and present it, for that is a forfeyture of their estate.

Also you shall enquire if the Bayliffe, Whether the Bayliffe and other
officers do execute their office.
Hedborough, Constable, and Hay ward, and all other Officers have well and
truly executed their offices, yea or no, and present it.

To conclude, you shall enquire whether all the defaults and plaints that were
presented at the last Court be sufficiently amended yea, Whether the defaults
and playnts be amended.
or no, and whether all the orders and laws heretofore made be observed and
kept, yea or no, and present it. And further, you shall enquire for all things
which in your consciences you think ought to be searched and enquired of, and
by the oaths that you have taken you shall truly and diligently enquire of all
the premises, and plainly without concealing of any fault, bring in a true
verdite in writing, subscribed with your own hands, sealed with your Seals,
by such an hour, or as soon as you can.

And finally if you shall know any thing that ought to be presented to the
Lords advantage, you shall do us to weete by the Oath that you have made, and
bring us in a true presentment. And now you may depart and enquire of your
charge, having a regard of your Oaths.

Finis de le Charge de Court Baron.

