garland embellished with Tudor rose
Prayers for the Parliament.
GOd be merciful unto us and bless us: Psalm. ^
and show us the light of his countenance, and be merciful unto us.

That thy way may be known upon earth, thy saving health among all Nations.

Let ye people praise thee, O God: yea, let all the people praise thee.

O let the Nations rejoice and be glad, for thou shall judge the folk
righteously: and govern the Nations upon earth.

Let the people praise thee, O God: let all the people praise thee.

Then shall the earth bring forth her increase: and God, even our own God,
shall give us his blessing.

God shall bless us: and all the ends of the world shall fear him.

After the Psalm, these Suffrages.
THE Lord be with you.

Answer.

Let us pray. Lord have mercy upon us. Christ have mercy upon us. Lord have
mercy upon us.


Our Father which art in heaven, etc.

Then shall follow three Collects.
The first for the Kings Majesty.
O Lord our heavenly Father, high and mighty, King of Kings, Lord of Lords, the
only ruler of Princes, which do from thy Throne behold all ye dwellers upon
earth, most heartily we beseech thee with thy favor to behold our most gracious
Soueraign Lord King James, and so replenish him with ye grace of thy holy
Spirit, that he may always incline to thy will, and walk in thy way: endue him
plenteously with heavenly gifts, grant him in health and wealth long to live,
strengthen him, that he may vanquish and overcome all his enemies, and finally
after this life he may attain everlasting joy and felicity, through Jesus
Christ our Lord. Amen.

The second Collect.
Almighty God, which by thy holy Prophet David art most truly said to stand in
ye congregation of Princes, and give judgment in the midst of the mighty
men of the world, and through whose authority Princes do reign, Law makers
do discern just things, Lords bear rule, and all Judges of the earth execute
judgment, and for that comes of thee all counsel and equity, all
understanding and strength: Grant unto us here gathered together in thy Name,
that Wisdom which is always assistant to thy seat, to give knowledge to our
feeble and ignorant minds. Send down (we beseech thee) the same Wisdom out
of thy holy heavens, and from the throne of thy Majesty, that it may be now
with us, and labor with us, whereby we surely knowing what is acceptable unto
thee, may be led through it to the debating, weighing, and final determining
of those matters, by the which thy blessed Name may be glorified, thy
Catholic Church of England confirmed and increased, the Kings assurance
established, the common tranquillity of this Realm safely maintained, and
last of all, all estates and people thereof, in true obedience and charity
united and knit together. Grant this, O God, for thy only Sons sake Jesus
Christ our Lord. Amen.

A Thanksgiving for peace and Victory.
O Almighty God, which art a strong Tower of defense unto thy servants against
the face of their enemies: we yield thee praise and Thanksgiving for our
deliverance from those great and apparent dangers, wherewith we were compassed
in this place: We acknowledge it thy goodness, yt we were not delivered over as
a prey unto them: beseeching thee still to continue such thy mercies toward
us, that all the world may know, that thou art our Savior and Mighty
deliverer, through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

The third Collect.
Prevent us, O Lord, in all our doings, with thy most Gracious favor, and
further us with thy continual help, that in all our works begun, continued,
and ended in thee, we may glorify thy holy Name, and finally by thy mercy
obtain everlasting life through Jesus Christ our Lord.

Then shall follow the Benediction, as thus.
2. Corinthians. 13. THe Grace of our Lord Jesus Christ, and the love of God, and
the fellowship of the holy Ghost, be with us all evermore. Amen.


