A PROCLAMATION concerning payment of tithes and oblations, as well within the
city of London as else where within the realm.
THE KINGS most royal majesty having perfyt knowledge and understanding
that as well his loving subjects (...) of his city of London of the one
p(...) as the persons cutates of the churches of his said city of the other
party, by their mutual assentes compromitted them self to stand abide and
perform the order decret and at(...)rement of his right trusty and right
entierly beloved counsailours, the most reverend father in God Thomas
archebysshop of Canturbury Metropolitan and prymate of England, Thomas
Audeley knight lord Chancellor of England. the reverend father in god
Stephyn bishop of wynchester, Thomas Crumwell Esquier chief secretary to the
kings hyghnes, and master of the rolls, Thon Fitz James knight, chief
justice of plees to be holden before the kings hyghenes, and Roberie Norwyche
knight chief justice of the kings commen benche, in and upon the debate and
variaunce that was moved between the said parties for the rate and certayntie
of tithes offetynges and other duties claymed by the said persons and
curates to be paid by the kings said subjects the citezens of his said
City, where upon the said counsayllours of our said souetayne lord by great
advise and deliberation, by one accord and assente among other things have
ordained and decreed, that every the kings said subjects, citizens, and
inhabytauntes of his said City, should from the time of their awarde and
decree pay for their tithes after the rate of syxtene pence halfepeny for
every.x. s. of their house rent, and for every.xx. s. to pay.ii. s.ix. d. and
so accumptynge and assendynge always by.x. s. should pay for every ten. s.
after the rate of syxtene pence. ob. and not above. And yet nevertheless the
kings hyghenesse is enfourmed, that diverse and sondrye persons inhabyted
within his said City, not only refuse to pay their said tithes, according
as is lymitted by his said counsayllours, but also that many of the said
cytesens and of other the kings subjects inhabyted in sundry parts of this
realm, grudged and murmured to pay their tithes offerynges and other lawful
duetyes to the persons, vicars, and other having cure of their souls, like as
heretofore by the lawdable customs of this realm they have done and been
accustomed to do, and obstinatly and wilfully withdraw and deteyne their said
duties, again Justice equite reason and good conscience, to the great peril
of their souls. For reformation whereof the kings said royal majesty being
the supreme heed in earth under God of the church of England, myndinge and
entendynge to maintain and sustain the honor of God and the godly
obseruances and tyghtfull duetyes customably and by laudable customs dew to
the ecclesiastical ministers of the church of England, in as large and ample
manner as heretofore has been laudably and honorably used and accustomed within
this his realm, does therefore by this his present Proclamation strayghtely
charge and command all and every his said subjects of his said City, to
satisfy pay and content to their persons vicars and other, having cure of
their souls, in the name and lewe of their tithes after the rate above
expressed, lymitted by the kings said counselors. And that al such of his
said city as pay less of yearly ferme than.x. s. and all and every other
person and persons men women and chylderne, inhabyted within the said city,
being of age to receive the blessed and holy Sacrament of the altar, the very
body of our lord Jesus Christ, shall pay yearly for their four offering
days two pence, the householders inhabyted within the said city, payinge
above the yearly rent of ten shyllynges, only for their own persons excepted
and to be discharged of the.ii. d. for the said four offryng days.

And over this his hyghenes strayghtly charge and commands, that all and
every his other Subjects, in all other parties of this his realm, shall pay
and content to the persons vicars and other the ministers of the church, and
having cure, such tithes as well prediall as personal offerynges and other
dewtyes, which by the laudable customs of this realm they heretofore have
been oblyged accustomed and bounden to pay, without deteynynge any part
thereof, and without further denial, contradiction, molestation, or trouble in
any behalf, upon pain that every person offendinge this his gracious
Proclamation, to have imprisonment, and to make fine at his gracis will and
pleasure, and over that the offenders shall run into his highness displeasure
and indignation.

And his majesty also charge and commands as well all and singular
archebysshoppes, bysshoppes, and other having ecclesyasticall jurisdiction, as
all and singular mayres, shyreffes, bayllyffes, aldermen, and all other his
ministers true liege men and subjects, as well of his city of London, as cls
where within his realm, that they and every of them, put their effectual
endeavor for the dew execution of this his proclamation from time to time as
to them shall apertayne upon the pains above rehearsed.

GOD SAVE THE KING. Thomas Berthelet
Regius Impressor excudeba^. CVM PRIVILEGIO.

