The defense of age / and recovery of youth / translated by the famous Clarke,
and right expert medycines, Arnolde de noua Villa very profitable for all men
to know.

R* device with initials of printer Robert Wyer (1529-60)W*

THe conseruacion of youth, and withstanding of age, co^systeth in the
maintening of the powers, the spyrites, and the natural here of the body in
their state and temperancy, and in the comfortyng and repayringe of them being
defective. For so long as the powers the spirits, and the natural here of
man's body are not debilitate nor wekened, so long (I say) neither shall the
skin wrincle, for the debilite of the natural hete declynyng, to coldenes and
drynes through the which fode and noryshment of the body is corrupted and
hindered, is cause of corrugacio^ or wri^kling of the skyn for the meat being
first dygested in the stomach, and then shortly after sent in to every part
of the body, is dygested again of the natural hete of the same part, where it
is received, the^ if ye this natural hete be by any occasyon corrupted, or
destroyed, the fode also is sent to ye same place shall be likewise corrupted and
the^ so ensues corrugacion of the skyn, and hoar here is as ye may se in the
auncy eut and aged men when theyde cold and dry, for hotenes comes of the
defect of natural hete, the which defends the body from age, age properly
does make man cold and dry and therefore they be of little blod and the powers
and natural hete in the^ very weke, and unable to concectyng and degestynge of
meat, wherefore there increase great plenty of humidites and crude raw
humors, and therefore the in sprites and ye.iii. degestyons in age be decayed,
and in them rayneth the debylytie of hete, and this follows with y^ course of
time the which course may be somewhat let and detended by physic, and by
avoiding of such accidental causes as do induce age, as sorrow, sludy, heny
nes, disperacion, ouermoch venery, labor, travel, or rest, and when age by any
of these causes is come, the^ to amputat or cut away the cause by things
apropriat, and for the preseruacion of ye powers is no better thing then a
syrup made of wine and sugar, mixed together.iii. parts of wine and.ii. parts
of sugar drunk with fair water, or borage water this sirupe is both meat and
drink, and in it be.ii. things confyct together, which are most friendly to
nature, and when the powers be weke they need such things as may corupt them
both meat. drinks, and other spyces, and moystynge medicines and thi^ is a
very secret thing. For ^ugacion and reu^^yng o^ the skyn require such things,
as do cleanse and make plain and smoth skyn with certain oils, waters, and
oyntementes. Goodlines and fresshenes of color, is by fedinge upon such meats
and drynkes, as do engendre good and laudable blod, and are light of digestion,
and by such things as do cleanse the blod corupted, and the other powers is
ouermoche euacuacion, or to often lettyng of blod, or such other like things.
These things may be amended with thus, eating of chekyns, and chekyn broth,
with oewe rest and sleep, and also with sweet and Odoryferous things, and
such other like. Things engendrynge euyil and rotten flume, be fruytes,
tysshe, all things made of milk, and such other, of the which be engendered
waterye humors nor dygestable in the me^bres and the^ in the same members it
causes horenes, and wrincles. But among all other things there is nothing,
the which so stronglye does cause a man to look oldely, as fear, and
desperacion. For because in that passion and effection, all the natural hete of
the body does resort inward, and forsakes the outward parts, and that
most chefelye, when the man's complexion is dysposed to the same, and yt is
the cause that many being tossed turmoyled, and vexed with this worldly storms
sodaynely their here wax hoar, or white.

Now things that do resyst or put away these causes, are chose^ the joyce of
pomegranate, and chyefely gold, the joyce of Borage, and of Fumytotye, and
specially grene and purified, and the virtue of the root of Plantayue, and
such other.

The roten flume is destroyed with the use of Mirabolanes composed, and Alot
rosaru^ and Agarike, things to be had at the Pothecaries And that wherewith
properly both melancoly and flume be expelled out of the body, is Cleborus
niger, called in English, Bears foot, prepared by by a certain manner unto
few known. For in the rectyfynge of the malyciousnes of this herb, stands
all the secret of his operation. For by him a man shall be altered from evil
compliction to good, and it restores youth again but it is not co^uenyente for
belycate bodies and noble co^plections, and therefore I will say little of him.
Beware ye never entermedle with this herb without the aduysemente and
counsel of some expert and well learned Physycion.

Also Dianthos composed with sugar, the which properly does consume all the
fleume and melancoly beyuge in the head and it taryeth and lets the hoar
heeres coroborateth and strengneth the senses, and prolongeth the life, and
chyfely when a quantite of it is dysolued in aqua vyte well and craftily made,
and sometime it is dyssolued in wine, and lies in it.ii. or.iii days, and the^
strayned, and so used conveniently according to the counsel of a Physytion.

Other things also there be, which quicken and makes lusty the body, as
Diacameron, Mirabolany, Chebuly composed which by their propertye do consume
and wast the fleumatike superfluites of the stomach and do comfort him, and
do claryfy the blod, and be of great force against melancoly, and the use of
those do comfort youth, and causes a man for to wax young again, and
defends a man from hoar here is. Also the decoction of seen with
Dlaboraqinatum, and of the whey of Sotes milk, and such other. And one of the
chief things, whereby age is defended and youth prolonged, is once in a mouth
to have a vomet to expel the fleumatycke humor, and once in a weke to receive
aclyster / and specyallye that composed of the joyce of Mercury / Walworte /
Elder / and beat with half an ounce of Yeropegara / the which is a great
secret.

And also subjection made with ye ropigra, or Cassia fistula, and the joyce of
fresshe roses / preparate with sugar, is a goodly easer of nature, mynystred
wisely, and it is a blessed medy eyne to make aman soluble, and there with also
it comforts the pryncypall members in man, and altreth the evil disposycion
of man to good, it opens opilacions or stoppy^ges, it comforts the heart,
and cleanses it, and to speak of the praise of this medycine would require a
long process.

Other things also destroyenge and co^sumynge the humors, which cause age are
those temperat spices known to every booy, Cloves, cinamom Liquirice, and such
other, but most princypally, when they an confyet and incor perat with good wine,
and so being fyrit so^what watered) received and dronken.

Also it is not unknown, how that pylles made of myrtha, be of an exellente
goodness in the conseruacion of heith and life, for it withstandeth putrefaction
rectyfyeth and syncereth ye which is ready to putrif action, wherefore this
Myrtha is confyete with such things as dead bodies are incered withal, to
defend the corse from putrifactio^. And the foresaid spyced wine, when it is
received of man it spredeth it self abroad in y^ parts of the body, and
comforth all the parts of the body, and dries up the superfluous humydytes of
the body, and also the powder of the same Spyces often used with meat profyteth
wonderfully.

Howbeit, if the man be of a dry disposytion, then shall it be nedeful to
adioyne to these spyces, some more te^perate thing, as the joyce of
Pomegranates, Rosewater, Sugar, Lyckerice Resyns and such like. Diacameron
restores dygestion lost, and comfort it and Trifera passes all declynynge,
somewhat more to calidite, the natural hete then and the meat coming to the
members being decayed or corrupted, which comes of putrifyed color,
forthwith ensues corrugation and old lokynge as ye may se in such as ar
scaby in any part of their body, for that part being infected / it seems
riuyled and old skyn. The infection being once departed again the skyn shows
it self fair, smoth and yongly, and to those gold preparate is sovereign,
and the wine of Pomegranat, and this is special good for the lepry. And this
wine of granates taken and received how ye list, has properte to extenate the
humors, and to alay the hete of the liver, and to comfort all parts of man's
body offended with hete, and it is good against wekenes othert, fortefieth the
mouth of the stomach, and comforts the heart. Also Mirabolani, rebuli co^diti
be very good both in hot and cold deseases, they comfort the stomach, and
dries up the superfluous moystnes of the same, and besides this they do help
the melancolyke people / they claryfy and make clear the blod and the spyrytes
neither is there anythinge more excellent for that purpose then these.

Also Borage wine made (in time that grapes be gathered and pressed) with must is
princypally good for melancoly, faynte herted, and mad people, for it cleanses
the blood and takes away evil fantasyes, and comfort all the regetyue
powers, and encountreth all corrupcion. The electuary also of the Mirabolans
used is a thing right often proved and allowed, to the conseruacion of health and
prolonging of the life, and to wax young again, for it comfort the stomach
and makes it apt and lusty, and co^sumeth the watrynes left of the fore fode,
and the use of this electuary wtstandeth age, and causes man to live long by
the help of God.

Again certain suffumygacions and savors made of couenient things, and
according as the man needs is very profitable.

Bathing also temperately without any great swetynge so that only the skyn
be mu^dyfyed and cleansed from fylthynes, is wholesome and profitable, for thereby
the powers are opened, and the super^luous humydyties lutkynge within the skyn,
be wasted and dried up.

But the use of good wine / in the which such spyces as we have spoken of
before, have be steped, and the virtue of them in it desolued, temperatly taken
with a little water myxt therewith in dew season, shall pass and enter in to
all the hyd ways of the body, and it shall dry up all the evil humidities,
and comfort all the inward parts, and perfitly does open all manner of
opilations or stoppynge, the which is secret for the aparition or openinge of
places opilat or stopped, causes the lively spyrites to run throughout
every part of the body, and causes the natural hete for to wax strong,
and to be of great force, but opylacion or stoppynge causes the contrary, for
the natural hete being conculcate, or strangled, not having fre passage
through every part, is thereby debylytate and wekened, and so not suffyciente
and mighty to separate the pure from the vnpure, when reupon the superfluous
humydities, rotten and putryfyed be in the body much increased, and thereby
consequently ensues the wrynkelynge of the flesh and skyn and age at hand.

Another also strong mean there is, to defend age, and for to recover youth
again, by abstynence, and conuenyente for bearing of your quantyte of meat,
unto such time as the body be brought very low, and made very spare, and
then to restoore, and norysshe it again with lawdable wholesome and good food,
which has a propertye to engendre clear and pure blood.

This point also do they observe, the which make faete Oxen, whose flesh
the more it waxes lean and bare, the more also does it become tender and
young, and the better afterward do they like and batten, and ye may also se
the practice of this i^ such as be lately recovered from sycknes.

But to be short, he that will refreyne age, and conserve youth, let him not be
neglygent in choosing of his meat / that it be such, as may bread good clear
fat, thick and viscous blod and then may he withstand well age.

And when that such humydyties or moystnes, which are in the body, and crude
humors that are increased in man, then has he need of such things which do
extenat and exiccat those superfluous moystnes, and such things as may dygest
the crude or raw humors / sincere and depure the hole body.

Among other things, such as wax aged, have great need of calefaction / and
humystacion, that is to say, warming, and moistynge, of both equally by meats
and drynkes, and medycynes conuenyent / by exercise and gladness.

Now that he may keep his body in such temperancie, that he may live without
the horrydle danger of grievous syckenes, and the better able to serve
almyschty God, to who^ be all honor and glory. Amen.

FINIS.
Imprinted by me Robert wyer, dwelling in saint Martyns Parysshe at the sign
of saint John^ Euangelyst, beside Charynge Cross.


