royal blazon or coat of arms
Prouysion made by the King hyghnes and his counsayll for putting a part
thercessyue fare and redusynge the same to such moderacion as folowyngly
ensues thobseruaunce whereof to begin the last day of May the.ix. year of the
raygne of the King now our Soueraygne lord Henry the.viii.
First that a Cardynall man have nine Dysshes at his own mess at one meal
besides potages to be served in courses at his pleasure.

Item an Archebysshoppe and a Duke may have.viii. dysshes at their own messes
at a mele besides potages to be served in courses at their own pleasure.

Item Marquis Erlys and Bysshoppes m^ye have.vii. dysshes at their own messes
at a meal besides potages to be served in courses at their pleasure.

Item all lords temporal under the degree of an Earl Abbottes being lords of
the Parlyament Mayres of the City of London for the time being knights of
the garter* to have.vi. dysshes at their own messes at a meal besides potages
to be served in courses at their pleasure.

Item Iuges the chief Baron of thexchequer the kings counsayll the Sheryffes
of yt said city for the time being and all other both spiritual and
temporal that may dispende in l^nde^ or fees to the yearly value of.CC. li.
may have.v. dysshes at their own mess at a meal besides potages to be served
as they will.

Item all persons spiritual and temporal that may dispende.C. li. by year
and not.CC. li. may have.iiii. disshes at their own mess at a meal besides
potages.

Item all persons spiritual and temporal that may dispende.xl. li. by year
and not.C. li. may have.iii. disshes at their own mess at a meal besides
potages.

Item all persons spu^all and temporal having goods to the value of.MM. li.
may have like disshes / as he that may dispende in lands to the value
of.CC.li. by year.

Item all persons spiritual and temporal having goods to the value of.M.
li. may have like disshes / as he that may dispende in lands.C. li. by year.

Item all persons spiritual and temporal having goods to the value of v.C.
li. may have as many disshes as he that may dispende.xl. li. by year.

Item if.ii. metes of one kind be dyuersly dressed / or.ii. metes of diverse
kinds be served in a disshe* every of the^ a^ shall stand for one disshe
after the rate aboue^ayd.

Item crane swane bustarde peycoke and all other fowls of like gretnes / but
one in a disshe.

Item par^riche plouers wodcok and all other wyldefowle of like gretnes /
but.vi. in a disshe for a Cardynall oonly / and.iiii. in a disshe for all other
lords.

Item quayles / dottrelles* snytes / and all other fowls of like gretnes
but.viii. in a disshe.

Item fesaundes gulles and all other fowls of like gretnes but.ii. in a disshe.

Item larkes and all other fowls of like gretnes but.xii. in a disshe.

Item all persons aforesaid may have less disshes at their pleasure but no
more at one meal than is before lymyted / not otherwise than is before rehersayd

Provided always that at the day of Marriage of my person he or she after
their degrees above the said rate may have iii. disshes more at a meal than is
above lymytted after the rate.

Provided also that Brawne and other entrayles of bestes and portenaunces of
bestes and fowls oysters cockles / muskles all white metes not altered out of
their kind shall not be taken for any disshe.

Item.iii. Saltfysshes of any kind to be accounted for one disshe and having
any mo kind of saltfysshes / every of them to be accounted for one dysshe.

Item at the Receuynge and festynge of Ambassarours / and noble men of outward
parties every man to be at his liberty the rate before rated natwithstandynge
/ And in semblable manner the knight of the garter to be at their lyberties on
Saint Georges day oonly.

Item it is ordered yt in case any of ye Estat or other before rehersayd shall
fortune to dyne or suppe with any other of a lower degree / it shall be lefull to
the person or persons with whom the said Estates or other shall so dyne or
suppe to serve them and every of them according to their degrees / after the
rates before ^pecified.

Finally it is determined that if any person or persons shall otherwise order
themself than is contained in the foresaid Rate and prouysion And so following
their sensual appetite shall violate the same / he or they so doing shall not
oonly be reputed and taken as a man of evil order contemptuously disobeyinge
the direccion of the kings hyghnes and his Counsayll But also to be sent for
to be corrected and punysshed at the kings pleasure to the example of other
that shall enterpresse any such folyous and sensual appetites hereafter.

Imprynted at the commandment of out Soueraygne lord the king and his
Counsayll by Richard Pynson prynter unto his noble grace.

God save the king.

