AN HVMBLE MOTION WITH SVBMISSION UNTO THE RIGHT HONORABLE LL. OF HER
MAJESTY'S PRIVY COUNCIL.

WHEREIN IS LAID OPEN TO be considered, how necessary it were for the good of
this Land, and the Queens Majesty's safety, that Ecclesiastical discipline
were reformed after the word of God: And how easily there might be provision
for a learned Ministry.

REVEL. 3.20. Behold I stand at the door and knock: if any man hear my voice
and open the door, I will come in unto him, and will suppe with him, and he
with me.

CANT. 2.15. Take us the foxes, the little foxes which destroy the vines; for
our vines have small grapes.

Anno 1590.

The preface of the author.
WEre it not (gentle reader) that the truth of the cause, and the want in the
practice, had a long time called unto me, in reading of Gods book, and by
experience of former time, drawing out before me, in the daily knowledge of my
conscience, the manifold necessitye of Christ's discipline: I would not have
adventured, seeing mine own wants, to put pen to the paper in a matter of so
great weight. But knowing that by this my motion, there might be occasion to the
learned and wise, to think upon very good things for the benefit of this
realm, and (if need be) to set forth more deep and settled demonstration, with
far more exceeding excellency: and for that I see the wiles of Satan, by works
of disgrace to hinder the good of my country: I thought it my duty to our high
God, to his holy church, the Queens most excellent Matie, and my native
cuntrie, by such means as these troublesome times would give me leave, unto my
loving mother that bare me, and my tender nurse yt fedeth me, those good and
honest fruits wherewith God has vouchsaued me for her use: beseeching al my
loving cuntrimen, charitably, soberly and wisely to think and with sanctified
affections to deal in these matters: that the hand of our God may be with us,
to give us this honor, that at the length his cause may have favor and prevail
to the profit and joy of us and our posterity. And I desire no other good will
of thee (gentle reader) whosoever thou be, in the christian accepting of this
work, than my very soul, in doing hereof, did with great care and godly love
seek the prosperous estate of this land, and the flourishing of Gods church:
for whose peace let us pray night and day.

Amen.

TO THE READER.
WHEN I had read over this treatise (which by the providence of God light into
my hands) and considered not only the declaration of Christ's discipline in
the beginning thereof, though briefly, yet plainly set down, and plentifully
proved by those testimonies of Scripture, that (after many assaults) does
confirm the cause unanswerably but also the aequity, easines, the benefit and
necessity thereof even in reason and policy, for the safty of her Majesty, the
peace of the Land, the rooting out of popery and al other ungodliness; and that
by such reasons as answer the foolish objections of ignorant politikes: and in
such manner laid open and urged, as may satisfy all that be not be sotted with
wilful ignorance, and stir the turbulent affection of none: as I took just
occasion to praise God for his labors, whosoever was the penner of it: so did
it give me matter to increase my persuasion in that which long before I had
conceived, to wit that the Lord means certainlye either to establish this
same scepter of his son Christ Jesus in a glorious manner among us, or to
make England an example of his vengeance for the rejecting of it. For first it
is evident that God has cleared it so evidently, and that by so dyuer and
sundry sorts of handling the same, as no man of what state soever (if he desire
to know it,) can want wherewith to satisfy his expectation. For if thou desire
to have it disputed against a professed and bitter enemy thereunto, thou have
the first and second reply of T. C. against D. VV. If thou would hear it
handled in a sweet and pleasant latin style, the Ecclesiastical discipline is
able to content thee, if thou be unlearned and desire the same course in thy
mother tongue, behold the Learned discourse (which D. Bridges assaying to
confute has confirmed) the sermon upon Romans 12. etc. If thou desire to see it
laid open and concluded in scholastical manner, the demonstration does that
way satisfy thee and lastly, if thou would see it freed from the sclander
that are against it, answer the objections that may be, and are coined to
disgrace it, and understand how it ouerturneth not, neither (in the substance)
alters any tolerable commonwealth; but is the only stay and prop of every
good policy: besides the forenamed, and many other worthy writings, this
present treatise professes and notablye performs the same: so that there is
no man, learned or unlearned, fervent or myld, employed or at leisure, but God
has prepared some of these books (except he be as the deaf adder) every way
to justify the truth of his discipline unto him: which causes me to gather
unto my self a comfortable persuasion, that these several guiftes, bestowed
upon diverse men, and manifested unto the Church in so diverse a manner, and al
to one end; are not in vain: But for the great good and comfort of those that
shall strive for this cause in this age, and for their certane direction that
shall reap the benefit of it, in the ages to come. But (alas) if we diligently
wey on the other side, how this glorious and heavenly offer of the Lord unto us
has been and is reiectcd, and shamfully disgraced by all estates and
conditions. How great ones cast of the yoke and break the bands: yea, and how
that many who should have commended the same unto the prince with Helkijah,
have employed al their wit and learning to traduce it with Amasiah yea and
spent al their time in converting, sclaundering, displacing and imprysoning
those that have been but suspected to favor this truth: and lastly when the
increase of Gods dishonor that ary seth from hence is duly weyed, it gives
us rather cause to fear, that God has cleared his own light thus manifestly
unto us, rather to make us the more without excuse, than to make us pertakers
of so heavenly a condition. For we see how it comes, that our great Cleargye
masters spend al their time, in vexing of Gods people, and set themselves to
disgrace all that favor this way: the ministers of God that should be always
busied in studying Gods word, and teaching their people, ar constrained to
spend the most of their time, in seeking to be quite of those intolerable
molestations wherewith they are daily vexed: the nobles and gentlemen take
occasion hereby to do what they list: and the people seeing the ministers in
such disgrace, care not a button for their doctrine, so that if any of them be
reproved for their sins, they can be thus revenged, complain of him to the
Bishop that he is a mislyker of the state of L. Bishops: and they are so
jealous of their honor, that they admit the information of known Papists, or
any other notorious wicked wretches, and will (yea do usually) give more
countenance to the veriest varlet in the Land that comes with such a
complaint; than to the most learned minister in all their diocese, if he be
thought to like of the discipline, and (which is the greater argument of Gods
vengeance not far off) ignorance and contempt of Gods word, and al kind of
sin abounds in every place, and in all estates and conditions: so that as
the consideration of Gods mercies toward us in offering us this blessing,
gives us some cause to trust that he will perfect his good work begun in this
Land: so the regard of the increase of al kinds of monstrous transgressions
does justly occasion us to fear that the land has prepared (which without
speedy reformation we shall shortly feel) such a scourge as shall make us more
wondered at for our punishment, then we have been admired for our peace: yet
may none of these things discourage the seekers of this holy Reformation, for
if they look to be crowned, they must strive to the end. And let the
adversaries of the same know, that it may be their wickedness shall being thus
much to pass, as to keep it from us for a time: but if they think either to
weary the defenders, or lessen their number, or overthrow the cause: the
mistres of fools, their own experience does show them that they deceive
themselves. For is not the cause far more cleared, and the number of them that
favor and seek to advance it, since they have waged war against it under their
last general, mightily multiplied above that which was to be seen before? Yes
doutles, and so it must be still: for it being a portion of the Gospel, must
needs be of the nature of the Gospel, even to spring where it is cut down, and
to spread where it is trodden upon: and though the love of Egypt cause this
generation never to know what so heavenly a condition means, yea and Moses
his ill managing of the matter be the cause that he shall only see it: yet
certainly the days will come, when our posterity shall no more be gainsaid for
desiring and practicing Christ's discipline, (for which we are so many ways
abused) then we are for professing of the doctrine, for which our fathers shed
their blood. Let this be the conclusion of al, though the Lord do not vouchsafe
this generation an honor so excellent, yet take thou heed that thou be no
means of keeping it back: for if thou be a minister, and give thy heart, hand
or countenance against it; if a magistrate, and do any way discountenance it,
if a private person, and cease to pray for it or live a life unworthy of it:
thou shall answer at the day of judgment, and be co^uicted as an enemy to
the kingdom of Christ Jesus, and an occasion that in thy time be reigned not
over that generation: and therefore by this book and such others inform thy
self in the truth of it: and when thou know it, be in love with it and so
labor by all the means of thy calling to advance it: so shall thou be
comforted whether with it, or without it.

AN HVMBLE MOTION WITH SVBMISSION TO THE Ll. OF THE COUNCIL CONCERNING THE
NECESSITY of Christ's discipline in our Land.
WHO so calls to mind the woeful estate of this land, before the happy
entrance of the gracious raygne of our dear Sovereign, Queen Elizabeth,
(whom God long continue and preserve,) in what sort the foreign and usurped
power of the Romish Antichrist, was injurious to the commonwealth, and cruel
to the true members of Christ's church: and compare it with the joyful liberty
and godly tranquillity of all sorts and degrees of people, in the midst of so
many most apparent dangers, most mildlye and sweetly begun, and through so
strange, so secret, so mighty, so continual, mischeuous and monstrous
platformes, constantly and firmly seated and established: he shall see great
cause that we Englishmen have, both to admire the wonderful providence of our
merciful God, and to magnify the high glory of his vaspeakeable goodness; not
only for his rich blessings both heavenly and earthly, with abundance of
peace: but also for his rare kindness of great long suffering and miraculous
deliverance. Surely we may be truly said to be the vineyard of the Lord, Esaias.
5.
and his pleasant plant set in the fruitful hill, dressed and fensed by God
himself. And this has he done this thirty year, looking we should have
brought forth fruit accordingly. Now I would to God that it were not true of
us, as of Israel, that God looked for judgment and behold a leaper fore, for
righteousness but behold a crying. Many good laws for maintaining of a quiet
and dutiful civil life, are very wisely and prouidently provided; I pray God
it be notlaide to our charge, that they are negligently and corruptly
executed: yea, the abundance of suits, quarrels, complaints appeals,
presentiments, indightments and supplications do argue apparently the cruelty,
extortion, contention, deceit, oppression, murders, thefts, whordoms, and many
other strange villainies wherewith the unthankful people of this land be
guilty. And how swearing, lying, idleness, drunkenness, excess of meat,
wantonness, excess by pride, and an unmerciful and cunning gripping of the
poor by many strange reatches, and Machiauelian plottes, ar left almost
without check or controlement, it grieueth them who weep over Sion, and makes
good men to fear very much, seeing that for these things God has punished
many people and cast off them that were most nearest and dearest unto him, as
it is written: Hierem. 7. Ezech. 16.
for the transgression of the land there are many princes thereof. And again,
he turns the floodes into a wilderness, Hosea 4.1. Proverb. 28.2. Psalm.
107.33.
and the springes of water into drynes, and a fruitful land into barrennes,
for the wickedness of them that dwell therein. This latter we have felt in some
sort of late, which might make us to suspect our own wretchedness: and the
former (which the Lord in mercy keep far from us,) has been wonderfullye in
the great patience and tender compassion of God, and yet not without many
fearful threatenings hitherto prevented, and (as it were) waiting our
conversion, put off and prolongued: god give every English man the grace to see
it.

But look we into the Churches among us (oh that the nakedness thereof is so
open,) shall we not find there, 2. Tim. 4.10. Ioh. 3.9.
Demas embracing this present world, Diotrephes loving pre-eminence, to cast
out the brethren that do better than himself, Mat. 15.6.
the Scribes and the Pharisees, making the commandment of God of no authority
by their traditions: Mat. 21.12.
buyers and sellers and money changers in the temple? Shall we not find there
blind watch men that have no knowledge, Esa. 56.10.
dumb dogs that cannot bark, they ly and sleep, and delight in sleeping, even
greedy dogs that can never have enough. Amos 7.10.
Amasiah the Priest complains against Amos the prophet and the prophets which
deceive the people, byte the^ with their teeth and cry peace. Shall we not find
that by these, Micha. 3.5. and 6.16.
some of the statuts of Omri, and of the manner of the house of Ahab, are kept
and maintained, even the marks of the second beast, Reu. 13.11.16
which comes out of the earth? How can these things become the holy Churches
of Christ, and yet we do think our selves rich, increased with goods, and to
have need of nothing: not knowing our wretchedness, misery, poverty, blindness
and nakedness. I pray God it befall not us, (as was threatened unto the Angel
of the Church of the Laodiceans) that because we are neither hot nor cold, Reu.
3.14.15.
the high priest of our profession Jesus Christ, spew us out of his mouth.
Here we see the exceeding riches of the bountifulnes, patience, and long
fuffering of God, leading us to repentance: and our unthankfulness and
disobedience, giving occasion of the altering of Gods mercy and our happiness.
What is then to be done? Solomon answers very wisely: Prove. 22.3.
A prudent man sees the plague, and hydeth himself, but the foolish go on
still and ar punished. And again, Cap. ^.32.
Ease slays the foolish, and the prosperity of fools destroieth them, Very
sober and wise were those priests, Levites, chief fathers, and ancient men,
who having seen the first temple of Solomon, wept in the days of Ezra, when
they saw the foundation of the Temple, Ezra. 3.12.
which was after the captivity of Babylon, notwithstanding that many others
shouted aloud for joy. And in the time of Nehemiah, the people in the day of
their joyful solemnitye, wept and mourned, Nehem. 8. and 9. and 10.
and with one consent joined unto their feast, wherein they covena^ted with God
to amend their lives, and make statuts for themselves to follow his Law. So I
am verily persuaded, that many grave and prudent Christians have their
reioicing mixed with grief, when the want of things yet not attained unto,
makes them to feel the less comfort in that which they have, and the fear
of Gods anger for the abuse of that which we possess, and for the refusing of
other more graces offered, does daunt their courage; while other men think all
is well, and follow the pleasures of their hearts: and this is of all other
most lamentable, that neither mercy nor threatenings, corrections nor
comforts, fears nor deliverances, though the warnings of God be never so
apparent, can yet move our hearts to go one degree forward in the reedifiing
of the decayed places of gods churches, but we say with the people in the days
of the Prophet Haggai. The time is not yet come, Haggea. 1.2.
that the Lords house should be built: but we mark not what God says
again: The reason of this book
Is it time for your selves to dwell in your seeled hou2es, and this house lie
waste: Consider your own ways in your hearts, you have sown much, and bring
in little, etc. you looked for much, and lo it came to little: and when you
brought it home, I did blow upon it, and why says the Lord of hosts? because
of my house that is wast, etc.

For this cause (Right H.) I have taken in hand this treatise, that I might
show a way for the continuance of our happy estate, which I take to be, by
establishing the church government according to Gods apointment, by which all the former enormities, and al other being taken away, the glory of God may
flourish the more among us, the honor of her Majesty more highly advanced, and
by the favor of God our joys may be exalted. Which work as an humble motion, I
do with all duetifull submission present unto your honorable wisdoms, desiring
no further to be esteemed herein, than the divine wisdom of Gods word which
cannot err, and good reason (not contrary to the same) do warrant that which I
say, and persuade that which I speak.

The proposition which I take in hand to prove is this: The Proposition
It is the best and surest policy for the maintenance of peace, and the good
estate of this land every way, to reform the disorders of the church according
to the holy Scriptures of God, and to have no other church government, than
that which Christ has ordained and the apostles practiced. The reason why I
frame my proposition after this order, to make it a matter of very good policye
to set up discipline in England according to gods word arises upon this: that
I hear in many places, and lately have read publikelye set forth, as a defense
of L. Bb. that it is esteemed (by the abuse of the true rules of policy) to be
dangerous to the state, no invectiue.
full of many inconveniences, and not fit, yea impossible for a maine country
or region as ours is. Which when I considered to be in reason and truth far
otherwise, and that the vnseated wisdom of men's frailty and ignorance do
greatly stumble at it, I thought it my duty to God, to hit Majesty, and my
native country to unfold the secret meditations and observations of my heart:
which as I submit to the consideration of the wiseand godly learned, so I
refer it wholly to the master of the house (which is a God of knowledge, 1.
Sam. 2.3.
by whom enterprises do come to pass) to give that succes which his good
pleasure thinks best.

In the next place my humble desire is, that this my proposition and whole
treatise, be understood, not as any invectine against the present state, or
that either I disanulled the churches of England to be the churches of God,
Churches of England true visible churches
or that the true doctrine of the gospel were not preached, or the true
sacraments administered, which are the infallible tokens of ye true visible
church: but that certain things of very good moment for the due and right
administration of the church and the holy things thereof (whereof God has
left as straight commandment as for the rest) have not yet obtained their due
authority, but for lack of that good entertainment which God looks for of
his churches, may argue a change and a small continuance of our present welfare.

After this I pray that my meaning may be known touching the disorders of the
church: that I tak them to be of two sorts: namely, of Ceremonies which are
variable according to time, place, and occasions, which come under this
general rule, Disorders
1. Cor. 14.
Let all things be done honestly and orderly. Whereby the church is authorized
to consider and ordain in small matters, not particularly determined in the
word, touching the time and manner of doing such or such a thing, which thing
is prescribed in the word, that there be no confusion or vnseemlines in the
time and manner of doing. The other sort of disorders whereof I especially
speak and mean to stand in, is a thing of greater importance: namely, where
the church presumes to add, diminish or take away any of those things which
God has ordained to be observed, or to bring in other of their own, whereof
God has given her no authority by his word: as in the administrations,
gifts, and works of the church: that where 1. Cor. 12. the administrations are
under one Lord, the gifts of one spirit, and the works of one God: if the
church do take upon her to make new administrations, apointing unto the^ gifts
and works, whereof the Lord, the spirit, and god have made no assignment to her,
that this is a great disorder: and so I understand the church government or
discipline, not to be in small and trifling ceremonies, (such as are hours,
places, garments, seats, tables, etc. which yet in their kinds are
necessary, being ordered after the former rule of comelines and order:) but in
the very swaye and frame of the church, the pillars, foundations, 1. Cor.
3.9.10.
building and builders thereof: as the king which is Christ, his officers,
their offices and commission with their callings, abdications, continuance,
gifts, works, and prerogatives: for the good squaring and laying together of
each stone, Heb. 3.4.5.6. Kom. 9.5.
and rearing up the whole form and beauty of the temple of God, ac cording to
the pattern given, not by the servant, but by the son who is over the house,
of two sorts.
and whose house every church is, and who is over all, God blessed for ever.
Amen.

In the last place that I say no other government of the church ought to be
suffered but that which Christ has ordained, etc. although by many men the
same has been learnedly and truly described, yet because it is the thing
wherewith only in all this treatise I bind my self to meddle, I will briefly
set forth a small and plain pattern thereof (as it were in a card lightly.)
Leaving the reader to other books already extant, for the larger discourse, and
ample confirmation: as by evident and clear places of scripture, God shall
make me able to show. First this is called (Taxis) order, Col. 2.5.
to which soundnes of faith, in Christ being joined, the churches of god ar
highly commended, as those which having the foundation laid, are to walk in
Christ after the manner of the same, rooted and built in him, Discipline what.
and confirmed in the faith. It is also for the manner thereof, compared unto a
body, Romans 12.4. Ephe. 4.15.16.
where the head is joined to the body, and all the members receiving nourishment
from it, do grow by joints and bands into the head, and one into an other,
where every member has his several action. The head here is Christ, the body
ar the churches, the members are the people of all sorts in the churches,
having several callings, gifts and works. as it is said: You are the body of
Christ, 1. Cor. 12.27. Ephesians. 4.7.
and members every one for his part: and again, Unto every one of us is given
grace according to the measure of the gift of Christ. Now as a body haviug all
his members under one head seated in their proper places, and according to
their several faculties does bring forth in every member the proper action for
the good of the whole; is a goodly and well ordered body: Discipline described
So the members of the church by the scriptures are set in the church, 1. Cor.
12 28. under one head Jesus Christ. Colos. 1.18. and have several gifts as
faculties given according to the will of the spirit to aedifie withal. 1. Cor.
12.7.11. and every one has his office accordinglye in his place, either to
prophecy or otherwise, which he must wait upon: Romans 12.6. Act. 20.28. 1. Pet.
5.2. and the people are to obey and submit themselves: Heb. 13.17 Every thing
being thus constituted, ordered and furnished, is a well and right governed
Church of Christ.

Now in this government we may observe diverse sorts of persons, and their
proper works, in which two things the whole policy is contained. For when
every one does his proper works of his place, the church is very well
guided. Now these persons are the master of the house, and the household. And
here first we are very reverently and wisely, to acknowledge the master and
chief governor, Christ head of his Church. Gal. 4.4.
who is Lord and king, and this is the only son of God made man, who by his
wise and powerful administration, orders and establishes his church, Psalm.
110.1.
and defends it against al enemies and till all be destroyed, and he
deliver up his kingdom to his father in the day of glory, 1. Cor. 15.24.
and so the scripture speaks saying: Unto us a child is borne, and unto us a
son is given, Esaias. 9.6.
and the government is upon his shoulder, and he shall call his name
wonderful, counselor, the mighty God, the everlasting father, the prince of
peace, the increase of his government and peace shall have no end: he shall sit
upon the throne of David, and upon his kingdom to order it, and to establish
it with judgment and justice from hence, eve^ for ever, etc. Which the Apostle
interpreting, says, by Gods word.
Ephesians. 1.22.
that God has appointed Christ over all things to be head to the church, which
is his body, etc. Moreover because his kingdom is not of this world. Ioh.
18.36. Christ's government not civil.
that is to say, after the manner of earthly princes, which in comparison of
this government is called the ordinance of man, 1. Pet. 2.13. being in the
earth, he took upon him no earthly or civil government, but submitted
himself, teaching that Caesar ought to have his due, Mat. 22.21. paying tribute
voluntarily, Mat. 17 27 and refusing so much as to divide between brethren,
making such civil matters pertain to other judges, Luke 12.13.14 and yielded
himself to die without resistance, when by civil authority he was wrongfullie
judged, Ioh. 19.11.13.14. etc. Hereof it comes, that the things by which he
governs, are not of the right of any civil regiment, being holy and
spiritual, and his servants or officers are not furnished with civil power or
dignity, 2. Cor. 10.3.4. Luke 22.25. and his throne is, where he sits at the
right hand of the majesty in the highest places. Heb. 1.3.

The first thing he rules by in his visible church, Gods word Christ's scepter.
is his word, which is a scepter of righteousness. Psalm. 45.7 even the word of
truth which is the gospel. Col. 1.5. which because it is spiritual, is called
the sword of the spirit. Ephesians. 6.17. in sharpnes to exceed any two edged
sword, entering even to the dividing a sunder of the soul and the spirit, and
of the iointes and marrow, discerning the thoughts and intents of the heart,
Heb. 4.12. This is the rod of his mouth, and of his power, wherewith he smyteth
the earth, and slays the wicked. Esa. 11.4. Psalm. 110.2. and in the elect
who believe, Tit. 1.1. it casts down the imaginations and every high thing
that is exalted against the knowledge of God, Discipline described
and brings into captivity every thought to the obedience of Christ. 2. Cor.
10.5. being the power of God unto salvation, Romans 1.16. and this is unto the
church a perfect law, Psalm, 19.7. teaching them judgment and equity and every
good path. Every good path in Gods word.
Pro. 2.9. The second thing be the ce^sures of the church adjoined to the word,
as vengeance ready prepared if any disobeye, The censures joined to the word.
2. Cor. 10.6. with 2. These. 3.14. These has Christ given to his church, as a
power to purge out the leven of malitiousnes, that they may celebrat the Lords
feast, and serve him sincerely: Mat. 18.17. 1. cor. 5.4.7.8. These censures are
of two sorts, according to the party which offends, either to heal and
reform, or else to cut off for ever. Men are reformed by admonition or sharper
affliction. Admonition is taught in 1, These. 5.14. Gal. 6.1. 1. Tim. 5.20,
Where admonition will not serve, according to the qualitye of the offense and
disposition of the person, there are two degrees in seeking his reformation.
First suspension, when a man is cut off from some of the holy exercises in the
fellowship of Saints. Mat. 5.23.24. as namely the lords table, 1. Cor. 11.28.
For the greater offenses and greater contumacy follows excommnnication,
which is a casting of them out of the church, and delivering them to Satan,
in which state they are to be holden of us as heathen and publicanes, that is
such as are not of the church. 1. Cor. 5.5. Mat. 18 18. and all these upon their
true repentance ar to be forgiven and comforted of the church, 2. Cor. 2.6.
The other censure which cutteth off is spoken of in 1. Cor. 16.22. If any man
love not the Lord Jesus Christ, let him be anathema. [Maranatha] viz. accursed
till the Lord come. Whereupon says John epist. 1. cap. 5.16. by Gods word.
There is a sin unto death, I say not that thou should pray for it: and
Christ says, that he which speaks against the holy ghost, it shall not be
forgiven him, neither in this world, nor in the world to come. Mat. 12.32. The
things of Christ's kingdom, not like to the things of earthly rulers.
These are then far distant from the things which earthlye princes use to
rule their subjects with: the one medleth with the outward man, afflicts
the body, and things of this life: but this touches, reformeth, and
afflicts the soul, the thoughts, and intentes of the heart: and concerns
the things of the life to come.

In the next place are the other persons to be considered which are under
Christ the king: and these are his household, the servants and subjects of Jesus
Christ in his church: according to the dignity of the Lord, and amplitude of
his kingdom; are partly superiors, The subjects and officers of christ
and partly inferiors: the first ar such as either have charge committed unto
them over others, as the disposers of the secrets of God, 1, Cor. 4.1. or
ministers about the holy things of the church, 1. Tim. 3.13. and the other are
all the members of the church, called Saints: who submitting themselves to the
voice of the gospel, are sanctified in Christ Jesus. Romans 1.5.6.7. 1. Cor.
1.2. The duty of these latter, is in two words, submission, and obedience. Heb.
13.17. The former are of diverse degrees and several functions, and therefore
require a larger discovery, in speaking whereof I bynd my self to that only
which is ordinary and perpetual. In general terms they are called Bishops and
deacons. Philip. 1.1. The general terms of their office, be likewise two,
prophecy, and a ministry, Romans 12.6. In description of which diverse offices
and officers, the scripturs appoints their calling and works. Discipline
described
The calling of Christ's officers
In their calling, there is this general rule, that no man take upon him this
honorable function except he be called. Heb. 5.4. Secondly that there be a
place or charge whereunto there is need that they should be called: such was
Mathias, Act. 1.20. the Deacons, Act. 6.1.2. the Elders Act. 14.23. Bishops in
Creta, Tit, 1, 5. In their callings, common to all be election and ordination.
Election is a free choice with the consent of the people, and ordination is, by
imposition of hands, and prayer: to commend them to the work of their
calling. Act. 6.2.5.6. 1. Tim. 14.13, Act. 4.23. Unto this election as a
forerunner this rule is adjoined, let them first be proved, then let them
minister if they be found blameles: 1. Tim. 3.10. that is every one must be
examined before he be chosen.

The works of these offices are either proper according to the distinct nature
and gift in their several office: or else mixed, where they join in some common
action of the church. Christ has ordained diverse officers and their works.
In prophecy, this is peculiar and common to all Bishops, that they attend
upon the administration of the word and prayer, Act. 6.4. and these Bishops are
of two sorts, Pastors and Teachers. Ephesians. 4.11. their gifts diverse, to the
one that is Pastors, is given the word of wisdom, to the other the word of
knowledge. 1. Cor. 12.8, their works also distinct, for the former, is to tend
on exhortation, and the latter on teaching. Romans 12.7.8. In the ministrye,
(that is such offices as have not to do with the prophecy or preaching of
the word,) there are governing Elders, and those which properly are called
Deacons. The first have their authority and title, 1. Cor. 12.28. Governors,
their gift: 1. Tim. 5.17. to rule well their work, Romans 12.8. a diligent
practice in ruling. by Gods words.
The deacons are nominated and set down what manner of men they should be, 1.
Tim. 3.8. their gifts to be full of the holy Ghost and wisdom. Act 6.3. their
work to look to the tables, ver. 2. that is, to distribute with simplicity,
Romans 12. Unto these are joined widows or servants of the church, whose title,
gifts, and properties are set down Rom, 16.1. 1. Tim. 5.1.2.3.4.5.6. etc. and
their work, Romans 12.8. to show mercy with cheerfulness.

The mixed work is of the Pastors, teachers and governing Elders, who are
joined in one work or gift of ruling well, 1. Tim. 5.17. have the same title
of Elders, Act. 14.23. and 20.17. and their work is joined to look to
themselves, and the whole flock. ver. 28. and to watch over the peoples
souls. Heb. 13.17. the meeting or assembling in this office of governing is
called an Eldership. 1. Tim. 4.14. And because they bear herein the power of
Christ in the church, they are called by excellency of speech, the church. Mat.
18 17. their work is to see all things done according to the commandment of
God, and ordinance of christ. In the callings of the several offices, and in
the use of the censures that every man do his duty, as in election to direct
the people, and to examine the party to be chosen, and to lay their hand, and
pray over the party in his ordeining, Act. 6.2.3.6. cap. 14.23. 1. Tim. 4.14.
and in the censures they have the full authority, Mat. 18.17.18.19. except that
in so great a matter as excommunication, the people have their interest, in
that a member is to be cut off. Therefore that was done in a fuller assembly,
namely of ye whole church 1. Cor. 5.4. and the whole church is directed by
Paul to receive such a one again. Discip. described by G. word.
2. Cor. 2.6.7. Lastly, in and about all the former things Christ ordained for
his church, they have authority given the^ to appoint, and see that al things
be done honestly and in order, 1. Cor. 14.40. But if a matter fall out too hard
or weighty for one church, or ye any manner of ways some one church has need
of help: this is supplied by other churches. 2. Cor. 8.13.14. When a matter of
controucrsie was at Antiochia, they sent chosen men to Jerusalem, and there by
a greater meeting of the Apostles and Elders, the matter being decided: there
were also chosen men returned with the decrees of that synod. Act. 15.1.23.
etc. In these meetings of synods and Elderships, some one for the time did
moderate the assembly, not by any standing office of superiority, but for order
to see al things well and orderly done, and to gather the conclusion. Such was
Peter Act. 1.15. and James, Act. 15 13.22. and this is the description of the
church government, 1. Cor. 14.37. cap. 11.1.2. 1. Tim. 6.14.
according to the scriptures of God, left and commanded by God to his holy
churches for ever: and therefore I take that no other can stand with the safty
of our estate.

They which oppugn this doctrine do not simplye deny, that such a thing is
taught and commanded in the word, (for it is so clear that no man can but with
a shameless face, and seared conscience open his mouth to the contrary) but they
partly cavil at some places, but especially affirm, that it was not
commanded as unchangeable, that it was of force when the civil magistrate was
not friend, but now it is determinable according to the diverse estats and
governments of countries: as being not so needful or convenient. Whom I
defire in the fear of God to consider these few things First, Christ's discipl.
perpetual.
that I have here showed it by Gods word (and other have done it, and can do
a great deal better) if they bring in such an exception, they must show some
reason out of the word for the same. For can any thing which God has ordained
in his word, Prouer 30.5.6.
be altered by man, without his authority which ordained it? If God have set
Elders to be governors in his church as 1. Cor. 12.28. Man cannot change Gods
precepts without Gods license
Who that is wise will dare to pull them out except he have commission from him
that set them there? If the question were touching the officer of an earthly
prince, men would keep silence waiting the pleasure of their sovereign: then
must it needs be arrogance, to deny him whom God has appointed. Remember
them who said, we will not have this man to reign over us. Secundlye, Luke
19.24.27
consider this order of Christ is not limited to be only when the civil
magistrate is no friend, and that the civil government supplyeth nothing in
the room of any thing here spoken off: for these are (as is showed) for the
spiritual and heavenly administration, and theirs is carnal and earthly. And
how can an earthly king thruste into the house of God, an officer, a gift, or
a work, which he knows not whether it will be fit, or will be accepted as
agreing with the heavenly pattern These then being plants which our heavenly
father has not planted shall be rooted up, and where the fear of God is taught
by the precepts of men, Mat. 15.13.
there the wisdom of the wise shall perish, Esaias. 29.2.13.14. Thirdly we have
heard that Christ is head unto the church in all things, and that princes and
judges should learn to be wise, and kiss the son least he be angry: if the^
the church take upon her to alter his ordinance, or a king do keep out that
which he commands, and maintains other things diverse or contrary, Christ's
discipline
ar they wise and learned? do they kiss the son? may they not fear his
anger? If it appear by the gospel, that all these officers are members of the
body of Christ's church, and are admistrations under one Lord; if they have
gifts by one spirit, and operations by one God for the aedifiing of the
church: who loving Christ, and knowing Christ, Christ's members ought not to
be changed.
will readily disfigure Christ's body, by mangling the members, changing the
gifts of the spirit, altering the works of God. Again, if all this be
appointed to endnre for the work of the ministry, to the aedifiing of the body
of Christ, till we all meet together in the unity of the faith, and the
knowledge of the son of God, unto a perfect man, and unto the measure of the
age of the fulness of Christ. Ephesians. 4.11.12. And this commandment of
church-governement is to be kept without spot, and unrebukable until the
appearing of our Lord Iefus christ. 1. Tim 5.21. cap. 6.13.14. then, who is he?
or where is he whose arm is flesh, that will not tremble to speak against
them? Last of al, it is against the duty of the church, (who as the pure and
chaste spouse of Christ should always be obedient to her head and lord) to
limit the authority, Psalm. 78.41.
and check the wisdom of her king: ought she not rather to hearken and
consider, and incline her ear (being swift to hear, Psalm. 45.10. James 1.19.
and slow to speak,) forgetting also her own people and her fathers house: so
shall the king have pleasure in her beauty, for he is her Lord, and she ought
to reverence him. Bu^t can this be reverence to his majesty, Christ's church
ought to obey him
or taking him to be Lord: when she submits her self, to the laws of
government which she has received of his greatest enemy, eve^ Antichriste, or
can she be said to forsake her fathers house and to hearken: unchangeable.
who punishes and afflicts as a stepmother those her children, that meeklye
puts her in mind of the husband of her youth, and the oathe of God:
detecting and bewraying the filthiness of her skirtes, when she has defiled
her self with strangers, and stands stiffly for the customs and manners of
her fathers house, even of vile flesh and blood, brickle constitutions of
blind men? And who I pray you can say (except he will tell a lie for his
mother, and that against God his father) that she does not limit his power and
control his prudencye, Mat. 28.20.
when he gives her charge to observe all things whatsoever he has commanded
her, affirming most amiably and comfortably unto her, 2. Pet. 1.3.
that by his godly power he has given her al things that pertain unto life
and godliness, through the knowledge of him that has called us unto glory and
virtue, and namely a perfect Law, Psalm. 19.7. Prove. 2.9.
teaching judgeme^t and equity, and every good path: and yet she leaning to
her own wisdom, and presuming of her own power, will alter, add, diminish,
and change as she thinks best. Therefore the Lord most earnestly complains,
and in the vehemence of his godly iealousy cries against her, and says. Ye
heavens be astonished at this, be afraied and utterly confounded says the lord:
Ierem. 2.1^.
for my people have committed two evils: they have forsaken me the fountain
of living waters, to dig them pittes, even broken pittes that can hold no
water.

In this last place, for clearing of my proposition, and that my reasons for
the policye of our country may plainly be seen: I am further to show in
part, what these disorders be, small or great, and how near we come to the
ordinance of Christ. First we hold the head Christ Jesus and renounce al
other heads of the church, giving unto the royal person of the Queens
highness, the due and lawful supremacy over al persons within her dominions,
and in all causes to use the sword of justice, for the maintenance of well
doing, and punishing of vice: renouncing all foreign power and potentate to
have any interest or title of any such supremacy. Secondly, we receive the
scepter of christ the gospel of truth, holding and teaching the doctrine of
faith and love according to the same: the Sacraments also as seals of the
doctrine in their true nature, are taught and administered with prayers, singing
of psalms and reading of holy scripture: We allow also pastors in every
church, and some teachers: and by these ministeries the word is taught
ordinarily in many churches, by means whereof the church of England, our
mother has brought forth many notable children to God the father, and notable
members of Jesus Christ: Here one steppeth in and says: Is not this well? you
would have been glad in Queen Mary's days with less liberty, can you not
be content? Truth, this is well indeed, and I pray God we may be thankful as
we ought to be thankful. Yet as I take it, and they confess, all is not
well. And if a man have the foundation of his house laid, and many parts of
the building framed, he will not content himself till all be fastened together,
and the roof covered. And shall we content our selves to see the house of God
full of breaches, and uncovered, because some principal part is well begone?
Let us then see those breaches.

Surely, surely, I would your good Hh. should understand, that of all other, I
am loathest to speak of those things: neither would I, if I thought the truth
of this question might appear without it: therefore I humbly crave your
favorable patience, submitting all that I speak (as before) to your Hh. wise
considerations, not willingly doing any thing that might give just occasion
of offense. The imperfections of our churches are of two sorts, either in
matter of ceremonies, or in things substantial presrcibed of God. Of the
first I will say only this, that it is well known, that some of our
ceremonies, are part of the character of the beast, and therefore not comely
for Christ's undefiled spouse: but if the other greater things were reformed,
they would fall away of themselves, like untempered mortar, after a hard frost.
The other, ar either in the holy things, or holy offices. The first holy thing
is the word, here some part of the holy scripture is commanded to be left
unread, the Apocripha are appointed to be read, and that under the name of holy
scripture, for instruction of manners: and homelies in steed of preaching: this
I take to be an abuse to the scepter of Christ, which is before showed to be
perfect The other holy things are the censures, and namelye excommunication,
which is made a civil ordinance committed to a civil judge in matters of
heritage, in a quarrel often groates, for not appearing the party may be
absolved by his proctour. A ministers name is used in the form, but he has
nothing to do to judge or determine, or to receive again. And besides all
this, the penance may be changed into money or some other thing. Here the
Elder-ship is despised, the congregation loses her right, and earth and
heaven are mingled together: no small disfigure unto Christ's church, if you
remember how God would have it ordered and adorned.

The disorders in the holy offices are either by mingling or mangling. Mingling
is of two sorts, first the superfluity of offices and officers, as
Archbishops, L. Bishops, Chancelors, Commissaries, Archdeacons, Officials
Deanes, Vicedeanes, Treasurers of Cathedral churches, Prebendes, Cannons,
Peticannons, Singing men, Quiristers, Vergers, Curates and Readers, every one
of these have a certain dignity above others: and besides that there are
Deacons, who have no charge of the poor at all, Churchwardens, Sidemen, and
collectors for the poor. Proverb. 9.3.
Are these the maidens whom wisdom sends forth to call the simple to her
banquet? Ver. 1.
Are these the pillars that God has set in his church? Ephesians. 4.8.11.
Can it be said that Christ when he ascended up on high, gave these? There is
also a second mingling in their works, as he that preaches will also sit in
commission, he will be a Pastor over some 2. or 3. churches, and an Archdeacon
over many churches. One man will be a Pastor to one church, a Chaplain to an
other, and a prebend to an other. In their prayers they are bound to such a
form as for the most part is translated out of the popish portues, having
diverse ungodly mixtures of signs, with sacramental signification, as the
cross in baptism, imposition of hands in confirmation, and of other rites
and observations which Gods book never dreamed of. Concerning all these and
other such minglings, how shall it be answered when the Lord shall say, Who
required these things at your hands? Esaias. 1.12.
The manglings ar very little better. For first diverse members are cut off, as
governing Elders and Deacons: Presbyteries of particular churches, and free
Synods: In the calling of ministers many are made without a place, few have
their election with the consent of the church: the right of imposition of
hands, is in a L. Bishop, and such as he choseth, many are made ministers
of the word that have no gifts, contrary to the rule in examination. In their
works, there wants residency in many able men: there is no practice of
preching in many resident: four sermons a year discharges a man before our
church. But what should I repeat all? I fear and tremble, that the glorious
spouse of Christ Jesus, should thus be defiled with the filthy clouts and
rotten patches of the foul and beastly strumpet, Revel. 17.1.9.
the whore of Babel, which fitteth on the feven hills of Rome. where is the
fullness of Christ? Col. 1.9. Where are the treasures of wisdom and knowledge
that are hid in him? cap. 2.13. and how are we complete in him? ver. 10. if
we suffer our selves to be led as a pray, through philosophy, and vain deceat
after the traditions of men, and not after Christ. ver. 8.

The question being thus cleared, Proofer of the proposition.
the reasons that prove the same, will show themselves more readilye, and be
seen more apparently. My reasons are either general or special- Generally I
first consider the author of church discipline, on the one side Christ
furnished with authority from God: on the other side, man's wisdom and
Antichriste, aduersarye against GOD, whose coming is by the effectual power
of Satan: 2. These. 2.4.9. The first proof from the author of discipline.
seeing that it is already showed, that God is the author of that we want, the
consideration of his person may teach us that his is best and surest for our
estate: for he is wonderful in counsel, and excellent in works, Esa. 28.29.
the foolishnes of God is wiser then men. and the weakness of God is stronger
then men, 1. Cor. 2.25. If God tha^ in counsel be wisest, and in works most
perfect and stable: Geueral reasons showing that Christ's
how should not all state-men think that to reform our churches after his
cou^fell, and to practice his works were safest for the estate of our land.
Look we upon man, Antichrist, and Satan, what are these to ye almighty? and
their wisdom to his? Can they teach a church-governme^t more certain for our
safety, than he? Is not the wisdom of this world foolishnes with God? 1. Cor.
3.19. Does he not take ye wise in their craf tines, and make ye counsel of the
wicked foolish? Job. 5.13. And concerning Antichrist: oght we not to hearke^ to
him, who calls unto us from heaven, and says: Go out of her my people,
Revel. 18 4.
that ye be not partakers in her sins, and that ye receive not of her
plagues: for her sins are come up unto heaven, and God has reme^ bered her
iniquities. As for Satan, his wiles are but to deceive, even as he deceived
Euah, to the misery of all mankind: and as he seduced Ahab to his
destruction. Therefore I think it best, and the surest policy, to be ruled by
God.

And this reason will be the more evident, Our profession is to serve God in all
he teaches us.
if we consider our selves: what we have done, and now do. We have entered
into covenant with God, by submitting our selves to the scepter of his word,
and taking upon us his sacraments as badges of our profession. Here
peradventure a wise Politian does not see, that it is not safe to serve two
masters: though the Lord says, Luke 16.13. 2. Cor. 6.15.
You cannot serve God and Mammon. And what concord has Christ with Belial.

The next general reason is from the thing it self, I mean the
church government which is of Gods commandment: first, The second general
reason from the thing
if we consider that the same being Christ's, and we christians, what can be
better for us? the same is from heaven, heavenly, and spiritual: and we
profess the Lord from heaven, Discip. is for our safety.
what then can be safer for us? What do we (fuppose you) if we judge any
thing unfit for us, when he says: Pro. 3.8.
All the words of my mouth are righteous, there is no lewdness nor frowardnes
in them, If the commandment of God by Moses the serva^t was such, that no
nation was comparable to Gods people, because no nation had laws and
ordinances so righteous, as all that law which he set before them: and if
those laws should be their wisdom and understanding before al people: Deuteronomy.
4.6.8.
so that they which should hear, should be forced to confess only this people
is wise and of understanding: Shall we think, that the Laws of the son, Lord
and master of the house, would make us less righteous, wise, Christ's discipl.
makes a nation honorable. 1. King. 10.
and honorable before al people? If Solomon for the wisdom which he had of God,
was admired and sought to of all people, and the glory, wealth, and peace of
his kingdom, was herein especially, in that he builded the material temple
after the pattern given him of God? Is there not a greater than Solomon with
us, and shall not the glory of our Queen and country, be as great, if we in
the building of the spiritual temple, use no other platform, but that which
God does send unto us?

Join hereunto the use and end of Christ's government: namely, why god
appointed Christ's kingdom: the kings of the earth, and civil states, being
ignorant of the mystery of Christ's ruling, are many times troubled, when they
hear that a king is borne: Mat. 2.1.2.
and when they perceive, that the never fay ling word of the Almighty, does
set down that it must be so, where, and how, they lay privy netts and engines
to prevent him: but wise men are contrary minded and do come from their own
country, The end of Christ's discipline
to seek him out: and are exceeding glad when they see the tokens of his
coming, reioicing to do homage before his holy Majesty, for they know plainly
that he came not to dissolve the Law, Mat. 5.17.
as to teach subjects to disobey their natural princes, but to fulfill it:
and to make men of conscience, even without fear of temporal sword, Romans 12.5.
to be subject; and to pay tribute to whom it belongs. What good state-man
that is a christian, Discipline cannot hurt the state.
can wisely, and by warrant of good policy once dream, that that manner of
government which not meddling or usurping one whit upon the civil power, but
by the spiritual powerfrom Christ, Mat. 18.18.
binding and loosing the soul and conscience, does subdue the will of all
evil doers, which are set against the wholesome laws of God and man, and by
the terror of Satan does make them learn to leave such evil ways, 1. Cor.
5.4. 1. Tim. 1.20.
that when this is done, as it ought to be done, and by those persons and
orders, which the ordainer thereof has appointed: that it should hurt the
estate, and diminish the happiness of a Christian nation? Therefore well said
the Prophet Esaias of this government. Esaias. 42 4.
He shall not make to smok nor bruise, till he have set judgment in the
earth, and the Yles shall wait for his Law. By which he means that the
government of Christ is such, that of it self in his proper nature, it
disquieteth and troubles no man, no not to the bruising of a reed, or
quenching of smoking flax: but it peaceably brings men to good order, yea,
says he, the nations shall attend upon him to be ruled by his Law. See how God
has determined the good of the nations by his sons government: ca^ it be
good policy to refuse it? And we have great experience of this thing since we
submitted our selves unto Christ by receiving the gospel so far as we have
done. to help the civil Magist.
What works of righteousness God has wroght among us? How is our Queen become
an helper of the oppressed, and a succor, and a nurse to the bannished? How
has our peace under her flourished? What age can show the like in this land?
And what praise has God brought upon this land, and glory unto her Royal
Majesty, by worshipping Christ, and constant defending of his truth? If we
forget all the mighty deliverances, yet this last years overthrow of Gods
enemies may testify: being strange to all nations, admired of all people, an
astonishment to the enemy; and triumph to the godly: not by power or policy,
but by the faithful and merciful hand of God. Does not this (I say)
testify: Psalm. 144.15.
Blessed is that people that has the Lord for their God. But if we have so
great profit and pleeasure by a part of Christ's government: what would it be,
if we received all? would he not say of us, as he did sometimes of Sion. Psalm.
132.14.
This is my rest for ever, here will I dwell, for I have a delight therein: I
will surely bless her victuals, and satissie her poor with bread: and I will
clothe her priests with salvation, and her saints shall showt for joy. There
will I make the horn of David to budde, where I have ordained a light for mine
anointed: his enemies will I clothe with shame, but on him his crown shall
flourish. Look upon Iehu king of Israel, he was zealous a little, 2. King.
10.30.
destroing the house of wicked Ahab, and the abomination of Baal, and god
blessed his seed to sit on the thron of Israel, unto the fourth generation:
what would he have done if he had been zealous in all the will of god: but
because he left not the sin of leroboam, god loathed Israel, and smote them
in all their coasts by the sword of Hasael. Look on Asa also king of Judah, 2.
Chro. 14. and cap. 16.
when he sought the Lord our God, the land had quietness ten years, and after
he had a wonderful victory and much spoils of an huge host, often hundredth
thousand and three hundredth charets: but when he made flesh his arm, and cast
the Seer for admonishing him into prison, and oppressed certain of the people,
he had an extreme disease in his feet in his old days, which took from him
the glory of his youth. Look we farther on that good king Iehosaphat who caused
the people to be taught in the law of god, he was wonderful in peace, 1. Chre.
17. cap 18.1.
prospering in wealth, and marvelous in victory: Cap. 19.2.
yet when he joined with wicked Ahabs house, helping the wicked, and loving
the^ that hate the Lord, Cap. 18.31.
did he not hazard his own life? was not he and his people put in fear with a
great multitude from beyond the sea: Cap. 20.2.3.37.
and were not his ships broken that they were not able to go to Tarshish. And
generally from Joshua, and thenceforth in all the story of the Bible, you shall
hardlye or not at all find, that ever God blessed the people long with peace
and prosperitye, when they declined from his Laws, or that he spared good
kings, when they followed their own minds, and left the will of the Lords
word unperformed. So if we would consider what has followed the disorderly
and rash urging of subscription, (a thing under pretense of unity, to cut the
throat of Gods ordinance in discipline) when the mouths of Gods faithful
servants were stopped, and very many of her Majesty's most faithful subjects
fearing God, grieved and molested, it may be it were good policy for us to
besturre our selves to set up reformation: for we know that one fear or plague
has ever since followed an other: first in that very year, how many ways
was her Majesty's sacred person endangered by the diuelishe and traitorous
Papists, then followed a dear year of corn, and after many were punished
with penury: besides this, we have sent forth soldiers kept watch and ward,
and lastly forced to forsak al to wait upon the enimye, whom God brought even
in our sight before our doors, and at this hour we are still busy in labor
and study, to keep the sword out of the land. If unto Judah and Israel such
things as these were warnings, threatenings, and corrections: let us take heed,
that we go not to far in flattering our selves molesting Gods servants,
refusing Christ's ordinance, till it be too late, and there be no remedy. O Lord
for christ's sake, bow thou our hearts, that we may not lean too much, unto the
uncertain staff of earthly policy, but look unto thee that smitest us.

An other general reason is this, The thid reason from the event.
that now it is easy to establishe it, and hard to keep it back: yea says a
mild and reverent man: I would gladly know, D. Some in his treatise of
decyding certain quest. etc. pa. 36
whether it be possible or safe, to plant discipline in this land, before
that Gods holy truth be soundlye both taught and received: and that there be
fit churchmen and people to execute the discipline. I am sorry that by publik
authority such a book should be allowed, that has no better reason against
discipline, then that which stands with the accusation of the whole state and
dispraise of the whole land. For what can be greater shame to our state which
profess the true and sound doctrine of the gospel, then that the same should
not be soundly taught: and what greater dispraise, then after 30. years
teaching, there should want fit Churchmen and people, Paul was but one, Romans
15.18.19
and yet in very few years he caused the gospel to abound from Jerusalem, An
easy matter to set up
and round about unto Illiricum: The Apostles in a short time planted very
many churches with the discipl. of Christ.
So that he durst not speak of any thing, which Christ had not wroughte by
him, to make the gentiles obedient in word and deed: and we have diverse L.
Bishops through all the shieres in England, dispersed in several charges, and
have not all they done as much in one country, as he did in many? He had the
civil power against him, these have it for them: he was many times troubled,
imprisoned, these have nothing to fear that might amongst men discourage
them: he was poor and labored for his living diverse times, these have great
livings: he had no humiane help, but the simple and sincere teaching of the
truth; these have very large authority: and have they not yet prevailed so
far, as that Gods holy truth, is soundly taught and received, but that the
lack hereof must hinder the good course of discipline? In a very small time
did Pauland Barnabas preach, and teach, many in Derba, Listra, Iconium, and
Antiochia: Act. 13. and. 14.20 21.23.
and ordained them Elders in every church. At Ephesus Paul continued three
year in whch space he taught them all the counsel of god, Act. 20, 17.27.28.31.
and left them Elders to look to themselves and to all the flock. It may be
some man will object, that Paul's calling being extraordinary, and his blessing
extraordinary, to blame our Bb. may not be fit. I answer, if they will take
upon them an office and charge of many congregations as Paul, and claim
authority in ordering of churches and church men, as Paul: why should it not
be looked for, that they should do as much good in their place, as he did in
his, having many more helps, then he. But this comes to pass, by no other
reason, but by the want of Gods church government. Discipline in England.
For when they take a calling whereof they have no warrant as Paul had, how
can they be blessed as Paul: when they meddle with civil causes which Paul
did not: how can they, or do they attend unto preching in themselves, and
promote it in others, as Paul did: when they by articles and devised plots
make daily trappes to entangle good preachers, and thrust many out because
they teach all the counsel of God, as Paul did: and maintain, and bear with
some which preach against the counsel of God: and more, which preach never a
whit of gods counsel, which Paul did not: when they have in their mouths
the way of preferment, and in their labors the care of honor, and give
dispensations to Non-residensy, tollerations to naked Readers, which all were
far from Paul: how can we look for the fruit of their loyterings, which
came of his labors: or that such as strive against the gospel, should do good,
as he which strove for it. Let all men consider by this, what it is to be L.B.
(jure humano) by man's law, and to be a poor minister and true servant of
Christ, (jure diuino) by gods Law. But it should seem by this question, that
if the holy truth of God were soundly taught, etc. then it were possible and
safe to pla^t discipline in this land, and surely I think so too. But herein I
differ, that I am persuaded that gods truth is sou^dly taught in this land
(which he seems secretlye to deny, Gods truth is soundly taught in England.
or else his question were no question) and so I think all men that speak
advisedly, and all the churches of god will witness with me: so that I think in
a matter so clear, I need not to use many unnecessary reasons: therefore it
follows by his own judgment, that it is possible and safe to plant
discipline in England, where the holy truth of god is soundly taught. As
touching fit church men and people (god be thanked for it) there be more known
then be accounted of, and more unknown than we are worthy of, and more would
have been if the resisting of discipline, and maintening of popish disorders,
had not discouraged some, and prevented very many. But I would feign be taught
either by the scripture of God, or by sound reason; how in many places of
this Land the holy truth of God, can be (as it ought) soundly taught and
received, and fit church men and people: Christ's orders and discipline, makes
fit churchmen and people.
till the rule and law of Christ be observed. For see you not, that the orders
now keep them out, which would like kind shep-heards feed the flock, and
that it feeds and fostereth the Idle and proud Prelacy, who lie lurking in
their warm nests, having many easy impedimentes, and sweet silver coardes
to pull them back from their duty, they are so invested into offices civil,
and so preferred to the honor of the high commission, that their leisure is
small, some dwelling in Cathedral churches, are so pestred with consultations
about leases, and changing of church lands, with feasting and flattering one an
other, with rhewmes and stitches, and the farnes of the places, or vnholsomnes
of the air, where their charge is: that they commend that business to their
curate. Some having been put to learn their Catechism, and to make exercises
now thirty years, are as fit churchmen for knowledge and utterance, as a
child of eight years of age. No marvel then, though the people in all places
be not so fit as they should be: when by the order of our disorderly church
government, such wicked and blind guides may be suffered and defended. But if
according to the law of Christ's church-governement there were diligent search
made in all places of the land, for wise, learned and stayed men of all
degrees to be called to the office of Pastors and teachers: and that by the
wise circumspection of these, discreet and sober men, with the consent of
several churches were adjoined as helpers: think you that there would be many
places void of able and godly teachers. And if there should some be, could it
long so continue, seeing that the power and spiritual authority of these,
would soon breed such a light, and bring forth such a harvest, as the beauty
and glory of such churches as were established and furnished, would soon draw
on the other, and cause them like wise to be provided. Now men thrust in
themselves, then they should be called by other. Now men seek (like journey
men) a curatship, and (like farmers before hand) get an advowsen before the
incumbents lease (I should say life) be out: then should such as be good men
and of fit gifts be sought for, not only in the university, but in the
country, court city, and gentlemen and noblemens houses, whersoeuer any
might be found worthy of so high a calling. Now many are violently thruste out,
because they do their duty: then should many be set in, who would tremble of
themselves, to enter into that calling, for fear they should not discharge it
Now many change their studies from divinity, many after study go to other
trades, many parents are discouraged from bestowing cost on their children,
because they see how little they be esteemed, if they will not yield to the
corruption of our disorders. Then many would change their studies from law,
physic, music, schooling, etc. and many would leave their trades, and
parents would think their cost well bestowed, and be diverse ways comforted, to
prefer their children to the study of divinity. Again, many who now are dumb,
if they saw Christ coming but a fair of with the scourge of discipline, would
soon find their tongues, and the uniting of small parishes would make us need
fewer than be: and the sending of bish, and non-residentes (such I mean as
are meet) to a charge, would supplye some that want: and some of their
curates, (being as learned, as they) would serve to fill a gappe: and diverse
other things would God offer, if we would go about it. If the Apostles in a
short time found fit men to place for Pastors, Teachers, Elders, and Deacons
in every church: how much more would it appear easy among us, if so be now
after 30. years of peace, and increase of all kind of learning, there were
liberty for Christ; orders, and authority to further the same. The worthy
example of Iehosaphat, in this place, might both teach this thing, and
encourage our state men. 2. Chr. 17.6.7.8.9. cap. 14.4.
For he first sent teaching Levites throughout all his kingdom to teach the
people: and after went through all towns, causing them to turn to the Lord.
And so by little and little in a short time restored the church to a wonderful
beautye and perfection.

But it may be the godly reader hearkeneth and longs to know, how I can prove
it easy at this time to reform the disorders in our church, and to plant
christ's discipline: he thinks peradventure, that he sees many things of
contrary persuasion. He that had lived in the day of the death of Christ,
seeing how despitefully he was handled, would not easily have believed that
which Christ speaks John 12.32 I, if I were lift up from the earth, will draw
al men after me. But if he living in the days of Constantine the great,
Christ's discipl. easy to be planted
the first Christian emperor of Rome, he had read over the horrible battles
of all Potentates by fire and sword, for the space of three hundredth year
against Christ, he might easily stand astonished to think, that through so many
years of unmeasurable affliction, such horrible torments, and infinite
butcheries, that the kingdom of Christ stood fast and increased, according as
it is written: Be thou ruler amidst thine enemies. Psalm. 132.14.
How much more may we think it easy to set up Christ's discipline in the
church, now under so Christian and mild a Queen, so highlye honored of God,
No good thing hard for our gracious Queen.
so ten derly beloved of her subjects, after so many years of peace and
preaching the Gospel, upon so good occasion as these wonderful warnings and
merciful deliverances, when thousands sighe for it, and ten thousands have
sought it: and approved and worthy men of all sheires have consented unto it,
and in some sort craved it, and all men almost confess that we ought to have
it (only they say they cannot tell how it may be accomplished,) and no man is
able soundly to confute it. In the days of King Henry the eight, a prince of
noble memory, by the means of one man the true right of the King being
revealed: how soon, and how easily was the Popes supremacy cast out of
England, in a time of great danger, when the Realm had very little
acquaintance with the gospel, and the Pope did rule in men's hearts as God. And
without the realm (for the most part) the whole world on the contrary: yet did
that worthy King prevail and keep his right. King Edward the sixte, that rare
young prince, being tender for years, how did he set up the Gospel in the
midst of darkness? What fit churchmen and people was there, if he had tarried
till they had come of themselves, how long might he have stayed. Or if the
Queen's Majesty had cast al perils that in reason might have fallen out in
restoring the churches at her joifull entrance into the seat of her rightful
throne: she might have said it was impossible, and not safe to alter the state
of religion. How much more would it be easy now to overcome and turn out the
remnants, and tail of the Pope, when there was no hurt to this land nor great
matter in the doing of the thing, to subdue and bannish his head.

The easines of this, may farther appear if we consider, Maintainers of men's
traditions despised.
first how the maintainers of men's traditions against Christ's church-gouernment
by the just judgment of God, Malach. 2.4.
(as he tells them in the Propher) are made to be despised and vile before al
people: because they kept not his ways, but have been partial in the Law.
So that a poor simple minister that handles the word of God aright, though
all his living peradventure be not worth forty marks the year, is hard with
more reverence, and resorted unto with more diligence, than one of those that
imagines that the dignity of ministers consists in outward things, though he
have the great bell rung, and men to help him to the pulpit. Men cty out for
lack of teching.
Again, who is ignorant how men cry out for able ministers in every place:
what suits and supplications in time of Parliament, what means has been made
to counselors?

In the next place consider, that the same which the L.Bb. and the Cathedral
churches do possess, if it be taken in time, There is living for able
ministers, if it were taken in time.
before it be too much scambled, how well would it serve to redeem
impropriations, and augment the smaller livings, and with the overplus serve to
other good uses, for her Majest. wars, and increase of learning: how easily
might two or three, or more small congregations be united into one, when there
is law already to do the same.

Again, some of themselves will say in some places, that if it pleased her
Majesty they would be willing, but we must not go before a law. But I cannot
be persuaded, but they slander her godly and christian mind: for if they would
deal faithfully with her, and by themselves, and by suffering others, make
this holy truth of Christ's Ecclesiastical government, The Queens Majesty
abused by the Bb.
plainly known to her royal and princely understanding: it is impossible that
so zealous and godly a prince, having so many years in so many perils of her
life, against so many mighty men abroad, and false hearts at home, so wisely
and constantly maintained the gospel of Jesus christ, and comfortably received
so many blessings, deliverances, and aduancements of honor, so that her name is
great and terrible to al lands, would be so negligent of her duty, so
unthankful to God, so fearful of any danger, or any way so backward: that in
her only, so holy, so worthy, so hye and necessary a thing, most profitable
to her subjects, most certain for her safety, should be withstood and
resisted. Do not they preach? do they not perswad? do not they sue for
co^missions? Do not they suspend, imprison, and keep back al they can from the
court and Paul's cross, which might detect their unfaithfulness to God, and
abusing of her Majesty.

Furthermore, if we weigh how the Papists courages are well alayed, their nets
broken, and many fallen into their own pits, and their long woue^ spiders web,
their filthy plots, by Gods merciful providence made void, No hard thing to
cast out
and that the zeal of many has been lately sturred up, and made more desirous
to serve God, and follow his law: were it not easy now to plant discipline?
and would not all men think, that the mercifulnes of God calls unto it? and
would not his mercies bow thousa^ds to like of it? how redily did the people
leave their work without all constraint, and with very small and slight warning
in many places, when they kne we that her highness was desirous that God
should be solemnly praised of her people, how did this pearce the peoples
hearts toward hit? how much more would the Lord frame the peoples hearts toward
her, if this noble work were enterprised, and the fruit thereof would be a
thousand fold doubled.

Lastly, The Pope in a consumption.
consider that since the time of Luther, the Lord has breathed upon the Pope,
and stricken him in a mervelous consumption: and that is a sure word of
prophesy, 3. These 2.8.
that by preaching he shall be consumed, and the people of God have commission
to reward him, Renel. 18.16.
and give him double, according to his works: think you it will be a hard thing
to cast out of England, some relics and scattered remnantes of the rail of
the beast, when we have experience that these prophosies are true, in the
great and most substantial fro^tiers of his power. Let us not fear then, as an
hard thing, when God and man, heaven and earth, time and place do favor the
work, and warrant good success.

Out of this follows the second part of my reason, for if the Pope must
consume, and that by the breathe of Christ's mouth, 3. These. 2.3.
then surely Christ's meaning is, that his own kingdom shall prevail. This is
the stone that was cut without hands, that breaks the image in pieces, Dan.
2.34.44.45.
and makes the great monarckes of the world like the chafe of the summer
flowers, the reliks of Popery.
carried by the wind, Christ's kingdom (...) prevail.
where the place cannot be found, and it self grows into a great mountain
to fill the whole earth. This is Michaell the great prince that stands up for
his people, and casts out the great dragon. Dan. 12.1.
This is the King of Kings, and Lord of Lords. Revel. 12.9. cap. 19.16.
Now seeing we crave no other government but his, and his cannot be withstood:
let all state-men judge, whether it be not hard, and contrary to safety, to
stand against him. And if we knew what the Prophet means, Esaias. 49.23.
when he says: that Kings shall be the nursing fathers of the church, and
Queens her nources, that they shall worship with their faces toward the earth,
and lick up the dust of her feet, Psalm. 110.6.
and that Christ shall be judge among the heathen. He shall fill all with dead
bodies, and smite the head over great countries. We might soon perceive that
it will be hard kicking against the prick, and as the Apostle said to the
Corinthians, for mingling themselves with the table of the Lord, and table of
Devils. So it may be considered of us for mingling the holy things of Christ,
with the profane things of Antichrist. Do we provoke the Lord to anger, 1.
Cor. 10.22.
are we stronger than he?

When D.W. was made Archb. and set forth his unadvised device of subscription,
Subscription did but trouble the church and commo^-wealth
it seemed as a strong pot of brass that would soon have broken in pieces all
the power of poor ministers, and made discipline in utter contempt. But mark
what followed by distur bing Gods servants and many churches, the cause of
discipline is better known and more favored, and their Hh. and Lordly
presumptions, by a contemptible and very base and strange means, not once
dreamed of by a thousand of gods saints, even when their creases were set up,
To keep out discipline
and they began to say, all is ours, was so dashed, daunted and taken down,
that the more they stir for their own glory, against the glory of God, the
more shall they fall before the presence of his power and the glory of his
truth. And in them is fulfilled that which the Lord spoke against Ely, who
suffered his sons to profane the holy things of God. The^ that honor me I
will honor, 1. Sem. 2.30.
and they that despise me, shall be despised. Alas, what armor had David against
Goliath the great, armed with spear, shield, and sword, 1. Sam. 17.40.
and brigandine, that he made the whole host to fear: had he any more but his
shepe-heardes sling with a stone, who fighting in a good cause, and in the name
of the Lord, subdued the Philistim, and smote off his head with his own sword.
Judge. 8.5.6.
How did the princes of Succoth, and the men of Penuel despise Gideon with his
small power, refusing to give them bread, when he pursued Zcba and Zalumna
kings of Midian, yet we know, that he had the victory, and they the smart of
such contempt.

Let them consider I pray you, that by that very means which the children of
Jacob thought to be rid of Joseph, did God bring to pass, that which they
feared: and a time came wherein they remembered that they had no compassion on
the tears of their brother It may be remembered, Book of mart. page 1430. and
1431.
what hard dealing was against the reverend and godly man, B. Hooper, and how
God made them to see their faults, and to be reconciled that did it. It may be
considered that Anno do. 1538. there was an injunction by the noble king Henry
the eight, that the bible should be set in churches to be read of all men:
and anno 1540. the 6. articles followed. These two, like unto the ark of God,
and Dagon in the very temple of Dagon, had their conflict, no eafie matter.
but where was the victory? we this day see. So can it not be possible to keep
out discipline, seeing we have the scepter of Christ, not only read, but
preached among us? For in the days of King Henry, Dagon fell down upon his
face on the ground before the arc, and his head and hands were cut off in King
Edwards time: he was set up in a patching manner in the days of Queen Mary:
he has received the second wound by Queen Elizabeth. And I pray God, that by
the emrodes sent from God, those which maintain the stomp that remains, be
not forced with homage and honor to Christ, to give the Ark of God his free
passage. I would wish rather, and I desire God most heartily, (that now they are
in a rage, and furnished with commission for their private revenge,) the Lord
would stryk them as he did Paul, when he went with letters to Damascus, and
make them to see their folly, Acts 9.
that by their happy conversion there may be rest to the churches of England:
and that they may be aedified and walk in the fear of the Lord, and be
multiplied by the comfort of the holy Ghost. O if it would please God to give
them grace like good Elders to fall down before him that sits on the throne,
and worship him that lives for ever, to cast away their popish crown, Revel.
4.10.
and cursed jurisdiction before his throne, and suffer not themselves to be
called Rabbi, Mat. 23.8. ^ Pet. 5.3.4. Heb. 7.26.
or lords of Gods heritage, but let Christ be the only Teacher, chief
shepe-heard, and Archbishop, and live with their brethren, as examples to the
flock. Let them consider the good example of the faithful and humble servant
of Christ, John the Baptist, who gave Christ the honor, (though his own
disciples repined) to be the bridegroom, and he as a friend stood by, Ioh.
3.29.
reioicing to hear his voice, and confessing this to be his joy, and to fill
him with joye, saying: He must increase, but I must decrease.

Seeing then that God is the author of this Ecclesiastical discipline which we
seek, The end of the general reasons
and that he is the wisest, and his works most permanent, and that man's
vain wisdom, Antichrist which consumes before him, and Satan the deceauer,
be the inventers and maintainers of disorders and usurped authority in the
church: and that we have covenanted with God in Christ, profess his word,
renounce Antichriste, and God accepts not Iuke-warme gospellers, and to be
worshipped by peece-meale, seeing the thing itself is pure, perfect, and full
of all goodness, for the peace, wealth and honor of Gods people, and that it
is ordained for the joy and happiness of all nations. Seeing that it is easy to
be done among us, having the gospel soundly taught, and received now thirty
years, and the head of Antichrist broken in pieces, in more dangerous times,
and the sincerity of doctrine is and has been among us set up, maintained, and
zealously and constantly defended by a most christian Princess, and that the
enemies are in derision, the Papists cooled, the people inflamed with zeal,
and the occasion of Gods mercy calls us thereunto; and the very time of
Antichrists consumption, and that there is living sufficient, and men, and
means to accomplish it. And lastly, seeing it is hard, dangerous, and
impossible to stand against it: I most humblye beseech, and move your Hh. to
consider, whether it be not the best and surest policy for this realm, that it
may continue quiet and happy, to reform al disorders in the church, after the
scriptures of God, and to suffer no other churchgouernment, but that which
Christ ordained, and the Apostles practiced.

The special reasons are now to follow, More special proofs of the
proposition, from the church or commo^-wealth
which are such as specially concern, either the commonwealth or the church,
for these are two twins which are united together, and remain distinct in
every nation fearing God, for the double benefit of the inahbitants thereof,
whereby God has that which is his, Mat. 22.21.
and Caesar that which is his: and some are put a part in the church, for the
matters of God, and some in the common wealth have civil offices for the
affairs of the King. When these two are rightly ordered, 2. Chro. 19.11.
and being joined together, and remaining distinct, do in their several
natures and proper places work together, they make a happy state and people.
Which two things, if it may appear that the establishing of discipline after
Gods word, will bring to pass: I hope it will be granted that the true rules
of policy will challenge Christ's church government for this Land, and bannish
the usurped and Antichristian hierarchy.

In the common-wealthe, there are the persons and times to be considered: the
persons, for the wise and upright executing of Laws, and the times of peace
and war, or any other calamity, which require a diverse kind of travail and
providence. Concerning the temporal and common Laws and statutes of this
realm, The civil estate and common laws of England worthy great commendation.
so far as I can see, there can be few nations preferred before us, and for the
wise fore cast of things in the sway of the commonwealth, both for the main
tenance of peace, and strength for war, as my purpose is not to meddle with
it, so I cannot but admire, and give god thanks for the rare and honorable
virtues of wisdom and magnanimity, The orders of Christ
in her most excellent Majesty, and the constant, faithful, and diligent
providence and labor of her most honorable and grave counselors: praying God
always for the blessed continuance of the same. The thing which I endeavor, is
only to show how this happy tract of time, under so wise, both laws and
governors may be best and surest kept and enlarged, either by that church
government which is borrowed and left as the smoking tail of Antichrist, or
by the ordering of the churches, after the word of God.

If we speak of the persons in common, 1. special reason for the execution
and practice of good laws, Christ's discipl is best.
how the good and wholesome laws should take good effect both in them, and
for them: and we consider the loose handling of holy things, which is in the
very nature of the bastard discipline, and the great occasions which the church
governors and churchmen have, to be drawn away from the just and due
practice of their offices, you shall easily perceive, that the matter is cleared
by the experience of times paste: for as touching the word, when on the one
side in the most places, there wants the quickening work of preaching: and on
the other side, where that work is, it is hindered with dispensations,
Totquots, and civil dignities: how can the word of God enter into the
conscience of all degrees, as it were necessary to breed a conscience, either
in the Magistrates to execute the laws justly, or in the people to obey them
faithfully, being so little, being slightly and so untimely taught. Whereas Gods
order is, Act. 14.23. Tit. 1.5.6.
that every church be furnished with able me^; of good life and diligent
teaching, 2. Tim. 2.3.4.
to be as soldiers free from all business to serve their captain Christ, which
a thousand times more effects the due executing, and practice of Laws
wholesome and good. Maintain the common laws.


And as touching the censures; first when they may be executed for trifles,
and then in weighty matters changed for money: thirdly by persons which in the
nature of the thing ought not to meddle with such ho ly matters; and in regard
of distance of place cannot deal so justly as a good man would and should,
(for a man though he be let with sickness, or the Queens Majesty's business,
is excomunicated before the cause of his not appearing be examined.) Verily
all these things which lie in the very nature of our disordered government, and
not in the corruption of the persons, make the holy things of God contemned,
the execution hated and derided. Very hardlye then can any man be well and
soundly brought to be a good Magistrate, or subject by these, whereas Gods order
is, Heb. 13.17. Act. 20.28.1 Pet. 5.2. Gods order makes good magistrates and
good subjects.
that the Eldership shall watch over every congregation or parish, and so every
man's cause may easily be known: and that shall be by men of Ecclesiastical
function, set apart only for the same, according to the qualitye of the
offense, without change of any censure into a civil mulct, without respect of
person be duly and truly exercised. If you compare these together, and judge in
the lykelihood of the several nature of things (for I meddle not with
persons, in whom always there may be corruption) you shall perceive that the
one is like the leaden rule of Lesbos, which will bend where the party to be
ruled will not bow, and the other is the blade of a shaken sword in the hand
of the Cherubins, to keep the way of the tree of life. Tell me then I pray
you, which most agrees with policy (if we were desirous to have al good laws
duly executed) a thing contemptible and vile, which is far from true justice,
or that which has power and pearceth the soul. The discipl. of Christ
alters not


And surely this may easilye be observed, that the most part of such as are
against the orders of god, are a people that delight in licentiousnes, Wicked
like not Christ's discipline.
which cannot abide to hear of their sin, and hate to be admonished. By
which it is manifest, that the other is of no powerful nature to keep men in
good order, and that which of all other is a very weighty matter, the nature of
these disorders is such, that they keep out and thrust out of the ministry,
such worthy men as of all other, are known most diligent and wise, in framing
the co^ science to all good laws, for executing of justice, and practice of
obedience. By T.C. In the admonition to the people of Eng. page 77. etc.
Here it is objected, that the whole state of the laws of this realm wilbee
altered, which is a manifest untruth, as al men may see, that the
church-gouernment intermedleth not in the temporal laws, but only with such
cannons and laws, as concern the ecclesiastical jurisdiction and orders: and
the proofs from the cannon law, and state of ciuilians, of tithes and
matrimonye, etc. which contain but some very small part of the law, do of
themselves convince the contrary. But as for the cannon law, it is no way
hurtful, but good for the state of the laws of this realm, if it were
abolished: being (as hereafter will appear) not necessary but dangerous to the
state, and by former statutes already Anno 25. H. 8. cap. 19.
indighted, and to remove a dangerous thing already found guiltye by other
wholesome laws, was never inconvenient. As for the maintaining of ciuilians, as
the law already makes no great necessity of them, There is little need of
cannon or civil law.
having little other way to set them on work, but by the cannon law: if such
men's studies were converted an other way to more profit, in the church and
common wealth, little or no loss or inconvenience would follow. the estate of
laws established.
As touching tithes, testament, and matrimony, judgments of adultery, slander,
etc. if they be temporal, why should not the magistrate have his right to
deal with them: and the alteration will not be great, but only peradventure
some small addition unto those laws and statutes which are already provided,
with an increase of matter to those courts and offices already established,
whose process and proceeding in judgment, will be no harder to be appointed,
then from time to time in every statute, that has been made, partly in those
matters, and partly in others, since the first year of her highness reign,
has usually been accustomed. Touching the Judicial laws, that is nothing to
the question, for whether these things be altered or no, it is all one in
respect of discipline, which intermedleth not therewith, and they may be
altered if the wisestates of this land see it necessary, though the discipline
crave it not: and if they should be altered, the inconvenience can be no
greater, than in such cases is usual: for Princes re peale and alter such laws
without hurt, as they find necessary to be repealed and altered, or else what
need so many parliaments, and so many new Laws. As for that is alleged,
concerning the laws which maintain the Queens supremacy. etc. It is a
manifest sla^der, as is declared plainly in an answer to D. Sect ^.
Bridges preface, entitled, A defense of the godly ministers, and shall after
be seen also in this treatise. A lamentable abuse in impropriations and
patronages.
As for impropriations and patronages, if they confess a lamen table abuse,
then they join with us, that there ought to be amendment. As for the
difficultye, it is ra her presumed, than any way proved, as shall appear
afterward: and to speak generally to all the rest, what hurt can there now
come to go forward in religion, The discipl. of Christ alters not
to augment and alter a little, No danger to go forward in religion.
seeing that when indeed the whole state of laws were altered, at the
entrance of her Majesty's most happy regiment, in time of more danger as is
aforesaid, the Lord gave a contrary event and happy blessing. And though it
seem a matter of great weight, to alter one of the three estats, by which the
laws have stood, yet the Lord has by the ministry of your honorable wisdoms,
effected more greater and difficult matters than this. Howbeit (as the Lawiars
report) the L.Bb. are not one of three estats in making laws, The L.Bb. not
one o the three estates by which the laws do stand.
but are mingled with the Lords of the upper house, which Lords are one of the
three estates. For they describe the state and body of a Parliamen, and the
members it consists of, in this order: Namely, See the L. Diars book or
reports An. 36. H. 8. fol 59. b. and An. M. 1. fol. 93.a.
that it does consist first of the King as chief: secondly, of the Lords as
chief members of that body: thirdly, of the commons, that is knights, citizens
and burgesses as the inferior members, and all this make the body of the
Parliament by which the laws do stand. Whereby I gather, that as before the
pride of Antichrist brought in the L.Bb. to be lords, joined to the lords
temporal in the upper house, the laws stood by the said three estates without
them: so it may be very well at this time, seeing they are not an estate of
themselves, Laws made without L.Bb. Rastal. tit. provision and premu mire.
cap.4.
but joined to the estate of the lords, and that diverse statutes have been
made without them. And if their lordly title and dignity were taken away, might
there not be present in the Parliament house, some wise and grave ministers of
especial gifts and learning, sorted out of all the land, to yeald their
counsel according to Gods heavenly law, even as the civil judges are ready
to give their advise, according to the temporal law, the estate of laws
established
and for matters of greater difficultye, there might be a free Synod after
the manner of the Convocation house, at all times to minister further help.

Come we now to the several sorts of persons, they are either superiors or
inferiors: and amongst these (as Peter says) the King is the chief. 1. Pet.
2.13.
David on a time was in a hazard by a mighty Philistime, 2. Sam. 23.26,
and rescued by a valiant and faithful captain Abishai. To whom his men
swear, that he should go out no more to battle, least he quench the light of
Israel. These men no doubt did know that the glory and safety of the whole
common wealth did depend upon a good ma gistrate: who being taken away, as a
light quenched, A good prince is the light of ye weale-publick.
the whole land was like to be in great distress and hazard, and this verily
is always a principle that never fails. When the righteous are in authority,
Pro. 29.2.
the people rejoice, but when the wicked bear rule the people sigh. Therefore
we of England are much bound to praise God, both for so happy a light which
he has vouchsaued to give and keep unto us, our most sacred sovereign lady
Elizabeth, and for the great and wise travail of her honorable counselors, so
far as in them lies, to prevent all dangers to her person, and perform every
action that may make for her preservation. Grant me then I beseech you, your
gracious favor, though I be the least and basest of the thousands of
England, to show my good will, my hartye desire and faithful mind in this
thing. 2. special reason
For I am persuaded that there is nothing that can by any pollicye be devised,
comparable for her safety; unto the establishing of discipline after gods word.
Princes keeping Christ's word are his friends.
For if it be true, 1. Sam. 12.25.
that they that do wickedly shall perish with their king and to disobey Christ's
commandment be sin and wickedness, Discipline after Gods word
1. Tim 1.9.10.
and he says you are my friends if you do whatsocuer I command you: Ioh.
15.14.
then it is a point of great policy that you labor wisely, to set up Gods
orders in his churches, if you desire the continual preservation of our Queen.

Again, Good policy to root out the spriggs of popery, that he grow no more
to hurt the state.
in all historics it is found to be most agreeing to policy, when thou have
subdued thy capital enemy, or bannished him, to root out al his friends, and
whatsoever may minister occasion of his return: and in your books of policy,
you shall find diverse princes for their safety, have both taken away the heads
of the men that might have been dangerous to their estate, and as conveniently
(as possible they could) altered the form of government. But seeing we have
sufficient in Gods word, 1. King. 2.26.
I will not lade you with other. Solomon was a wise king as ever lived, he used
this policye toward Adonijah, Ioab, and Shimei: and the text says, after he
had slain these three, the kingdom was established in the hand of Solomon.
Now this king needed not to change the law, because coming to his crown by
lawful succession, he might safelye continue the old. And yet in the matters
of God, he went farther then his father, in building the temple, and setting
forth the true service and worship of Almighty God therein: which when he
swarued from, and followed the laws of the nations round about him, which
were enemies by nature unto him, his estate was troublesome, and his end not
so glorious. For this cause God gave his people when they should enter into the
land of Chanaan this law, that they should utterly destroy those nations,
Deu. 7.2.3.4. Cap. 12.2.3.
make no covenant nor have compassion of them; nor make any marriages with them:
and secondly, is for the Queens May, safety
that they should destroy their Idols, and all monuments of Idolatry, so that
the very names of such should not be heard of among them. Which when they did
not carefully follow, they were pricks in their sides, and snares to their
feet, Judge. 2.3
and greatly to their woe and misery. So I do sear, and very much believe, that
one great cause of many scourges and fears, and flights that we have been put
unto, comes by a contrary policy which fostereth the enemies of her Majesty,
and gives occasion of many mischiefs. What made the I urke prevail against
the east churches, Anno 1245.
and that he came even to the borders of Germany, even the supremacy of the
Pope, which is the maine breach of this discipline. But when and how was he
stayed? even then when Luther had detected the disorder of the Antichristian
Prelacy, Anno 1529.
and at Vienna where served the value of resolute Prote stantes, The breach of
Christ's discipl. has over thrown many kingdoms, and namely the Romain empire,
he had his first stop, and a very great overthrow: and why prevailed he so
far into Hungarye, but only because they which should have given rescue, as
vassals to the Pope, were so busy in healing the wound which the triple crown
had received in Saxonye: and that they neglected the true duty to their
country. Anno 604.
When Phocas to get favor after the murdering of Mauritius his Lord and
master, had granted to the B. of Rome, to be B. of Bb. and head of all
Christian churches: did not the authority of the Empire decay and the power of
the Empire wax weak ever since? have not the servants benelords over their
Lord? Consider I pray you what difference there is between the B. of Rome
under the Emperor, to be made chief B. of all Bb. in the Empyie: and that the
B. of Canter. should be chief, or Archb. Primate and Metropolitan over all the
Bb. and churches in England. Discipline after Gods word
If that were dangerous to the empire and Emperor, how can this be fafe for
England and the Queen thereof? If Thomas Becket his predecessor, could
wrestle with the King, who then was Henry the second: peradventure this man (if
occasion were offered) by his place (I speak not of his person) might be made
strong to do some thing. If king Henry the eight had not been wise and stout,
it is to be doubted that the wiles of Stephen Gardener, and the pride of
Cardinal Woolsey (as one of them in diverse things did cross him, and the
other many ways ledd him) might have very greatly enda^gered him and his
country. If you look on our L. Bb. their Chancelors, The Bb. seas and
cathedral dignities with the cannon law, are entisements to the Queens deadly
enemies.
Archdecons, Commissaries etc. and join (that which they work by) the cannon
law: What shall you find but that the Pope has his horse ready sadled and
brydled, watching but the time to get up again. For if Allin that filthy
traitor, and such like, had not been set on fire with the love of the Sea of
Canterbury, and other like places, and that the cannons were not so fit for
popish purposes, would there not be a great deal less stomach in those men,
to venture their lives, and very vnhand some sitting for the deadly man of
sin. These seas and Cathedral cloisters, are fit for their pompous
dwellings, and the cannon law is the foundation of his throne. What policye
can there be to leave any thing in the land which might either encourage, or
entice, or any manner of ways, serve, help, or strengthen, the greatest and
most deadly foe and hostile enemy, which her Majesty has, or can have: and
how can we long hope that our armies shall stand before our enemies in
battle (though for a while God spare us and call us to repentance) as long as
the greedye minds of many Achams which lust after the Babilonitish garment, is
for the Queens Ma. safety
and the wedge of gold, and the cursed and damned thing of the cannon Law, be
suffered and fostered among us.

But let us go a little nearer, may we not see that these offices are fit
for Papists, whom no reward (if we believe D. Parry) can make true subjects:
Read the book of his tragedy. Popish church-offices, cloakes for the Queens
dissembling friends.
may they not be civilians, and doctors of the cannon law? may they not be
Chancelors, and L. bishops chief counselors? may not they in their courts,
nay do we not see them daily to spare and wink at open recusants and trouble
honest poor men, and especially those which are readiest, to detecte and
bewraye their disobedience to her Majesty? So the very order and nature of
these unnatural disorders, is against the safety of her Majesty. For
whatsoever fostereth the fittest instruments, to obey the bulls in the great
day they look for, that must needs be against the Queens Maicsties safety.

But besides that before said, there is an other thing in the being of this
corrupt church-gouernment: first the lack of teaching of youth: secondly, by
these colored offices a man may have a popish schoole-maister, especially if
he can semble a little: thirdly, when some are secretlye intised and wauereth;
who shall resolve them? the vanity of some, and the ignorance of so many,
(though a few no doubt, be well able and meet) does so drive them back, and
make them stumble, Christ's discipl. preventeth revolters from his Majesty's
obedience.
that hardly can you hear, that by these any be drawn to their due and true
obedience. But on the other side, the whole frame of Gods order is clean
another way. First, all the officers and cannons, horse, sadle, Discipline after
Gods word
and bridle is taken away. Secondly, a learned ministry, every way to write
obedience in their heart is here seated. And as he that planteth a right and
true catholic Papist, cannot plant any other, but a traitor in heart and
conscience: so he that by preaching frames a true christian, cannot but frame
a true subject in heart and conscience, when the preaching is the right way to
make true Christians, many revolters may be prevented, which otherwise swarm
and grow into great nombers.

This says one, ^ By T.C. In the admonition to the people of Eng. page 77.
is [non causa pro causa,] a wrong cause, that for lack of preaching the evil
of reuolting has happened: seeing it was not so, or so much in King Edwards
days, or in the first ten years of her Majesty's reign, when we had not
half so much preaching and a thousand less preachers: but the true cause is
the evil heart of men, who hear the word of God irreverently, the schism of
the church, and the Devil taking occasion by scisme. Whom I meekely desire to
consider, that the merciful providence of God, might, did, and does wonderfully
stay the hearts of the people, when it pleases him, even without and contrary
to means: Want of a learned ministry a cause of revolting. Prou. 19.2. and
29.18. Romans 10.14.15
yet by all reason, seeing it is written, that without knowledge the mind is not
good, and that the people perish, where the vision fails, and the ordinary
means of God to instruct and bring into the way of truth, is the preaching
ministry, it must needs follow that the lack hereof is some cause of their
reuolting and backsliding. For inquire we into all men, and they will answer,
so we did, because so we wereledd and taught. And though the wicked heart of man
and schism, and the Devil be great occasions, and sometimes causes of such
things, yet the power of preaching and the due administration thereof, is for
the Queens May. safety
is the means to prevent and bridle al these: as may appear, in that the
preaching is ordained to open the eyes of the people, Act. 26.18.
that they may turn from darkness to light, and from the power of Satan to God.
And how can any man in reason think, that teaching men obedience and truth
should not more draw them to obedience and truth, than not teaching. And if God
have ordained it to do it, why should not the want of Gods ordinance be a
cause, that it is not done: as it is written, My people is destroyed for lack
of knowledge. And whence is the evil heart of men maintained, and schism
fostered, Hosh. 4.6.
and the Devil occasioned to work his will, but hence: namely, that the one
is not taught diligently by preaching, and kept in order by discipline, and the
other are let out at random for lack of them both. For if by Gods order things
were squared, where were the scisme, and the door for the Devil: where does
the wolf prevail, but where the shepe-heard sleeps, and the dog does not
bark, and why should we pray the lord of the harvest, to thrust in laborers
into his harvest, Mat. 9.38.
if the want of such laborers, could be no cause of harm. For trial hereof,
look on the country and parishes where preaching is by a standing ministry,
and compare them with other, I could name some place of two thousand
communicantes, where there is not a suspected papist, and hardly shall you see
such a one tarry in such a place, except it be in hope, through the popish
disorders, to drive away him who is the means of the good subjects faithful
hearts. Secondly, if there had been an Eldership joined with such a ministry,
think you that there could have been so many seduced as there are, and so
many hanged, drawn and quartered as there are? When the nature of our
disorders does so negligently provide a remedy, no marvel though the Jesuits
prevail as they do. Add hereunto, that by these disorders, those men are
brought into contempt, which have written most for her Majesty's right and
labored with most profit, for the increase of good hearty subjects.

Here an other steppeth forth and says, that in stead of those you find
fault withal, you would have a Pope in every parish, and the Queen should be
subject to your Pastor, and that by the discipline, the just power of her
royal magnificence shall be abridged, and in that sense slander us with the
abuse of the words of Esaye, Esaias. 49.23.
that Kings and Queens shall worship with their faces to the earth, and lick
up the duste of the churches feet. First consider, that to be a Pope over one
Parish, Christ's discipl. diminishes not the Queens supremacy.
is farther from the crown and power of a kingdom, than an Archb. or L.B. over
many parishes and shieres, yea, Metropolitan of all England: And yet the
Pastor has no Papal authority to do as he lists, but has his voice only
as the rest, 1 Timothy 4.14. Act. 20.28. 1. Cor. 5.4.
and is subject to the Eldership. Neither can he excommunicat without the
consent of the church: but as Peter and John were sent by the Apostles from
Jerusalem, Act. 8.14. and cap. 15.2.22.
and Paul and Barnabas from Antiochia, and Judas and Silas to Antiochia were
sent by the church: so every pastor is subject to the church and censure, as
well as other men, save only that he has an office that every man cannot
have. Then it is a slander also to say, that we make her subject to the
Pastor, for whatsoever authority any prince can have over their subjects, that
we give unto her, teaching every soul to be subject to the higher power,
neither is it to be feared which some men dream of, for we affirm not (as
god knows) that the homage that Esaias speaks of, is of any such nature,
that her royal crown and dignity should be subject to any man whatsoever,
but only unto Christ, which I am persuaded her most excellent Majesty most
freely, and of godly zeal does embrace: Namely, that Jesus Christ the Lord
of life, is Lord of Lords, and King of Kings, and that his laws are to be
preferred, before all Princes laws, and that they ought to be obedient unto
them, and not contrary. Here of it comes to pass, that her Majesty
counts it no subjection to kneel down in the presence of a minister in
prayer to God, to hear him preach, and admonish her of her duty, to deliver to
her as from god the sacraments, and by her royal authority to command and
enforce all her subjects to do the like, and in all other things to submit
them selves to the ordinance of Christ: and in doing this, her royal Majesty
does greatly honor the church, after the meaning of Esaias, who speaks in a
borrowed speech from earthly potentates, to show the obedience and honor of
Princes to Christ in the church, and their care to advance his church. So
then, heerin her highness worshipping God after his own Law, and thereby
making her self as a member of the church and not head, and reputing Christ
only for head, to whom in all things she gives homage, and taking her self
only under him as chief governor over all her people, to see every man, as well
church officers as others, to do their duty according to Gods law, having the
lawful sword to punish them that do it not, and to defend their churches in
their right, does leese no one little jot of her princely supremacye, Romans
13.1.2.
for she has the honor of the building of the Temple with Solomon, 2. Chron
2: 1. Chron. 28.11, 12.39.
to see by her royal authority every thing done according to the pattern of
God, and the Priests and Levites to take their courses as God has appointed,
2. King. 12.4 8, 9. 2. Chron. 24.4 9.
and with Ioash to command the Priests to look to the repairing of the
temple, and to proclaim in her dominions, that men shall do after the law of
Moses, and by her authority with Iehosaphat to set the Priests and Levites,
2. Chron. 19.8.
and of the chief of the families, for the judgment and cause of the Lord: and
for the establishing of her supreme magnificence above all persons, the Lord
will give unto the hearts of al sorts of people to do her commandment, and of
the rulers under her, according to the word of the Lord, as he did for the
advancement of the throne of Ezechias: 2. Chro. 30.6.12.16.
so that by his direction and commission, the Priests and Levites did
sanctify themselves, to stand in their places after the manner according to
the law of Moses the man of God. Out of all which I gather, that the
discipline hinders not, but that by her supreme authority she may compel
all the people to keep the commandment of God, and the ministers to be, and
do, after the law of Christ his son. And by her commission she may have, as
she has already, rulers and officers in every shire and great town, as
commissioners in causes Ecclesiastical, to be as it were, her eyes, ears, and
hands, to hearken after the due and orderly proceedings of the ministers,
Elderships, and Synods: to compel them to do every thing after Gods word, by
civil authority: and if need be, to punish them which handle Gods holy things
out of order, and to force the people to be obedient unto the ordinance of
Christ Jesus: so that she still shall remain over all persons, in all things
supreme gouernesse, (and her self, under none, but God in his son Jesus
Christ) in that full and royal authority, superiority, preeminence, supremacy
and prerogative, which the Laws already established do now give unto her, and
her Majesty's injunctions, and the articles of the Convocation house, and other
writings Apologeticall of her royal authority and supreme dignitye, do
declare and explane. Now I say, seeing her highness does acknowledge Christ to
be her head, and renounceth the Pope, is it not for her safety, by her
authority to set up that which remains of Christ's most holy laws, and to
bannish all the Popes cannons? May not her princely mind perceive it to be
so, if she remember that it is said of Christ: By me Kings reign, Prou.
8.15.16.
and princes decree justice: by me princes rule, and the nobles and all the
judges of the earth.

An other reason may be drawn from the common effects of the church
government. For if it be true, Christ's discipl. makes learned and good men,
therefore it is best for a monarch or king.
that a certain Politic counselor gave to a heathen Emperor, Omnes
imperiti and vitiosi, bono Principi suspecti esse debent: that a good Prince
may suspecte and stand in fear of al ignorant and wicked men: then seeing that
both heaven and earth do witness, that our sovereign is a good prince, that
church government which breeds most learned and good men is best, and surest
for her safety. What our disorders do breed all the world sees, it maintains
blind guides, how can it make a learned people? and how wicked men do
shrowde them selves under them, this one thing may stand in stead of many:
that partly by color of Law, they can so molest a good man that would teach
them and make them good, and partly by commutation of penance, licenses,
dispensations and tollerations, any evil man especially if he be rich, can
tell how to escape their slender cob-webs well enough, that men are
discouraged from presenting or dealing any way against wicked men. And let a
good minister once suffer a harlot to be presented, she is so reformed that she
will have two or three bastards on in an others neck, do the minister and the
parish what they can to the contrary. But how such should or might be scourged
out, with the through preaching of the Gospel in every church, and the good use
of the discipline of Christ, and knowledge and wisdom planted in man's heart,
it may appear by this, that for civil, wise, and good behavior, compare them
which are under continual teaching of Pastors, with them that be further
removed, you shall find a great difference. And how can it choose but nourish
learning, when the wisdom of the word shines in every church, by a standing
Pastor, and Teacher? Will it not inflame men's hearts, with the bewty thereof?
There shall you see young and old called from blindenes to light, from
wickedness to virtue and piety: must it not needs turn a great many more,
where it wants? Consider what M. Fox says of M. Thomas Bilney of Hadley,
Book of mart. page 445.
that the same church seemed in his time, rather to be like an University,
than a poor town of clothing. Tell me whether a Non-resident, or idle and dumb
minister can or has done the like? and verily when men know their duties to
her Majesty, it is the way to make them do it: but if they be not taught, how
shall they know.

But of all others, Christ's discipl. an enemy to flat terers, who spoil good
rulers.
I find that flatterers are reported of some to be most dangerous to the safty
of a prince, as in the life of Alexander the great, when he delte hardly with
them that told him the truth, and yielded to flattery, to bear the reputation
of lupiters son, he was never without one treason, or tumult or another, and
in the end, (as some esteem) poisoned. Now the disorders of our church, what
are they, but a very mass of flattery, and a pit that casts out flatterers:
for while men contrary to their own knowledge say all is well, and there is
nothing contrary to Gods word, and that by subscription and other means, they
would drive men to allow of every thing, and that this by order is so, that a
man were better to swear or lie, (which are manifest breaches of Gods moral
Law) then to break one of these traditions, is not this to make us, not only
secure, but to think that even the law of God is not comparable to ours. How
may this endanger a virtuous Prince; if the Lord by his grace did not uphold
her? Again, if it be suspected that a man do mean to speak plainly, and
truly before her Majesty, is there not order provided by our disorders and for
their maintenance, that if it be possible such shall not come in place?
Lastly, those great dignities and spiritual promotions may easilye beget
flatterers. Me thinks I see a further sore here, than I can ha^dsomely
express. I pray God to deliver her Majesty from all flattering, lying, and
deceatfull tongues.

One thing more there is which makes for the honor and safety of our noble
Lady and mistress: namely, that by this means when al things shall be
reformed by Gods word, Christ's discipline furthereth the league with religious
Princes.
as it is certain that she cannot have more hatred than she already has of the
wicked, so the Christian princes of al parts will be a great deal the surer, and
the league with them the more certain, and that which is more, many will be
drawn by her example, being a monarch, and a mighty people, to go forward in
religion: Christ's holy Discipline
for all wise and good potentates, must needs think, that this christian Lady
and Queen increases much in zeal, wisdom and courage, and her people grow
in the fear of God, and constancy in religion: therefore is it our best to
make much of her and her people, and it is a shame for us if we should not be
as forward in zeal, and as valiant in the cause of God, as a woman and maiden
Queen. How much will these and such like thoughts and speches turn to her
immortal fame, and present safty? for if it were honorable to king Josias, from
age to age, more and more to establish religion in the purity thereof: and that
Solomon was noe longer honorable and safe, then he kept the same rule: how
much more shall it be for her renown and safety, to deal more wisely then
Solomon the wisest, and to be as zealous as Josias, who was for zeal as highly
commended as ever any.

And here fall down two vain and fond reasons, Christ's discipline no hazard to
her majesty, nor Argument of inconstancy if she set it up.
that if she should reform the Church, she should be reputed inconstant, and
purchase greater hatred: for hatred, can there be greater then to seek her
life, and to rob her of her crown and dignity? this has bin sought after
(all the world knows) by hatred, and can there be greater by discipline? al
wise men will also think that inconstancy is in going backwarde, and not in
going forward. Luke 14.28.26. Psalm. 84.7. Romans 1.17.
It is inconstancy to begin abuilding and not to make an end if one be able:
and not to finish a good work well begone is inconstancye, but this is the
very nature of a christian, to grow from faith to faith from strength to
strength, and from virtue to virtue, that we may appear before GOD in Sion.

Concerning the nobillitie and comminaltye of this land, is good for Nobil. and
Com.
The third special reason.
there is a great cause both for the one and the other, to seek after
discipline as God commands it: first the one leseth a right in civil offices,
and functions, Christ's discipline gives the right to the nobility and
cominaltie.
for when it appertains not to the ecclesiastical functions to meddle with
works mere civil, as is before declared, then do they usurp upon the
temporal estate, to meddle with these callings, which must needs be an injury,
and therefore in times past (as lawyars say) there have bin diverse laws made
to bridle this insolency, and it is a matter punishable at the sessions, if
they meddle with any subject, Mast. Lambert justice of peace book. 2 cap. 4
page 338.
to call him before them or to put him to an oath, otherwise then in causes
matrimonial, and of restament, but if they do not only bear upon their
shoulder the commission of peace and other great commissions, but also in their
spiritual courts against law, call her majesty's subjects before them in
matters which pertain to the civil judges, then it does appear that such
disorderly government is not to be suffered, as a thing plainly injurious to
the nobillitie, and comminaltie: besides, that howsoever peradventure some
godly Princes have reposed great trust in such persons, yet is it a great
dishonor to the nobility and gentillitie of this land, that there could not
be wise and honest men enough found out amongst them to deal in civil
causes, but that ministers must be taken from the study of diuinitye wherewith
they ought to beautify the Church, to the study of law and executing of
commissions, for they which by the nature of their calling, and manner of
bringing up, they are most unfit. Christ's discip. affords to al sorts godly
and learned techers.
And how can a christian man delight in that government, which by the nature
thereof, will take out of his chapel a learned wise and zealous minister, whom
he knows to be honest and of good conversation, Christ's holy Discipline is
good
and maintain in other places such as are clean otherwise, may not all the
cominaltie have little delight in that dissipline, which in one year could
stop the mouths of a hundredth godly and faithful preachers, and not in thirty
years to root out thirty blind guides, otherwise then nature it self and
the mere blessing of God has afforded? Christ's discipline excomunicateth
none for trifles.
Can they delight in that which contrary to law can call them for every trifle,
and excommunicat them, which is to deliver them to the Devil, if they do not
appear? I will not here use such terms which my matter and proposition
requires, because I see the people in their wound, and it is not good to stir
and cherish an il sore, but rather to heal it, in as much as God has
appointed an other way. Therefore we lie here at her majesty's feet, craving,
begging, and humbly suing, that she would look well unto her self, tender
the honor of her nobillitie, and have compassion upon her poor people, who for
lack of Christ's holy dissipline, have great cause to doubt of her safety,
and to fear their own misery, and to suspect the present happiness.

What a godly thing were it, Christ's discipline good for children, and most
equal and just for all persons.
that the nobility and cominaltie had some help in every place by a learned
ministry, even in the infancy of their children, to breed that fear of
god, which might prevent worse matters, which we see come to pass when the
raines are laid loose in their necks, and there has bin little dissipline?
What a comfort were it that a man might be sure, no licenses could steal away
his daughter, and what ease were it for the people, and readiness to find out
the truth and perfection for justice? that in causes ecclesiastical a man might
be censured in the Church where he lives: for Nobility and Commi.
the wicked could not bear it out with changing or perjurye, neither would
the innocent be so soon oppressed (as touching the nature of the thing, I
speak not of the person) but every one should have occasion to be dealt withal
according to sight, rightly and honestly.

Now we are to consider of the times of peace and war, here one speaks
soughtly and says, The 4. special reason.
if your majesty should set up dissipline, you should have present
rebellion. What might this man have said unto Luther, a poor simple Friar,
1518.
that set up the Gospel almost under the Alps of Itallie, which remains so
steady, that all the power of princes cannot take it away: and when diverse Popes
who sought his life, and that with strong hand, died, he lived an old man and
ended his days peaceably. No reason to fear rebellion by setting up of
discipline.
In the entrance of her highness gracious reign, there was more policy in
reason, to have so objected against the setting up of the Gospel, but now God
be thanked, the case is altered, as I have before showed, I do not doubt but
that the lively faith, which her good and princely heart has in Christ Jesus,
and that royal magnanimity which she has always showed, if she might be let
to see the certain truth of the venerable doctrine of Christ's discipline,
would easily persuade her that she could not doubt, but have as good success
with this, as with the first, and the long experience of Gods merciful and
assured protection, now in a time less dangerous, would make a matter of so
great necessity, to be cheerfully sought for, and spedilye put in practice.
Moses first brought the people out of Egypt, after he declared the law, and
lastly erected the tabernacle, so I do not doubt, but as God has mightily
blessed her in the two first, The Church government of Christ
he will as greatly honor her in the last.

But me thinks this man in this case misseth the true rules of policy, The
Papists look for achaunge so long as we want Christ's holy discipline.
for where the Papists are so full of plots, is it not because they are in hope
that things will change? and why do they hope? but because they behold the
image of their father the Pope and his marks: they think he is not so gone,
but that if they did their duty, he might return. Therefore they are busy,
and many nets are spread for the feet of our inno cent Princess (whom God
bless and maintain) and engines of diverse forts are made to break in sunder
our peace. Will you be without fear? With all speed, and yet with wisdom
and understanding, set up Discipline and reformation that is amiss after Gods
book, Psalm. 122.3. and 48.5.
and you shall see their hope will be turned into fear, they will see Jerusalem
so to be built, as a City at unity in it self, that when they behold it,
they will marueill and be astonished, and suddenly driven back. Thus was it with
the people of God after their captivity: they never had quietness till Nehemias
that worthy Prince arose, who though he were never so much put in fear, that
he was driven to cause ye people to work with one hand, and hold the weapon
with the other, Nehem. 6.16.
yet he never ceased til he had finished the wall, and made all things in his
order about Jerusalem. Whereof, when all the enemies did hear, even all the
heathen that were round about, they were afraid, and their courage failed them,
for they knew that this work was wrought by God, and shall we, who by her
gracious and godly government, are brought out of the spiritual Babylon, into
the fellowship of the Citizens and saints of God, doubt more of his blessing,
if we should strive to garnishe gods City with this goodlye wall of
Ecclesiastical Discipline? maintains peace.
should not all Papists be forced to say, that the Lord has done this?
especially now, when he has so wonderfully driven back our enemies.
Iehosophat after that he had escaped in the battle where Ahab was slain,
and had been admonished by Iehu the son of Hananie the Seer, for taking part
with the wicked, gave himself to reformation, and not only in Judah, but even
from Beer sheba to mount Ephraim, he brought the people again to the Lord God
of their fathers. What followed? could there any prevail against him? No no: It
is written, that the fear of God was upon all the kingdoms of the earth, when
they had hard that ye Lord had fought against the enemies of Israel, 2. Chro.
19. and cap. 6, 20.29.30.
so the kingdom of Iehoshaphat was quiet, and his God gave him rest on every
side. Shall we think that the Lords hand is shortened, if we be as zealous as
he? Exodus 10.26.
Moses would not leave a hoof behind him in Egypt: did he speed any whit the
worse in the end? and shall we think that if some Achitophel should fortify
some wicked Absalom, to resist his liege Lady and peaceable mother; that God
would not stir up a thousand Hushais to overthrow all his counsels?

Let us remember wherein our peace consists, and the strength thereof: is it
not in serving of God, and walking in his commandments, and putting our trust
in his mercy? Then must we take heed of all those Baalamites, who under
pretense of preventing rebellion, give crafty counsel for the devil: to make
us careless, in our duty toward God, that when we refuse to go forward,
we might fall backward: and then God proclaim war against us and say, if
they will not obey, The Church Government of Christ
Ierem. 12.17. Esaias 57.21. 2. Kin. 12.27.
then will I utterly destroy and pluck up that nation. And again, there is no
peace to the wicked says my God. So was it with Jeroboam, who to establishe
his kingdom over the ten tribes to himself and his posterity: he altered the
precepts of God and made two Calves, the one in Dan, and the other in Bethell,
least the people going up to worship at Jerusalem after Gods law, should
rebel and fall away from him: but this turned to be such a sin, that it
rooted out his house, and many other houses after him, and in the end, the
whole ten tribes, whereof he was king, were spued out of that land, so
dangerous athing it is to choose that policy, which is against gods law and
commandment.

Now in peace as one says, Christ's Discipline is for the wealth and honor
of the realm.
small things are made great, riches and honor are multiplied. Let us see
whether these disorders do not maintain the contrary, I cannot say but God
has blessed us in our peace with both, and yet I must say, that the state of
our churches and church government is rather a hinderer. First there lacks
that orderly seeing to the poor which were expedient, and men for the most
part are left to them selves, so that by idleness and liberty, great pouettie
are among us, which fall into many noisome things, which might very well be
amended by Christ's discipline. Secondlye there are among us, suffered and
nourished by order in Cathedral churches a cloister of idle men, who living
upon the goods of the Church and Common wealth, do little or no service for the
same. It is a heavy burden in a common wealth to suffer men to live in
pleasure and ease like oxen in a stall, to do almost no labor. For most of
these (I will not say all) do little or nothing, as by the nature of this order
they are occasioned: Is not this to be amended? they will say they are rewards
of learning, but it is scarce good policy (as I take it) that when men have
learning, they should be maintained to idleness, and put their learning to no
use. But they do preach, that is to say, some of them sometimes do preach,
and some do hier others to preach for them. But to look nearly to the thing,
one man may do as much as all the orders of the house (in the place of the
house) do require. Then if one of necessity should be there, all the rest of
the livings might well be spared for the helping of churches which have small
livings, and to further the increase of learning.

But as touching honor, it may be that they would say, that we should loose
one estate, and so the Commonwealth decayed in wealth and honor. The honor
of a Commonwealth stands, not in an estate which is of an other nature, but
in the honorable and wise carriage of true Commonwealth men, counselors,
Judges, Justices and Captains. Now when their living should be employed to
better uses, it would be a greater honor, and riches of more profitable
increase. This would (say they) turn to the damage of the common treasure,
which by first fruits in the remove of L.Bb. and Cathedral Prelates, is
somewhat augmented. Not a whit: for if it were so that the money should be
carried out of the land, as in times past it has bin to that powling City of
Rome, then it were something that were said, but seeing it is to be bestowed
in the land, it can be no loss. For in the conuaiance, that benefit might be
reserved: yet I pray you, how did out treasure hold out, when that a great
deal more was wanting, which has come in within these 80. years. If our
forefathers in blindness, thought nothing to much for the Churches advancement,
neither almost had any end in giving their lands and goods that way, shall we
think that God cannot another way bless us as much, if we parted from alitle,
for the competent and decent erecting of his ministry? but God be thanked, the
Commonwealth (as I hope) may the rather be increased: for if things be wisely
handled, the Ministry may be well and decently maintained, and yet there will
arise such a portion of good lands, to be bestowed at her Majesty's pleasure,
as may make a large recompense by a yearly certainty, and this will be a
great deal more honor to our Commonwealth, to have Gods house well and
rightly built, and his servants comely entertained, then for the making of one
L.B. unnecessarily, there should be a hundredth Bb. beside to the realm, 1.
Tim. 3.1.
as poor almost as beggars. It would be more honor and wealth to the realm,
then to maintain a sort of idle, red or blew coats, to have in every parish, an
honest, and learned B. who in a competent living would feed the poor, and by
giving and lending, keep many a good Subject in heart, that he might be able
to serve his Prince in time of need.

In time of peace, Christ's discipline cutteth of contention.
a great waster of prosperity is contention and strife, and many houses lie
wast by such inordinate iarring and suites of law: here to let pass how many
suits are bred and fed by these disorders, as about aduowsons, privileges and
presentiments. This one thing will show the excellency of discipline, for the
wealth of the Realm and quiet of subjects, that the Church is to censure such
a party, who is apparently troublesome and contentious, and without reasonable
cause, and upon a mere will and stomach does vex and molest his brother, and
trouble the country. And the daily showring dew of the preaching of peace,
will bring forth many counselors of peace, and many, when they see that such
a thing is vncomlie, and to be answered before the Church, will be well
advised what suits they take in hand. Thus when the authority of the Church
and good preaching, cutteth asunder the cords of discord, men must needs
increase in wealth, and so at all times shall be able to bear any burden
that the Commonwealth shall require, and this will be a great deal better,
then if the treasure lay unprofitably and without use in Coffers, and to the
honor of the Realm far more excellent, when men shall be in all places,
found able to relieve themselves and other.

Now as concerning wars, The 5. special reason.
we may learn of the children of this world, that it is the best policy to
advance the Lords holy Discipline, and that as well in the preparation for
war, as in the time of war it self. This does altogether further our estate.
The Bb. of Rome have Seminaries erected, for the training up of young men in
their abominable errors, out of which, as out of the dragons mouth, there go
these unclean frogs the Jesuits and Seminary Priests, who go about as it were,
by night closely and secretly croking, at the consciences of her Majesty's
subjectes, to bring them from their dutiful obedience and subjection. Now in
war it is an ordinarye pollicye to have a countermine, because the enemy
most commonly uses to undermine where he cannot well come nere in fight. So
if we had Discipline, and every Parish his learned Pastor, these creeping
crokers would be so narrowly looked unto, Discipline after Gods word
Christ's discipline forest aleth all sedition and rebellion.
that they could not have any hole to hide their heads: and the people, would
be so well instructed in the knowledge of God in Christ Jesus, and of their duty
to their true Sovereign, that all the frogs in those moorish Seminaries, should
not be able once to move them, and by this means, so prepared for war, if
need be, that whereas now there go a great many only with their bodies, and
some only of a natural love to their Country, then would they go with a
resolute judgment, and of conscience to God, they would willingly do any
service, and that, which in this case is not small, they would not so easily
be drawn after any great man, or mean man, to sedition and rebellion. For
how ignorant men, are like children carried with every wind, all state men do
understand. Therefore, seeing as is already proved, and al men by too too
lamentable experience may know, that the nature of our Church government, as
it is now imperfect, does very slowly bring forth, true resolute christian men
of knowledge: we may easily perceive, that it is dangerous for the state to
suffer it in the Commonwealth, and to let the church be over run with such
careless and blind guides.

Besides this, Quietness in charges for war comes by Christ's holy discipline,
and wiling soldiers.
when men have knowledge and understanding, what is fit for Gods glory, and
their duty at such a time: they will not murmr and grudge at every trifling
charge, which comes to pass, for the supply of the wars, but willingly
and cherefully, do any thing that may become good Subjects, in cases of
necessity: But what I see both in this, and in the other for lack of good
teachers, makes my heart to bleed, and my pen cannot utter. Whereof think
you, was it that Abraham ha in his house, 318. men, so ready at an hours
warning, is good against war.
Genesis 14.14. and 18.19.
to go with him to pursue them which had taken Lot, but by the good instruction
and Discipline of his house, which he is commended for to have, according to
Gods ways? What made the Reubenites, the Gaddites, and the half tribe of
Manasses, so willingly to leave their wives and Children, on the hither side of
Jorden, and to go before their brethren against Canaan, Josh. 1.12.
and to bind themselves on pain of death, every man to be obedient to Joshua,
and to go whither so ever he would send them? Was it not because they knew the
Lord, and that Joshua was appointed by him, The keeping of Gods orders good for
warlike provision. 1. King. 10.26.
to be their governor? was there ever king provided more royally of al store
of good things, for peace and for war, then Solomon? Was there any at any time,
that did more advance Gods ordinances, then he did in the time, he got all
this abundance? Who went forward more in all prosperity, and in all plenty and
provision for war, then Vziah, so long as he sought the Lord God, in the dais
of Zechariah that understood the vision of God? but when his heart was lifted
up, and he presumed to break the order that God had appointed in his Church,
he became a pitiful leaper, and so for his transgression, lost his great
honor, which he had of the Lord. 2. Chron. 26.
See then, that it is good policy, for provision of good and faithful
soldiers, and all manner of store of munition, for honorable service in war,
to follow gods word, and his ordinances in the governing of our churches.

In war it self, there is nothing more needful, Christ's discipline best to
make soldiers obedient.
then faithful obedience, which where can it be more truly found, either in
Captain, or common soldier, then where the conscience is catechized in the
ways of the Lord: which if it be wrought by this, in the things of
preparation, it will be also as firm in the very time of war it self: I
will not say, but some thing is, and may be done, as the state of the Church
now stands, for God be thanked, there be diverse good Preachers: but the
question is, of the best and surest policy: If now then by a few, much good
is done, what would it be, if every congregation were rightly informed, and
truly reformed? a thousand to one.

In war unto obedience, Cotage and patience, by Christ's discipline.
there is to be linked courage and patience, courage to bear the assault of
the enemy, his force and terror of warlike weapons, and patience to endure all
distresses, pennury and scarcity. Now if men be not well resolved by good
knowledge of their duty, they will fly, for fear of the one, and fall to
mutinies, for grief in the other. Therefore if there be in every congregation,
a worthy teacher, he will be able so to prepare theit hearts, that they shall
stand immooueable, with liuelines of spirit, to go through the one, and with
modest quietness to go under the other: which thing, is not possible to be,
where the order of the Church, suffers or fostereth so many unfit and raw
scholars, which have more need to be taught, then to teach others.

Again, the presence of an honest, wise, and grave Minister (the Captains can
tell) does more then many fresh water soldiers do think, especially in
extremity, for he shall sweetly comfort them in grief, mightily imbolden them
in fear, meekly stay them in rage, and prudently prevent many evils. Hereof
was it, that Ioab, that valliant warrior, when he was beset before and
behind, by the Aramites and Amonites, having divided his army, ^.Sam. 10.9.
and set his battle in array, could and did use these words of encouragement:
be strong, and let us be valiant for our people, and for the cities of our God:
and let the Lord do that which is good in his eyes. Hereof was it, that when
Saneherib, king of A shur, besiedged Jerusalem with a mighty host, and sent
his servants to rail upon God, and to make weak the hands of the people: 2.
Cron. 32. Esaias. 36.
There was great silence by the servants of Hezekiah that godly king, and no
man stirred, for he had caused them to be instructed in the ways of the Lord.

Last of al, Ordering the Church aright brings strength and victory in war.
that you might know how good a policy it is, for strength and victory in war,
to have the church ordered aright, with the proper offices, and proper works,
namely what courage it may work, and what good success it may bring in the
end, consider well the battle which Abijath the son of Rehoboam had with
Jeroboam the son of Nebat. The first being king of Judah brings into the
field, 400000. able figh ting men, the other being king of Israel had 800000.
valiant men of war. Abijath setting his men in array, 2. Cron. 13.
calls unto Israel, and admonishes them to remember that they had forsaken
their God, and therefore should not prosper: amongst other things he comes
to this present point: and says: Have you not driven away the Priests of the
Lord, the sons of Aaron and the Levites, and have made you priests like the
people of other countries, etc. And again, but we belong to the Lord our God,
and have not forsaken him, and the priests the sons of Aaron minister unto
the Lord, and the Leuits in their offices, etc. and again. Behold, this God is
with us as a Captain, and his priests with the sounding trumpets to cry alarm
against you. O ye children of Israel, fight not against the lord God of your
fathers, for you shall not prosper. Lo here what courage, and confidence, the
true order of Gods ministry may breed and bring forth. in the day of a
dangerous battle, let us hear the success. Jeroboam caused an ambush to
compass Judah behind, so that the battle was behind and before: but the men
of Judah cried unto the Lord, the priests blew the trumpets, and the people gave
a shoute: and the men of Israel fled before them, and were slain with an
exceeding greatslaughter, so that there fell down wounded of Ifrael, 500000. of
chosen men, and Israel was brought under, and Judah prevailed, because they
stayed upon the lord God of their fathers. Oh happy success: oh wonderful
victory, blessed is that people who can follow this example, to reform
themselves after Gods law, and to order the churches with these holy
administrations, and sanctified works which God has appointed, and to leave
the proud, antichristian, profane, unclean, lame, blind offices and
officers, of countries estranged from God, and the unholy and defiled rites and
ceremonies of the unrighteous Babylon, from whence we are returned unto the
city of the living God.

Let us now look unto the church, The fixed special reason of the Church.
and see whether al be well and safe: namely whether it were not better and
safer to have reformation after Gods word: the Church is called Gods house, 1.
Tim. 3.15. 1. Cor. 12.28. Cap. 4.1. Heb 5 4. Mat. 25.14. 1. Cor 12.6. 1. Pet
4.10. 1. Cor. 11.23. Act. 20.27.
the ministers are Gods stewards, set in by him, and noe man is to take this
honor except he be called, and those he puts in office have talents, these
work the works of God, both to speak the oracles of God, and to minister of
the ability which God ministers, delivering that which they receue of the
Lord, and teaching the whole counsel of God that the church may observe
whatsoever Christ has commanded, Mat. 28.20. 1. Tim. 6.14.
and that without spott and unrebukable until the appearing of our Lord Jesus
Christ. When therefore it is already declared, and al men may see that many
offices, works, and rites, are added to that of Christ's out of the house of
Antichrist, and that many of these, want that which Christ has appointed, and
that the house of God is daubed with untempered mortar of man's devise, with hey
and stubble not agreeing with the foundation, and that the church is his
truespouse, and with us is maimed, Christ many ways calls us to reform out
churches after his word.
in many members, and her nakedness and wounds covered, with the filthy and
stinking clouts and patches borrowed of that damnable whore of Rome, Christ's
mortal enemy. I cannot tell how it can be safe for our churches if they be
not reformed, for if we be the temple of God, and he dwells among us, 2.
Cor. 6.26.
we are to know, that he calls us to come out of Babylon, and to separate
our selves, and to touch noe unclean thing that he may receive us: and if we
suffer our lord Christ to stand and knock at our doors, Cantie. 5.2.
as it is said in the Canticles, til his head be full of dew, and his locks
with the drops of the night: and we as half a sleep and half a wake, are
loath to go out of our warm beds, to put one our clothes, and to foul our
feet: it may come to pass, that when we would open unto him, he will be gone,
and when we shall seek him, we shall not find him, and call for him, and he not
answer: and that counterfeit watchmen, of the wicked Sinagogue, shall find
us, and beat us, as in times past, and take away the veil of Christ from us:
then will we think, that it had been better to have been zealous, and opened
unto him, that he might have come in, Reave. 3.20.
and supped with us, and we with him.

To leave out all other things, Christ's orders, taught in the gospel,
Christ's church government, best for unity and honor of the ministry.
especially, because they are partly contained in the former reasons: there are
two things, that men marueilously stand upon, for the upholding of this
Antichristian lordlines, and usurpation of Church government: the dignity of
the Ministry, and the unity of the Church: two things of very great weight,
whereof the one is so great, that every minister ought to look very carefully
to it, studying to show himself approved, a workman that needs not to be
ashamed, 2. Tim. 2.15. Titus 2.15.
dividing the word of truth aright: speaking, exhorting, and rebuking withal
authority: the other is such, that if it be not looked unto, the contrary
thereof, is the ruin and downfall of the Church, Oala. 5.15.
as it is written: if you bite and devour one another, take heed least you be
consumed, one of another. Now say they, if there were not L.Bb. the pore
ministers would be borne down, and made no account of, but they are a
countenance and defense unto them, and whereas, every one would be master,
and do as they list, by them, men are kept in awe, and things are made quiet:
therefore you know not what you do, when you go about to pull them down.
Surely, a goodly show at the first sight, but not such as will abide the breath
of God. Is not Christ sufficient, that has promised to be with his servants
unto the worlds end, to countenance and defend his ministry, as well as he did
three hundredth years together, when all the power of earthly authority was
against it, and shall he need now a devise which he long since forbad: saying,
it shall not beso with you, but he that will be gretest, let him be your
servant, Luke 22.25.
especially, when he has reared up the christian magistrate, to be a
nurse-mother to his church, and to defend all the ministers for well doing, be
best for the churches safty.
as she does all other subjects in their callings: and is not Christ by his
own order, as well able to keep his church in unity, as by that which he
abhorred: and may not also the civil sword (if need require) help to bridle
the insolent and unruly?

But in very deed, these men are greatly deceived, who think, that either
unity, or good ministers, are furthered by their lordships: for as their
callinges are not of God, so they countenance such as are like them selves,
corrupt offices and works, Cathedral churches, non-residence, pluralities,
dumb Idol ministers, etc. These, if they subscribe, and show them selves
conformable, though they slay never fo many souls, shall be borne out and
countenaunced to the utmost. I would we had not too lamentable experience: what
a countenance is this? that though a man live neuerso honestly-preach Christ
never so soundly, wisely, and profitably, yet if he answer not their
expectation, in that bastardly government, and canonical obedience, he shall
be as much regarded, as though he were the vilest man alive: and I would it
were not true, that very wicked men are maintained, while good men are put out,
and can any thing be more to the contempt of the Ministry and rent of the
church, and making of seisme, then when men are quiet, and follow their
calling, with great care of the peace of the church, they should be called
forth to subscribe, to humain constitutions, as unto the book of God: and
without due time of examination, consideration, and resolution, to be suspended
or deprived, and tossed from court to court, what can make the gospel more
hated, then to see bad fellows, and dumb Idols to be set free, with credit and
commendacion, and they that have won many to the fear of God, English books,
seen and allowed,
and duty to her Majesty, by diligent preaching: even against the law of God
and man, to be entangled with troubles, torn and turmoiled with diverse
molestations.

And is this the fruit of unity, that is pretended? to begin the quarrel
with the quiet, and to pursue it with all violence, to make them, who in town
and country were very greatly at unity, took sweet counsel together, for the
profiting of the church, to be now sundred as strangers? O Lord deliver my
soul from such honor and unity, and deliver thy pore servants from such
bondage and contempt, and thy Churches from such reptoches and disturbance.

But if these disorders were removed, and Christ's Discipline planted, where
were all these mischiefs? they would be thrown into the bottom of the Sea:
then would be the glory and beauty of the ministry, in the true work of every
calling, and the power of the spirit, Christ's Discip. takes away the causeof
contention, etc.
which accompanies the same: then would be the unity of the Church, when their
causes of contention should be taken away, and the house of God, joined and
built with the right stuff and gold of God, and Gods grace in the midst of
it. Then should the Papist quail, to see the glory of Christ's kingdom: then
should the Annabaptist wail, that he has abused Gods people: Then should the
Atheist be forced to stand amazed, at the wonderful brightness of the chaste
and holy spouse of God, looking forth, as the morning, Cantic. 6.9.
fair as the moon, pure as the sun, terrible, as an army with banners: For
this I hope, all deuines will grant me, All disorder and scisme, by breaking
Christ's orders.
that there never was, or can be in the church, by the members thereof, any
dishonor, scisme, disorder, or disquietnes, but by the breach of the law, and
order of Christ: whereof, teach Christ's discip. for our sasty
in all the complaints of Gods spirit, you shall find these, and such like
phrases. Divisions and discensions, Romans 16.7. 1. Cor. 11.18.22. 2. These. 3.14.
Gal. 16.16 cap. 1.7.5.8 Math. 15.6.9.
contrary to the doctrine ye have received. I have received of the Lord, that
which I also delivered unto you. Withdraw your selves from every brother, that
walks in ordinatly, and not after the instruction which he received of us.
As many as walk acording to this rule, peace shall be upon them. 2. Tim. 4.3.
It is not the persuasion of him that calls you, Revel. 3.14.20
you have made the commandment of God of no authority by your traditions: and
such like: therefore I may boldly hold, Jude. 3.4.
that Christ's Church government is best for the Church every way, and namely
for the honor and unity thereof.

And here I most humbly beseech the reverend fathers, by the mercies of God our
father, An humble speech to the Bb.
by the consolation which is in Christ lesus our Savior, and by the fellowship
of the spirit, by whom we be renewed, setting apart, al affection to
themselves, and faction with others, in a simple and single eye, to consider
these few things. First, that seeing by themselves, in their public sermons,
and writings, and other books, set forth with authority and privilege: The
seekers of reformation, may learn, Sermons of Thomas, B. of Lincoine page 5
that the government and direction by Gods word, prevails more, than any
devise of man: and that there are infinite examples, of unarmed men, who
obeying gods commandments, have scatered the most puissant armies of the
infidels, Antimartinus page 26.
and of most mighty Emperors, who for mingling sometime, and sometime changing
the precepts of the Lord, with their inventions, have com under most vile
bondage: And yt where the people are not taught, they can not serve God, the
Prince is not so dutifully obeyed, the rebellion in the North is proof of
that. D. Some in his treatise of deciding certain questions. pa. 8 D. Bilson
in his defense of the Queens supremacy part 2. page 233.
And that this authority which you have, was not ordained by the commandment
of Christ, for his Apostles, but by sufferance of other Bb. and that only with
this prerogative, that in all doubts of doctrine or discipline Archbb. and
patriarks might assemble the rest of their brethren, or consult them with
letters, and see that ob. served which the most part of them determined. Luther
on 1. Pet. 5. ver. 2.
So that the Bishops are greater, then Ministers or Elders, rather by custom,
then by any truth of the Lords appointment, and ought to govern the church in
common, M. Nowelin his Catechism fol. 40 B.
and that there is described out of Gods word, a certain order of governance
and form of Ecclesiastical discipline, which ought to be observed in every
Church, if it be well ordered: which by desire of impunitie, and liberty to
sin, is long since decayed. And seeing we have most plainly and perfectly
teaching, the whole discipline out of the word of god, and ancient writers, and
Cannons of the Church, translated into the English tongue. Peter Martirs
Common-places, Caluins-Institutions, Bullingers Decads, Bezaes confessions, the
Apoligie of the Protestants of France, and diverse others: Whereof, some I have
seen lying openly to be read in some of your great chambers, some are commanded
to be studied, by the unlearned ministry, Keeping out of Christ's Discrpline,
little comfort to the Bb.
and all printed with public allowance. Here I say, you are to consider,
whether it be equal and just, for you to do contrary to your doctrine: to
punish others for seeking humbly, that reformation in Discipline, which by your
means, they have learned to be according to Gods word. or what comfort you
can have in your consciences, (if God should but a little call you to account)
to stand so stiff for that, you cannot but confess to be of man's custom,
against that which was of Christ's institution. And lastly, whether you can be
said to have a care of the safety of her Majesty, and the good flourishing
estate of this land, especially now, when God calls us unto repentance and
reformation by many troubles, when you do so aegerly fight for that, which made
the mighty Emperors, vile slaves, and that against such a thing, as made the
naked men great conquerours.

Secondly, seeing that now thirty years, taking upon you, the governing of
all the Churches in England, you have put out more godly, Little good in 30.
years by all our Bb. governing.
learned, and zealous Ministers, for your own traditions: then you have
removed, of other unfit and ungodly, for breaking Gods commandments: and
that S. Paul having but a while preached at Creta, an Island of an hundredth
Cities, left Titus there after his departure, to set all things in order, and
namely, a learned ministry in every City, Titus 2.5. cap. 3.12.
(and that without help of the civil Magistrate) appointing him to stay but
till winter, and then to come to him to Nicapolis. Consider I beseech you, that
in so many winters and summers, in this little Island, you have done so little
good, and cry out still, it is impossible to have a learned Ministry, when
you have the most renowned Prince in the world for religion, to back you with
civil power and countenance. As it is to her immortal fame, to give you this
liberty and authority, thinking it not to much to aduanceyou to great dignity
and honor: so, wey with your selves, what may be thought of you, that have so
meanly discharged the great trust committed unto you.

Thirdly, where you say, that the godly seekers of reformation, The Bb.
disturbers
The godly seekers of reformation, contend not for trifies.
contend about trifles, (which is not so) and that they ought not for small
matters, to disturb the peace of the Church, and provoke her Majesty.
Consider I pray you: whether that, when you do so earnestly stand to maintain
them, and are not as earnest against the greater offenses, suffering thousands
of souls to perish, by ignorant ministers and non-residents, you tithe not
mint, and leave out the weighty matters of the law, and whether you ought not
for the peace and good of the Church, to yield to your brethren, Genesis 13.8.9.
in that you count small matters (as Abraham did to Lot) especially, seeing
youcannot deny, but that they seek that which God commands, and refuse that
which is of man's ordinance, and that, not as new fangled heads, and singular,
but with the agreement and consent of most approved, both old and new
writers, and as most reformed Churches have also determined and practiced.
Consider I beseech you herein, whether the word of God went from you, 1. Cor.
14.36.
or came only unto you, and that when in so many years, you have found these
things to be inconvenient, The Bb. make themselves slaves to their own orders.
it were not your duty, to do as the Apostle says, that in lawful things,
which were not profitable, he would not be brought in subjection unto any
thing, 1. Cor. 6.12.
which while you neglect: Consider I pray you, whether it be not you, that
disturb the peace of the Church, and provoke the good and peaceable mind of
our gracious Sovereign, against your brethen, and that you have not need to
take heed, least the master of the house come suddenly upon you, and find you
beating your fellows, Math. 24.49.
and separate you, etc.

Lastly, whereas you mistrust some Machiauilian plot, by deep sleights, to
maintain this contention, for the bringing forth of diverse mischiefs,
Admonition to the people of Eug by T.C. page. 155. Antimartin. page 24.25.
noisome to religion and godliness, and hurtful to your selves. Consider I
beseech you, whether it be not in you to prevent it: For if you would leave
discountenauncing of your brethren, for that which you call small matters, and
join with them in humble suite to her Majesty, It is in the Bb. to remedy
many mischiefs.
to take away all the stumbling blocks of offense, or at least wise, obtain
some godly toleration, if you would not leave your brethren, nay oppose your
selves, exprofesso, against them, and have your ears so open to popish
information, and malicious accusation, and force them by oath, to be their own
accusers. Luke. 6.26.
If you could see what it is, to be so highly commended, by open recusants,
and desperate Atheists, and that the worser sort of people, under the shadow
of your proceedings, begin to make an head, and to be strong against the
gospel, and the sincere professors thereof: you might easily cut in sunder,
and break to powder, all the pollitike reaches which you fear: For what is
it, that the joined labors of faithful brethren might not do? But when you
make light of these things, wey with your selves I pray you, whether you have
not great cause to suspect, your own inconsiderat doings, and to fear, if God
prevent it not, your dealing with your brethren (as Eliab with David) be not
voluntary instruments of your own overthrow, 1. Sam. 17.28.
and of the gospel, while you weaken your selves, by cutting of from you, your
faithful brethren, by unjust separation, and that (which many men bewail,
when they behold the increase of your gifts, and other your dealinges)
whither it be not fulfilledin you, which is prophesied against them that teach
the fear of God by men's precepts, namely, a strange work and a wonder: The
wisdom of the wise shall perish, Esaias. 29.13.14
etc. I pray God give us all grace, that we be not wayward conceited, and
opiniate by contention and vain glory, provoking one another, and envying one
another, but that our care may be united to tender the young lambs, for whom
Christ Jesus our Lord and Savior, did shed his most precious blood.

Seeing then, The end of the special reasons.
that the Discipline of Christ, does most properly teach every soul to execute
and practice good laws, both for the constant doctrine, continually taught,
and also for the Eldership being at hand, without charge of penance, reforming
the disobe dient, and that the other government ministers less able men, and
practices the censures a far of, by a person unfit, with change of penance,
and that wicked men, love this, and hate that, and that this keeps out good
men, and that helps them in: seeing, by the orders of Christ, the Queens
safty is best provided for, being a thing of obedience unto prosperity: and by
it, all the helps of Antichrist be removed, and the other orders, have alwais
hurt the lawful authority of princes, and to be chief B. in one country, is
all one, as to be chief Bishop in one Empire, and these have hurt kings, as
well as our Popes the Emperor: and that by the common law and these offices,
there is a hope left, for the deadliest enemy to her Majesty to enter in, and
that papists (who in conscience can never be true, nor by rewards be made
faithful) are fit for such offices, to cover themselves and others, that for
lack of teaching, and by licenses, the breed of Papists is not hindered,
neither can the doubtful be every where resolved, and that Christ's laws do
take away all these, and make faithful and obedient subjects, keeping out the
recusants, and bewraying the Jesuits, and that the ill orders do hardly entreat
the doers of such good works and that Christ's Discipline, does give all kings
their just titles, prerogatives, and dignities over all persons in their
dominions, and that in all causes, keeping out al ignorant, wicked, and
flattering men, making strong yt league with christian Princes, to her immortal
fame, and fear to the enemy, seeing that by this holy discipline of GOD, the
Nobility and Comminalty have their right: are freed from diverse wrongs and
disturbances, receiving comfort to themselves, and their children, being
terrible to the wicked, and easy to the godly: seeing that by Discipline,
there can be no fear of rebellion, but a sure confirmation of peace, when all
hope shall be taken away from the known adversary of recovering strength in
this Land, beholding the Lords hand to prosper this work, and that the Lord
shall not be provoked against us, for our disobedience: and that by this, the
wealth and honor of the realm are increased, and contentions, and brawles,
and unnecessary pleas prevented and alaied: and that idle men, of all sorts,
might be set in order, and poor men greatly comforted. Seeing that this makes
best for war, as in the preparation to prevent all seducers of the dutiful
subject, and by instruction, to make men resolute, in the right, so that they
will not be drawn after great or small, nor murmr at any pains, or charges
reasonable, but be always willing, ready, and cheerful to serve her Majesty:
and that GOD has given them great store of munition, and faithful soldiers,
who followed his ordinance, and punished the contrary, and that in the war it
self, it makes courage to fight, and patience to bear extremities, united to
just obedience of the Magistrate, Church-gouerne. after gods word
making Princes in time of danger bold and confident, and in the end victorious.

Lastly, seeing that Christ has ordained all manner of offices and works of
his Church, for the right ordering and establishing thereof: and therefore it
is unnecessary, and an ungodly thing, provoking Gods anger to defile it with
the things of Antichrist, and that Christ does call us to repentance, and that
he has promised sufficiently to defend his Church in honor and unity, by his
own order and means by him appointed, and has added for that purpose, the
civil Magistrate, and that by these disorders, all dishonor to the good
Ministry, and disturbaunce to the Church has been broched, and never any
dishonor, confusion, or disquietnes, did or can come to the Church, by the
members thereof, but by violating the sacred law of Christ. I beseech, and
humbly move your honors to consider, whether it be not the best and surest
policy, for our estate in England, to reform all disorders after the word
of God, and to set up that Church government which Christ has ordained, and
the Apostles practiced and no other.

Now, The last proof taken from the judgment of Christ.
if in civil policy, all that I said were nothing, (which I am verily
persuaded is not so) yet unto Christians, there is further matter, and more
reason for upholding of that discipline which God ordained For we by profession
(if we be not counterfeit) by belief also of the heart, Romans 10.9. 1. Tim.
4.8.
look not only to have promises of this life, 2. Cor. 5.10.
by Christ our Lord and savior, but also of the life to come, and do know that
we shall all appear before the seat of Christ, Act. 10.42.
who shall come again to take account of his servants, and of every man, Romans
2.6.
and render unto every one according to the works which he has done in his
body, either good or bad, is best against the great day.
and that these are to be judged by the law of God, Iam. 4.12.
and not of man: Therefore, when we know these things are the commandments of
God, 1. Cor. 14.37. Romans 16.26. 1. Tim. 1.9.10 11. Gal. 5.21.
and that such as continue obstinate in the breach thereof, without repentance,
shall not inherit the kingdom of heaven: it were not good policy for us to
obtain a little peace, wealth, honor, and ease in this world, Luke. 16.25. Romans
2.9. 1 Cor. 9.25.27.
to purchase al misery, disquietnes, anguishe, shame and torment in the world
to com, for love of our bodies, to leese both body and soul: for an earthly
crown, to leese a heavenly, Heb. 11.25.
for the pleasures of sin for a season, 2. Cor. 4.17.
to leese the pleasures of the righteous God for ever, and to avoid a light and
momentany affliction among men, to leese an eternal and exceeding weight of
glory: Revel. 6.15.16.17.
when kings of the earth, great men, rich men, and the chief Captains, the
mighty men, and every bond man, and free man shall covet to hide them selves in
the great and terrible day from the lamb: when he that has not on the
wedding garment shall be speechless, Math. 22.12. cap. 25.26.28. cap. 24.48.
Revel. 19.20.
and the evil servant and slothful, shall have his tallent taken from him,
and such as think he will defer his coming, and begin to smite his
fellows, and eat and drink with the drunken, shall be cut off and cast into
utter darkness: when the beast and the false Prophet shall be taken and cast
alive into the lake of fire, burning with brimstone, and all unclean things
whatsoever, cap. 21.10.27.
works abomination or lies, cap. 22.18.
shall be kept out of the holy and heavenly Jerusalem, and they that add or
take away from Gods book: 2. These. 1.7.
shall have the plagues therein written, and leese their part in the book of
life, when the lord Jesus shall show himself from heaven, with his mighty
angels, in flaming fire, rendering vengeance unto them that do not know God,
and which obey not the gospel of our Lord Jesus Christ, which shall be
punished with everlasting perdition, from the presence of the Lord, and the
glory of his power, when he shall come to be glorified in his saints, and to be
made marvelous in the^ that believe: Luke. 16.29. Math. 17.5.
then shall it be found the best and surest policy, to have heard Moses and
the prophets, Ephesians. 2.20.
ye beloved son of god: then shall it be known that the temple of the Lord is
built upon the foundation of the apostles and prophets, cap. 4.11.12.13.
Jesus Christ being the chief corner stone: and that he has given gifts for
the gathering together of the saints, for the work of the ministry, and for
the edification of the body of Christ, til we all meet together, in the unity
of faith, and knowledge of the soon of God unto a perfect man, and unto the
measure of the age of the fulness of Christ.

Now, The second part of ye book answering the objection, of provision for
the learned ministry.
while we of good and single meaning, open the necessity of reformation,
other which never peradventure deserved any thing of the Commonwealth, stand
gaping to run away with the spoils, of such goods as may be well bestowed,
upon the great need of many churches. I have thought good therefore, partly,
because it may appear, that in this style, I shout not against any man's
person, or envy or desire his goods: and partly, because it seems amongst
many, to be a great objection: how sufficient livings should arise, How living
may be had for a leathed ministry is a great objection
for the maintenance of a learned Ministry: and especially, that it is high
time to consider of it, before that by leasing, chopping, and changing of such
things as might supply the want, it be made in deed a hard matter, which as
yet, may very well and easily be done. I have thought good (I say) and
appertaining to this treatise, to show a way how, the Churches, may have
sufficient living for an able ministry, wherein as in the rest: I only make an
humble motion, and as it were, the light opening of a window, put your
wisdoms in mind of this thing, which I take to be one principal matter,
worthy consideration, knowing that with far more deepnes of judgment, and
soundnes of counsel, you are able to enlarge, either where it wants, or to
cut of where it abounds.

Two things in this, I hope I shall not need to stand upon, that is, first
to show that there are many mean livings for ministers, partly by
impropriations, and partly by the littlenes or situation of the parishes, Many
means livings for ministers.
for this is in the knowledge of al men very clear, that there are diverse
liuinges, that are not worth above 20. marks yearly, some twenty pounds, which
come nothing near that competency, that were fit for the man of God: who in
this last age, not having gifts extraordinary, is driven to study much, and
thereby his charges be increased, by buying of books and order of diet and some
thing for the decensy of that calling, would be considered in the comlines of
aparrell and householde, that it be not contemptible, and lastly, 1. Tim. 3.2.
it is required, that he should keep hospitallity, all which, by many degrees
cannot come so low as twenty marks or twenty pound, as if we look upon the
proportion of Gods provision under the law, which the holy Ghost teaches to be
our pattern 1. Cor. 9.8.9.10. Ministesought to have very good maintenance.
Number. 38. and 28
it may appear: there shall we find, that for the maintenance of the
Ministry, they had not only the tenthes and convenient dwelling places, but
even all the first fruits, and of all offeringes of diverse sorts, and they
were bound to three feasts every year, (besides every new moon and
Sabbath) wherein every male was to appear before the Lord, How a learned
ministry may have
Deuteronomy. 15. and 16 and 12 Leuit. 23.
but he might not come empty: yetin al these, and many mo charges, they
prospered, though it seemed never so chargeable, so long as they willingly
served God after his order, and for so much as our land, by the blessing of
God, may well be accounted among the fertile and rich soiles of the world: I
hope we are not so ungrateful, as to recompense God, with a vile and base
entertainment of his servant, understanding very well, 1. Cor. 4.11.
that it is a small matter, that the Minister should reap carnal things of
them, upon whom they sow spiritual things.

The other thing, which I trust I shall not need to stand upon is this: that
seeing there is need, and that very great, that the ministry should be better
pro uided for: It were the duty of the Common wealth, to convert those things
(which by their foundation were first meant and ordained for the service of God,
The Church livings are to be bestowed one the ministers.
and now have been, and are in the opinion of al men bestowed to that use) in
the time of reformation, should be kept for that very use, that the reforming of
things be not thought rather a bait to feed our bellies, then to proceed of
any godly zeal, or love of religion, for who would not think it a plain
mockery of God, and a scorn of godliness, that men going about to beautify the
Church, should rob and ransacke the same: and pretending to further the service
of God, should give occasion to prophaneit? This were the most devilish policy
in the world, and the only ingen almost, to overthrow both Prince and people:
For God says, if men offer the blind and the lame unto a prince, Mal. 1.7.
cap 3.9.
he would not be content, nor accept the person, and shall we think that God
can put it up at our hands, if the things of his holiness should be lightly
regarded, Sufficient maintenance.
and that his ambassadors should be so spitefully shaven, 2. Cor. 5.10. 2.
Sam. 10.4.
and their coats cut off to the middle. No, no: he will not take it in good
part: for in the zeal of his wrathful indignation, he pronounces such men
accursed, Hag. 1.9.10.
with a curse, because they have spoiled him, and makes the heaven over them
to stay it self from dew, and the earth to stay her fruit, because his house
lies wast. I hope rather we will hearken unto Solomon, who says: Honor the
Lord with thy riches, Proverb. 3.9.
and with the first fruits of all thine increase: so shall thy barnes be
filled with abundance, and thy presses shall burst with new wine. Be it far
from us in so clear light of the gospel, we should be flower in this duty,
then our forefathers, who did they know not what.

The matter then I will stand upon, is the thing which may thus be employed,
what it is, and how it is to be ordered: The first point what it is, may partly
be understood by that which is already spoken: What may scrue to make
sufficient living for a learned ministry in England.
for I mean the Archbb. and L.Bb. livings, and all the Cathedral churches,
houses and lands, and whatsoever profits adjoined excepting the free schools,
and alms houses, or such like, which unto some of them belong. The nature of
reformation, as may appear by that which is already declared, and the good of
our land requires, that these dignities or spiritual promotions, which are
not of Gods planting, should be pulled up by the roots, and the men of those
places (such as are fit for learning and reverend behauior) applied and tied to
some congregation, where they should labor to feed souls: then would there be
many a fair palace void of a master, and goodly houses, churches, and lands
void of owners. Here I take it to be the duty of the common wealth to keep
these livings still for the maintenance of the Ministry, seeing there is a
very great need of them, and to change only the order and manner of the
applying: that whereas before they served to uphold a lordly pomp, idleness
and bravery in some few: they might now by a wise and godly distribution, be
communicated unto many: for the benefit of many Churches. The lands, houses,
and palaces may be sold, and the money bestowed to the redeeming of
impropriations and increase of small livings: and surely, this is of all other
most equal, that where the people do pay their tenthes under the name and
propriety of the Churches use, they should be so applied indeed. And again:
seeing the corruption of our time, has made impropriations, as fee simple
lands, they which have reasonable recompense for the value of them they
possess, should by no means think them selves injured. It is no reason that
seeing the people do already stand burdened with such a great charge, that they
should be oppressed with a second, especially when there is a means to
relieve them. And it is against all conscience, that the Ministry should be
left without iustand comely provision and maintenance. But of all other,
Forslow not the time till the Bb. and Cathedral Prelates have wasted all.
it were most unwise, and ungodly, to foreslowe the occasion, especially when
the Commonwealth was never so rich, by yearly fruits and commodities. And it
is yet more horrible wickedness, that private men (although peradventure some of
them have done service) should prevent the Church, and commit so great
sacrilege. For if they deserve, there is sufficient besides to reward them.
There is no good Christian, or man, either of valor for fortitude, and
wisdom, or of estimation for religion and honestye, or of any good name for
justice and clemency, can be of so base and servile a mind, as to grope after
the spoil and havoc of the Church, or to suffer himself to be rewarded
with those goods, which should by all reason and conscience, A good man will
not enrich himself, with that which should serve to the soul benefit of many.
be employed to the service and immediate honor of almighty God. But I hope
these speeches shall not need, and that the example of Nehemiah that
honorable and zealous Prince, will be followed in this case, he having the
fear of God before his eyes, being twelve years governor over the people
that returned from Babell: Nehe. 5.10.14.
when his labor was to build the wall of Jerusalem, and to set up the
purity of religion: that he might give good example to the Princes and
Rulers, and that the people might no way be over charged, that so the
business of the Lord might go chearefully and prosperously forward, as it did
indeed. He not only took nothing to him, which was due unto him, as he was
chief Governor, but also spent of that which he had of his own, for the
common charges of the wall, and fed many at his table, lent his money to the
poor, redeemed them that were captive, and caused his servant to do the
like in their place, and that all of them came to help forvvard the work.
The example of Iehoash King of Judah, is very memorable for this purpose, 2.
Kings 12.
when the priests had neglected the repayring of the decayed places of the
Temple (notwithstanding the Kings commandment) till the three and twentieth
year of his reign. The charge and money for that business was committed to
others, who were so far from gaining by it, that they showed such
faithfulness in doing of it, that it was not thought needful that they should
give any accounts of their doing. If ever it please GOD to give reformation
amongst us, I pray God that this mercy in framing of the hearts of al sorts
and degrees, after the good of these examples, may be also a blessing upon us,
as I hope that through his tender compassion and bounty it will.

Now as great a matter stands in the second point, how this shall be ordered:
one says that it would be very good, that it should be all, and all the other
church livings likewise taken out of the ministers hands, and that they should
have their several pensions or stipends of a reasonable sort, To put all the
ministers to their pensions were not good.
for this says he, would be easiest and quietest, so that they should be
troubled with nothing, but to follow their books, and look to their charge:
if it might be so indeed, as these words do roundly bear us in hand in very
good show, it were the best, and every minister would be glad of the quietest
way, and most benefit to the church. Another peradventure is of a diverse mind,
and thinks it very inconvenient, especially at this time, when there is a
settled provision for most places, and that by such a means, as is no great
trouble to the minister, that will not wilfully be a loyterer. It is better to
keep a good way which we have, then to follow a new, and change for the worse:
and truly this latter, agrees most with policy for the state, and with
benefit for the church: for the state, it is found a point of tried policy to
alter as few things as may be, (especially when they are good and well) wherein
the people have had a long custom or interest, for this is a way unto
murmurings, coffeehouse, stirs and sedition, and the people will quickly
suspect, that for the private gain of some few, such things are invented,
when they see plainly that it is very well already. I doubt it will be found a
hard measure to some, an unlucky piece of work to begin, heavy in the
carriage, and a day of blacknes unto posterity. Secondly, there must be
offices erected and augmented, and a great many men must have leases or some
other authority and office to gather the fruits: and what will come of this
(which requires many devices) a man cannot tell at the first fight, neither
shall he see all the mischiefs till it be practiced: but this must needs fall
out, that many men for gathering the fruits, for receiving and paying again,
must have a fleece, and so the church shall be shortened and shorn of her right,
by a needles occupation: when the people shall pay peradventure well the more,
for he that hireth must live by it: again, when the right and property is out
of the churches hold: it may offer occasion in time, that it shall be taken
away altogether, and then there will be injury to the church and oppression of
the people.

But the other is every way better: First, it is easier to be done when there
remains no more but the due examinations of the liuinges, The ready way to
provide for ministers.
and to redeem the impropriations, and to augment the smaller livings: it is
without all suspicion, for we see the practice, we know it to be good, and
need not fear any ill to come of it: and it is more just, for then the whole
living goes that way it should, and the people will the better away with it,
partlye, because they see it is bestowed according to their mind, and partly,
because they are likely to be better used and the minister for his part shall
be better able to keep hospitality, and to feed the pore by the use of such
things as arise by that means, and that which is no small commodity, he may
let out part or all, as he shall find most for his ease, and best for his
profit, and if there do any benefit arise, this opens the door to him,
whereas the other way penneth him in to one certain place, be it good or be it
bad: and it may be, that his neighbors of good will for his ease, will gather
his fruits for him, and he shall save al, that by the other way should be lost,
both to him and the people: Briefly, the more one looks in the comparison of
these two wais, the more he shall perceive, that the order now established, is
the best: if the impropriations were redeemed, and the small liuinges
increased. Now for the furthering of this good work, there are two things to
be added, which will help this matter very well: Uniting of small livings one
help to the ministry
First, the uniting of diverse little parishes in one, a thing of common
practice, out of which comes this commodity, the living is increased: and by
the number of the people, there are the more wise men to be chosen for
Ecclesiastical officers: and the church shall be the more cumly, and as easily
taught in a manner. Benefices without cure may be some help, united to the
smaller liuinges.
The next is, there are certain things scattered here and there without
cure, these may be joined to help the smaller livings.

Then as touching the impropriations: in some there is great ease, Resigning
and redeeming of Impropriations by Bb. and Cathedral livings will be a good
means to main taine a learned ministry.
and in some there is no great hardness. Those which be in L. Bb. hands, and
pertaining to these great churches, may easily be redeemed, if they be sent
from whence they came: there need be no charge: and I dout not, but the third
part will be thus redeemed: but if there be any in the Queens possession, or
of any temporal man, or in Colleges, the lands and houses and other
temporalities of the L.Bb. and other great Churches may be employed to redeem
them: If the consideration and account of these things, be committed to wise
and godly men, inhabiting in every shire, Josh. 18.4.
where such livings and churches are (as Joshua appointed 3. of every tribe to
walk through ye land to describe it) it will easily be found out, that ye
living of the ministry will be brought to a good and cumly measure: and that
every Church would have at the least two hundredth marks yearly for the Pastor
and teacher, and some above two hundred pound, Tith wood me dowe, etc. might
help in some places.
which might also be helped in some places by tithe wood and medowe, and a
greater sise of pasture, where such things are either not paid, or not
according to the value of the tenths by much.

But here grows a question: The overplus of Bb. and Cathedral liuinges may
pay first fruits, tenthes, subsidies etc.
What if the L.Bb. and the Cathedral churches come to more then will serve for
the redeeming of the impropriations, or less: If more, (as I am verily
persuaded it will) it may serve to recompense the wonted first fruits and
tenthes, which were from these seas and churches, it may serve to erect in all
shires, a Lecture of al sciences, that such as cannot put their sons to
Cambridge and Oxford, may have them in the free Schools, and after by those
Lectures brought through all arts: which would greatly increase learned and
wise men in this land, and make a flourishing time.

But if it should fall short of our reckoning, If Bb. and Cathedral livings be
too little: a general beneuo lence will make it up.
there is yet an easy help, that is, a free benevolence, and as it were an
offering of all sorts of people, young and old through this land: this way has
the church of God been very much helped and advanced, and who is it that will
not be willing to further such a worthy, honorable and holy work. In the time
of Moses, Exodus 36.5.6.
when he built the Tabernacle, and made the altars and priests garments, Our
for fathers liberal in giuinge to the Church.
things of a wonderful great charge, for gold, silver, silk, precious stones,
incense and all costly things: The people came so willingly, and offered so
plentifully, that there was to much, so that Moses proclaimed that they should
offer no more. 2. Chron. 31.4.
And when Hezekiah commanded to bring a part to the priests and levites, to
encourage them in the law, they brought in such abundance, that they did eat
and were filled, and yet there remained plenty in heaps that they had made.
And in David's time for the building of the Temple, 1. Chron. 29.6.
the Princes of the families, and the Princes of the tribes of Israel, and the
captains of thousands, and of hundrethes, with the rulers of the kings work,
offered willingly, and gave for the house of God, five thousand talents of
gold, and 10000. pieces, and 10000. talents of silver, 18000. talents of
brass, 100000. talents of Iron, and they with whom precious stones were found,
gave them to the treasure: and the people rejoiced when they offered willingly,
for they offered willingly unto the Lord, with a perfect heart, and David the
king also rejoiced with great joy. And there is no reason to fear the contrary
in our time, of which it is written: the people shall offer willingly in the
time of the assembly. Psalm. 110.3.
I doubt not therefore of Gods mercy and blessing, if we were as forward to
go about such a matter, with singlenes of heart, and simplicity of Godly
wisdom, and would follow after it with earnestnes of zeal, and painfulnes of
knowledge, forgetting our own ease, pleasure, wealth and will, to prefer the
true worship of God, the benefit of our souls, the glory of the Gospel of
Jesus Christ, unto the praise of God the father, and this would be the glory
of our land. For thus speaks God unto his own people, whom he honors with
his word. Bring ye all the tithes into the storehouse, Mal. 3.10.
that there may be meat in my house, and prove me now herewith, if I will not
open the windows of heaven unto you, says the Lord of hoastes, if I will not
open the windows of heaven unto you, and power you out a blessing without
measure, and I will rebuke the deuourer for your sakes: and he shall not
destroy the fruit of your ground, neither shall your vine be barren in the
field, says the Lord of hoasts.

If I should stay here, I might be accused either of injustice or cruelty, of
injustice, bicaus I have but slightly spoken of her Majesty's due, in the
first fruits, tenths, and subsidy of the Clergy (as they call it) and of
presentations never a word. The first of these is the greatest doubt: for if
the common wealth stand in need (as it is likely in this troublesome time) then
there is good reason, that al men help without any privilege, in as much as
every one has part of the benefit and comfort, otherwise, I am persuaded that
the royal and christian heart of her Majesty, would as willingly part from it,
and especially the first fruits and tenths, knowing how they came in, as ever
David did, 1. Chron. 29.3.4.
who considering that it was the house of God and not man, and because he had
a delight in the house of his God, besides the great preparation which he made,
of gold, brass, iron, silver, and precious stones of diverse sorts for ye
sanctuary, he gave of his own, three thousand talents of gold of Ophir, and
seven thousand talents of fined silver.

First it may be seen, How first fruits, tenthes and subsidies of Bb. and
Cathedral churches may be paid notwithstanding they be sold to redeem
impropriations
whether the overplus of the lands, after the impropriations be redeemed,
there be not sufficient to repay the valu of so much, as the abundance of those
first fruits tenths and subsidies of L.Bb. and Cathedral churches do amount,
which if it do (as I verily think it will, and spare if things be handled
wisely and with a perfect heart) the^ there need no further dealing for
recompense: 1. by the overplus.
and al other churches may be as in times past: but if not, 2. by the foresaid
benevolence.
then the foresaid benevolence may stop the gap for the redeeming of the
foresaid impropriations, that the lands may remain to this use of buying out
of the said first fruits, which would be a great ease to the church, and the
burden would not be great, at once to give, every man a little of his
superfluity, to have a continual benefit for ever: Besides that, the
ministry would be better able, and willing at all times, if need be, to give
a benevolence, to further all necessary purposes to the ease of the commonwealth, as a recompense of this kindness.

Besides this if need be, 3. By the renting those churches which are increased.
those livings that be increased by the restored impropriations, or otherwise:
may be set up to hier and greater first fruits, tenths and subsidies: and where
three or four, less or more be made one, they may follow the rate of so
many, so that there need be no diminishing of the treasure of the land by this
alteration, except it please her highness, of her gracious bounty, upon the
trial of gods rare blessings toward her and her people, to mittigate some
part, as a drink offering of a sweet smelling sacrifice unto almighty God:
knowing that he can a thousand manner of wais send it in again by other means,
with great interest and increase, as it is written. Prou. 11.25.
The liberal person shall have plenty, and he that waters shall also have
rain. He that sows sparingly, 2. Cor. 9.6.8.
shall reap sparingly, and he that sows liberally shall reap also liberally,
and God is able to make all graces abound toward you, that ye alwais having
all sufficiency in all things, may abound in every good work. Prou. 10.22.
The blessing of the Lord, it makes rich, and he does ad no sorrows with it.
Deuteronomy. 28.1.3.5.6.7.12.
Again, if thou shall diligently obey the voice of the Lord thy God, blessed
shall thou be in the city, and in the field, in thy basket, and in thy dough,
when thou come in, and when thou go out, the Lord shall cause thine
enemies that rise against thee, to fall before thy face, they shall come out
against thee one way, and fly before thee seven ways, and the Lord shall
bring upon thee his good treasure, even the heaven to give rain to thy land in
due season, and to bless all the work of thy hands, and thou shall lend unto
many nations, and shall not borrow thy self.

As touching Presentations, it would be a very good and commendable thing, Of
presentations.
if they were contained in the free gift of Prince and people, to be resigned
to every church, which by the laws of Discipline, ought to have their free
choice of their ministers. It will be no loss to the patrons, except a man will
stand upon a dignity. For every man holds it Symony, for patrons to take any
rewards or gain, and men are sworn against it. But if it shall not be thought
good so to do, the order that now is of presenting of able and sufficient
Clearkes may remain, so there be sufficient caution that the Cannon of Christ
be not broken, the order of his Discipline violated, nor the church whereto he
shall be presented robbed of their right in election. Yet in all these things I
prefer not mine own judgment or wisdom, An humble caution of the Author.
neither do I set it down as the judgment of al or many of them that seek
the reformation: but as I have often said, I submit this my private motion, to
your honorable wisdoms, and to all godly learned men, that if a better and
easier way may be found, this may be rejected, only I crave that the things
and my reasons, first and last, may be rightly waighed, and that if a better
cannot be found, this may be wisely considered and not neglected.

Now in the second place it were cruelty (says some) to put down these
spiritual lords, and great men of the church, and to turn them into small
livings, but especially to turn out the unfit men: it were pity to see
them, their wives and their children to be put to misery and begging. If a man
should make comparison with their doings, what pity eought there to be
showed upon them, which justly for breaking Gods commandments are turned out,
when there is no pity showed to such as stand to Gods truth, Mat.
25.6.7.12.13.
and break only the traditions of men: 1. Cor. 9.16.
To the one, the scripture pronounces woe, and therefore why should they be
pitied? Mat. 15.9.
to the other, the scripture joins in league as it were, pronouncing unto
the^ mercy, and says with them against the other. In vain do you worship
God, teaching for doctrine the traditions of men, why should not they be
pitied?

As touching the L.Bb. and great clergy men, which have so laden themselves
with thick claye, that they have much ado to get up in the pulpit of God:
Haback. 2.6.
do they not know that it is their duty, that they may please him who has
chosen them to be his souldiars, not to entangle themselves with the affairs
of this life, 2. Tim. 2.4.
and that they ought for the peace and wealth of the church, to follow the
example of their Lord and Master Christ Jesus and to have his mind in them,
who being God, made him self of no reputation and took upon him the form of
a servant, Philip. 2.5.
and was made like unto men, and was found in shape as a man, and humbled
himself and became obedient unto death, even the death of the cross, 2. Cor.
8.9.
and he being rich became poor that we through his poverty might be made
rich: then is it a small matter for them to leave their thousands, The Bb. and
Cathedral prelates, if they be fit, may be applied to some particular churches
of good living.
and be content with their hundrethes: and surely I hope so of the men that
they will: for God forbid that they should be of that cursed crew of
unbelievers: who they know love the praise of men more then of God: and
seeking honor one of an other, Ioh. 5.44.
seek not the honor that comes of God alone: or of those unfaithful
stewardes, which seck their own, Philip. 2.21. cap. 3.19.20.
and not that which is Christ Jesus, or of those damnable bellye gods: whose
glory is to their shame, and mind earthly things, when all the true Ministers
have their conversation in heaven.

As for the other, which by no means can be fitted to be workmen, and to
labor in Gods building and husbandry: although they are worthy of nothing for
their presumption and rash entering where they should not, Mat. 5.13.
but as unsavory salt to be cast forth and trod under foot of men, especially
such unthrifts, as being broken from living by their trades, or are thrust out
of their untimely occupation of a seruiture, do choose as their refuge, and for
an easy life to be in the ministry: 2. Cor. 13.10.
yet because the Church is to correct her children to edification and not
destruction: and the law of charity wishes to do good unto al men, yea unto
them that have done us evil, Unable ministers being displaced may have some
stock: or a stipende for their life time.
and it may please God by this means to give them repentance, it may be a
very good thing, that these have a stipend for their life time, or some stock
to help them that are not able to get their living otherwise by their trades:
and especially such as being very honest men at the beginning of her
Majesty's reign, were drawn in of simplicity, not knowing the great burden of
the calling: only herein they have greatly offended, that through idleness
they have not, in all this time, attained to any knowledge fit for that calling,
and they have been diverse ways admonished, yet some may be one degree more
charitably thought of, because they have so small living, that they are driven
to labor and care, to make it hold out, being burdened with very many and
too heavy paiments.

And in this point, the honorable and noble care of King Henry the eight, has
purchased his due praise in giving stipendes or pensions, for the life time of
them that were turned out of the Abbeys and Monasteries which were no more
worthy to be suffered in a commonwealth, then these L.Bb. and vnpreching
prelacie: and it will be found a better thing and esier for the church, a little
while to bear the burden of these men's pensions, or stocks, then to suffer
the Church to be damnified by them for ever: for we see that it is a brood of
such a nature that will hardly be weeded out, except this good way of turning
them out together be taken in hand: and while men will look to do it by
little and little, a time wilfal out, that they will wax too strong: and
oppress the good ministers as the Cananites did Israel under Iabin twenty
years. Judge. 4.1.2.
Delay is dangerous, and cursed is he that does the work of the Lord loosely
or negligently.

But what should I run through every thing: I know your honorable wisdoms
can do a great deal more sufficiently in the consideration, searching, and
applying, of every thing to his proper place, that God has raised up at your
hands, very notable men which are endued with gifts: Exodus 35.30.34.
which like unto Bezaleel and Aholiab are filled with an excellent spirit of
wisdom and understanding, and knowledge in all the work of God, and to teach
other likewise. Therefore as this is every way the fittest time for such a holy
and honorable purpose, so I thought I was in conscience to make known, that
which has diversely and many times been advised of in my mind, as it were by
an humble motion to bring to your remembrance, that which I hope you cannot be
ignorant of: and in some sort to enter you in that, which I trust you are
willing and forward unto, and to draw that out with a coal, as it were rudly,
which you by good advise and mature judgment, may bring forth and make perfect
with great profit, beuty and glory. And I refer all that I have done, unto
your honorable wise and godly censure, that if I have swarued any thing from
the word of God, or good reason agreing to the same, it might be rejected,
protesting that I meddle not with any man's person, but with the cause, and
understand and mean when I reprehende some men's doings in the naming of the
persons, only by the title of their place, the thing which is the ground and
occasion of such doings: which being taken away, I suppose the evil of such
persons will be purged. And thus in all humbleness, desiring your Honors, and
all wise men, to consider in the fear of God of every thing, without
prejudice to the truth, or affection to men or times: from my very soul I
commend you to the tuition and government of almighty God, and whom from the
bottom of my heart, in fear and trembling, I do pray and beseech, to power
down the riches of his graces upon us all, in all wisdom and spiritual
understanding, that we may walk worthy of the Lord, and please him in all
things, and namely upon his Anointed and gracious handmayde, Elizabeth our
dear Sovereign Lady and Queen, to bless her with long days, and good
among us, with daily increase of honor before God and men, and joy of heart
in the holy Ghost: and that we al which are under her, may worship our true and
everlasting God, according to his word: in truth, sincerity and vprightnes,
and live in all faithful duty to her Majesty, and godly love one with another,
being blessed with peace wealth and godliness, from generation to generation,
through Jesus Christ our Savior, to whom with the Father and the holy spirit,
one God, be al honor and glory for ever AMEN.


