A Proclamation for the Merchants Adventurers.
ELizabeth dei gratia Angliae, Franciae, and Hiberniae, Regina fidei defensor,
etc. Maiori and vicecomitibus Ciuitatis sue Londoniensis, salutem. Vobis
mandamus quod statim visis presentibus in singulis locis, infra Ciuitatem
predictam and Suburb, eiusdem, tam infra libertates quam extra, vbi magis
expedire videritis ex part nostra, solemniter and publicae proclamari fac. in
haec verba.

WHERE in the Parliament begone and holden at Westminster, the first day of
March, in the seventh year of the Raygne of our dearest brother King Edward
the Sixth, and there continued till the last day of the same month of March. It
is there resited by one act of Parliament, then and there made entitled an
act reviving a Statute made in the xvii year of our most noble progenitor,
king Edward the fourth, amongst other things it was then ordained and enacted
by auctheritie of the same Parlyament, that no person should carry or make to be
carried out of this Realm or Wales, from no part of the same, any manner of
money of the coigne of this Realm, nor money of the coin of other realms,
lands, or Lordshippes, nor plate, vessel, bullion or Iuell of gold, garnished
or ungarnished, or of Silver without the kings license, but such persons as
be dispensed with in the statute made in the second year of our most noble
progenitor king Henry the Sixte, and other diverse Statutes made upon pain of
felonye. The which estatute and ordinance so made in the time of our said most
noble progenitor King Edward the fourth, was made to endure from the feast of
Easter in the xviii. year of the said King Edward the fourth, unto thend of
seven years then next ensuing, which said estatute and ordinance so before
rehearsed by authority of Parliament, holden in the fourth year of the late
king of famous memory, Henry the Seventh, was confirmed and established to be
good and effectual from the feast of the purification of our Lady in the year
of our lord God a thousand four hundredth, four score and nine, to thend and
term of twenty years then next ensuinge, as by the same Statute also more
plainly appears. And where also at the said Parliament holden at
Westminster, in the Seventh year of our said dearest brothers reign, it is
enacted by authority of Parliament, that the said estatute and ordinance
before rehearsed, made in the xvii. year of our most noble progenitor king
Edward the fourth, and every clause, article, sentence or provision therein
contained, is by authority thereof confirmed and enacted, to be good and
effectual from the first day of May then next ensuing, and to endure unto
thend of twenty year then next following. As by the said act made in the
seventh year of our said dearest brothers Raygne plainly appears.

NEVERTHELES upon good and reasonable considerations us moving, we be pleased
and contented, that from and after the publication of this our Proclamation, it
shall be lawful unto all notorious Merchants, and all and every other person
and persons passing by our special license out of this realm, into any
outward parties beyond the Seas, to carye with them for their reasonable
costs and expenses, the sum of four pounds of any money current within
this Realm, or under and not above, or any Rings or Signettes of gold or
Silver upon their fyngers, without any loss of life, lands or goods, or any
other pain, forfeyture, imprysonment, or penalty to be to them or any of them
for the same. The said estatutes or any other Statute, ordenaunce or law
heretofore made to the contrary in any wise notwithstanding. Et hoc sub
periculo incumbenti nullatenus omittatis.

Test me ipsa apud Westminster primo die Maij. Anno Regni nostri primo.
God save the Queen.
Imprinted at London by Richard Judge and John Cawood, Printers to the Queen's
Majesty. Anno M. D. LIX. Cum priuilegio Regiae Maiestatis.


