A Proclamacion, set furthe by the Kings majesty, with the assent and consent
of his most dear uncle, Edward Duke of Somerset, Governor of his most royal
person, and of his Realms, Dominions and Subjects Protector, and others of
his highness most honorable privy counsel, concerning the calling in of
Testons, the.x. day of April, in the second year of his majesty's most
gracious reign.
VVHeras it is come to the knowledge of our sovereign Lord the Kings
majesty, what fraud and corrupcion, has of late time been used in the
falsyng of his highness coin now current, specially of the pieces of.xii. d.
commonly named Testons, by reason that the same sort of coin, for the
greatness and facility of counterfaictyng, has the rather given occasion to
diverse evil persons, to stamp or cast pieces of the same form and ^ignes,
in great multitude: The practizers whereof (as is known) are not only men
here dwelling, but also for the most part have been strangers, dwelling in
forain parts, who have found the means to conueigh preuely, and disperce
thesaied counterfeict pieces abroad in his majesty's dominions, to the great
deceit and detriment of his highness most loving subjects, which have
received the same. His majesty therefore myndyng the due reformacion hereof,
and to preuente the lik^ ^^^ctise hereafter, by thaduise and assent of his
derest uncle the Lord Protector, and others of his counsel, does will and
command, that from the last day of Decembre next coming, after the date
hereof, thesaied coin or pieces of.xii. d. commonly called Testons, shall no
more be current within any his highness realms or dominions, but be taken
only for Bullyon. And further straightly charge and commands, all and
singular his highness subjects, and others whatsoever, being within any his
majesty's said realms or dominions, that from thesaied last day of Decembre,
they or any of them, shall not utter or receive in payment any of thesaied
Testons, as his highness coin current. And also his highness by th advise
aforesaied, wills and commands, that whatsoever person or persons after
thesaid last day of December, shall bye or amasse into his or their hands,
any of thesaid Testons for a peculier gain to be had thereof, to him or
themwardes, shall not only encurre and suffer the penalties of loss of
the same, whereof the one moytie to be adjudged and taken as forfaicte to his
highness, and the other moytie to the parties presentyng the same in Thexchequer,
or before any Justice ^ the Peace: but also shall suffer fine and emprisonment
at his majesty's pleasure.

Nevertheless, his highness most gracious clemency, tendryng his subjects and
others interestes which by lawful means do possess thesaied Testons, as
their propre goods, and for aduoydyng of the loss, which otherwise they
should sustein hereby: Is pleased, and does ordain by the advice aforesaied,
that every person or persons, so having and possessyng thesaied Testons ^eyng
of his highness just standarde, shall and may bring or send the same, to the
officers of any of his majesty's Myntes, where in exchange shall be delivered
unto him or them, the just value and recompense thereof, as they be now current,
either in grotes or other his highness coins, accordyngly.

God save the King.
Excusum Londini, in aedibus Richardi Graftoni Regij Impressoris. Cum
priuilegro ad imprimendum solum.


