A Proclamation, set forth by the kings Majesty, with thassent of his derest
uncle, Edward Duke of Somerset, Governor of his most royal person, and of
his realms, dominions and subjects Protector, and others of his most
honorable Counsel, for the ratyng, assessyng, and order of the prices of
victuals.
THe kings majesty, having the principal and continual charge of the common
wealth, and tranquillity of this realm for the which cause almighty God has
given to his Majesty, power to rule: and to all his people, has enjoined
lowlines to obey: certainly understands, by the informacion and good advice
of his most dear Uncle, Edward Duke of Somerset, Governor of his most royal
person and Protector of his Realms, Dominions and Subjects, and others of his
priuey Counsel: That of late time, the prices of all manner of victual,
necessary for man's sustenaunce, be so heigthened and raised, above the
accustomed and reasonable values, that thereby (except spedy remedy be prou^ed)
very great loss and damage, must needs chance to his majesty's loving
subjects. And therefore both of wisdom, wherewith his majesty uses to
consider the state of his common wealth, and of pity, which at all times his
Majesty conceiueth upon the lack and greues of his people has by long and
deliberate study, of his said dear Uncle, the lord Protector, and the rest
of his priuey counsel, concluded, and finally resolved, to provide remedy
herein, the which (restyng upon the former redress, of sondrie dissordres in
the whole common wealth) although it cannot be so absolutely and spedely had,
as his majesty's most hearty desire is: yet it is thought by his majesty, for
the present disorders, a great relief, to put in due execution, diverse good
laws and statuter, provided heretofore, by thaucthoritie of Parliament, in the
reigns of the kings majesty's most noble progenitors, and especially two
pollitique good estatutes, made at Westminster, in the.xxv. year of the reign
of his majesty's most dear father, late deceassed, king Henry theight, or
deined, as by the same appears, very pollitiquely for the redress of these
like disordres of prices, which at any time thence after might happen.
Theffecte of which later estatute is, that the Lord Treasorer, the Lord
Chauncellor of England, the lord President of the kings most honorable
counsel, the Lord priuey Seal, the Lord Steward, the Lord Chamberlain,
and all other Lords of the kings counsel: The Treasorer and Comptroller of
the kings most honorable house, the Chau^cellor of the Duchy of Lancastre,
the Justices of either Benche, the Chauncellor, Chamberlain, under Treasorer,
and the Barons of the kings Exchequier, or.vii. of them at the least, whereof
the Lord Treasorer, the Lord Chauncellor, the Lord President of the kings
cou^, saill, or the Lord priuey Seal to be one, should have power and
authority, from time to time (as the case should require) to set and tax
reasonable prices, of all kinds of victualles, mentioned in thesaied act, how
they should be sold in gross or by retayle, for relief of the kings
subjects. And that after such prices set and taxed, in form aforesaied:
Proclamation should be made in the kings name, under the great Scale of
thesaied prices, in such parts of this realm, as should be convenient for
the same.

And it was further enacted, by thesaid estatute, that al Fermors, Owners,
Broggers, and all other victualers whatsoever, having and keeping any of the
kinds of victualles, mentioned in thesaied act, to the intent to sell, should
sell the same to such, the kings subjects, as would buy them, at such
prices as should be set and taxed, by thesaied Proclamacion upon the pains to
be expressed, and limited in thesaid Proclamacion, to be lost, forfeicted, and
levied to the kings use, in such wise, as by thesaied Proclamation should be
declared.

And it was further provided, by thesaid act, that the same act, or any thing
therein contained, should not be hurtful to M^iors Sheriefes, Bailiefes, and
other officers, of Citees, Boroughes, and Tounes corporate, nor to any person
or persons, or bodies poilitique having authority, to set prices of such
victualies, or of any of them, but that they and every of them, might set
prices thereof, as if the same act had never been had nor made, as by the same
act, amongst other things, more at large it does and may appear.

And forasmuch as complaint has been made, of the enhaunsyng of prices, of
the same victualles, without ground or cause reasonable, in all parts of this
realm: In consideracion whereof, the Lord Treasorer, the Lord Chauncellor of
England, and all others requisite by thesaid estatute, have by aucthorite of
the same act, set and taxed reasonable prices, of all kind of victualles,
mentioned in the same act, to be sold in form followyng, to the intent the same
should be Proclaimed, according to the same act: That is to say, that from the
day of this Proclamacion made, without delaie, all and synguler person and
persons, having or keeping, any of the kinds of victualles, me^cioned in
thesaid act, within this realm, to the intent to sell, shall sell the same to
such of the kings subjects, as will buy them at the prices, hereafter
mentioned, that is to say: from Midsomer to Hallowmas, every Ox being primed
or well stricken, of the largest bone. xxxviii. s^. of a meaner sort. xxviii.
s^. An Ox fat, and of the largest bone. xlv. s^. of the meaner sort being
fat. xxxviii. s^. Steres and Runtes, being primed or well stricken, and large
of bone. xx. s^. of a meaner sort. xvi. s^. being fat and of the largest
bone. xxv. s^. being fat of a meaner sort. xxi. s^. Heifurths and Kyne, being
primed or well stricken, and large of bone. xvi. s^. of a meaner sort, xiii.
s^. iiii. d. being fat and large of bone. xxii. s^. being fat and of a meaner
sort. xviii. s^. And from Hallowmas to Christmas, every Ox being fat and large
of bone. xlvi. s^. viii. th. being fat of a meaner sort. xxxix. s^. viii. th.
Steres and Runtes within the same time, being fat and large of bone. xxvi. s^.
viii. th. being fat of a meaner sort. xxii. s^ viii. th. Heiforths and Kine
within the same time, being fat and large of bone. xxii. s^. of a meaner sort.
xix s^. And from Christmas to Shroftide, every Ox being fat and large of bone.
xlviii. s^. iiii. th. of a meaner sort. xli. s^. iiii. th. Steres and Runtes
within the same time, being fat and large of bone. xxviii. s. iiii. th. of a
meaner sort. xxiiii. s^. iiii. th. And from sheryng time to Michaelmas, every
wether being a shere sheep, being lean and large of bone. iii. s^. of a meaner
sort. ii. s^. iiii. th. being fat and large of bone. iiii. s. being fat of a
meaner sort. iii. s. Ewes within the same time, being lean and large of bone.
ii. s. being lean of a meaner sort. xx d. being fat and large of bone. ii.
s. viii. d. being fat of a meaner sort. ii. s. And from Michaelmas to
Shroftide, every wether being a shere sheep, being lean and large of bone.
iii. s. being lean of a meaner sort. ii. s. iiii. d. being fat and large of
bone. iiii. s. iiii. d. being fat and of a meaner sort. iii. s. iiii. d.

And from Midsomet to Michaelmas the pound of sweet Butter not to be sold
above. i. d. q. And from Michaelmas to the New years croppe, the pound not
above i. d. ob. Bartelled Butter of Essex, the pound not to be sold to any
the kings subjects, above. ob. di. q. And bartelled Butter of any other
parts, to be sold to the kings subjects, not above. ob. q. Chese of Essex,
to be sold to the kings subjects, from Midsommer to Michaelmas, the pound,
not above. ob. Chese of other parts, not above. ob. di. q. And of Essex to the
kings subjects, from Michaelmas, to the New years croppe, not above. ob. di.
q. And of any other parts, not above. ob. q. Upon pain of forfeiture for every
Ox, Stere, Cow, Heckfor, and Bullock, that should be sold by virtue of
thesaid act, and this Proclamacio^, and shall not so be sold, v. f. and for
every Sheep that should be sold, by virtue of the same act and this
Proclamacion, and shall not so be sold. x. s. And for every pound of Butter
and Chese. xii. d. And that for all and every sum that shall be forfeited, by
virtue of the same act, and this Proclamacion, the king our sovereign Lord,
shall and may have his recovery and remedy, by informacion, bill, plaint, or
accion of debte, in any of his highness Courts of Record. Wherefore, we
considering the premises, to be for the wealth and commodity of this our
realm, will and command you our Shirief, of our County of (...) within two
days next after the receipt of this said Proclamacion that ye with all speed
shall Proclaim the premises, in all Market Tounes, within the said County
of (...) and that all manner our subjects, shall obey the same, not only upon
the pains above said, but also to incurte our indignacion and displeasure.

And furthermore the kings Majesty of his authority and power royal,
straightly that geth and commands all manner his Justices of Peace, Shirifes,
Majors and Bailifes of any tounes corporate, or any other ministers to be
assigned or appointed by any two Justices of Peace of the said county, if any
the market or markettes within the same county shall lack wherwithall to
furnishe the marketies, for the relief of his loving subjects, that then they
shall foresee and provide that the owners, Grasiers, Drouers, Farmors, Broggers,
or any other of any kind of estate or degree whatsoever, nere adioynyng,
having such store of any kind of the aforesaid victual, that he may spare
part of his said store, be it lene or fat (over and besides the store necessary
for the maintenance of his household, the allowaunce whereof must be made, in
respect of his accustomed expenses, and the time of an other usual provision)
toward the futniture of the market, shall by thappointment, and order of the
said Justices, and other officers above named, bring to the market and
markettes such nombre and quantity of the said victuals, and at such time
and times, as they shall think the cause and necessite requires, and the same
shall sell there according to the prices by the said Justices to be rated, as
for an example, where the markettes cannot be ser^ed with sufficient quantity
of Motton, so that in default thereof the people hap to have ouermuche lack,
then in that and like cases, the kings Majesty's will and commandment is,
that the said Justices of every county, and officers above named, upon the
certain knowledge of that lack shall compel all and every such person and
persons, as shall have nigh to the said market tounes, the number of v. C.
here Sheep, for every hundredth of the same v. C. and above, to send to the
market so lackyng, at the most 1. of the best and fattest sheep of that sort,
to be sold from time to time, and at the prices to be rated by the said
Justices and other officers, and if less lack, then less in number, upon
like pain aforesaid, for every sheep not so brought to the market. Furthermore
because the prices of the Bieffes and Mottons hereto adjoined, be but the
prices of Bieffes and Mottons alive and sold in gross and not by retaile, as
the Boucher uses to do: His Majesty notwithstanding the tenor of this
Proclamacion, lieenseth the Boucher in such cases where he shall buy of those
prices so to sell above the said price, as it shall be thought and ordered by the
said Justices, and officers above named according to the laws and estatutes of
the realm mete, for a convenient gain toward his living. And so in all cases
the same to be observed upon pains expressed in sundry estatutes for the same.

Provided that notwithstanding any article or clause above mentioned, every
Boucher being no Grasier having bought, and in his possession any manner cattle
above the prices herein contained, before the time of this Proclamacion, shall
have license and full liberty, to make sale of any such cartell so bought of
those prices according to the rate and proporcion of the price he paid or then
became debtor for, without any couyn, by the space of viii. days after the
Proclamacion shall be proclaimed, in the next market town to his dwelling place,
or to the place where he shall that sell, and after those viii. days, then to
remain subject to the whole tenor of the Proclamacion. And herein the kings
Majesty to whom only under God appertains auengement, punishment, and
redress of his peoples offenses whatsoever the same be, most straightly
charge, and upon the pain of his highness extreme indignacion, commands al
manner of people to seek the redress and amendment of any manner offense
against ye tenor of this Proclamacion, or any other estatute or laws, only by
order of his Majesty's laws, wout force, riot, manasse, unlawful assembles,
or any other disturbance of peace. And on the contrary if any subject of what
degree or estate soever he be, shall contrariwise, and unlawfully, that is to
say, otherwise then by complaint or order of law, seek, begin, or enterprise
to redress, his own cause, or the cause of any other, be the same never so
just: Then his Majesty asserteneth and lets the same to know, that without
any manner favor, or grace to be hoped upon, he and every of them, so offendyng,
shall surely feel, by extreme punishment the kings highness utter
indignacion, and in such case no extremity to be spared, but to be taken and
accepted, not only as unkind, unnatural, vnlouyng and disobedient subjects:
But also as high traptors and rebellors against the kings Majesty's own
royal person, his croune, state, and dignity: Dated at Richmont the second of
July, the third year of the reign of king Edward the. VI.

God save the King.
Excusum Londini, in edibus Richardi Graftoni Regij impressoris.

^um priuilegio ad imprimendum solu^


