(...) prosperous reign, against such as slanderously whisper and spread
abroad false rumors of the further abacing of the coin.
WHereas the kings majesty, upon the publishing of the last proclamation. for
the abacing of the shilling to. ix. d. minded to have brought his coin unto a
more perfection of finenes then it was, and so from time to time to have
amended it, as in very deed he purposes to do, with all the speed that may be.
Now it is come to pass, yt by the spreading of false and untrue rumors, the
prices of al things are growe^ so excessiuely, that it is intolerable for his
loving subjects to endure it, by reason that certain lewd persons of their
own light heddes have immagined, that because his highness has already sumwhat
abated the value of his said come, therefore his majesty should yet more abace
it, and of their imaginacions, have uttered this fond rumor, in such sort, as
every man that has corn, cattle or other kind of victual, mere to be
brought to the markettes, rather will keep it then utter it feating their loss
in the fall of the money, whereof follows a scarsite in the market, where no
scarcite ought to be, and a merueilous dearth where plenty is of al manner of
victualles. And as this gredy restreining of them that has plentifully,
bredeth the plague of god upon them, both for their light credit, and for they
insatiable covetousness, as in the death of a number of the^ it has of late ben
seen: So the kings highness having charge from god, to se his commonwealth well
governed, must have an earnest ^^e, to the streighte punishment of them that
raise these slanders ^monges his subjects. Wherefore his majesty straightlye
prohibiteth and defends, all and every of his subjects, of what estate,
degree, or condition soever he or they be, that from the publishing of this
present proclamacio^, they invent not, speak, mutter, or devise, any manner of
tale, news, or report, either touching the abacing of thesaid coin, or that
in any manner of wise may sound either to the dishonor of his majesty's
person, or to the defacing of his highness procedinges, or of is council, or to
the disquieting of his loving subjects, upon pain of. vi. months
imprisonment, and such fine to the kings majesty's use, as shall be thought
mete by the Justices of the Peace, in the Shire where thoffence is committed,
if thoffend or be able to pay it immediately before his delivery: and in case
the offend or be not able to pay it, then he to be put on the pillory, and one
of his Ears cut of, or both, if the greuousnes of his offense shall seem to
the Justices, Mayor, or other officer so to require. And whosoever shall hear
any such tale, rumor, inuencion, or devise, and do not immediately reuele it
unto some Justice of the peace, Mayor, Bailiffe, Constable or such other
Officer, he to incur no less pain then the first offender: the like whereof
to be inflicted upon the Justice, Mayor, Bayliffe, Constable, or other officer
to whom the accusacion shall be given, in case that upon the trial thereof, they
do not put the effect hereof in execution upon the offenders, and the accusor of
such officers to be rewarded at the kings majesty's hands, ^or thuttering and
declaration of thofficers fault, in not executing his charge, in such sort,
as they shall have good cause an other time to watch for the like.

God save the King.
RICHARDVS GRAFTON typographus Regius excudebat. M. D. LI.


