By the Queen.
THE QVENES majesty considering how necessary it is and pleasynge to
almyghtye God, to have concord and peace with all princes, and specially with
such as be her neighbors: And finding not only her realms and dominions
left to her in hostility and war after the deceasse of her dear sister the
late Queen, with the realms of France and Scotland, but also an honorable
occasion offered of treatyce of peace with both the said Realms: has
therefore upon good advise, removed all ennimitie, and has upon most godly,
honorable and profitable consyderations (upon the second of this month)
passed, concluded and agreed, a good, perfect, sincere and perpetual amity,
peace, intelligence, confederacion and union, to remain and continue for ever
between her most excellent Majesty, her heirs and Successors on the one
party: and the right high and mighty Prince Henry the French King on the other
party, their realms Countries, Cities, towns, lands, dominions, territories,
segnories, castles, vassales, and subjects, by land, sea, and fresh water,
and else where. And the like peace also between her said Majesty and the king
and Queen, Dolphines of Scotland, and their Realms and Countries. By the
which peace it is provided, that al hostility and war shall cease on either
party, and that the said Princes, their Subjects and vassalles, shall live
together in peace, amity, intelligence and frendshippe. And that all things
be used and exercised as freely and lyberally, as they have done in any former
time of peace, had between the said Realms and dominions.

ALL which premises her Majesty has thought mete to notifye to all manner her
subjects of what estate soever the same be, that they and every of them,
observe all that hereto belongs: as the like is at the City of Paris in
France on the french part publyshed and notyfyed.

YEVEN at the palace of Westminster the seventh of Apryll the first year of
the reign of our sovereign Lady Elyzabeth by the grace of god Queen of
England, France and Ireland. defender of the faith. etc.
God save the Queen.
IMPRINTED AT LONDON IN POVLES CHVRCHE yard, by Richard Judge, and John
Cavvood, Printers to the Queen's Majesty. ANNO. M. D. LIX.

Cum priuilegio Regiae Maiestatis.


