Instruccions, given by the kings majesty, to his Commissioners, appoyntted
for the execucion of certain statutes, made in the fourth year of the reign of
king Henry the seventh and the.vii. and the.xxvii. year of the reign king
Henry the eight, to be inquired of, in the Shires and places, in the Commission
hereunto annexed, expressed.
FIrst, ye shall enquire what tounes, villages, and hamletes, have been decayed
and laid down, by enclosures, within the Shire conteigned, within your
Commission, sith the first year of the reign, of king Henry the seventh.

Item, what land was in tillage, at the time of the said enclosures, and what
was then in pasture.

Item, how mnay plowes, by reason of the said enclosures, be decayed and laid
down.

Item, how many Meases, Houses, Cottages, and dwelling houses, be fallen in
decaie, and the inhabitauntes of the same, departed from their inhabitacion
there, by reason of enclosures taken away of the lands, or otherwise. And how
much land, belonged to the same.

Item, if any person have severed the lands, from any house of husbandry,
whereby it is made a cottage, a Sheep house, a Dary house, or otherwise
converted, to any other use, then for a dwelling place, of an husband man.

Item, by whom the said enclosures and decaies were made, and how long agone,
and if they were made within the same time, and of what yearly rent and
proffites they be,

Item, who has now the state of inheritance, and the profits of the same
enclosure, and houses decayed, and of whom the lands be holden.

Item, how many new Parkes be now made, sith the said time.

Item, what arable land, at the time of the making of the said Parkes, were
imparked with the same.

Item, how many Parkes within the Shire be enlarged, since the said time, and
how much of the same ground, was then arable and put in tillage.

Item, how many Plowes, houses, inhabitacions be decayed, by reason of the
said new imparkyng.

Item, if any person has or does keep, above the number of two thousand
sheep, beside lambs of one years age, either in his own right, or in the name
of his wife, child, kinsman, or any other person, and whether he has kept the
same, upon his own lands, or upon his Ferme lands, or otherwise, by couin or
fraud, and how long he has kept them.

Item, how many Sheep ye think have been necessary, for the only expenses of
such persons, household for one year.

Item, if any person has letten, any lands to ferme* by copy of Court
Rolie, reseruyng the sheep pasture of the same to himself, or if any person
has taken, from any other their Commons, whereby they be not able to bread and
keep their cattle, and maintein their husbandry, as they were in times past.

Item, if any person has had or occupied, above the number of two houses, or
tenementes of husbandry, liyng in any Town, Uillage, Hamlet or Tithyng, and
how long they have occupied the same.

Item, whether such person, has taken the same in Farm, for term of life,
years, at will, by Indenture, or copy of Court roll, or otherwise, sith the
feast of the Nativity of our Lord God, a thousand CCCCC.xlv. And where such
person dwells.

Item, if any person, or body pollitique or corporate, that has by gift,
grant, Lease, or Demise, the site or precinct, and Demeanes of any Monastery,
Priory, or religious house, dissolved by thact of Parliament, made in
the.xxvii. year, of the reign of the king that dedde is, do keep an honest
continual house and household, in the same site or precinct: and do occupy
yearly, as much of the same demeanes, in plowyng and tillage of husbandry, as
was commonly used, to be kept by the governors, Abbottes, or Priors of the
same houses, Monasteries, or Priories, or by their Fermer or Fermers, occupiyng
the same, within the time of.xx. years, next before the making of the same
statute.

Item, that you our said Commissioners, for your better instruccion, take with
you copies of al such offices as were found concerning the premises, in
the.ix. or tenth years, of the reign of our most noble father, King Henry the
eight.

Item, that you cause tappere before you, at all places where you shall sit,
for thexecucion of this Commission, six persons of every Parish, that is to
say: Two Freholders, two Fermers, two Copy holders, or tenauntes at will,
if there be so many there dwelling, or else as many as be there dwelling to make
presentment by their oaths, of all such things, as be presentable before
you, by virtue of this Commission.

Item, if any person has or keeps, in his occupacion, in one Town, Parish,
Lordship, or Hamlet, any more tenementes of husbandry then one: And by what
title he so has or keeps them.

Item, if any Commons or high ways, have been enclosed or imparked, contrary to
right, and without due recompense. That then the same shall be reformed, by the
said Commissioners.

God save the King.
Excusum Londini, in aedibus Richardi Graftoni Regij impressoris.

Mese Iulii.

M.D.XLIX.

Cum priuilegio ad imprimendum solum.


