By the Queen
Forasmuch as the time wherein common Interludes in the English tongue ar
wont usually to be played, is now past until All Hallontyde, and that also
some that have been of late used, are not convenient in any good ordered
Christian Common weal to be suffered. The Queen's Majesty does straightly
forbid al manner Interludes to be playde either openly or privately, except the
same be notified before hand, and licenced within any City or town
corporate, by the Mayor or other chief officers of the same, and within any
shyre, by such as shall be Lieuetenauntes for the Queen's Majesty in the same
shyre, or by two of the Justices of peax inhabyting within that part of the
shire where any shall be played.

AND for instruction to every of the said officers, her majesty does likewise
charge every of them as they will answer: that they permyt none to be played
wherein either matters of religion or of the governance of the estate of the
common weal shall be handled or treated, being no meet matters to be written or
treated upon, but by men of authority, learning and wisdom, nor to be
handled before any audience, but of grave and discrete persons: All which
parts of this proclamation, her majesty charge to be inuiolably kept. And
if any shall attempt to the contrary: her majesty gives all manner of
officers that have authority to see common peax kept in commandment, to
arrest and enprison the parties so offendinge for the space of fourtene days
or more, as cause shall need: And further also until good assurance may be
found and given, that they shall be of good behavior, and no more to offend in
the like.

AND further her majesty gives special charge to her nobility and
gentilmen, as they profess to obey and regard her majesty, to take good
order in this behalf with their servants being players, that this her
majesty's commandment may be dulye kept and obeyed.

Yeuen at our Palayce of Westminster the.xvi. day of May, the first year of
our Raygne.

Imprinted at London in Poules churcheyarde by Rychard Judge and John Cawood
Printers to the Queen's Majesty.

Cum priuilegio. Regiae Maiestatis.


