A Proclamacion set forth by thee Kings Majesty, with the advice of his most
honorable Counsel, for the aouoydyng of idle persons out of the city of
London.
THE King our Sovereign Lord, by thaduise and consent of his highness most
honorable privy counsel, Straightly charge and commands that al and
every person and persons of what esate, condition or degree so ever he or
they be being his graces natural subjects borne, which were not borne within
his Majesty's City and Chamber of London, the Borough of Southwarke or the
Suburbs within the liberties of the same, nor be householders there, or have
sufficient to live by, and good and reasonable cause there to remain, nor have
continued and dwelled within the same by thee space of three years together now
last paste, and now do continewe soiourne and abide there within the said
City, Borough, or Suburbs, not being retained in service with any Person,
nor applyeng them selves to any bodily labor or lawefull occupacion. and
taking Stipend and wages for the same, do not only furthwith upon this
Proclamacion, depart and avoid out of thee said City, Boroughe and
liberties thereof, but also with all convenient speed, do return and get them
selves home again either into their native Countries where they were borne,
or else into the places within the realm where they last dwelt by the space
of three years together according to the tenure fourine and effect of the
estatute in that behalf, concerning the ordering of aged and ympotente persons
and the punishment of vacaboundes idle and loyteryng persons and Masterles
men. lately made and provided, upon the pains in the same estatute lymited
and expressed. And that the said Mayre, Aldermen and Shriefes and every of
them, and al and every other his Majesty's Officers and Ministers within the
said City, Borough of South warke and liberties thereof (all excuses ceassyng
and set aparte) endeavor theimselues with all convenient diligence from
hencefurth, from time to time too see, procure and cause the said estatute
and every branch and article therein contained, justly to be observed and put
in due execucion accordyngly, as they and every of them tender his Majesty's
favor and will a void his highness Indignacion, and displeasure.

God save the King.
RICH ARDVS GRAFTON typographus Regius excudebat. Mense Maii. A, M. D, L. Cum
Priulegio ad imprimendum solum


