By the King and the Queen.
THERE as the Queens hyghnes is infourmed that diverse and sundry evil
disposed persons shipmaysters, mariners, and sea faringe men, latelye prested
and retained to serve in her maiestyes Navy of ships, presently prepared and
set forth to the Seas, as well for the defense of her graces Realms and
dominions as also for the better annoyaunce and empechemente of the enemy,
have without any just cause and sufficient pasporte and license obtained of
the lord Admy rall, or vyceadmyrall of the flete in that behalf appointed,
contrary to their duetyes of obedience and service, due by good subjects, with
drawn them selfs from the said service, both to the great detriment of her
Majesty's affairs, and to the evil example of other her highness subjects,
now serving and placed already, and appointed in the said Navy. Her hyghnes
therefore minding that the said offenders, vsyng and practysyng such deceyte
and fraud should not escape vnponished, and that also by this example of
ponyshment, al other persons so retained or to be retained to serve on the
Seas, may take suffycyent admonition and warnyng how to avoid the danger of
such offense, and to prevent the peril which might ensue through the lack
of their duetyes to be by them admynistred in this behalf, does by this her
hyghnes proclamation expressly and strayghtlye forbid, that no person or
persons hereafter, by any color* fraud, or deceit do attempt upon pain of
death, to with draw him or themselfes from her graces said service, without a
sufficient pasporte, signed by the hand of the Lord Admyral, or of the said
vyceadmyrall of the flete, wherein he or they shall be so appointed to serve.

And further most straightly charge and commands all Justices of peace,
Majors, Sheryffes, Bailyffes, Constables, Hedborrowes, and al other her hyghnes
officers, many sters. and subjects, to whom auethoritye is committed for th
execution of laws, and for the good governance and order of the people, to
apprehend and commyt to ward every such shypmaister, maryner, or sea faring
man, which at any time since he was prested, or that from the time the same
shall be hereafter prested, has or shall commyt offense contrary to the tenure of
this proclamation, whersoeuer the same person or persons shall happen to be
found, in any City, Town, Borroughe, Vyllage, or other place within this
her Maiestyes Realm, there to remain without bail or maynepryce, until the
Lord Admyral being certifyed thereof, do give order for his or their
enlargeme^t or co^tinuaunce in prison as to his discression shall seem
conuenyent. And for as much as this service on the Seas shall much conduct to
the furtheraunce of the honor, and service of the Realm, which every good
Subject owes to render, and to his vttermoste power according to his degree
and vocation, to advance and set forth.

Her hyghnes oftsones wills and requires al justices of peace. Majors,
Sherifes, and other the said officers, that they do attend to the diligent and
careful execution of the premysses, as they and every of them tender her
majesty's favor, and will answer for the contrary at his or their extreme
perils.

Given at Grenewich the. xxix day of March.
God save the King and the Queen.
EXCVSVM LONDINI IN AEDIBVS Iohannis Cavvodi, Tipographi Regiae Maiestatis.
Anno. M. D. LVIII Cum priuilegio ad imprimendum solum.


