By the King and the Queen.
WHERE as Henry Dudly, Christofer Aston thelder, Chrystofer Aston the younger,
Frauncys Horsey, Edward Horsey, Roberte Cornewell, Alias Cornwall, Richard
Tremayne, Nycholas Tremayne Richard Ryth, Roger Reinoldes. John Dale, Ihon
Calton, Hamond, and Meuerel, forgetting their duties to almighty God, their
all gyaunce to the kings and Queen's Majesty's, and not regarding yt good and
quiet state of their natyue country, have of late unnaturally, and most
traitorously attempted, ymagined, conspired, compassed, and practiced many
notable Acts, conspiracies, and detestable treasones, entendyng thereby not
only the destruction of the King and Queen's most Royal persons, but also
the disturbaunce of the peace and tranquillity of this Realm, and the
invasion, and subuersyon of the same, if their malyces and malignityes might
have taken such success as they intended. Who knowing them selfs false
conspiratours, and traitors to the said king and Queen's Majesty's, and their
said Realm, have of late contrary to ye laws of this Realm, withdrawn
themselves and be fled, and departed into the parties of beyond the Seas, where
they do still remain, and continue in contempt of their said Majesty's, and
of their laws, not cefsynge to pracetyse and execute their malicyous and
traiterous purposes, and enterprises against our said Soueraygne Lord and
Lady, the king and the Queen's Maiestyes, and this their Realm and domynion,
contrary to their duty of allegyance, where by they cannot presently be
brought to trial according to the laws and stacutes of this Realm, in that
case provided forsuch offenses conspiracyes, and treasones, as have been by
them and every of them committed, perpetrated and done.

And to the intent our said Soueraygne Lord and Lady, the king and Queen's
Majesty's, true faithful and iouynge subjects, of this Realm, being
ignorant of such conspiracies and treasones, as have been perpetrated
committed and done by the said Henry Dudley, Christofer Aston thelder,
Christofer Aston the younger, Frauneys Horsey, Edward Horsey, Robert Cornewell,
Alias Cornwall, Richard Tremayne, Nicholas Tremayne, Richard Ryth, Roger
Reinolds, John Dale, Ihon Calto^, Hamo^d and Meuerel, should not incur the
daungier of their highness laws, or be impeached or troubled, for aydyng
comfortyng or helpyng them or any of the^ hereafter, do therefore by this their
highness procla mation, pronounce, publyshe. and declare the said Henry Dudley,
Christofer Aston thelder, Christofer Aston the younger, Frauneys Horsey, Edward
Horsey, Roberte Cornewell, Alias Cornwall, Richard Tremayne, Nycholas
Tremayne, Rychard Ryth, Roger Reinoldes, Ihon Dale, Ihon Calto^ Hamond, and
Meuerell, and every of them to be notorious, and manifest traytoures, to their
said majesty's, and their said Realm. And therefore will and command all and
singular their good true, and natural subjects, that they do not aid the
said Henry Dudley, Christofer Aston thelder, Christofer Aston the younger,
Fayuncys Horsey, Edward Horsey, Robert Cornewell, Alias Cornwall, Richard
Tremayne, Nicholas Tremayne, Richard Ryth, Roger Reynoldes, Ihon Dale, Ihon
Calton Hamond and Meuerell, nor any of them, with any thing, nor adhere or have
access unto the said trai toures or any of them within this Realm, or
without. But do that lie in their powers, to apprehed the said traytoures, and
every of them, as they will avoid their Majesty's high indignation and
displeasure, and the penalties, of their laws and statutes. And further the
king and Queen's most excellent Majesty's, straightly charge and command all
and singular Justices of peace, Maires, sherifes Baylyffes, Constables.
Customers, Comptrollers, Searchers, and all other their hyghnes officers, and
mynysters, of the ports, and Crekes of this their said Realm, and the
dominions of ye same, to have a vigilant eye, and regard to the said ports,
and Crekes, and to stay, apprehende and take al and every such person and
persons, which after the publication of this their highness Proclamation, shall
atte^pte to pass out of this realm, (except merchants, and such as shall
have their majesty's special license* or may pass over by force of the
statute of Richard the second, progenytor of our said sovereign Lady the
Queen, made in the fyftyeare of his Reygne. And them and every of them, to
commytte to safe custodye, ward or prison, so to remain until further order
shall be taken by their Maiest^^s or their most honorable Counsel for their
delyuerye, or otherwise as the case shall require.

Given at our manner of Grenewych the first day of Apryll.
God save the King and the Queen.
Excusum Londini in aeedibus Iohannis is Cawald, Typographi Regiae Maiestatis.
Anno. M. D. L VI. Cum priuilegio.


