A PROCLAMACION for the Merchants Adventurers.
ELizabeth dei gratia Angliae Fraunciae, and Hiberniae, Regina fidei defensor
etc.
Maion et vice comitibus Ciuitatis sue Londoniensis, salutem.
Vobis mandamu quod statim visis presentibus^a singulis locis, infra Ciuitatem
predictam and Subarb, eiusdem, tam infra libertates quam extra, vbi magis
expedire videritis ex part nostra, solemniter and publicae pro^amari fac. in
haec verba.

WHERE in the Parliament begone and holden at Westminster, the first day of
March, in ^^e seventh year of the Raygne of our dearest brother King Edward
the Sixth, and there continued till ^^e last day of the same month of March. It
is there resited by one act of Parliament, then and there made ^^^ituled an act
reviving a Statute made in the.xvii. year of our most noble progenitor, king
Edward ^he fourth, amongst other things it was then ordained and enacted by
authority of the same Parly^ment, that no person should carry or make to be
carried out of this Realm or Wales from no part of the ^^me, any manner of
monye of the coigne of this Realm, nor money of the coin of other realms,
lands, ^^ Lordshipes, nor plate, vessel, bullion or Iuell of gold, garnished
or ungarnished, or of Silver, wtoute (...) kings license, but such persons
as be dispensed with in the statute made in the second year ^four ^ost noble
progenitor king Henry the Sixte, and other diverse Statutes made upon painc of
felonye. ^he which estatute and ordinance so made in the time of our said most
noble progenitor King Edward (...) forth, was made to endure from the feast of
Easter in ye.xviii. year of the said king Edward ye fort^ unto thend of seven
years then next ensuing, which said estatute and ordinance so before
rehearsed (...) ^ucthoritie of Parliament, holden in the fourth year of the
late king of famous memory, Henry the (...) ^^nth, was confirmed and
established to be good and effectual from the feast of the purification of our
Lady ^n the year of our lord God a thousand fore hundredth, four score and
nine, to thend and term of twenty ^eares then next ensuinge, as by the same
Statute also more plainelye appears. And where also at the ^^id Parliament
holden at Westminster, in the Seventh year of our said dearest brothers
reign, it is ^nacted by authority of Parliament, that the said estatute and
ordinance before rehearsed, made in the ^vij. year of our most noble
progenitor, king Edward ye forth, and every clause, article, sentence or
prouy^ion therein contained, is by authority thereof confirmed and enacted, to
be good and effectual from the first ^ay of May, then next ensuing, and to
endure unto thend of twenty year then next following. As by the said act made
in the seventh year of our said dearest brothers Raygne plainly appears.

NEVERTHELES upon good and reasonable considerations us moving, we be pleased
and ^ontented, y^ from and after the publication of this our proclamation, it
shall be lawful unto al notorious Merchants, and all and every other person
and persons passing by our special license out of this ^ealme, into any
outward parties beyond the Seas, to carye with them for their reasonable
costs and expenses, the sum of four pounds of any money current within
this Realm or under and not ^boue, or any Rings or Signettes of gold or
Silver upon their fyngers. without any loss of life, ^andes, or goods or
any other pain, for^eyture, imprysonment, or penalty to be to them or any of
them for the same. The said estatutes or any other Statute, ordenaunce or law
heretofore made to the contrary in any wise notwithstanding. Et hoc sub
periculo incumbenti nullatenus omittatis.

Test me ipsa apud Westminster primo die Maij. Anno Regni nostri primo.
God save the Queen.
Imprinted at London by Richard Judge and John Cavvood, Printers to the Queen's
majesty. Anno. M.D.LIX.

Cum priuilegio Regiae Maiestatis.


