A proclamacion, set forth by the Kings Majesty, with the assent of his
dearest uncle. Edward Duke of Domerset governor of his most royal person and
of his Realms Dominions and subjects Prolongacion of the formet Proclamacion
made for the calling in of Testons.
WHere as the Kings most excellent majesty with thaduyse and assent of his
derest uncle Edward duke of Somerset, governor of his Roial person,
Protector of his highness Realms, dominions, and subjects and the test of his
graces cou^sail. has hertofore by proclamacio^ bering date the.x. day of April
in the second year of his reign, given notice and ro^maundeme^t to almaner his
loving subjects and others haunting his Majesty's Realms or domimo^s that
from the last day of ye month of Dece^bre last passed forwards, yt pieces
of.xij. d. commonly called Testo^s should no le^gar be currau^t nor pass in
payment or receipt as his graces coin, but be taken only for Bullio^: Whereunto
his majesty was moved upon such co^sideracio^s as in thesayd former
proclamacio^ was more at large expressed. For as much as it has sithe^s come
to his highness knowledge, that by reason of ye great no^bre of the same Testons,
which at this present are dispersed abrod in so many men's hands. besides no
less caut^le and policy used cue^ hard upon the day, by diverse making hole
payme^tes in thesayd coin, and specially for that those yt have plenty of
other money, take unreasonable allowance of the poorer sort which is most to be
relieved for the exchange of those Testo^s, much detriment and inconuenie^ce
should ensue to the possessours of the same, onles a remedy by prolonging of the
term then appointed for their calling in were provided: His Majesty therefore
by the advice aforsaid, is most graciously pleased, wills, and commands
that the term of the calling in of thesayd pieces of.xij. d. commonly called
Testons, shall be yet further prolonged and extended to the first day of May next
coming after the date hereof. And that during all the mean space, thesaid
Testons (being of his highness standerd) shall be curraunt through out his highness
Realms and dominions after no less value and sort, then if thesayd former
proclamacion for their calling in had not ben made.

Provided always that after thesayed first day of May, thesayed Testons shall
no longer be current, but be used in such sort, as that former Proclamacion
does specify, this present prolongacio^ notwith standing.

And further his Majesty exhorts all his said loving subjects, that like as
his highness for their benefit was moved to revoke thesayed Testo^s, and for
their more commodity is pleased to prolo^g the day of their calling in: so they
also in the mean while will have the better regard and head that such Testons
as they take, be of his Majesty's standerd and coynt, seeing the nombre to be
such of false and foreyn Testons as are now so dispersed abroad, to the
deceit and loss of the takers: and that during this time of respit, they
endeavor them selves from day to day by portions and smaller sommes, to bring
in such Testons as they shall h^^e into any his Majesty's myntes, as shall
best serve for their purpose, there to receive the just exchange of the same:
So as by lyngeryng or defertyng of the bryngyng in of such Testons until
thesayed first day of May, lymitted by this peremptory admonition, their
negligence be not cause that when the myntes (if the whole mass come in at
once) are pestred, their exchange shall not be so ready unto them as otherwise
it should.

Moreover, because his Majesty most graciously above other things tendryng
the relief of the poter sort of his loving subjects, does considre, that their
need or vnhabilitie to forbear by a space (be it never so small) thexchaunge of
their Testons at his graces myntes, might be an occasion that others of the
richer sort with whom they should perchance be driven to bargayne for other
money in lieu of their Testo^s, should then exact or take of them vnresonably
for thexchange (as it has came^ to his highness knowledge that sum al ready
have not ben ashamed to demand and take so against all conscience and
equity) His highness therefore by thefor. and a^^^ do the strayghtly charge and
command that no (...)


