A Proclamation set forth by the King and Queen's most excellent majesty's with
th advice of their most honorable counsel of certain moneys and coins of
fine gold and fine silver with the valuation of the same, newlye set forth by
their highness.
WHERE the Queen's highness (calling to her gracious remembrance the great and
intolerable charges, grown and chanced to her highness specially, and also
to all her loving subjects, as well by reason of the base moneys, made within
her realms and dominions, as also by great quantities of the like base
moneys, made and counterfeyte both in this her highness realm, and in other
foreign realms conveyed hither, and issued out within her graces realms and
dominions) caused to be made and set forth in the first year of her raygne
certain coins of moneys, as well of fine gold, as of fine silver,
according to her highness proclamation, sent forth in that behalf.

THE King and Queens majesty's of their great and abundant clemencies,
mindinge to avoid all inconveniences, happening and growing thereby for the
tender scale and love they bear to all their loving subjects, and for the
commodity of their said loving subjects, are resolved and determined to
continue the said fine moneys, and therefore have newlye caused to be made and
set forth within their mintes certain pieces of coins of moneys of gold and
silver of the fine standerdes, with such stamp and prynte (devised by their
graces appoyntement) as is mete and convenient for the same, and most
redcundynge to their graces honors, after the rates and values hereafter
expressed.

THAT is to say, one piece of fine gold called a Sovereign of the value of
thirtic willinges of lawful money of England. One other piece of fine gold
half of the said Sovereign, called the Royal of gold of the value of fiftenne
willinges of the lawful moneys before said. One other piece of fine gold
called the Angel of the value of ten willinges of the lawful moneys
aforesaid. One other piece of fine gold called the half Angel of the value
of five willinges of the lawful moneys aforesaid. One piece of fine silver
moneys called the willing of the value of twelve pence of the lawful moneys
of England. One other piece half of the said willing of the value of six
pence of the lawful moneys aforesaid. And one other piece called the Grote of
the value of four pence of the lawful moneys aforesaid. Al which pieces of
coins of moneys of gold and silver the King and Queen's majesty's wills and
pleasures is, walbe curraunt within this their highness realm of England, and
the dominions of the same, after such value, and in such manner and form, as
above is declared. Strayghtlye charging and commaundinge all manner of persons
within their said realm and dominions, of what estate or degree socuer they
be, to receive and pay the said several pieces of moneys, as well of gold as
of silver accordinglye, upon pain of their highness displeasure, and to be
further punished, as shall some to their graces most convenient. Nevertheless
their majesty's express commandment is, that all such base moneys as have
been reduced to the value of a lower rate, shall go curraunte in receypte and
payment in like manner and sort, as the same be curraunte at this day*
according to the proclamation last made in the time of the late most noble
Prince King Edward the.vi. in ye behalf, until such time, as their highness
with th advice of their counsel shall take further order, touching the same.

GEVEN at our pallaice of Westminster the.xxvi. day of December, in the first
and second years of our raygnes.

Excusum Londini in aedibus Iohannis Cawodi Topographi Regiae Maiestatis

Cum priuilegio Regiae Maiestatis.


