A proclamacion set forth by the Kings Majesty with the aouise of his highness
most honorable privy Counsel, concerning casters, and spreaders abroad of
slaundetous and sedicious bills. the.xx. day. of May in the.v. year of his
most prosperous reign.
Orasmuche as diverse lewd and sedicious persons, minding to sow contencion
in diverse parts of this realm, have of their malicious and cankered
affections, forged and made many staunderous and wicked bills, as well against
the kings majesty's most honorable Counsayll, as against other noble
personages within this Realm. And the same bills has spread and cast abroad in
streets and in diverse other places. and has fastened the same, at such privy
corners where they thought they might best publishe their conceived malice:
The Auctors where of (because they have wrought their malice so covertly)
cannot casely be found out to be punished according to the laws, statutes and
proclamations made in that behalf. And yet nevertheless their deuelish devise
takes place and effect for that the said bills have not been broken, de
faced and destroyed immediately, after they have been found, not only to the
staunder and infamy of many godly and weldisposed persons and defacing of
their weldoinges in the common wealth, but also to the maintenance and
encouraging of such malefactors to persevere and continue in their lewdenes:
Therefore the kings Matestie with the advice of his most honorable counsel
straightly charge and commands al and singular his loving subjects to
whose hands any such staundetous Bills or Writings shall come, or that
shall find theun cast abroad, or se theun fasteued to post, pillar, or other
place, the same shall by the auothoritie of this proclamation furthwith with out
further de'ay, break, burn, destroy or deface without showing them to any
other person or persons, that the effect and meaning of thesaide bil may not
apeare and be conserved thereby. And whosoever after his or their sight, reading
or knowledge thereof, shall suffer the same bills to stand still or remain not
destroyed, nor defaced, as is beforesayde, or shall publishe the same to any
other by any manner of means, the same shall be taken and punished as the Auctor,
maker and deuisor of the same, and being brought before a Justice of the peace
lefully convicted, shall suffer imprisonment and make fine at the kings
majesty's pleasure.

God save the King
RICHARDVS GRAFTON typographus Regius excudebat.

Mense Maij.

A. M. D. LI.

Cum priuilegio ad imprimendum solum.


