A proclamation, divised and made by the kings highness, by the advice of his
majesty's counsel, the.xviii. day of Decembre, in the.xxxv. year of his
highness reign, for restraint of wares and marchaundises to be conveyed and
transported out of the french kings dominions in to the realm of England.
THe kings most royal majesty being informed, that not withstanding there is
open war proclaimed and manifestly known between his highness and the french
king, upon sundry occasions only mynistred on the part of the same french
king, Yet never theles diverse of his majesty's subjects and others, do daily
transport convey and bring into this his highness realm of England, and other
his majesty's dominions, out of the realm of France, and other the french
kings countries, diverse and sundry kinds of wares and marchandises, to sell
exchange barter and utter, whereby the said french king and his subjects and
adherentes, being the kings majesty's ennemies, have taken and daily take
great commodities, benefittes, profittes, and advantages, and be thereby
enriched and encouraged to mainteyne their wrongful and iniust wars
annoyaunces attemptates and malicious purposes, moved by them and their
occasion against oath honor truth and all honesty. FOR reformation whereof,
the kings said majesty straightly charge and commands all and singular
his loving subjects and all other persons as well denyzens as strangers, of
what so ever estate degree or condition so ever they be, that they nor any of
them shall not at any time after.xiiii. days now next ensuyng after this
present proclamation proclaimed, by any manner of means convey transporte or
bring in to this realm or in any other his highness domynyons, to be sold
exchaunged bartred given or by any other ways or means uttered, any manner of
wares marchaundises or other commodities, of what name nature kind or quality
so ever they be of, being made growyng or increased within the said realm of
France, or any other the french kings domynions, without special license
under his great seal to be obtained of the kings highness for the same, upon
pain that every such person, brynging into this realm any such wares
marchandises or commodities, contrary to the form of this his majesty's
proclamation as is aforesaid, to forfayte and lose the same wares marchaundises
and commodities or the value of them, and to suffer punyshement by imprisonment
or otherwise at his hyghnes pleasure.

God save the king.
Tho. Berthelet regis impressor excussie. Cum priuilegio ad imprimendum solum.


