(...)er, in any ^ and open prayer, or to minister any sacrament otherwise, or
in any other manner or form, then is me^cioned in thesaied book, or that by
any of thesaied means, shall unlawfully interrupt or let any Person, Vicar,
or other ministers in any Cathedral or parish church, Chapel, or any other
place, to sing or say common and open prayer, or to minister the sacraments,
or any of the^, in such manner and form, as is mentioned in thesaid book,
that then every parson being thereof lawfully convicted, in form above said,
shall forfet to the king our sovereign lord, his heirs and successors, for
the first offense. x. l. And if any person or persons, being once convict of
any such offense, eftsoon offend against any of the premises, and shall in
form aforesaied, be thereof lawfully convict, that then the same person so
offendyng and convict, shall for the second offense, forfet to the king out
sovereign Lord, his heirs and successors. xx. l. And if any persons after
he in form aforesaied, shall have been twice convict of any offense,
concerning any of the premises, shall offend the third time, and be thereof in
form abouesaid lawfully convict, that then every person so offendyng and
convict, shall for his third offense, forfet to our sovereign lord the king,
all his goods and cattalles, and shall suffer emprisonment during his life.
And if any person or persons, that for his first offense concerning the
premises, shall be convict in form aforesaid, do not pay the some to be
paid by virtue of his conuiccion, in such manner and form, as the same ought
to be paid, within six wekes next after his conuiccion, that then every
person so convict, and so not paiyng the same, shall for the same first
offense, instead of thesaied. x. l. suffer emprisonment, by the space of three
months, without baill or mainprise. And if any person or persons, that for
his second offense, concerning the premises, shall be convict in form
aforesaied, do not pay the some, to be paid by virtue of his conuiccion, in
such manner and form as the same ought to be paid, within six wekes next
after his said second co^uiccion, that then every person so convict, and not
so paiyng the same, shall for the same second offense, instead of thesaied.
xx. l. suffer emprisonment during six months, without baill or mainprise.

AND it is ordeigned and enacted, by the authority aforesaied, that all and
every Justices of oyer and, Determiner, or Justices of Assise, shall have full
power and authority, in every of their open and general Sessions, to
enquire, hear and determyne, all and all manner of offenses, that shall be
committed or done contrary to any article, conteigned in this present act,
within the limittes of the Commission to the directed and to make process for
the execution of the same, as they may do against any person, being endited
before them, of trespass or lawfully convicted thereof.

PROVIDED always, and be it enacted by the authority aforesaied, that all
and every Archebishopp, and Bishopp, shall or may at all time and times, at
his liberty and pleasure, toyne and associate himself, by virtue of this act,
to thesaied Justices of Oyer and Determiner, or to thesaied Justices of Assise,
at every of thesaied open and general Sessions, to be holden in any place
within his Dioces, for, and to the inquiry, hearing, and determinyng, of the
offenses aforesaied.

PROVIDED always, that it shall be l^full so any manne, that understands the
Greek, Lattin, and Hebrewe toungue, or other strange toungue, to say and have
thesaied prayers, heretofore specified of Matins and Euensong^, Latten, or any
such other toungue, saying the same privately, as they do understand. And for
the furthe^ encouragyng of learning in the toungues, in the Universities of
Cambridge and Oxford, to use and exercise in their common and open prayer, in
their Chapelles (being no parish churches) or other places of prayer, the
Matins, Euensong, Letany, and all other prayers (The holy Communion commonly
called the Mass, excepted, prescribed in thesaied book) prescribed in Greek
Latten or Hebrewe, any thing in this present act, to the contrary
notwithstanding.

PROVIDED also, that it shall be lawful for all men, as well in Churches,
Chapelles, Oratories, or other places, to use openly any Psalm or prayer,
taken out of the Bible, at any due time, not lettyng or omittyng thereby the
Service, or any part thereof mentioned in thesaied book.

PROVIDED also, and be it enacted by the authority aforesaied, that the books
concerning the(...)


