A Proclamacion, set furthe by the kings Majesty, with the advice of his
highness most honorable counsel, for the publishyng of sundery statutes and
acts of Parliament heretofore made, for the prohibicion of the cariyng out of
the realm of gold or silver, and of eschaunge and reeschaunge.
Forasmuch, as there has grown, and daily grows, great displeasure of God,
and inestimable damage and hurt, to the king our souercigne Lord, and to his
people, of this his realm of England, by the inordinate chaunges and
rechau^ges of money, and cariyng out of the realm gold or silver, in money,
bullion, plate, or vessel, that has been of long time used, and yet
continues in his realm, without license and aucthoritee, given by the kings
Majesty, to such chaungyng, rechaungyng, and cariyng out of the realm, to
the great impouerishement of this his said realm: for remedy whereof,
diverse and sundery notable and profitable statutes and ordinances have been
made, provided and ordained, amongst the which, one very notable and
profitable statute was made, ordained and enacted, in the.iij. year of the
reign of the right noble and famous prince, of worthy memory, king Henry
the.vij. graundfather to our said sovereign lord, as well for the
confirmacion of diverse and sundery profitable statutes, before that time made
and provided, for that Godly intent and purpose, as also for the due execucion
of the same. In the which estatute, of king Henry the.vij. it is further
contained, that no man should make any eschaunge, without the kings license,
ne make any eschaunge, or reeschaunge of money, to be paid within this land,
but only such as the king should depute thereunto to keep, make, and answer
such eschaunge, and reeschaunge, upon pein of forfeicture of such penalitie,
as is contained in the Statute, made in the time of King Richard the second:
which is, that the offender shall forfeicte, as much as he may forfeicte,
as well for the priuey and apert sendyng, or bringing, or causing to be sent or
brought, out of the realm, of any gold or silver, in money, bullion, plate or
vessel, as also by eschaunge to be made: all which things, be more at large
contained, in the said several estatutes. Our said sovereign lord, by
thaduise of his counsel, considering, and right well perceiuyng, the great
enormities and prejudice, which grows unto his Majesty, and the common
wea^^ of this his said realm, by occasion of the said cariyng, chaungyng, and
rechaungyng: wills, defends, and straightly, by this his Proclamacion
commands, that the said former statutes, and every of them, be observed and
kept, in all and every Article and poynct, articles and poynctes, and that due
execucion be there of made, as apperteineth, upon such peines and penalties,
as in the said statutes been comprised. And that no manner of person or
persons, of what degree, estate or condition so ever he or they be, ta^^ upon
him or the^, to carry out of the realm, any gold or silver, in coin, or
bullion, or make any eschaunge or reeschaunge, contrary to the form of the
said estatutes, and this his highness Proclamacion, without his Majesty's
license and aucthoritee, to him or them to be given.

And his majesty wills it to be understand and known unto all his
subjects, his graces full mind and pleasure is, that they and every of them,
observe and keep his laws, ordinances and statutes heretofore made,
concerning the premises, as they will avoid his great indignacion and
displeasure, and further to incur the danger of his laws, which his
highness wills, duly to be put in execucion, without respect or favor, to be
given unto any offender, contrary to his said laws and this his highness
proclamacion.

God save the King.
RICHARDVS GRAFTON typographus Regius excirdebat Mense lunij. Anno. 1551.

Cum priuilegio ad imprimendum solum.


