By the King and the Queen.
PHILIPPE AND MARIE by the grace of God king and Queen of England, Spain,
France, both Cycilles, Jerusalem, and Irelande, defendonts of the Faith,
Archdukes of Austria, Dukes of Burgon, Myllayne, and Brabante, Counties of
Haspurg Flaunders and Tyroll.
To our right trusty and right welbe loved Colyn and Counsaylor, Willyam
Marquis of Winchester, our Treasurer of England, greting.
Whereas for the defense of this our Realm, and for the peace and quiet of our
loving Subjects of the same. We have heretofore by our Letters patentes, under
our great Seal, appointed certain of our nobility and other, to be our
Lieutenauntes of Sundry Counties, Cities, and towns in the same letters
patents expressed. So have we thought it requisite and convenient to provide
for the surety and preservation of our Royal persons. And have for that
purpose reserved the power of the Counties, Cities and Towns hereafter
mentioned. The rule and charge whereof we have thought good to commit unto
you, Whom in that case we have specially appointed, to be attendaunte upon our
said persons. Know ye therefore that for the great and singular trust and
confydence, that we have in your approved fydelitie, wisdom and
circumspection. We have assigned, made, constituted and ordained, and by these
presents do assign, make, constitute, and ordeine you to be our lieutenaunt
within our counties of Buckingha^, Bedford, Huntington, Cambrydge, Midd.
Oxenforde, Berk. Wigorn, Hereforde, Gloucester, Monmouth, Northampton Rutlande,
Leiceter, Warwick, Hertforde, Brecknocke, Glamorgan, Radnoure, Carmarthen,
Pembrocke, Cardigan, Denbighe, Mou^tgomery, Flint, Carnaruon, Anglesey and
Merioneth, the Isle of Elie, the Cities of London, Gloucester, Bristoll,
Couentre, and the town of Hauerford west, and the counties of them, and every
of them as well within liberties as without, and by these presents do give
full power and authority unto you, that ye from time to time, may leuye,
gather and call together al and singular our Subjects of what degree, estate,
or dignity they or any of them ben dwelling or inhabitinge within our said
Counties, Isle, Cities, and town, or in any of them, as well within liberties
as without, mete and apt for the wartes. And them to try arraye, and put in
redines, and them also, and every of them after their liabilities, degrees, and
faculties, well and sufficiently to cause to be armed, and sufficiently
weaponed. And to take the musters of them from time to time, in places most
mete for that purpose, after your good discretion. And also the same our
Subjects so arrayed, tried, and armed aswelmen of arms, as other horsemen,
Archers, and fotemen of al kinds of degrees mete and apt for the wars, to
lead and conducte as well against al and singular our enemies. As also against
al and singular rebels traytoures, and other offenders, and there adherentes
against us, our Crown, and dignytie, within our said Counties, Isle, Cities,
and town, or any of them, from time to time, as often as need shall require,
by your discresion. And with the said euemies, rebels and traycoures, to
light, and them to invade, resist, repress* subdue, slay* kill and put to
execution of death, by all ways and means, by your said good discretion.
And to do fulfill and execute all and singular other things, which shall be
requysyte for the leuying and government of our said subjects, conservation
of our person and peace, so by you in four me aforesaid levied and to be led.

AND further to do execute and use against the said enemies, traitors,
rebels, and such other like offenders, and their adherentes, as necessytye
shall require by your dyscretion, the law called the marshall law, according
to the law marshal, and of such offenders appreheded and being brought in
subjection, to save whom ye shall think good to be saved, and to slay dystroy
and put to execution of death, such and asmany of them, as ye shall think: mete
by your good discretion to be put to death.

AND further our will and pleasure is, and by these presents do give full power
and aucthotitie unto you, that in case any inuation of enemies, insurrections,
rebellion, riottes, routes or inlawefull assembles, or any like offenses, shall
happen to be moned in any place of this our realm, out of the lymittes of this
our commission. That then and as often as ye shall perceive any such
misdemeanor to arise, you with all the power ye can make, shall with all
diligence repair to the place where any such invasion, unlawful assembles, or
insurrections shall happen to be made, to subdue, repress, and reform the
same as well by battle and other kind of force, as otherwise by the laws of
our Realm, and the law marshall, according to your discresion.

AND further we give you full power and authority for the executing of this
our commission, to appoint and assign within the said counties, Isle, Cities,
and Town, and every of them, a provost marshall to use and exercise that
office in such cases as ye shall think requisite, to use the foresaid law
marshall.

WHEREFORE we will and likewise command you our said lieutenaunte, that with al
dylygence ye do execute the premises with effect. And further we will and
command al and singular our Justices of peace, Majors, Sheriffs, Bayliffes,
Constables, Hedboroughs, officers ministers and al other our subjects, mete and
apt for the wars, within our said counties, Isle, Cities, and Town and
every of them, to whom it shall appertain, that they and every of them with
their power and servants, from time to time shall be attendaunt aydinge,
assistinge, counsellynge, helpyng, and at your commandment in the due
execution hereof, as they and every of them tender our pleasure, and will
answer for the contrary at their uttermost perylls. And further our pleasure
is, that whatsoever ye shall do by virtue of this our commission, and according
to the tenure and effect of the same touching the execution of the premises,
or any part thereof, ye shall be dyscharged in that behalf against us, and the
heirs and successors of us the Queen. In wytnes whereof, we have caused these
our Letters to be made Patentes, and to continue during our pleasure. Wytnes
our selfs at Grenewiche the.xii. day of Apryll, the sourth and fyfte years of
our reygnes.

God save the King and the Queen.
EXCVSVM LONDINI IN AEDIBVS Iohannis Cavvodi, Tipographi Regiae Maiestatis.
Anno. M.D.LVIII

Cum priuilegio ad imprimendum solum.


