A proclamation set furthe by the Kings Majesty, with the advice of his most
honorable priuey counsayll, for the valuacion of the Shillinges and grotes to a
meaner and lower value and rate.
Whereas, the late king of most famous memory, king Henry the.viii. father unto
our most redoubted sovereign Lord the Kings majesty that now is, considering
at the beginning of his last wars, that great and notable sommes of money,
were requisite to be provided for the maintenance and supportacion of the same,
did therefore devise, to abace, and diminishe the goodness of the Coin, and
thereupon, caused to be coined and setfurth to be current among his subjects,
certain pieces of money called Testons valuing the same at.xii. d. sterling. the
piece, and likewise, grotes of the same bacenes, after the rate of.iiii. d.
sterling. the piece. After which time, our said souereine lord that now is,
perceauing, that as well strangers in foreign parts, as diverse lewd persons
within this realm, did by reason of the bacenes of thesayde Coin,
counterfaict no small quantity of like money: His Majesty therefore mynding to
remedy the same, devised and caused to be coined and setfurth, to be current
with in this Realm, and other his dominions, other pieces of money called
Shillinges and grotes, under another stamp, likewise valuing thesaid
Shillinges, at.xii. d. sterling. the piece, and the grotes at.iiii. d. sterling. the
piece.

Forasmuch as this notwithstanding, it has appeared since most certainly,
unto our said souerein Lord, and to his highness counsel, that not only
diverse strangers of beyond the seas, but also sundry false and naughty
Persons within this Realm, have in like manner, from time to time,
counterfaicted and falsely coined the said Shillinges and Grotes, set furthe
by our said Souereygne Lord, and with the same counterfaicte and false
Moneys, in great and notable Sums, do trafficque and bie al manner of
victualles, Wares and other kind of Merchandises, geuyng they care not what
Prices for the same: Where upon has risen one great and special occasion of
so great dearthe, of all manner of things as at this day does appear among
all men, to the great loss of his majesty and his subjects, and to the
great slander of the whole Realm, and to the empouerishement of every man in
his Degree, that has the same money, and would keep it in store. His Majesty
therefore graciously considering, with the good advise of the Lords, and
others of the privy counsel, what great benefit, commodite and reputation
shall arise and follow very shortly after, to the whole body of the realm, if
that thesaide Coins were amended, and brought to such a finenesse, as may make
the same certain, like as in times past it has been. Albeit that thesayde
first abacement of the Coin was greatly beneficial unto his said Majesty's
Father of famous memory, and also to the King our Sovereign Lord that now
is, yet his Majesty considering that this amendment of the coin shall be both
great honor to this Realm, and also a merueilous benefit unto the whole
common wealth, for the bringing down of the high prices of all things,
has like a most gracious Prince determined to reform the same. And forasmuch
as this can not be brought to pass onelesse the said money called Shillinges,
coined by his majesty, and grotes coined both by his majesty, and by the king
his father, might be rated at a value, more nere unto the goodness and finenes
of the same, then now they be rated at, which thing taking place, his highness
with all the speed that may be, determines to reform this present coin, and
to bring it (with gods leave) to such perfect goodness and finenesse, as shall
give all his loving subjects great cause to rejoice. Therefore his majesty
does ordeine and determine, that from and after the last Day of August now
next ensuyng, the said Shillinges coined and setfurth by his Majesty, shall be
curraunt within this Realm of England, and the town of Caleis and Marches of
the same, for ix. d. sterling. and not above, and the said grotes at iii. d
sterling. and not above And therefore straightly charge and commands, al and
every person and persons, of what estate, degree or condition so ever the same
be, to pay and receive after the said last day of August the said coins of
Shillinges for. i^. d. sterling. and thesayd grotes for.iii. d. sterling. And for no
higher, or lower price, within this his highness realm, and the town of Caleis
and Marches of the same, upon pain of forfeiture to his majesty, of such somes
of money as shall be paid or received otherwise then by this proclamation is
setfurthe, and also upon pain of imprisonment with a further fine to be set
upon thoffendors, at his maiestes pleasure. Given the last of April, in the.v.
year of the reign of our said sovereign Lord King Edward the.vi.

God save the King.
RICHARDVS GRAFTON typographus Regius excudebat.

Cum priuilegio ad imprimendum solum


