AProclamation set fourth by the Queen's majesty, with the advice of her most
honorable counsel, for the new several moneys, and Coins of fine sterlynge
silver and Gold, and the valuation of every of the same, new set surth by her
heighnes.
THe Queen's most excellent majesty, of her great and aboundaunte clemency,
calling to her graciouse remembrance, what great and intolerable charges
has come and chaunsed most specially unto her heighnes, and also to her
loving subjects, as well by the reason of these base Moneys of late made
within her majesty's realms, as also by great quantities of the like base
moneys made and counterfeyt in other realms, and issued out within this her
graces realm, and other her heighnes dominions. For the tender zeal her grace
bears to her louinge subjects, in no wise can longer suffer the same
inconueniencie, but is fully resolved and determined with all conueniente speed
to cause to be made, and set forth certain coins, as well of gold as of silver
of the perfect fynes according to the rates hereafter ensewyng, which shall
redounde much to her heighnes honor, and to the great wealth, commodity, and
profit of her louinge subjects.

Wherefore her majesty has ordered, and established to be made within her
mintes, these several coins, as well of silver in fynes of the standerd
sterlynge, as also of Gold, as hereafter enseweth, that is to say: The whole
Sovereign of fine gold, which shall be current within al her realms and
dominions. for.xxx. s. of the lawful moneys of England. One other piece of fine
gold, being half the Soueraygne aforesaid, which shall be called the Ryoall of
gold, shall be currante for.xv. s. of the lawful moneys aforesaid. One other
piece of fine gold, which shall be called the Angel current for.x. s. of the
lawful moneys aforesaid. One other piece of fine gold which shall be called the
half Aungel, current for.v. s. of the lawful moneys aforesaid. And of coins
of silver as here enseweth. That is to say: One piece of silver moneys which
shall be called the grote, and shall be current for.iiii. d. of the lawful moneys
of England. Item one other piece, the half of the foresaid grote, which
shall be called the half grote, and shall be current for.ii. d. of the lawful
moneys aforesaid. Item one other piece, the half of the half grote, which
shall be called the penny, and shall be current for.i. d. of the lawful moneys
aforesaid. All which moneys aforesaid, the Queen's heighnes, straytly
charge and commands al manner of persons, within her realms and dominions
(the realm of Ireland only excepted, for as much as her heighnes coins there
has a special standerd) of what estate, or degree, soever they be, to
receive, and pay, the said several pieces of moneys, as well of gold, as of
silver, at the several rates before rehearsed, upon pain of her heighnes
displeasure, and to be further punished, as shall seem to her grace most
convenient. And her majesty's express commandment is, that all such base
moneys, which have been redused to the value of a lower rate, shall go current
in payment in like manner and sort, as the same be current at this day, and as
is declared in the proclamation last made, in the time of the late most noble
Prince, king Edward the.vi. in that behalf, until such time as her heighnes,
with the advice of her counsel shall take further order, touching the same.

Given at our manor of Rychemonde, the.xx. of August. In the first year of our
most prosperous reygne.
God save the Queen.
Londini in aedibus Iohannis Cawodi Typographi Reginae excusum. Anno. M. D. L
III.

Cum priuileg to ad imprimendum solum


