By the King and Queen,
WHere it is of late brought to the knowledge of the king and Queens
Majesty's, that many wicked and ungodly persons, some of purpose to stir
unquietness and seditions among their Maiestyes good and faithful subjects,
and others because they may thereby make their own gaynes and utter the corn
and other things at the greter pryces, have contrary to their bounden dewtyes
spread and caused to be spread rumors, of the decreynge or fall of the coygne or
monyes commenlye called testous of which rumor thus maliciously and
vnmercyfully begone and spread abroad much contention has grown amongst their
Majesty's good subjects, the pryces of grain and other things be uncharitably
enhaunsed and many other great inconveniences have arisen, and greter be like
to arise if spedy remedy be not provided herein. Like as their Majesty's be
heartily sorry that any man to whom god has given abundance of things,
should in this unmercifully sort in this time of darthe wherewith it has
pleased almighty God, presently to plage the world, for the sins and
wickedness thereof seek upon this pretense their own gaynes with so great an
injury and oppression of there pore nedy neigh bours. So does their Majesty's by
this their proclamation straitelye charge and command al their subjects of
what sort or degree soever they be, that they and every of them in all their
traffiques, byinges and sellynges do quietly and obediently receive utter and
pay as well the said coin or monye called testons as all other coygnes or
monyes, of what sort soever the same be, according to there just valuations
heretofore by their majesty's authority proclaimed and published, upon pain
of their majesty's utter indignatyon and most sharp punishment by imprysonment
and fine at their majesty's pleasure. And their Majesty's further strayghtly
charge and command upon like pains al Majors, Baylytes, Sheryfes Justices of
peace, and all other officers in all the countyes, Cities, towns, and other
places of this there majesty's Realm, as well within liberties as without, that
they and every of them, take diligent care and forsee within the lymyttes of
their charges and offices that this their majesty's pleasure be in all things well
obeyed and observed, And that the markets in all places, may be from time to
time sufficiently furnished with corn and other necessary victuals, causyng
such as shall be found disobedient or offenders in any the premysses to be furthe
with committed to ward, and further ponished according to their majesty's
laws, and theffect of this their proclamation, not failing as there majesty's
does specially trust them, and as they will answer for the contrary at their
uttermost peryls.

From Saint James the.xxii. of December. 1556. God save the king and the
Queen.
Excusum Londini in aedibus Iohannis Cawodi Typographi Regiae Maiestatis.

Cum priuilegio ad imprimendum solum.


