A Decree of the Priuye Counsel at westminster. Anno. 1.5.5.9.xx. October
Articles agreed upon by the Lords and other of the Queen's Majesty's pryuy
Counsel, for a reformation of their servants in certain abuses of
apparel, thereby to give example to al other Lords, noble men and Gentlemen.
Every Lord and Master having servants, shall forth with cause a view to be
taken of al his servants, attending about the City, and considre their degres
and habilities of living, how many may dispende and be assessed to the Subsedye
at.xx. pound of yearly lyuelyhode, or at two hundrede pound in goods, and
thereupon cause them to understand what is lawefull for them to wear in their
apparel, and take order to reform it, in this manner or such like.

First as many as have any apparel unlawful for them to wear, and can
without their loss leave the same, to leave it furthwith, and to be
strayghtly charged that they procure no new.

NExt that sum mete persons be assigned by the Master to take a certain
view of all the servants present apparel, being unlawful, and make a
certain book thereof, and thereupon give commandment that no new be
bought or worn after the said view taken.

THyrdlye these books shall be delivered either into the counting house, or to
the gentlemen huyshers, there to remain, to thend that if any shall be empeched
for wearyng of any unlawefull apparel, that then the same might be tried
whether it were newely provided since the view taken or no.

ITem, order shall be taken and charge given by the Lords and Masters, that
upon this reformation the mallycyous inuencion and froward nature of any
servants, shall not deuyse any new fashion or sort of apparel, that
should be as sumptuous as the former, though not contrary to the words of the
statute, thereby sekyng by fraud to avoid the pain of the law, with which
perverse condition the wisdom of the Masters must mete, both to chastyse
such lewd servants, and to confort such as will live in order and honest and
cumly manner.

ANd because many Gentlemen and servants, have at this present, sum by
gifts, some otherwise, furs, embrodiries, and other garments, or
ornaments, contrary to the laws of the Realm. It is convenient that every
person having such being not well hable to change the same. But meaning
hereafter to observe the law and not be empeached for his default herein,
shall deliver a true certificate signed with his hand, of al such his apparel
as is not laweful for his degree to the Lord Chamberlayne of the Queen's
Majesty's household, if he mean to wear the same apparel in any the Queen's
Majesty's Chambers, or to the comptynge house, if he mean to wear thee same,
within the gates of the Court. So as for the time such person as were their
former unlawful apparel may be forborne and spared.

ANd it seems not unmeet to refrain the couetuouse lewd condition of the
Taylers, and hosyers, that every Lord and Master, either by him self, or
some his principal officers prescrybe to al manner of his servants, that none
of them excede (...) conuenyent and reasonable price for their garments, and
specially for their hose, wherein a diversity would be had between them which
be hable, and so assessed in Subsedy, either at.xx. pound yearly lyuelyhode, or
two hundred pound in goods, and all others that be not. And yet
notwythstandynge that all this travail is to be taken for reformation of the
shameful excess of Apparel, as thoccasyon of diverse of pouertye, in
others, of robberies and such like. Yet it is mete and convenient that all
Lords servants (specially in the Court) should go semely and cumly for the
honor of their Master, which may be well done, wearyng the commodities of this
Realm, and using measure in all shape and form of apparel.

God save the Queen.

Imprinted at London in Povvles Churchyard by Richard Judge, and John Cavvood,
printers to the Queen's Majesty.

Cum priuilegio Regiae Maiestatis.


