By the King and the Queen.
THe Queen's most excellent majesty, being credibly enformid, That
notwithstanding diverse of her highness restraintes, and proclamations lately
made and set furthe, as well for the stay from going to the Sea of Ships,
and other vessels, and of shipmasters, mariners, gonners, sea faryng men, and
waterme^ fittic and hable to serve her majesty in these present wars, for
the defense of her highness Realms, dominions, and people, as also for the more
annoyaunce, and impeachment of thenemies of the same. Yet nevertheless no small
number of the best and hablest of the said Shipmasters, maryners, gonners, Sea
farynge men, and watermen, contrary to the obedience, and duty of good
subjects, not regardinge the premises, but in contempt thereof, have
withdrawn them selves from her highness said service, and by colorable means
conveyed them selfs into diverse good ships, and other vessels, lately set
fourth toward outewarde Realms, and places, in voyadges, for traficque of
marchaundises. And also in aduenturynge and warrefare. So as by such vndewe
means, and disobedience, her majesty's navy royal cannot be furnyshed, but
with the refuse, and basyst sort of men of service, much to the danger and
hinderaunce of her highness said nauye royal, and also of her majesty's said
realms, dominions and people.

FOR reformation and spedy redress whereof and to thend, that the same, her
majesty's said nauye royal, and present service, may be forth with the better
furnished and appointed, both with the principal and choice of such ships,
and other vessels, And also of the said shipmaisters, maryners, gonners, sea
faring men, and watermen, as be at this time most mete and able, to serve the
same, according to her highness exspectation, and order taken in that behalf.

HER highness does by this her majesty's proclamation expressly, and straightly
charge, and command, yt from henceforth no manner of person or persons under
pain of confiscation and forfeyture of there ships and goods, and also of
imprisonment of their bodies, do attempt by any ways or means, to set forth
unto the Sea, out of any hauon, river, creke, or place, of this her highness
Realm of England, or Wales, upon any manner of voyadge either on
marchaundizes, aduenturynge, or otherwise, any manner of ship, or kind of
vessel, without a special license be first obtained, and had for that intent
under the great Seal of her Majesty's Admyralty, in dew form to be made, as
in such cases it has been used and accustomed, any proclamation heretofore
made and set forth to the contrary in any wise not withstandinge. And her
hyghnes does likewise charge and command that all such ships and vessels,
and also al capytaines, shipmasters, maryners, and other persons, that are
gone to the Sea, at their own adventure or otherwise, by force or color of her
majesty's proclamation, set forth for that purpose, do (under like pain)
return again into this Realm, before the last day of this present month of
May, the same her hyghnes proclamation or any other thing therein contained, to
the contrary in any wise notwithstanding.

AND furthermore her majesty does straightly and expressly charge and
command, al vice admirals, Majors, Sheriffs, bayliffes, and other head
officers and governors of cities, countyes, boroughes, towns, and places by
the Sea costs, of her highness said realm of England and wales, that every of
them, al respects set apart, and as they tender her majesty's favor, do
effectually for se that this her majesty's proclamation, may be with all
expeditio^ duly published. And also truly obeyed, kept, and obseruyd, as
every of the^ will answer for the contrary at his extreme peril.

Given at our manor of Grenewich, the t hirde day of May. God save the King
and the Queen.
EXCVSVM LONDINI IN AEDIBVS Iohannis Cavvodi, Tipographi Regiae Maiestatis.

Anno. M. D. LVIII

Cum piuilegio ad imprimendum solum.


