Orations, of Arsanes against Philip the treacherous king of Macedone: of the
Ambassadors of Venice against the Prince that under crafty league with
Scanderbeg, laid snares for Christendom: and of Scanderbeg prayeng aid of
Christian Princes against periurous murderyng Mahumet and against the old false
Christian Duke Mahumetes confederate. With a notable example of Gods vengeance
upon a faithless King, Queen, and her children.

Imprinted at London, by John Day.

GReat is the pleasure of readyng histories. So natural is to man the delight
and desire of knowledge. And as in all other affections wherewith we are led by
instinct of nature, the wise or unwise appliance thereof by the rule of reason
and learning or by the unruly sway of will and fancy, do make the same tend
either to vices or virtues, to hurt or to profit, and with the clothing of use
and circumstance they take upon them the show and name of good or bad: so in
desirous hearing or reding the acts of men and monumentes of times, the
employeng and directing of knowledge thereby gotten, in wise or vain form, to
good or evil ends, makes the difference of time well or ill bestowed, of
profit or disprofite, and of deseruyng praise or dispraise. He that redeth
histories of far distant contreyes or far passed ages, with an idle vain
lust to hear news, or to tell tales, or as it were to spend out time, or to
do as those that know no other use of redyng but after surfeit to win sleep,
has lost both his leisure and his labor, and has spent them both like a
drane that flies about the fields gazing upon flowers but gathering no honey
of them, and after the fair day fondly wasted is feign to be sustained by the
labors of other, him self a frutelesse burden to the common weal. But he
that followyng the right rule of wisdom, gathers profit of every lawful
pleasure, takes not only the beauteous sight of the variety fairness
proportion form and order of those ornaments of the earth the her^es, leaves,
flowers and fruits that garnish the fields and gardens, but also uses to his
comfort and health the sweetness of their savor, and works out of them to
the benefit of his own life and of the common weal the sweet tasting, the
pleasant smelling, the wholesome feding and healing honey. By that he is him
self sustained, his neigbours releued, his posterity preserved, and by common
conference the whole society maintained, with obedience to their own natural
king the minister of justice and enemy of idleness. Such a reader of
hystories digesteth every matter into his right place and to his right purpose,
and thereof he lays up the store of wisdom for him self, and counsel for
other, and is made able to show the true difference of a man from a beast, in
that he is not carried by sense alone to that which either present sight does
offer him, or present hunger or other need enforce him, but of his own
experience remembers, or by hearing of other or readyng of books he learneth
the state of times past, the doyngs of men, their counsels, their governance,
and lastly their successes. By beholding of those, as in a glass, he
discerns and judges rightly of things present, and foreseeth wisely of
things to come. Toward the furniture of a man thus disposed, histories not
only many but in sundry wise have been written, and of that diversity in
form of writing names have been given to such works and treatises. Some have
set forth brief notes by years and days called Annals, diaries and
iournales, expressing shortly what things have happened in those years or
days, with only notyng the persons times places and factes. Some for their
own remembrance or aduertising their friends have kept commentaries or
memorialles, wherein they have dealt largelier or breflier as their disposition
to labor or their leisure have served the^. Some have written treatises or
discourses upon some special factes, by way of gathering other things to the
conformity of that which they treat of, and applieng both it and the other to
some end of persuasion, as some present occasion of their cause or time has
required. Some coming to that work furnished with understanding and learning
have written such books as we call just and perfect hystories, either of all
times and places, or of all places for some time, or of some place throughout
all times, or of some singular country, common weal, place, or person, or of
some special war, enterprise, gouerna^ce, or matter. Those as their purpose
has led them, have not only with faithfulness set out what has been done,
but with great art and wisdom have laid open the secret intentes, counsels,
meanings, and grounds of doings conceived by those whoes acts are there
expressed. They have described the contreyes, the persons, the state, the form
of rule, the laws, the affairs and managing thereof, the order of war and
peace, the quiet calmness of some times, the troublesomnesse of other
seasons, either by war or sedition, the raising of the one or other or
appeasing of both, by the ambition or violence of some wits or the discretion
and policy of other, the negligence in some, the wantonness in some, the
foul vices in some, the folly in some, the want of counsel and assistance in
some, the variety of successes, and upon what occasions, and what effects
have followed upon sundry causes, as safeties, destructions, rising falling,
good bap or misery, either by pleasing or offendyng God, by taking fit
auantages or neglecting good seasons and occasions, by foreseyng in time or
hedelesly drawing of mischeues, by forsakyng friends and neighbors in
necessity or by tymely and friendly assistance thereby both bindyng kindness
and gatheryng assurance, by caring for no warnynges or listening to good
understanding ere it be to late, by hangyng upon Gods miracles only or seruyng
him with due travail and policy, by trusting to humane wisdom and borrowing
upon the will of God or subiectyng all devises to the rule of Gods pleasure, by
doing not enough, by trustyng to much, by egall or vnegal distribution of
right, by cunnyng dissemblyng or plain true dealyng and by infinite other
means dispositions and appliances of times persons matters doings and
chances in this mortal life. Such writers have beside this also some time for
encouragyng to souldiars, some time for appeasing troubles, sometime for
counsel either for matter of justice or of policy, or for deliberation to
provide for atteyning of benefits or eschuyng of mischieues to come, or for
other wise purposes, set forth Orations in the names of those persons whom they
make to speak them, whereof are plenty to be found in the Greek authors
Thucidides, Xenophon and other, and the Latins Caesar, Salust, Liuie, and the
rest. And in the same they seem as in their whole history to have served the
use of posterity, in true declaration of the factes to lay a ground for the
judgment of the wise reader, least by misreporting of the matter, the
understanding of the considerer should be seduced in pronouncing upon the
success. And again in the large explication of spech and Oration, both the
use of eloquence in common weal should appear, and the manner of applyeng of
hystories in consultation should be laid abroad for an example to the wise
readers of hystories, not only how to furnishe their own knowledge, but also
how profitably to deliver the same to the information warnyng or advise of
other. Such hystories be glasses of experience, scholehouses of wisdom, very
prophecies of times and chances, governesses to virtue, terrible threateners
and warners to flee vice and folly. In such histories written to such ends, I
do not think that all the Orations were so spoken by the parties as they were
penned by the reporters, but that such writers seruyng truth in the factes,
have in the manner of speches served wisdom and teaching, and and not so much
told what in what form was said in deed, as (all true circumstances of factes
considered) what such a person might have fittly spoken, ye author respectyng
therein both what such a man might with good seruyng his purpose then say, and
what in his saying the readers in time to come were also to be taught and might
well learn. This kind of exercise is both pleasant and profitable. And for
some example thereof, it has seemed to tend to good purpose to publish in our
tongue these Orations following, wherein is contained matter and president of good
admonition, and a mean of great efficacy to awaken Christians, and a
substantial teaching to trust in God and to fear shrinkyng from the defense
of his cause and Church. The arguments are severally set before the Orations.
The first, of Arsanes the Persian, is made after the matter of the history as
it is reported in Iustines Epitome of the history written by Trogus Pompeius.
Wherein as Iustine has shortly knit up what Trogus had set out at large, so
here is largely dilated what Iustine had abriged, the truth of the fact and
decorum or convenient agreement of the persons and circumstances always justly
observed. The second containing two Orations, one of the Uenecia^ Ambassador,
the other of the Archbishop of Durasso, are faithfully translated out of
Marinus Barletius. The last, of Scanderbeg to Christian Princes, is made as the
first is, as we thought he might then aptly have said, and as he so saying,
should both have agreed with his cause and person and with our case and
learning. All is warra^ted by the history in effect, though not in form of
every syllable or sentence. As where it is said by Barletius that Mahumet being
a Prince Principes Rasciae contra fidem datam perfide obtruncauit, did against
his faith given periurously slaughter the Princes of Rascia, we take it free
for detestation of falshed and warnyng to posterity, to set out at large any
most periurous manner of murdering of noblemen against faith given, having
always regard that it be such as might be truly reported of Mahumet. And where
he says that Mahumet so did against faith given, he can not mean any other
but says given by Mahumet. And Mahumet being a Prince, that faith can be no
other but faith royal and the word of a Prince, the breach whereof is for the
rareness, and for the mighty ability to do hurt, justly most odious, and of
necessity in wise policy most strongly to be resisted and repressed with most
terrible example, or else the fall of that estate or destruction of mankind
to be shortly looked for.

If this shall do good, either in teaching how to apply, or warning what to
feate, or aduising how to do, the labor is well bestowed. If other captious
constrctions be gathered, their fault is it, and their blame be it, for whom it
was never provided. Let such cauillous expounders and wresters leave it to
truer men to read it, to wiser men to judge upon it, and to honester men to
take profit of it. Who so will draw hystories of times past further than he
ought, in racking an other ma^s mind he has ouerstretched his own
conscience. Who so truly touched in like faults will think him self to be
charged, charge him self. Who so findyng truth and advise for his safety
will not thereto apply it, or espieng matter for his instruction will take no
fruit of it, shall perish nevertheless miserably but a great deal more
worthily. Finally good reader take this rule, that God made al things for his
glory, God foreseeth and disposes the very fall of a sparow. Therefore all
acts of men and all successes are to be referred to his honor. Him let us
serve and trust upon, him let us thank and to him let us pray for our most
gracious sovereign, that she may long reign, and ouerlyue Gods enemies and
hers, and specially those which envy her state, and would her place to be
occupied by them selves or any other that hate the word and flock of God: and
that it will please God (if it be his will) to stablishe our sovereign Ladies
throne in long peace, and either by his own mighty hand, or by his work in
her heart for doing of justice, to destroy the rod of foreine and Popish
tyranny that he in danger of succeedyng shakes over his Church, that no
enemy of Christ nor child of Antichrist may live to bring the thraldom of
Mariane cruelty, Sylla. Mar. Car.
nor Caracallaes royal perjury, nor any of such faythlesse kinds or races to
oppress the poor Realm of England: and that no Prince fearyng God ever trust
the untrusty, specially those whoes Antichristian Popish doctrine pronounces
open allowrance of breach of faith to Christians whom they call heretics, and
whoes Mahumetane factes proclayme what is to be looked for at their hands, and
whereto their counselles are directed, which God confound.

The Argument of the Oration of Arsanes the Persian.
THe Phocoeans, Lacedaemonians and Atheniens, being driven thereto by the
outrageous dealings of the Thebanes, spoiled the Temple of the Idol Apollo.
Whereupon the whole realm of Greece was divided into two several factions: of
the which the Thebanes and their allies termed them selves the holy league,
and Phocoeans, Lacedaemonians, Athenians and their partakers were termed the
confederates against the league. The Thebanes mistrustyng their own state,
commit the^ selves and their case to the tuitio^ of the king, whose name was
Philip of the house of Macedonie. Philip having erst laid a platform and
already practiced certain secret attemptes for the conqueryng of the kingdom
of Persia, and now thinkyng this to be a fit occasion, as well to reuendge the
displeasure that he bare to certain noble houses, as also to dispatch all lets
and incomberances at home, that he might the freelyer go foreward with his
intended enterprise, takes upon him the defense and maintenance of the holy
league, whereby he gate him self great allyances and frendshyp at the first.
Nevertheless keepyng neither promises, fidelity, nor oath, he violateth all
right and law of God and man, murtheryng and spoylyng as well such as he had
taken into his protection as those that had submitted them selves to him upon
assurance of safety, by reason whereof the confederates draw them selves to
arms again. Wherefore Arsanes the Lieutenant of the lesser Asia for the king
of Persia, having perfect intelligence of all Philips attemptes and privy
practices, and foreseyng the imminent peril that was like to in sew to the
kingdom of Persia, aduertiseth the king thereof, and after leave given unto
him, propounds his advise in Counsel as follows.

MY Lords upon whose vigilant foresight and provident care depends the
welfare of this most happy and prosperous state of Persia, it is not unknown
unto your wisdoms, that the preservation and mayntenance of Royal states and
Empyres, consist not only in largeness of populous Countries, in abundance of
treasure, in howgenesse of hosts, in faythfulnesse of friends, allies and
subjects, in valeauntnesse of soldiers, in knowledge and courage of expext
Captains, in politic, speedy, and stout execution of things concluded in
strength of towns and fortifications, nor in the store of armor, vitell, and
artillery (howbeeit that without these things no Empire can continue) but
also and chiefly in foreseeing and preventing of mischeeues that are likely or
possible too ensue, and in accepting and following of oportunities when they be
proffered. The cunnyng pylote perceives the pirries a far of, and strikes
his main sheate before the storm come, and when he finds the wether
favorable, he clappeth on all his sails, and takes the full benefit of the
present gale. This has bin the policy of our famous predecessors, and
specially of our peerlesse princes Cyrus and Darius the founders of this most
renowned Empire: and this must be the policy of all such as mind to keep
that which they themselves have gotten, or which has been left them by the
purchase of others. And doutlesse, not without good cause has it always bin
counted a greater matter too keep, than too get: for too win is the benefit
of fortune, but to keep is the only power of wisdom. We need not to seek
out old examples for proof hereof, let us but cast our eye over the narrow
seas into Europe, and look upon our next neighbors the Grecians. The matter
is yet fresh in our eyes, and their wound is yet raw and not grown too a
scarre. The one side (as we see) having gotten the upper hand of their
adversaries, and set themselves in good surety as they thought, were sodeinly,
through too much credulity and trust of the parties whom they had most cause
to beware of, put too the sword after peace and faithful promis of safty given
in the word of a prince, and now lately again put to new spoil and utter
subversion for want of eschewing their former oversight. Which lamentable
example leads me as it were by the hand to the matter that we have presently
to treat of, and is the very ground thereof. For when I behold the thickening
of the air in those quarters, and the gathering together of the clouds in the
coasts of Europe, considering how small a gale of wynd may bring them hither,
and the disposition of those climates too power out their storms upon the
feeldes of Asia, I can none otherwise conjecture, but there is some great
tempest a brewyng toward us, which doutlesse will light upon us, if some
contrary wind do not either disperse it abroad, or hold it back among them
selves at home. The house of Macedonie creeping foreward by little and little
(as all of us know) has in continuance of time gotten into their possession
the most part of the ancient Grecia, in so much that at this day it bears
the cheef renown in the hither part of Europe, and is becomme terrible or at
leastwise too be mistrusted of all his neighbors. And surely none have more
cause, if not too fear the Greeks, yet to beware of them, than we have. For
in the time of our aunceters we have oftentimes greatly anoyed them both at
home and abroad: we have slain their people, won their holds, sacked and
burned their cities, taken their kings, possessed their countries, and bereft
them of their dominions both by sea and land. They have done the like with us
in all things, saving for taking of our kings, and dispossessing us of our
Empire. By means whereof, there is grown as it were a natural hatred between
the two realms of Persia and Greece. And although there have been diverse
leagues and alyances by marriage made between us: yet notwithstanding forasmuch
as no particular salve can remedy a common sore, the mischief is rather
covered than cured. Old hatred thirsts always new revenge, and the rooted
rancor that is once thoroughly settled between countries do^th so shed it self
into the veins of all posterity, as it may sometimes be dissembled for
advantage or for want of ability, but never forgotten. For it is like the
smoldring fire of mount Chymera, which boiling long time with great buskling in
the bowels of the earth, does at length burst out with violent rage to the
hurt of the fields wherinto it casts it self. Again, whereas in the present
division of Greece, wherein Philippe of Macedonie now king of Greece takes
upon him as protector of the Thebanes, and defender of the holy league (for so
does he term himself and all those that take his part against the houses of
Lacedaemon, Athens, and Phocis and other noble men that spoiled the temple of
their Idol Apollo): the confederates have been relieved by our souereignes
subjects (though not by his graces commandment or consent) and the fugitive
and banyshed people are for pity and humanities sake received and cherished in
this Realm: we may assure our selves that king Philip being both a subtle,
ambitious, and cruel Prince, does horde up these things in his heart, as
fyerbrondes to kindle his intent of revenge, whenever opportunity shall
serve. For things done between states and nations, are commonly construed, not
according to the intent of the doers, but as he lysteth to take them which
seeks matter of quarrel. Let us then look into him, and into his present
doings, and consider whereto they tend. First he is a Greek borne, that is
to say, a deadly and unreconcilable enemy to the realm of Persia by nature.
Secondly he is of the house of Macedonie, which has always maligned the
Persians for clayming the crown of Greece, whereto they entitle themselves by
style, while he holds the thing in possession. Thirdly he is of a proud and
ambitious mind, desirous to aspyre, insatiably eagre of revenge, and thirsty
of blood beyond all measure or belief, and an exceeding deep dissembler. Add
hereunto that there want no solliciters to prick him forward, by flattering
him with the success of his late exploytes achieved by most shameful and
odious treachery, now colored with the name of princely policy. Besides this
the state of Persia wants no hartburning against it. The Gods immortal have
given us long prosperity, and peace has greatly increased our wealth: our
good fortune is an eyesore, yea rather a hartsore to him: envy shoots
always at high marks: and covetousness can be staunched with no small
things. To the compassing of his desire he wants no power: for the Realm of
Greece which was divided in old time, is now wholly under his dominion: the
countries of Thrace and Thessaly which sometime were belonging to the Empire of
Persia, are now recoucred to the crown of Greece: and we have forgone all our
towns which we had on that side of the Sea. Finally, what shall we think of
this that insueth? He himself is in person in the field, with so huge a
power, as the like has not ben raised heretofore but to anoye some mighty
potentate. He has sent a great navy of ships and Gallyes to the sea, he has
stablished peace with his neighbors, he has alyed himself with our utter
enemies, he has made tecrete chalenges to the Empire of Persia, he has sent
privy spies into the bowels of Asia, he has indirectly solicited our
souereines subjects and alyes against him, he has murdered our welwillers,
he has succored our offenders, he daily wageth foreign souldyers, he leuyeth
still great masses of money, he is ever sending of Capteines and men of war
into Cappadocia, and (which is the finest cloak of all his devices) he
professes him self the defender and maynteyner of the Thebanes and their holy
leage. Whereto serves all this furniture? who be the adversaries of this
holy leage? Is it the house of Phocis? The Lord thereof is shamefully slain,
and his children are able too work no revenge. Is it the king of Lacedoemon
and the prince of Athens? They are beco^me his vassalles. Is it the Town of
Byzance and the other few towns of Greece that hold with the Lords of the
confederacy against the Thebane holy leage? Alas what are they too so mighty
a prince? they cannot hold out long if they have not help. Both the
confederates and these towns would feign submit themselves to him and serve
him, if they might be sure but only of their lives, and too escape the imminent
destruction with safety of their ancient liberty. Seeing the^ that the Greeks
being either in leage or at peace with all their neighbors round about them
have not as now any known enemy but Philip himself, and that of those he is
not in any fear but well knows that they will be quiet if he assail them
not: it is manifest that in taking upon him the defense of the Thebane leage,
and so quarelling with the confederates, he both reuiueth the old grudge and
welneere foreworne hatred between the Realms of Persia and Greece, and also
covertly pricketh, not only at all such as resisted the Thebanes, or have had
alyance and confederacy with their adversaries, but also at all such as by any
means have succored or relieved them, by saving them from his unmerciful and
faithless hands. Of whom because we be the cheef, therefore he bears the
more malice against us. For the nature of Tyranny is, not only too oppress, to
spoil, and too murder innocents, but also to hate all such as are not of the
same disposition. And surely where soever cankerd hatred, desire of dominion,
ability too give the attempt, and sufficient recompense of cost and travel
do meet, it is not too be supposed but that opportunity shall be sought. No
dout therefore, but that what soever countenance Philip make, and under what
pretenses soever he shroud himself, his very intent and drift is to give a
push for the kingdom of Persia. Let none of us beguile himself: let us not
imagine that the stale alyances and late leages between our prince and the
house of Macedonie, are able too extinguish the old emnitie and new kindled
displeasure of the two Realms of Persland and Greece: least our eyes be so
dazeled with the fond ouerlikyng of present peace, as the mischeef light upon
our heads, before we perceive it coming toward us. What account so ever we
on our part make of leages, (as certesse we have from ancient time had
always a singular religion and conscience in observing them, and so would I
wish we should do still, for there cannot be to much honor and reverence
given to faithful alyances and true meaning leages) surely he shows him
self to make none account at all, nor to pass further of them than to serve
his own turn. Has he not twice within these twelve years plighted his faith
before the Gods immortal, and made faithful promis before men, that the
confederates against the Thebanes should with free forgettyng of all former
quarelles enjoy life, liberty and goods, as if there had never been any jar
betwixt them? How well he holds his covenant, our hearts lament to see, and
all men that have any piece of common humanity in them abhor to hear. For
(as it is well known) he set not upon them like a valiant champion in the
field, for he durst not do that: neither did he charge them with any crime to
execute them by way of justice like an upright judge, for they had done no
fault: but as a butcher that gathers sheep into a pinfolde to the slaughter,
or as a Wolf that falls upon a flock when they be folded: and as a fowler
that allureth birds into his nets with baytes and pyping: so did he foade his
noble men into security with vain promises and dissembling looks, and
cruelly murdered them without mercy, when they thought themselves in most
surety, yea and he spared not the grayheaded, he pytied not the silly
infants, he reverenced not the chaste matrones, he had no regard of the young
Damsels: but as it were in contempt of Gods and men, and to the utter
derogation of princely majesty, he imbrued his wicked hands with the slaughter
of his most faithful and trusty subjects, only because they were too good
and virtuous for so unnatural a Monster to reign over. Moreover, triumphing
in his outrageous cruelty, he laid the dead bodies of noblemen, gentlemen,
inferior sort, men and women (a horrible, unkindly, and beastly spectacle)
wounded, mangled, defiled, bemyred, and naked, upon a heap before his palace,
like a quarrie of Dear at a general hunting, for all the world to gase upon.

Now then, may we hope that he will be a faithful leaguefellowe toward us,
who has been so faythlesse and cruel toward his own? May we think he
will stand in fear of us, who despises the Gods immortal? or may we believe
that the hungry Lion will lie still when he sees a fit pray before his
face? I could the easlyer be induced to that opinion, if he had not of late
(for all the league that is betwixt us) sent Captains and men of war
priuilye into Cappadocia, to annoy the frountyres of this kingdom. Now then,
seeing that there is no trust in him with whom we have to deal: seeing that he
seeks privy practices to annoy: seeing he wounds our common weal
indirectly through the sides of our neighbors: shall we sit a fleepe til the
fowlar have cast his net over us? shall our league serve him to cut our
throtes, and shall it not serve us to defend our lives? Unwise are they that
end their matters with had I wist, specially in matters of state: It is too
late to shut the stable door when the steed is stolen. Let us prevent the
mischief in his pryme before it grow too far and become incurable. He is no
good Physician which trusts so much either to his cunnyng or to his good
fortune, that when he seth a canker breeding in the body, destroys it not at
the first, but lets it run till it have taken root, to win himself the
more praise by healing it afterward. There comes more harm to kingdoms by
too much sufferance, than by too much warenesse. This sore is already waxed
proud, it swells, it is grown to a head, and daily it will fester more and
more, and if it be not looked to betimes, it will (I fear become incurable.
There is none other lykelyhoode but that early or late we must have war with
the Greeks. Whether to our own behoof or to theirs, there stands the case.
The choice is yet in our own hand: either to purchase peace and maintain
quietness to our selves and to all our posterity, or to make our enemies
lords over us. Phillip is now at variance (as we see) with his own countrymen:
he is worthily behated of them for his monsterous cruelty, and trustlesse
infidelity: all kings detest him as the disparagement of their state: all his
neighbors loathe him as a misshapen wretch against nature: and the Gods are
angry with him for violating their sacred majesty's. If we send a power into
his country, he shall not be able to resist us: for the fresh remembrance
of his horrible doings shall dismay him, the falling away of his own people
shall discourage him, the reuolting of his Cities and fortresses shall weaken
him, and the vengeaance of the Gods shall hunt him from place to place till it
have consumed him. His subjects being wearye of his intolerable yoke, pray
night and day to the Gods for delyuerance, and wait for some good Prince to
take them into his tuition. And who shall be so welcome to them as our king, in
whose dominions they have had safe refuge from the sword of their homebred
enemy, and whose clemency they know to be far passing all expectation? Again
diverse of the Regions having tasted of the sweetness of our Persian liberty
in the time that we had souereintie over them, and finding our government to be
lighter the^ a fether in comparison of their present bondage, do long to be
under our jurisdiction again, the rather for the continual felicity which
they perceive us Persians to live in. Thus are all things ready to make with
us, and to make against him, and we may confound him with his own weapons. For
how can he look for trustiness at their hands, whose trust he has so often
disappointed by treason? But if it seem not good to work this way, for
infringing the league that is not yet openly broken, as I will not greatly urge
that point, though it would be most for our profit: yet may we play the
Cretanes with Cretanes (as their own proverb says, and as we commonly say):
Let us set the Hares head against the Gooses giblet: He works wyles with us:
Let us work wisely with him. And now while the Pig is proffered let us hold
open the poke. No league can or ought to bar Princes from succouring the
oppressed, or from ayding such as willingly yield themselves into their
protection, and specially from doing those things which being left undone
there is left no likely possibility of safety to those Princes that should
have taken better heed in time. Those sort of men whom he now pursues with
fire and sword, are our dear friends, and we have hitherto maintained them.
Their case is common to us, and so is taken to be by their Prince. If they
smart, let not us look to laugh: If they decay, let not us look to stand: If
they be overthrown, then have at us, our staff stands next the door. When
perils are common, they would be repulsed with common power, because they
breed common mischief. I like not to have that fire spread over into Asia for
want of fuel to feed upon at home. We are not unacquainted with the nature
of the Greeks, we have had too long experience of them. Geeue them leave to
contend with us out of their own country, and we shall never bridle them.
But let us hold them play at home by succouring the oppressed part: and then
shall we be sure to keep them always at so low an ebb, as they shall not be
able to annoy us, and we shall continually be arbytrers of peace and war at
our pleasure, to the benefit of both the Countries. The like occasion was
offered and taken in the time of our great grandfathers by the valiant
Artaxerxes surnamed the long hand. The two noble houses of Lacedoemon and
Athens fell at debate and mortal war, wherein the house of Athens being
ouermatched and brought utterly under foot, sought refuge and succor at our
kings hand: and he relieved the Athenians both with men and monye abundantly,
where through it insewed that he both diuersed the war that was intended and
already begone by the king of Lacedoemon against the Realm of Persia, and also
in the end had all Greece in such wise at his commandment, as he made peace
at his own pleasure. In which deed of his this is worthy to be remembered
to his perpetual fame, that as he ouerslipped not any opportunity which might
make for the safety of his own state, so he oppressed not the country with
any bondage, but left it in such peasible liberty, as we have had the less
annoyance and better neighbourhode of those ever since unto this day. My
counsel therefore is, that we should lay our purses together, that we should
join hands with the confederates, that we should spare no cost nor eschew any
peynes for the suppressyng and quenchyng of this common fire. Necessity
inforceth us to this war, except we will seek our own destruction, and
betray our trusty friends to their and our common truthlesse foe. And
therewith all it is just, and honorable, yea and also easy. We shall stand in
the defense of faithful and loyal folk against a kind of people in whom
there is neither faith, nor troth, nor regard of common humanity, so passing
malicious and spytefull, as they can find in their hearts too endure any
misery, rather than to suffer their adversaries too live in rest, (their
adversaries are all good and godly men, yea and even the Gods themselves) and
are of far more furious and bloudthirstie nature, than the hungerstaruen
tiger of Armenie, or the she bear that is robbed of her, whelps. We shall
stand in defense of innocents, against a most cruel and merciless Tyrant,
against a deceitful and double dealyng for, against at trothlesse truce
breaker and false for swearing kaytif, against a captious spy another trusting
nor trusty, against one that weyeth frendshyp by profit and not by
faythfulnesse, a betrayer of his own subjects, and a hater of honor and
honesty, an enemy of virtue, a stayne and canker woorme of princely majesty,
a very helhound and monster of nature, fraught with all wickedness and worse
than wickedness it self. The intelligence of these things comes not by
uncertain report from a far, neither is it gathered by gessing conjectures:
he is here at hand and hard under our noses, we behold his dooinges with our
eyes, and we may in manner feel and grope them with our fingars ends. They
can not be denied, the whole world sees them, and wisdom wills us to
impugn them. It is the common case of all princes and all people, to set hand
to the suppressing of Tyrants, if they will be counted just and rightuous. For
if faythfulnesse be taken away, if troth shall serve too work treachery, if
the word of a prince be but wynd, if will may go for law: what shall becomme
of the world? Must not commonweals needs decay? Must not mankind needs come
to confusion? For if the head which is the life and stay of the body, betray
the members, must not the members also needs betray one another, and so the
whole body and head go all together to utter wrecke and destruction? The
renowned Darius the son of Histaspis, the repayrer of the drowpyng empire of
Persia, thought it not enough to minister justice to his own subjects, but
also (to his everlasting glory) made war upon Polycrates the Tyrant of Samos
(who in those days was infamous for cruelty and outrageous doings though not
comparable to our feendly Philip) and taking him alive hung him the same day in
the place where he had committed his cruelties: a notable example of Justice
for all just princes to follow. Also the Greeks them selves do boast of
certain princes of theirs as of Theseus, Hercules, and Agamemnon, and commend
them with immortal praises for taking away and for executyng of wicked
Tyrants. Let us not be ashamed nor hold scorn to follow the Counsel and
example of our enemies where it may do us good. Whither we be minded to provide
for our fafetie by inuadyng the tyrant or else by ayding the confederates, or
both, the way is easy for us and the Gods have set us open a broad gate. For
on our enemies behalf, it appears sufficiently already by the former process
of this whole discourse, that although he have great numbers of people, yet
has he few hearts, and consequently little strength: the best of his Capteines
are in arms against him, the wisest of his Counselors wot not which way to
turn them. For they know that the haynouser that men's offenses are, and the
greater that their contempt is against the Gods, the sorer is the wrath of the
Gods against them: and the sorer that the Gods are displeased, the less power
have men against the Gods.

Philip and his accomplices shall bring with them into the field a stingyng
remorse at the remembrance of their former wickedness, and the Ghostes of them
who^ they have traitorously murdered shall flyng the fear of vengeance
continually in their faces, so as they shall find no means to shift them from
the hell of their guilty consciences within, nor lurkinghole to hyde them from
the terror of the heavenly wrath from above, nor way to escape from the sword
of Justice pursuyng them by the hand of man. Finally which way soever they
turn them, heaven and earth, them selves and theirs shall be against them. But
unto us on the contrary side all things are favorable. Our souerein is
singularly beloved for excellent clemency and other princely virtues, not only
of our souereines own subjects, but also of all foreign nations. The Gods do
tender him as their dear friend and child, as by many their miraculous
preseruations has appeared. He is rich of treasure, strong in men, provident
in care, wise in government, guarded, with faithful hearts and sage counsel,
at peace with his neighbors, in rest at home, so well stored which armor,
vittell, munition, artillery, as none of his predecessors has been the like,
so as there rests nothing but resolute constancy in noble and necessary
actions. The king of Cappadocia is very young, and they that have the
government of him are our friends. The former competitors of that country are
in our own custody, and the faction of the Armenian rebellion is extinquished.
The Capteines of the confederates are either with us here to use as fit
instruments for our purpose, or practicing already in the enemies land to anoy
him: and besides the poor exiles that are escaped hither, we have more trusty
friends and more good hearts in our enemies own Court, than our enemy himself
has.

Thus have the Gods offered all oportunities into our hands, and in a manner
put victory in our mouths: there wants nothing but expedition on our
behalf. It is a true proverb, that a man may bring a horse to the water, but
he can not make him drink. Let us not be as horses and mules that must be
spurred and whipped forward by the ryder. Let us strike while the iron is
whote, the tide taryeth no man, and the nature of occasion is to steal away
unawares, not without leaving of a continual hartsore, yea and sometimes of an
incurable wound behind her, specially in matters of state. If we suffer this
gate to be shut up, behold what a number of inconveniences are like to ensue of
it. First our present welwillers which by our ayding of them might have been
made our continual friends, shall be abandoned to the spoil, and therefore
justly cry out against us as betrayers of them into their deadly enemies
hands, a fit mean to provoke the indignation of the Gods against us.
Hereupon it will follow that other nations will trust less to our friendship,
and ware weary of our alyance, so as if we stand in need of succor at their
hands (as who stands upon so sure ground that he may not slide, or who is
so strong and mighty as he may not have need, yea even of his inferior?) we
shall make them either to forsake us utterly and to be against us, or to aid us
so faintly and skantly, as it shall turn finally to our benefit, because we
so scantly aided them. Herewithall it will come to pass, that the whole company
of the confederates, (who being now offended with the present wrongs, and with
the oppression of their ancient and glorious liberty, could well find in their
hearts to shake of the yoke of tyranny, if they had a sure staff to stand by)
hereafter being subdewed by force, or persuaded upon good assurance of safety,
shall willingly consent with Philippe to seek the asswagement of their present
griefs, in the reuengement of their old harms and late renewed unkindness.
The Athenians shall call to mind again the battle of Marathon and the
destruction of their country and city by Xerxes and Mardonius. The Thebanes,
Plateans, and Phoceans will bethink them of the burning of their Cities by the
Persians, and of the misery whereby some of them were feign to seek new soil
to dwell in. The Lacedaemonians and Achaeans, will look back to the mayme of
their own state, and to the restitution of Athenes by the puissant Artaxerxes.
The Macedonians, Thracians, and Thessalians will disdain at the former
subjection of their countries to the Crown of Persia. Finally, all the Greeks
will renew the remembrance of the displeasures that we have done them in old
time, and therewithal long to be revenged of us for leauyng them so lately in
the briars. Thus shall we bring the whole house (the whole mischief I mean)
upon our own heads. For may we think that Philippe (whose ungracious
fingars itche to be doing with us already) will hold himself within the
bounds of Grecia, when he shall have neither inward nor outward enemy to
keep him play on that side of the sea? May we hope that the long continued
hatred of Greece will then die, when it shall be of most babilitie and find
fittest opportunity of aduendgement? Shall we believe that so many thousand men
of war that have been inured to the spoil, noseled in blood, and always
envious of our state, will then forbear the sweet soil of Asia, when they
shall perceive them selves in best possibility to obtain it to their profit
and honor? Believe it who list, I can not, for I see to many things in our
state wherewith to allure an aspiryng mind, and the kingdom of Persia is a
sufficient reward for a conqueror. And therefore when soever Philip has
pacified his own Realm, so as he may leave no backefrendes behind him: then
will he surely pour out the tempest of his wrath upon our land, like as the
great river of Nilus being sodeinly increased with the molten snow from the
hills of Aethyope, breaks out of his banks, and ouerfloweth the whole land of
Egypt. For it is not the subduyng of the confederates nor the wynnyng of
Bizance and the other towns of Thrace, that can satisfy so insatiable a
cormorant. Great fowls look after great prays. It is the kingdom of Persia,
believe me it is the kingdom of Persia, that Philippe ameth at, and which he
will one day give a push for if he ca^. And in what case shall we be then? We
shall be feign (which the Gods forbid) if the war be drawn hither and not
diuerted, to behold ye burning of our villages, the sacking of our cities, the
spoiling of our countries, the slaughters of our gentlemen, the slavery of our
commons, the rauishyng of our maidens and matrones, the destruction of our
dearest things, and a thousand other displeasures and vilanies, which shall
enforce men to say (though all to late) would God the counsel of Arianes had been followed. And if we happen to overcome in the field, the war being in our
own country, then fare well our good days. We have no holds nor fortresses
of strength to flee unto till we may recover a new power. Our neighbors whom
our unfriendly dealyng shall have alienated from us, will peradventure receive
us for humanities sake, but not releue us that we may recover. So shall we be
left desolate of friends, and either come into most miserable bondage with our
contrie, or at least wise live in sorrowful exile which is little better.
Moreover, our own subjects and cities in such case being appalled with the
misfortune of the time, shall either for fear or for hope of favor, revolt to
the enemy, according as it commonly falls out, that look which way fortune
swayeth, that way do the multitude inclyne, as the reed that is beaten upon
with a vehement wind. And I pray the Gods that in so great and populous a
country as this is, there may not be found any that will prefer the filthy
lucre of a little gold before honest love of their country. But admit we
overcome him in battle in our own country: will he cease his enterprise for
the loss of two or three fields? will he come so slenderly accompanied, as to
be driven away for one or two discomfitures? will he assail us but only in
some one place at once? Do ye think that our old enuiers the Cappadocians
shall not be solicited against us? Yes, and all others that may by any means
anoy us. We shall have our hands full, and to full. And although that at length
we overcome them all and drive them quite away (as if it should come to that
point I pray the Gods we might, and I hope we should) yet would they leave
some print of their being here behind them. There was never yet any great
wound so thoroughly healed, but there remained some scarre of it a good while
after.

Thus your Lordshippes have heard mine advice concerning the broils in Greece,
and concerning our present state, which I doubt not but your wisdoms will so
provide for, as it may continue long time in honor and safety. Only this I
repeat for a conclusion, that in such weighty cases, delay breeds danger,
and it is not good to be careless when our next neighbors house is on fire.
It is far better to be envied than to be pytied. I would not have our Realm
to rue afterclappes. I had lever opportunity should be taken, than wished it
had been taken. I have said.

PHilip king of Macedone having ben made Protector of ye Thebanes holy league,
pursued ye benefit of that occasion, till he had so yoked all Grecia that he
left them unable to recover their ancient estate and liberty. Toward the
atcheuing of which his subtle enterprise, he was not a little helped by the
flattering and salable tongues of sundry corrupted orators and traitors,
preferring their own ambitions and gains before their due zeal and love to
their contreyes. The honest and eloquent Demosthenes that gave warning and
disclosed the subtle purposes of King Philip, was not regarded. The Grecians
themselves gave aid and service to their own destruction. And while the one
joining against the other, under distracted opinions of honor to their false
gods and idols, and with deceived greediness to revenge old displeasures and
quarrels, and with some vain hope of some small increases by part of the
spoil, they raged in civil and mutual wars, neglecting all aduises and
warninges, rejecting all true means of firm peace, and (that worst was)
having by many breaches of promise and by untrue dealing, left no possibility
of credit whereupon any assured reconcilement might be stablished, both fondly
and wretchedly put their own necks in the halter of servitude, together with
the poor Phocoeans and the other confederates, who were enforced for lack of
power in them selves, or aid from other, to yield to the crafty and cruel
victors fraud and outrage.

In the mean time, the king of Persia not regarding the aduises to the effect
abouesayd, neither remembering both the old and also late quarells that Philip
did bear in heart against him, nor fearing the Macedons ouergrowing in
strength, sat negligent with his wanton court at home, while Philip by
augmentation of victories armed his will with power, to proceed with the
plotte that he had long before laid for inuading of Asia.

Afterward Philip him self the untrue and unjust prince, through high
indignation conceived against him for not doing of justice, and for maintayning
villainy of life unpunished in one of his capitaines and ministers of his
cruelties, was in his greatest security and glory, most worthily in him that
suffered it, though traitorously in him that did it, sodeinly and openly slain,
even in the presence of those whom he most hyely trusted, in the midst
between his son and his son in law, and not without suspicion of their
good liking, and specially of his next heir and successor, to an eternal
document that a traitorous tyrant can have none to trust unto, and has ever
those most untrusty whose service he has used to unfaithful and unmerciful
doings.

But although Philip him self was so prevented by slaughter, yet his next
heir pursued the enterprise. Alexander the great being heir to the same
Philip, now free from fear and accombraunce of Grecia at home, set upon the
kingdom of Persia, the king whereof had now by not ayding of Grecia pulled the
whole weight of the war and of all the Macedonians fresh and proud violence
upon him self and his own Empire in Asia, where he might have diuerted it to
have been spent to Alexanders greater hardness, and his own good assurance
in Europe. Which because he did not in time, his land was destroyed, his wife
and children taken, his crown lost, him self slain, all Persia brought to
ruin and slavery. An everlasting lesson to Princes to keep peril far of
if they may, to succor their distressed neighbors, to beware of those that
have given examples of infidelity and of deep reachyng dissimulation, and to
take heed to them selves betymes.

GEorge Castriot, son of John Castriot, was afterward for his valiantness
surnamed Scanderbeg, which in our tongue signifies Alexander the Lord, or
Alexander the Great: not much varieng from the like sound of our own language.
For in some part of this realm, Alexander is called by corrupt contraction
Saunder. And Beg among the Turks signifies great, and a Lord or a great man,
as in the office of Bellerbeg: and with us big is also great. This Scanderbeg
breaking from the Turks service, recovered his fathers dominion in Epirus
otherwise called Albanie, which country is it of which sometime Pirrhus was,
and of which are those Albanois that we have seen in this realm, of whom some
did serve king Henry the viij. at the war in France, when Boleine was
conquered. Having so in short time with incredible industry won again his
inheritance, he was for his excellent prowess by common consent of all the
Lords of Epirus chosen their chief Prince and sovereign. He flourished about
the year of our Lord. 1543. and a good sort of years both before and after. He
long continued war with the great Turks, Amurathes the father and Mahumet
the son. He slew diverse of the great Bassaes and capitaines of the Turk,
with infinite multitudes of their people. He twice expelled Amurathes out of
Epirus, and at the later time enforced that great tyrant to dye for sorrow,
because he could not win Croia, but was feign to leave it with dishonor. He
drove out Mahumet also with shame, not only at both the said iorneyes when he
came with his father, but also when him self invaded Epirus, at all which
three voyages the Turks army when it was least was above C. thousand men. He
continued the war above xl. years. He prepared to have joined his forces with
the king of Hungary and noble John Huniades. But having the passage denied and
stopped by George the traitorous Despote of Mysia otherwise called Rascia,
through whose country his way did lie of necessity into Hungary, he could not
come in time, but that in mean season the Christians joining battle before his
coming to them received the great and lamentable overthrow at Varna, but with
so bloody a victory to the Turk him self that the Turk was enforced to sit
quiet a good while after, with most plain proof of great likelyhode of
auoydyng that great calamity if Scanderbegs power might also have been present
to their assistance. The life and doyngs of this noble Prince Scanderbeg are
set out in Latin by Marinus Barletius of Scodra, out of whom follows here
translated into English the discourse of a subtle practice of Mahomet the Turk
intendyng mischef against Christendom: how he fearing the force of Scanderbeg
to interrupte his other attemptes if he should join with other Christian
Princes, first by crafty means promises and persuasions of good and peaceable
meanynges not only to Scanderbeg, but to all other Princes the professors of
Christian faith, he obtained to make peace and league with Sca^derbeg. And the
same once obtained he did in deed surcesse to make open war upon Epyrus, but
fetched a further compass about, he assailed Scanderbegs neighbors and those
whom Scanderbeg in time past had defended, and from whom Scanderbeg also in
time of need was to look for society and succor, and by whom (if they were
subdued) Scanderbeg was without all dout to be most perislously accombred and
endangered. Thus peace was gotten with this fraud, that howsoever Scanderbeg
did not expressly capitulate for other Christians, yet because the Turk made
the cause of his sekyng that peace to be his werrinesse of war with
Christians and his desire to live in quiet with them, and that Christians were
the instruments to procure it, Scanderbeg could not be persuaded but that not
him self only but also his Christian neighbors by whom he received and was
to receive aid in all necessities should enjoy the fruit of the same peace,
whom otherwise no doubt he would never have betrayed and left destitute,
both for the common faythes sake, and for necessary policy, knowing in what
likelyhoode he stood to need them an other time, who either subdued must in
time to come enuiron him as enemies, or upon articles of peace be likewise tied
from relieuing him, or departing on eue^ hand or victors recompense him with
the like unkindness. So was the peace like Cydippes apple, a snare in form to
an entrapped mind, conceiuyng the peace intended far more generally and
largely than it was by the letter expressed, or by the tyrant pursued. For
while by that peace Scanderbeg deceived, was made a looker on of his neighbors
harms and his own dangers, while he held himself against the meaning of the
league to be tied by the sillables of the league, from serving Christ and
defending his Church and people, the Turk made war upon those dominions of
the Venetians that bordered next upon Scanderbeg, and by which Scanderbeg was
to be enclosed in peril, and forclosed from succor. And the Turk carried with
a forewynde in that course against the territories of the Venecians in Epyrus
and Dalmatia, and hardly containing his malicious courage against Scanderbeg
till sit opportunity, did still now and then by advise of old Duke George
the Despote, pinche Scanderbegs friends, sow him quarelles at home, and so
divert his mind to other necessities, and specially prepared matter to occupy
him upon other borderers and neighbors. And the Turks subjects carried with
incklinges of their masters affection, had made a road into the utter part of
Scanderbegs dominions, and ministered secret aid to his enemies, whereof
Scanderbeg complained. The Turk finding his purposes not yet ripe to be
broached, and seeing that because he had yet won no land from the Venecians
whereby he might beset Scanderbeg as he intended, he dissembled for the time,
and gave Scanderbeg fair words, with laying all the blame from himself upon
his subjects, saying that it was done without his knowledge, and by certain
about him without his assent. The case standing thus, while Scanderbeg saw the
peril, and in doubtful amaze between construction of words and appearance of
meaning, wythdrewe his power from doing any thing to the eschuyng of the common
peril, the Venecians sent their Ambassadors to treat with him to take part
in the war with the rest of Christendom, whom he meant in the league to have
partakers with him of the fruits of the peace. According to which true
meaning, being not hid, but the evident semblance to the whole world on both
parts at the time of the making of the same league, so many ways so apparent,
as it needed no expressing in letters, nor can now be compted a devised cavil,
the league ought in truth (said they) to have on both sides been kept, and so
to be expounded: beside occasions of breach on the Turks part well known to
Scanderbeg.

The manner of dealyng herein, as it was done in deed, and the orations of the
Venetian Ambassadors, and of the Archbishop of Durazzo, whom for his great
credit with Sca^derbeg, they had entreated to join with them to persuade him,
do here truly follow in English as Barletius has written the same in Latin.

King Mahumetes Ambassador, who had been with Scanderbeg in forty days before
to treat for peace, returned to him again with his Princes letters for the
confirmyng and stablishyng thereof according to Scanderbeges own mind and
demaundes. Upon the receipt of which letters Scanderbeg calling his Capteines
and officers about him, read them openly unto them. Who gave their consent
together to stablish peace with Ottoman, auouching the same to be both
honorable to Scanderbeg, and also very behoffull and profitable for his Realm.
Wherefore a league was made between Scanderbeg and the Turk, and peace every
where proclaimed through both their kingdoms to the reioycement of all their
subjects. And the same league was kept faithfully on either part for a
certain time. But afterward the truce-breaking Turks, in whom there is never
any trustiness, gave occasion of a breach of the peace. For they first invaded
the marches of Scanderbeg, and drove away a great booty with them. Of the
which deed Scanderbeg complained to Mahumet by letters and messengers: who
answered that he was not privy to it, and in excuse seemed to be very sore
displeased with the matter, that his men of war had done it without his
commandment or consent: and therefore he made him restitution of many things
again. About the same time the Turks wasted the borders of the Uenetians in
Morea. Whereupon, the Uenetians, who were Scanderberges confederates and very
dear friends, sent unto him their Ambassador Gabriel of Trinisa, exhortyng
and intreatyng him to make war upon Mahumet, which thing he might justly do
for so much as the Turk had already broken the league and violated his faith.
This Gabriel coming before Scanderbeg, spoke thus in the presence of him and
of his Lords.

RIght high and mighty prince, our coming unto you is not, (after the manner
almost of all such as come of Ambassade,) to exalt you with praises, nor to
advance the worthiness of your country, the antiquity of your progeny, and
the excellency of your noble doyngs with deserved commendacions: for neither
do I think that any man, were he never so eloquent, could easily do that:
neither does the state of the present time seem to suffer the same to be done
with comlynesse. But our coming is rather to exhort and persuade you, and
moreover to entreat you, to cast and bend the sight of your mind (which is
always wont to espy a far of, and to look and perce through things to come
that lie yet in covert) upon the peril that hangs over Christendom, and
upon the mischief that already begins to bud and burst out, and is like to
ouerspred all Europe within a while, if it be not met withal betimes. For you
may be well assured and out of all doubt, most noble prince, that whereas the
treacherous and wylye Tyrant could pretend no natural intercourse of love
between the Turks and Albanes, his making of peace with you is nothing else but
utter falshede and dissimulation, that when he had first subdued the residue of
the Christen Kings and Princes that are your neighbors, (for he saw him self
to be held at the staves end, yea and ouermatched by your majesty's puissance)
he might advance his power and dominion further, and turn his wars upon us
also: We see already that after this barbarous Prince had once made peace with
you, and saw him self safe and quiet from war and anoyance at your hand, by
and by he turned his force against the Rascians and Triballes, and put them to
wrecke. That done he conquered the Sclauons and overthrew the Thracians, and
deposing the Greeks from their Empire, won the kingdom of Trebizond
increasing still his strength, and aduauncing his dominion further and further.
And now breakyng the covenant of peace, and violatyng all right, he wageth
war against us. He has forrayed both your country and ours far and wide.
Behold Prince Scanderbeg, how well the barbarous Turk keeps promise with you.
He has reered war, he is entered into arms, he provoke you already to
battle, and utters his meaning and outrage without couerture. Are these
things to be quietly put up? should you yet still held your peace? must you
yet still trust the Turk? must you yet still trust to his courtesy, while he
makes havoc of Christendom and utterly destroys us, whereas unlucky
war were better tha^ so dishonorable a peace? Think you that the infidel
has so soon forgotten the shameful death whereunto you drove his father to
his great dishonor? match herewithall the slaughters and calamities of his
armies Capteines and Lieutenantes which you have put him to. The savage and
cruel Mahumet thinks of all these things, he myndeth them continually, he
sets them day and night before his eyes, and he desires and longs to be
revenged. But alas most noble prince, he works wyles, believe me he works
wyles, he uses the sleight of his aunceters, he practices daily how to wynd
about you and to catch you by his deceites and policies. Hitherto he has
flattered you to cease from war and to lay away weapon, that he might go
through with his own wars, and oppress and cast down the rest of the
Christen Kings and Princes that are about you, of whom he saw none able to
withstand his force but only you. And now after he has subdued all the others
unto him, and all things are fallen out as he desired, he turns unto you. He
bends his battles at you, to make clean riddance of you and all your
subjects and kingdom, and then to swallow up us, and to satisfy his own
barbarous rage. Therefore most gracious prince, what should you linger any
longer? The matter is come to that point, that you must have Mahumet neither
your enemy or your Lord. Let us also enter into arms against him, let us
encounter force with force, let us join battle with him. He provoke us to
war, let us give him his hands full of it. Let us burn and spoil his
country as meet is we should, and let us not suffer our selves to be
intrapped by his wiliness and policies. For the false forsworn kaytif
intends and practices nothing but to oppress us one by one, til the state
of Christendom (which God forbid) being bereft of counsel and comfort, may be
yielded into his hand without any stroke strikyng, and the common liberty of
all men be past recovery for ever: whereas if he see us knit our selves
together, he will be afraid of our force, and shun our power: or if he will
needs venture upon us, it may be his chance to go away vanquished. But if he
find us separated, he shall easily ouerwhelme us. So ouermightie is he alone
at this day. Therefore let us not suffer this plague, this infection, this sore
to be in Europe, which doubtless will ouerspred and fester the whole contrie
if it be not prevented before hand. For you know well enough the wyles of the
Ottomannes, you are well acquaynted with their crafts and policies, whereby
they shift out all their matter, and bring all their greatest exploytes to
pass. What man is able O most victorious prince, to reckon up the wicked and
heinous doyinges of this most cruel tyrant, who in that point far
surmounteth all his aunceters, as the person that cannot be satisfied with the
daily slaughter of his own subjects and nerest friends, and also longs to
employ all his force against our state of Uenice, which (as your majesty
knows) has always been a buttresse and bulwark of the Christen faith, to
the intent that when he had once shaken, broken, and overthrown that, he might
also strike down not only the Albanes, but also the other nations of
Christendom, and trample them under feet. But this is not the only thing
that the cruel and outrageous tyrant intends, though it be very great and
unable to be abidden among men: But also to destroy the right faith and to
forbid men the way of everlasting salvation. For he is in a wrong box who
soever he is that believes that Mahumet desires not rather to wast and
unpeople the countries of the Christians, than to tread down the true faith,
and to root it utterly out of men's hearts. What then? Good God what may we
Christians hope for at this beasts hand, since that both in belefe and all
kind and trade of life we be utterly disagreeyng and strangers from him?
Therefore O invincible prince Scanderbeg, the champion and soldier of Christ,
make speed, make have, away with delays, dispatch the imminent mischieues and
perilles from thy self and from thy neck. Take heed to thy self, take heed
to thy state and kingdom while you may (for now thou may if thou will)
before the mischieues and perils cast thee down and ouerwhelme thee. For if
they once light upon thee (which God forfend) thou will wish and shall not be
able. Therefore to my seemyng it is far better for you and more for your ease,
to provide before hand, than to seek remedy and redress after the receipt of
the wound when the stroke has hit you. Provide therefore, provide, most
excellent Prince, out of hand, that the outrage, rancor, pestilentnesse, and
venim of Mahomet may not infect, defile, and mar thee, who doubtless
seeks, prepares, and practices nothing but to toll you to trusting of him,
and then cruelly to lead you to death and destruction, as who is and always
has been an vndermyner of Christendom and sheader of Christen blood, and a
deadly hater of the Christian and right believing faith, which he studieth and
indeuoreth night and day to defile, cut of, and utterly destroy by all the
means he can. To the maintenance and defense whereof, against the rage and
cruelty of this wood and butcherly tyrant, Christ (whose champion and Soldier
your invincible majesty is termed) together with the state of Uenice, who take
you for their Prince, does call and entreat you. Gold, silver, men of war,
and whatsoever else is needful for such exploytes, we promise and proffer
unto you abundantly. Wherefore most glorious Prince, girde up thy self out of
hand, bring thy Soldiers into ye field, set thy battles in order, draw thy
sword, put thy spear into the rest, and geeue charge upon the Turks, the
vtterest enemies of the true faith, whom thou have always easily overcome, and
whom likewise to overcome, there is a fatal and heavenly power given thee by
God from above. For surely if we prevent him not sooner, he will out of doubt
infecte and mar all. For you know already the wyles of the Turkishe kings,
you know their crafts and policies whereby they shift out all their matters,
and bring their greatest exploytes to pass. And again, O most victorious
Prince, who is able to rehearse the wicked and heinous factes of this most
cruel tyrant, wherein he surmounteth all his aunceters, as one that can never
be satisfied with the slaughter of his trusty subjects and near kinsfolk.
Therefore to conclude, what may we Christians who are straingers to him in
belief, and differ from him in all trade of life; good Lord, what may we hope
for at the hand of this beast.

WHen he had made an end of speaking, Sca^derbeg, not that he wist not what
opinion to be of, but because he was wont to do nothing without the advice of
his men of war, called his Captains and officers together, and debated a
long time at large with them whether he should consent to the Uenecians and
make war upon the Turk, or no. All which were of opinion, in any wise not to
make war against him, because he refused to make open war with Scanderbeg,
and had restored the most part of the booty which his soldiers had (as he
avouched) taken out of Scanderbegs territory, rather of wantonness, and
through a certain looseness of souldyerly liberty, than otherwise. By reason
whereof the Ambassador of Uenice receiving this answer, and understanding
their minds, departed from Scanderbeg in great heaviness for missing of his
purpose, and in his way went to Paul Angel Archbishop of Durass^* (whom he
knew to be a man of very great credit, and that there was nothing so great and
hard, which he was not able to win them to when he listed) to try if
the^strehbysh. would take upon him to deal with Scanderbeg and his officers,
to enter into arms against the Turk, and to make war upon him, for he
hoped undoubtedly that Scanderbeg and his men of war would easily be won to
the Uenecians request. The Archbishop being a very great fauorer of Uenecians,
did in honor of their Senate go immediately unto Scanderbeg. This Archbishop
was an Albane, borne of the house of Driuast, the son of Andrew Angel
aforesaid. He was a man indewed with great wit, singular eloquence, and
excellent learning, both in divinity and humanity, very well seen both in
Greek and Latin, notable for the gravity of his life and conversation, and
exceeding earnest in the Christen religion. And Scanderbeg had him in singular
reverence for his modesty, and for the excellency and great vprightnes of his
life: and all the Albanes and Epyrots gave ear to him and honored him as an
Oracle. Immediately upon his coming to Scanderbeg, all the captains and
Soldiers were called together, whom he indeuered to persuade to take war in
hand against Mahomet, by such an oration as this following.

THe divine Plato, most victorious prince, affirms that commonweals,
kingdoms and Empires be then happy and thoroughly blissed, when they chance
to be governed by the best and wisest men. Which thing we see in the open light
at this time to be come to pass among us Albanes, who are governed by you
alone a most sage and gracious Prince and most invincible Captain. And
therefore, not without good cause, all the Kings and Princes near about and
borderyng upon you, have for your valeantnesse and singular actiuitie chosen
you alone for their captain and general, as a man sent unto them from heaven,
to defend their realms and kingdoms from the Turkish outrage and barbarous
cruelty, who have always hitherto been singularly and honorably defended by
your power and wisdom, and by the valeantnesse of your Capteines and men of
war. Which thing Mahumet that subtle and crafty vndermyner and fierce
persecuter of the Christen religion perceiving, and longing to satisfy his
inspeakable hatred conceived against the Christians, has brought to pass by
his Turkish traynes and wiliness, that you fell to composition with him by
making a league, to the end that you might cease your wars, and he be no
more troubled by your power, which he was sore afraid of, for the dispatch
whereof he easily granted what soever articles of peace liked you best. But
alas most noble Prince, who sees not that the barbarous tyrant has wrought
all these things with you by barbarous treachery, and that his making of peace
is but a policy, that he might first dispatche the other Kings and Princes
that are your neighbors, and then turn again upon you as he has done
already? For where are the Princes of Rascia? where are the kings of
Sclauonie? where is the kingdom of Trebizond which supplied Constantinople,
become? Now, even now a late he has turned against you, and breakyng his
league and faith, has wasted your country far and wide. He troubles and
vexes your league fellows with continual rodes. For who (O noble Prince) is
able to utter this most outrageous tyrants unmeasurable spyte against you?
Think you that he will leave the death of his father Amurathe, the sorrowful
slaughter of his hosts, the sleayng of his Capteines, and the killing of his
generalles unrevenged? Do you trust the words and promises of this beast? do
you admit his excuses? will he keep touch with you? will he keep faith, which
he never had, nor never kept with any man unto this day? Good God, who is able
to rehearse the wicked doings of this most cruel Tyrant? Nevertheless I
think it against reason to wrap them up in silence, for so much as it is a
certain honest pleasure to inuey against a sinful and wicked person, and to
hale forth the workers of mischief into the light, and to call them by their
names, to the intent that other men may abstain from vice and lewdness for
fear of shame. Therefore like as virtue is not to be left without praise, so is
not vice to be left without disprayse. For like fruit is received both of
praising the good and of dispraysing the evil. And therefore it is good right
and reason that all naughty and wicked men should be ill spoken of. But so
much the more is this Tyrant Mahumet to be ill spoken of, because he excels
and passes other men in naughtiness, whose life, manners and doings I will
run over as shortly as I ca^, to the end they may be the better known unto
you, and that you may shun them. Mahumet was borne of very base and unhappy
stock and of very mean parents, Mahume^ their Prophet.
in that nation which being the worst of all barbarous nations is always wont
to fleet from place to place. For whereas the Scythians about Maeotis are the
barbarousest of all barbarous people, he is reported to have been borne in the
basest and dishonorablest place among them. For Scythia was his country, and
the village of Otmanach was his birthplace, from whence the house or family of
the Otmannes takes his original, which glory to be counted slaves. So is
there nothing more shameful and vile than his auncetrie. His father Amurathe
therefore, for whom it was not lawful to reign by reason of his auncetrie,
for so much as he was of the house of Otman, which was borne to bondage and
always given to slavery, invaded the kingdom of Asia and other Realms by
craft and wickedness, and increased and enlarged them all, and so far
advanced his state which proceeded from a beggarly and lewd beginning, that
as now he is unable to weeld his own greatness. And to the intent I may also
come to his conditions: this Mahumet is of great strength both of body and
mind, howbeit of an evil and lewd disposition, an enemy of mankind, a common
foe to all men, a sheader of blood, a workemaister of mischief, a wellspryng of
all vices, a furtherer of death, a father of all naughtiness, and an
insatiable mansleaer. Who being issued of such aunceters, and reteyning still
his barbarous and unmeasurable cruelty, has evermore continued still one man
in his crabbednes all his life long. From his youth up his pleasure has been
in wars; slaughters, rauishmentes and debates, and in the same has he spent
his young years. Of courage he is hardy, wylye, variable, a fine coater of any
manner thing, a coueter of other men's goods, a burner in his own lusts, and a
desirer of things immoderate, incredible, and unmeasurable. First therefore
there grew in him a desire of gain and afterward of dominion more than can be
expressed. His mind was stained with evil tatches. Neither was he clear
from wicked lusts: but was a filthy adulterer and a deviser of vices which
even nature it self abhors. This is the same Mahumet which for desire to
reign murdered his own brother. The princes of Rascia* and the king of Bosna
he slew by treachery, and their kinsfolk he partly carried away into bondage
and captivity, and partly put out their eyes, or maimed them in some part of
their bodies. What shall I say of others, upon whom he tried all kinds of
torments, in so much as it should seem he would wreake his teene upon him
self if he wanted others wherein to do it, so cruel is that nature of his,
and his ouerboyling anger can never be satisfied. For his heart being unclean
to Godward, and spyteful toward men, does always imagine mischief, estemyng
frendshyp or enemitie not by desert but by profit, nowhere keeping measure, no
where keeping modesty, committyng shameful and cruel things both against
friends and subjects, spoylyng Churches both openly and privily, vnhalowyng
holy things, defilyng all things, snatchyng all things, pluckyng all thing
to him, confoundyng shame and chastity, and heaven and earth together. Has he
not subdued, slain, and caught prisoners almost all against his leagues? And
therefore what novelty is it, most noble Prince, if a truce-breakyng Turk keep
no promise with you, seeing he is stained with all kind of vices, and holds
still the said wickedness and treachery by inheritance from his aunceters?
Wherefore believe not the tyrant, neither trust you to his words and promises:
but withdrawying from all frendshyp with him, think the peace to be broken
which he him self has first cut a sunder and dissolved, and forslow not to
pursue him with war for favor toward him. Provide, provide quickly for
your self and for your Realm, that the Turk surpryse not you and yours by
treason and sutteltie. The wyly For imagines nothing else, the lewd cankerd
carle practices nothing but how he may overcome and oppress the faith of
Christ, for ye which, you (as you know) have determined to labor and travel
continually, and also sworn the same, yea and I remember well that you have
oftentimes said, that you were borne and begotten for the defense and
maintenance thereof. Wherefore then (by your patience) have you laid weapon
away? Why suffer you the faith to be oppressed by a tyrant, while your
souldyers minds become lazy by idleness? Have you abandoned ye common
welfare? have you renounced the wars? have you chosen to live only to your
self? Think you there shall ensue small peril to your self by so doing? Shall
a valiant and ancient Captain in battle sit still with his arms folded one
within an other? Alas for shame, shall me^ see the courage of a prince which was
sometime lively and lusty, become now lazy and vanishe away through idleness?
But your friend Mahomet loytereth not, he becomes not drowsy with idleness,
but he watches, he labors, he bestirreth himself, to dishonor the Gospel
of Christ, to sink Peter's ship, and to rend and tear Christ's coat,
following the footesteps of his aunceters and the traditions of his false
prophet, who charged his people to persecute Christianity with all egernesse,
as a hateful and unholy thing, and to shed the giltles blood of the Christians
without pity. By reason whereof this tyrant has always persecuted ye
Christen faith most sharply above others: against whom, if you who are the
inuinciblest of all Princes, do not out of hand arm your self, raise your
power, and make war upon him, undoubtedly all men will deem you to be
fearful, cowardly, and given over to slothfulnes. Know you not that all the
Christen kings and Princes together with our most holy Pope Pius the chief
Bishop of the world are conspired together against this tyrant, whom they are
fully determined (by Gods help) to pursue to the uttermost, till they have
driven him quite and clean out of Europe? A pardon is already gone out from
the Pope, and published through all Christendom, wherein all Christen kings
and Princes are willed to take arms with the Pope against the king of Turkey,
and behighted forgeuenes of their sins for so doing. In consideration whereof
your friends the Uenecians with their Duke and whole Senate, and their armies,
as well by sea as by land, together with our chief Bishop, do ^an and cry upon
you to this against Mahomet, and make you their Prince, Captain, and
Lieutenaunt general of all the whole host of Christendom. And as soon as
the Pope shall be passed the seas and entered into Durasso, he is determined to
proclayme you king of Albanes and Epirots, as the worthyest person to whom the
chief charge of this war should be committed. Therefore most happy Prince
Scanderbeg, what do thou? Why make thou delay? Either thou must forget
war and battle for ever, and receive the yoke, or else thou must neither in
valyantnesse nor in painfulness give place to this party with whom thou must
have to do for the souereintie and dominion of all. Pluck up thy courage and
strength, call together thy captains and coronelles, assemble thy people and
subjects on all sides, entreat the kings and Princes that are confederate
with thee, set thy battelles and bands in array, follow the company of the
faithful, and the congregation of all the Christians, obey the high Bishop,
and get pardon for thine own si^nes and the sins of all thine army.
Behold, the Uenecians have sent me to tell thee these things, and to persuade
and exhort thee to match thy power with their power, thy ensinges with their
ensinges, and thy battelles with their battelles. For as you know, the Uenecian
Princes are right Christian, bountiful, and very puisaunt both by sea and land,
and they promise and profer unto you abundance of gold and silver. Wherefore
Lord Scanderbeg, play the That is to say Lord Alexander.
Sca^derbeg in deed, thou glory of Princes, give thou the first onset upon the
barbarous infideles with thy power, invade thou his marches, strike thou thine
enemy in fear and terror, which has provoked thee first by breaking the
league and violatyng his promise and peace. For all laws cry out, and all
duties permit that no promise should be kept with him that keeps none
himself. Therefore go boldly, I say, go boldly before the Christen army,
assail thou the enemy first, proclayme general war against the Infidel,
and make way before hand, against the high Bishop come. For lo, the Pope Pius,
lo, thy Uenecians, lo the Frenchmen, Spanyardes, Flemminges, Hungarians,
Bohemians, Polonians, and all Christendom follow thee and assist thee. By
reason whereof it is not possible that the Infidel should be able to withstand
so many kings and Princes, and so many hosts and armies, and therefore he
must be feign to take him self straight ways to flight and to get him quyte
and clean out of Europe. The Turks pride shall not avail him, neither shall
his wonted wiles, treasons and policies help him. But by the way I must put in
mind, and you your self must wisely forecast it, that the guilefull Turk
foreseeing all these things, will by and by send messengers and Ambassadors
to you, to allure you to lay aside weapon, and to keep the peace with him,
which he has broken with you. But regard not his mischeuous nature, shut and
stop up your ears against his inticementes. You know the man's disposition
already, ye find well enough what he is, and you are as well acquainted with
the wyles of the house of Ottoman as any man is who soever is best acquainted.

MAhumet the ambitious subtle and cruel Prince, continuing his purpose to
increase his wicked sect and to enlarge his dominions, seeing him self unable
to atcheue that purpose so long as Christian princes were united in minds and
forces against him, resorteth to his accustomed auantage. He practices to
bind some Christians whoes strength he most feared, with band of league and
peace, which he judged they would sincerely observe, him self always reteynyng
a periurous mind to break faith when it should be for his profit so to do.
So had he done in his peace with Scanderbeg whereof in the former Orations is
made mention. For seeing, that while Scanderbeg was his open enemy in war and
employed his daily strength upon him, he could do nothing to the Venecians, he
durst not attempt any new enterprise in Hungary, and his allye the false
Christian Duke of Mysia could not rest in quiet, much less in ability to anoy
Christendom at his pleasure, but that Scanderbeg was ever ready with his aid
to stand between him and the Venecians, to assist the Hungarians, to make way
thorough Mysia with fire and sword, and at every need to defend the Church of
God: Mahumet first practiced to oppress him by strength and treason, and by
accomberyng Scanderbeges own country, one while with inuasio^s, an other while
with war of his neighbors, an other while with seditions and conspiracies of
his own friends and Capitaines and nobility against him. Under promise of a
hie marriage, endowed with hopes of crowns, and great wealth, and the possessing
of Sca^derbegs own land and inheritance, the Turk allured Amesa the greatest
Duke under Scanderbeg in Epyrus, and Scanderbegs own kinsman, and who^
Sca^derbeg with great love and indulgence had suffered, yea and advanced to rise
to the greatest credit in that land among all estates and specially the
commons of that Realm, both by authority and offices to him committed, and by
his kindred to the prince him self and alliances to the most of the nobility
of the land, which estimation Duke Amesa had him self also hyely augmented by
great virtues that otherwise were in him, specially such as were aptest to
win affections of the multitude. This Duke Amesa was so by this traitorous
Prince Mahumet seduced. He promised him the marriage of his own nere kinswoma^
after the dispatchyng of Amesaes own wife, he promised him foreign aid and
force of men to stre^gthen his rebellion against Scanderbeg, apointyng him both
number and time and place where they should arrive, with sufficient furniture
of all means and provisions to atteine his wicked purpose, and he promised him
the succession and crown of Albanie to him and his heirs for ever, which yet
God wot the tyrant never truly intended, but fully determined, if by this
mean Scanderbeg could have been made away, to have shortly after easily
dispatched poor Duke Amesa and quickly joined whole Albanie as a province to
his own Empire. And not only he so misguided Duke Amesa, but also by means of
Duke Amesaes favor credit and alliance, and by great corruptions and promises
from him self, he found the way to draw unto the same party and faction
sundry other of Scanderbeges nobility, and specially his trusty Cou^seller
Moses. But almighty God, who had often before, as by miracle and of his own
immediate grace, preserved his noble champio^ and true servant Scanderbeg, did*
now also assist the good prince and principal instrument of succoryng the
Church and deffendyng Christ's Gospel, in this great danger of hostility and
treason packed together against the safety of this godly and honorable
sovereign. Duke Amesa prevailed not, but was taken, emprisoned, and after dyed:
Moses upon repentance returned to grace: Mahumet lost his great preparation,
and like a horrible stinche left behind him at the end of the enterprise, an
odious and loathsome disclosing of a treacherous mind against the safety of
true Christian princes, and an eternal unappeasable hatred against Christ's
Gospel and Religion.

This attempt failing, he practiced a new devise. He fayneth him self werry of
wars with Christians, he takes upon him to be grieved with the wast of his
people and with his great losses in so continual enemities and destructions,
he protests a desire of quiet and at length to give happy rest to
Christendom and to him self, and therefore he writes fair glosing letters to
Scanderbeg: he sends Scanderbeg goodly presents, Turkye horses, bows,
carpets, silks and many gay things: he makes much of Scanderbeges
messengers: he sets those in his court whom Scanderbeg best loved to be
instruments to draw Scanderbeges ministers to commend the peace: he makes
most friendly shows of favor to the faction of Scanderbeges friends in the
tyrants own realm, court and family: he half yeldeth the zealous show of his
own heresy, to beguile Scanderbeg with such hypocrisy: he practices to make
some of Scanderbeges nobility to set out in large speech the discommodities
and hazardes of the war, the wasting of treasure, the loss of men, the
hinderance of the lands by withdrawyng trafike and intercourse between their
subjects, with great amplifieng the benefits of long desired peace and such
other devises. By these and such like fetches at length he somewhat softened
his invincible zele, and a little blyndfolded his clear pearcyng judgment. And
so this great tyrant Mahumet by little and little diuertyng Scanderbeges eyes
from Mahumetes periurous falsehed, and from considering how the tyrants
Bassaes and Bishops did justify infidelity and breach of faith against
Christians, at length a peace was made between Mahumet and Scanderbeg,
Scanderbeg always iudgyng the same peace not to be taken for him self only but
also for his Christen neighbors. Which he was induced to believe by these
reasons, for that Mahumet pretended the cause of his sekyng that peace to be
his werrinesse of warring with Christians, and for that other Christians,
specially those that lived under the tyra^ts empire, were the chief means and
instruments of practicing the league, assuryng Scanderbeg and his ambassadors
and ministers that the same should not only be to the great benefit of
Sca^derbeg, but also to the perfect surety of those Christians that labored
the peace, and to a notable mean of revenge and overthrow against the old
false Christian Duke of Mysia that had been the sower of all the former
troubles and mischieues. So rested the comprehe^sion and express provision for
other Christians in only undoubted confidence. And while Scanderbeg never
suspected so foul a treachery as Mahumet intended, the other Christian
princes, and specially those that were most subject to Mahumetes power,
although the peace was most chiefly pretended for their surety, yet by reason
that Mahumetes dissembled shows of good will toward them made forgetfulness
or appearance of no need to comprise them, or by some sinister practice, were
left out of the capitulation and articles.

Then the peace was not only solemnly accorded, but also ratified and
confirmed, by oaths, by Ambassadors, by solemn testifications and
gratulatio^s, and by all the exquisite means that might be to bring Sca^derbeg
in confidence of the infidel Mahumetes fidelity. But immediately upon this
conclusion of peace, Mahumet having Scanderbeg fast tied from stirring, and
finding that (which he chiefly coueted in the whole peace) that there was no
special article expressed for the other Christians for whoes sake and for
whoes safety and by whoes means the peace was chiefly intended and procured,
first makes war upon the Venecians: not in Cyprus nor Candie nor other
places, wherein he might do as great hurt to the Venecians with less peril to
Scanderbeg, but he piketh out those places and territories of theirs that lie
hard upon Scanderbeg, he besieges, Scodra, and makes war upon the
Venecians dominions in the self Epirus and Dalmatia. He pretends aydyng of
his allye the Duke of Mysia and so piketh querell to Hungary, and by the way
under color against the Hungarians he fortifieth Mysia against Scanderbeg. By
these devises this plat has he laid. If he win Scodra and other pieces and
territories of the Venecians in Epyrus, the^ has he Scanderbeg enclosed with
mighty fortifications on that part. If he oppress the Hungarians and win
from them the frontier towns, then has he also so much near strength on the
other side* In fortifieng Mysia he has also a third mean to assail
Sca^derbeg. And in all these cases he has a sure distractyng of all aid from
Scanderbeg in his necessity by hemming him thus round about And though it
should happen that he could in none of these places win ground and so hedge
him in, yet was he sure so to werry the Venecia^s, Hungaria^s, and other
neighbors, that when he should begin war with Scanderbeg they should be so
entangled with articles of a new league, or tyered with discommodities of old
war, and partly so irritated with Scanderbeges withdrawing his assistance
from them at this time, that in his need they should either not be able to do
him good, or willingly shrink from him as he does now from them, and should
pretend them selves likewise to be bound by league as he for him self now
allegeth. And one further reach therein also has the tyrant, though he win
nothing against the other Christians, yet under color of his wars in so nere
parts to Scanderbeg to have a great power always in readiness unsuspected, with
full purpose to pour it suddenly upon Scanderbeg if he spy him upon trust of
peace negligent and open to auantage. For this cause he makes his siege
against the Venecians both by land and sea, and makes sembla^ce that after the
war ended with the Venecians he is to use his nauye for an other enterprise a
far of, only to this purpose by sea and la^d to set suddenly upon Scanderbeg
so sone as the perjured tyrant might find either Scanderbeg hedelesse, or
Scanderbegs friends and Christian neighbors either wrapped and withdrawn with
the like peace of werryed with former wars. But as God would all this
sutteltie was prevented. For by the persuasion of Triuisa the Venecian
ambassador and Angelo the Archbishop of Durazzo, as is above said, and by a
notable good occasion ministered by Mahumet him self, by a road made into
Scanderbegs country by the Duke of Mysiaes men Mahumetes co^federate during
the peace, and by sundry inclinges and practices of Mahumet to undermine
Scanderbeges safety, Scanderbeg was persuaded to enter into the defense of his
Christian neighbors and to account the true meaning of the peace to extend to
them all, as him self at the making of the league did understand it and expect
the success of it, and as Mahumet him self did bear semblance and feed the
said expectation. So were all the subtle devises of the faythlesse tyrant for
that time thwarted and wisely met withal. Whereupon Mahumet grew to accord
with the Venecians and Hungarians, and raised his siege of Scodra, and withdrew
his army by sea from that place. And in that peace with the Venecians he
likewise left Scanderbeg vncomprehended. And notwithstanding other pretenses to
use his strength against the barbarous Mamaluches in Egypt, to which kingdom
he was trained with some hope of their crown and Empire, the same force that
he had used by sea and land against Scodra and against the Venecians he did not
dissolve, but wholly employed it against Scanderbeg. In this distress comes
Scanderbeg to his old friend Alphonse of Arragon, the king of Hungary, the
Princes of Germany, the fathers of Venice, and other Christian Kings and
states, to crave their aids in defense of the Church of Christ, and speaks
to such effect, as follows.

IT is not unknown unto you most puissant and Christian Kings, Princes, Lords
and fathers, how we have these many years, in continual war against the
most mighty Tyrant the professed enemy of our faith and liberty, and against
his confederate falsely bearing the most holy name of a Christian Prince,
sustained the defense of our own right and preservation and of a few noble
princes and faithful Christians in territory nere adjoining to us, and in
bond of most Christian and noble society most nerely conjoined with us. It is
also evident that the mightynesse of our adversaries, and the sclendernesse of
our powers in comparison of theirs, we being in all things saving in the
goodness of our cause and in assurance of faith the only foundation of
invincible courage far inferior unto them, have after so many spoils of our
country, so many battayles foughten so many princes slain, so many sieges
suffered brought us to great vnlikelynesse of long continuance, specially when
they aboundyng in multitude, although each of the bloudes of us and our
valeaunt friends and subjects should be sold with the lives of many on the
other part, must needs yet by and little at length consume us. Hereby it may
seem to some that our speech and most earnest suit unto you at this time is
but our own cause enforced by our own necessity. In part we must needs
confess that so it is, and we do account it our greatest comfort that our God
vouchsaueth in such noble place and honorable degree of most dangerous and
therefore also most glorious and hye service to employ us. Yet must I admonish
you to call to mind, and most principally inform you to consider, and most
entierly beseech you and therewith also most seriously advise you to remember,
and not only to hold in memory, but also to exercise in continual
cogitatio^, that the case is also sundry ways your own, and so far as you
excede me and my confederates the poor Princes and nobility of Epirus, in
wealth, largeness of dominion, ability of resistance, numbers of your own
royal and magnificall persons, and multitudes of your subjects, and your and
their posterities, so much is it, though not more nerely yet more hyely yours
than ours, so much is your charge weightier, your burden of duty heavier, you
peril of loss dishonor and damnation greater and greuouser, and in respect
of subject matter, of persons and of time and posterity though it come not
sooner at you yet it extends both deper and further to you. What is it to
lose Epirus in comparison of the rest of Christendom? But toward the loss of
the rest of Christendom, how great a matter is it to lose Epirus? What great
loss can be of us a few poor gentlemen that keep but a corner of land, in
respect of our selves, when we shall gain by death in the querell of Christ?
but how great loss shall be to you so many so great Princes that possess the
body of the Christian world, to lose your lives at length if not by war yet
by ordinary necessity, and therewith to lose your souls for destituting the
cause of Christ, and the lives and souls of infinite your subjects and
friends, in leaving or rather making open the entrance into the fold of Christ,
for the enemy of Christen faith and religion to make hauock of Christ's flock
and people, which you might have helped? Hear me and my confederates therefore
I beseech you, as you being men endued with kindly nature of man would hear
natural men oppressed and nedyng your aid: Hear us as you being noble
Princes would hear Princes and noblemen in utter danger of their lives
possessions and liberties: Hear us as ye being Christians would hear
Christians and the champions of Christianity in greatest peril and
extremity, fightyng for our common faith and freedom and crauyng your
succors: Hear us as ye your selves would hear men speaking to your selves,
for your selves, of the greatest matters, most nerely touching you, and most
depely importyng you, in hauiour, in honor, and in safety, for the present
season, for the time shortly at hand, and for everlasting continaunce. And in
hearing of us, put on I beseech you, humanity to pity us, wisdom to look to
your selves, zeal to serve God, necessary courage for the present, honorable
and dutyfull care for posterity, an heroical desire to atteine immortal
glory, and a dreadful diligence to escape eternal punishment and infamy. And
above all things while you live imagine your selves dyeng, and when you have
heard us imagine your conscience at your dyeng hour vpbraydyng you with not
doing that which we desire ye to do.

Let now you own deep impressions of the cause upon our admonition avail to
move you, and in my words I pray you remember that how soever you have been
used at home to delicate and tickling speches exquisitely framed to please you,
by those that either for their deep reverence being your subjects, or for
their profit sekyng gain by your favorable audience, fear nothing so much as
with any scratch of plain truth to offend your ears accustomed to more deinty
usage, you will be pleased not to look for that of me, but be contented in a
new necessity to awake to a new form of hearing. Bear with me I beseech you
that have not been brought up in schools to gather my advancement by words,
but have spent my life in arms to defend Christendom by deeds. And being my
self (though by Gods ordinance that has placed me in the frontiers of his
church to bear the first brunt of the enemy, a poor one and nedyng succor,)
yet a prince of sovereign authority in mine own dominions as you are, I
presume that such things as I shall speak, which at your subjects hands were
not so mete to be said, yet at my mouth, one of us freely admonishyng an other,
and in this hye necessity, you will patiently hear me and in a rude vessel
receive the wholesome fruit of counsel for provision for all our safeties.

The great enemy of the Christian religion has as ye know by the sins of
the people and discord of Princes excedyngly prevailed, and daily grows more
and more against us, and of all that ungodly race never was there any more
perilous to Christendom than he that now reigns. For though Amurathes his
father were terrible and in long course of victories had stablished an opinion
of invincible felicity, yet anguish and disdain that he atteined not to feed
his cruel heart with sight of our destruction in Epirus, against whom he had
intended most horrible cruelty, has by Gods most gracious provision taken him
away in most happy season, and joined him to his progenitors the persecuters
of the Gospel of Christ, and so disappointed him of his most tyrannous purpose,
which he not only had in heart conceived, but threatened to see it with those
eyes which God both shortly after and most happily closed. This present
tyrants brother by Gods grace also lived not to execute the cruelties that
were to be looked for of such an ungracious stock, of so outrageous a father,
and so faithless a mother, and so perilously matched, but by the treason of
those that ought in nature and duty most to have preserved him, or rather by
the mighty and bountyfull hand of God, was cut of in good season for Gods
Church and people, so as what soever Christendom might have feared, yet it
felt not that by him, which at this man's hands both has been found and is
daily to be looked for. Now after the deliverance of the world by Gods benefit
from his father and brother, this monster of perjury and cruelty has
succeeded, in whom is to peril and dread of Christendom such confluence of
dangerous likelihodes and horrible effects as never were seen y^ like in any
before. Descended of a father whoes very childhode was nothing but delight in
mischief, whoes youth was nothing but outrage unchastity violence and
continual disorder, whoes man's state and age was nothing but sowyng of war
upon war, daily delight in blood, couetyng to enlarge his dominion, desire of
subduyng and destroyeng, under color of protection and succor, and whoes end
blessedly sent by the hand of God was the rather hastened in his own freatyng
mind with seeing his cruel intentes not satisfied, and so he departed as it
were more pined and starued with want of tragical food to glut his cruel
appetite and thirst of slaughter and blood, than any poor famished wretch
languisheth for lack of meat and drink to sustain his feeble nature. He is
borne of a mother Cathagusina worthy to match with that husband, and likely to
bring forth this child, the daughter of a runnagate infidel, whoes very
nation, whoes City and place of birth, whoes race and kindred, are despisers of
God, scorners of Christ, blasphemously co^ptyng his most divine and meritorious
works for a fable, and setting heaven and the bliss thereof behind worldly
wealth and glory. His mother I say Cathagusina, beside this inheritable and
natural habit of Godless impiety has ever been a deep dissembler, a crafty
snarer, a cruel executer of mischiefs, in so much as it may be truly said,
that the engendryng of this Prince of the seed of that father and that mother
is, as well said of the Roman tyrant, Lutum sanguine maceratum clay tempered
with blood, a compound mixture of bloody cruelty and subtle pliant falsehed to
infect to poison and to destroy the world. His very phisiognomy, not only in
favor, which God has given him unchangeable to note him to the world, but
also in his manner of look gate and gesture, which he has by use framed to the
conformity of his mischeuous disposition, do portend and threaten treason and
murder, a glumme silent clokyng of treachery, an earthly downward look
fleeyng the conscience of heaven and tendyng to the ground and to hellward.

All these wicked signs, and dangerous inclinations, have ever been fed
cherished and increased with the company of most false wicked and bloody
fellows of his sportes actions devises and counsels. The principal fathers of
his false faith, upon whom as a door upon henges, hangs the vpholdyng of
their heresy, do guide and misguide both him and his. They lay the crocodiles
eggs that he hatcheth. They govern lead and toss, him as if they had some
part in his fatherhode, and as if they accounted that he it is by whom their
damnable feet shall be enlarged. That abominable falsehed and blasphemous
heresy is it, with zeal whereof they color all his untruths and tyranny:
with it they shadow his ambitious intentes to enlarge his dominion, and
enterchau^geably with ambitious hopes to increase his conquestes they augment
his zeal to their error. With the principles of that heresy they assoyle him
from keeping of faith, they teach him to make no account of treason and
perjury, they make all leagues and promises to serve their turn, to be
dissoluble at their wills, both under pretense of omnipotent power that their
great Mahumet and them selves have to discharge him, and of the former
continuing league to their blasphemous idol, to which they hold that all
later leagues are to give place when it shall be profitable to break them.

For execution of these terrible conceits, and for serving his pestilent
humor, whom uses he, whom loves he, whom estemeth he, but the misbegotten
race, the offspring of old murderers, and the hopeful youth to hazard any
mischief or villainy, without regard of God, of faith, of chastity, or kindly
pity, or of any natural affection or godly virtue, such I say as are taught
to fear no God, to shun no sin, to have shame of no filthiness, to have
care of no faythfulnesse, to have reverence of no worthiness, to have mercy
of no ruthfulnesse, and to have only confidence in the fained almightinesse of
their great prestes that persuade them that all horrible acts against
Christians are meritorious services to their false Prophet and Antichristian
Mahumet? Thus descended, thus begotten, thus shapen, thus brought up, thus
inclined, thus guided, thus taught, thus accompanied, thus served by other,
thus delited him self, what can we hope? nay what ought we not to fear at his
hand?

Now of these great likelyhodes, of these godly blossoms, what fruits has he
showed, since he has after death or rather murder of his brother inherited his
fathers open vices and crown, and added thereto his mothers secret craft and
unfaithfulness to make up a perfect tyra^t? Behold every way if his atte^ptes
have not ben wonderful, his successes prosperous, and his boldness thereby
gathered intolerable. The particulars whereof being known enough, and to
loathsome to remember, I will but show you his late doings even now in hand to
your peril. Since his great intelligence and conspiracy with that old
wretched prince the Despote of Mysia, what mischiefs has he wrought to
Christendom, what falsehed has he not attempted what cruelty has he spared?
The noble princes and gentlemen of Rascia, subject to his power, he (...)
constant in Christian faith, and not to be drawn to shrinks from their
conscience, and perceived it impossible to wrest them to be wicked and
unthankful ministers of his trecheries and traitorous violences intended by
him against the Christian kings and states their good and virtuous neighbors
in whom they had found comfort and in whom there remained hope of loving and
lawful assistaunce at their need. This tyrant therefore continuing a long
foredeuised plot of subduing Christianity and of aduauncing his dominion
monarchy and heresy, by growing still upon his neighbors, and specially
bending him self for this time against poor Albanie and wealthy Hungary, out
of the one of which he has lately been happily shaken, and the other he and
his auncesters have long gaped for, and now espying the said Rascian Lords his
subjects to be no small impedime^ts to those his vile and dangerous attemptes
against their chief friends and to whom they were in common faith and had been
in benefits so hyely bounden and such as were then in peace also with the
tyrant him self, he used the counsel of the old ungracious Duke George
Despote of Seruia, an old trained traitor to Christian faith, one that had long
been practiced in supplanting true Religion, an extreme and mercylesse tyrant,
furnished with experience of the ancient serpent and underminer of the old
liberty of the highest Christian state, an assured slave to great Antichrist,
close in counsel, spedy in pursuing, resolute in execution, lacking nothing in
deed of an excellent captain but faith truth moderation of cruelty and an
honest cause. With this old cankered Duke instructed with all the virtues that
the devil has to minister, this young Mahumet and his accomplices consultyng how
to reach his ambitious intent, to destroy and captive those Christian Princes
his neighbors and their kingdoms that were so great eyesores unto him and so
much hindered his course of conquest and of ouerthrowyng the religion of
Christ, have entered into this devise, first to murder the said Lords of
Rascia. By open war he could not do it, for thereof he had made large
experience. God had so defended them against his sundry attemptes, God had so
moved the hearts and virtuous courages of the good princes their neighbors
(against whom the tyrant for that cause yet holds deep emprinted a
reuengefull hatred to be poured out when power and opportunity shall serve him,
how soever he now dissembleth) God I say so styrred these good Princes with
care of Gods honor and their duty to his Church, that their assistances how
soever they were sclender and neither open nor to the full, have been so
blessed that he could never by just strength and sincere war confound them.
By public justice and lawful proceeding he could not touch them, such ever
has been their upright loyalty, as him self with his own testimony has
been enforced to confirm. Wherefore now no mean rested, but treason and
perjury, to prostitute and defile the most reverend and sacred faith of a
prince, and for the highest treason and tyranny that ever has been heard of, to
call to aid the highest and holiest means of credit, the word and oath of a
king, his counsel, and officers, that to his superlatiue title may be added
all superlatiue falsehed infamy and dishonor, that now the faith royal of that
nation may in common understanding signify nothing but treachery and breach of
oath and of universal fidelity. This course was lyked among them. Under
peasable pretenses and the swetest baits of faithful amity, the poor Lords
of Rascia were trained within the net of his power. There were they fed with
joys of security. They saw the tyrants face framed to sweetness of
cou^tena^ce, almost beyond that which nature could permit to so portentuous a
visage shapen to mischief. They considered the Christian princes nere bordering
upon them to be in league and amity with this Mahumet. They saw the peace
between him and his Christian neighbors sworn before them, whereof themselves
had been the instruments. They saw it commodious for Mahumet to keep faith
and sound peace. They saw him in some necessity and lack by his former wars
in Trebizond, in Hungary, at at the siege of Croia, and elsewhere. They saw his
people wasted, and great need of quiet. They heard his many repentaunces of
former troubles. They saw his pretense of joys for present amity. They heard
it daily by his attestations to their friends. They saw them selves admitted to
his daily pastimes. They saw him delited in their companies, exercising his
sportes with pleasure among them. They saw them selves received to secret
counsels and conference with him. They saw him co^ferre with them about his
great enterprises and namely about conquest of parcel of ye Empire of
Trebesonde. Them he fained him self principally to trust therein, and chiefly
to repose him self upon their force and fidelity. They saw their backbiters
frowned at. Their familiar access unto him and great favor with him femed to
be envied at. They saw all ceremonies of his own heresy made to stoop and
give place to their encourageme^t. They felt the^ selves liberally rewarded. A
thousand other exquisite means to abuse them did train them to assurance of
his love and constancy. In the midst of all this security grounded all upon
naked simplicity truth and confidence on their part, and upon treachery
dissimulation and perjury on his behalf, be slaughtered them all, and among
the rest, how he used the poor king of Bosna it is to odious to tell. Without
order, without judgment, without law or lawful cause, noblemen, gentlemen,
old, young, men, women, children, all that ever were subject to the reach of
cruelty though not subject to any possibility of offending, were butcherly
murdered, as if he had conceived a purpose in his heart not only to glut his
tyra^nie with the blood of those whom he thought impedimentes to his unjust
purposes, but also not to leave in the world a witness of his falsehed, but
such as were gilty with him and partakers of his outrage, nor to suffer any to
remain whoes sight hereafter might represent to his gilty heart the memory of
their fathers, husbands, mothers, or friends so unjustly, unnaturally, and
vnma^ly slain. And yet to have the double auantage of both devises, see the
crafty wretch what he has inverted. To be sure both ways, that on the one
side this extreme cruelty should fray all persons from standing against his
wicked purposes hereafter, and as it were to shake his sword and halters over
all your heds and in example to hold the charged pistole to your bosoms, and
yet on the other side that this horrible perjury and murdering of persons
yielded after his faith royal, after his promise and his oath assured unto
them, and after his long cloked and continued course of dissimulation, should
not utterly fray all men from ever trusting him again, and thirdly to make the
name of Christians odious, and also fearyng least so foul treason should
throw him into sodeyne war with to many of his neighbors at ones for whom
he was not yet fully ready, and specially douting least those with whom he is
in league should of so open falsehed gather open warnyng to stand upon their
guard, and an apparent proof that in their leagues also he intends to keep no
faith with them, but watches opportunities against them, and therefore that it
behooves them to look to his doings, to construe them by this example, to
remember that their cause of his malice to them and to those that he has
murdered is all one, and to provide for him, and to succor the remnantes of
silly Christians which he yet hunteth about the world: for these reasons to
bleere other Christian Princes eyes till he lay his net over them, he published
forsooth that the poor Lords of Rascia had conspired against his life and
crown. But O ye mighty Princes, wey the untruth hereof, and when it is weyed,
let it wey with you for an undoubted argument what is intended against you, and
how much it behooves you to look to your selves betymes. Let it avail to put
you in mind if ever the like manner of league or alliance has been fought by
him to be made with any of you, and compare by this example what is like that
you should have suffered if it had proceeded, and how much you are to thank God
that you have escaped, and for your escape how much you owe to God and to his
Church and to your contreys and to your own preseruations, to succor the
afflicted, and provide for your selves, and your charge. Let his cruelty make
you careful: let his falsehed make you hedefull: let the disclosing of his
untruths make you skillful, that ye may pity us, look to your self, and
beware of him when ye understand him. He says forsooth that all this great
slaughter which he calls execution was but to prevent treason on their parts
against him. Note the likelyhodes and see the manifest falshodes. The Lords of
Rascia which when they stood against him in field and had him their open
enemy, yet ever sought his grace and to live in peace under him, and never
attempted treachery against him, now having him (as seemed) their good Lord,
their liberal and bountiful sovereign and friend, would they enterprise any
thing to his destruction? They that by only sincerity of conscience and good
dealyng had won the hearts of such as were not their subjects, and thereby
gathered strength for their defense, would they now with treason lose that
favor gotten and so stand without all hope of power for their preservation?
They that knew the great mischiefs that they before had suffered by the
disgrace and under the name of so great a prince, to have proceceded from lewd
traitorous counsel of such as now Mahumet him self pretended to bereue of
their seignorie and conferred with the Lords of Rascia for atcheuing it, would
they practice his destruction while he was now joining with them to be revenged
upon their greatest enemy? would they have done it at this time? would they
not (if any such intent were) have stayed till first this revenge had been
accomplished, and so to have had their hatred satisfied against their
principal foe, and also Mahumet the weaker by lack of his assistance, that
they might then better have performed this traitorous purpose if ever they had
conceived any such? Would they, if any such purpose had been in their hearts,
have been the means for peace and league between Mahumet and you noble
Christian kings and princes, and so not only to set Mahumet in more security
to be bold upon them, but also by reason of such leagues to take from them
selves your accustomed succors, and their own safest refuge? Would they have
chosen that place at Andrinople ye Turks chief seat, wherein the Christian
faith is hated, where the tyrant and their enemies were hyeliest honored, where
the inhabitants detested their persons and religion and have ever been the
parteners and the chief encouragers of Mahumetes treasons, whom Mahumet him
self could hardly hold from assayeng violence till his bloody counsels where
ripe and ready, where I say their adversaries power was great and not
resistable? Would they have made their match so madly, against so many, against
Mahumetes whole populous cruel city of Andrinople, against his great train
of Princes then assembled, against his gardes of Ianizares, against all
likelihode of preuaylyng or of escapyng if they had prevailed, them selves
being so few in number, unarmed, and unprovided? Would they have brought their
wives and daughters to the place? Would none of them all in that slaughter
findyng God disapointyng their treason and turning it on their own heds, have
confessed it for very remorse of conscience? Would not torture have wrong it out
of them, but that after torment and at death, they all still denied it? would
not promise of life to those that dyeng without confessyng (if it were true)
were hastenyng to eternal death, have allured them to save them selves without
care of shaming or offending those whom they now saw past all ability to
help them or revenge it upon them? How happens that the contradictions of
things spoken written and published by him self do excuse them and accuse him?
How chances that the slaughters at the same time in all places where
Christians were to be found in his dominion, do plainly show that any their
sodeine conspiracy there could not extend the giltinesse where they were not?
And were the wives, the Ladies, the noble virgins and women gilty, whom no man
for their sex would so dangerously trust with so great a secret, and whom no
man for their weakness, would make parteners that had no force to assiste
them, but many impedimentes to withold them? And were the silly babes also
gilty, even the sucking infantes, and the unborn fruit gilty, whoes very
remembrance would rather have stayed them, or at least some of so many, from
such an enterprise? Would they have come to such a feate so vnstored of weapon
and means of furtherance, so laden and clogged with weak burdens and means
of accombraunce. Does not the hasty execution argue the murderers giltinesse,
where him self stood in no fear or danger, nor the other side in any
possibility of escapyng? Were they not in his power to be detained, to be
arrained, to be tried in judicial form, and in their public conviction to
have condemned them selves of treason and acquitted him of perjury? Would he
have suffered the stayne dishonor and infamy of so vile a murder, if he might
have avoided it with proving them guilty who could not escape the trial if he
had lifted to have brought them to it? If they were so wise as their former
lives have showed them, it can not be credible that they would have attempted
so great a matter so foolishly. If they were fools, as they must needs be if
they were truly charged, then had they not wit enough to have prevailed. So if
they were wise they are not truly to be accused, and if they were stark
fools they were never justly to be feared. But (O excellent Princes) neither
were they fools nor false. Noble and true ge^tlemen they were: valiant
Christians, and faithful persons they were: only unwisely they trusted a
tyrant, and now lamentably they pray you to be wiser. Such were the false
excuses of Iugurth against noble Hiemsall and innocent Adherball. Such were the
shameless proclamations, letters, and edictes of vile Antoninus Caracalla
against his brother Geta and against the people of Alexandria. It was not their
treason it was their cause, it was their faith, it was their Christian
Religion, it was their virtuous and loyal constantie, whereby the tyrant could
never be assured of them against you, but ever accounted them impedimentes such
as he must of necessity remove ere he could proceed with his practices against
you, your kingdoms and states. Albanie could not be possessed, Hungary can
not be subdued; while Rascia is to minister aids and means of friendly passage
for the one to releue the other. Rascia divided from Christianity, and added
to his heathen servitude, sets him in the midst of the frontiers of
Christendom, and seuereth the assistance that should defend them. That is the
mark, that is the end, these be but entrances. It is the cause that slew these
Princes, it is the cause and the same cause that is common to you. It is your
Christian faith, that they dyed for: it is your amity, for that they could not
be drawn against you, that they dyed for: it is the defense of your dominions
which could not be subverted nor ones with any force attempted in their lives,
which they dyed for. It is they that living honored and served you, and now
dead do warn and teach you, and this they teach you, that you trust not the
faithless tyra^t. They tell you they were slayen for the faith that you
profess: they tell you withal that the same cause suffices the tyrant for
querel to do the like to you if he can: They tell you that they were murdered
to make him the easier passage to your dominions: they tell you withal that he
will not lose the fruit of that labor, but much more seek to destroy you than
them, whom he destroyed but to make way to you. They tell you that (beside
opportunity to hurt you) he gained nothing by their death, for that they were
his vassals before: they tell you withal, that he shall gain great kingdoms
by oppressing you, and therefore will more egrely pursue you than them. They
tell you that he holds him self bound to maintain his principal league
and confederacy with the princes of the Mahumetane heresy, wherein is
included the joining of all their powers to ye rootyng out of the godly princes
that maintain the religion of Christ: they tell you with all that ye be those
Princes to whom although this late mischief has not yet atended yet surely it
was and is intended against you. They tell you, and in their own example
plainly prove it, that what soever later peace or leagues have been made with
you, they were never more sacredly made and assured than these that were made
and sworn to them: and therewith they tell you that Mahumet supposes them all
subject to his former league with those infidels, and that he will break them
so some a^ his auantage serves against you. Imagine O ye noble Kings,
Princes, Lords, and fathers, that ye saw here before yt the late excellent
Lords of Ra^^ia, some with hoare beardes reverend, some with manly visages
honorable, some with youthful comely personages lovely, and joined with them
in company an infinite multitude of noble Ladies, ancient women, flourishing
virgins, tender babes, the healthy, ye sick, the lame, the young, the old, ye
virtuous, the learned, all berayed with goare blood with filth and mire of
streets, naked, howed, mangled, singed with powder, shot through with pellets,
every way most lame^tably slaughtered and made loathsome to look upon, and
imagine that piteously some one of them for all death say unto you. Ye noble
Princes the remainyng succors and defenses of Christianity, behold we
beseech you the spectacle of Christians slain for our and your faith, and let
the sight of us be warning to you that ye look to your selves and to the
^^ocke of God. We are now delivered from earth and are no more the subi^ctes of
the tyrant that cruelly slew us. Now by death delivered from his yoke, ^owing
him no duty we speak boldly lawfully freely and truly against him. Trust no
bonds of his, for he is all together faithless and untrusty. We were ^^es the
stay between you and him, now by our death is the passage made open to you. If
we could have been contended, unthankfully and unworthily of the great
benefits that we received of you, to have promised him to serve against you,
he had been pleased to have suffered us to live with liberty of our religion.
He proponed us that article, he travailed with us to that end, we refused it.
He was chiefly bent to bereue you of your possessions and lives, to root out
your Religion and stablish his monarchy. He practiced earnestly to have our
assistance. When he saw he could not win us thereto, but that we remained
impedimentes to those devises; he has for your sakes slain us, and made (...)
terrible examples to fray all other from resistyng his purposes. In deed we
know well, that if we had yielded to his request against you, his promise of
enioyeng the freedom of our Religion and conscience, should not have lasted
but till you had been oppressed. Let that therefore be a lesson to you, that his
promise shall be no longer kept with you tha^ till he may have leisure, after
destroyeng us, to set upon you. For what assurance have ye of him more then we
had^ nay surely ye have not so much by this that we being slain there is so
much less mutual assistance left to Christians. For it is nothing but fear
and want of ability that holds him from breach of faith. Can ye trust upon
better then we have found, by reason of treaties and articles conceived and put
in writing? we had articles conceived, written, entered in records, and yet
broken. Can ye trust upon better by assurance of the word of a king? we had
faith royal given us in the word of a king, and yet broken. Can ye trust upon
better by the oath of a Prince? we had many oaths of a Prince and many ways
testified and yet broken. Can ye trust upon better by oaths and promises of
Lords, cou^sellers, and Magistrates joined with their king and so bound to
advise him to observe it* Alas we had the oaths of Queen Cathagusina his own
mother a borne Christian in name though descended of a ra^e despising Christ:
we had the oaths of his Bassaes, his Lieutenantes and governors of the
prouincies where we lived and of all the officers of all the Courts of Justice
and Capitaines of places of strength within those parts of his dominions, and
yet broken. Can ye trust upon better in respect of honor? here was honor most
highly violate, and the greatest dishonor entered that ever Prince deserved. Ca^
ye trust upon better by regard of natural pity? Alas we were his own and
found no pity, what shall strangers look for? Can ye trust upon better by
shows and apparances of good countenances, fair words, and pleasant
semblance? we had plenty of those, and yet broken. Can ye trust upon better in
respect or comparing of your own consciences on your part, knowing that on
your behalf all peace is truly kept without cause of offense? Surely there
was on our part nothing but innocence and naked confidence and much less matter
of unkind construction than can on your parts be showed if the quarelling
victor ones growest out of fear shall him self have the expounding of it.
Thus it has pleased God we should appear to your considerations in such
mornefull and piteous wise as ye now behold us, to set before you your own
perils, to imprint them in your hearts, and to be causes of extending your due
compassion to the rest of Christ's members which need your aid, and which yet
do (as we sometime did) stand as a fense for a time between you and the common
enemies of Christentie, and so serve we in the case of our bodies to warn you
that ye defend them as your utter wall, least if it be lost, the peril draw
nerer to win your innermost dongeon and greatest strength. And if it be lost
by your betrayeng it, or by your doing nothing for defense of it, you not only
hasard your safeties, but shall lose your honors for ever, and with the
conqueror himself you shall not win the thank of good peacekeepers and
league-fellowes, but he in his triumph will brag in reproach of you that ye
pretended fidelity of peace to cloak fear, and shounyng of honor with peril,
and that most is, ye shall charge your selves with a hard account to him that
gave you the honor to bear the sword not in vain, and trusted ye with the
keeping of his vineyard house and Church. On the otherside in the case of our
souls, the same our God has willed us to let you know, that how soever we
seem in this show lamentable because in bodies we were so, yet now we are not
in peine but in joy, that ye may be assured, how soever (if ye well serve him)
he guides the success to his glory, it shall be your benefit, and though you
give your lives in his querell, yet shall you gain them, and eternal joy
shall succeed your blessed endynges, and if you can carry clear conscience
that you shrink not from the peril of his warrefare you shall be assured to
have your part in the honor of his triumph.

Imagine ye mighty Princes that ye saw their bodies in this array, and that
their ghostes thus spoke unto you. The moving of conscience to consideration is
called the speech of that which it co^sidereth. So has it been said by our
Savior, that those and those shall rise against these and these to condemn
them in the day of his dreadful judgment, which is no more but that the
consciences of the guilty shall burden and condemn them selves with the others
example and comparison.

And now leauyng that impression to prepare you to a right manner of construyng
Mahumetes doings and your own duties, I beseech you mark the rest of his
procedinges, and thereby judge the course of his counselles, and direct your
contermines thereafter. Behold how cruelly he has dealt with the noble
gentlemen my kinsmen and dearest friends the long parteners of my travails
perils and fortunes both good and bad, whom being taken in war he could not
be brought either to ransom or exchange, but horribly murdered them. Moses
of Dibra my dearest companion, Giuriza de Vladen my kinsman, Musachio my sister
Angelinaes son, Ginio Musachio, John Perlato, Nicholas Berrisio, George
Chucca and Ginio Manessio, all excellent Capitaines and zealous Christians,
travailing in succor of our faith and taken prisoners by that paisant borne,
that runagate infidel and traitor Ballabano Mahumetes minister within the
streightes adjoining to the vale of Ual(...) the frontiers of Epirus toward
^^^^edone: how despitefully were they used, dragged about in most shameful
^i^e, vexed, tortured, and at length against all law of justice and nature put
to most vile and horrible execution, and set up for signs, not so much of
their great calamity, as of his most abominable t^rannie, and if ye wi^e be,
to your most (...) warning and pearcing example* The strong town of Sfetigrade
one of the keys of Epirus he has taken by treason of the superstitious
garrison of the Dibrane soldiers, and by practices of foul and vnhonorable
corruption. Croir and Petrella he besieges. And, that his extreme malice may
appear, in the deep of sharp winter, in hardness of provision, in scarcity
of all things necessary, in the poverty of his own people, in so great need
of rest after so many travails and miseries, in hye security of being
assailed by us if he would have let us alone, in the midst of the hope of his
conquestes elsewhere to be extended, and of his business other wise to be more
profitably employed, behold how his hatred of Christian name can give his
gredy heart no (...), but in all these reasons to the contrary, he pursues our
blood, to wade through it into your bodies and into the rest of Christendom.
What a wound has he given to Christendom at the battle of Uarna? How cruelly
has he used his victory, and what lamentable, slaughters and unspeakable
outrages has he committed at the winning of Constantinople? Behold how nere he
is, how small a distance by sea departs you. If Epirus be thoroughly
conquered that he leave no dout behind him, how nere and how dangerous a
neighbor is he (...) your possessions in Dalmatia? how ^^tal (...) is into
Sicile? how lie your Islandes under his nose? what opportunities has he to
oppress your nauigations? your sailing decayed, how sore enemies shall he and
his confederates by sea, yea and the sea it self, be unto you, even to enclose
you and not to defend you, to enuiron you as a siege or net and not as a wall
or trench. Note his means of growing further. While the querels that he
mainteineth in Epirus, and the siege of small towns with houge armies, and
preparations to other great attemptes, do give him color to raise great powers
provisions and numbers, does he not divert you from suspecting what he
intends? It is not Epirus that needs so great a force. Epirus is the color
to make you negligent. When Seruia your neighbors land is his confederate,
when Epirus is distracted from you and not aided by you to find him fully
occupied elsewhere, look for it out of hand, so soon as he shall by conquest
of Croia and Petrella, or by new supply of his own forces, be able to spare
them from thence, Albanie shall pour out his men of war upon your frontiers,
his ships that now attend for that service shall bring your danger nerer ^ithe
your selves will not drive it further. Then your sclender succors that served
not us for safety, shall serve him for querell, beside that he has prepared
and cherished querels within your own bosoms. How often has the Duke of Mysia
that old false Christian his co^federate practiced to corrupt your subjects,
devised means of dividing your selves, secretly raised rebellions within your
lands, cherished traitors, given them strength and countenance when they were
in force, and refuge when they were vanquished? he mainteineth your fugitives
and exiles, he suborneth titles to your crowns, he has prepared you work at
home if you tarry til he be ready for you. In all these things is Mahumet to
carry the gain, he is the principal laborer and for whom is principally
labored. They have cast lottes upon your garments, they have in their very
leagues and treaties divided your dominions, and the great Antichristian
fathers of their sect have drawn the lines between them, and in their
conuenticles confirmed the distribution of your kingdoms, they support your
nere enemies, they feign the^ selves protectors of those to whom they say you
do wrong, and whoes cause they keep in store to accomber you. And whereto
tends this, you can not but see, and if seeing it you foresee not to meet
with it, you can not but feel it. And above all things I beseech you note one
thing, by bold resolutenesse on his part he has the fame of constancy and it
is found perilous to resist him: by timorous dealing on our side we have won
a mocking name of silly clemency and made it no danger to shrink from us. By
his growing the hopes are on his side: by our forbearyng the fears are drawn
to our side. And by this mean our own politic and worldly wise subjects and
friends, which are the greatest numbers, flee daily from us, make their peace
under hand with our adversaries, and still ripen the mischiefs till our state
fall rotten to ruin, with small need of any foreine violence, but one
boystcous blast of wind, to overthrow the feeble stay that we stand upon.
Thence came the Despotes first declining, thence came it that many towns and
regions bordering upon the conqueror have followed his fortune and forsaken
those in whom they saw no hope of steadfast succor.

Bend your selves therefore bytimes, O noble Princes, to take the querell of
Christ in hand, to succor your neighbors, to defend your selves, to keep
peril far of, to prevent impossibilities of escape, to win to you the praise
of prudence and fortitude, to do true justice in succoring against wrongs, and
in doing the true offices of noble Princes repellers of unjust violence, and
mainteining the public faith and society of men and specially the service and
religion of God. You have heard by example in other, to whom Mahumet was as
depely bounden as to you: you have heard by the principles of his religion,
which he more estemeth than the love or fear of you: you have heard by the
inclination of his affections, and the course of his counsels and doings,
which being made by him the scope of his life he will not change and so forgo
all his ambitious hopes to spare you: you have I say hereby and many other
ways heard and understood the case that presses you. Arm ye therefore with
Christian and princely minds. All Christian kings and princes have charge of
the Church of God, the defense thereof against infidels and professed enemies
of Christian religion pertains to us all. The very law of nature has not
only in rule taught it to be dutiefull one to releue an other against undue
and unnatural violence, but also in example of all ages have set forth the
praise of such as have been the rescuers of mankind against open tyranny.

Herefore is Hercules worthily commended as the common patron of innocence
and the daunter of monsters, the succourer of mankind, and the destroyer of
manslaying tyrants. Who ever thought him unjust and not most honorable, in
that he sacrificed the sacrificing murderer Busyris, and taught the
superstitious wretch to know strange blood in his own body, and such blood as
the Gods required to be shed for purging the earth and appeasing the heaven,
and not the blood of innocents that Busyris by advise of devils and deuillishe
priests had made to flow from his bloody altars? Who ever condemned Hercules
of injustice, in that he worthily recompensed vile Procustes that ioyed and
made pastimes of the mangling of men, that racked short men to his long
bedstedes, and cut of tall men by the measure of his short ones, and so would
pike querels for murder by men's not egall answering his opinion and fancy? Who
magnifieth not the name of Hercules, and under title of justice, in that he
slew a multitude of the perjured faythbreaking Centaures that defiled the
wedding feast with blood, and had turned the time appointed for mirth, for
joy, for amity, for security of true league and friendship, to querel, to
treason, to murder and outrage? Spain it self that sometime boasted of
Hercules pillars, though they have lost those famous pillars the monumentes of
his far extended conquestes, yet they and the whole world keep in honor the
fame of Hercules valiaunce and justice in that he slew the threehedded monster
king Gerion, so by antiquity called and reported a monster with three heads,
being in deed nothing else but three tyrants the king and his two brethren
unjustly and tyrannously reigning and exercising all cruelty upon virtuous
innocent and godly persons. Who thinks that Hercules did not right, although
he were not that contreyman nor natural sovereign of that place, in that he
threw the wicked murderer into his own horsemanger to be devoured, who before
had fed his beasts with men? Eternal are the praises of noble Constantine,
that made just war upon Licinius for his cruelty to Christians, and after
for the same cause justly put him to execution of death, though he were by
right Emperor of the East and otherwise Constantines egall. The very name of
that excellent Constantine (O noble Princes) with remembrance whence he was,
even out of the famous Isle of Britain, makes me to run out into joyful
exclaiming how much (I know not by what instinct from heaven) even at this
present my mind is kindled with persuasion that God has ordained the same
Island at this time and of the line of that Constantine to give us an heir of
Co^stantines virtue, a spreader of the glory of God and rescuer of his Chirch
against him that usurps Constantines seat, and against his periurous
vpholder. After the death of Constantine, when the Empire was divided between
Constans and Constantius, and so by just right and title possessed, and that
Constantius in favor of Arrian heresy had banished Athanasius and many godly
fathers, Constans though in civil causes he had no right nor entermedling in
Constantius dominion, yet to his eternal praise made just war upon
Constantius and by force constrained him to give sincere safety and full
restitution to his subjects the true professors of the Gospel of Christ. The
like did Theodosius the virtuous Emperor at suit of Bishop Atticus. The like
has ever been lawful to Christian kings and princes. And if ever it were
necessary, now it is, when not only many an Athanasius, many an Atticus, and
many a noble prince and godly personage lie prostrate at your feet for succor,
but also the respect of your own safety and of your special charge of your
own kingdoms concurreth with their petitions.

Thus as nothing is more consonant with duty in respect both of God and man,
of religion and nature, nothing more commendable for charity* nothing more
auayling to honor, so is there nothing more profitable for every of your
states, more needful for upholding the general degree and name of kings, nor
more necessary for eschuing of imminent peril to all those things that you
have most desire to preserve, than it is to take this querell in hand for your
faith, for your neighbors, for your selves, against the enemy of God, of
Christendom, of your crowns, and of public truth. The degree of kings is a
most sacred and reverend office ordained by God, armed and adorned with lawful
power and majesty to preserve mankind and common society. It behooves all
kings to join together to uphold that estate in the same estimation and
reverence, that kingdom may be esteemed as it is a wholesome ordinance for the
kind of man. If a king shall break common faith and become an open tyrant and
oppresser of men, without law, without judicial order, without all ground and
form of right, though subjects may not, yet it behooves kings to redress it
and to repress the rage and insolency of the defamer and shame of their
state, to provide betimes that kings wax not odious to subjects, and that
particular examples increasing by contagion to numbers make not the whole
degree grievous. If Tarquine had received due punishment by the king, the
kingdom had remained in Rome. If Appius the Decemuir had beeen justly
chastised and not wantonly defended by his fellows, the Deremuirate had not
beeen so easily abolished. States are vpholden by virtue and credit, and egall
princes for their common interest to maintain the honor and continuance of
princes, and to keep it free from hatred of the world, have just cause and
just authority, great wisdom and great necessity, by natural and virtuous
consent to provide for the common society of men whereof they have the supreme
charge on earth, to wype away the stain of their state, to remove such a
wicked king from the earth and from example, and to cut from the world and from
posterity the corrupter and sclaunderer of kingdoms and of their sacred
majesty's. How much more ought this to be done in case of the defense of
Christian religion so far as the secular arm of princes who^ Christ has
armed with the sword and lawful power is able to advance the surety of
Christ's Chirch? How often to this end have there been proclaimed croisadoes,
common leagues and confederacies entered, noble societies stablished, great
voyages attempted, great promises of heaven proponed, to enlarge the kingdom
of Christ in earth, to deliver not only the ancient possessions of Christians
from wrongful holding, but also and principally the souls of infinite
multitudes from the servitude of Satan? But here will perhaps be said, that
howsoever my speech may be construed against the great Mahumet, yet the other
tyrant is a Christian prince, under whom and in whoes dominion Christians are
suffered to keep their religion. I confess in deed he holds the name of a
Christian in as hye degree as may be, but with such heresies and Turkishe
mixture of heathen ceremonies, superstitions, and blasphemies against the name
and dignity of Christ, and therewith is such a malicious cruel enemy to
Christians, in stopping their passages to help one an other, in ministering
dangerous counsels to Mahumet, in ayding him with his force, according to the
league and amity that is between them, that his name of Christianity serves
him to no more but to increase the giltinesse of his fault, and the justness
of your war against him, whoes case differs only thus much from the Turk,
that in that he says he is a Christian he has to all the Turks lewdnesses
added blasphemy, and where the Turk is an open enemy, this tyrant is both an
open enemy and traitor to Christian faith.

Oh most excellent Princes, be it ever printed in your heart, that whatsoever he
be, though he presume to bear the name even of most Christian, or of most
holy, or usurp the title of pity or catholic religion, or other like good
names, if he persecute the Church of God, if for ambitious respects he join
him self in society with the Turk and Christ's enemies to further ye Turks
invasions upon Christendom, or to withdraw his own aid from the common cause
of Christians, if public faith do not hold him, if law of nature and humane
society be no bond unto him, if the word of God be not the rule of his
religion, if he kill or oppress his subjects or his neighbors for being
Christians, and for professing the same according to the rule of Christ, as
this prince has done, he ought to be in your judgment, as he is in his own
practice, a heathen and publicane, one against whom your swords ought to be
justly drawn for that you bear the^ not in vain, and in vain shall you
bear them and deeply answer God for vain bearing of them, if ye use them not
to defend, to succor, to rescue the Church of Christ. And by the way in the
example of this false Christian the Despote, I beseech you note one thing. The
danger of leagues and societies with infideles. Surely it was no law of
ceremony, but of the hye wisdom and eternal policy of God, that his people
were forbidden heathen marriages. The great fall of wise Solomon to deep
idolatry by that mean ought to be a terrible pattern to you all in that case,
and to warn you not only that it is dangerous but also unlawful to couple
your selves in bonds of marriage with open heretics or infideles. It is a hye
pride in your own strength and a hye presumption against the will of God to
trust that so matching you shall be able to retain your faith. Solomon was
wise and could not do it, and was the rather by Gods mercy to you, destitute of
Gods grace to him, to teach you to beware by his example. After that the
Despote had given his daughter Cathagusina in marriage to Amurathes, the
friendship of the tyrant, the love of his daughter, the ambitious pride of so
hye alliance, common conferences of counsels and affairs, transported him by
little and little from faith to open falshed and enmity against Christ and
Christians. So great a thing it is to yield a little in matters of faith and
service of God, as if it lay in our selves to qualify the sincerity of truth,
whereupon the grace of God by little and little destituting such yelders and
dispensers with them selves in matters of God they become at length indurate
and desperate, and void of all virtue and sense of God. O noble Lords believe
it for a most certain truth, record it for a most necessary admonition, that
he has not the religion of Christ that feels it not. And he feels it not
that does not together feel with other Christians the hurtes and dangers of
the body and members of the Chirch of Christ. Nature has told you how the
difference between doing wrong and not preserving from wrong if you may, is so
small as they be both subject to the title and gilte of wrong even in a private
person, much more in those whoes office lies in power and in charge to defend,
and to that end was ordained. When a Christian after shipwreck, naked and
destitute of ordinary mean of succor, wrestling in the waves for his life, his
forces wasted with labor of swimming, his body filled with bryne of sea, is by
the working of the wind and water driven nere the shore, where you in safety
stand and behold his woeful case and danger, and that thereupon his tyered
spirits do of your presence gather some hope, and with recollecting his
uttermost remaining force draws together so much silly strength as by sign
of hand stretched up, or by voice strained forth, to call to you for help, and
that the throwing out of a rope, or reaching of a poale may save him: how will
you answers him that made him if you save him not? will you be thought to have
humanity in you and refuse to releue him? will you beast of Christianity and
not be moved with pity? will you vaunt of your religion and so fowly defame
it? will you think that any man can in faith believe that you have faith when
you show it not in the deeds of mercy and charity the true fruits of faith,
specially to those that be of the householde of faith? Will you pretend that
Leuiathan and his sea monsters, that the Whales and Haddockes will be offended,
that in saving the man you bereued them of their pray? Will ye allege that it
were wrong to the flesh eating fishes that by your help the Christian was not
devoured? But what if the case were such, as the case is in deed, that on the
one side a monster of sea pursuing the man did threaten to eat up your
Goslinges and your Ducklinges when he finds them swimming on the water
unless you suffered him to eat the man, and on the other side the poor man's
father the King of Kings and Lord of Lords, that has your life and death and
the universal change of all things in his power and at his beck, shall stand
over you, and shall say unto you, unless you help this man my child, your
brother if you be mine, I will presently tomble you from the safe shore that
you stand upon, I will give wings and feet to the monsters that now pursue
this silly creature in their own element and dominion only, I will bring them
to land, I will give them strength and mean to pursue you there also till they
root out you and yours? what would you then do or not do? whom would you then
choose to please or displease? which threaten or peril would you rathest
shun or adventure? It is not hard to conjecture what choice you would make,
if these things were thus presently before your eyes: why make you not the
like choice when the same thing is present to your understanding? Surely it can
have no cause but lack of faith, that concerning God we confess more in mouth
than we feel in belief. We can be content to affirm religion and conscience
to make other for religion and conscience obedient to our authority, and shall
we our selves against religion and without conscience neither have pity of
Christian men for whom our authority is stablished, nor show love or fear of
God by whom it is ordained. But admit that our selves were in like peril with
the poor man, and the danger so egally conjoined that we must either be saved
or perish together, what would we do? When the whole ship of Gods militant.
Chirch stands in this likelyhode of extremity, when our selves are sailing
in the ship ready to burst wholly in peers, will we still sleep and be wanton?
Death is certain to you all, and this life must have end, and in the ending of
it a battle at the passage must be foughten with the mighty enemy of your
salvation. It can not be avoided but it must be tried, it can not be escaped
but you must perish if you be not strongly armed. At your dying hour (O noble
princes) that hour I say that ends the estate of all princes and subdueth
them in equality with all men to the highest prince, when the danger is most
great, natural strength most feeble, and divine aid most needful, be sure of
this that Satan shall then most fiercely assail you, he shall querell with
you upon your great account, he shall so charge you with great faults, that he
shall not omit the smallest default. Judge your selves therefore that ye be not
judged. Charge your selves now to amendment, that ye be not then charged to
damnation. Imagine your selves now to be in such case as ye are one day sure to
be. Suppose the hour come when you are to yield your spirit and your power
together, when you lie in languor of dying, in sharpness of pain, and in
expectation of the imminent judgment of God, and that now as then Satan shall
in his vggliest manner present him self unto you, and shall say thus: O ye
sometime great princes, and now the more burdened because ye were princes,
bethink you what you have done and not done, and acknowledge the justice of
God in your damnation now present and not to be avoided. I let pass your
private faults against Gods co^mandementes. Come to the greatest. You know
Christ him self did set on his left side, and sent into eternal fire, those
that in need did not releue him, with clothing, with lodging, with food and
comfort, pronouncing that uncharitableness to have been showed to him self,
when mercy and succor was not extended to one of the poor ones that he had
commended to their mercy. What shall he say to you that have withholden your
due aid not only from one little one but also from his whole Chirch, from the
defense of his whole religion and people, and not that only, but when you
might have helped their misery, you have not only suffered them to be spoiled,
robbed, and slain, but infinite multitudes of them, their children and
posterities to be thralled to a false faith, to be carried captive into heresy
and the kingdom of Antichrist? Do you think to sit in heaven and see whole
armies, whole nations go to hell by your fault? If blood ask blood, what
vengeance shall be due to the instruments of eternal death? What shall it
avail you to have kept your own kingdoms in quiet and good estate for a
little less or more than xx. years, and by your default to be gilty of all
the infinite mischeues that you have without compassion and succor seen among
your neighbors, and without provision shall succeed after you in your own
realms and dominions? When Satan shall lay this to your charge, what shall be
answered? you can not defend it nor excuse it. Will you run to mercy? he will
run between you and the mercy gate, and tell you it is denied to the
unmerciful? Will you allege that heaven is due to those of the Chirch of God?
he will bring for witness against you the very Chirch of God it self that you
have destituted and forsaken it, I will not say betrayed it? Will you think to
be helped by faith, and the promises of the Gospel? he will say you have not
faith, and the promises of the Gospel belong not to you: for he will bid you
to show your faith by your deeds, he will charge you that infidelity has
been advanced by your means, and the faith of Christ and truth of his Gospel
defaced by your suffrance, and you have so dealt in the cause of faith and of
the Gospel as if you felt no zeal thereof. What shall remain to you in this
case? Then shall you feel a passion if now you will feel no compassion. The
senseless beholding of the distress of the Chirch of God, will raise such a
sense of miseries, as shall be able to receive no comfort in horror of the
pain that will have no end. O how deeply it will then be wished, that all
treasure, all travail, all policy, all adventure had been employed to the
service of God, and the success committed to his goodness. O how ruthfully
will wantonness be bewailed, idleness lamented, sparing detested, lust
lothed, and liking of life hated? O extreme danger when so great burdens are
laid upon the weakest time, when presumption differreth good doing to the late
and latest hour. Now is the remedy. Now noble princes so reign that ye may
ever reign, both in fame and blessedness, in the world and after it: so live
that ye may never fear to dye, which shall be if ye shall so do in life which
is but a way to death that ye may yield to Gods mercy a life spent in his
service, that the prayer of Gods Chirch may prolong your reigns, testify your
faythes, and commend your souls. But see the mischefe, see the suttletie of
Satan. The self same devil that will then charge you with not doing, does
now withhold you from doing. He that then will threaten you with damnation,
does now move you to deserve it. The self same devil that will then say unto
you to put you in terror, you betrayed the Chirch of God, does now say to you
to bring you in error, that you owe no such duty to the Chirch of God. The
self same devil that will then obiecte against you that in not showing your
deeds to the help of Christians you have showed that you have no faith, does
now say unto you, if you help Christians you break faith. O wretched
entanglement. O crafty Devil. He holds you snared with pretense of faith
least you should do any thing in defense of faith. He says your late league
with the infidel does tie you, by promise, by articles, by public
attestation, by oath, so that howsoever your neighbors need requires,
howsoever your own danger craves, howsoever Gods service commands,
howsoever charity, howsoever faith, howsoever religion, howsoever wisdom,
howsoever honor, howsoever the proper duty and office of princes and Christian
princes advises, you may not fall out with Mahumet, you may take no part
against him, you may succor none, no not your selves, whom he would have
destroyed. He tells you that we are not comprehended in the league, there is
no express capitulation to comprise us, you may not therefore for us interrupt
the reach of his purposes, be they never so cruel, never so faithless, never
so dangerous to the universal Chirch or to your several lives, subjects, and
kingdoms. Record (O noble princes) the truth of the league between him and
you. Observe all leagnes justly, for so becomes Christians: but judge all
leagues truly, for so behooves Christian governors. Wey your league with the
mind that you made and understood it, keep it with the faith that you
promised and assured it. You remember well I am assured, what means procured
your league, what purpose did further it, and what trust and mind concluded
it. You know how your noble virtues have given succors to us your Christian
neighbors, and therein you have not only charitably done us good but wisely
diuerted peril from your selves. It pleased almighty God that used your
honorable ministry in defense of his Gospel and Chirch, so to prosper the
procedinges that good form of peace ensued. Which as it was on our part for
the benefit of Christendom embraced, so on the tyrants behalf it was most
fraudulently meant and most untruly observed. He first concluded peace with us
in Epirus and Rascia, hoping to have used our aids against you. To that end he
procured the siege of Scodra, wherein he set Christians against Christians, that
he might feed him with joy of the destruction on both sides. To that end he
made offer to me and to the other princes in Epyrus and to the Lords of Rascia
to permit to us and them the free use of Christian Religion with his good
contentment, if we would have joined in serving him against you. That article
we refused, whereupon he has certainly holden us for impedimentes to his
purposes against you. But finding that while your aids were ready to succor us
in our necessities, and our services thankfully ready to withstand al perils
that might be intended toward you, he practiced to snare you with league that
you might so be withholden from releuing our lives or reue^ging our deaths. He
pretended great weariness of wars, of waste of his country and people, and a
great desire of rest and quiet, with singular joy that in part he had already
obtained and tasted the sweet fruits of desired peace. He made us the means
to persuade the peace, he made us to tell your ministers as from him what zeal
and affection he had to cherishe us, and that for this cause and for assurance
of our safety, and our peaceable enjoying the quiet of our conscience this
peace should be the bond and pledge, which hope he confirmed with infinite
circumstances and means of credit. With this trust, and for the benefit and
security of the Chirch of God, and with this understanding of Mahumets
affection you made the peace. This was the cause and this was the purpose
thereof. You were not vanquished in battle, you were not forced by any fear or
necessity to take any dishonorable composition at his hand, to the prejudice
of your faith, religion, or honor, or to a necessary constraining of you to
forsake the cause of Christ and the querell that had already so much cost you
and yet still so much imports you, you know you were not driven to any such
need. Your conscience can tell you that you made the league only upon these
good semblances on his part, to preserve the Chirch, and not to be compelled to
destitute and betray it. Reach into your own hearts I beseech you, and let
every one of you record with him self, whether you would have made that
league if he had said unto you before hand that which now has followed. If he
had said unto you sincerely, I have made peace with the Christians at home and
nere me, I have testified it, I have sworn it, I have bound my blood, my
Counsel, my Justices, mine officers and subjects, with oath and charge to
keep it, I have subscribed it, I have proclaimed it, I have set forth edictes
for observing of it, I have punished breakers of it, I have defaced the
monuments of former discordes and unkindness, I have told you that I seek
and assent to league with you and them that both I and they and you may enjoy
quietness with each of our consciences as we are persuaded, I will now join
in bond of amity with you, but so soon as that is ended, I will keep no
faith with heretics, the Rascians whom you have aided shall dye for it, the
peace that I have proclaimed with that sect of Christians shall be dissolved,
the permission of use of their religion shall be revoked, Great Mahumet my
prophet and lawgeuer shall be served with their blood in peace, and the league
that I now make with you shall remain, and it shall remain to bind you
neither to assist nor to releue such of them as shall escape my hand, nor to
hold up a side that may any way assiste you if you have need hereafter: If I
say he had plainly thus told you, would you have entered into any such league?
Search your conscience and let it inform you. If you would not have made if you
had so understood him, surely neither did you make it with understanding that
it should be free for him so to do. If then the cause of league directly
understood between you both, and so laid open to the worlds judgment, was to
have peace for the Chirch, for religion, and for the politic estate on both
sides, then who so breaks that purpose, and by innouations lays the other
open to fraud and danger, that is he that has dissolved the league, that is
he that has undone the knot, and with his unjust doing against the meaning and
apparent cause of the league he has justly armed you to withstand his
treasons, and in vain complayneth that you be tied by the words of the
league. Remember I beseech you his other doings against your safety, even in
the civil part of your charge and authority. It is well known to you that
though be forbear to auow attemptes, yet he ceasseth not to make attempts
against you. Whereto sent he secret assistance to uphold a faction in your
nearest borders to your peril? Why promised he money, men, munition and other
sinews of war to the disturbers of your state? Why joins he daily in
practice with your deadly enemies? Does he it to other end than to destroy
you? Why throws he the blame upon other whom he cherishes, and by whom he
is governed? Does he it to any other end than to deceive you? If then you were
deceived in the making of your league, shall it not suffice you to pursue and
observe the cause and true purpose of the league? and shall it be free for him
against the mind and appearing purpose thereof to murder your friends and
undermine you? and the cause of the league so destroyed by himself, shall it
not be free for you to defend you selves? and shall it not be free till it be
too late? I leave to Divines, whether you may make a league against the Chirch
of God or no, but I hold upon common right and nature, that if a false Prince
being in league with an other tyrant, with articles therein expressly contained
to destroy certain godly Princes, do make peace with one of the good princes,
and after with the other of them, pretending and so making it understood that
this peace is made for the surety of both the good Princes, without which
persuasion the second good Prince would not have entered into league to forsake
and betray the first, and afterward the tyrant by treason inuadeth and
murdereth the first good Prince, and publishes that he lawfully did so,
notwithstanding his peace sworn to him that he murdered, because (says he)
the articles of his first league with his fellow tyrant so required, and that
he holds not himself bound to keep faith with the other: Whether this be
proclaimed in word or in fact, it gives warning to the second good Prince to
look to himself, and liberty by all means (of which sometimes invasions is
one mean both lawful and necessary) to repress the rage of the tyrant, to
save the remnants that have escaped his cruelty, and by force to withstand his
attemptes and purposes. If after a league made, new just cause of war be
given, that new cause binds him that gave it, and gives liberty to the
other to use lawful force agaiost him. It is just cause of war for a Christian
prince against a heathen or heretical tyrant, if the tyrant invade the chirch
of Christ and do any attempt to the hurt of the Christian common weal. Since
the last league between him and you he has murdered Christians, he has
invaded your neighbors dominions, he has done many new outrages to the
oppressing of the Chirch of God and to your evident danger. If he had been a
Christian Prince with whom your league is made in respect of defending
Christendom, and he had afterward renounced Christendom and become an
Infidel, had not the intent of your league been so disappointed as such an
alteration of his estate had set you at liberty by arms to defend the Church
of God? If he were a heathen with whom your league is made, upon pretense to
give peace to Christendom, and he afterward by new murders and innouations
bring new danger to your selves through the sides of your christian neighbors,
is not the purpose of that peace so defrauded, as you may take this fraud and
violence on his part for a just cause of resistance and revenge on your part,
without being tied by league to him against whom may justly be said that in
vain he seeks to be shielded under the law that himself has broken? It is
not free for any to exact all faith and keep none. Fraud and deceit give
just defense to no man. A chirch-robber* shall in the same Chirch have no
sanctuary, a peacebreaker can not win thereby liberty to have the protection
of peace with freedom of war. Awake therefore (O noble Princes) and see your
danger by ours, his falsehed by his factes, and your necessity by both his
and our example. And now when you have seen what need you have, what right
you have, what charge you have, and what free authority you have, and that
thereby you be armed, now consider what strength, what means, what commodity
and what ease you have to do it. First almighty God shall be your defender if you
will defend your Christian neighbors in charity, and your charge in justice.
The tyrant is hated of his own subjects: plague and famine already pursue his
land: the friends of the murdered, and the remnantes of those that fear to be
murdered are ready bent to all occasions against him: the fury of conference
with conceiving continual presence of their ghostes that he has stayne have
him in daily chase and amaze him both day and night: terror of giltinesse and
the face of hell leave him no quiet nor assurance: his extreme cruelty makes
desperate necessity without yelding, in those that shall stand against him:
the defense of murder and mischief is so odious that he can not gather an army
to trust unto, but mingled with such whose hearts in their slain friends he
has galled, or whose courage so evil a cause abateth, or whose giltye minds
with him the like terror vexes and apalleth: after the destruction of a
hundred thousand mouths by murder, vitail is derer and scarcer, and not to
suffice the remnant of his people: Gods wrath a thousand ways does show it
self. Eternal honor shall follow the reuengers of the breach of common faith,
the rescuers of the Chirch, the saviors of the afflicted, the preseruers of
the godly, the subduers of monsters and miscreantes. Wherefore (O noble princes)
have pity, have compassion of princes, of Christians, of men, that humanity,
religion, and honor, may commend you to eternal fame and to the favor of God.
That ye the succorers of many a fatherless infant may live to see your
childrens children in joy and not bear the curse of God to dye without heir
that may be the comfort of your selves and stay of your realms, that ye the
deliuerers of true religion to present time and posterity may presently live
in the good grace of God, and leave to posterity a blessed remembrance and not
a defacing of your present good doings with calamities to succeed for lack of
provision, that when ye have lived happily ye may dye joyfully, and not feel
the dangerous tentations that Satan at your last hour shall assail ye with
if Gods people shall perish which you might have preserved. Let our case move
ye to mercy, let your own case stir ye to wisdom, let the case of your
kingdoms raise ye up to justice, let the case of God and his Chirch kindle you
in zeal. Hope not always for miracles, least they justly fail you for
tempting God, or if they fail you not, they justly damn you for not serving
God. Draw the sword that God has given you for him and his people, against
Antichrist and the enemies of God and his Gospel. And so almighty God preserve
you, give you victory, honor, and eternal bless.

A notable example of Gods vengeance, upon a murdering king. Written in Latin
by Martine Cromer the writer of the history of Polonia, and is to be found in
the xxxvii. page of the said history as it was printed at Basile by Oporine
in the year of our Lord 1555. with Charles the Emperors privilege. Truly
translated according to the Latin.

Imprinted at London by John Day over Aldersgate.

Popiel the younger.
AFter the funeral solemnities of Popiel ended, his son of the same name,
being under age, was with the uniform assent of his uncles and of the
nobility, set in possession of the kingdom, they all by oath promising him
their allegiance. The governance of the young kings person, and the
administration of the common weal was committed to certain of his uncles that
were thought most meet for it. They were continually in the Court, and ever at
the Princes elbow. They heard and determined causes and controversies, and did
in no point leave the common weal unserved, until the king himself was hable
in person to do the public affairs, or at least so long as he would suffer
himself to be governed by their aduises. For when he came to be a stripling
toward man's estate, which is the most slipperie and inclining age to
licentiousness and pleasures, he began by and by to live after his own
fancy, to despise the admonitions of his uncles, to take counsel of young
fellows of his own years, and with such youths to use banquetinges and long
large drinking feasts, to spend out whole nights in brothelhouses, in
daunsinges, in plays and dalliaunce with young women: and then glutted with
surfeit and lechery, to sleep the most part of the day, to neglect the common
weal and hearing of causes in judgment, and poor men's suits: he became
unapt to any good actions, witless, doltishe and blockishe, and so waxed
contemptuous to all men, in so much as he was conmmonly in scorn called
Chostek: beside that his dissolute and vile conditions were further increased
in deformity with a thin hear on his head and beard, such as commonly
happens to unchaste persons. His uncles with the rest of the nobility
consulted together how this dissolute life and desperate licenciousnesse of
their Prince might be reformed. They provided him a wife, a very beautiful
Maid, the daughter of a Prince of Ducheland. And it seemed to them lykely that
she a covetous and ambitious woman, would have reduced her husbands life to
better temper from prodigality, and would have shaken from the sluggishe dull
beast his drowsinesse. But it happened otherwise, For he both abated nothing
of his former disorders and wickedness: and such faults as he before was free
from, he now learned of his wife and added them to his other lewdness. For
both he became more covetous, and sold judgments, honors and offices: and
where he could not stablishe his kingdom by virtue and worthiness, knowing
himself so giltye of daily enormities, he labored to atchieue it by pride and
cruelty, and coueted to be feared of his subjects, when he listed not to
deserve to be beloved. And all this he did by provocation of his wife, and
she taking the doing and profit into her own hand. She having once tasted
the sweetness of dominion and gain, and despising the base heart of her
husband, had by her womannishe craftines conveyed the whole governance to her
self. And specially when she having borne him two sons, Lechus, and
Popielus, was once become a Queen mother, she held the wanton weak heart of
her husband fast bound in awe of her love, and so persuaded her self to make
her authority in Poleland to stand firm and fast for ever.

One only impediment stood in her way, namely, the favor and credit of the
kings uncles among the commonaltie, which they had attained by uprightness of
life, gravity, and wisdom. Them she feared: them (for their sometime gentle
admonitions, sometime free and plain rebukinges) she deadly hated: Their very
secret conscience she stood in dread of. And therefore she practiced as much
as she could possibly, with feigned quarrels to bring the^ in suspicion and
hatred. She persuaded the king that while they were alive and in safetye, his
crown should never sit assuredly and fast on his head. And if he minded to
keep it himself and leave it to his children, he must needs dispatch his
uncles out of the way. If he himself had not the courage to do such an act,
she bade him commit it to her to compass, saying, that though they passed her
in armoure and true force, yet she was better furnished then they with subtle
inventions. She promised to bring it about without any offense, yea or any
suspicion of the people. With which her persuasions she easily drew to the
worser part the feable and fearful heart of her husband. Thus they entered into
devise for the murdering of his Uncles. The king feigned himself to be
grievously and daungerously sick. His wife caused his uncles (whom she had
appointed to the slaughter) to be sent for in the kings name. They came in
have, and in great heaviness stood about the sick king, and comforted him, He
with gronyng fained himself to be very sore sick: he told them that it was
reveled to him from the Gods that the end of his life was at hand: he again
and again committed his wife and poor orpheine children to their trust and
tuition.

All the court was filled with noise of the Queens womanishe howlyng, sobbing,
and lamentations: preparation was made for the funerals by the kings own
commandment. The day thus spent, when it drew toward sun setting, the
king as one even presently ready to dye mynding to take his last leave of his
Uncles, spoke to every of them flatteringly by his name, and in toke^ of his
love and good will toward them all, he commanded to be brought a poisoned cup
of drink which he had prepared for the same purpose. He fained him self to
drink to them, but he only blew away a little of the frothe in the midst,
and scarsely touched the drink with the uttermost part of his lips. When
they had all drunk and pledged him in order one after an other, he feigned
himself to be heavy and disposed to sleep, and that he would feign take some
rest. They reverently took their leave of the king and departed. The poison
once conceived in their stomakes possessed their vital parts, and forthwith
they fell distraught of their wits, and raging with great torment fell down and
died.

The Queen being immediately informed thereof by her espialles, commanded the
dead carcases of the noble men to be thrown abroad unburied. She caused it to
be published by Proclamation, that they had co^spired against the life of ye
king their kinsman and friend, which had so well deserved of them, and that
they were therefore by the euydent vengeance of the Gods stricken with sudden
death. Although the black spots of their bodies, and their bowels bursting
and gushed out of their bellies gave manifest proof of poison, yet for fear of
the tyrant (which now no more feigned and sickness or fear of death) no man
durst openly lament so unworthy deaths of the good noble men.

But the majesty of God suffers not such horrible factes to be long
unpunished. For out of the putrified carcases came Rattes of monstrous
bigness, which pursued through fire and water, which way soever he fled, the
unnatural murderer, with his vile wife, and his children. No defenses of doors
and stoppes auayled him, nor no succor of his guard and servants endeavors to
drive them away. At the last, all persons flying from him, his sons were
first devoured, and then his wife, and last of all himself unhappy wreatch was
with painful flow death miserably consumed in the Castle of Cruswik. And so
his own fathers curse fell not in vain upon him. This happened about the
year of Christ eight hundred twentye and three.

The same history reported also by Munster in the 895. Page of his
Cosmographie in Latin. Wherein he not so largely declares the treason, but
more amply expresses the vengeance of God in punishing thereof.
HE being left by his Father within age, his Uncles governed the kingdom, till
he came to full age and married a wife. Afterward while he was sitting at
banquet, tipled with wine, bedecked with garlandes, smeared with oyntmentes,
all dissolute with surfeit and royot, he was set upon by exceeding great Mise
that came out of the dead carcases of his Uncles, whom he and his wife had
murdered by poison. They with furious eger biting assailed at his banquet the
tyrant and his wife and children, his guard laboring in vain to drive them
away, because when the force and succor of men was tired, the Mise continued
day and night unwearied. They made great round fieres, and within the compass
thereof they set Pompilius, and his wife and sons: but the Myse ran through
the fire and ceased not to gnaw the unnatural murderer. At length they assayed
an other element. They conveyed Pompilius the murderer of his Uncles, with his
wife and children in ships into the midst of a great lake: but the myse
incessantly followed them, and eat through the bordes of the ships, in so
much that the water coming in at the holes, they were in danger of sinking,
wherefore the Mariners fearing to be drowned, conveyed the ships to land, from
whence an other company of myse joined with the first, and more fiercely
assailed him. They that defended him seeing this, and acknowledging it to be
the vengeance of God fled away.

Pompilius destitute of his succors, withdrew himself into an hye tower in
Cruswic, whether the Myse furiouslye ran and clymed up, and consumed and
devoured his two sons, and his wife, and wicked Pompilius himself. Behold
there is no power nor counsel against the Lord.


