By the Queen,
THe Queen's highness by thaduise and consent of her graces priuye Counsaylis
pleased and does ordain, that from the date and publication hereof forwards,
all manner French crowns of the Sun, being of the just standerde finesse
and weight shall be demed and accepted to be of the value of six shyllynges
four pence of curraunte money of this Realm, and all manner of crowns of the
Emperors coigne, being of the just standerde fines and weight, shall be demed
and accepted to be of the value of six shillynges four pence, of curraunte
money of this Realm. Every double ducket of Spain with two faces, being of
the just standerde fines and weight, shall be demed and accepted to be of the
value of thyrtene shillynges four pence of curraunt money of this Realm.
Every single ducket of Spain with two faces, being of the just standerde
fines and weight, shall be demed and accepted to be of the value of six
shillinges eight pence of curraunt money of this Realm. Every double royal of
plate silver of the Spaynishe coigne, being of the just standerde fines and
weyghte, shall be demed and accepted to be of the value of thyrtene pence, of
curraunte money of this Realm. Every royal of plate of the Spaynishe coigne,
being of the just standerde fines and weight, shall be demed and accepted to be
of the value of six pence halfpennye, of the curraunte money of this Realm.
And every half royal of plate of the Spanishe coigne being of the just
standerde fines and weight, shall be demed and accepted to be of the value of
three pence farthynge, of curraunte money of this Realm. And that every of the
said several coignes above mentioned, being of the just weight and fines
according to the standerde of the same, shall commonly be paid and received
through out this her highness realm and other her graces dominions in all
paymentes and receptes, for and after the rates and values before in this
proclamation expressed and declared,

Straightly chargyng and co^maundyng al, and singular her highness subjects and
others, dwelling, conuersyng or traffecking within the said her graces realm
and dominions, that they and every of them observe, fulfill, and execute
theffecte, and tenor of this present Proclamation, upon pain that whosoever
disobeieth or refuses so to do, being by due proof thereof detected, shall
fuffre imprisonment, and further punishment at her highness pleasure.

Given at our palais of Westminster the eight day of March, in the first
year of our reign.
God save the Queen.
Londini in aedibus Iohannis Cawodi Typographi Reginae Mariae excusum. Anno. M.
D. L. IIII. 4. die mensis Maij.

Cum priuilegio ad imprimendum solum.


