By the Queen.
WHereas by diverse and sundry proclamations heretofore published, set forth
and proclaimed, in the time of the excellent Princess Queen Mary, late of
famous memory, restraint was given and made, that no Ships, Crayres,
Uessels, Shipmasters, Mariners or seafaring men whatsoever, of this Realm of
England, or the Teritories of the same, should without special license first
obtained and had, under the great Seal of Thadmiraltie, pass unto the Seas,
either on ventring, marchandizes, or otherwise, or should by any ways or
means misuse, evil entreat, rob, spoil or hurt any subject of this Realm
or Stranger, being friend with the said late Queens Majesty, under certain
penalties and pains in the foresaid proclamations expressed and contained:
Which proclamations, are by reason of the said Queens highness death
determined, and of no force.

The Queens Majesty being presently informed, that since the same, diverse
and sundry her highness subjects of this Realm, going unto the seas (as well
under license as without) by color and pretense to repress, apprehend, and
annoy the enemy without regard of duties belonging to good subjects, have
invaded, spoiled, injured and robbed, as well her Highness subjects as Strangers,
being friends and alied to her Majesty, contrary to her Highness expectation,
and the good league and amity of friends. Her Highness therefore minding the
redress and reformation of the premises, does by this her Majesty's
proclamation expressly charge and command, that from henceforth no subject of
this her Highness Realm whatsoever, other then such as have already obtained
and gotten license under the seal of her Majesty's court of Thadmiraltie, upon
pain of confiscation and forefeyture of their ships and goods, and of
imprisonment of their bodies, and indignation of her Highness, do by any ways
or means attempt to set forth unto the Seas, any ship or vessel, either on
warfare, merchandise or otherwise, without special license and grant be first
obtained under the said great Seal of her Majesty's high court of
Thadmiraltie. And that no person or persons aforesaid under the like pains, do
presume or attempt to spoil, rob, evil entreat, or hurt any of her Highness
said subjects being at the Seas, nor any other strangers, being friends
confederates, and in league with her Majesty, their ships or goods, by any
ways or means.

And furthermore, her Majesty does straightly and expressly charge and
command, all Uiceadmirals, Majors, Sheriffs, Bailiffes, and other head
officers and governors of Cities, Counties, Boroughs, Towns and Places, by
the Sea coasts of her Highness said Realm of England and Wales, that every of
them all respects set apart, and as they tender her Majesty's favor, do
effectually foresee that this her Majesty's proclamation, may be with all
expedition duly published, and also truly obeyed, kept and observed, as every
of them will answer for the contrary at his extreme peril. Yeuen at Strond
place the xxi. day of December, the first year of our reign.

God save the Queen.
Imprinted at London by RICHARD IVGGE, Printer unto the Queens Majesty.

Cum priuilegio ad imprimendum solum.


