A Proclamacion set forth by the body and state, of the Kings Maieiests priuey
Counsel, concerning the deuisers, writers, and casters abroad, of certain
vile, slanderous, and most traiterous letters bills, scrowes, and papers,
tendyng to the seducement of the kings majesty's good and loving subjects.
Forasmuch as there be diverse lewd and sedicious persons which do labor
now to maintain the traiterous doings of the duke of Somerset, and for that
purpose do devise, the most vile, false and traitetous villes, papers, and
books that ever wethard of, strawyng the same in the streets, as well within the
city of London, as in diverse tounes, and other places in the country,
wherein they do falsely and traitorously travail, to slander the kings
Majesty's counsel, thin king thereby to amaseand abuse his Majesty's good
subjects, which be in a readiness to join with thesaied Counsel, for
delivery of the King our sovereign Lords most royal person, remainyng to
his great peril and danger, in thesaied dukes custody, and for the restoryng
of this noble realm, to some better order and quietness, which shall be the
benefit of us all universally: The kings Majesty's most honorable counsel,
for auoydyng of the inconvenience and great danger, that by such sedicious
and slanderous bills, papers, and scrowes, might ensue to his Majesty, do
in his highness name, and by his graces authority, require, and nevertheless
command, al and every his majesty's good subjects, which love his highness
and this realm, to use all their wisdoms, policies, and diligences, to
search out the writers, diuisers, casters and counsailors to such traitorous
bills, and papers, and the same to apprehende, and present before thesaied
most honorable Counsel, that they may receive condign punishment,
according to their demerites. Wherein as they shall do most acceptable
service to his majesty, and their natural country, so thesaied counsel,
does in his majesty's name promise, that whosoever shall attache, and bring in
any such diuiser, writer, or caster abroad, of such vile and traitorous
bills, papers, scrowes, or books, or give such certain informacion, to
thesaied counsel, of their names and doings, as the same may be
apprehended, and their offenses proved against them, shall receive for their
travails and pains therein, by way of his majesty's reward, the some of one
hundred Crounes. Dated at London, the.x. of October, in the third year of the
most prosperous reign, of our sovereign lord King Edward the sixth, King of
England, France, and Irelande, defend or of the faith, and of the Church of
England, and Irelande in earth the supreme head. Subseribed by the lords, and
others of the priuey connsaill, whose names hereunder do follow.

The Lord Rich, Lord Chauncellor. The Lord Saint Ihon, Lord great
Master, and President of the Counsel. The Lord Russell, Lord priuey Seal.
The Lord Marquis of Northhampton. The Earl of Warwick, Lord Great
Chamberlain. The Earl of Arundell, Lord Chamberlam. The Earl of Shrewsbery.
The Earl of Southhampton. The Lord Wentworth. Sir Thomas Cheiney Knight of the
Order, and Threasaurer of the kings Majesty's house, and Lord Warden of the
Cinque Ports. Sir Willyam Herbert knight, Master of the Kings Majesty's
horse. Sir Anthony Wingfeld, knight of the order, the kings Majesty's vice
Chamberlein, and capitain of the Guard. Sir Ihon Gage knight of the order,
Constable of the Tower. Sir Willyam Petre knight, Secretary. Sir Edward North
knight. Sir Edward Montague knight, chief Justice of the Common place. Sir Raufe
Sadler knight. Sir Ihon Baker knight. Sir Edward Wotton knight. Master docter
Wotton Deane of Cantorbury. Sir Richard South well knight. Sir Edmund Peckham
knight, high Threasaurer of all the kings Majesty's Myntes
God save the King. (...) excudebat.

