By the Queen.
MAry by the grace of God Queen of England, France, and Irelande, defender of
the faith, and of the church of England and also of Ireland in earth the
supreme head.

To all Mayres. Shiriffes, Bayliffes, Constables, and to all other our officers
ministers and subjects, and to every of the^ gretynge. Where by reason of our
abiding here at our palace of Westmynster, as well for our coronation, as for
this our present parliament and term, great resort of our nobles, and other
of our subjects have repaired hither to our cities of London and Westminster,
and there have tarried, and yet still do remain, by occasion whereof such
byllets, fagottes, talewoodes, and other fewels as were provided, and brought
to the said cities for their provision, are greatly wasted and consumed, where
by the same our cities, and the Suburbs of the same are like to lack
sufficient and compotent store thereof, for their furniture for this present
winter, as we be enfourmed by the heads and governors of the same our cities.
We myndyng the present relief of the same want, and lack of fuel, do
strayghtly charge and command all and synguler our loving Subjects, which
have any manner of talewood, byllettes, fagottes, or other fuel whatsoever,
cut down, felled, and made, or to be made ready to be carried, that they and
every of them, with all convenient speed, do bring, and cause to be brought
to our said cities and suburbs of the same all and synguler the same talewode,
byllets, fagottes, and other fuel.

And further we will, and by these presents do give license to all and every
our said subjects, which shall bring any of the said fuel to our said
cities or the suburbs of the same, that they and every of them shall, and may,
franckly, and freely, utter, sell, and put to sale the same fuel, and every
part thereof, to our said nobelles and Subjects, at reasonable and compotente
pryces, without impechement, or incurrynge of any for fayture, loss, pain, or
penaltye, contained in the act of parliament, made for the assyse of wood, the
first day of March, in the.vii. year of ye reign of our dear brother, king
Edward the Sixth, for, or by reason, that the same fuel, or any percell
thereof shall fortune to lack or want any part of the just assyse or
proportion which it ought to bear and keep, by virtue of the said act, any
thing in the same act contained to the contrary, notwithstanding. In witness
whereof, we have caused this our present letters of license and proclamation to
be made patentes. Wytnes our self at Westminster, the.xx. day of November, the
first year of our reygne.

God save the Queen.
Londini in aedibus Iohannis Cawodi

Cum priuilegio ad imprimendum solum


