By the Queen.
THE Queen's majesty considering, how necessary it is and pleasynge to
almyghtye god, to have concord and peace with all princes, and specially with
such as be her neighbors: And findinge not only her realms and dominions
left to her in hostilytie and war after the deceasse of her dear sister the
late Queen, with the realms of France and Scotland, but also an honorable
occasion offered of treaty of peace with both the said Realms: has therefore
upon good advise, removed al ennimitie, and has upon most godly, honorable and
profitable considerations (upon the second of this month) passed, concluded
and agreed, a good, perfect, sincere and perpetual amity, peace, intelligence,
confederacion and union, to remain and contynewe for ever between her most
excellent majesty, her heirs and Successors on the one party: and the right
high and mighty Prince Henrye the French king on the other party, their
realms, Countries, Cities, towns, lands, dominions, terrytoryes, segnories,
castles, vassalles and subjects, by land, sea, and freshwater, and elsewhere.
And the like peace also between her said majesty and the king and Queen,
Dolphines of Scotland, and their Realms and cositries. By the which peace it
is provided, that al hostility and war shall cease on either party, and that
the said Princes, their Subjects and vassalles, shall live together in peace,
amitye, intelligence and frendshippe: And that all things be used and
exercised as freely and lyberallye, as they have done in any former time of
peace, had between the said Realms and dominions.

ALL which premises her majesty has thought mete to notify to al manner her
Subjects of what estate so ever the same be, that they and every of them,
observe all that hereto belongs: as the like is at the City of Paris in
France on the french part publyshed and notifyed.

YEVEN at the palace of Westminster the seventh of April the first year of
the reign of our sovereign lady Elizabeth by the grace of god Queen of
England, France and Ireland, defender of the faith. etc. GOD save the Queen.
Imprinted at London by Richard Judge and John Cawood printers unto the Queen's
majesty.

Cum priuilegio Regiae Maiestatis.


