THe Queen's highness by thaduise and consent of her graces privy Counsayll is
pleased and does ordeyne, that from the date and publication hereof forwards,
all manner French crowns of the Sun, being of the just standerde finesse
and weight shall be demed and accepted to be of the value of six shyllynges
four pence of curraunte money of this Realm, and all manner of crowns of the
Emperous coigne, being of the just standerde fines and weight, shall be demed
and accepted to be of the value of six shillynges four pence, of curraunte
money of this Realm. Every double ducket of Spain with two faces being of
the just standerde fynes and weight, shall be demed and accepted to be of the
value of thirtene shillinges four pence, of curraunte money of this Realm.
Every single ducket of Spain with two faces, being of the just standerde fines
and weight, shall be demed and accepted to be of ye value of six shillinges
eight pence, of curraunte money of this Realm. Every double royal of plate
silver of the Spanishe coigne, being of the just standerde fines and weyghte,
shall be demed and accepted to be of the value of thyrtene, pence of curraunte
money of this Realm. Every royal of plate of the Spanishe coigne, being of
the just standerde fines and weight, shall be demed and accepted to be of the
value of six pence halfpennye, of the curraunte money of this Realm. And
every half royal of plate of the Spanishe coigne being of the just
standerde fynes and weight, shall be demed and accepted to be of the value of
three pence farthinge, of curraunte money of this Realm. And that every of the
said several coignes above mentioned, being of the just weight and fynes
according to the standerde of the same, shall commonly be paid and received
through out this her highness Realm and other her graces dominions in all
paymentes and receptes, for and after the rates and values before in this
proclamation expressed and declared.

Strayghtlye charginge and commanding all, and singular her highness subjects
and others, dwelling, conuersing or trafficking within the said her graces
realm and dominions, that they and every of them observe, fulfill, and execute
theffecte and tenor of this present Proclamation, upon pain, that who so
disobeyeth or refuses so to do, being by due proof thereof detected, shall
suffer enprisonmente, and further punishment at her highness pleasure.

Given at our Palais of Westminster the eyghte day of March, in the first
year of our raygne.

God save the Queen.
Londini in aedibus Iohannis Cawodi Typographi Reginae Mariae excusum. Anno. M.
D. L iiii.

Cum priuilegio ad imprimendum solum


