By the Queen.
THe Queen our Sovereign Lady, understanding that a nultitude of euyldisposed
persons, being borne out of bet highness dominions in other sundry nations,
fleinge from the obeysaunce of the Princes and rulers under whom they be
borne, some for heresye, some for murder, treason. robberye, and some for other
horrible crimes, be resorted and come into her majesty's realm, and here have
made their demour and yet be commoraunt and lyngryng, partly to eschew such
condign punishment, as their said horrible crimes deserve, and partlye to
dilate, plant and sow the seeds of their maliciouse doctrrine, and lewd
conversation, among the good subjects of this her graces Realm, of purpose
to infecte her good subjects with the like, in so much as besides innumerable
heresies, which diverse of the same being heretics, have preached and
taught, within her highness said Realm. It is assuredlye known unto her
majesty, that not only their secret practices have not failed to stir
comfort and aid, diverse her highness subjects, to this most unnatural
rebellion, against god and her grace, but also some other of them, desiste not
still to practice with her people eftsoon to rebel: Her majesty therefore
having (as is before said) knowledge and intelligence hereof, has for remedy
herin determined, and most strayghtly charge and commands, that al and
every such person or persons borne out of her highness dominions, now
commoraunte or resiaunte within this Realm, of what soever nation or
countreye, being either preacher, prynter, bokeseller, or other artificer or
of whatsoever calling else, not being denizen, or merchaunt known, vsyng the
trade of merchaundise, or servant to such Ambassadors as beliegers here,
from the princes and states joined in league with her grace, shall within
xxiiii. days after this proclamation, avoid the Realm, upon pain of most
greuouse punishment by imprisonment, and forfaiture and confiscation of all
their goods and moueables, and also to be delivered unto their natural
Princes or Rulers, against whose persons or laws, they have offended. Geuynge
to all majors, shrieffes, bailifes, cunstables and other her ministers,
officers and good subjects, straightly also in charge, if they know any such
person not borne in the Queen's highness dominions (except before excepted) that
shall after the time and day limited in this proclamation, tarry within this
realm, that they shall apprehende the same person or persons, and commit him
or them to ward, there to remain without bail or mainprise till her graces
pleasure or her counsailles be signified unto them, for the further ordering
of the said person or persons.

And that if any of her said officers, after the said xxiiii. days
apprehende, take or know of any such, that they shall with diligence
immediatlye certify her said counsel thereof, to the intent order may furthwith
be given, for their punishment according.

God save the Queen.
Londini in aedibus Iohannis Cawodi Typographi Regine Mariae excusion* Anno. M.
D. LIIII.

Cum priuilegio ad imprimendum solum.


