By the King and the Queen.
THe king and Queen's most excellent Majesty's, understanding how that diverse
naughty and insolent persons, have now of late attempted to make quarelles,
ryottes, and frayes, as well in Churches and Churchyardes, contrary to the laws
and Statutes in that case provided, as in sundry other places, Cities, Towns,
and Marketes. And for thaccomplishment of their noughty purposes and quarelles,
have caused swords and Rapyers, to be made of a much greter length, then
heretofore has been accustomed, or is decent to use and were. And with ye said
wepons, do use and wear gauntlettes, and vambraces, and bucklers with long
pykes in them, contrary to thauncient usage of this realm, and the laws and
statutes of the same. Whereby diverse irreuerente and profane behauyours in the
said Churches and Churchyardes, and many times maymes, hurtes, manslaugh ters
and murders, have been of late committed and done, and much more is like to be,
if some remedy be not the sooner provided in that behalf.

Their hyghnesses myndyng to take away thoccasion of such mischiefs, and
disorders, do streyghtlye charge and command al and singular their Justices
of peace, mayres, sheryffes, baylyffes, constables, and other their majesty's
ministers and officers, that all and singular the said Law and statute,
concerning the fighting and quarelynge in churches and churcheyardes, be duly
executed, and that from henceforth no person or persons, of what estate, or
condition so ever he or they be, do use or wear by night or by day, nor sell
any sword or rapier above the length of a yard and a half quarter in the
blade at the most, nor any buckler, with more pykes therein then one, and the
same not to be sharp, or above.ii. inches long, or of a brother syse then has been most commenly used within this Realm, nor use or wear any gauntlet, or
vambrace, nor any other weapon of defense, other then their common swords,
rapiers, daggers, and bucklers, according to thauncient usage and custom of
this their majesty's Realm, upon pain of the loss of such weapons so used
or worn, contrary to the tenor and effect of this proclamation, and to suffer
imprysonment of his or their bodies, and to make fine at their majesty's will
and pleasure.

And further their majesty's strayghtly charge and command all and singular
the said Justices of peace Mayers, sheryffes, baylyffes, constables, and other
their majesty's officers, and ministers, to see this their hyghnes proclamation
duly executed, and to commyt thoffenders therein to ward and prison, there to
remain without bail or maynepryce, until their majesty's pleasure shall be
further known in that behalf. And that they fail not thus to do, as they
tender their majesty's pleasure and commandment, and will answer for the
contrary at their uttermost perils.

Given at our manor of Grenewyche, the.xvii. day of March. God save the king
and the Queen.
Excusum Londini in aedibus Iohannis Cawodi Typographi Regiae Maiestatis.

Cum priuilegio ad imprimendum solum.


