A proclamation set fourth by the King and Queen's majesty's, against Thomas
Stafforde, and others traitors his adherentes.
WHere as Thomas Stafforde, and others maliciouse and evil disposed subjects
his adherentes, having conspyred to perpetrate diverse heinous treasons against
the most royal persons of their majesty's, and thereupon fearing to receive
just punishment for his and their deserts, fled into the parts of beyond the
seas, and there remaining for a time, have, persisting in their said malice,
devised and attempted diverse times to stir seditions and rebellions within
this realm, to the great disturbaunce of the quietness, peace, and
tranquillity thereof, by sendyng hither into the realm, diverse books, letters,
and wrytynges, both printed and written, farced and filled full of untruths,
and seditious and most false surmises, of things said to be done and devised
by the king our sovereign Lord and his servants, which were never
ymagined or thought. And to show their utter malice with more effect, the same
Stafforde did lately, with certain of his said accomplices unnatural English
men, and some strangers, enter into this realm, and by stealth took their
maiestyes Castle of Scarborough, in the countye of York, and set out a
shameful proclamation, wherein he trayterousely calls, names, and affyrmeth
our said sovereign Lady yt queen's highness, to be vnryghtful and most unworthy
Queen, and that the kings majesty our said soueraygne Lord, has induced
and brought into this realm the number of. xii. M. strangers and Spanyardes,
and that into the said Spanyardes hands. xii, the strongest holds of this
realm be delivered. In which proclamation also the said traitor Stafforde,
did name and take him self to be protector and governor of this realm by
these most false and unnatural means minding to allure the good subjects of
their majesty's, to withdraw their duty of allegiaunce from their said
majesty's, and to adhere to him the said Stafford, to their confusion. Albeit
the said Stafforde and other traitors his accomplices, be by the help of God,
and dylygence of the earl of Westmerland and other noble men and gentlemen,
good subjects of those parties, repressed, apprehended, and forth coming, to
receive just punishment according to their deserts, and that it may be well
thought, that no wise nor honest man thinks, or can justly gather any cause
to think that the kings majesty myndeth any other thing unto the queen's
majesty and the realm, but only to be careful, and studious of all things,
tendinge to the benefyt, surety, honor, and defense of the same, and in this
part most louinglye and daily bestows the great travail of his royal
person, besides ye large expenses of his goods and treasure, yet to the intent
none of their said loving subjects should by simplicity be seduced and
deceived through the deuelysh devises of the aforesaid, or any other like
traitors, their majesty's of their great clemency and tender zeal toward
their said subjects, have thought good to warn and admonysh them of the
premysses, exhortyng and chargyng them, to give no ear or credit to the said
false proclamations and bruytes, set out or spread by the said traitors, or
hereafter to be set out by any others, whereby they shall the better avoid the
dangers which they may otherwise incur by adhearynge or resorting unto the
said traitors, and that also their said loving subjects do use them selves
quietlye without stir or rysinge, till they be commanded in the name of
their majesty's, by the lieutenaunt of the county where the said subjects dwell
or inhabit, or by the Sheriff or such Justices as shall have authority from
their highnesses in that behalf to raise and leuy them. And that the said
subjects, and every of them, shall endeuer them selves to apprchend and take,
and before the same lieutenaunt, Sherif, or Justices of the peace of the said
county, bring all and every such person or persons as they suspect, or know
to be of the company of the said traitors, or to favor and aid them, and all
such other also as shall procure the people unlawfully to stir, or shall
sediciousely, or maliciously, spread or tell any seditious news concerning the
doings of the said traitors or otherwise. Strayghtly chargyng and
commaundinge all Justices of peace, Mayers, Sheriffs, bayliffes, Constables,
and al other their majesty's officers and ministers, to se this proclamation
put in execution, as their majesty's specially trust them, and as the said
officers and ministers will answer to the contrary at their uttermost
perils.

Given at our Palace of Westminster the last day of Apryll. God save the king
and the Queen.
Excusum Londini in aedibus Iohannis Cawodi, Typographi Regiae maiestatis.

Cum priuilegio ad Imprimendum solum. Anno. 1557.


