A Proclamation set furthe by the Kynge^ Majesty, with thassent of his derest
Uncle Edward Duke of Somerset (...) ^oyal person, and of his realm, dominions
and subjects Protector and others of his highness most honorable counsel,
concerning Testons.
WHere as the Kings Majesty by thaduise of his most dear uncle the lord
Protector and the rest of his highness cou^sail, for diverse great and urgent
co^s^deracions, had commanded that all manner of persons should bring al coin
commonly called Testons, coined with the face and stamp of his highness most dear
father the late king Henry the eight, before the feast of Christmas last past
into the Tower of London or other his Majesty's Myntes, to the intent the same
might be exchaunged into Shillynges, Grotes or other kind of monoyes: It has
so chaunsed that by reason as well of the multitude of that coin heretofore made
in the time of thesayd late king his Majesty's father, as also by the great
quantity and foyson of the same coin, counterfaited and brought into this
realm, being current, here, all thesayd Testons has not be changed. And
thereupon his highness by thaduise aforesaid was pleased that thesayd
Proclamacion should be enlarged unto a longer day, and so has permitted and
suffered thesayd coin of Testons to be current among his subjects until the
first of May last past, upon trust that in that space upon the co^sideracions
in thesayd Proclamacion expressed, every man for his part helping that ways,
all manner of thesayd Testons of the stamp of thesayd late king of famous memory
should have been brought into the Myntes and exchau^ged. In the which space
yet many abusyng his highness clemency has kept their Testons still in their
hands, or otherwise uttered them, and fewer since that time til now of late
have been brought into his highness Myntes. The which Testons if they should
now remain only mere bullion, should be great loss and hynderau^ce to his
Majesty's subjects: And if the same stay or Proclamacion should in any wise be
released, it should be greatest loss and hynderaunce to the realm, and a
present occasion of continual bringyng in more cou^terfait Testons: Therefore
the kings Majesty by thaduise of the lord Protector and the rest of his
highness cou^sail, straightly charge and commands thesayd Proclamacion of
disanullyng and criyng down of thesayd Testons to be kept emonges al his
loving subjects so that the same be never hereafter taken for current or
lawful money, but may lawfully be refused of any manner of person: And yet
nevertheless of his most princely clemency and liberality, his highness by
thaduise aforesaid is content that all such sums of money as shall be due to
his Majesty, as well for the Relief granted in the last sessions of the
Parliament, as for all other rentes and debtes may be paid in good and lawful
Testons of the stamp and coin of his Majesty's father at any time before the
first of June next following, and so received of his highness Threasurers until
the said first of June next following only, after the rate and value of xii. d.
every Teston. After which time his highness pleasure is, that in no wise
thesayd Testons be any more received of any his highness officers of receipt, of
or for that price. Nevertheless for the space and time of two months after,
that is to say, unto the end and last day of July next following, his highness
is content that all good and lawful Testons at his Majesty's Myntes, shall be
received for bullion after the rate of xii. d. the piece of any person who
shall bring them thither. And further that it shall be lefull to any man to buy
any good and lawful Testons of he said coin and stamp of the late king, and
made in any of the Myntes within this realm of England, to that intent to
bring them to the Myntes of any person not disposed to bring them himself: So
that he do buy them for no less price then after xi. d. ob. the piece and not
under, upon pain that whosoever for his own gredynes and lucre, shall buy
any such Testons for less value then after xi. d. ob. the piece, to the
damage of the poor men, who would sell the same, shall forfaite therefore the
Testons so bought and ten times the value of them, whereof one moytie to the
kings Majesty, the other to the demaunder of the said forfaite, by bill,
accion of debte or informacion in any of the kings Majesty's courts of
Record, where no essoyne, proteccion nor wager of law shall serve or be
allowed. And his highness further is content that all his officers and ministers
may receive all such good and lawful Testons, and so repay them again unto
his highness after thesayd price of xi. d. ob. the piece, during only thesayd
months of June and July. In the which time for that price of xi. d. ob. the
piece, they shall refuse no lawful and good Testons of any his highness
subjects. After the which last day of the month of July next following his
highness express will and pleasure by the advice aforesaid is, that the coin
called Testons of his highness father king Henry theightes stamp, shall neither
be received of his highness officers, no of none others, nor yet at the Myntes
or exchange, as coin or money of any valuacion but after such sort as plate
or any other strange bullyon is, or then shall be, that is to say, according to
the rate of the standard, and the quantity of fine silver in them contained,
and none otherwise.

Given at Grenewyche the xxii. day of May. M.ccccc.xlix.
God save the King.
Ex (...) Richardi Graftoni (...) impressoris. Cum (...) ^mprimendum sol^^.


