WHere as the Queen's majesty, has in this present last session of
parliament, with the assent, and consent, of the lords spiritual and
temporal, and the commons in the same assembled, made amongst others, one
estatute to repeal sondrye acts of parliament made in the time of the late
Queen her majesty's sister, and to reuyue and make good certain other
necessary and godly laws, used in the times of the reygnes of king Henry
the.viii. her majesty's father, and king Edward the sixte her majesty's
brother, of noble memories: amongst the which one godly act there is revived,
entitled: an act against such persons as shall irreverently speak against the
Sacrament of the body and blood of Christ, comenly called the Sacrament of
the alter, and for receiving thereof under both kinds, made in a parlyament
begone at Westminster the.iiii. day of November, in the first year of the said
king Edward the sixth, and continued to the.xxiiii. day of December then next
following. And because ye time of Easter is so at hand, and that great nombers,
not only of the nobility and gentlemen, but also of the common people of this
realm, be certainly persuaded in conscience in such sort as they cannot be
induced in any wise to communicate or receive the said holy sacrament but under
both kinds according to the first institution, and to the common use both of
the Apostells and the primative church. And for that also the forsaide statute
now made in this last parliament being of great length, cannot be printed and
published abroad, nor any other manner of dyuine service for the communion of
the said holy Sacrament (than that which is now used in the church) can
presently be established by any law, until further time therefore may be
had. For to avoid al contention and discord, and to quiet the consciences of
such great nombers: It is thought necessary to her majesty, by the advice of
sundry of her nobility and Commons lately assembled in parliament, to signify
and declare, like as by this present proclamacyon her majesty does signify
and declare to all manner her majesty's subjects, that the forsaide statute
made in the said first year of king Edward the syxte, is now wholly revived
and in force, to al manner of purposes, and intentes, and that the same is and
ought to be followed, obeyed and used. And therefore her majesty by the said
advise, straightly commands and charge al manner of persons, and specially
all manner pastors and Curates to whom the ministracion of the said holy
sacrament does belong, charitably and quietlye to observe the form and manner
of the said estatute now revived, concerning the ministracion under both
kinds. And yet least disse^tion or disquiet might arrise, if in any place the
preistes and ministers of some church shall refuse to deliver the said holy
sacrament in both kinds to their parishoners which shall humbly requyer the
same: her majesty by thaduise aforesaid requires and commands all manner
her subjects, that so shall reverently and humblye requier the same, and
cannot have it quietly granted by their priest or curate, yet not to molest
the said priest at this time of Easter for the same, least occasion thereby be
given of breach of charity: but to resort to some other honest, discrete and
learned priest and minister, either in the same church or sum other, and to
receive of him the said holy sacrament reverently, under both kinds as is
abouesaid. And notwithstanding the same, to pay al manner other tithes and
duties to their propre parson or Curate, as otherwile they have done, leauyng
the consideration of the Curates contempt, to such as in that behalf, have
cause to redress it.

AND further her Majesty commands straitlye, all manner of Majors,
Sheryffes, Justices of peace, and other head officers, as they will answer for
the contrary, to have an earnest regard that peace and concord be kept, as well
in Churches, as without, specially during all this feast of Easter, and not to
fail, but forthwith to commit to prison, all disordred persons, that shall
seek willingly to break, either by misordred deed, or by railing, or
contemptuous speech, the common peace and band of charytie, which ought
amongst all good christians to be at this present most abundant and of most
force and value.

Yeuen at our Palayce of Westminster the.xxii. day of March* the first year
of our Raygne.
God save the Queen.
IMPRINTED AT LONDON IN POVLES CHVRCHE yard, by Richard Judge, and John
Cavvood, Printers to the Queen's Majesty. ANNO* M.D.LIX.

Cum priuilegio Regiae Maiestatis.


