A Proclamation set furthe by the kings majesty with the advice of his highness
most honorable counsel, the.xi. day of September, in the.v. year of his
Maiestees most prosperous reign, inhibiting the melting of any his highness
coins of silver, being curraunt within his graces dominions.
WHere by diverse and several acts of Parliament holden in the.ix. year of the
reign of the noble prince king Edward the third, and in the.xvii. year of king
Richard the second, and in the.iiii. year of king Henry the.iiii. the kings
majesty's noble progenitors, it was enacted, ordained, and established among
other things, that no grote, half grote, halfpeny nor farthing, should be
molten by any person or persons to make vessel or any other thing thereof, upon
peine to forfaict and lose four times the value of the money so moulten, and
to suffer other grievous peines in the ^eide statutes contained, as in thesaide
several acts more at large amongst other things plainly apeeth. And where
also the kings most excellent highness, graciously considering and tendering the
common wealth of this his realm and other his dominions, has of late to his
great loss abated and diminished the valuacion of his co^^e, by his several
Proclamations, in such order and form, as in thesaid Proclamations more amply
and at large, is contained and expressed, to the intent that his highness
would reduce and bring his coin and Mintes to a certain better estate and
estimation, for the honor of his maiestce, the benefit of his subjects, and
the commune wealth of this Realm, and other his graces dominions. Which godly
purpose and intent of his maiestce as is aforesaid, and thesaide several
statutes and forfaictures therein contained notwithstanding: His Majesty is
credibly enfourmed, and aso understands, that diverse insatiable and gredy
persons, as well Goldesmithes as other, not regarding their duty of obedience
toward his maiestee, and being void of al charitable respect, and regard to
the common wealth of this their country, have molten and daily do melt diverse
great Sums of money, as well of grotes as half grotes, half pence,
farthinges, and other current money of this Realm. to the great diminishing
of his graces come and mintes, to the great hurt and detriment of the common
wealth, contrary to his maiestees said godly ententes and purposes, and against
the tenor and effect of thesaid several estatutes, to the great burdening and
utter undoing of diverse and many of the said offenders, if his maiestee
should use and extend the rigor and extremite of his laws against them for
their offenses, which his highness intends to execute and do without favor,
if by their unlawful doings, he be farther moved and occasioned thereunto. And
therefore his maiestee, being fully minded to have thesaide several statues
observed, and his coin not to be molten, does straightly charge and command,
that no Teston, or shilling, grote, half grote, penny, halfpeny, or farthing,
or any other coin of silver, being current within this realm, shall
fromhencefurthe in any wise be molten, by any person or persons, to make
vessel, plate, or any other thing thereof, upon peine to forfaict and lose to
his highness, four ^imes the value of the money so molten, and farther to
suffer imprisonment and other punishment at his maistees will and pleasor.

God save the King.
RICHARDVS GRAFTON typographus Regius excudebat.


