By the King and the Queen.
THe Kings and Queen's most excellent Majesty's, most gracyously considering
how that a great quantity of forged and counterfeyt coins, of Gold, as well of
this Realm as of other Realms being currante within the same, has been of
late, and daily is counterfeyte forged and brought into their said majesty's
Realm, by diverse noughtye and evil dysposed persons, to the great dysceyte
prejudice loss, and hynderaunce of their loving Subjects, receyuynge the
same, and more is like daily to be if some convenient remedy should not be
the sooner provided in that behalf. Their majesty's therefore minding not
only to give knowledge, and warnyng thereof to all their said loving
subjects, but also to put such counterfeytours, and naughtye persons in
fear, that would go about hereafter to commyt such like offenses, do by
this their hyghnes proclamacion warn and admonysh all their said loving
Subjects, that they, nor any of them, after the proclaymynge hereof, take, or
receive in payment, or otherwise, any of the said coygnes of gold of this
realm, or any other coygnes of gold, being curraunt within the same, except
they, and every of them do first try the same coignes of gold by weight, or
know by other means the goodness thereof, so as they, ne any of them be
deceived in receauynge of the same. And if they or any of them shall upon trial
as aforesaid, find any of the said coygnes to be forged or counterfeyt, that
then they, and every of them, shall immediately deface, or cause to be
defaced, and break, or cause to be broken in pieces, every such counterfeyt
coygne and coygnes, and the same so defased and broken, shall with convenient
speed, deliver or cause to be delivered to the next Justice of the peace of the
county where they, or any of them shall then dwell or inhabyte. Chargynge and
commaundynge all such Justices of peace as shall receive any such counterfeyt
coygnes, defased and broken in manner and form aforesaid, to reteyne, and
keep the same, until the next Assizes to be holden within such countye and
countyes, where such counterfeyte coigne shall be so defaced broken and
delivered, and shall then deliver the same to the Justices of assyse to be by
them brought up, and delivered to the Lords and others of their maiestyes
pryuye counsel, attendau^t upon their most royal persons.

Given at our manner of Grenewych the third day of Apryll.
God save the king and the Queen.
Excusum Londini in aedibus Iohannis Cawodi Typographi Regiae Maiestatis. Anno.
M. D. L VI. Cum priuilegio.


