A Proclamacion set forth by the state and body of the Kings Maiestes
Counsel now assembled at London, conteinyng the very troth of the Duke of
Somersets euel Government, and false and detestable procedinges.
THe Kings Majesty's most honorable Counsel, calling to their remembrance
the quiet state, that this the kings majesty's most noble Realm of England
and other his Majesty's Realms and Dominions, stood in at the deceas of his
highness Father, of most noble memory king Henry the eight, their late
sovereign Lord and Master, and studieng upon the causes of such calamities,
losses and displeasures, as of late have happened among vf, not only by
inward division, which has been already the death of thousands of his
Majesty's natural subjects, and oneles GOD of his mercy do give them that
have been offenders grace to repent, and to determine to live hereafter in a
due and Godly obedience, must needs bread to this Realm an utter desolacion,
But also by the losses of his Majesty's pieces beyond the Sees, the which his
Highness said Father not many years before his deceasse wanne, to the great
honor of his Majesty, and to the great commodity of his realm, with the
great adventure of his most noble person, and the consumption of his
inestimable treasure: they have found and fully perceived that the only root
and chief cause of al these evils have grown by the malice and evil
government of Edward Duke of Somer set, lately called Protector, whose pride,
covetousness, and extreme ambicion, does declare and show to all the world,
that list to behold the same, that he has meant nothing less then the
preseruacion of thee Kings most Royal majesty, or the good order of his
Realm and the safe keeping of his graces pieces beyond the Sees, but rather
that he has sought the satisfaction of his deuelyshe and evil purposes, for
the compassyng whereof, what ways he and his have used to enryche him, how he
has in all this time of the wars both with France and Scotland builded
most sumptuously in a nombre of places, the kings Majesty's poor Soldiers
and others having sommes of money due to them unpaid of their wages and
duties: how he has labored to make himself strong in all Countries: how he
has subverted all Laws, Justice, and good order of the Realm, whereby he
has fearfully shaken the Chair of his Majesty's estate: how little he has
esteamed the grave advise of all his Majesty's good and faithful Counsailors:
how little he has regarded thorder appoincted by our late sovereign Lord
king Henry the eight, for the government of his majesty, his Realms and
dominions, now in his tender age: what division he has labored to sow in the
Realm whereby have brought his purpose to pass, between the Nobles, the
Gentylm(...) needs if it should continue destroy both parties, and at last be
(...) ueraigne Lord the king, whom God long preserve unto us, (...) his
majesty and the Realm have of late suffered by his w(...) furniture of the
pieces beyond the Sees: And what da^(...) les God help it by his mighty
hand, for that he wol(...) moved to it, both by such as had and ha(...) by
diverse of them a part, eu(...) lament it.

Which things (...) Majesty's counsa(...) better and more c(...) iesties
person(...) pieces (...)


