By the King and the Queen.
ALthough we ye Queen at our first coming to the Crown were given to
understand yt the notable and heynouse treason, enterprised by ye late Duke of
Northumberland was supported and furdered by Henry the French king, and his
ministers, by him put in trust, and that shortly after in the conspiracy, moved
against god, and us, by wyat and his traiterous bad, the said kings ministers
did secretly practice and give their favorable compfort thereunto, contrary to
the treatice of peace between both ye realms, and al good amity and honor,
yet the great love we bear to the peace of Christendom and to the quiet of
our louinge subjects, moved us rather to impute the same to his ministers
whom he used in service, then unto him self, thinking ever by that our
patience to have induced him to bear us true amity, and to use good
neighbored toward us, and our Subjects, for the which respect we were not
only contented to bear such iniuryes, as to our self, had been by him done,
but also traueled to be a mean of pacification, between The Emperor, and the
said king, sending our ambassadoures to Callyes for that purpose, to our great
charge, as the world knows, which our travail and good zeal was not so well
employed, and taken of him as of us meant, for not long after that time when the
devil had put in the heddes of Dudley, Asheton, and others their accomplices to
enter into a new conspiracy against us. The said kings Ambassador was not
only pryuy thereof, but also received them into his house, there suffering
them to assemble and contriue their malicious and deuelish enterprise. And
although the said king were advertised thereof by our Ambassador with him
resident, and also friendly desired not to supporte or favor any such doings.
Nevertheless the same conspiracy being afterward detected, and sundry of
thoffendors confessing it by just order of law executed. Dudley, Asheton, and
others flyeng into France, were both received of the king, and also maintained
with annual pencions by him given, contrary to his promise which he made unto a
personage of honor, sent to him from us, gyuinge thereby a most dangerous
example, and pernicious unto al princes, whose estate and life cannot be sues
if traytoures may be received and supported. The like mind toward us he
declared in receiving sundry famous and notoriouse pirates enemies of
Christendom, and spoilers of our subjects, whom he mainteyned with men money
and ships, to exercise their piracy, and to declare that no patience, or good
demeanor of our part can move him to bear us good amity, of late he sent
Stafford with other rebels whom he had interteyned in that Realm, furnyshed
with armor money, municion and ships, to surprise our Castle of Scarborough,
not contented this long time to have borne with pirates and such as have
robbed our merchants, and other subjects by seas, and to have used
dishonorable practices for the surprising of Callies, and our pieces on that
side, the ministers whereof has been openly known and the spyals taken, for
the better mainteining of which ungodly doings and greter anoyaunce of our
realm he has continually suffered in his countries, forgers of false moneys,
and counterfeiters of our coin, for the which causes, and also for that he
has with al hostility invaded the low countries to the defense and
preservation whereof we are bound by special treatye, and considering that
neither by demanding redress hereof we can obtain any, neither by good
means which we have hither to used enjoy any amity, or good neighbored at
his hand, neither by promise be assured of ye same, we have thought better to
have him known and taken for an open enemy of whom we may beware, then under
the pretense of amity a secret worker against us, and a privy enemy, such as
we have hitherto found him, to the great danger of our person, and lose and
damage of our subjects. And therefore we give warning to al our loving subjects,
fromhenceforth to forbere al traffitque and contracting with any of that Realm,
and to repute ye said French king, and his subjects as open enemies annoying
them by all such means as men may, and are wont to do there enemies. And
although he has used without just cause ordenouncing any war, to annoy our
merchants and subjects, yet give we unto al his merchants and subjects
fortye days space after this proclamation to depart this our Realm with such
goods as they have here and may by our laws carry away to ye which effect we
shall give them or any of them our safe conduct and pasporte if they shall
require it. Given at our pallyce of westminster the.vii. of June the third and
forth years of our Reygnes.

God save the king and the Queen.
Excusum Londini in aedibus Iohannis Cawodi, Typographi Regiae maiestatis. Cum
priuilegio ad imprimendum solum. Anno. 1557.


