A proclamacion set furthe by the kings majesty, with the advice of his
highness most honorable privy counsel, in the.v. year of his highness most
prosperous reign, for the prices of victualles.
Whereby an act of Parliament holden at Westminster upon prorogacion the.xxv.
day of January, in the.xxv. year of the reign of the most noble Prince of
worthy memory king Henry the, viii. it was enacted amongst other things, that
upon complaints made of enhaunsing of prices of victualles necessary for men's
sustenance, in any part of this realm, or in any other of the kings
dominions. The lord Chauncelor of England, the Lord Threasorer, the Lord
President of the kings counsel, the lord Privy Seal, the lord Stuarde, the
Lord Chaumberleine, and al other lords of the kings counsel, the Treasorer
and Comptroller of the Kings house, The Chauncellor of the Duchy of
Lancaster, the kings Justices of either Benche, the Chauncellor Chamberleines,
under Treasorer and the Barons of the kings Exchequer, or.vii. of them,
whereof the lord Chauncelor, the lord Treasorer, the lord President of the
kings counsel, or the lord privy Seal, to be one, should have power and
aucthorite, from time to time, as the case should require, to set and tax
reasonable prices of al kind of victualles necessary for man's sustenaunce, how
they should be sold in gross or by retaile. And that after such prices set
and taxed in form aforesaid, Proclamation should be made in the kings name
under the great seal, of the said prices, and that al Fermors, Owners,
Broggers, and other victuallers having or keeping any kind of victual to
the intent to sell, shall sell the same to such the kings subjects as will buy
them, at such prices as shall be set and taxed by the said proclamation, upon the
pains to be expressed and limited in the said Proclamation, to be lossed,
forfaited and levied to the kings use, in such wise, as in the said
proclamation should be declared, as in the said act more at large amongst
other things appears. Wherefore, upon diverse good and pitiful complaints,
made of the great and excessive prices of victualles necessary for man's
sustenaunce, the Lord Chaunceler of England, the Lord Treasorer, the lord
privy Seal, and other of the kings most honorable counsel, to the number
expressed in the said act, by virtue and aucthoritee of the said act,
assembled at Windesore together the.xxx. day of August last past, after
deliberate consultation thereof, have set and taxed prices of certain
victualles in form following.

First, that the greatest lean Ox, shall not be sold above the some of.xl.
s^. Item the lean Ox, of the second sort, not to be sold above the sum
of.xxxiii. s^. iiii. d. The lean Ox of the third sort, not to be sold above
the sum of.xxvi. s^. viii. d. The best, greatest, and fattest Ox, shall not
be sold above the sum of.liii. s^. iiii. d. The fat Ox of the second
sort, shall not be sold above the Sum of.xliii. s^. iiii. d. The fat Ox
of the third sort shall not be sold above the sum of.xxxiii. s^. iiii. d.
The lean Sheep of the greatest sort, not to be sold above the sum of.iii.
s^. iiii. d. The lean Sheep of the second sort, not to be sold above the
sum of.ii. s^. viii. d. The lean sheep of the third sort, not to be sold
above the sum of.ii. s^. The fat sheep of the gretest sort, shall not be sold
above the sum of.v. s^. The fat sheep of the second sort, shall not be sold
above the sum of.iiii. s^. The fat sheep of the.iii. sort shall not be
sold above the sum of.iii. s^. And that no Befe, nor Porke, be sold raw, by
retayle above the sum of penny half farthing the pound. Nor Veale or Mutton
raw by retaile above penny halfpeny the pound. And that no manner of person,
shall sell by retaile any great thick Essex chese above the rate of halfpeny half
farding the pound, nor any other chese by retaile, above halfpeny farthing the
pound.

The Kings most excellent majesty, most graciously tendering the common
wealth of this his realm, besides diverse remedies already provided, as well in
Parliamentes as in other consultacions, has for remedic thereof, of late, to
his own great loss, abated, and decayed the valuation of his coin by his
several proclamations, thinking thereby, the excessive prices of al things, of
good congruence should consequently fall and abate, as by natural reason and
equite necessarely it ought and should. Nevertheless, contrary to his graces
expectacion, diverse insatiable and greedy persons, in whose hands a great
part of the victual of this realm by regratinge rests, being void of all
charitable regard and respect to the common wealth of their natural country,
for their own wealth and filthy lucre, do not only by their undue, subtle
and sinistre practices continue their excessive prices of all manner of
victualles, but also as much as in them lies, daily do invent and study for
the increase of the same, to the great detriment and utter undoing of the
greater part of his loving subjects being forced to fetch their necessary
victual at their hands, which his majesty will nor can in no wise suffer. And
therefore graciously assenting and agreyng to the said rates and prices, and
intending to proclaim and publishe the same, most straightly charge and
commands, that no person or persons, from hencefurth do sell or cause to be
sold, the greatest lean Ox, above the su^me of.xl. s^. upon pain of
forfeiture of.xx. marks of curraunt money of this realm, for every lean Ox
so by him sold. Nor any lean Ox of the second sort, above the sum of
xxxiii. s^. iiii. d. upon pain of forfeiture of.x. l. of like money, for every
Ox by him so sold. Nor any lean Ox of the third sort, above the sum
of.xxvi. s^ viii. d. upon peine of forfeiture of vi. l. xiii. s^. iiii, d. for
every Ox so sold by him. Nor the greatest, fattest and best Ox, to be sold
above the sum of liii. s^. iiii d. upon peine of forfeiture of, xx. marks,
for every Ox so by him sold. Nor any fat Ox of the second sort, to be sold
above the sum of.xliii. s^ iiii. d, upon peine of forfeiture of.x pounds,
for every Ox so sold. Nor any fat Ox of the third sort, to be sold above
the su^me of.xxxiii. s^. iiii. d. upon peine of forfeiture, for every such Ox
so sold.vi. l. xiii. s^. iiii. d. Nor shall sell any lean sheep of the
greatest sort, above the sum of.iii. s^. iiii. d. upon peine of forfeiture
of.iii. l. vi. s^. viii d. for every such sheep so sold. Nor any lean sheep
of the second sort, above the some of.ii, s^. viii. d. upon pain of
forfeiture of.liii. s^. iiii. d, for every sheep so sold. Nor any lean sheep
of the third sort, above the some of.ii. s^. upon pain of forfeiture of.xl.
s^. for every sheep so sold. Nor shall sell any fat sheep of the greatest
sort, above the sum of five shillinges, upon peine of forfeiture of.iii. l.
vi. s^. viii. d. for every sheep so sold. Nor any fat sheep of the second or
mean sort, above the price of.iiii. s^, upon peine of forfeiture for every
fat sheep so sold.liii. s^. iiii. d. nor any fat sheep of the third sort,
above the sum of.iii. s^. upon peine of forfeiture of.xl. s^. for every sheep
so to be sold.

And that no Butcher nor other person shall sell any raw Befe or Porke by
retaile, above the Rate and sum of penny half fardyng the pound, upon peine
of forfeiture of vi. s^. viii. d. for every pound so sold, nor shall sell
veale or Mutton raw by retaile, above.i. d. ob. the pound, upon pain of
forfaiture of.vi. s^. viii. d. for every pound so sold.

And that no manner of person, shall sell by retaile any great thick Essex
chese above the rate of.ob. di. quam. the pound, upon peine of forfeiture of
ii. s^. for every pound so sold, nor any other chese, by retaile above.ob. q.
the pound, upon peine of forfeiture of.ii. s^. for every pound, so to be
sold: The same sums and forfeitures, to be levied to the kings use, in
form folowinge. That is to say, by byll, plaint, information, or accion of
debt, to be taken before his Justices of peace, in their Session, in any
County, City, or town corporate, where any such offense shall be done, or in
any other his courts of Record, wherein no protection, essoyne or wager of
law, shall be allowed for the defendaunt: the one moite of al such forfeit or
forfeitures to be to the use of his majesty and the other moyte thereof to yt
use of him or them that shall first sue and pursue the same with effect. And
that every person and persons, that have reared, or shall rear or keep, or
have fatted or shall fat or keep any such cattall, or sheep, to the intent to sell
the same, shall upon request made, sell the same at the price aforsaide, upon
pain of forfaiture for every such refusal twenty pounds, the same to be
recovered and levied in form aforesaid, and to suffer imprisonment at the
kings will and pleasure.

His highness also straightly charge and commands, al and every his
Justices of peace immediately after this proclamation published and proclaimed,
to assemble themselves, and to take order, by division, or otherwise, for the
good and perfect execution of this proclamation. And does further signifye to
his said Justices, that as he will well consider and advance their diligence,
and well doing in the premises: So will he severely and sharply punish their
negligence in contrary doings.

And for the better effect, sequel, and success of this proclamation, his
highness by thaduise of his most honorable counsel, has determined to
address, his special comissioners for the hearing and examination of the
defaultes and negligent doings of his said Justices in the premises, if any
hap to be so, as his highness may proceed to the correction and punishment of
such Justices offenders, as the importance of the case shall require

His maiestee also straightly charge and commands al and every his loving
subjects, that they ne any of them from hencefurth attempt to take from any
owner, any cattail or victual before mentioned against the will of such owner,
otherwise the^ is aforesaid, or by the delivery of the Justices of the peace
or some of them, upon pain of loss of al their goods and cattals, and to
suffer imprisonment during the kings pleasor.

God save the King.
RICHARDVS GRAFTON typographus Regius excudebat.

M.D.LI.

Cum priuilegio ad imprimendum solum.


