An Act for the repeal of certain Acts made in the time of king Edward the
sixth.
Forasmuch as by diverse and several Acts hereafter mentioned, as well the
divine service, and good administration of ye Sacraments, as diverse other
matters of religion (which we and our forefathers found in this Church of
England to us, left by the authority of the catholic Church) be partly
altered and in some part taken from us, and in place thereof new things
ymagined, and set forth by the said Acts, such as a feaw of singularity have
of them selves devised. Whereof has ensued amongst us in very short time
numbers of diverse and strange opinions, and diversities of sects, and thereby
grown great unquietness, and much discord, to the great disturbaunce of the
commonwealth of this realm, and in very short time like to grow to extreme
peril and utter confusion of the same, onles some remedy be in that behalf
provided. Which thing all true louinge and obedient subjects, ought, and are
bounden to forsee and provide to thuttermoost of their power.

In consideration whereof, be it enacted and establyshed by the Queen's hyghnes,
the Lords spiritual and temporal, and the commons in this same present
parliament assembled, and by thaucthority of the same, that an Act made in ye
parliament begone at Westmynster the fourth day of November in the first year
of the reygne of the late king Edward the syxt, and from thence continued to
the.xxiiii. day of December then next ensuynge, that is to say, in the first
session of the same parliament, entitled, and Act against such persons as
should irreverently speak against the Sacrament of the body and blood of
Christ, commonly called the Sacrament of the altar, and for the receauinge
thereof in both kinds. And also one other Act in the same session, which is
entitled, an Act for the election of Bishops, and what seals and styles they
and other spiritual persons exercisinge jurisdiction Ecclesiastical should
use. And also one other Act made in one other session of the said parliament,
holden upon prorogation at Westminster, the fourth day of November, in the
second year of the reygne of the said late king Edward the syxte, and there
continued and kept to the.xiiii. day of March in the third year of the said
late kings reign, entitled, an Act for the uniformity of service, and
administration of the Sacraments, throughout the realm. And also one other
Act made in the session last before mentioned, which is entitled, an Act to
take away all positive laws, made against the marriage of priests. And also
one other Act, made in one other session of the said parlyament, holden upon
prorogation at Westminster the fourth day of November, in the third year of
the raygne of the said late king Edward the syxte, and there continued, and
kept to the first day of February in the fourth year of his reygne, entitled,
an Act for thabolishyng and puttyng away of diverse books and images. And
also one other Act made in the same session last before mentioned, entitled,
an Act made for thordring of the Ecclesiastical ministres. And also one other
Act made in one other session of the said parlyament, holden upon prorogation
at Westminster the xxiii. day of January in the fyft year of the reygne of the
said late king Edward the syxte, and there continued and kept, till the.xv.
day of Apryl. in the sixth year of the reygne of the said late king,
entitled, an Act for the uniformity of common prayer, and the administration
of the Sacraments. And one other Act, made in the same last session,
entitled, an Act for the keeping of holy days and fasting days. And one
other Act made in the session last recited, entitled, an Act made for the
declaration of a Statute made for the marriage of priests, and for the
legittimation of their children* and every clause, sentence, branch, article,
and articles, mentioned, expressed, or contained in the said Estatutes, and in
every of them shall be from henceforth utterly repelled, void, adnichilate, and
of none effect, to all purposes, constructions, and intentes, any thing or
things, contained or specified in the said Estatutes, or any of them to the
contrary in any wise notwithstanding.

And be it further enacted by thaucthoritie aforesaid, that all such divine
service and administration of Sacraments, as were most comenly used in the
realm of England, in the last year of the raygne of our late Sovereign
Lord, king Henry theight, shall be from, and after the.xx. day of December, in
this present year of our Lord God, a thousand, five hundred, fyftie and
three, used and frequented through the hole realm of England, and al other the
Queen's Majesty's dominions. And that no other kind nor order of divine service,
nor administration of Sacraments, be after the said twenteth day of December,
used or ministered in any other manner, form, or degree within the said
realm of England, or other the Queen's dominions, then was most comenly used,
ministered, and frequented in the said last year of the raygne of the said
late king Henry theyght.

And be it further enacted by thauctoritie aforesaid, that no person shall be
impeched, or molested in body or goods, for using heretofore, or until the
said. xx. day of December, the divine service mentioned in the said Acts, or
any of them, nor for thusyng of the old divine service and administration of
Sacraments in such manner and form, as was used in ye church of England,
before the making of any of the said Acts.

God save the Queen.
Londini in aedibus Iohannis Cawodi Typographi Regiae excusum. Anno. M.D.LIII.

Cum priuilegio adimprimendum solum


