A Proclamacion, set furthe by the kings Majesty, with the advice of his
highness most honorable counsel, the. xvij: day of July, in the.v. year, of
his highness most prosperous reign, wherein diverse wholesome and profitable
laws, made against regrators, forstallers, and engrossers. etc. are mentioned
and recited
THe kings most royal maiestee, having perfect knowledge daily out and from
all parts of this his realm, that the great and excessive prices both of
Corn, Cattle, Butter, Chese and other victualles, necessary for men's
sustenaunce, for the most part grows by the gredy and insaciable covetous
desires and appetites of the Breders, Broggers, Engrossers, Grasiers,
Victuallers, and forstallers (minding only their own lucre, without respect of
the common wealth, to the great damage, empouerishing and disquieting of his
majesty's subjects) can not in respect of the office committed unto his
majesty of god, for the preservation of his people, but furthwith provide spedy
remedy for reformacion thereof. And therefore his Maiestee lets all manner his
subjects to understand that by the advice of his counsel, he purposes most
severely and straightly, to execute all such laws as have been heretofore,
most godly and holesomly made and ordained, against al such Breders, Broggars
Engrossers, Grasiers, Victuallers, Regrators and Forstallers, as well of
victualles, as of Merchandises and namely one old statute, made against
forstallers, the tenor whereof hereafter follows. No forstaller shall be suffered
to dwell in any town, the which for his lucre will make have to mete any
corn, fish, hering and other things, to be sold sometime by water, some time
by land, the which so taken, does imagine to sell it the more dear: Also they
that come to the merchantes strangers offering them to the sale of their ware,
and exhorting them to sell their ware more dear, then they did purpose to sell
it, and so by craft and engine, beguileth both the towns and the country.
The first time that he is thereof convict he shall be grievously ainerced, The
second time, he shall be put upon the pilory. The third time, he shall be put in
prison and make fine. The fourth time he shall be abiured, and banished the
town. And that shall be observed of al manner of forstallers, and of them, that
gene unto them counsel and aid. And it shall be inquired, if any Steward, or
Baylife, for any reward, did remit the judgment of the Pillory, or Tumbrell,
judged or of right to be judged. And further, where there was in the.xxv. year
of the reign of his majesty's most dear father, king Henry theight, a good
statute made against regrators and forstallers of fish, his majesty
commands that according to the form of thesaide estatute, that the
stewardes of the faires, of Sturbridge, S. Yues, and Ely, cause thesaide
estatute to be openly proclaimed, and red, within their limits, and that
likewise the Shiriffes of the counties of Essex, Suffolk, Norffolk and
Lincoln, and the Majors, and Bayliffes, of cities and tounes corporate, within
the same shires, shall before the last of July, next coming publishe and
cause to be proclaimed the said estatute, at convenient places. And where there
were in the last session of parliament, holden at westminster, in the.iiii.
year of his majesty's reign, good laws made as well against them that should
buy any manner of Oxen, Steres, Routes, Kyne, Heighfers, or Calves, otherwise
then in open faires, or markettes, (except it be for his own provision of
household, Teeme, or Deicie,) or that should sell the same again alive, in the
said fair, or merket, where the same cattle was bought, and against the
Butcher, that should buy any fat cattle, and sell the same again on live, as
also against such which use to buy butter, and chese, to sell again, (except
they sell the same by retaile in open shop fair or market, and not in gross,)
his majesty straightly charge and commands, all manner of his subjects, to
whom the same may apperteine, that they shall duly observe and keep, the good
intent, and meaning of all the said estatutes, and Laws, upon such peines and
penalties, as be contained in the same. And further his maiestee streightlye
charge and commands, all and singular his Maiestes Justices of peace,
Majors, Shiriffes, and other head officers, of every Shire, City, Boroughe, and
town corporat within this his majesty's realm, that they and every of the^,
within their limits to their uttermost power and habilite shall endeavor
themselves, with all diligence, from time to time, to se, and cause this his
highness proclamation, and laws, to be executed and obeyed, as they will enjoy
his majesty's favor, and aduoyde his indignation: That in case upon this
admonition, the gredy malice of covetous men, shall by proof appear to be
nothing amended, but to continue still in their corrupt intencions of disobeiyng
the laws, and empayring of the common wealth: His majesty as head of the same,
and of all his loving subjects, is resolved to provide in such wise for the
redress, and repression of such gredy disordinate enhauncers of prices, as
shall be much more sharp and penal, then any former law, or proclamation,
heretofore made or ordained has been,

God save the King.
RICHARDVS GRAFTON typographus Regius excudebat Mense Iulij. Anno. 1551.

Cum priuilegio ad imprimendum solum.


