A Proclamation, as well for restrainct of cariyng of Grain out of the Realm
and order of bringyng of the same to the markettes, as also for restraynct of
cariyng out of all kinds of victualles and certain other commodites of the
Realm, set forth by the kings Majesty, with thaduise of his highness
counsel, for reformacion of the excessive prices of the same, the.xx. of
October, the.iiij. year of his most noble reign.
WHere as at the parliament holden upon prorogacion at Westminster the.xv. day
of January in the.xxv. year of the Reign of our most dear father of famous
memory king Henry theight, it was ordained and enacted by authority of the
same parliament, that the lord Chauncellor of England, The lord Tresorer, The
lord President of the kings most honorable counsel, The lord Privy seal,
The lord Stuard, The lord Chamberlain, and all other Lords of the kings
counsel, The Tresorer and Comptroller of the kings most honorable House The
Chauncellor of the Duchy of Lancaster, The kings Justices of either Benche,
The Chauncellor, Chamberlains, under Tresorer and Barons of the kings
exchequer, or vii. of them at the least, Whereof the lord Chauncellor, The lord
Tresoret, The lord President of the kings Counsel, or the lord Privy Seal
to be one, should have power and authority from time to time as the cause
should requier to set and tax reasonable prises of al kinds of Chese, Butter,
Capones, Hens, Chekines and other kinds of Victualles necessary for men's
sustenaunce mentioned in the said act, How they should be sold in gross or
by retayle for relief of the kings subjects, And that after such prices
set and taxed in form aforesaid, Proclamacion should be made in the kings
name under the great Seal of thesaid prices in such parties of this Realm as
should be convenient for the same. And it was further enacted by thesaid
estatute that all Farmores, owners, Broggers and all other victuallers
whatsoever, having or keeping any of the kinds of victualles mentioned in
thesayd act, to thentent to sell, should sell the same to such the kings
subjects as will bye them, at such prices as should be set and taxed by thesaid
proclamacio^, upon ye peines to be expressed and limited in thesaid
proclamacio^, to be lost, forfaited and Levied to the kings use, in such wise
as by the said proclamacion should be declared. And further by the same act it
was provided that the same act or any thing therein contained should not be
hurtful to Majors Shiriffes, Bailiefes or other officers of Cities, Boroughes
or tounes corporate, nor to any person or persons or bodies politic having
authority to set prices of such victualles, or of any of them, but that they
and every of them might set prices thereof, as if that act had never ben had
or made. And it was also enacted by the same act, that no person or persons
oneles it were by licens under the kings great Seal, fromthensforth should carry
or convey or cause to be carried or conveyed any corn, Beoffes, Muttons,
Veales, Porkes or any other of the victualles aforsaid to any the parties
beyond the sea, except only for the victuallyng of the town of Calice,
Guisnes, Hammes and the matches of the same. And except for victuallyng of
Masters, Mariners and merchants Ships passing the seas. And also except
barelled Butter and meal to be carried to the parties of Iseland as has been
accustomed, upon pain of forfaityng of the value of the thing conveyed and
carried into the parties of beyond the sea contrary to the same act: The One
half thereof to thuse of our said sovereign lord the king, and thoder half
to the party that will sue for the same by bill, plaint, writ or informacion
in any of the kings Courts of record. In which suites the defendant shall
not wage his Law, nor any proteccion or essoine for him shall be allowed, as by
the same act more at large it may and does appear.

And forasmuch as diverse and sundry great complaints of inhau^sing of ye
prices of victualles, necessary for man's sustenaunce, and inespeciall of Corn,
Grain. Butter, and these be had and made not only to the kings most excellent
majesty, but also to his most honorable Counsailors, by reason that diverse his
subjects, and others upon their insatiable covetousness, minding and purposing
of their peruers minds to make great derth and scarcity, more the^ necessite
requires of corn, grain, beoffes, muttons, veales, porkes, butter, chese, and
other victualles, necessary for man's sustenance, not only by unlawful
engrossing, forstalling and regrating of the same, but also by unlawful
transporting and conueiyng the same victualles and other the premises into
sundry parties beyond the seas, contrary to thesaid statute, and contrary to
the kings maiestes Laws and Proclamations, in that behalf had and made, and
to the great hurt and peril of the co^mo^welth of this his realm: WHEREUPON
the kings most excellent majesty having a vigila^t and merciful eye and
respect toward his loving subjects, and willing and straightly charging his
said subjects and others fromhencefurth to enterprise no such offenses,
contrary to his Laws, Statutes or Proclamations upon the peines and
forfaitures contained in the same, and upon his high indignation and
displeasure, has according to the tenor of the said act willed and required
his honorable Counsalors named in the said act to setfurthe reasonable prices
of all kind of Corn, Grain, Butter and Chese, according to the tenor of the
said act. In consideracion whereof, the lord Chancelour of England, The Lord
Threasorer of England, the Lord President of the kings most honorable
Counsel, The Lord Privy Seal, The lord Chamberlein, and al other limited and
appoincted by thesaid act for taxing and setting the prises of al kind of
victualles mentioned in the said act, have by authority of the said act, set
and taxed reasonable prises of all kind of Greine, mentioned in the said act
to be sold in form following, That is to say, that from the feast of all
Saints next ensuing without delay all and singular person and persons,
having or keeping any of the kinds of Grain, Butter or chese within this realm
to the intent to sell, shall sell the same to such of the Kings Subjects as
will bie them at the prices hereafter mentioned, or under, and not above, that
is to say, white Wheat of the best sort, clean and sweet and not tailed, for
xiii s^. iiii d. the quarter and not above, and White Wheat of the second
sort, and red Wheat of the best sort, clean Sweet and not Tailed, for
xi.s^. the Quarter, and not above, and Graye Wheat of the best sort, clean
Sweet, and not Tailed, for.x.s^. the quarter, and not above. And all other
Wheat as well White, Read and Graye of the meanest sort not clean or tailed,
for viii.s^ the quarter, and not above. And that Malt clean, sweet and of the
best sort, shall be sold for.x s^. the Quarter, and not above, and Malt of the
second sort for viii.s^. the quarter, and not above. And Rye of the best,
cleanest, and swetest sort, for.vii.s^. the quarter, and not above. And Rye of
the second sort for vi.s^. the quarter, and not above. And Barley of the best
sort, clean and sweet, for.ix s^. the quarter, and not above, and Barley of
the second sort for.vii.s^. the quarter, and not above. Beans or Pease of the
best sort, clean, and sweet for.v s^. the quarter, and not above. And Beans
or Pease, of the second sort, for.iii.s^. viii.d the quarter and not above.
Otes of the best sort, clean, and sweet for.iiii.s^. the quarter, and not
above, accompting.viii. Busshelles to the quarter.

Provided always that in what place or county soever within this the kings
Realm of England or other his graces dominions, the Measure or Reysure shall
fortune to be more or less then is above expressed, that then the prices
shall be likewise taxed, limited and appointed according to.viii. Galones to
every Busshel of land measure, and not otherwise.

And that from thesaid feast of al Seintes, the pound of sweet butter not to be
sold above.i.d.ob. and barrelled Butter, of Essex, the pound, not to be sold to
any the kings Subjects, above. ob.di quam. and barrelled Butter of any other
parts not to be sold to the kings Subjects above. ob, quam. And Cheese of
Essex to be sold to the kings Subjects from Hallowmes next til the new
years Croppe. for. ob di. quam. and not above. And chese of other parties not
above. ob.quam. And in case any person or persons, by himself or by any
other by his assent or procureme^t shall sell or attempt to sell, any kind of
Grain, Butter, or Chese above the prices aforesaid contrary to thesaid act, and
this proclamation, that then the offender or offenders in that behaulf, shall
forfete and lose to the king.xiii.s^. iiii d. for every Busshel of any kind of
the corn or grains before mentioned to be sold, contrary to the tenoure and
effect of this proclamation, and upon peine of forfeiture of.ii.s. for every.
l. of Butter or Chese, to be sold contrary to the tenor and effect of this
proclamation, The motte of ye which forfeitures. the kings majesty's pleasure
is, that the first presentor or approuer that will sue for the same, shall have
the same moietie of his highness gift, And that for all and every such
forfeiture the king our sovereign Lord shall and may have his recovery and
remedy by informacion, bill, plaint or accion of debte in any of his highness
courts of Record, in which suit no essoin, protection, ne wager of law
shall be allowed.

AND to thentent this proclamacion may be put in good execution, the kings
majesty's pleasure by thaduise aforsaid is, yt the Justices of the Peace in
every Shire shall with all convenient speed after this proclamation made,
divide them selves, into hundredes, Rapes, and Wapentakes, according as
heretofore in other his highness affairs they have done, And that iii. or two
of them at the least within the limits of their division, shall with all
diligence repair to all Farms, Barnes, Stackes, Garners Sellers, Sollers,
Loftes, Wykes, Daties, Graunges and other houses within the precinct or limits
of their said division, and there shall, by all the ways and means they can,
view, search and try out by their good discrecions what quantity of kinds of
Corn, Grain, Butter and Chese, every person and persons have within the
precinct of the same their deuisio^, and after the certeinty thereof (as nere as
yt can) be known unto them, they shall allotte, appoint and allow to the
owner of thesaid Corn, Grain, Butter, and Chese, so by them found in Barnes,
Stackes, Garners, Granges, Wykes, Daryes, Loftes, Sellers, Solers and other
houses, sufficient and competent Grain, Butter and Chese, for the finding and
maintenance of his or their houses and family, until the xx. day of Septembre
now next coming and also for necessary sede corn to be employed on his or
their ground, farm or farms, to be sowe^ before the.xx. day of June now next
coming, And for ye overplus of the said corn, Grain, Butter and Chese, found
in Barnes Stackes and other houses aforesaid, thesaid Justices shall by virtue
hereof have authority to charge and command in our name and behalf upon peine
of inprisonment the said owner and owners, to bring to the markettes next
adjoining such porcio^ of the same overplus as they thesaid Justices shall think
mete and requisite. And in such sort as by their discresions shall be thought
mete and convenient, there to be sold according to the rate of prices, before
limited by this proclamation. And his highness pleasure also is, that the
Justices, so viewing, and seeing the premises as before, shall after the view
taken by their writing, signify unto the chief officer or officers of the
market or Marketes, fair or faires, the just proportion of all such kind of
Grain, as they shall so apoint to the same, and also what kind of Grain it is,
to thentent the same may be sold accordingly.

Provided always, that incase any of thesaid owners do sell such portion or
part of the portion of the Corn, Grain, Butter or Chese as he or they shall be
so appointed to bring to the Market, to any his neighbors being householders or
common laborers, having not competent, Grain, Butter nor Chese, for his or
their family and for the only Sustenance and maintenance of himself, his house
and family, that then the same owner and owners shall be discharged from the
bringing of thesaid porcio^ to the next Market so to his neighbor sold in form
aforesaid.

AND incase any Fermor or Fermours, owner or owners, shall refuse or do not
bring to the merkettes his or their Corn, Grain, Butter or Chese according to
theffect of this proclamation, or as he or they shall be appointed by thesaid
Justices, That then every such offender, shall for every such default, suffer
imprisonment during the kings pleasure. And if it shall happen any variance or
dought to arise for the goodness or baseness of any of the kinds of grains
aforesaid, Then the same shall be tried and finally judged by any two justices of
ye peace, within the same shire, or by the Mayor, Bailief, or other head officer
with the two constables, or one of them of the town, parish, village, Fayer or
Market, where the said Grain shall be put to sale or offered to be sold.

AND furthermore the kings majesty, of his Authority and power royal,
straightly charge and commands al and singular his subjects of what estate
or degree so ever he or they be, yt they ne any of the^ from hensfurth,
transport Ship or carry, over the Seas, out of this his highness Realm of
England or any other his Graces dominions perteining to the same, or into the
Realm of Scotland, or else where into any other foreign Realms, or contries,
willingly there to make port sale, of any Wheat, Malt, Rye. Barley, pease
Beans, Ootes, Mustardsede or any other kind of Grain, or the meals of any of
the same or any Bieffes, Muttons, Veales, Chese, Butter, Tallow, Candle, Beer,
Ale, Bread, Biscuit, Lether, Salt Hides, Wood, Coals, Wool, Felles, or any
other kind of victual, upon peine to forfet the thing so transported or
conveyed, and ferther to incur the danger, peines and forfetures of the
kings laws and statutes in that behalf mentioned and provided, any license,
or dispensacio^ to the contrary in any wise notwithstanding

Provided also that all and every of the kings highness said Subjects, borne
within this Realm by virtue and authority of the Kings Letters Patentes may
carry over and transporte any of the kinds of commodities aforesaid, for the
necessary victualling and furnishing of Callice, Guisnes, Hammes, Ryce bancke,
and the marches of the same, this proclamation notwithstanding, So that by
color thereof, the said kinds of commodities ne any of them be not in other
places bestowed or employed contrary to the true intent and meaning of this
proclamation.

Provided also that it shall be leful for all manner of persons as well marchantes as
other having good and lauful occasion to repair to the sees, to furnish their
ships and vessels with necessary provision of victual for the same and not
otherwise, this proclamation or any thing therein contained to the contrary
notwithstanding.

Provided always that all Brewers, and Bakers, may bie all and every the said
kinds of Grains and the Meals of the same, so that they convert the same, so
by them bought, or to be bought, into bread and drink to be sold at reasonable
prices according to the ancient estatutes and laws of this realm, or one of
them.

Provided also that all and every Inn kepers may sell and utter in their Iunes
or houses, Beans Pease and Otes to such as be or shall be there gestes and
shall be Lodged with them or any of them, so that they sell the same at reasonable
and convenient prices, according to the laws and statutes of this Realm.

Provided also that al baggers and common cariers of grayn may bye and sell any
of the said grains, so that the same be sold to any Bakers, Bruers. Inholders
or in open Market, according to the tenor and effect of this proclamacion,
forseing always that thesaid Baggers and common cariers ne any other to their
use have at any one time of their own in their possession or in the possession
of any others to their use above the noumber of.xx. quarters of any one of the
kinds of grain aforsaid, over and above the grain and corn that he carries
to the market to be sold from market day to market day, taking for the carriage
of the same grain to the market such like gain and advantage as heretofore
they have used for the same carriage.

AND further the kings Majesty most straightly charge and commands al
and every his subjects of what degree soever he or they be, that in no wise any
of them upon his or their duty of allegeaunce meddle or enterprice to put any
article or clause of this proclamacion in execucion by color or pretense of
the same, but only ye Justices of peace or such other as have especial
authority by this present proclamacio^.

AND we considering the premises to be for the welthe and commodity of this
our Realm, will and command all Shirifes of our county, Majors and
Bailiefes of every City and borough within this our Realm, within vi. days
next after the receipte of this our proclamacio^, yt he or they with all speed
shall proclaim the premises in all market towns within their limittes, and
that all manner out subjects shall obey the same, upon pain to incur our
indignacion and displeasure. And this proclamacion to continue during our
pleasoure.

God save the King
RICHARDVS GRAFTON typographus Regius excudebat. M. D. L.

Cum priuilegio ad imprimendum solum


