By the King and the Queen,
FOrasmuch as the king and Queen's Majesty's, have perfect intellygence, that
as well Strangers resortyng hither, as their highness natural subjects, have
now of late for their great gain and lucre, not only used to melte the moneys
and coygnes, of this Realm, but also to buy and sell the same monyes, and
coignes, at and for higher pyrses, and values, then the same be rated, valued
and curraunte, by the laws, Statutes, and proclamations of this Realm.
Whereby great quantities of the said monyes and coygnes, has been, and are by
diverse persons, in secret manner, daily transported, carried and conveyed out
of this Realm, and great quantytie thereof molten, to the great defraudyng of
their Majesty's Subjects, dyminyshynge of their hyghnes money and coygne, and
to yt no little impouerishyng of the Realm, and more is like daily to be,
unless some spedy remedy be provided in that behalf. Their Majesty's
therefore, not only tenderyng the wealth of this their said Realm, and
their loving subjects, of the same, but also to provide remedy herein by this
their highness proclamation, Strayghtly charge and command that no manner of
person or persons, whatsoever he or they be, do from henceforth buy or sell
any manner of money or coigne, of this Realm, or curraunt within the same, by
what name so ever it be called, at or for any other price or value, then the
same is valued, rated, and curraunt by the laws, statutes, or proclamations of
this Realm, nor melte any of the said monyes, or coygnes, upon pain of their
Majesty's indignation, and high displeasure. And that as well the melter as the
buyer and seller of such monye or coygne, shall forfeyte the same monye and
coygne, so boughte, sold, or melted, and to suffer imprysonment of his or
their bodies, at their highness will and pleasure, and further to incur such
pains penalties and forfeytures, as be in such case by the laws and statutes
of this Realm appointed and provided. And to the intent, that such as would go
about to search and find out any of the offenses aforesaid, may be the
better incoraged to do the same, their Majesty's will and pleasure is, that
whosoever shall find out and dysclose any of the said offenses, or shall make
seasoure of any such monye, or coygne, bought sold, or molten, contrary to the
tenor of this proclamation, or the laws or statutes of this Realm, in that
case made and provided, and the same shall lawfully and duelye prove, shall
have the hole penaltye and forfeyture of every such offense, given assigned or
lymited, by any the laws, or statutes aforesaid, which should or ought to
accrue to their Majesty's. Provided that it shall be lawefull to any person, to
sell the coignes of this Realm, or any other coigne into any of the kings
and Queen's Majesty's myntes, upon such pryses as their Majesty's there do
give, And thoffycers there may buy the same, so to melte and coygne them to
their hyghnes use, any thing in this present Proclamation notwithstanding. And
moreover their Majesty's, do strayghtly charge and command al and synguler
their Justices of peace, Mayiors, Sheryffes, Baylyffes, Constables, and all
other their hyghnes officers, and mynysters, to put as well this proclamation,
as all such good acts, and statutes in execution, as heretofore have been made
touching the buying and selling, and meltyng of the kings and Queen's Majesty's
coygne, of this Realm. Given at our manner of Saint James, the.xxvii. day of
Apryll.

God save the King and the Queen.
Excusum Londini in aedibus Iohannis Cawodi, Typographi Regiae Maiestatis.
Anno. M. D. L. VI. Cum priuilegio.


