By the Queen,
THe Queen's highness well remembrynge what great inconvenience and dangers have
grown to this her hyghnes realm in time past thorough the diversity of
opinions, in questions of religion, and hearing also that now of late, since
the beginning of her most graciouse reygne, the same contentions be again
much renewed through certain false and untrue reports and eumors spredde by
some light and evil disposed persons, has thought good to do to understand
to all her hyghnes most loving and obedient subjects, her most gracious
pleasure, in manner and form following.

FIRST her majesty being presently by thonely goodness of God settled in her
just possession of thimperiall crown of this realm, and other dominions
thereunto belonging, can not now hyde that religion (which GOD and the world
knows the has ever professed from her infancy hitherto) which as her
majesty is minded to observe and maynteyne for her self by gods grace during
her time, so does her highness much desire, and would be glad the same were
of all her subjects quietly and charitablye embraced. And yet she does
signifye unto all her majesty's said louinge subjects, that of her most
gracious disposition and clemency, her highness myndeth not to compel any her
said subjects thereunto, unto such time as further order by common assent
may be taken therein. Forbyddinge nevertheless, all her subjects of all
degrees, at their perils, to move sedicions, or to stir unquietness in her
people by interpretyng the laws of this realm after their brains and
fancies, but quietly to continue for the time, till asbefore is said further
order may be taken. And therefore wylleth and streyghtly charge and
commands all her said good loving subjects, to live togethers in quiet
sort, and christian charity, leaving those new found deuelishe terms of
Papyste or Heretic, and such like, and applyenge their whole ears, study,
and travail, to live in the fear of God, exercising their conuersations in
such charitable and godly doing, as their lives may in deed express that
great hunger and thyrst of Gods glory and holy word, which by rash talk
and words many have pretended, and in so doing, as they shall best please
GOD, and live without danger of the laws, and maynteyne the tranquillite of
the realm, whereof her highness shall be most glad: so yfanye man shall
rashelye presume to make any assembles of people, or at any public assembles
or otherwise, shall go about to stir the people to disorder, or disquiet,
she myndeth according to her duetye, to see the same most severely reformed
and punyshed, according to her hygnesse laws.

AND furthermore, forasmuch also as it is well known, that sedition and false
rumors have been nouryshed and maynteyned in this realm, by the subteltye and
malice of some evil disposed persons, which take upon them without
sufficient authority, to preach, and to interpret the word of GOD, after
their own brain, in churches and other places, both public and pryuate. And
also by playinge of Interludes and pryntynge of false fond books, ballettes,
rymes, and other lewd treatises in the english tongue, concerning doctrine in
matters now in question and controuersye, touching the high points and
mysteries of christen religion, which books, ballettes, rymes, and treatises
are chiefly by the Prynters and Stacioners set out to sale to her graces
subjects, of an evil zeal, for lucre and covetous of vile gain. Her highness
therefore strayghtly charge and commands all and every her said subjects,
of whatsoever state, condition, or degree they be, that none of them presume
from henceforth to preach, or by way of reading in Churches, or other
public or pryuate places (except in the schools of the universities) to
interpret or teach any scriptures, or any manner points of doctrine
concerning religion. Neither also to prynte any books, matter, ballet, ryme,
interlude, process or treatise nor to play any interlude, except they have
her graces special license in writynge for the same, upon pain to incur her
highness indignation and displeasure.

AND her highness also further strayghtly charge and commands all and
every her said subjects, that none of them of their own pryuate authority,
do presume to punyshe, or to rise against any offendour in the causes above
said, or any other offendour in words or deeds in the late rebellion
committed by the Duke of Northumberlande, or his accomplices, or to seize any of
their goods, or violentlye to use any such offendour by strykynge, or
imprysoninge, or threatynge the same, but wholly to refer the punishment of
all such offenders unto her highness, and her public authority, whereof her
majesty myndeth to see due punishment according to the order of her highness
laws. Nevertheless as her highness myndeth not hereby to restreyn and discourage
any of her louinge subjects, to give from time to time true information
against any such offenders in the causes abouesayde, unto her grace, or her
counsel, for the punishment of every such offendour, according to theffecte
of her highness laws provided in that part. So her said highness exhorts and
strayghtly charge her said subjects to observe her commandment and
pleasure in every part aforesaid, as they will avoid her highness said
indignation, and most greuouse displeasure. The severity and rygour whereof,
as her highness shall be most sorye to have cause to put the same in execution:
so does she utterly determine not to permytte such unlawful and rebelliouse
doings of her subjects (whereof may ensue the danger of her royal estate) to
remain unpunished, but to see her said laws, touching these points, to be
thoroughly executed, which extremities she trusts all her said loving
subjects will forsee, dread, and avoid accordinglye.

HER said highness strayghtely chargynge and commaundinge all Mayors,
Sheryffes, Justices of peace, Bayliffes, Constables, and all other public
officers and ministers, diligently to see to the observing and executynge of
her said commandments, and pleasure, and to apprehende all such as shall
wylfully offend in this part, committinge the same to the next gaile, there
to remain without bail or maynepryse, till upon certificate made to her
highness, or her pryuye counsel, of their names and doings, and upon
examination had of their offenses, some further order shall be taken for their
punishment, to the example of others, according to theffecte and tenor of the
laws aforesaid.

Given at our manor of Rychemonde, the.xviii. of August. In the first year
of our most prosperous reygne.
God save the Queen.
Londini in aedibus Iohannis Cawodi Typographi Reginae excusum. Anno. M.D.LIII.

Cum priuilegio ad imprimendum solum.


