By the Queen. A Proclamation for pardon to them of Tindale and Riddesdale.
WHEREAS the Queens most excellent Majesty has been informed by her right
trusty and right entirely beloved Cousin the Duke of Norfolk, whyleste he was
her Majesty's Lieuetenant general in the North, and also by her right trusty
and well-beloved the Lord Gray of Wylton, whilst he was Warden general of the
East and middle Marches against Scotland, that there were and be diverse of her
subjects within the County of Northumberland, in the parties of Tindale and
Riddesdale and other parts thereto adjoining, that have of long time ben
culpable and guyltie of sundry crimes for the which the said Lieuetenant
general in some part, by order of the laws of the Realm, did cause
execution to be made in the month of March last, And finding the number of the
offenders and their repentance very large and great: Was moved on her
Majesty's behalf to have commiseration and so to stay further prosecution
against them, until her Majesty's pleasure were known and the repentance and
submission of the said offenders notified.

HEREUPON her Majesty being inclinable to show mercy toward such as show
themselves ready to live like true subjects in the peace of God and the Realm,
Is pleased that by this her Proclamation it be notified, to all manner of
persons inhabitants within the said County of Northumberland, in the parts of
Tindale and Riddesdale, that her Majesty does acquit and pardon all such
persons of the same parts as have committed any offense worthy death before
the said month of March, and not such as have committed any offense worthy
death since the said month of March.

AND for the more certainty of the persons that shall be pardoned: Her
Majesty wills and commands that whosoever means or will take any
Commodity of this her Majesty's pardon, shall repair to the Lord Chancellor
or keeper of the great Seal of England, with certificate under the hand and
Seal of the said Duke of Northfolke, or of the Lord Gray of Wylton, or of the
Warden of the middle or East marches, containing the name and surname of the
party, with an note of such offenses as for the which the party will require
his pardon, and a testimony that he has found surety to be of good
behavior. And thereupon the said Lord Chancellor or keeper of the great
Seal, shall grant to such person a sufficient pardon under the great Seal of
England, excepting all high treasons to the person of her Majesty, and wylfull
murders. And the same persons shall pay only such fees for the same, as were
paid for pardons obtained at her Majesty's Coronation, and no greater.

PROVIDED always that no person shall have any benefit by force of this
Proclamation, but such as shall sue forth a pardon in form aforesaid before
the last day of Hyllary term next.

Anno 1560 4 Nouembris the second year of her Majesty's reign.

God save the Queen.

Imprinted at London in Powles Churchyard, by Richard Judge, and John Cawood,
Printers to the Queens Majesty.

Cum priuilegio Regiae Maiestatis.


