By the Queen.
THe Queen's Majesty being in good and perfect peace with all Princes and
Countries, and meaning, with the assistaunce of almighty God, to continue in
the same: Has thought convenient, according to the treatise of peace betwixt
her Majesty and other Princes her neighbors, for auoydyng of sundry offenses
upon the Seas, to notify to her Subjects certain Articles to be by them
observed, the like whereof, her Majesty understands are meant for the same
purpose to be published and observed on the part of the kings and princes her
neighbors.

First her Majesty strayghtly commands, that all manner of ships and (...)
armed for the war, and being now upon the Seas, shall with all speed
return from the Seas, and disarme themselves, except they be such as have
already given good and sufficient suertie not to offend any of the Subjects of
the Kings and Princes with whom her Majesty is in amity, upon pain to be
ac^^^pted as breakers of the common peace, and to be punyshed with all
severity.

Secondly, that no manner of ships or vessels be suffered from henceforth to
go out of any Port or Creek, without good and sufficient suertie first given
in the Court of the Admiraltie, or to the principal officers of the Ports,
according to the ancient good order heretofore used, for not offendyng of any
manner of person being in peace with her Majesty, except such vessels as
shall be prepared by Merchants, well known only for the exercisyng of
marchaundizes, or for fysshyng, or to make ordinary passages of persons, or
such as ^^albe specially appointed by her Majesty (if cause shall so require)
to be armed and pass to the Seas, for clearyng of the same from pirates or
rouers, upon pain that whatsoever officers of any Ports shall suffer or aid
any manner of person to do to the contrary, the same officers or ministers to be
taken as breakers of the common peace, and the offenders them selves to be
used as pirates.

Thirdly, her Majesty strayghtly charge and commands, that no manner
person shall receive directly or indirectly, any manner of pirates or rouers
upon the Seas, except it be without fraud to arrest and apprehende them, nor
that they shall succor any of them with victuals, money, apparel, for them
selves or their vessels, or any other thing whatsoever, upon pain to be
taken, used, and punyshed as abbettours and maynteyners of the said pirates.
And for the relief of such as shall chance to be robbed or spoiled by any
Pirates, and for the recovery of their goods, with the least charges, and in
most spedy manner that may (...) Her Majesty does order and command, that
where any pirates or rouers upon the Sea, shall come into any Port or Creek,
that there upon the first arryuall of them, arrest shall be made forthwith of the
persons ves^elles and goods, and likewise a perfect Inuentory of the same
goods, with their marks, qualities, and quantities. Of all which there
shall be, by the officers of the Port where the said Pirates shall aryue, (...)
unto them at the least five or six persons mete to be witnesses) due
certificat made under the hands (...) common seals of the said officers, and
subscribed by the hands or marks of the said witnesses, and (...) same so in
good form made and sealed, shall be closed up and sent the next day after the
arrest made, without delay, by the officers of the port which have made the
arrest, to the judge of the Admiraltie, or to his deputy, resident in the
City of London, conteynyng therein the time and place of the said arrest. And
the said Judge or his deputy shall receive the same, taking an oath of the
messenger that he has made neither alteration nor disclosyng of the said
certificat. And shall further cause the same certificat to be safely kept, to
^^^nde that such persons as shall come to complain and seek for restitution,
may exhibit to the said Judge or his deputy, their proves of their claymes,
and so thereafter as it shall seem probable that the goods do ^^long to the
complaynantes, the same to be sent to the places where their goods shall be, to
recover the ^ame by order of law, as the proves shall fall out. And the said
Judge or his deputy, shall reasonably and ^auourably assesse and give order
what the parties spoiled shall pay for the charges of bryngyng the said
cer^ificat, having thereof before taken knowledge of the same by the messenger.
And further it is ordered, for auoydyng of certain unlawful exactions,
whereof complayntes have been lately made, that no manner of ^fficer* nor other
person, shall have any allowaunce made unto them, by retaynyng to them selves
of any of ^he goods and marchaundizes taken, but only in ready money for their
charges or duties for their labors or any other things done for the recovery
or preservation of the said goods. Finally to avoid certain frauds whereof
complaynt has also ben made of officers and others, seasyng the goods brought
in by pirates, and sellyng of them spedely under their valor, for their own
lucre: Her Majesty orders and straightlye commands, that no manner of
person be suffered to make price or sale, or to disperse abroad any part of the
wares or commodities that shall be brought to any ports by any pirates or
rouers, or by any other that shall have taken them upon the Sea from any
pirates or rouers, during the space of.vi. months, from the time that the
same wares and commodities shall be so brought into the port, upon pain that
whosoever shall within the said space do the contrary, shall be taken and
ordered as a fautour of the said piracye, except it shall be in such cases as
the said wares or some part thereof, shall be without fraud judged by the
officers of the port, with the consent of.iiii. or.vi. other honest persons of
good behavior and understanding, to be of such nature as they cannot be
preserved so long time without corruption or notoryous detryment: In which
case, the same shall be prised in the next market place if any be near, or else
in some other open place, by the oaths of.vi. honest descrete persons at the
least, and so after open proclamation made in three several places of the
said port, to be put to sale within twelve hours after the last proclamation,
to the best price that can be obtained for the same. And that good sureties be
given to the head officers of the port, for the aunsweryng of as much in value
to such persons as shall afterward make title and proves to the same, upon the
said title approved good by order of law: of which sureties the said officers
shall take good regard, that therein be no fraud nor deceit used, as they
will answer thereunto. And for all other good means to withstand the
offenses upon the Seas, or to make spedy and favorable administration of
Justice to al manner of persons that shall make pursuit therefore: Her Majesty
gives straight charge, and therewith also requires all manner her officers,
ministers, and good subjects, to have regard to the execution of all other
ancient laws and orders heretofore made, devised, or used to this intent, and
them to reuyue and put in execution as they shall se cause, and as they will
answer if they shall be charged with the contrary: Wherein her Majesty
intends heareafter to use some severity in the favor of Justice, and for
the satisfaction of her Alyes and confederates, of whom she is promised for her
Subjects, to have the like favor to all purposes and intentes.

Yeuen at Her Majesty's Manor of Enfield the last day of July. 1564. in
the.vi. year of her hyghnes reign.
God save the Queen.
Imprinted at London in Powles Churchyard by Richard Judge and John Cawood,
Printers to the Queen's Majesty. Anno. 1564. Mense Iulii.

Cum priuilegio Regiae Maiestatis.


