By the Queen.
A Proclamation against the deceiptfull winding and folding of Wools.
FOR reformation and redress of many deceits and falsehoods used and practiced
in winding and folding of Wooles: The Queens most royal Majesty by the advice of her most honorable Counsel straightly charge and commands that
no manner of person or persons, whatsoever he or they be, at any time hereafter,
go about or take upon him or them to wind or fold any manner of wooles in
any Country, where any end wooles are accustomed to be wrought or in the
Counties of Lincoln Licester, or Rutland before he or they shall be admitted
and allowed by the Master and Wardens of the Company and fellowship of the
Woolmen of the City of London, or one of them for the time being, or before
the Mayor of the Staple of Boston for the time being, for the woolles of the
grothe of the Counties of Lincoln, Leicester, and Rutland aforesaid, by
thaduise of a sworn Packer. And that every person or persons so allowed and
admitted for an able and lawful workman or workmen in form aforesaid shall
have a Testimonial or Certificate of his allowance and admittance under the
seal of the Mayor of the Staple at Westminster for the time being or of the
Mayor of the Staple of Boston for the time being, for the Wool of the growing
of the Counties aforesaid. And that none of the said persons so allowed and
admitted, or that shall be so allowed and admitted, shall go about or take
upon him or them to wind or fold any woolles, before he or they have taken a
corporal oath before one of the said Majors for the time being according to
the intent above limited, that he or they shall truly and justly without
deceit wyn de or fold all and singular such Wool or Woolles as he or they
shall take upon him or them, to wynd or fold, ne shall use any deceit, craft,
fraud, or guyle therein, upon pain that every person which shall take upon him
to wynd or fold any manner of Wooles being not admitted and sworn as is
aforesaid, shall suffer imprisonment by the space of x. days and to be set
upon the Pillorie in the next Market town, with a fleece of Wool hanging
about his neck.

And her Majesty by the assent aforesaid further straightly charge and
commands that no grower, breeder, brogger or gatherer of any end Wooles or
other Wooles within the Counties aforenamed shall at any time hereafter set on
work any Woolfolder or Woolwynder to fold or wynd his or their Wool or
Woolles, unless the said Woolfolder or Woolwinder, bring with him or them a
Testimonial or Certificate under the Seal of the said Mayor of the Staple of
Westminster, for the time being, or the Mayor of the Staple of Boston, for the
time being in form as is aforesaid, testifiyng him or them, to be sworn and
admitted for an able workman to fold and to wynd Wooles in manner and form
as is aforesaid, upon pain of imprisonment and fine at the Queens Majesty's
pleasure.

And further whereby an Act made in the xxiii. year of the reign of her
Majesty's most dear father, King Henry theight yet standing in force it was
enacted that no manner of person do wind or cause to be wound any fleece of
Wool, not being sufficiently riuered or washed, ne wind or cause to be wound
in any fleece any deceiuable thing whereby the fleece may be the more weighty
to the deceit and loss of the buyer, upon pain the seller of such deceitful
Woolles to for faite for every such fleece vi. d. Her Majesty being informed
that notwithstanding the said good Act much deceit is used in washing winding
and folding of Woolles, does straightly charge and command all and every her
Subjects to observe the true meaning of the said Act, upon pain of forfeiture
of the penalties therein contained and as they will avoid her Highness further
displeasure: And for the avoiding and eschewing of further craft and deceit
now of late used. The Queens most royal Majesty with thaduise aforesaid
straightly charge and commands, that from henceforth no grower or breeder
of Woolles whatsoever he or they be, shall permit and suffer his or their
sheep being washed and dried again ready to be shorn, to go above v. or vi.
days unshorn or vnclipped if the weather be dry, upon pain of imprisonment
and fine at the Queens Majesty's pleasure.

And further her Majesty by the thaduise aforesaid straghtly charge and
commands all and every Justice of Peace, Majors, Sheriffs Bailiffes and all
other officers and ministers as they will avoid her Highness displeasure, and
answer to the contrary at their perils, that they and every of them cause
every such offender and offenders to be punished for such offense or offenses
according as is before expressed and declared.

Given at our manor of Grenewich, the x. of August, in the fourth year of Our
reign. Anno M. D. Lxij. God save the Queen.
Imprinted at London in Powles Churchyard by Richard Judge and John Cawood,
Printers to the Queens Majesty.

Cum priuilegio Regiae Maiestatis.


