By the Queen.
THe Queens Majesty understands, that now of late since the base and copper
moneys of this Realm have (to the great honor of the same) been altered into
fine silver moneys, by reason that a great part of the said base moneys were
rated at sundry small values, and that the greateste quantity of the fine
silver moneys now lately coined, has been in great pieces of shyllinges, and
but a small quantity in grotes and pence, or halfpence, in respect of haste
and expedicion to avoid the base moneys: There is risen great anoyaunce
amongst the poorer sort of her subjects, for lack of small moneys of fine
silver. Whereupon her Majesty having a perpetual care from time to time, and
from one degree to another, to relieve the common hurtes or griefs of her
subjects, as they may be perceived: has presently ordered, that in her
Myntes no more pieces of shyllynges should be coined, but that beside the
pieces of grotes, halfgrotes, and pence, there shall be immediately coined in fine
sterlyng moneys, half shyllynges of six pence, quarter shyllynges of three
pence the piece, and a half piece thereof called three halfpence. And because
a halfpeny cannot be made of such finenesse to bear any convenient bulk, an
other small piece shall also be coined of three farthynges. All which pieces
her Majesty assures her subjects shall be of mere fine starling silver. And
whatsoever may be reported to the contrary (as percase has been, though most
falsely and slanderously of the money already coined, as of late has been
notoriously proved:) Her Majesty lets them all to understand, that she
never entendeth (Gods grace assistyng her) to leese the fruicte of so famous an
act, by abasyng of the coin of this Realm, which she found to be for the
more part copper, and has now recovered it to be as fine, or rather finer
sterlyng silver, then ever it was in this Realm by the space of these two
hundred years and more, a matter worth markyng and memory. The French Crown.
The French Crown.


And further, her Majesty understanding what quantities of forrayne coins of
gold and silver be here in this Realm received of the subjects upon far
greatter values then they be worth, and that nor value certain can be set
upon them, by reason the forrayne standards of those moneys be so commonly
changed for gain, and so easily counterfayted: By which means the subjects
receyuyng the same, be daily greater losers then they commonly can understand,
either in delyueryng money or wares for the same: Has thought meet strayghtly
to command and charge her subjects, that from henceforth they nether pay nor
receive any manner of coins forrayne of gold or silver, as, and in the name of
current money, saving only the French crown, and the Flemyshe or Burgondion
crown: the Printes whereof are (for better knowledge) in the margent of this
Proclamacion plainly set forth, to be current at the values lately limited
in a former Proclamacion, dated in October the second year of her Majesty's
reign. But whosoever by any means shall have any manner forrayne coins of
gold or silver: the same shall from time to time have at the tower of London,
fully as much money in gold or silver of the fine coins of this Realm, as
the same shall hold in gold or silver. (...) or Burgondion crown.
The English Angel.


(...), that of late a forreyne piece of gold printed like (...) into this
Realm, and is paid for ten shyllynges of (...). And for demonstracion of the
error that may be (...) betwixt the Angel of England, and that other: the
(...) of both be also in this margent. By example whereof it is to be seen
what great loss has and might come to this Realm by common allowaunce of
such forrayne moneys in paymetes. Of these things her Majesty has thought
meet to warn all her subjects, least by greediness and error, they enter
into greater loss then they would or ought to do. (...)



Yeuen at her Majesty's Manor of Saint James the.xv. of November, the third
year of her Majesty's most prosperous reign.

God save the Queen.
Imprinted at London in Powles Church yard by Richard Judge and John Cawood,
Printers to the Queen's Majesty.

Cum priuilegio Regiae Maiestatis.


