By the Queen,
THE Queens Majesty is presently given to understand of some ill disposed
persons, who partly to move misliking amongst the common and meaner sort of her
loving people, partly of covetousness, to enhaunce the pryces of Corn, have of
late secretly spread abroad in Markettes and other places, that the pryces do
rise, and are like daily to increase, by reason that certain persons have
bought some quantities of grain to her Majesty's use in sundry countries: And
that also her Majesty means to grant to some about her. license to carry
Corn out of the Realm. Upon which rumors being maliciouslye spread, it may in
deed happen, that although there be no scarcity in the Realm (thanked be
almighty God) yet thereby, the covetousness of (...) have either of their own
store, or by unlawful bargaynes engrossed into their hands, great quantity
(...) of grain, will take occasions to inhaunce the pryses thereof without
necessary cause, to the detriment (...) of the multitude which have lack.
Therefore her Majesty myndyng to prevent the inconveniences (...) arise, does
strayghtly charge and command all manner of persons, and specially such as
have go(...)ettes, to apprehende and commit to prison, such as do or shall
utter and sprede abroad any such (...) dearth or offense amongst her good
subjects. And secondly, her Majesty wylleth all her good (...) to understand
for a truth, that she has no meaning to do, or suffer any thing to be done,
whereby any (...) should rise amongst her people, neither has she granted
license to any person about her, to carry (...) of grain, and therefore if any
be so named of evil intent, the same is also misused. And as to (...) or
buying of any grain by any of her ministers in her Majesty's name, other then
has been ordina(...) (...) for her household, and her garrisons upon the
frontures, she is pleased, that the truth of her good (...) understand,
which was this. Having sundry earnest requests made to her Majesty, by
diverse of (...) belongyng to the king of Spain her hyghnes good brother in the
low Countries, to have license (...) and carrying out of certain quantity of
Wheat, and other grain for their necessity: Her Majesty ^^^^^^t best,
neither fully to grant, nor flatly to deny the same, until it might be first
understand, how the (...) might be done without hurt to her own Country.
And therefore first order was given to certain of her (...), to prove at what
pryces certain several quantities of grain in sundry Countries, might be
bought (...) ready money, without vsyng any other means, then commonly is used
betwixt subject and subject, meaning if it (...) appear, that a convenient
quantity might be provided at reasonable pryses, and without enhaunsyng of
(...) other damage to the Realm, then her Majesty would gratify her
neighbors therewith, in like sort as (...) Realm has been oftentimes of late
years, from the other parts beyond the seas, in time of scarcity here. (...)
in that manner, her Majesty thought better to make a proffe by her own
ministers, what might be reasona(...) provided, rather then to permit
strangers and their factours, to travail abroad in the Countries, (...) both
the pryses should be disordered, and yet they not satisfied. Nevertheless,
considering it appears, (...) number of covetous men, having engrossed into
their hands in sundry Counties of the Realm, and speci(...) (...) to the sea
coasts, great quantities of all manner of grain, specially of such as serve
for bread and drink, (...) pretense of this her Majesty's good and loving
intention, through spreadyng of false rumors, threatened a (...) and by
forbearyng to bring their Corn to the Markettes as they were accustomed, have
given some color (...) and so the pryses be grown suddenly very great, and not
to be well endured, nor such as can bear the sending (...) any grain out of
the Realm, without occasion of great inconvenience to the multitude of the
meaner sort.

For help whereof, and for the tender favor which her Majesty bears
toward her loving subjects, whom (...) most touches: Her Majesty has
given order to her ministers, in respect of the greatness of the pryses (...)
are, to forbear from the transportation over the Seas of the said grain, and
to disperse it among her (...) people. And does most strayghtly charge and
command, that no manner of grain shall be carried out of the Realm, by any
manner person English or stranger.

And further, that due search be made immediately in all places, what
quantities of Corn has been bought (...) manner of person, by way of
engrossing, and to extend, as reason is, her laws against them to the
uttermost, (...) all others that by (...) or otherwise by forestallyng or
regratyng, or by vnordinat^ keeping of grain, (...) occasion to enhaunce the
pryces thereof, as of late they have been made (...). Ans so her Majesty
wylleth and charge all manner her officers and other (...)ers, to see to the
execution of the premises, as the spreaders of rumors, who have given, or
shall give, and threaten cause of dearth, and such persons as by ingrossyng,
forestallyng, or any other unlawful (...), has or shall give like cause of
dearth, may be duly punyshed. And for the further remedying of the
inconvenience aforesaid: her Majesty means forthwith, to send special
commission to persons of special trust, in sundry Counties, requisite to
inquire upon the statutes provided against ingrossyng, forestallyng, or
enhauncyng of the pryces, as well of grain, as of other victayles, and to
provide also, that the Markettes shall be duly served of necssary grain and
victayle.

Given at her Majesty's Pallayce of Westminster, the twentieth day of January.
1565. in the eight year of her Majesty's reign. GOD save the Queen:
Imprinted at London in Powles Churchyard, by Richard Jugge and John Cawood:
Printers to the Queens Majesty. Cum priuilegio Regiae Maiestatis.


