By the Queen.
WHereas in the Chart of the Lotterie lately erected, amongst other things
devised for the advantage of the adventurers, there was a limitation of three
months, within the compass whereof, who so adventured money into the said
Lotterie, should be partakers of diverse profits and advantages more then
others that should adventure their money after the said three months ended.

Forasmuch as in sundry parts of the Realm, the principal persons that were
appointed to be the Treasurers for the money that should be gathered in the
several shires of the Realm, had not received their instructions and charge
in such due time as was requisite, by reason that upon the first nommation of
them, there were after sundry alterations of some by reason of sickness, of
others by reason they were dead about the time of their nomination, and of some
others, that after ward were so otherwise occupied in public offices, as the
said service could not be by them executed, so as of the said space of three
months, there passed over a good part, to the detriment of the adventurers.
Her Majesty being duly advertised of the premises, to the end that in the
affair of the said Lotterie, advanced by her Majesty for the good of the
common weal, all her loving subjects should be entreated with an indifferency
of dealing, and participate alike of the advantages expressed in the said
Chart, without any prejudice of time passed away from them without their fault
or occasion: is pleased, that the advantage of the said three months now
expired, shall be enlarged and proroged to all manner of persons, that have or
shall adventure their money into the said Lotterie, for three months longer,
to have course and coutinuance for the space of four score and ten days
accompting xxx. days to the month, to begin within every shire their account
exclusiuely, from the xxiiii. of December last past.

So as whosoever within the said three months of prorogation, shall adventure,
or at any time before have adventured their money into the said Lotterie, shall
have and enjoy all manner, and as ample advantages and commodities, as by
virtue and tenor of the said Chart, they should have enjoyed if they had
adventured their money into the said Lotterie within the space of the three
months mentioned in the said Chart.

And where as through the fault of Printing of the Chart, there has been
ministered occasion of certain doubts and faults found in the said Chart, among
the which one is in the third Article of the conditions set forth in the ^^^d
Chart, in the first line of the same Article, in these words (to the number of
thirty Lots and upward) it was and is meant, and is now explaned, for the
benefit of the adventurers, that those words shall be amended and read thus to
the number of xxx. Lots or upward.) And where also through list fault, in the
fourth and next Article of the said Conditions, in the beginning of the said
Article be contained these words (whosoever shall gain the best, second and
third great prices) The meaning and intent thereof for the like benefit of the
adventurers was and is to have the understanding and reading of the said words
thus (whosoever shall gain the best, second or third great prices So as in
both those Articles this word (and) is to be changed into this word (or.)

And where as also some have moved a scruple and doubt, that forasmuch as no
mention is made in the said Chart incase of death of any of the adventurers,
before the time of the reading of the said Lotterie, that the commodity of the
prices and other advantages rehearsed in the said Chart, that should happen to
the adventurers at the time of the reading of the said Lotterie, shall remain
to the heirs, executors or assigns of the said adventurers. For the explaning
thereof, it is to be understand, and the meaning thereof was always: That
every aduentuter may make such assignation by Testament, deed or otherwise, of
the commodity that may fall unto him by the good fortune of the said Lotterie,
as he may or might otherwise do and dispose of any other goods. And that such
as shall have the said assignation, their executours or assigns, bringing with
them the Counterbill, being delivered by the Collector to the aduenturer or
adventurers (the reading of the Lotterie being finished, or else at the time
appointed in the said Chart) shall receive all such prices and advantages as
the aduenturer himself should have, if he were living.

Finally, if any other scruple, suspicion, doubt, fault, or mistyking may
happen to be found (as every thing for the satisfaction of every person, cannot
be so exactly set forth in writing, but some doubts may chance to enter into
the conceits of men, and specially of those that be inclined to suspicions.)
her Majesty for a full and general satisfaction of all such and all other
adventurers in this Lotterie gives to understand, that the same resorting to
the Creasurers of the Shires, Cities or good Towns, shall receive at their
hands such resolution and answer, to all and singular their said doubts,
scruples and demands, as shall be to their reasonable contentation and
satisfaction.

God save the Queen.
Imprinted at London by Henry Bynneman, dwelling in Knight rider street, at
the sign of the Mermaide. anno 1567. Ianuarii 3.


