A Proclamation against the deceiptfull wynding and folding of Wooles.
FOr reformation and redress of many deceits, and falsehoods used and practiced
in wynding and folding of Wooles: The Queens most royal Majesty, by the advice of her most honorable Counsel, straightly charge and commands,
that no manner of person or persons, whatsoever he or they be, at any time
hereafter, go about, or take upon him or them, to wind or fold any manner of
wooles, in any country, where any end wooles are accustomed to be wrought, or
in the Counties of Lincoln, Leicester, or Rutland, before he or they shall be
admitted and allowed by the Master and Wardens of the Company and fellowship of
the Woolmen of the City of London, or one of them for the time being, or
before the Mayor of the Staple of Boston, for the time being, for the wooles of
the grothe of the counties of Lincoln, Leicester, and Rutland, aforesaid, by
thaduise of a sworn Packer. And that every person or persons, so allowed and
admitted, for an able and lawful workman or workmen in form aforesaid, shall
have a Testimonial or Certificat of his allowance and admittance, under the
Seal of the Mayor of the Staple at Westminster, for the time being, or of the
Mayor of the Staple of Boston, for the time being, for the wool of the growing
of the counties aforesaid: And that none of the said persons so allowed and
admitted, or that shall be so allowed, and admitted, shall go about or take
upon him or them, to wind or fold any woolles, before he or they have taken a
corporal oath, before one of the said Majors, for the time being, according to
the intent above limited, that he or they shall truly and justly without
deceit, wind or fold, all and singular such wool or woolles, as he or they
shall take upon him, or them, to wind or fold, ne shall use any deceit,
craft, fraud or guyle therein, upon pain that every person, which shall take
upon him to wind or fold any manner of woolles, being not admitted, and sworn
as is aforesaid, shall suffer imprisonment by the space or x. days, and to be
set upon the Pillorie, in the next market town, with a fleece of wool hanging
about his neck.

And her Majesty by the assent aforesaid, further straightly charge and
commands, that no grower, breeder, brogger, or gatherer of any end woolles,
or other woolles within the Counties aforenamed, shall at any time hereafter set
on work any wool folder, or wool wynder, to fold or wind his or their
wool, or woolles, unless the said woolfolder, or woolwinder, bring with him
or them a Testimonial or Certificat under the Seal of the said Mayor of the
Staple of Westminster for the time being, or the Mayor of the Staple of Boston,
for the time being, in form as is aforesaid, testifiyng him or them to be
sworn and admitted, for an able workman to fold and wind woolles, in manner
and form as is aforesaid, upon pain of imprisonment and fine at the Queens
Majesty's pleasure.

And further, where by an Act made in the xxiij. year of the reign of her
Majesty's most dear father, King Henry theight, yet standing in force, it was
enacted, that no manner of person do wind, or cause to be wound any fleece of
wool, not being sufficiently riuered or washed, ne wind or cause to be wound
in any fleece, any deceiuable thing, whereby the fleece may be the more
weighty, to the deceit and loss of the buyer, upon pain the seller of such
deceiptfull woolles to forfaite for every such fleece vj. d. Her Majesty being
informed that notwithstanding the said good Act, much deceit is used in
washing, winding, and folding of woolles: Does straightly charge and command,
all and every her Subjects, to observe the true meaning of the said Act, upon
pain of forfeiture, of the penalties therein contained, and as they will avoid
her Highness further displeasure. And for the avoiding, and eschewing of further
craft and deceit now of late used: The Queens most Royal Majesty, with
thaduise aforesaid, straightly charge and commands, that from henceforth,
no grower or breeder of woolles, whatsoever he or they be, shall permit and
suffer his or their sheep, being washed and dried again, ready to be shorn,
to go above v. or vj. days unshorn or vnclipped, if the weather be dry, upon
pain of imprisonment and fine at the Queens Majesty's pleasure.

And further her Majesty by thaduise aforesaid, straightly charge and
commands all and every Justice of Peace, Majors, Sheriffs, Bailiffes, and
all other officers and ministers, as they will avoid her Highness displeasure,
and answer to the contrary at their perils, that they and every of them cause
every such offender and offenders to be punished for such offense or offenses,
according as is before expressed and declared.

Yeuen at our Manor of Greenwich the x. of August, in the fourth year of our
reign. Anno. M. D. LXII.
*Imprinted at London in Powles Churchyard, by Richard Judge, and John Cawood,
Printers to the Queens Majesty.

Cum priuilegio Regiae Maiestatis.


