By the Queen.
THe Queens Majesty having not long since given her loving subjects
knowledge by Proclamation, of certain forrayne Coins of gold brought into
this Realm, of much less value then Angels of gold of this Realm, and yet
stamped so like to the same Angels, as it was hard without diligent markynge
thereof, to decerne the one from the other: Is newely infourmed, that an other
sort of forrayne Coin of gold, of great quantity, is likewise brought of
late time into the Realm, being stamped like the Royalles of gold of.x.s. and
yet being much less in value both in weight and fynenesse, whereby many of her
good subjects receauyng the same, are daily deceived and dammaged. And for
that purpose, her Majesty has thought very meet to warn al her subjects to
take diligent heed and regard to these manner of notable deceiptes, intended
by evil disposed persons, in vtteraunce of the said forrayne Coins.

And for remedy herein, Her Majesty strayghtly charge and commands all
manner of persons, that have or shall have any coins of gold or silver, being
made or fourmed in likeness to the Angel or Royal of gold of this Realm,
or like to any other piece of coin of gold or silver, allowed to be current
money in this Realm, and shall of their own knowledge, or by admonition of any
other, understand the same coins, not to be lawful current moneys of this
Realm, in no wise to utter any of the same to any person in the name of any
monyes, but only to sell or change them at the mynt, or otherwise use them as
Bullion, according to their weight and finenesse, upon pain that whosoever
shall do to the contrary, shall be attached, and committed to prison, there to
remain without bail or maynepryse, until her Majesty's express pleasure in
that case shall be certaynely known. And shall further suffer that, which shall be
due to persons committyng such offenses, tendyng to the derogation of the
dignity of this Crown, and to the manifest deceit and colorable robbery of
her highness people.

And because it may manifestly appear to the sight of her subjects, how to
avoid the deceiptes already discovered, in the vtteraunce of the foresaid
coins: Her Majesty has ordered, that there shall be prynted and publysshed
herewith, the true pryntes and stampes, of the Angels and Royals being the
current moneys of this Realm, and also the stampes of the forrayne monyes
above mentioned, which do in part resemble her Majesty's said monyes, and in
part do in deed differ from the same, although without regard thereto had,
either by weight or sight, they may seem all one, and not different.

And for that it may be, that mo like attemptes will be invented hereafter, to
devise other coins, to resemble the rest of the coins of gold or silver
being current in this Realm, thereby to deceive her people: Her Majesty
wylleth, that al her Sheriffs in all Counties for the time being, and all
(...), and head officers, of Towns Corporate, and Baliffes of liberties,
whenever they or any of them, shall perceive that this abuse shall hereafter
be revived in the vttrance of these coins, or that any new attempt shall
appear, for any like deceypt to be used to the prejudice of other current
moneys of this Realm: They shall cause this her proclamation without further
commandment, to be newely proclaimed, and set up in time and place
accustomed, addyng to the end of this proclamation, an admonition to the
people, to beware of such other strange monyes by name, as shall not be
allowable to be current within this Realm. And shall further use al good
means, to try and search out the offenders against the meaning hereof, and
without delay, shall commyt the same to straight prison, according to the
intent of this present proclamation.

Given at Westminster the first day of December. 1565. the eight year of her
Majesty's reign.
God save the Queen.
Imprinted at London in Powles Churchyard, by Richard Judge and John Cawood:
Printers to the Queens Majesty.

Cum priuilegio Regiae Maiestatis.


