By the Queen.
WHERE in the Parliament begone and holden at Westminster the eight day of
June, in the.xxviii. year of the reign of the noble king of famous memory
king Henry the eight, father to our Sovereign Lady the Queens Majesty, one
Act and Statute was then and there made, entitled, an Act limittyng the pryses
of Wynes. And where also in the session of the Parliament holden upon
prorogation at Westminster the.xxii. day of January, in the.xxxiiii. year of
the said noble king, one Act and Statute was then and there made, entitled,
an Act to aucthoryse certain of the kings Majesty's Council to set pryses
upon Wynes, to be sold by retayle. By the which said several Acts and
Statutes, authority is given unto the Lord Chancellor of England, Lord
Treasourer of England, the Lord president of the kings most honorable
Council, Lord privy Seal, and the two chief Justices of either Benche.
or.v. iiii. or.iii. of them, by their discretions to set the prises of all
kinds of wynes yearly* from time to time, when they shall be sold, in gross,
and by retayle, and thereof Proclamation to be made in the City. Borough, and
Town, where any such wynes are to be sold. Which said order, for the
retaylyng of wynes, is further limited and appointed by the Statute made in
the fyfth year of the reign or our Sovereign Lady the Queens Majesty,
entitled, an Act touching certain politic constitutions made for the
mayntenaunce of the Navy: As by the said several Acts and Statutes amongst
other things more at large it does and may appear.

Forasmuch as the Lord keeper of the great Seal of England, the Lord
Treasourer of England, and the Lord chief Justice of England, in the
execution of the said several Acts and Statutes, have by their deliberat
aduyses, taxed, limited, assigned, and appointed the pryses of Gascoigne and
French wynes, to be sold within this the Queens Majesty's Realm, as well in
gross, as by retayle, wherein they have had respect and consideration, that by
reason of the great frostes, and other unseasonable weather, happenyng the
winter last past, that the plenty and increase of the said Gascoigne and
French wynes, have been much more byndered and diminished, then in many other
years past: And therefore her Majesty, by the council of the said Lords, is
pleased and contented, for this time, that they give therein the greater price,
which her byginies means nevertheless at other times to be abated, as
occasion may hereafter seem good and convenient. That is to say, every Tun
of the best Gascoigne wine, to be sold after the custom and impost paid to
the Queens Majesty, at the price and rate of.vii. li. vi. s. viii. d. the
Tun, and not above. And every Tun of the best French wine, to be sold in
like manner after the same rate of.vii. li. vi. s. viii. d. the Tun, and not
above. And every Pype, Hoggeshead, Punchion, Terce, and other vessel of the
same several wynes, to be sold after their quantities, according to the same
rates, and not above. And for small and thynne wynes, to be sold under the
same rates, as the buyers and sellers thereof can agree. And for the retaylyng of
the said Gascoigne and French wynes, the said Lords and Justice, by
authority aforesaid have assigned and appointed the pryses as follows. That
is to say, every gallon of the best Gascoigne wine to be sold for xii. d. the
gallon, and not above. And every gallon of the best French wine, to be sold
(...) for.vii. d. the gallon, and not above. And for the retaylyng of sweet
wynes, the said Lords and Iu^^^^^^* by authority aforesaid, have assigned
and appointed the pryses as follows. That is to say, every gallon of the best
Muscadell, to be sold for.xvi. d. the gallon, and not above. And every gallon
of the best Malm^sey, to be sold for.xiiii. d. the gallon, and not above. And
every gallon of the best Sack, to be sold (...) iii. d. the gallon, and not
above. And also that every Pottel, Quart, and Pynt, of all the said several
wines, shall be retayled and sold after and according to the said several
rates and pryses.

The Queens Majesty, our Sovereign Lady, therefore strayghtly charge and
commands all and singular her Subjects, and others, puttyng any manner of
Gascoigne, French, or sweet wynes to sale, within this her Majesty's Realm,
that they, ne any of them, in any manner of wise, by any craft, couin, or
(...)te agreement, shall sell any of the wynes abouesayde, otherwise, or at
any higher pryses, then (...) above limited, upon pain to forfayte and pay
such penalties as are contained and expressed in the several Acts and
Statutes thereof made. And further her highness pleasure and commandment is,
that ^ll and singular Majors, Sheriffs, Bayliffes, Constables, and other her
officers and ministers, to whom it appertains, that they and every of them,
with diligence, cause and see that this her Proclamation be put in due
execution, after the tenor of the same: And also according to an other Act of
Parliament made in the.xxxvii. year of the reign of her Majesty's said father
king Henry the eight, against such as will refuse to sell their wynes at pryses
taxed as is aforesaid, as they will answer thereto, at their perils.

Given at her Majesty's Palaice of Westminster, the.xx. day of December, in
the.viii. year of her Majesty's reign. God save the Queen.
Imprynted at London by Richard Judge and John Cawood, prynters to the Queens
Majesty.


