A Proclamation for the observation of certain Statutes, with a form how the
same shall be executed: And a Summarye abridgement of every of the same
statutes, following.

1562. and. 4. Elizabet.

The Proclamation.
THE Queens Majesty calling to her good remembrance how well this Realm is
furnysshed with good laws and orders for redress of many enormities, and how
through negligence of officers, and presumption of offenders, the same
nevertheless do rather grow then abate: has thought mete at this present to
deuyse with her counsel, how some few necessary laws very beneficial for
this time, might be duly executed and observed, as they were meant, to the
weal of the Realm, and comfort of her Majesty. For which purpose her
Majesty gives all manner her subjects to understand, that like as the last
year a certain abbreuiat of Statutes was made and published by order of her
Counsel upon her commandment, and was by the Justices of peace in diverse
countries diligently regarded, and in a great part put toward execution,
though in some other parts, for lack of time the same took not so good
effect: So her Majesty charge al manner her Justices and other ministers to
whom the same shall belong, to take in hand again their former charge given
to them the last year, for therecution of the said Statutes, hastenyng their
assembles for that purpose now in the beginning of this Summer, so as their
doings may be certified in such sort, as they were commanded and prescribed
the last year.

And besides these, her Majesty fyndeth like cause to have two other great
enormities dayelye encreasyng in this her Realm, to be spedely reformed, for
which there do remain in force good laws. The one is, the monstrous abuse of
Apparel almost in all estates, but principally in the meaner sort. The other
is, the decay and disfurniture of all kind of horses for service within the
Realm. And because her Majesty perceaueth, that although the laws be very
penal in both these cases, yet without some special direction given for the
execution thereof, the reformation will not ensue: Her Majesty has caused the
Statutes remaynyng in force for both the said purposes to be briefly
collected, and presently by this her Proclamation, charge all manner her
sheryffes to publyshe the same jointly with this Proclamation, and to fyx the
same up in places accustomed.

And for the manner of the spedy execution of the Statutes for apparel Apparel.
and other enormities incident thereto: Her Majesty has caused certain good
ordinances to be devised and accorded by her counsel, which also her
Majesty's pleasure is, to be well regarded, straightly kept, and observed
according to the several limitations thereof. Wherefore there is good hope
conceived by her Majesty of a spedye redress, by means of the said good
orders. And if in any point of the same statutes or orders, any dout shall
arise for the understanding of the same: her Majesty wylleth that the advice
and answer of her privy council be required and followed. And for the other
default tendyng to the decay of horses within the Realm, which partly ryseth by
stealyng and carryinge numbers of Horses, Geldynges, Mares, and Coltes out of
the Realm, and by neglecting the breedyng and keeping of Horses within the
Realm, according to the laws provided:

For redress of the former part concerning carrying out of Horses out of the
Realm: Carrying of Horses out of the Realm.
her Majesty charge al manner her subjects and others within her Realm, to
take knowledge of the laws now publyshed for that purpose, and not to trust
in any remission of penalties therefore provided. For the spedier observation
whereof, her Majesty means shortly to direct her several Commissions under
the great seal, to such parts of her Realm where the conueyaunce has
accustomably ben, or hereafter may be, to enquire thereof diligently and
straightly by order of law, and thereupon to proceade sharply to thexecutio^,
as the cases shall require.

And as to the latter part tendyng to the decay of breeding and keeping of
Horses: Breedyng and keeping of Horses.
her Majesty does likewise charge all manner her subjects to take knowledge of
the laws remaynyng in force, and now published at this present time. And for
that it is thought by her Majesty, that the same laws has been by diverse
persons so long forgotten, that it will seem hard to have to same spedely
put in execution: her Majesty of her gracious disposition, means to proceade
to thexecution thereof in this manner following.

Her Majesty intends to direct her several Commissions to special persons
in every county of the Realm, to enquire by order of law, what persons shall
not have before the.xv of August next, Horses according to the Statute by
reason of their wives apparel mentioned in the Statute, and what other persons
chargeable to breeding or keeping of Horses by force of the Statutes, shall not
before the.xv. of December next, perform the meaning and intent of the said
Statutes, as well for breedyng as keeping. And for the more certain execution
hereof: her Majesty also means to cause a special vieu to be taken through
the Realm in September next, of the number inquirable by the foresaid.xv.
day of August, as is above expressed: and a like muster* and vieu to be taken
in Ianuarye next at one instaunt time, both of the same number, and of all the
rest whereof inquisition shall be made by the said Commission, to be provided
before the said.xv. day of December. After which views and musters taken: her
Majesty intends at every half year to have the fame severely executed by
officers specially appointed, until the Realm be replenished with such
number of Horses, as may be well kept and mayntayned for the service of the
same.

Of all these her Majesty's determinations, tending only to the weal, good
order, and strength of her Realm: her Majesty has thought mete in this
plain manner to give notyce thereof by this Proclamation to all manner her
subjects, to avoid the pains that otherwise thereof must and shall ensue.

Yeuen at her Majesty's Pallaice of Westminster the.vii. of May, the fourth
year of her hyghnes reign.

Articles for the due execution of the Statutes of Apparel, and for the
reformation of the outrageous excess thereof grown of late time within the
Realm. Devised upon the Queen's Majesty's commandment, by advice of her
counsel, the.vi. of May. Anno. 1562.
FIrst the Queen's highness pleasure is, 24. ^. 8. 1. and. 2. Phil. and Matie.
that the laws heretofore made touching the reformation of the excess of
apparel, and namely the laws made in Anno. xxiiii. Henrici. viii. and in Anno.
i. and.ii. Philippi and Marie, be observed, and withal diligence put in
execution.

And forasmuch as no sort of people have so much exceaded, or do daily more
exceade in thexcesse of apparel, contrary to the said statutes, then such as
be of the meaner sort, and be least hable with their lyuynges to maintain the
same: Her Majesty's pleasure and straight commandment is, 1. and. 2. Phil.
and Ma^^e.
that all Justices and officers to whom the reformation thereof may
appertain, have special regard to the observation and execution, with all
severity of the law made Anno. i. and.ii. Philip. and Mar. purposely for that
respect.

For the better order in the due execution of which Statutes, The order in ye
Court.
for her hyghnes Chaumber: it is ordained the Lord Chaumberlayne and the
Uicechaumberlayne. And for her Majesty's houshoulde, the Lord Steward, the
Treasurer or the Comptroller, to appoint such trusty officers as they shall
think fyt to have in those two places special regard to all such as shall
after.xiiii. days next following the publication of this ordinance, presume
to enter into the Court otherwise apparayled then is permitted by the said
Statute, and straight to apprehende and to commit them to ward, there to
remain till they shall be duly punyshed for their offenses, and until such time
as they shall have thoroughly paid and satisfied the penalty of the said
Statute: Time of execution.
Examining them first how long and how often they have sithen the time above
written after the publication of this ordinance, worn the said apparel, who
is their master, Punyshement
and how long they have served him, and how long it has been that he has
known them to wear any part of the same apparel. Upon which examination, the
master The master.
straight to be sent for, to appear if the offense be found in the Chaumber,
before the Lord Chaumberlayne, or Uicechaumberlayne: and before the Lord
Steward Treasurer, or Comptroller, if it be found in the household. And in
case it shall appear by any due mean that the said master had knowledge of
the said servants abuse, so long time as in the said Statute is prescribed:
Punyshement of the master.
the^ to take of him a band of two hundred marks to the Queen's highness use,
to answer the forfayture fallen upon him by the said Statute: which band
if he shall refuse, then to commit him to ward, there to remain till he shall
have satisfied the penalty. The said examination and obligation to be sent to
one of the Queen's highness Remembraunces in the Exchequer, to be by them
called upon, according to the effect of the said Statute: the parties
appointed to this execution to have for their pains the moitie of the
forfaiture Forfeture.
appointed by the law. Provided that in case it shall be thought fit to be
dispensed withal within the court for any person upon reasonable cause, the
Lord Chaumberlayne or the Lord Steward knowing first her highness pleasure,
Dispensation.
shall and may license them by writing subscribed with one of their hands,
testif^yng her Majesty's said pleasure: foreseing that none of them do thereby
use any apparel inhibited unto them, but during such time as they shall
attend upon her hygnesse person.

And within the City of London and the liberties of the same, In London
the Mayor and court of Aldermen shall take and observe the like order: That is
to say, to appoint in every ward.iiii. substanciall and well meaning men, to
see the said Statute executed, in such sort as it is ordained in the Court.
And the said four or any of them to examine all offenders in the sort above
written: and apprehendynge them, to bring them to the Alderman of the ward, he
to commit them to prison, and to certify the examination and confession, and
such knowledge of judgment of the truth of the matter as he can attain unto,
as well touching the master as the man, to the Mayor and court of Aldermen: and
they to certify the same indelayedly into the Exchequer, to the intent the
forfaytures Forfeture.
may be answered. The said four following the execution of the statute, to
have the moitie of the forfayture.

The like order to the taken and followed within the four Innes of Court,
Innes of Court.
and in all the houses of Chauncerye, by the principalles and auncientes of the
houses, where are noted to be so great dysorders at this present, as behooves
to be looked upon.

The same order to be followed in like sort in the Suburbs out of the liberties
of London, and in Westminster, and in all other exempted places, Suburbs and
places exempted.
by thofficers of those places.

And finally like order to be observed in all Cities, Towns, Cities and towns.
and villages throughout the Realm. In all Cities and Towns corporate, the
order to be executed by the Mayor, Bailiefes, and other head officers. And in
all Towns and villages, the Justices of peace in every several Shire, to
follow the like order for the apprehencion, examination, taking of bands,
committyng to prison, and certificate into the Exchequer, according as is
abouefayde. The moitie of the penalty to fall to the officer and officers,
appointed to the execution of the law.

The county Palatine of Lancaster and Chester, County palatine.
to make certificate into the Exchequer there, and the Exchequer there to the
Chauncelour of the duchy, and he to certify the same into the Exchequer here,
to the intent abouesayde.

The doings herein of al officers as well in the court as in London, Certificat.
in Cities and towns corporate, and of the Justices of all other places
through the Realm, to be certified during the first two months after the
publication of this ordinance to be made, to the Lord Chauncelour of
England, or to the Lord keeper of the great Seal every.xv. days, and after
the said two months expyred, the same to be made every.vi. wekes, during
the space of one whole year, and so to continue as by the said Lord
Chancellor, or Lord keeper shall be prescribed. And finally, that all Justices
of Assise Just. of Ass
in all their circuites do enquire specially hereof.

It is not meant by any thing above written, to take the liberty from any
man, to make information against any offendour in the premises, and to
enjoy, if the party be convicted, such part of the penalty as by the said
law is appointed, foreseynge that no man be twice convicted for one offense.

And to the intent such as shall be appointed in the Court to thexecution of the
premistes, may work the more certainly: It is ordained they shall have
delivered unto them a brief of the said Statutes, the like also to be
delivered and sent prynted by them selves, to all parts and parties, where the
particular knowledge thereof may be thought fyt, for the better execution of
the same.

And for the reformation of the use of the monstrous and outrageous greatness
of hosen, Great hose
crept a late into the Realm to the great slander thereof, and the undoing of
a number using the same, being driven for the mayntaynaunce thereof, to seek
such unlawful ways, as by their own confession have brought them to
destruction: It is ordained as abouesayde, that no Taylour, Hosyer, or other
person whatsoever he shall be, after the day of the Publication hereof, shall
put any more cloth in any one pair of hosen for the outsyde, The outside.
then one yard and a half, or at the most, one yard and three quarters of a
yard of karsey, or of any other cloth, leather, or any other kind of stuff
above that quantity. And in the same hosen to be put only one kind of
lynyng, The lyning.
besides lynnen cloth next to the leg if any shall be so disposed, the said
lynyng not to lie loose nor to be bolstered, but to lie just unto their
legs, as in ancient time was accustomed: Sarcenet, Moccado, or any other
like thing used to be worn, and to be plucked out for the furniture of the
hosen, not to be taken in the name of the said lynyng. Neither any man under
the degree of a Baron toweare within his hosen any Ueluet, Ueluet and Satin.
etc.
Satin, or any other stuff above the estimation of Sarcenet or Taffata.

For the due and better execution and observation whereof, the Mayor of London,
and the rulers and officers of the Suburbs, Hosiers to be bound.
and of Westminster, and other exempted places, shall immediatlye after this
Proclamation made, call before them in every of their several jurisdictions,
all Hosyers, or Tayllours making hosen, dwelling within the precinctes of the
same, and shall bind every of them in the su^me of.x. pounds, or more as
cause shall require, to the Queen's hyghnes use, to observe this part of this
said Proclamation touching hosen, without any manner fraud or guyle: which
bands as any shall be found to offend contrary to this ordinance, they shall
certify into the Exchequer, with the name of every such offendour. In all
other Cities or towns corporate, the Mayor and head officers shall do in all
points the like: And in all other places the Justices of peace. The officers
of the Exchequer to certify the lords of the Queen's highness privy counsel
at the beginning of every term, what bands have come, or have been sent into
that office, Certificat.
touching the premises till that day, and what number of them have been
executed.

If any Hosyer shall refuse to enter into such band, to be immediatlye
committed to ward, and to be suffered no more to continue his occupacion.

The Mayor of London, and all other officers in their jurisdictions and
liberties, to make or cause to be made search Search.
once within every.viii. days in every Hosiers house, to see what kind of
hosen they shall make, and fyndyng any such as be inhibited by these orders,
to see the punishment thereof as is above written.

Finally, no men vndispensed with, in such sort as is abouesayd, be so hardy
after.xiiii. days following the publication of this ordinance, to presume to
show him self in the Court, or in any other place within this Realm, in
any pair of hosen passing the syse abouesayde: that is to say, contaynyng in
the nether stocks and upper stocks, more then one yard and a half, or above
one yard and three quarters at the most, of the brodest karsey, or with any
other stuff beyond that proportion, or with mo lynynges then one, and that
plain, and just to the legs as is abouesayd, neither with any Shurtes
having double Ruffes, Ruffes of Shurtes.
either at the collar or sleues, which Ruffes shall not be worn otherwise
then syngle, and the synglenesse to be used in a due and mean sort, as was
orderlye and comely used before the coming in of the outrageous double Ruffes,
which now of late are crept in. Or being under the degree of a Knight, with
any gylted spurs, Gylte Spurs.
or any damaskyng or gylt sword, Gylte Swords.
rapyer, or dagger, upon pain of forfayture of the same, and of imprysonment
and fine at the Queen's highness pleasure for every such offense, to be
executed within the court by such as shall be appointed, in sort as is
abouesayd, by the Lord Chaumberlayne, Execution
Uicechaumberlayne, the Lord Steward, the Treasoure and Comptroller. And in
London and within the liberties thereof, to be executed by the Sergeauntes and
such others as shall be appointed in form aforesaid by the Mayor and Aldermen.
In the suburbs, Westminster, and other priuileged places, by the officers,
rulers, and governors of them. In all other places by the head officers and
Justices of peace.

In the two universities, Uniuersities.
the Chauncelour, or in his absence the Uicechauncellour or Co^missary, to see
to the execution of the said statutes, and of all other orders: and none other
Justice or offycer there to meddle, but as shall be by them or one of them
appointed. In which places is thought meet to have an uniformity of apparel,
according to every several vocation. The heddes of Colleges and Hawles of the
said universities, to be warned by them to see the Scollers under their
government to observe thoroughly the said statutes and orders, and to abate
their ruffes and other unseemly excesses, and to have in their apparel
regard to thobseruation of their Statutes, and to the decency of vsyng of
them selves therein, as heretofore has been used: wherein if either the master
shall be found to forget his duty, or the Scoller to lack obedience, the
Queen's highness shall be forced to appoynte others to see unto the due
punyshement of both sorts.

Ladies and gentilwomen Ladies and Gentilwomen.
attendinge upon the Queen, or resorting to the Court, and their gentylwomen,
to be apparelled according to the ancient order of the Court: whereof the
orders in times past to be put in ure, by the gentilmen ushers, at the
appointment of the Lord Chaumberlayne, to thyntent there may be a difference
of eftates known by their apparel, after the commendable custom in times
past used in the Court. Which order is to be sought, renewed, and out of hand
to be put in ure by the said Lord Chaumberlayne, or otherwise to be devised
for a certayntie of all degrees.

And where as an usage is crept in, contrary to former orders, of wearing of
long Swords, and Rapiers, Swords, Rapyers, and Daggers.
sharpened in such sort, as may appear the usage of them can not tend to
defense, which ought to be the very meaning of wearynge of weapons, in times
of peace, but to murder, and evident death, when the same shall be occupied: Her
Majesty's pleasure is, that no man shall after.x. days next followynge this
Proclamation, wear any Sword, Rapier, or any weapon in their stead, passing
the length of one yard and half a quarter of blade, at the uttermost: neither
any Dagger above the length of twelve inches in blade: neither any Buckler,
Buckler.
with a sharp point, or with any point above two inches of length, upon pain
of forfayting the Sword or Dagger passing the said length, and the Buckler
made otherwise then is prescribed, to whomsoever will sease upon it, and the
imprysonment of his body, that shall be found to wear any of them, and to make
fine at her Majesty's will and pleasure. And if any Cutler Cutler.
or other artificer, shall after the day of the publication hereof, sell, or
have within his shop or house to be sold, or shall make or cause to be made,
any Rapier, Sword, Dagger, or Buckler contrary to this order, to forfaite the
same, his body to be imprisoned, and to make fine at the Queen's highness
pleasure, and to remain in prison, till the said fine be fully satisfied: and
being taken with the fault the second time, never to be permitted after, to
use that occupation, which in the Court is to be executed Execution.
by the officers aforesaid. In the City and libertyes, by the Mayor and Court
of Aldermen, and such as by them shall be appointed in that sort, as well
Sergeaunts as others beforesaid. In Westminster, the Suburbs, and other
priuileged places, by the officers of the same: in Towns corporate, by the
Mayor and other head officers, and in all other places, by the Justices of
peace.

And finally her Majesty strayghtly charge as well the said Lord Steward,
Treasurer, and Comptroller of the household, as the Lord Chaumberlayne,
Uicechaumberlayne, and such as under them shall be appointed and assygned, the
Mayor of London and all other Majors, Shr^^fes, Bailiefes, Constables, and all
Justices of peace, all Principals and auncientes of the Innes of Court, and
Chauncery, the Chauncelour and Uycechauncelour of both the universities, and
the heads of Haules, and Colleges of the same, and all other her highness
officers and ministers, each of them in their jurisdictions, to see these
orders being set forth and confyrmed by her Majesty's Proclamation, to be uely
and spedely executed in form aforesaid, as they will answer for the
contrary at their perils, and will avoid her hyghnes dyspleasure and
indignation.

A note of certain necessary acts mentioned in the Queen's Majesty's
Proclamation, beside a Collection of certain others, publyshed the last
year, and now to be all executed.
First concerning the acts remayninge in force for apparel.
THe Statute made in the.xxiiii. year of king Henry the.viii, for reformation
of the abuse of Apparel remaining now in force, conteyneth so many Articles
and clauses, as the same cannot be conveniently abridged, but is to be
considered by readyng and perusyng the whole Act at large. But the Statute
lately made in the time of king Philip and Queen Mary: For execution whereof
(as for that which at this time is most necessary) Articles and orders be
presently devised, follows here abrydged.

NO English man, Anno. i. and.ii. Ph. and. Mar. Cap. ii.
other then the son and heir apparaunt of a knight, or he that has yearly
revenues of.xx.li. or is worth in goods.cc.li. shall wear sylcke in or upon
his hatte, cappe, nyghtcap, gyrdels, scabard, hose, shoes, or spurlethers,
upon forfayture of.x.li. for every day, and imprysonment by three months.

Justices of Assise and of the peace, sheryffes, stewardes in Letes, head
officers of towns corporate, shall inquire and determine the offenses, and
commit thoffendour to prison, till he have paid the forfayture.

If any knowing his servant to offend, do not put him out of his service
within.xiiii. days: or so put out, retain him again within a year after such
offense, he shall forfait C.li.

Any above the degree of a knights son, or daughter, or wife to any of them,
or Mayor, or head officer in any town corporate, or wife to any of them, or
the king or the Queen's servants in ordinary wages attendaunt, wearynge
ordinary liveries, may wear as they might before.

None shall be compelled to put away his apprentice or hired servant before
the end of his term.

Women may wear in their hattes, cappes, gyrdels, and hoodes, as they might
before.

Concerning the increase and breeding of Horses, Geldinges, and Mares.
Every person, 27. H. ^. Cap. 6.
of what estate or degree soever he be, having a Park or ground enclosed,
wherein any Dear is or usually kept for game, and not lying within the countyes
of Westmerland, Commerlande, Northumberlande, and the Bishopric of Duresme,
containing the quantity of one mile in compass, and is thereof seized in fee
simple, fee tail, or for term of life in possession to his own profyt and
behoof: And every Fermour of every such park or ground enclosed, shall keep
two Mares, Mares.
being not spayde, apt and hable to bear foles, and each of them of.xiii.
handfuls in heyght at the least, The height of the Mares.
to be measured from the lowest part of the hoof of the foot, unto the highest
part of the shulder, upon pain of.xl.s. for every month. And for every park
of.iiii. miles compass and more.iiii. like Mares, and of the like height. And
that thowners of such ground, shall not willyngly suffer the same Mares to be
covered with any Horse under xiiii. handfuls in heyght upon like pain.

No stoned Horse being above the age of.ii. years, 32. H. 8. Cap. 13.
and not being of the height of.xv. handfulles, to be measured from the lowest
part of the hoof of the forefoote, unto the highest part of the wyther, Stoned
Horse.
and every handful to contain.iiii. inches, shall be put to pasture in any
forest, chase, moore, maryshe, heath, common or wast ground, upon pain of
forfayture of the said horse or horses.

And it shall be lawful to every person and persons, Scascur.
that shall find any such horse or horses contrary to the form of this
Statute, to sease the same horse in manner and form as in the same statute is
prescribed. And to retain the same horse or horses to his own use, and as his
own proper goods and cattelles for ever.

And all Forestes, Chases, Commons, Mores, Marshes, Heathes, and wast grounds
within this Realm of England, Forestes. Chases, Commons, etc. shall be driven.
Wales, and the Marches of the same, shall be driven yearly at the feast of S.
Michaell tharchangel, or within.rv. days then next after, by the Lords or
possessours of the said forestes and chases, or by thofficers of the same, and
by the Constables, headborowes, Bayliffes, Bursholders and Tythingmen, within
whose offices and limittes the commons, moors, maryshes, heathes, and waste
grounds, Pain.
being out of Forestes and chases, be or lie, upon pain of.xl.s. And it
shall be lawefull to every of the said officers and other the said persons, to
make like drift of the said forestes, chases, commons, moors, maryshes,
heathes, and wast grounds, at any other season or time of the year when they
shall think mete and convenient.

And if in any of the said dryftes, there shall be found any Mare, Mare killed
Gelding killed
fylly, fool, or Geldinge, that shall be then thought not able, nor like to grow
to be able to bear foles of reasonable stature, or not hable nor like to grow
to do profitable labor and service, by the discretion of the dryuers, or of
the more number of them: that then the said dryuer or driuers shall cause the
same unprofitable beasts to be killed. And all Justices of peace in their
quarter sessions, Inquiry.
and all Stewardes of Leetes and lawdayes, have authority to inquire of all
the defaultes, omissions, contemptes and offenses contrary to this statute.

For the having and keeping of Horses and Geldinges. And for the furniture and
having of Armor and Weapon.
Every temporal person having honors, 4. and. 5. Phi. and. Mar. Cap. 2.
Lordshyps, manours, houses, lands, meadows, pastures or woods, of estate of
enheritaunce or free hold, to the clear yearly value of a thousand pound and
A thousand pound in lands by year.
above, shall have, find, keep, and maintain within this Realm of England,
and of their own proper, and at their own costs and charges.vi. Horses or
geldyngs hable for Dimilaunces, whereof three of them at the least to be horses
with sufficient Harnes, steel Saddle, and Weapon, requisite and appertaynynge
to the said Dimilaunces Horses, or Geldynges: and ten light Horses or
Geldynges hable and mete for light horsemen, with the furniture of Harnes and
Weapon, requisite for the same. And.xl. Corslettes furnished.xl. Almayne
Ryuettes: or instead of the said Almayne Ryuets.xl. Cotes of plate, Corslets
or Brygandines furnished.xl. Pykes.xxx. long Bows.xxx. sheafes of Arrows.xxx.
stele Cappes or skulles.xx. black Bills or Halberdes.xx. Haquebuttes, and.xx.
Murryons or sallettes.

Item every like person having like possessions to the yearly value of one M.
marks A M. Marks in lands by the year.
or above, and under the yearly value of a thousand pounds, shall have and
find as is abouesayd iiii. Horses or Geldynges hable for Dimilaunces, whereof
two at the least to be horses sufficiently furnyshed, for Dimilaunces Horses,
or Geldinges: and.vi. light Horses mete for light horsemen, with furniture
requisite for the same. And of Armor and weapon.xxx. Corslets furnyshed.xxx.
Almayne Ryuettes: or instead of them.xxx. Cotes of plate, Corslettes or
Brygandines furnished. 30. Pikes.xx. long Bows xx. sheafes of Arrows.xx.
stele Cappes or skulles.x. black bills or Halberds.x. Haquebuts, and.x.
Murrions or salettes.

Item every such person having possessions as is abouesayd, Four.C. pound in
lands by the year.
to the clear yearly value of.iiii.C.li. or above, and under the clear yearly
value of one. M. marks, shall find and maintain in form as is aforesaid, two
Horses, or one Horse, and one Geldynge hable for Dimilaunces, and.iiii.
Geldynges hable for light horsemen, and.xx. Corslettes.xx. Almayne Ryuettes: or
in lieu of them.xx. Cotes of plate, Corslets or Brygandines furnished.xx. Pykes
xv. long Bows.xv. sheafes of Arrows.xv. steel Cappes or skulles.vi.
Haquebuttes, and.vi. Murryons or salettes.

Item every such person having possessions to the clear yearly value of Two
C. pound in lands by the year.
.ii.C.li. or above, and under the yearly value of.iiii.C. pounds, shall have,
keep and maintain one great Horse or Geldinge hable for a Dimilaunce, and two
Geldynges hable for light horsemen furnyshed with Harnes, steel Saddle, and
weapons for the same, sufficient as is aforesaid. And in Armor.x.
Corslettes.x. Almaine Ryuettes: or in the place of Almayne Ryuets.x. cotes of
plate, Corslets, or Brygandines.x. Pikes.viii. long Bows.viii. sheafes of
Arrows.viii. steel Cappes or skulles.iii. Haquebuties, and three Murryons or
salettes.

Item every such person having such possessions to the yearly value of one
hundredth pounds or above, One C. pound in lands by the year.
and under the yearly value of two.C.li. shall find, keep, and mayntaine in
form aforesaid, two geldinges mete for light horsemen, three Corslettes, three
Almayne Ryuettes: or instead of them, so many Cotes of plate, Corslettes, or
Brygandines, three Pykes, three long Bows, three sheafes of Arrows, three steel
Cappes or Skulles, two Haquebuttes, two Murrions or Salettes.

Item every such person having lands as is aforesaid to the clear yearly
value of one C. marks or above, One C. Marks in lands by the year.
and under the yearly value of one hundredth pounds, shall have and keep one
Geldynge hable for a light horsman with a Harnes and Weapon requisite for the
same, two Corslettes furnished, two Almayne Ryuets: or in the stead of the
same, two Cotes of plate or Brigandines, two Pykes, two long Bows, two sheafes
of Arrows, two steel Cappes, or Skulles, one Haquebut, one Murrion or Sallet.

And every such person having such possessions to the yearly value of.rl.li.
or above, Forty pound in lands by the year.
and under the yearly value of one hundredth marks, shall have and keep two
Corslets, two Almayne Ryuettes: or in the stead of the same, two Cotes of
plate, Corslets or Brygandines furnished, two Pykes, one long Bow, one sheafe
of Arrows, one stele Capppe or Skull, two Haquebuttes, two Murrions or
salettes.

Item every such person having possessions to the yearly value of (...) pound
in lands by the year.
.xx.li. and above, and under the yearly value of.xl.li. shall have and keep
one Corslet, one Pyke, one Haquebut, one Murryon or Sallet, one long Bow, one
sheafe of Arrows, one steel Cappe or skull.

Item every person having possessions to the yearly value of.x.li. or above,
Ten pound in lands by the year
and under the yearly value of.xx.li. shall have and keep, one Almayne Riuet: or
in the stead thereof, one cote of plate, or one Briga^dine, one Haquebut, one
Murryon or sallet, one long Bow, one sheafe of Arrows, and one steel Cappe
or skull.

Item every person that has possessions to the clear yearly value of.v.li. or
above, Five pound in lands by the year
and under the yearly value of.x.li. shall have and keep one cote of plate, one
black Byll, or Halberde, one long Bow, one sheafe of Arrows, and one steel
Cappe or skull.

Item every such person having goods or Cattels to the value of one thousand
marks or above, One thousand Marks in goods.
shall have, find and keep in manner and form aforesaid, one Horse or
Geldynge hable for a Dimilaunce, with steel Saddle, Harnes, and weapon
requisite for the same, and also one Geldynge hable and mete for a light
horseman, with Harnes and weapon requisite for the same. Or else.xviii.
Corslettes furnished instead of the said Horse or Geldynge at his choice. And
also shall have, keep and tynde two Corslettes, two Almayne Ryuertes, or else instead of the same Almayne Ryuets, two Cotes of plate, two Corslettes, or two
Brygandynes, two Pykes, four long Bows, four sheafes of Arrows, four
steel Cappes or Skulles, three Haquebuttes, three Murrions or Sallets.

Item every such person having goods or cattelles to the value of four C.li.
or above, Four C. pound in goods.
and under the value of one.M. marks, shall have, find and keep one Geldynge
able and mete for a light horsman, with all Harnes and weapon requisite for the
same. Or else at their choice, nine Corslettes good and hable for the field
furnished. And also shall have and find one Corslet, one Pyke, two Almayne
Ryuets, Cotes of plate, or Brygandines, one Haquebut, two long Bows, two
sheafes of Arrows, and two steel Cappes or skulles.

Item every such person having in goods or cattelles to the value of
two.C.li. or above and under the value of four.C.li. shall have, Two C. pound
in goods.
keep and find, one Corslet, one Pyke, two Almayne Ryuettes, Cotes of plate or
Brygandines, one Haquebut, one Murrion or salet, two long Bows, two sheafes
of Arrows, and two Skulles or steel Cappes.

Item every person having in goods and cattels to the value of one.C.li. or
above, One C. pound in goods.
and under the value. of ii.C.li. shall keep and find one Corslet, or Pike, one
pair of Almaine Riuettes, one cote of piate, or one pair of Brygandines, two
long Bows, two sheafes of Arrows, and two Skulles.

Item every person having in goods and cattelles the value of.xl.li. or
above, Forty pound in goods.
and under the value of one.C.li. shall keep and find two pair of Almayne
Ryuetes, or two cotes of plate, or Brygandines, one long bow, one sheafe of
Arrows, one steel Cappe or Skull, and one Black byll or Halberde.

Item every such person having in goods and cattelles, the value of.xx.li. or
above, Twenty pound in goods.
and under the value of.xl. pounds, shall keep and find one pair of Almayne
Ryuettes, either one cote of plate, or else one pair of Brygandynes, two long
Bows, two sheafes of Arrows, two Skulles or steel Cappes, and one black
Byll or Halberde.

Item every person having in value in goods and cattelles Ten pound in goods.
.x.li. or above, and under the value of.xx.li. shall keep and find one long
bow, one sheafe of Arrows, one steel Cappe or Skull, and one black Byll or
Halberde.

And every person or persons having at this present, Annuitie. Term of life.
or hereafter shall have any Annuitie or yearly fee, Inheritance.
or any copy hold, for term of life, or inheritance, not charged by this
Act, Coptholde to the yearly value.
to the clear yearly value of.xxx. pound or above: shall keep and find such
furniture of Armor and weapons in every degree, according to the proportions
and rates before expressed, limited for goods and cattels.

Item that every person which by virtue of the Act made in the Wives apparel.
.xxxiii. year of the rain of King. H. viii. Cap. v. was bound (by reason that
his wife should wear such kind of apparel or other thing, as in the said
Statute is specially mentioned and declared) to keep or find one great stoned
trottyng horse, and is not by this act before charged to have, keep and
maintain any Horse or Geldynge: shall by force of this act, be bound to keep,
and to have and maintain, one Geldnge hable and mete for a light horseman,
with sufficient harnes and weapon for the same, in such manner and form as
every temporal person having lands as is aforesaid, of the clear yearly
value of one hundred marks, is charged and appointed to have and maintain by
this present act.

And if any of the persons above remembered, Forfaytures.
shall by the space of three hole months, want the said number and kinds of
Horses, Geldinges, Armor, weapon, and furniture aforesaid, after such rate,
proporcion and form as is before limited: that then every such person shall
forfayt and loose for every such three months for every Horse or Geldynge so
lackyng, ten pounds: for every Dimilaunce and furniture of the same, three
pounds: And for every Corslet and furnyture of the same.xl.s. And for every
Almayne Ryuet, Cote of plate or Brigandine.xx.s. And for every Bow, sheafe of
Arrows, Bill, Haulberd, Haquebut, steel Cappe, skull, Murryon, and Sallet.x.s.

Against the carrying and conuayinge of Horses and Mares out of the Realm.
NOne shall carrye or convey out of the Realm any Horse, Anno. 11. H. 7. Ca,
13.
or any Mare, the price of which Mare shall be above.vi.s. viii.d. and under the
age of three years, without license: upon pain of forfayture Forfayture
of the same Horse and Mare. Nevertheless every subject of this Realm may
carry any such Horse for their own use, taking an oath before the Customer of
the port where he embarketh, that he entendeth not to sell the same Horse.

None shall sell, An. i. Ed. 6. Cap. 5.
convey, exchange, give or deliver into the Realm of Scotland, to the use of
any Scottishman, or into any place beyond the Sea out of this Realm, any
Horse, Geldyng, or Mare, without special license under the great Seal,
Forfaiture
or under the privy Signet: nor shall sell, convey, exchange, give, or deliver
to any Scottishma^ within this Realm, or the marches of the same, to thyntent
to be conveyed into Scotland, any Horse, Mare, or Geldinge, without like
license, upon pain of forfayture of the same Horse, Mare or Geldyng, and the
sum of.xl.li. for every such Horse, Geldyng, or Mare, and to suffer
imprysonment by the space of one hole year.

And it shall be lawefull to every subject of this Realm, Artest and imprison.
to arrest and impryson every Scottyshman, and every other person that shall
lead or convey (contrary to the meaning of this act) any such Horse Geldyng,
or Mare. And that every person that shall have such license to carry any such
Horses, Mares, or Geldynges into Scotland, shall, before the said carryage or
conueyaunce of them, upon the pain of forfayture of the same, or the double
value thereof, show his said license to one of the wardens of the three
Marches of England, The license to be kalendred.
foranempst Scotland, to thyntent that one of them shall cause the number of
the said Horses, Mares, or Geldings, not only to be kalendred in a book,
remaynyng in his own custody: but also to be indorsed and written on the
backsyde of the said license, and the same indorsement to be sygned with the
hand of the said Warden.

If any person shall exchange or deliver within the Realm of Scotland,
Anno. 23. H. 8. Ca. 16.
or in any place or ground called the Batable land, or ground between
England and Scotland, to the use of any Scottyshman, any Horse, Gelding, or
Mare, Felouie.
without license under the great seal: or sell, exchange, or deliver to any
Scottishman within the Realm of England, Wales, the town of Barwike, or the
Marches of the same, or in any of the said Batable ground, any Horse, Geldyng
or Mare, to the intent to be conveyed into Scotland, without like license, shall be
adjudged and demed by the law a felon. And this offense is made felony, as well
in the seller, An. i. Eliz. Reg. Cap. 8.
exchaunger, or delyuerer, as in him or them to whom the said sale, exchange
or delyuery shall be made.

The Wardens of the three Marches in their warden courts, and the Justices of
peace in their quarter sessions, shall enquire, hear and determine any such
felony.

And it shall be lawful to every subject of the Realm, 23. Hen. 8. Cap. 16.
and inhabiting on the foresaid Marches foranempst Scotland, to arrest any
Scottishman, leading or conueying any such horse, Geldyng or Mare out of the
Realm. Arrest.


And although this last resited Statute of xxiii. H. viii. was repealed by the
several Statutes of An. i. Ed. vi. and An. i. Regi. Marie: Yet it is now fully
revived by the Statute of Anno. i. Eliza. Regine. Cap. viii.

A collection of the substance of certain necessary Statutes, to be by the
Justices of peace diligently executed, within every Shire of the Realm.

Publyshed. Anno Domini. 1561.

Anno Regin. Elizabet. 3.

THE TABLE.
i. Of Alehouses. ii. Of Apprentises. iii. Of Archery. iiii. Of plays and
games. v. Of Rebellion. vi. Of Regrators and forestallers. vii. Of Tyllage.
viii Of vyttayles and wood. ix Of Wynes. x. Of Wooddes. xi. Against Uacabundes.
xii. Against reteyners and geuers of liueries. xiii For robberies and watches.
xiiii Against reporters of slanderous tales and news. xv. For repayryng and
amendyng of high ways.
Of Alehouses. Anno. v. Edw. vi. Cap. xxv.
Justices of peace shall remove common Alehouses, and typlyng houses where they
shall think meet.

None shall be suffered to keep any common Alehouse or tiplinge house, but such
as shall be admitted in the sessions of the peace, or by two Justices of peace,
and they shall be bound by recognisaunce against the vsyng of unlawful games,
and for mayntaynaunce of good rule.

The Justices of peace shall certify the recognisaunce at the next quarter
sessions.

Justices of peace in their quarter sessions shall enquire and determyne of them
that be so admitted and bound.

If any not admitted shall keep a common Alehouse or tippling house, the
Justices of peace shall commit him to the common gayle for.iii. days, and
before his deliverance shall take recognisaunce with two suerties, that he
shall not keep any alehouse or typling house.

The Justices shall certify those recognisau^ces and offenses, at the next
quarter sessions, which certificate shall be of conviction of the offense,
and.xx.s. shall in the sessions be assessed for the fine.

Fayres be excepted.

Of Apprentices. An. 7. Hen. 4. Cap. xvii.
APprentice where his father and mother cannot dispend.xx.s. by year, his
covenant shall be void, and he shall be put to such labor as his father and
mother uses, or to some other as his estate requires, upon pain of a years
imprisonment, and to make fine and ransom to the king, and he that reteyneth
him shall pay.C.s. to the king, if the yerelye value of his fathers and
mothers land be not first testified under the seal of the two Justices of
peace of his country. And he that will sue for the king shall have the one
half. And in every leete, they that be out of services, shall be sworn to
serve, or else put in suerties until they will serve.

And this suit shall be taken as well before the Justices of peace, as other
Justices.

By Anno. viii. Henri. vi. Capit. ii. London is except. And by Anno. xi. Hen.
vii. Cap. ii. Norwich is except.

Of Archery. An. xxxiii H. viii. Cap. ix.
Every Subject under.xl. years of age, not having impediment (except spiritual
men Justices and Barons of thescheker) shall use shotyng in long bows, and
have a bow and arrows ready.

The fathers and rulers of men children shall bring them up in shootyng, and
have in his house for every man child of.vii. year old till he come to.xvii. a
bow and two shaftes, and to abate the money for them of their wages, upon
forfeture.vi.s.viii.d. for every month lacking.

Every man after his age of.xvii. years, shall have a bow and four arrows,
and occupye the same, upon forfaiture of.vi.s.viii.d. for every month lacking.
None under.xxiiii. years shall shote at pricks upon forfaiture of.iiii.d. for
every shote. None above.xxiiii. years shall shote at a mark of.xi. score or
under with any prickshaft, under pain of.vi.s.viii.d. for every shote* None
under.xvii. years, except he, his father or mother have.x.li. lands, or be
worth xl. marks in goods, shall shote in any bow of ewe bought for him, upon
forfaiture of.vi.s. viii.d.

Buttes shall be made and continued in every place by thinhabitauntes. upon
forfeture.xx.s. for every three months lacking. The inhabitants shall
exercise shoting in holy days and times convenient.

Bowyers out of London for every bow that he makes of ewe, shall make four of
Elm, witch, or other apt wood, upon forfaiture.iii.s iiii.d. for every bow
lackyng: and in London for every bow of ewe, shall make two of Ash, Elm, or
other wood meet.

No Bowyers shall sell any bow of Ewe for any under.xiiii. years, above.xii.d.
And shall have bows of Ewe for them fro.vi.d. to.xii.d and for them under.xxi.
years, at reasonable prices: and shall sell no bow of Ewe of the tax called
olke, above.iii.s.iiii.d. upon forfaiture of.xx.s. Bowstaues of Ewe shall be
sold open, and not in bundels.

Fletchers of London may sell timber to other: and ordinances made by their
Wardens or otherwise to the contrary, to be void.

Bowyers, Fletchers, Stringers, Arrowhed makers in London, not free, shall by
thapointment of one of the Council, inhabit in other towns, upon forfaiture
of.xl.s. No alien not denizen shall conueye out of the kings obeysaunce any
long bows or arrows, upon forfeture thereof or the value, and to have
imprisonment till he have made a fine before the Justices of peace, or find
suertie for the fine, nor use shootyng without license, upon forfaiture of
their bows and arrows to the^ that will sease.

Justices of Assise, Gayle delivery, and of the peace, and Stewardes of letes
to enquire and determine the premises.

Of plays and games. An. 33. H. 8. Cap. 9.
NOne for gain shall keep any common place of bowlyng, tenys, dysyng, or
carding, or unlawful game, upon forfaiture of.xl.s. every day. Every person
haunting the same, to forfeite for every tume.vi.s.viii.d. Every placard for a
common gaming house, shall contein what game shall be there used, and who shall
play thereat, or else to be void: and the party obteyning such placard, to be
bound in the Chauncery to use the placarde not otherwise.

Justices of peace and head officers, to resort to suspected places, and to
imprison the kepers and players, until they have found suertie to leave it.
The head officers to make search monthly in suspect places upon forfaiture
of.xl. s. No artificer, husbandman, apprentise, nor servant, shall play at
tables, tenis, dice, cards bowls, or other unlawful game out of Christmas,
upon forfaiture of.xx.s. And in Christmas in their masters houses or presence.
None shall bowl in open place without his Garden or Orchard, upon forfaiture
of.vi.s.viii.d. Justices of peace and head officers shall commit to ward such
as shall use unlawful games, till they be bound to the contrary.

All suits upon the Statute to be co^mensed within the year. The Lord of the
Let to have the one moitie, and he that will sue to have the other: and out of
fraunchises the king to have the one moitie. Proclamation to be made by the
Justices and head officers four times in the year in every market and sessions.

Against Rebellion. An. 1. Mar. Cap. 12.
IF.xii. or above assembled together, entend or practice with force and of
their own authority, to change any laws made for religion by Parliament, or
any Statutes: or to overthrow, cut, break or dygge up the pales, hedges,
ditches, or other inclosiers of any park, or ground enclosed, or the banks
of any fishepond or poole, or any conduit, conduit heads, or pypes having
course of water, to the intent that the same should remain not enclosed, or
void: or unlawfully to have common or way in the said park or ground: or to
destroy the Dear in any park, or any warren of Connies, or any douehouses, or
any fish in any ponde or poole: or to pull or cut down any houses, barnes,
mylles, or bays: or to burn any stacke of corn, or to abate the rent of any
lands, or the price of any victual, they being commanded (by the Sheriff
or any Justice of peace, Mayor, or bailiffe of any town corporate where such
assemble shall be) by Proclamation in the Queen's name, to retire to their houses,
and shall remain together by one hour after the Proclamation, or after shall
in forcible manner attempt any thing abouesayde, this is felony.

It is felony in any person, that without authority by ringing any bell,
soundyng any trumpet, drum, horn, or other instrument, fyryng any beacon,
malicious speaking any words, making any outcry, setting up or castyng any
writing, or by any act shall reyse or cause to be raised.xii. persons or
above, to the intent that the same persons should do any thing above mentioned:
which persons so reised, after commandment as is aforesaid, do continue
together, or unlawfully do any thing abouesayde.

It is felony in any wife or servant, or any other, that without compulsion
shall send, deliver or convey any money, harneis, artillery, weapon or victuell
to any so assembled, which do not depart to their houses after commandment as
is aforesaid.

If above.ii. and under.xii. assembled together, entende or practice with force
of their own authority, to kill any subject, or to overthrow, cut,
break, or dygge up the pales hedges, diches, or other closure of any park or
ground enclosed, or the bank of any fishpond or poole, to the intent that the
same should remain open or void, or to have common or way there: or to destroy
any park, fysheponde, or poole, or any warren of Connyes, or any douehouse: or
to pull or cut down any house, barn mylle, or to burn any stackes of corn,
or alter or abate the rentes of any lands of any subject, or the price of
any victuell, or any other thing usual for the sustenaunce or apparel of
men, and being commanded as aforesaid, to retire to their houses, and shall
not so do, but after shall in forcible manner attempt or put in ure any of the
things last mentioned, they shall suffer imprisonment by a year.

If any shall be damnified by the doing or puttyng in ure of any thing above
mentioned, he shall recover against the offenders, damages with the costs of
the suit trebled.

If above two unlawfully assemble, to the intent with force to do or put in ure
any of the things abouesayde, it shall be lawful to every Justice of peace,
Sheryffe, Mayor, Baylyffe, or head officer of any town corporate, or any
other having the Queen's Commission or letters, as well to raise the subjects in
manner of war, in such number as he shall think mete, to the intent by
strength to suppress and take the persons so assembled, and that if those
persons so assembled, after such commandment by proclamation, shall continue
together, and not endeavor them selves to return toward their habitacions, in
such short time as they may conveniently: then it shall be lawful to them
having authority as is aforesaid, to suppress and take them so unlawfully
assembled, and that if any of them shall fortune to be killed or hurt about
the suppressyng or taking of them, every person having authority as is
aforesaid, shall be vnpunyshable of such kyllyng or hurtyng.

Every copyholder and fermer being yoman, artificer, husbandman, or labourer
of.xviii. years old, or under.lx. not impotent, nor having reasonable excuse,
being required by the^ having authority as is aforesaid (they declaring their
authority) or being required by the lord immediate of their copyholde, or by
the landlorde of the ferme, to serve the Queen for any cause abouesayde, and
refuse so to do, shall during his life lose to his lord all their copyholdes,
and to his landlord his ferme, and they to enter into the same, and to reteyne
the same during the life of the offendour.

If any which shall be moved to make co^motion or unlawful assemblye for any of
the intentes abouesaid, do not within.xxiiii. hours (unless he have
reasonable excuse) declare the same to a Justice of peace or Sheriff, Mayor,
Bailiffe, or other head officer of town corporate, where such is, he shall be
imprisoned by three months, unless he be discharged by three Justices of
peace, of that Shire (whereof one to be of the Quorum.) If any above.xviii.
years old, and under.lx. able to serve, which shall be required by any Justice
of peace, or the sheriff there, or by the Mayor, Bayliffe, or other head
officer of any town corporate, or by any of their commandments, to go
with him to suppress the persons unlawfully assembled, do wyllyngly and
obstinately refuse so to do, he shall be imprisoned by a year.

If the Queen by letters patentes make any lieftenaunt in any shire for the
suppression of any commotion: then the Justices of peace, sheriffs, head
officers, and all subjects there, (except they have reasonable excuse) shall
upon declaration of the letters patentes and request made, be bound to give
attendaunce upon the lieftenaunt, to suppress the commocion, upon pain of
imprisonment of a year.

If any do let, hinder, or hurt any that shall proclayme or go to proclaim
the proclamation, whereby the proclamation shall not be made, he so offending
having knowledge of his message, shall incur such pain and forfeiture, as
the persons assembled should have incurred for not obeying the proclamation, if
it had been made.

And every person assembled to the number aforesaid, to attempt or do any thing
aforsaid, to whom proclamation should or ought to have been made (if the same had
not ben let, as is aforesaid) if they do afterward commit any thing
aforesaid, having knowledge of the let so made, or procuryng the same let,
shall incur like pain and forfaitures aforesaid, as though the proclamation
had been made.

Theffect of this act shall be declared at every quarter sessions, and at every
Let.

The heir of every offender aforesaid, and al other, except such persons as
shall be attainted, convicted, or outlawed of any felony aforesaid, shall enjoy
all such right and interest, as they have or shall or ought to have, as if
such atteynder had never ben made.

Saving to al persons their liberties and fraunchises.

If any procure any to do any of the offenses aforesaid, he shall suffer
such imprisonment as is before expressed against conceilours of such offenses.

If forty or mo assemble in forcible manner, and of their own authority, to
the intent to do any of the things abouesayde, or other felonious or rebellious
act, and so shall continue together three hours after Proclamation made, at
or nygh the place of the assemble, or in some market town next, and after
notice thereof to them given: every of them shall be adjudged a felon.

No lieftenaunt shall make any deputy, nor shall convent before him by
authority of lieftenau^cie any, for any cause, save only for causes expressed
in this act.

None shall be put to any loss or punishment as accessory to any of the
offenders aforesaid, for receiving, comforting, or aydyng any such offendour,
after such act committed or done. None attainder or conviction for any
offense aforesaid, shall be corruption of blood between the offender and any of
his Auncesters, or such as should be heir unto him, if no such attainder or
conviction had been.

Of Regrators, forestallers, and Ingrocers. An. v. Ed. vi. Cap. xiiii.
HE that shall bye any thing coming toward any market or fair to be sold,
or coming toward any place from beyond the sea to be fold, or make any
bargayne or promise for having the same before it shall be in the market, fair,
or place to be sold, or make any mocion for inhauncing of the price, or
dissuade any coming to the market or fair, to abstain to bring any thing
thither to be sold, shall be adjudged a forestallor.

He that shall regrate or get into his hands in any fair of market any
vyttayle, and do sell the same again, there or in any other fair or market
within.iiii. miles thereof, shall be taken a Regrator.

He that shall ingrosse and get into his hand by bying or promise (other then
by demise or lease of land or tithe) any dead vyttayles to sell again,
shall be taken an ingrocer.

The offenders aforesaid, shall for the first offense be imprisoned by two
months, and forfeit the value of the thing bought. And for the second
offense, shall have imprisonment by half a year, and forfait the double value
of the thing bought, and for the third offense, be on the pyllory, and forfait
all his goods, and be imprisoned at the kings pleasure.

Bying of barley, big, or otes to make malt, or bying of any thing by an
inholder or vittailer as concerning his faculty to sell again by retayle upon
reasonable price, or taking of vyttayle reserved upon a lease, or bying of
vittayl by any bager, or carier, or drouer that shall be allowed, or common
provision made for any town, ship, or forte, without forestallyng, shall not
be judged any offense.

Bying of sold corn, and having sufficient before for his own provision, not
bringyng so much to the market, shall forfait the double value.

Bying of quick cattle, and sellyng of the same within.v. wekes, shall lose
the double value.

Justices of peace shall enquire and determine the offenses aforesaid.

Of Tyllage and increase of Corn. Anno. v. Ed. vi.
As Much land shall be put in Tillage, and so continue in every town, as was in
tyllage by.iiii. years since. An. i. H. viii. upon forfeiture for every acre,
for every year.v.s.

The king may direct commissions, and the Commissioners shall search by the
other of.xii. men, what lands in every town, have since An. i. Hen. viii. ben
converted from tyllage to pasture, and so continues. And the.xii. men shall
present the names of thoccupiers thereof, and their presentment shall be estreted
into the Eschequer.

The Commissioners shall take an oath to execute the Statute, and shall direct
their precept to the Sheriff, to warn men to enquire and present the
premises, and to set fines, issues, and amerciamentes, and estrete the same
into the Eschequer.

Certain grounds be excepted.

Justices of Assise, of Oyer and determiner, and of the peace, shall enquire
and certify the presentmentes, and the party grieved may tend his trauers.

Sheriffs shall not enter into any liberties for thexecution of this act.

He that is sued by force of this act, shall not be sued by any Statute before
made for reformation of this matter.

Of Uictuales and wood. An. 1. and. 2. Philippi and Marie.
NOne shall carry out of England any corn or malt, bear, butter, cheese,
herryng or wood, except to Callis, Hames, Gines, and Barwike, upon forfeiture
of the ship or vessel, and the double value of the thing carried, and the
master and mariners of the ship, to forfeite all their goods, and to be in
prison by a year.

And if any convey any things aforesaid, to any vessel on the sea, or within
any place of the border of this realm, to be carried out, the forfeitures to be
as is aforesaid.

If any obteynyng any license to the contrary, or his assigns, do carry any
more then shall be in the license, he shall forfeit the treble value of the
thing, and suffer imprisonment by a year.

None having license shall lade at sundry places, upon forfeture of the thing,
and all his goods.

Justices of peace shall enquire and examine all offenders of this act, and
determine the offenses.

When corn is at certain prices, it may be carried over.

Uyttaylyng of ships is excepted. The Admiral may execute his jurisdiction.

Of Wines. An. vii. Ed. vi. Cap. v.
NOne shall retayle any Gascon or French wines, but at.viii.d. the gallon, and
Rochell wine but at.iiii.d. the gallon, nor any other wine, but at.xii.d. the
gallon, upon forfeiture of five pound for every offense.

None except he have of yearly profytes certain.C. marks, or be worth in
goods a thousand marks, or the son of a Duke, Marquis Earl, Uiscount or
Baron, shall have in his house to spend any piece of Goscoine, French or
Rochell wine, above ten gallons, upon forfayture of.x.li.

None shall keep any tavern or sell by retaile any wines, except certain
places appointed in the statute, and except such as have the kings and Queen's
letters, upon forfayture for every day.xx.li.

None shall keep any tavern, nor retayl any wine, but such as shall be assigned
thereunto by writing, upon forfayture of.v.li. for every day.

There shall be assygned but two tauernes in every town (except certain towns.)

Forty tauernes shall be in London, and certain number is appointed for diverse
cities and towns.

None shall sell by retayle any wynes to be spent in his house, upon
forfayture. of.x.li.

Merchants aduenturing for wines, may spend in his house such wynes as he
brings into England, not sellinge it.

Sherifes and head officers of towns corporate, and kepers of Fortes, may have
wine in their houses, to spend there, without sellyng.

Justices of peace, Stewardes of letes, Sherifes, and eschetours, may enquire
by.xii. men of these offenses, the moytie of the forfaytures there found to
the king, and the other to the poor people of that place. This Act shall not
take away the privileges of the universities.

Of woods. Anno* 35. Hen. 8. Cap. 17.
Upon woods, Copyes, or underwoods, there shall be left vnfelled for every acre
felled.xii. standels like to prove timber, which shall be preserved till they be
of.x. inches square within three foot of the ground, upon forfayture for every
standell so not left.iii.s.iiii.d.

Al copies and underwoods at thage of.xiiii. years, during.iiii. years shall be
enclosed, or the springes thereof preserved, upon forfayture for every
rode.iii.s.iiii.d. for every month.

All copies and underwoods felled above the age of xiiii. years, during.vi.
years shall be enclosed, or the spring preserved, upon forfayture
of.iii.s.iiii.d. for every month. None shall return into pasture or tyllage
any copies or underwoods, contayninge two acrees, now preserved for thyncrease
of wood, upon forfaiture for every acre.xl.s.

Every person having any several woods or copyes with great trees above.xxiiii.
years groth, shall at the fellinge leave for every acre xii. trees, to be
preserved during.xx. years. And duringe seven years enclose them, or preserve
the sprynges, upon forfayture for every of those trees felled, six shillinges
eight pence, and for every rode.iii.s.iiii.d. Saving those trees may be cut
down for buildinges and reparations.

None having woods, wherein any has common, shall sell those woods, but to his
own occupatio^, til the fourth part be by the owner enclosed as is declared in
this act.

And at every fellinge, it shall be enclosed and preserved.vii. years, and no
beasts during those.vii. years, shall be suffered to feed in that part, and the
commons to have their common in the residue, and the lord is excluded to put
any cattle there, or to take any profit of the pasture there, during
those.vii. years, and after the.vii. years, al to lie in common for the lord
and the commons.

And if that part enclosed be not felled within four months, then the
commons to use their common, and the owner to leave open places, whereby the
common beasts may come in as long as it shall stand vnfelled. Certain places
and former bargaynes be excepted.

Breakers of fences shall forfayt.x.s.

If any suffer his swine to go in any common or woods not ringed or pegged, the
owner shall forfait for every swine.iiii.d.

Where woods shall be felled in any ground enclosed where dear shall be kept, the
enclosure shall be kept for four years. If the enclosures be broken against the
wills of the owner, the penalties to be extended upon those by whom the
spring shall be hurted. After the woods preserved by two years, Coltes and
Calves under a year old may be put there.

Against Uacaboundes. An. 22. Hen. 8. Ca 12.
THe Justices of peace, Mayres, sheryffes, baylyffes and other officers within
their limits shall divide them selfs, and so divided, shall make diligent
search and inquiry of all aged, poor, and impotent persons, which of
necessity be compelled to live of alms, that shall be abiding within the
limittes of their division, and thereupon shall have power by their discretions,
to enable to beg within their limittes, such impotent persons which they shall
think convenient within the limits of their division, to live of alms, and
to command them not to beg without the limittes to the^ so appointed, and
shall write the names of every such beggar in a roll indented, whereof the one
part to remain with them selves, and the other to be certified at the next
sessions of the peace: and they so divided shall have power to make seals with
the names of the hundredes, Rapes, Wapentakes, Cities, Boroughes, towns, or
places, within which they shall limit every such beggar, and shall deliver to
every such beggar a letter sealed with the said seal, and subscribed with
the name of one of the said Justices or officers, containing his name, and
wytnessynge that he is aucthorised to beg, and his limittes: and if he beg
out of his limittes, the Justice of peace and all other the kings officers,
shall imprison him in the stocks by two days and two nights, giving him only
bread and water: and after shall cause him to be sworn to return without
delay to the place whee he is aucthorised to beg in.

No impotent person shall beg, except he be aucthorised by writing under
seal as is abouesayde: and if any impotent person go a beggynge having no
such letter, the Constables and other inhabitauntes there, shall cause them to
be brought to the next Justice of peace, or high Constable of the hundred, who
shall cause the bringers to strip him naked from the the middle upward, and
cause him to be whipped, where the said Justice or high constable shall
appoint, or else command him to be set in stocks where he was taken by three
days and three nights, there to have only bread and water, and thereupon the
said Justice or high Constable shall limit ot him a place to beg in, and give
him a letter under seal as is aforesaid, and swear him to repair thither
immediately.

It any being whole and able to labor be taken in begging, or having no land,
master, nor vsinge any lawful marchaundise or craft to get his living, be
vagaraunt and can give no reckenyng how he does get his living: then it
shall be lawefull to the Constables and subjects of every place, to arest him
and bring him to any Justice of peace, or to the high Constable of that place:
and if he be taken in any town corporate, the^ to be brought to the Mayor,
sheriffs, or bayliffes there, and they to cause him to be had to the next
place where they shall think convenient, and there to be tied to the end of a
cart naked, and to be beaten with whippes thorowout that place till his body be
blouddy, and then he by them to be enjoined by his other to return forthwith
the next way to the place where he was borne, or where he last dwelt by three
years, and there to put him self to labor: and he to have a letter sealed
with the seal of the place wherein he shall be punyshed, witnessing that he has been punished according to this estatute, and contayninge the day and place of
his punishment, and the place whereunto he is limited to go, and by what time
he is limited to come thither: within which time he may lawfully beg by the
way. And if he do not accomplish that letter, then to be eftsoon whypped: and
so often as any default shall be in him, in every place to be whypped til he be
repaired where he was borne, or where he last dwelt by three years, and there to
labor for his living.

And if any so whipped be an ydell person, and no common beggar: then after
such whipping he shall be kept in stocks til he have found suertie to go to
service or labor, or else to be sworn to repair where he was borne, or where
he last dwelt by three years, and to have like letter and punishment if he
eftsoon offend, as is above appointed for the common strong beggar* and so
from time to time til he get his living. Justices of peace shall have power to
inquire of all Majors and other officers and persons that shall be negligent in
executing this act. If the Constables and inhabitauntes where any such
impotent persons or strong beggars do beg, be negligent, and do not punysh
him as is above limited, the Towneshyppe for every such impotent beggar, shall
forfeyt.iii.s.iiii.d. and for every strong beggar.vi.s.viii.d. the moytie. etc.

All Justices of peace shall have power to determine every such default, and to
make process by distress against the inhabitauntes there, by which
diffresse, the Sheriff shall deteyne the good of such one or two of the said
inhabitaunts, as he may have knowledge were most negligent in the execution of
this act, and the said distress reteyne till he find suertie to appear at
the sessions limited in the said dystresse: and if he appear and confess
the default, or transgress the presentment, and it be tried against him* or
deny the information, and it is proved against him: then the Justices of peace
in their sessions shall assesse their fynes, and to make process for the
leuying of the same be distress of the inhabitauntes of the town: the fine if
it grow by presentment, to the king, and if it grow by information, then the
moytis to him that sueth. etc. If any person dystrained appear not, then upon
the return he shall lose at the first.iii.s.iiii.d. and at the second.
vi.s.viii.d. and so to be doubled for every distress.

Scholars of universities that go a beggyng not being aucthorised under the
seal of the university: and all shypmen pretendynge losses on the sea, going
a beggynge without authority, shall be punyshed like strong beggars. And all
proctours and pardoners going without authority, and all other ydell
persons, some vsyng unlawful games, and some faynyng to have knowledge in
Physic, Phisnomie, Palmestry, or other crafty sciences, if he before two
Justices of the peace, whereof one to be of the Quorum, be found guilty, shall be
whypped two days together after the manner before rehearsed, and for the second
offense to be scourged two days, and the third day to be put on the pyllory
from nine of the clock unto eleven, and to have one of his ears cut of, and
for the third time to have like punishment, and to have his other ear cut of.

The Justices of peace have like authority within their fraunchises.

This act shall be yearly read in the opne sessions. If any give harborowe or
money to any beggar hable to work, he shall make fine to the king, by the
discretion of the Justices of peace at their general sessions.

If any let the execution of this act, or make rescues, he shall forfeit.C.s.
and have imprisonment at the kings will: the one moitie. etc.

This act shall not be prejudicial to the Barons and inhabitauntes of the.v.
ports.

And the Mayor, Bayliffes electes, and Iurates in any town within the five
ports, have like authority as the Justices of peace have in any shyre.

And the inhabitauntes within the said five ports, shall be bound to thexecution
of this act, upon like pain before remembered. And if any that shall inhabit
within the.v. ports, beg without the.v. ports, he to be punyshed according
to this act: every letter to be made whereby any impotent shall be aucthorised to
beg, shall be made in this form. Kent. S. Memorandum that A. B. of. D. for
reasonable considerations, is licensed to beg within the hundred of P. K. and
L. in the said county, given under the seal of that lymytte. Tali die and
anno. And every letter delivered to such beggar or vagabound after he has been
whipped, shall be made in this wise.

Kent. S. I. S. whypped for a vagabound strong beggar at Dale, in the said
county, according to the law. the.xii. day of July, in the xxiii. year of
king Henry the.viii. was assigned to pass forthwith and directly from thence
to Gale in the county of Mid. where he says he was borne, or where he last
dwelled by the space of three years, and he is limited to be there within
fourtene days next ensuynge at his peril. In witness whereof the seal of the
limyt of the said place of his punyshement hereunto is set. And every such
letter above rehearsed, shall be made at the equal costs of such Justices,
Majors, and other officers above rehearsed, and shall be subscribed with one of
their hands, after this form. per me A. B. vnum iustitiariorum pacis, or
Maiorum ciuitatis, or Ballium villa, or Constabularium talis, hundredth, or
else in like form in English.

And they that have the custody of any gaoles, shall make a seal granted,
with the name of the prison or Jail, and they that be delivered out of prison
for suspicions of felony, and have not wherewith to pay their fees, shall have
liberty to beg for their fees by.vi. weeks, and then compelled to go where
he was borne, or where he last dwelled by three years: and every one so
delivered, shall have a letter ot him delivered by the clarke of the peace, or
by the town clarke where he is delivered, witnessing the time and space of his
deliverance, and before whom, and the time appointed him to beg for his fees,
and the place whyther he is assigned to go, and to every such letter the
Jailer shall put to the seal before rehearsed: and every such letter shall be made
in this wise following. Essex S. the.xx. day of July. An. regn. regis. H
viii.xxiiii.I.S. was delivered for felony out of the Jail of D. in the said
county, at the sessio^s holden before A.B. and his fellows at Gale, the day
and year aforesaid, and is allowed to beg for his fees by the space of.vi.
wekes, and in case he can get him no master to work with within the said
term, then he is assigned to pass directly to Dale, in the said county of
Kent, where he said he was borne, or where he last dwelled by the space of three
years, and he is allowed.xiiii. days next after ye said.vi. wekes for his
passage thither. In witness whereof the seal of the said prison is hereunto
set.

And in such shires where is no Jail, the sheriff shall cause a seal to be
ingraued, with the name of the shire, and shall order and use the same in like
form. And every clarke of the peace, or town clarke, shall make for every
such person so delivered, the said letter, without any fee therefore taken, and
deliver it to the Jailer: or the sheriff of the shire, if there be no Jailer,
within one day after the sessions, upon pain of forfaityng for default of
every letter xii.d. to the king. Nor the gaolers nor sheriffs shall suffer
none to depart out of prison; except it be to service or labor, without he
first deliver him the said letter sealed with the said seal, under like
pain for every default.

And if any being delivered out of prison, do beg without having such letter,
or do beg contrary to the tenor of his letter, then he to be taken and
whipped, as above is said of the strong beggars, and that to be done, upon
such pain as is before limited for none execution of punishment of strong
beggars.

Every person being bound by any foundation to give any money in alms, and
every perosn at common doles used at burials or obits to give money in alms to
all persons coming to such doles, may give as they before this time have done.

Masters of hospitals may lodge any person according to their foundation, and
to give money in alms, in such wise as they are bound to do.

Against vacabundes. An. 3. Ed. 6. Cap. 16.
IF any aged or impotent offend this Statute, he shall be punyshed as is
provided in the statute of.xxii. H. viii. Cap. xii.

Common laborers hable in body, vsyng loytering and refusing to work for such
reasonable wages as is most commonly given where he dwells, shall be for every
refusell adjudged a vacabunde, and shall be punyshed as strong and mighty
vacabundes, in such form as is declared in the said act of.xxii.

All Majors, Sheriffs, Bayliffes, Constables or head officers of City, Town,
or Uyllage, shall before the Purification. An. M.D.xlix. see all such idell,
impotent, maimed, and aged persons, who can not be taken for vacabundes which
were borne there, or have been there most conuersaunt by three years, and now
decayed, provided of houses, at the costs of the said town, there to be
relieved and cured by the devotion of the people there. And that they do not
suffer there any other to beg within that precinct, except such as are
aucthorised by this act, upon forfeture for every.iiii. days.x.s. to him that
will sue. Majors, Bayliffes, Sheriffs, Constables, and other head officers,
shall every month once, make a vewe of aged, impotente and lame beggars within
their precinct, and see all such as were not borne there, nor has been for the
most part there conuersaunt by three years, or be bot aucthorised by this
estatute, conveyed to the next Constables, and they to convey the^ to he next
Constables, and so from Constables to Constables, till he be brought to the
place where he was borne, or was most conuersaunt, there to be noryshed of
alms as is aforesaid, upon forfeture for every default.x.s. The one moitie.
etc.

If any such aged, maimed or impotent person, not so impotent, but that they
may work in some work: than such town shall either in common provide such
work for him as he may be occupied in, or appoint him such as will find him
work for meat and drink: which if he refuse to do, or run away and beg,
then to punyshe him with stockyng, beatyng, or otherwise as shall seem
convenient.

All lepers and bedreds may remain in such houses appointed for them, as they
be now in* and may appoint their proctours, so they be not above two for one
house, to gather alms within.iiii. miles.

Commissions may be granted to such as has their houses or barnes burned, or
such losses, or to lepers to gather alms.

If any child above five year old or under.xiiii. go wanderyng or alone, if
any that is able to keep it, will take it from any beggar being the father or
mother, or other, and bring it before one of the constables there, and there
next quarter sessions, present it in the presence of the Constable, before the
Justices of peace, and there promise to bring it up till the woman child be xv.
year old, and the manchilde.xvii. year old: these Justices shall adiudge that
child unto those ages, to be servant to him so promising, which child shall be
ordered as servants without wages, and that iudgemnet to be entered by the
clarke of the peace.

If such child run away* the master to take it, and kept it, and punyshe it at
the liberty of the master, and to have a warrau^t from a Justice of the peace
for that child running away, and thereby the child to be taken and ordered as is
provided by the Statute laborers, for servants departing out of their
masters service. If any person steal or entice away any such child so
adjudged for a servant, the master to take an action upon the Statute
laborers, against such steler or intiser, or an action of trespass, wherein he
shall recover damages, and treble costs of his suit. If the master be
unreasonable in orderyng such child, then upon complaynt made at the quarter
sessions, by two honest neighbors, yt it shall then appear by honest witness
the complaynt to be true, the Justices of peace shall discharge the child from
his master, and apoynt him to some other, and that to be written in the book
of the clerk of the peace, for which he shall have iiii.d. and shall have
also.iiii.d. for the first entrye of the child to be servant: this to be
paid by the master. If such woman child be married before.xv. years old, she
shall be discharged of service. Every vacabonde or beggar being alien, shall in
form aforesaid, and upon the forfeitures aforesaid, be conveyed from place
to place, to the palce next adioynynge to his country, or to the next port,
if there be sea between this Realm and his country, there to be kept of
inhabitauntes of that port, in convenient labor, or otherwise, till he may
be conueyde over, and than at the cosses of those inhabitauntes (if him self
shall not have wherewith) to be conveyed over to his country.

Against reteyners and geuers of liueries, made in An. 8. Ed. 4. Cap. 2.
NOne may give livery or other sign, nor reteyne any but only his manuell
servant, officer, or a man of the one law, or of the other, by any writing,
oath, or promise* And if he does contrary, the geuer shall lose. C. s. for every
month that there is any with him so retained, and the receiver. C.s. and he
that will sue, shall have an action by byll of information against as many
offenders as he will in every of the kings courts, before Justices of peace,
of Assise, and Jail delivery, or county Palentine: and in Duresme, and in
Examshire, thereupon process shall be as in trespass: except that in county
Palentine, nor in Duresme, no exigent shall be awarded: and if any of the
offenders be present in court, the Justices may command him to be brought to
answer, and first the informer shall be examined upon a book that his
complaint is true, and after they may examine that defendaunt, and judge him
convict by their discretion, as well as by trial. And the informer shall recover
the one half, and the king the other half, if it be not in city or town
that has like forfeiture by the kings grant: and that no essoigne nor
protection be allowed. And that the Sheriff or Coroner may return no less
issues at the first day then.x.s. and the second.xxx.s. and so at every
day.x.s. of increase. And if the Sheriff or Coroner do the contrary, he shall
forfeit every time.xx.s. And the Mayor and governors of cities and towns,
that have power to hear and determine plees personels, have power to examine
and to determine it as is aforesaid, as well by examination as by trial. And
upon that, the king shall have the one half, the Majors or governors the other
half, to be employed to the use of the city or town.

Item the Kings and the Queen's Majesty's pleasures are, that all other
Statutes concerning reteyners, and giving liueries, now remaynyng in force,
shall be put in execution.

The Statute of Winton for robberies, hew and cry, and for watches to be
kept.
AFter a robbery or felony done, fresh suite shall be made from town to town.
etc. and if need be, inquestes shall be made in towns, hundredes, fraunchises
and counties, so that the felones may be attaint and suffer execution: and if
they be not taken, then the people where such robbery was done, as in hundred
and fraunches, shall answer therefore. And if it be done between two shires.
etc. within.xl. days, if the misdoers be not taken. Also in great towns the
gates shall be closed from the sun rysyng to the sun setting, and no man
harborow none in the suburbs, but such as he will answer for: and the
Baylyffes of towns shall enquire of such every weke. Also watch shall be made
and kept from Assention tide till Michaelmas, in every City by.vi. men at
every gate, and in every Borow by.xii. men: in every hole town, by.vi. men
or.iiii. after the number of thinhabitau^tes, continually all night, from the
sun set, to the sun rysyng. And if any stranger come by them, he shall be
arrested until morning: and if he be suspecious, he shall be brought to the
Sheryffe to be kept until he be delivered by due order: and every town
adioining, shall be ayding to the other. Also the hye ways of markette towns
shall be enlarged, where there is any woods, hedges, ditches, or busshes nygh
the hye way.CC. foot on the one side, and.CC. foot on the other side: but this
statute extends not to oaks, nor great fustes, so that they be clear under,
and if the Lord will not do thus, if any robberyes or murder be done, he shall
answer therefore, and make fine at the kings will. Also in the hye ways in
the kings wood, or park nygh the hye ways, it shall be done after the same
manner: or else that the Lord shall make such wall, ditche or hedge, that the
evil doers can not escape: and no fair nor market be holden in any
Churchyard.

Against reporters of slanderous tales and news. W. 1. Cap. 34.
IF any person shall publyshe or forge false news, whereof discord or slander
may arise between the king and his people, or the nobles of his Realm, the
same shall be imprisoned until he shall bring forth in court, the aucthour of
such news.

Anno. ii. R. ii. Cap. v.
THe forgers and counterfeitours of false news, and horrible false messenges
of prelates, Dukes, Earls, Barons, and other nobles, and great personages of
the Realm, or of the Chauncelour, Treasorer, Clerk of the privy seal,
Steward of the kings house, Justices of the one bench or the other, or of any
other great officers of the Realm, of things which by the same Prelates,
Dukes. etc. were never spoken or thought of, to their great slander, whereof
debates and discord may arise between the said Lords and commons: shall
suffer the punyshement mentioned in the said act of W.i. until they have
brought forth in court the auctour of the said false news and messenges.

Anno. xii. R. ii. cap. xi.
ANd if the said forgers and counterfaytours, can not bring forth the aucthour
of the said false news, then they shall be punished by the advice of the kings
Counsel.

Anno. i. and. ii. Phil. and. Ma. cap. iii.
THe Justices of peace within the limits of their commission, may hear and
determine all offenses committed and done against the form of the said
several statutes.

And further if any person or persons maliciously of his or their own
ymaginacio^, speak any sedicious or slanderous news, rumors and sayings,
or tales of our soueraygne Lady the Queen's Majesty, every person so offendynge
for the first offense, shall in the market place nere where the words were
spoken* be set openly upon the pillory, and shall have both his ears cut of,
unless he pay. C.li. to the Queen's hyghnes use, within a month next after
judgment given against him, and also be imprisoned by the space of.iii.
months next after his or their execution.

If any such sedicious or slanderous news be spoken by any person, of the
report or saying of any other: then the same person, to be set openly upon the
pillory as is aforesaid, and to have one of his ears cut of, unless he pay
i.C. marks within the time, and to thuse aforesaid: and also sustain a month
imprisonment next after his execution.

And if any person maliciously devise, write, prynt, or set forth any book,
rhyme ballade, letter or writing, containing false matter, clause or sentence of
slander, reproach and dishonor of the Queen's hyghnes, or the encouragyng,
sturring or mouinge of any insurrection or rebellion, or shall procure any of
the said offenses to be done: if the same be not punishable by the statute
of.xxv.E.iii. cap. ii. touching treasons etc. the said person shall after
conviction for his first offense, in some market place have his right hand cut
of.

Item if any person once convict of any of the said offenses punyshable, by
loss of ear, ears or hand, do afterward offend in any of the said
offenses, then he shall suffer imprysonment duringe his life, and forfeite to
the Queen's hyghnes use all his goods and cattelles.

The said offenses are inquitable and determinable before justices of Oyer, and
determiner, Justice of assise or gayle delivery, or Justices of peace.

Any Justice of peace upon vehement suspicion, may commit any person suspected,
to prison, there to remain without bail or maynpryse.

Thoffenders against this act, must be accused and convict within three months
next after thoffence committed.

For repayringe and amendynge of high ways.
THE Constables and Churchwardens of every paryshe, Co^stables, and
Churchwardens.
shall yearly upon the Tuesday or Wednesday in Easter week, Tuesda or
wednesdai in Easter week.
call together a number of the parishioners, and emonges them shall elect and
choose two honest persons of their paryshe, Suruayers.
to be Surueyours and orderers of the works (for the mendynge of their high
ways leadynge to any market Town from their paryshe) for one year,
Thaucthoritie of the Suruayers.
which persons shall have authority by virtue of this Act, to order and
direct both the persons and cariages to be appointed for those works,
according to their discressions. And the same persons shall take upon them
thexecution of their offices, Pain.
upon the pain of.xx.s.

The said Constables and Churchwardens shall also name and appoint four days
for mendynge of the said high ways, How many days and before what feast
shall be appointed for the amendinge of high ways
before the feast of the Nativity of S. John Baptist then next following. And
shall openly in the Church the next Sunday after Easter, give knowledge of the
same days, upon which days the parishioners shall endeavor them selves to the
mendinge of the said high ways, and shall be charged toward the same, as
follows: that is to say.

Every person for every plough land in tillage or pasture, What persons shall be
charged for the amendynge of high ways
and every other person that keeps a draught or plough within the same
paryshe, shall find and send at every day and place in the said parish where
such ways are amendinge, one wayne or cart furnyshed after the custom of the
country, with Oxen* Horses or other cattle, and al necessaries meet for
carriage to that purpose* Pain.
and two hable men with the same, upon pain for every draught.x.s.

Every householder, Householder, Cotager and labourer.
cotager, and labourer, of the same paryshe, hable to labor, and being no
hired servant by the year, shall (either them selves, or else by some other
labourer for every of them, upon every of the said four days) work and
travail at the amendinge of the said high ways, ^ayne.
upon pain for every such person making default, for every day.xii. d.

If cariages in that paryshe shall not be thought needful by the said
Suruayers to be occupied for the amending of the ways there: Then every such
person as should have sent caryage for the purpose, shall send to the said
work, Two hable men.
for every carriage, two hable men to labor, for that day, upon pain to lose
for every man not so sent.xii. d.

Every person and caryage abouesayde, Tools for the amending of the ways.
shall bring with them such shouyls, spades, pyckes, mattockes, and other
tools, as they do make their dykes and fences withal.

The said persons and cariages shall continue at their said work. How long the
persons and cariages shall work.
viii. hours of every of the said four days, unless by special occasion
they be lycensed otherwise by the said Surueyoures, or by any one of them.

All Stewardes of leetes and lawdayes shall be aucthorised by force of this Act,
Stewards of leetes and lawdayes. Enquire.
to have full power and aucthorite, to inquire in their Courts by the oaths of
the Sutoures at the said Courts, of all offenses and misdemeynours committed
against every point and article of this act: The Stewardes to assesse fines and
amerciame^tes.
and thereupon to assesse such reasonable fynes and amerciamentes for the same,
as shall be thought mete by the said Steward.

For default of such inquiry or presentment, the Justices of peace of that
limit, Justices of peace.
shall have authority to enquire of the same offenses committed within their
commission, in every of their quarter sessions, Fine.
and to assesse such fines therefore, as they or two of them, whereof one to be
of the Quorum, shall think mete.

All Stewardes of leetes and lawedayes shall make estretes indented, Stewardes
to make estretes.
of all such fynes, forfaites and amerciamentes sessed before him, and shall
deliver the one part thereof sealed and signed by him, Baylife, high Constable.
to the Baylife or high Constable of every hundredth, Rape, Lath, or Wapentake,
wherein such offenses have been presented. And the other half to the Constable
and Churchwardens of the paryshe where such defaultes are made, and the same to
be yearly delivered within six wekes after the feast of S. Mychaell
tharchaungell.

The Clarke of the peace shall make the like estreates indented, Clerk of the
peace to make estreates.
of the fines, forfaites, and amerciamentes for such defaultes presented
before the Justices of peace, and shall deliver them sealed and subscribed with
his hand, in like sort beforesayd: which estreates shall be a sufficient
warraunt to the said Baylife or chief Constable, to gather the said fynes,
forfaites and amerciamentes by way of distress: Distress.
and if no distress can be found, or if the said offender shall be vnwyllynge
and stubboure, Refuse.
refusing to pay the said amerciamentes and fynes, and do not pay the same
within.xx. days after the said offycer has demanded the same lawfully:
Double su^me.
That then every such persons to forfait the double some that he should before
have paid.

Every of the said head Constables and Baylifes shall every year once at the
least betwixt the first day of March, and the last day of Apryll, make a true
account Account.
and payment of all such su^mes of money to the Constables or Churchwarde^s
beforesaid, or to two of them, as he shall have gathered by the said estreates,
upon pain for every time he does omit to do Pain.iii.li
the same.iii.li.

All fines, amerciamentes and forfaytures which shall be due for offenses
committed against this act, Fynes, amercia-mentes, forfaiturs, bestowed.
shall be aunswerable and delivered by the collectours thereof, to the
Churchwardens of every paryshe where the offense is committed, to be bestowed
upon amendment of the high ways of the said paryshes. And that the said
Churchwardens shall have authority by this act, Accounts before whom and in
what manner.
to call the said Baylife and head Constable before the Justices of peace or two
of them, whereof one to be of the Quoru^, to make their account, either by byll,
information or otherwise. The which Justices shall have authority by this act
to take the said account, and to commyt the said Baylife or head Constable to
prison, Prison.
there to remain until he pay such arrerages as shall be adjudged by the said
Justices. The said Baylifes and head Constables, and every of them upon their
accomptes, Allowau^ce.
shall be allowed for the collection of every pound of the said fynes,
amerciamentes and forfaites, for his or their pains viii.d. Clerk of the
peace.
And the Clearke of the peace, or Stuard of the letes and lawdayes, to have by
force hereof for the es^reatyng of the fynes. etc. xii.d. of every pound fine,
forfayture or amerciament. And the successors of such Churchwardens shall have
the like action of account against their predecessors, Successors.
as is before appointed against the Baylife.

Imprinted at LonDON IN POVVLES CHVRCH yard by Richard Judge and John Cawood,
Printers to the Queen's Majesty.

Cum priuilegio Regiae Maiestatis.


