By the Queen.
THE QUEEN'S Majesty contynuing in her former earnest disposition to deliver
this Realm from the infamy of all manner of base monyes, and to restore the
same to thauncient possession of as good monyes in fynes, as ever was in the
same, meaning thereby beside thaduancement of thonour and fame of this Realm,
to restore by course of time, thancient good chepenes and prices of all things
necessary for the use of her Subjects, has by good advise of her Counsel,
thought mete by this Proclamation to make even a full end of thabolishing of
all kind and manner of base moneys within this Realm, and therefore (...)e at
this time no other base moneys be lefully curraunt, but only two small pieces,
whereof one is yet curraunt for penny halpeny, and the other for halfpeny
farthing, and besides them as it is thought, there remains some small
quantity of three other pieces of base moneys, scantly worth consideration,
which were in former time coined one for a penny, one other for a halfpeny, and
a third for a farthing, and now not certaynelye valued, but yet among common
people taken vncertaynelye. Her Majesty gives all her Subjects to
understand, that (...)ne of all the said pieces of base moneys, nor any other
kind of base money, shall be taken or allowed to be as curraunt money within this
Realm of England, after the twenty day of July next, but to be accounted
from the said twenty day of July as Bullion, and yet for relief of all such as
shall, at, or before that time possess any of the same: Her Majesty is
pleased that whosoever shall bring any of the said two former pieces now
curraunt, for three halfpence, or three farthinges, betwixt this and the xxv.
of August next ensuing to her Myntes in the Tower, shall have for the same in
fine moneys, not only the values according to the rates of the said three
halfpence, and three sarthinges, but also in consideration of their portage,
three pence for every pound thereof, within the space of twenty days or
less, and after the said xxv. of August, until the xx. of Septembre, to have
only the value according to the several rates of three halfpence, and three
farthinges, without any allowaunce for portage: And as to the other base pieces
being taken for the values of halfpenyes and under whereof there is little
account to be made, because of the small quantity coined thereof, yet for the
satisfying of every person that shall have any such small pieces at any time
betwixt this and the twenty day of Septembre, the same shall have at the said
Mintes, the full value of the silver contained in the same, as the same shall be
duly proved, and from the said xx. of Septembre, her Majesty determines to
receive no more base moneys of this Realm, into any her Myntes. And thus her
Majesty having now as it were atcheued to the victory and conquest of this
hidiouse monster of the base moneys, which although it has had no great
continuance in this Realm, yet has the same been in part no small occasion
of many euyles in the same: Wills and requires al manner her Subjects, to
use all the expedition that they may in bringing to the Myntes all their base
monyes, that her Majesty's officers and ministers appointed (...) refyning and
coynage may spedely end this good work, and not to wast their time for lack
of spedye bryngyng in thereof, as of late they have done to the great charge of
her Majesty, and her said Ministers.

Yeuen at her Majesty's Manor of Grenewiche the xii. day of June the third
year of her Majesty's Raygne. And the year of our Lord GOD. M, D. LXI. God
save the Queen.
Imprinted at London in Powles Churchyard, by Richard Jugge and John Cawood
Printers to the Queens Majesty.

Cum priuilegio Regiae Maiestatis.


