By the Queen.
THE Queens Majesty is infourmed from the Mayor of her City of London, that
certain Ships of the North parts, are arrived in the River of Thames, laden
with Salmons and Herrynges, brought from Scotland and other forayne parts of
the North, which are according to the custom of those countries, barrelled in
caske and vessels, not so great in quantity as barrels used for such fyshe in
this Realm of England: And that yearly here tofore the like has been brought
and sold here, to the benefit of the buyers, at pryses reasonable, according
to the true contents of the barrelles, and without the empechement of any
person. And yet because the owners of the same Salmons and Herrynges (doubtyng
that some advantage might be taken by the laws of the Realm, to sease the
same fyshe as forfayted, for want of the ordinary quantity of the barrelles
refuse to vnshyppe and put the same to sale.

Therefore, for the quietyng of them, and as reason is, to comfort such as do
bring seasonable victual (...) any port of the Realm: Her Majesty has
ordered, and by these presents commands, that the said Mayor of the said
City of London, shall cause the said vessels now brought, or hereafter to
be brought, to be gaged and tried, according to the ancient custom of the
said City. And the fyshe being found seasonable, to cause the barrelles and
vessels to be marked so apparently and notoryously, that all manner of persons
desyryng to buy the same, may well know what the contents be of the same
vessels, and vow much they dyffer from others. And her Majesty commands,
that the like be done from time to t me in all other ports of the Realm,
whersoeuer any like vessels shall be brought, presently, or at any time
hereafter, with like fyshe, so as no manner of person may be deceived by the
buyng thereof, for lack of the true knowledge of the contents of the same.
And her Majesty also commands, and strayghtly charge all manner persons,
to forbear from molestyng of any stranger, or other person bryngyng the same
Salmon or H^rryng, or any like, in such barrelles, differyng in quantity from
the barrelles of England, so as the same be duly gaged, and thereupon
notorious marnes set upon the same, before they shall be put to sale, whereby
their true contents may be known, and the pryces made thereafter ratably.
Which orders and commandments her Majesty strayghtly charge and
commands all manner of persons to keep and obey, as they will aunsw^re to the
contrary, at their peryls.

Given at her Palaice of Westminster the.xxii. day of December. 1565. the eight
year of her Majesty's reign.
GOD save the Queen.
Imprinted at London in Powles Churchyard, by Richard Judge and John Cawood:
Printers to the Queens Majesty.

Cum priuilegio Regiae Maiestatis.


