By the Queen.
THe Queen's Majesty being infourmed, that in some parts of her Realm,
sundry either ignorant or malicious people do spread rumors abroad, that
the base Testons of four pence halfepeny should not be current after the end
of January next: Has thought meet (left the like false and seditious rumors
might be further spread) to do all manner her Subjects to understand, that it
has been always and so is meant by her Majesty, that all manner the base
Monyes, which has been of late decreed by Proclamacion, saving the Testons of
twopence farthyng, should continue and be current still, and so taken and paid
from Subject to Subject, at the values as they be rated by former
Proclamacion, and so to continue until the same may be by her Majesty's
Subjects brought to the Mint at London, and there exchaunged for new sterlynge
Monyes, with thallowance to the brynger, of three pence in the pound. Wherein
such expedition is made, as in a matter of such a moment, possible hitherto
could be, and shall be now from day to day much more.

And as for the pieces of two pence farthing, it is and was meant and declared
in the Proclamacion, that they should be taken as current money until the
last day of January, that day being the end of four Months from Michaelmas
last. And yet nevertheless, because within that time it shall be hard to
bring up and make exchange of the same in the Mynt with new Monyes: Her
Majesty is well pleased, that whosoever shall bring any of the same Testons
of two pence farthyng after the said last day of January to the said Mint at
London, within the space of three Months after, shall have for the same in
new silver two pence farthing: So as her Majesty means, as much as in her
shall be, to bear herein with the burden of her poor Subjects. And her
pleasure is, that this should be notified to all her loving Subjects: geuyng
also straight commandment, that no manner person do refuse to take in payment
any of the said base Monyes, that is to say: the fourepence halfpeny, the
threhalfpence, the threfarthings, at the values rated by the former
Proclamation, at any time hereafter: neither the other base Testons of twopence
farthing at the same rate, until the last day of January. And in any wise to
cause all persons doing the contrary, to be severely punished as obstinate and
sedicious.

And further, her Majesty charge all manner of officers and ministers,
diligently to see to the attachment and punishment of certain lewd and
sedicious persons, that from town to town, and Country to Country, do
carry and spread sedicious and slanderous tales, importyng to simple people a
fear, that Cattle unmarked should be forfeited: or that all people
Chrystened or Married, should pay for Chrystenynges and maryages certain
Sums of Monye to her Majesty, with such like vain and sedicious follies
never meant, nor within the compass of any meaning of her Majesty or her
Counsel. The stay whereof, by speedy and severe punishment, her Majesty
straightly requires of all manner of Iusticiaries, as they will or ought to
answer to the contrary, and from henceforth to give order, that as soon as
any such lewd tale is uttered, that the reporters thereof may be either
punished with speed, or else produce the aucthours.

Yeuen at her highness Palyce at Westminster, the xxiii. day of December.
God save the Queen.
Imprinted at London in Powles Churchyard, by Richard Jugge and John Cawood,
Printers to the Queen's Majesty. Cum privilegio Regiae Maiestatis.


