By the Queen.
WHereas the infection of the plague and pestilence does at this present
remain and continue within the Cities of London and Westminster, to the great
grief of the Queens Majesty our Sovereign Lady, and peril of many of her
good Subjects of the same, (the which almighty God for his mercy stay) and
that by access of her people thither about their lawful and necessary suites
and affairs in this next Term of Saint Michael, (the plague then enduring)
might be rather occasion to increase the same, then diminish it, which should
be great sorrow to her Highness, and danger to her whole Realm. Minding
therefore the preservation of her loving Subjects, from the peril and danger
of the said infection, has thought it expedient by the advice of her Counsel,
for sundry good considerations, to adiourne the whole Term of Saint Michael
next coming, from and in the first day thereof, unto the first day of Hyllarie
Term then next ensuing. And therefore her Majesty does signify unto all and
singular her loving Subjects, that they and every of them which has cause or
commandment to appear in any of her Highness Courts at Westminster, in or at
any day or time in the said Term of Saint Michaell, may tarry at their
dwellings, or where their business otherwise shall lie, without resorting to
any of the said Courts for that cause, before Octauis sancti Hillarii, next
coming, and that without danger of forfaiture, penalty or contempt to incur
toward her Highness in that behalf. And nevertheless her Majesty's pleasure is
that two of her Justices, that is to say, of either Bench one, shall the first
day of Michaelmas Term, called Octauis M^chaelis, according to the ancient
order of her Laws, keep the Essoines of the said (...) M(...), at which vtas
of Saint Michael, writtes of adiournement shall be directed to the said Justices,
giving them authority to adiourne the said whole Term of Saint Michaell, and
the same adiournement shall be made in the first day of the said vtas, commonly
called the day of the Essoines. And her Majesty's further pleasure is, that all
matters, causes and suites, depending in any of her other Courts between
party and party, as in her Highness Courts of Chancerie, Star Chamber, and
Exchequer, Courts of Wards and Liueries, and Duchy of Lancaster, shall have
continuance, and the parties shall have day from the date of these presents,
unto the said first day of Hyllarie Term, next coming.

Provided always, and her Majesty's pleasure and commandment is, that all
Collectours, Receivers, Sheriffs, and other accomptants, and all other persons
that ought or should account or pay any sum or sums of money in any of her
Majesty's Court of Exchequer, Courts of Wards and Liueries, or in her Duchy
of Lancaster, or in any of them, or to enter into any account in any of the
same Courts: shall repair unto her Majesty's house of Sion in the County of
Middlesex, where her Highness has appointed such officers and ministers, as for
that purpose her Majesty has thought expedient, and there to pay and do in
every behalf, as though no such Proclamation of adiournement had been had or
made: Any thing mentioned in this present Proclamation, or in any writ of
adiournement to the contrary, notwithstanding. Willing and commanding every of
her said Subjects, to whom it does appertain, to observe and keep their
assemblies and apparances in her Highness said Courts at Westminster in Octauis
sancti Hyllary, next coming, then and there to be holden and kept, there to
do their offices and duties in every behalf, as they will answer for the
contrary, at their perils.

Yeuen at her Highness Castle of Windsor, the xxi. of September, the fifth
year of her Majesty's reign. God save the Queen.
Imprinted at London in Powles Church yard by Richard Judge and John Cawood,
Printers to the Queens Majesty.

Cum priuilegio Regiae Maiestatis.


