By the Queen.
WHere in the Parliament begone and holden at Westminster the eight day of June*
in the.xxviii. year of the reign of the noble king of Famous memory king
Henry the eight, father to our Sovereign Lady the Queen's Majesty, one Act
and statute was then and there made, entitled, an Act limitting the pryses of
Wynes: And where also in the Session of the Parliament holden upon prorogation
at Westminster, the.xxii. day of January, in the.xxxiiii. year of the reign of
the said noble king, one Act and statute was then and there made, entitled, an
Act to aucthorise certain of the kings Majesty's Counsel to set pryses upon
wynes to be sold by retayle. By the which said several (...) and statutes,
authority is given unto the Lord Chancellor of England, Lord Treasourer
of (...)de the Lord President of the kings most honorable Counsel, Lord
Privy seal, and the two (...) of either Benche, or.v. iiii. or.iii. of them,
by their discretions, to set the pryses of all kinds (...)y, from time to time
when they shall be sold, in gross, and by retayle, and thereof Proclama^ made
in the City. Borough, and Town, where any such Wynes are to be sold. Which
said order for the retaylyng of Wynes* is further limited and appointed by
the statute made in the fifth year of the (...) our Sovereign Lady the Queen's
Majesty, entitled, an Act touching certain politic consti(...)s made for
the mayntenaunce of the Navy, as by the said several Acts and statutes
amongst (...)ges more at large it does and may appear.

Forasmuch as the Lord keeper of the great Seal of England, the Lord
Treasourer of England, and the two chief Justices of either Benche, in the
execution of the said several Acts and statutes, have b^ their deliberate
aduises, taxed, limited, assigned, and appointed the pryses of Gascoigne and
French (...) to be sold within this the Queen's Majesty's Realm in gross:
That is to say, every Tun of the best Gascoigne Wine, to be sold after the
custom and impost paid to the Queen's Majesty, at the (...) and rate of.vii.
li. vi. s. viii. d. the Tun, and not above. And every Tun of the best
French Wine, to be sold in like manner after the same rate of.vi. li. vi. s.
viii. d. the Tun* and not above. And every Pipe, (...) Puncheon, Terce, and
other vessel of the same several Wynes, to be sold after their quantities,
^^^^^ding to the same rates, and not above: And for small and thin Wynes, to
be sold under the same ^^tes to the buyers and sellers thereof can agree. And
for the retaylyng of the said Gascoigne and French ^^nes the said Lords and
Justices, by authority aforesaid, have assigned and appointed the pryses, as
(...). That is to say every Gallon of the best Gascoigne Wine, to be sold
for.x. d. the Gallon, and not (...). And every Gallon of the best French Wine
to be sold also for.x. d. the Gallon, and not above. And also that every
Pottle* Quarte and Pynte, shall be retayled and sold after and according to the
same several (...) and pryses. The Queen's Majesty our Sovereign Lady
therefore straightly charge and commands all and singular her subjects,
and others, putting any manner of Goscoigne or French wynes to (...) this her
Majesty's Realm, that they, ne any of them, in any manner of wise, by any
craft, couin, (...) agreement, shall sell any Gascoigne or French Wynes
otherwise, or at any higher pryses, then is (...)tted, upon pain to forfayte
and pay such penalties, as are contained and expressed in the said s^uerall
Acts and statutes. And further her highness pleasure and commandment is, that
all and sin^^^^^ Majors* Sheriffs, Bayliffes, Constables, and other her
officers and ministers to whom it appertay(...) that they and every of them
with diligence, cause and see that this her Proclamation be put in due exe(...)
after the tenor of the same: And also according to another Act of Parliament,
made in the.xxxvii. (...) of the reign of her Majesty's said father King
Henry the eight, against such as will refuse to sell (...)Wines at pryses
taxed as is aforesaid, as they will answer thereto at their perilles.

God save the Queen.
Imprinted at London in Powles Churchyard, by Richard Judge and John Cawood:
Printers to the Queen's Majesty.

Cum priuilegio Regiae Maiestatis.


