A note of certain necessary Acts mentioned in the Queen's Maiestyes
Proclamation, beside a Collection of certain others, publyshed the last
year, and now to be all executed.
First concerning the Acts remaining in force for apparel.
THe Statute made in the xxiiii. year of King Henry the viii, for reformation
of the abuse of Apparel remaining now in force, contains so many articles
and clauses, as the same can not be conveniently abrydged, but is to be
considered by readyng and perusyng the whole Act at large. But the Statute
lately made in the time of king Philip and Queen Mary: For execution whereof
(as for that which at this time is most necessary) Articles and orders be
presently devised, follows here abridged.

Anno. i. and. ii.
NO English man, other then the son and heir apparaunt of a knight or he that
has yearly revenues of xx. li. or is worth in goods, Phi. and Mar. Cap. ii.
cc. li. shall wear silk in or upon his hatte, cap, night cappe, girdles,
scabbarde, hose, shoes, or spur lethers, upon forfaiture of x. li. for every
day, and imprysonment by three months.

Justices a Assise and of the peace, sheriffs, stewardes in Letes, head
officers of towns corporate, shall inquire and determine the offenses, and
commyt thoffendour to prison, till he have paid the forfayture.

If any knowing his servant to offend, do not put him out of his service
within xiiii. days, or so put out, retain him again within a year after
such offense, he shall forfayt C. li.

Any above the degree of a knights son, or daughter, or wife to any of them,
or Mayor, or head offycer in any town corporate, or wife to any of them, or
the king, or the Queen's servants in ordinary wages attendaunt, wearyng
ordinary liueries, may wear as they might before.

None shall be compelled to put a way his apprentice or hired servant before
thend of his term.

Women may wear in their hattes, cappes, gyrdles and hoodes, as they might
before.

Concerning the increase and breedyng of Horses, Geldyngs and Mares.
xxvii. H. viii, Ca. vi.
EVery person, of what estate or degree soever he be, having a Park or ground
enclosed, wherein any Dear is or usually kept for game, and not lying within
the counties of Westmerland, Commerland, Northumberland, and the Byshopricke of
Duresme, containyng the quantity of one mile in compass, and is thereof
seized in fee simple* fee tail, or for term of life in possession to his own
profit and behoof: And every Fermour of every such park or ground enclosed,
shall keep two Mares, being not spayd, Mares.
apt and hable to bear foales, and each of them of xiii. handfuls in heyght at
the least, to be measured from the lowest part of the hoof of the foot, unto
the highest part of the shoulder, upon pain of xl. s. for every month. And for
every park of iiii. miles compass and more, The heyght of the Mares
iiii. like mares, and of the like height. And that thowners of such ground
shall not wyllyngly suffer the same Mares to be covered with any horse under
xiiii. handfuls in height upon like pain.

xxxii. H. viii. Ca. xiii. Stoned horse.
No stoned Horse being above the age of ii. years, and not being of the heyght
of xv. handefulles, to be measured from the lowest part of the hoof of the
forefoote, unto the heyghest part of the wyther, and every handful to conteyne
iiii. inches shall be put to pasture in any forest, chase, moore, marysh, heath,
comen or wast ground, upon pain of forfeyture of the said horse or horses.

Seasour.
And it shall be lawefull to every person and persons that shall find any such
horse or horses contrary to the form of this Statute, to sease the same
horse in manner and form as in the same statute is prescrybed. And to retain
the same horse or horses to his own use, and as his own proper goods and
cattels for ever.

Forestes, Chases, Commons. etc shall be driven.
And all Forestes, Chases, Commons, Mores, Marshes, Heathes, and wast grounds
within this Realm of England, Wales, and the Marches of the same, shall be
driven yearelye at the feast of S. Michaell tharchangell, or within xv. days
then next after, by the Lords or possessions of the said forestes and
chases, or by thofficers of the same, and by the Constables, headborowes,
Baylyffes, Bursholders and Tithingmen, with in whose offices and limittes the
commons, moors mary shes, heathes, and waste grounds, being out of forestes
and chasess, be or lie, upon the Pain.
pain of xl. s. And it shall be lawful to every of the said officers and other
the said persons to make like dryfte of the said forestes, chases, commons,
moors, maryshes, heathes, and waste grounds at any other season or time of
the year, when they shall think mete and conueniente. Mare, killed. Gelding.
Enquiri.
And if in any of the said dryftes there shall be found any mare, fyllie, fool,
or geldinge, that shall be then thought not able, nor like to grow to be able
to bear foles of reasonable stature, or not hable nor like to grow to do
profitable labor and service, by the discretion of the dryuers, or of the more
number of them: that then the said dryuer or dryuers shall cause the same
unprofitable beasts to be killed. And all Justices of peace in their quarter
sessions, and all Stewardes of Leetes and lawdayes, have authority to inquire
of all the defaultes, omissions, contemptes and offenses contrary to this
statute.

For the having and keeping of Horses and Geldynges. And for the furnyture and
having of Armor and weapon.
iiii. and v. Phi. and. Ma. Ca. ii A thousand pound in lands by year.
EVery temporal person hauying honors, Lordeshyppes, manous, houses, lands,
meadows, pastures or woods, of estate of enheritaunce or free hold, to the
clear yearly value of a thousand pound and above, shall have, find, keep,
and maynetayne within this Realm of England, and of their own proper, and,
at their own costs and charges.vi. horses or geldynges hable for Dimilaunces,
whereof three of thyem at the least to be Horses with sufficient Harnes, steel
Saddle, and Weapon, requisite and appertayning to the said Dimilaunces Horses,
or Geldings: and ten light Horses or Geldinges hable and mete for light
horsemen, with the furniture of Harnes and Weapon, requisite for the same.
And.xl. Corslettes furnished.xl. Almayne Ryuettes: or instead of the said
Almayne Ryuettes.xl. Cotes of plate, Corslettes or Brygandines furnished.xl.
Pykes.xxx. long Bows.xxx. sheafe of Arrows.xxx. steel cappes or skulles,
xx. black Bylles or Halberdes.xx. Haquebuttes, and xx. Murryons or sallettes.
(...)Item every like person having like possessions to the yearly value of
one M. marks or above, M. Marks ^n lands by ^he year.
and under the yearly value of a thousand pounds, shall have and find as is
abouesayde.iiii. Horses or Geldynges hable for Dimilaunces, whereof two at the
least to be Horses sufficiently furnished, for Dimilaunces Horses, or
Geldinges: and vi. light Horses mete for light horsemen, with furniture
requisite for the same. And of Armor and weapon.xxx. Corslettes furnished.xxx.
Almaine Ryuettes, or instead of them.xxx. Cotes of plate, Corslettes or
Brygandines furnished.xxx. Pikes.xx. long Bows.xx. sheafes of Arrows.xx.
stele Cappes or skulles, black Bylles or Halberdes.x. Haquebuttes, and x.
Murrions or sallettes. Four C. pound ^n lands by ^he year.
Item every such person having possessions as is abouesayd, to the clear
yearly value of iiii. C. li. or above, and under the clear yearly value of
one. M. marks, shall find and maintain in form as is aforesaid, two Horses,
or one Horse, and one Geldinge hable for Dimilaunces, and iiii. Geldinges hable
for light horsemen, and xx. Corslettes xx. Almayne Ryuettes: or in lieu of them
xx. Cotes of plate, Corslettes or Brygandines furnished xx. Pykes.xv. long
Bows.xv. sheafes of Arrows.xv. steel Cappes or skulles.vi. Haquebuttes, and
vi. Murryons or salettes. Two C. pound ^n lands by ^he year.
Item every such person having possessions to the clear yearly value of ii. C.
li. or above, and under the yearly value of iiii. C. pounds, shall have, keep
and maintain one great Horse or Gelding hable for a Dimilaunce, and two
Geldinges hable for light horsemen furnished with Harnes, steel Saddle, and
weapons for the same, sufficient as is aforesaid. And in Ar^our.x.
Corslettes.x. Almayne Ryuettes, or in the place of Almayne Ryuettes.x. cotes of
plate, Corslettes, or Brygandines.x. Pykes.viii. long Bows.viii. sheafes of
Arrows.viii. steel Cappes or skulles.iii. Haquebu^tes, and three Murryons or
salettes. One C. pound ^n lands by ^he year.
Item every such person having such possessions to the yearly value of one
hundredth pounds or above, and under the yearly vallue of two C. li. shall
find, keep, and mayntaine in form aforesaid, two Geldinges mete for light
norsmen, three Corslettes, three Almayne Ryuettes: or instead of them, so many
Cotes of plate, Corslettes, or Brygandines, three Pykes, three long Bows, three
sheafes of Arrows, three steel Cappes or Skulles, two Haquebuttes, two
Murryons or Salettes. One C. Marks in lands ^y the year.
Item every such person having lands as is aforesaid to the clear yearly
value of one. C. marks or above, and under the yearly value of one hundredth
pounds, shall have and keep one Gelding hable for a light horsman with a
Harnes, and Weapon requisite for the same, two Corslettes furnished, two
Almayne Ryuettes: or instead of the same, two Cotes of plate or Brygandines,
two Pykes, two long Bows, two sheafes of Arrows, two steel Cappes, or
Skulles, one Haquebut, one Murrion or Sallet. Forty pound in lands by the
year.
And every such person having such possessions to the yearly value of xl. li.
or above, and under the yearly value of one hundredth marks, shall have and keep
two Corslets, two Almaine Riuettes: or in the stead of the same, two Cotes of
plate, Corslettes or Brygandines furnished, two Pikes, one long Bow, one
sheafe of Arrows, one stele Cappe or Skull, two Haquebuttes, two Murryons or
salettes. Twenty pound in lands by the year.
Item every such person having possessions to the yearly value of xx. li. or
above, and under the yerelye value of xl. li. shall have and keep one Corslet,
one Pyke, one Haquebut, one Murryon or Sallet, one long Bow, one sheafe of
Arrows, one steel Cappe, or skull. Ten pound in lands by the year.
Item every person having possessions to the yearly value of x. li. or above,
and under the yearly value of xx. li. shall have and keep, one Almaine Riuet: or
in the stead thereof, one cote of plate, or one Brygandine, one Haquebut, one
Murryon or sallet, one long Bow, one sheafe of Arrows, and one steel Cappe
or skull. Five pound in lands by the year.
Item every person that has possessions to the clear yearly value of v. li. or
above, and under the yearly value of x. li. shall have and keep one cote of
plate, one black Byll, or Halberde, one long Bow, one sheafe of Arrows, and
one steel Cappe or skull. One thousand Marks in goods.
Item every such person having goods or Cattelles to the value of one thousand
marks or above, shall have, find and keep in manner and form aforesaid, one
Horse or Geldinge hable for a Dimilaunce, with steel Saddle, Harnes, and
Weapon requisite for the same, and also one Geldynge hable and mete for a light
horseman, with Harnes and Weapon requisite for the same. Or else xviii.
Corslettes furnished instead of the said Horse or Geldynge at his choice. And
also shall have, keep and find two Corslettes, two Almayne Ryuettes, or else
instead of the same Almayne Ryuettes two Cotes of plate, two Corslettes, or
two Brygandines, two Pykes, four long Bows, four sheafes of Arrows, four
steel Cappes or Skulles, three Haquebuttes, three Murryons or Salettes. Four C.
pound in goods.
Item every such person having goods or cattelles to the value of four. C. li.
or above, and under the value of one. M. marks, shall have, find and keep one
Geldyng able and mete for a light horsman, with all Harnes and Weapon requisite
for the same. Or else at their choice, nine Corslettes good and hable for the
field furnished. And also shall have and find one Corslet, one Pyke, two
Almayne Ryuettes, Cotes of plate, or Brygandines, one Haquebut, two long
Bows, two sheafes of Arrows, and two steel Cappes or Skulles. Two C. pound
in goods.
Item every such person having in goods or cattelles to the value of two C. li.
or above, and under the value of iiii. C. li. shall have, keep and find, one
Corslet, one Pyke, two Almayne Ryuettes, Cotes of plate or Brigandines, one
Haquebut, one Murrion or salet, two long Bows, two sheafes of Arrows, and
two Skulles or steel Cappes. One C. pound in goods.
Item every person having in goods and Cattelles to the value of one C. li. or
above, and under the value of two C. li. shall keep and find, one Corslet, or
Pyke, one pair of Almayne ryuets, one cote of plate or one pair of
Brigandines, two long Bows, two sheafes of Arrows, and two Skulles. Forty
pound in goods.
Item every person having in goods or cattelles the value of xl. li. or above,
and under the value of one C. li. shall keep and find two pair of almayne
ryuettes, or two cotes of plate, or brygandynes, one long bow, one sheafe of
arrows, one steel Cappe or Skull* and one black bill or halberde. Twenty
pound in goods.
Item every such person having in goods and cattels the value of xx. li. or
above, and under the value of forty pounds, shall keep and find one pair of
almayne ryuettes, either one cote of plate, or else one pair of Brygandynes,
two long Bows, two sheafes of Arrows, two skuls, or steel Cappes, and one
black Byll or Halbarde. Ten pound in goods.
Item every person having in value of goods and cattelles.x. li. or above, and
under the value of xx. li. shall keep and find one long bow, one sheafe of
arrows* one steel Capp. or shull, and one black byll or Halberde.
Annuitie. Term of life. Inheritance. Copiholde to the yearly value. Wives
apparel.
And every person or persons having at this present, or hereafter shall have
any annuitie or yearelye fee, or any copy hold, for term of life, or
inheritance, not charged by this act, to the clear yearly value of thyrtye
pound or above: shall keep and find such furniture of Armor and weapons in
every degree, according to the proportions and rates before expressed,
limited for goods and cattels.

Item that every person which by virtue of the Act, made in the xxxiii. year
of the raygne of king H. viii. Cap. v. was bound (by reason that his wife
should wear such apparel or other thing, as in the said Statute is
specially mentioned and declared) to keep or find one great stoned trotting
horse, and is not by this Act before charged to have, keep and maintain any
horse or gelding: shall by force of this act, be bound to keep and to have and
maintain one Gelding hable and mete for a light horseman, with sufficient
harness, and weapon for the same, in such manner and form as every temporal
person having lands as is aforesaid, of the clear yerelye value of one
hundred marks, is charged and appointed to have and maintain by this present
act.

Forfeyture.
And if any of the persons above remembered, shall by the space of three hole
months, want the said number and kinds of horses, geldinges, armoure,
weapon, and furnyture aforesaid, after such rate, proportion and form as is
before lymytted: that then every such person shall forfayte and lose for every
such three months for every horse or geldinge so lacking, ten pounds: for
every Dimilaunce and furniture of the same, three pounds: And for every
Corslet and furniture of the same.xl s. And for every almayne ryuet, coat of
plate or Brigandine, xx s. And for every Bow, sheafe of arrows. Bill,
haulberd, haquebut, steel Cappe, skull morryon, and Sallet.x. s.

Against the carrying and conueying of Horses and Mares out of this Realm.
An. xi. H. vii. Cap. xiii.
NOne shall carry or convey out of the realm any horse, or any Mare, the price
of which Mare shall be above vi. s. viii. d. and under the age of three years,
without license: Forfayture.
upon pain of forfeyture of the same horse and mare. Nevertheless every
subject of this realm may carry any such horse for their own use, taking an
oath before the Customer of the port where he embarketh, that he entendeth not
to sell the same horse.

An. i. Ed. vi. Cap. v.
None shall sell, conueye, exchange, give or deliver into the Realm of
Scotland to the use of any Scottisheman, or into any place beyond the Sea out
of this Realm, any horse, Geldynge, or Mare, without special license under
the great Seal, or under the privy Signet, nor shall sell, conueye, exchange,
give, or deliver to any Scottyshman within this realm, or the marches of the
same, to the intent to be conveyed into Scotland any horse, mare, or Gelding,
without like license, Forfayture.
upon pain of forfeyture of the same horse, mare, or Gelding, and the sum of
xl. li. for every such horse, gelding, or mare, and to suffer imprisonment by
the space of one hole year.

Arrest and impryson.
And it shall be lawful to every subject of this Realm to arrest and imprison
every Scotyshman, and every other person that shall lead or convey (contrary
to the meaning of this Act) any such horse, gelding, or mare. And that every
person that shall have such license to carry any such horses, mares or geldings
into Scotland, shall, before the said carrying or conueiaunce of them, upon the
pain of forfaiture of the same, or the double value thereof, show his said
license to one of the wardens of the three marches of England, for anempst
Scotland The license to be kalendred.
to the intent that one of them shall cause the number of the said horses, mares,
or geldyngs, not only to be kalendred in a book remaining in his own
custody: but also to be indorsed and written on the backsyde of the said
license, and the same indorsement to be signed with the hand of the said Warden.

An. xxiii. H viii. Ca. xi.
If any person shall exchange or deliver within the Realm of Scotland, or in
any place or ground called the Batable land, or ground between England and
Scotland, to the use of any Scotyshman any horse, gelding, or mare, without
license under the great seal, or sell, exchange or deliver to any Scotishman
within the realm of England, Wales, the town of Barwike, or the marches of
the same, or in any of the said Batable ground, Felonye. An. i. Eliz. Reg.
Cap. viii.
any horse, Geldyng or mare, to the intent to be conveyed into Scotland, without
like license, shall be adjudged and demed by the law a felon.And this offense is
made felony, as well in the seller, exchanger, or deliverer as in him or them to
whom the said sale, exchange, or delivery shall be made.

The Wardens of the three Marches in their warden courts, and the Justices of
peace in their quarter sessions, shall inquire, hear and determine any such
felony.

xxiii. H. viii. Cap. xvi. Arrest.
And it shall be lawefull to every subject of the realm, and inhabiting on the
foresaid Marches for anempst Scotland, to arrest any Scottishman, leading or
conueying any such horse, gelding or mare out of the realm.

And although this last resited Statute of xxiii. H. viii. was repealed by the
several Statutes of An. i. Ed. vi. and An. i. Regi. Marie: Yet it is now fully
revived by the Statute of Anno. i. Eliza. Regine. Cap. viii.

Imprinted at London in Powles Churchyard by Richard Judge and John Cawood,
Printers to the Queen's Majesty.


