A Proclamation for pardon to them of Tyndale and Riddesdale.
WHere as the Queens most excellent Majesty has been infourmed by her right
trusty, and right entierly beloved Cousin, the Duke of Northfolke, whyleste he
was her Majesty's Lieuetenaunt general in the North, and also by her right
trusty and well-beloved the Lord Gray of Wylton, whylest he was warden general
of the Est and myddle marches against Scotland, that there were and be
diverse of her subjects, within the county of Northumberlande, in the parties
of Tindale and Riddesdale, and other parts thereto adioynyng, that have of
long time ben culpable and gyltie of sundry crimes, for the which the said
Lieuetenaunt general, in some part by order of the laws of the Realm, did
cause execution to be made in the month of March last. And finding the
number of the offenders, and their repentance very large and great: Was moved
on her Majesty's behalf to have commiseration, and so to stay further
prosecution against them, until her Majesty's pleasure were known, and the
repentance and submission of the said offenders notified.

Here upon her Majesty being inclinable to show mercy toward such as show
them selves ready to live like true subjects in the peace of God, and the
Realm: Is pleased that by this her Proclamation, it be notified to all manner
of persons, inhabitauntes within the said county of Northumberlande in the
parts of Tindale and Riddesdale, that her Majesty does acquit and pardon all
such persons of the same parts as have committed any offence-worthy death,
before the said month of March, and not such as have committed any offense
worthy death sense the said month of March. And for the more certeintie of
the persons that shall be pardoned: Her Majesty wylleth and commands, that
whosoever means or will take any commodity of this her Majesty's pardon,
shall repair to the Lord Chancellor or keeper of the great Seal of England,
with certificat under the hand and Seal of the said duke of Northfolke, or
of the Lord Gray of Wylton, or of the Warden of any the myddle or Est marches,
containing the name and surname of the party, with a note of such offenses as
for the which the party will require his pardon, and a testimony that he has
found suertie to be of good behavior. And thereupon the said Lord
Chancellor or keeper of the great Seal, shall grant to such person a
sufficient pardon, under the great Seal of England, exceptyng all high
treasons to the person of her Majesty and wylfull murders. And the same
persons shall pay only such fees for the same, as were paid for pardons
obtained at her Majesty's Coronation, and no greater.

Provided always that no person shall have any benefit by force of this
Proclamation, but such as shall sue forth a pardon in form aforesaid, before
the last day of Hyllary term next.

Anno. 1560 4 Nouembris. the second year of her Majesty's reign.
GOD SAVE THE QVENE.
Imprinted at London in Powles CHVRCH YARD, By Richard Judge and John Cawood,
Printers to the Queen's Majesty.

Cum priuilegio Regiae Maiestatis.


