By the Queen,
THE Queen's Majesty, having sundry complayntes made to her, as well by the
Ambassador of her good brother the king of Spain, as by certain merchants
strangers, and their factours, that of late certain ships and
marchaundizes, passing through her narrow Seas, have been upon the South
cost of this her Realm of England, or nere thereunto, taken by French ships
that came out of Newehauen in Normandy, and that certain of her subjects
should be aydynge thereunto, or at the least after the same so done, should
take part of the commodities thereof: Has thought it mete and necessary, to
notify her pleasure and intention, generally to all her ports on the said
South part of England, because hitherto the particularities of the offenses,
are not to her declared nor known, which is this. Her Majesty upon the word
of a Prince, assures all persons, that she never knew of any such attemptes,
intended by any of her subjects, neither gave authority or permission, nor
knows of any given, by any under her, to any person, to allow or procure any
such act: but has and does mean, whatsoever any particular evil subjects of
hers, shall have given contrary cause to think, to see all merchants of all
other nations, passing through her narrow Seas with their ships and
vessels, or hauntynge her ports, to be as favorably used and preserved, as
her own natural subjects.

And therefore her Majesty orders and commands, that for the satisfaction
of these complayntes, whersoeuer it shall appear, that any subject of hers,
has either helped to take any ship, or sease any goods, either upon the said
narrow Seas, or in any part of this Realm, whereunto he or they have no just
title, by lefull means, and with consent of the owners: That every publyke
officer in every such place, where either such person so offending, or the
goods so iniustly gotten, can be found, to arrest and commyt to prison the
person, and to sease the goods, until it shall further appear upon the
particular prosecution of the parties damaged, what is further to be done by
law and justice. And for the time to come, her Majesty strayghtly charge
all manner her subjects, to forbear from the attempt of taking or disturbynge
of any ships or vessels, or from aydynge of any other so to do: but to live
in good peace with all manner of subjects, appertaynynge to any Prince or
country, with whom her Majesty is in amity. For otherwise, her Majesty will
no wise spare from extremity of punishment without favor or remission.

Yeuen at her Majesty's pallayce of Westminster, the.viii. day of February, in
the fifth year of her hyghnes raygne. 1562.

God save the Queen.
Imprinted at London in Powles Church yard, by Richard Judge, and John
Cawood, Printers to the Queen's Majesty.

Cum priuilegio Regiae Maiestatis.

