A very rich Lotterie general, without any Blanckes, containing a great number
of good Prices, as well of ready Money as of Plate and certain sorts of
Marchaundizes, having ben valued and priced by the commaundment of the Queens
most excellent Majesty, by men expert and skillful: and the same Lotterie is
erected by her Majesty's order, to the intent that such commodity as may
chance to arise thereof after the charges borne, may be converted toward the
reparation of the Havens, and strength of the Realm, and toward such other
public good works. The number of Lots shall be Four hundredth thousand, and
no more: and every Lot shall be the sum of Ten shillings sterling only, and
no more.
Three Welcomes.
THE FIRST person to whom any Lot shall happen, shall have for his welcome
(bysides the advantage of his adventure) the value of fifty pounds sterling
in a piece of silver Plate gilte. THE SECOND to whom any Lot shall happen,
shall have in like case for his welcome (bysydes his adventure) the sum of
thirty pounds in a piece of Plate gilt. THE THIRD to whom any price shall
happen, shall have for his welcome (bisides his adventure) the value of twenty
pounds in a piece of Plate gilte.
The Prices.
WHOSOEVER shall win (...) greatest and most excellent price, shall receive
the value of Five thousand Pounds sterling, that is to say, Three thousand
Pounds in (...) ^ney, Seven hundredth Pounds in Plate gilte and white, and the
rest in good Tapissarie meet for hangings and other couertures, and certain
sorts or good Linen cloth.

WHOSOEVER shall win the second great price, shall have the value of Three
thousand and Five hundredth Pounds, that is to say, Two thousand Pounds in
ready Money, Six hundredth Pounds in Plate gilt and white, and the rest in good
Tapissarie and in Linen cloth.

WHOSOEVER shall win the third great price, shall have the value of Three
thousand Pounds, that is to say, A thousand and Five hundredth Pounds in ready
Money, Five hundredth Pounds in Plate gilt and white, and the rest in good
Tapissarie and Linen cloth.

WHOSOEVER shall win the fourth great price, shall receive the value of Two
thousand Pounds, that is to say, One thousand Pounds in ready Money, Four
hundredth Pounds in Plate gilt and white, and the rest in good Tapissarie and
Linen cloth.

WHOSOEVER shall win the fifth great price, shall receive the value of One
thousand and Five hundredth Pounds, that is to say, Seven hundredth and Fifty
Pounds in ready Money, Three hundredth Pounds in Plate gilt and white, and the
rest in good Tapissarie and Linen cloth.

WHOSOEVER shall win the sixth great price, shall receive the value of One
thousand Pounds, that is to say, Five hundredth Pounds in ready Money, Two
hundredth Pounds in Plate gilt and white, and the rest in good Tapissarie and
Linen cloth.

WHOSOEVER shall win the seventh great price, shall receive the value of
Seven hundredth Pounds, that is to say, Four hundredth Pounds in ready Money,
One hundredth Pounds in Plate gilt and white, and the rest in good Tapissarie
and Linen cloth.

WHOSOEVER shall win the eight great price, shall receive the value of Five
hundredth Pounds, that is to say, Two hundredth and Fifty Pounds in ready Money,
One hundredth pounds in Plate gilt and white, and the rest in good Tapissarie
and Linen cloth.

WHOSOEVER shall win the ninth great price, shall receive the value of Four
hundredth Pounds, that is to say, Two hundredth and Fifty Pounds in ready Money
One hundredth Pounds in Plate gilt and white, and the rest in good Tapissarie
and Linen cloth.

WHOSOEVER shall win the tenth great price, shall receive the value of Three
hundredth Pounds, that is to say, Two hundredth Pounds in ready Money, Fifty
Pounds in Plate, and the rest in good Tapissarie and Linen cloth.

WHOSOEVER shall win the eleventh great Price, shall receive the value of
Two hundredth and Fifty Pounds, that is to say, One hundredth and Fifty
pounds in ready Money, Fifty Pounds in Plate, and the rest in good
Tapissarie and Linen cloth.

WHOSOEVER shall win the twelfth great price, shall receive the value of Two
hundredth Pounds, that is to say, in ready Money One hundredth and Fifty
Pounds, and the rest in good Tapissarie and Linen cloth.

WHOSOEVER shall win the thirtenth great price, shall receive the value of
One hundredth and Forty Pounds, that is to say, One hundredth Pounds in ready
Money, and Forty Pounds in Plate, Tapissarie, or Linen cloth.

TWELVE prices, every price of the value of One hundredth Pounds, that is to
say, Three score and Ten Pounds in ready Money, and Thirty Pounds in Plate,
Tapissarie, or Linen cloth.

TWENTY and four prices, every price of Fifty Pounds, that is to say, Thirty
Pounds in ready Money, and Twenty Pounds in Plate, Tapissarie, or Linen
cloth.

THREE score prices, every price of Four and twenty Pounds and Ten
shillings, that is to say, Seuentene Pounds in ready Money, and Seven Pounds
Ten shillings in Plate.

FOUR score and ten prices, every price of Two and twenty Pounds Ten
shillings, that is to say, Fiftene Pounds in ready Money, and Seven Pounds
Ten shillings in Plate.

ONE hundredth and fourtene prices, every price of Eightene Pounds, that is to
say, Twelve Pounds in Money, and Six Pounds in Plate gilt and white.

ONE hundredth and twenty prices, every price of Twelve Pounds and Ten
shillings, that is to say, Seven Pou^ds Ten shillings in Money, and Five Pounds
in like Plate.

ONE hundredth and fifty prices, every price of Eight Pounds, that is to say,
Five Pounds in Money, and Three Pounds in Linen cloth.

TWO hundredth prices, every price of Six Pounds Ten shillings, that is to
say, Four Pounds in Money, and Fifty shillings in Linen cloth.

THREE hundredth prices, every price of Four Pounds Ten shillings, that is to
say, Fifty shillings in Money, and Forty shillings in Linen Cloth.

FIVE hundredth prices, every price of Three Pounds Ten shillings, that is to
say, Forty shillings in Money, and Thirty shillings in Linen cloth.

FIVE hundredth prices, every price of the value of Three Pounds in Plate.

FIVE hundredth prices, every price of Fifty shillings in Money.

TWO thousand prices, every price of Forty shillings in Plate.

SIX thousand prices, every price of Five and twenty shillings in Money.

TEN thousand prices, every price of Fiftene shillings in Money.

NINE thousand, Four hundred and Eightene prices, every price of Fouretene
shillings in Money.

AND all the rest to the accomplishing of the aforesaid number of Lottes, shall
be allowed for every adventure at the least Two shillings and six pens in ready
Money.

Conditions ordained for the advantage of the Adventurers in this Lotterie,
bysides the Prices before mentioned in the Charte.
THE Queens Majesty of her power royal, gives liberty to all manner of
persons that will adventure any Money in this Lotterie, to resort to the places
underwritten, and to abide and depart from the same, in manner and form
following: that is to say, to the City of London, at any time within the space
of one Month next following the feast of S. Bartholomew this present year.
1567. and there to remain seven days: And to these Cities and towns following,
York, Norwich, Exceter, Lincoln, Couentrie, Southampton, Hull, Bristoll,
Newcastell, Chester, Ipswich, Sarisbury, Oxforde, Cambridge and Shrewesbury, in
the Realm of England, and Dublyn and Waterforde in the Realm of Ireland, at
any time within the space of three weeks next after the publication of this
Lotterie in every of the said several places, and there to remain also seven
whole days, without any molestation or arrest of them for any manner of offense,
saving treason, Murder, pyracie, or any other felony, or for breach of her
Majesty's peace, during the time of their coming, abidyng, or return.

AND that every person aduenturing their Money in this Lotterie, may have the
like liberty in coming and departing to and from the City of London, during
all the time of the reading of the same Lotterie, until their last adventure
be to them answered.

ALSO that whosoever under one devise, prose, or poesy, shall adventure to the
number of Thirty Lottes and upward, within three Months next following after
the said feast of saint Bartholomew, and by the hazard of the prices contained
in this Lotterie, gains not the third penny of so much as they shall have
adventured, the same third penny, or so much as wants of the same, shall be
allowed unto them in a: yearly pention, to begin from the day when the reading
of the said Lotterie shall end, and to continue yearly during their life.

WHOSOEVER shall gain the best, second, and third great prices, having not
put in the posies (whereunto the said prices shall be answerable) into the
Lotterie, within three Months next after the said feast of Saint Bartholomew,
shall have abated and taken out of the sum of Money contained in the said
best price, One hundredth and Fifty pounds, and of the said second price One
hundredth pounds, and out of the said third price Four score pounds, to be
given to any town corporate, or Haven, or any other place, for any good and
charitable use, as the party shall name and appoint in writing.

AND whosoever shall gain a Hundredth pounds or upward, in any price, saving
the three several best prices next before mentioned, having not put in his
Lots, whereby he shall gain any such price, within three months next following
the said feast of Saint Bartholomew, shall have abated and deducted (as above
is said) out of every Hundred Pounds Five Pounds, to be employed as is next
before said.

WHOSOEVER having put in Thirty Lottes under one devise or poesy, within the
said three Months, shall win the last Lot of all, (if before that Lot won
he have not gained so much as has been by him put in,) shall for his long
tarying and ill fortune be comforted with the reward of Two hundredth pounds,
and for every Lot that he shall have put in bisydes the said Thirty Lots, he
shall have Twenty shillings sterlyng.

AND whosoever having put in.xxx. Lots under one devise or posie, within the
said three Months, shall win the last Lot save one, and have not gained so much
as he has put in, shall likewise be comforted for his long tarying, with the
reward of.C. pounds, and for every Lot that he shall have put in above.xxx. shall
receive Ten shillings sterling.

ITEM whosoever shall adventure from Forty Lottes upward, under one devise or
posie, shall have liberty to lay down the one half in ready Money, and give
in bond for the other half, to the Co^missioner that in that behalf shall be
appointed to have the Charge for that City or Town, where the party shall
think good to pay his money, with condition to pay in the same money, for the
which they shall be bound, Six wekes at the least before the day appointed for
the Reading of the Lotterie, upon pain to forfaite the Money paid, and the
benefit of any price. Which day of reading shall begin within the City of
London the.xxv. day of June next coming.

AND in case it shall fortune the same day of the Reading to be prolonged upon
any urgent needful cause to a further day: The parties having adventured and
put their money into the Lotterie, shall be allowed for the same, after the
rate of Ten in the Hundred, from the day of the prorogation of the said
Readyng, until the very day of the first Reading of the Lotterie.

ITEM every person to whom in the time of Reading any price shall happen and be
due, the same price shall be delivered unto him the next day following, to
dispose of the same at his pleasure, without that he shall be compelled to tarry
for the same until the end of the reading. And being a stranger borne, he
shall have liberty to convert the same being money, into wares to be by him
transported into foraine parts, paying only half custom for the same, and
other duties that otherwise he should answer therefore.

WHOSOEVER at the time of the Reading shall have three of his own posies or
devises coming togethers successively and immediately one after another, the
same having put in the said three posies within three Months (as before) shall
have for the same posies or devises, so coming together one after another,
Three pounds sterling, over and besides the price answerable therefore.

AND whosoever at the time of the reading shall have four posies or devises
coming togethers successively and immediately one after another, having put in
his said posies within three Months, (as before mentioned) shall have for the
said four posies or devises Six pounds sterling bisides the prices.

AND whosoever at the time of the reading shall have five posies or devises
coming togethers successively and immediately one after another, having put in
his Lottes within three Months (as before) shall have for the said five posies
or devises, Ten pounds sterling bysides the prices.

AND whosoever shall have the like adventure six times togethers, having put in
his Lots, as before, shall have for those.vj. posies or devises.xxv. Pounds
sterling, and the prices.

AND whosoever shall have like adventure seven times togethers having put in his
Lots (as before) shall have for those.vij. posies or devises a hundredth pou^ds
sterling and his prices.

AND whosoever shall have the like adventure eight times togethers, having put
in his Lots (as before) shall have for those Eight, Two hundredth pounds sterling,
and the prices.

AND so the posies or devises resorting togethers by increase of number, he to
whom they shall happen in that sort, having put in his money, as before is
said, shall have for every time of increase, One hundredth pounds sterling, and
the prices.

THE Receipt and Collection of this present Lotterie shall endure for the rest
of the Realm bisides London, until the.xv. day of April next coming, which
shall be in the year. 1568.

AND the Receipt and Collection of the City of London shall continue unto the
first day of May next following: At which days or before, all the Collectours
shall bring in their books of the collection of Lottes to such as shall be
appointed to receive their accomptes, upon pain if they do fail so to do, to
lose the profit and wages appointed to them for their travel in that behalf.

FINALLY it is to be understood, that her Majesty and the City of London
will answer to all and singular persons having adventured their money in this
Lotterie, to observe all the articles and conditions contained in the same,
from point to point inuiolably.

The show of the Prices and Rewards above mentioned, shall be set up to be
seen in Cheapesyde in London, at the Sign of the Queens Majesty's Arms, in
the house of M. Dericke, Golosmith, servant to the Queens most excellent
Majesty.

GOD save the Queen.
Imprinted at London in Pater noster Row, by Henry Bynneman.


