By the Queen.
WHereas by an act of Parliament made in the fifth year of the Queens
Majesty's reign, it was among other things enacted, that from the first day
of April in the year of our Lord God. 1564. it should be lawful to all and
every of her highness Subjects, at his and their will and pleasure to carry
and transport out of this Realm, in the ships or other vessels of any the
Subjects of the same, all and every kind of herryng and other sea fish, to
be taken upon the seas by any of the Subjects aforesaid, and all and every
person and persons which should by virtue of that act transport or carry any
herrynges, or other sea fish from or out of any Port or Harborough of this
Realm, to any place out of the dominions of her Majesty, should be free from
payment of any Custom, Subsidy, or Pondage money for the same fish so
carried or transported, during the space of four years then next following, and
so further during her Majesty's pleasure, as by the same act appears: Her
Majesty having ben well infourmed of the great benefit which thereby has
ensued to her Subjects, is well pleased, and does by these presents give her
loving Subjects to understand, that it shall be lawful for them and every of
them, to continue and enjoy the whole effect and benefit of the said
provisions in the said act, in such sort as is before expressed, until such
time as upon further cause her Majesty shall think meet to repeal or alter
the same.

And whereas it was at the same time further enacted for the benefit and
commodity of this Realm, as is in that act diversely expressed, that the fish
days in every week, as well those which of ancient time were by law allowed
and continued, as also the wednesday in every week then limited by the said
act to be observed and kept as a fish day, should be well and duly kept as
fish days, whereof none of her Majesty's Subjects can pretend any
ignorance: Which ordinances, namely that for the wednesday, have not ben, nor
be so well in most parts of the Realm observed, as for the benefit of the
common weal were meet, but rather broken, to the manifest contempt of the
laws: Therefore her Majesty straytly charge and commands, as well all her
loving Subjects to have due regard to the ordinances of the said act for
keeping of those fish days, upon the pain that may follow, as also all and
every the Justices of the peace, and other Justices, officers, and ministers,
to whom the execution thereof apparteyneth, to be diligent to enquire and
punish the offenders in that behalf, as they and every of them will answer
for the contrary.

Yeuen at her Majesty's Manor of Grenewich the xxiiii. day of June. 1568. the
tenth year of her highness reign. God save the Queen.
Imprinted at London in Powles Churchyard, by Richard Judge and John Cawood,
Printers to the Queens Majesty.

Cum priuilegio Regiae Maiestatis.


