By the Queen,
THe Queens Majesty understanding that certain malicious persons have of
late time caused a report to be made in foreign parts, that a great part of
such Armor and provisions of war as by her Majesty has of late years ben
made in Germany for her own use, should be transported into the countries of
Russia, whereby the countries of Christendom adioynyng thereto, being at war
with the Duke of the said countries of Russia should take great hurt and
damage. And considering that although this rumor be known to be false, vain,
and malicious, yet if it should be permitted without contradiction to be
carried from place to place, hurt and offense might come to her Majesty's name
and credit among Christian Princes: Has therefore both notified the
falsenesse thereof to diverse Princes and commonweals in Germany, where the
report has been made, with request to them to procure knowledge of the first
Authors thereof, and offer of reward for the same, and by this her present
Proclamation does let it to be known to all manner of persons, that there was
never provided, neither meant to be had out of Germany or else where any one
piece of Armor or thing belongyng to war by her Majesty, but only for the
use and service of her own countries. And as her Majesty never meant
otherwise, so thinking surely that none of her subjects have done to the
contrary at any time: Her straight commandment is, that none shall buy or
provide of Armor or such like, to be either directly or indirectly sent either
into Russia or to any place that is in war with any nation of Christendom,
upon pain of forfaiture of as much as by the parties may be forfaited. And for
redress of this false report and slander, her Majesty is so desirous to
have the Authors thereof known, as whosoever shall presently detecte the same,
shall have no small reward of her Majesty.

Given at our Manor of Grenewich the.viii. of July, the third year of our
reign. 1561.
God save the Queen.
Imprinted at London in Powles Churchyard, by Richard Judge and John Cawood,
Printers to the Queens Majesty.

Cum priuilegio Regiae Maiestatis.


