The EXHORTATION OF SOLOMON. By H. A.

printer's or publisher's device

LONDON, Printed for Cuthbert Burby. 1594.

TO The right Honorable George Earl of Cumberland, Baron Clifford, Lord
Bromflet Atton, Vescie and Vypont, Lord of Westmerland, and Knight of the most
noble order of the Garter,
Together with the right virtuous Countess his Lady, increase of all
blessings and graces needful.
AS ungratefulness for benefits received, is a sin detested of God and man,
(right honorable and my singular good Lord and Lady) so stands me vppor more
than any other, ever to avoid that suspicion, and to show my thankfulness
both to God and his servants above all others, forasmuch as I (being the
greatest sinner) have notwithstanding found greater favor extended unto me
from the Almighty, my sovereign Queen Elizabeth, her most honorable
Council, and all christian people, in remitting of my late monstrous offense
committed in Cheap, and receiving me again to grace and favor, more than
ever was showed unto any such like sinner since the world began. The
remembrance of which most horrible fact, by me comwitted, as it makes my heart
and soul to tremble when I think seriously thereof, so my deliverance causes
me oftentimes to break out in thankfulness unto his goodness, by whose only
power, providence and compassion, I was reclaimed from so gross errors,
renewed and restored to the use of my senses, repriued from death and endless
destruction, and reconciled again into their former favor, that joy in the
conversion of such a sinner, as has been subtly seduced by satan: so am I
bound to entreat the Lords favor, to recompense that undeserved kindness a
thousaud fold into their bosoms, which I have had from her excellent
majesty, and all their Honors of her Highness Council, with all the rest of
Gods chosen children: which duty by Gods grace I shall daily perform so long
as I live, and more particularly for all those to whom I am any way more
specially beholden: Then my honorable good Lord and Lady, seeing next her most
excellent Majesty and honorable Council in sparing my life, I am most bounden
unto your Hh for the continual maintenance thereof: her Ladyspip moving, and
your Lordship consenting to renew my Grant from your right honorable Father:
yea, more than so, whereas I was both unfit and unable to discharge that
office, wherewith I was charged by my Patent, your L. has disburdned me of the
same to attend better matters, and for those grounds which I had in possession,
to allow me one hundredth marks per annum during my life, which favor I
acknowledge with all submission and unfeigned thankfulness, and as a further
testimony thereof, do humbly present this Treatise following unto your Hh. as
most fit, for two causes: The one in regard of the Argument thereof, which first
did spring from most honorable authors: the other in respect of my poor self
(who having taken some pains therein, to open the fountain, that more plenty
of wholesome water might flow from thence, to the comfort of others) your Hh.
would be disposed to take the patronage of this second fruit of my true
repentance, entreating of the Exhortation of Solomon. As my former Seduction
was both accepted and allowed of their Hh. whom I had most dishonored in my
fall, when I was possessed with the spirit of Satan, by that vile Sorcerer Hacket
and his inchantmentes. To conclude, if your Hh. will vouchsafe to peruse the
same, and so far only to approve thereof, as you shall find it to abide the
trial of the true touchstone, the word of God, I shall think my pains
sufficiently requited, and be more bounden to pray for your Hh. and all yours,
whom the Almighty protect, preserve and prosper with much increase of honor
and comfort, both in this world, and in the world to come, Amen in Christ.

Your Hh. obidient at commandment, Henry Arthington.

To the christian Reader increase of those especial grates, which may most
further his comfort in Christ.
BEelooued in him, who looued us most dearly when we were all lost: Jf you
call to remembrance what I have published in my pittiefull Seduction, you shall
find from page 53. to the latter end of page 55. That J make mention of two
sorts of people, whom Satan very groslie seduceth: The one by alluring them
to profess popery or some false Religion: The other to polute the true
profession, by a profane and loose conversation: of which number are all
carnal Gospellers, promising in that place, that I will proclaim open war
against both and all other adversaries whilst I live. Since which time (and
yet during my most just restreint) I took occasion to peruse the holy Bible,
to arm me more strongly against all such enemies: and coming by course unto
the notable speeches of David, (which is the main argument of this discourse
following) considering the same to contein ma^ter of fit instruction against
all papists and profane persons, and withal reuoluing my mind what
necessary doctrine I had once heard a Preacher of the Gospel to produce
publicly out of the sa^e. I did forthwith prepare to indite and write what
good matter I could conceive and gather out of the same, and so (by Gods help)
did finish without direction from any Person or any other means (save my weak
memory and the book of God during the time of my imprisonment) the which for
some causes (as a byrd vnfligge) has hitherto lain by me, as unfit to fly
abroad.

But now by the providence of the Almighty is permitted to be published for
the use of such as shall be willing to hear or read the same, wherein the Lord
knows and bears witness (that I seek not my self) but his honor only who
has preserved me, and their edification whom I have offended any kind of
way: Jn which respect, J hope the courteous Reader will be are with the style
(though for want of art or eloquence it seem but harsh) for I profess not
learning, but plain dealing in all my endeavors, to profit there by the simpler
sort, which if by perusing thou shall acknowledge, then have I gotten my first
request. The second is this, That as thou shall feel it to change thy mind
and life, to refourme either in any good measure, thou will not forget to give
God his due, the only praise of all, because from him alone all good gifts
proceed James 1.17.

Namely for his extraordinary favor still extended toward me, in moving
all my good Creditors in London, to whom I stand deeply exdetted by
suretieship, not only to remit me all interests with charges, and to take
their principalles only at my hands after two shillings in the pound yearly
till they be satisfied, (If I live so long:) But which is more, and so much as
may be admyred of all men, whereas one of my creditors (vnt whom only I was a
surety, would not be pacified with his principal interest and charges at my
hands, after the former rate for principalls only but either would have it
after twenty pound per Annum, or else my body should lie in prison. The which
extremity rather then my good creditors would suffer me to incur: they have
all condiscended to rebate so much yearly of their due, to supply my want and
satisfy his mind, whom mercy would not move (the Lord lay it not unto his
charge) neither forget to recompense their kindenes, that are so willing to
extend mercy, as they have learned of their heavenly father. Luke 6.35.36.

To conclude I beseech thee (good Reader) to pray for me the Lords
vnwoorthiest servant, that as my late fall, did bring to just grief and offense
to many: so my vprysing by daily signs and tokens of true repentance, may
bring double joy to all the redeemed that shall either hear or see the same.
Amen.

Thy unfeigned wel-willer. Henry Arthington.

The several divisions of the Text.
And thou Solomon my son, know thou the God of thy father, and serve him with
a perfect heart and a willing mind, for the Lord sercheth all hearts and
understands all the imaginatio^s of thoghts, if thou seek him he will be found
of thee, but if thou forsake him, he will cast thee off for ever. 1. Cron. 28.9.
Divided into two parts. 1 An exhortation to the true fears of God. Which is
double. And 1 Certain circumstances going before: Which are four. fold. 1
Who gave this exhortation. 2 To whom it was directed. 3 When the same was
given. 4 Before whom. The matter is double. 1 To know God And 2 To serve his
Majesty.



2. Certain sound reasons to induce thereunto. which are three fold. 2 The
exhortation it self is double also. 1 Touching the matter: 2 touching the
manner. The manner double also. 1 With a perfect heart. And 2 With a willing
mind.


1 Is taken from the natural quallities of god which is double. 1 That he
searches all hearten. And 2 That he understand all thoughts.
2 Is drawn from the promise of god upon condition. The condition: If thou
seek God, The promise: he will be found of thee.
3 Derived from the justice of god upon just occasion. The occasion of Gods
judgment: If thou forsake him, The judgment it false: he will cast thee off
for ever.



The Exhortation to Solomon.
1. Cro. Cap. 28. verse 9. And thou, Solomon my son, know thou the God of
thy father, and serve him with a perfect heart, and with a willing mind: For
the Lord searches all hearts, and understands all the imaginatio^s of
thoughts: if thou seek him, he will be found of thee, but if thou forsake
him, he will cast thee off for ever.


AND all the whole Scripture of the old and new Testament and every part and
portion of the same: is written for our lerning and further instruction in the
fear of God (as well as for the Jews) As Paul the Apostle witnesses. Romans 15.4.

So amongst many other no table places serving to that end: this holy sentence
before alleged does contain in it as much variety of excellent matter for
man's obedience, (In my simple judgment) as any text in all the Book of God,
both for the matter and manner of his woorship, as in explaining the same
shall manifestly appear, if God shall be pleased to bless my poor endeavor
therein, which has been and is my humble request for the good of all people.

To come to the words therefore, they seem to divide themselves into two
parts.

The first is, A fatherly exhortation to the true fear of God, contained in
these words. And thou Solomon my son, know thou the God of thy father and
serve him with a true and perfect heart and a willing mind.

The second expresses certain sound reasons to induce thereunto: videlicet
For the Lord searches all hearts, and understands all the imaginations of
thoughts If thou seek him, he will be found of thee: but if thou forsake him,
he will cast thee of for ever.

Touching the exhortation, we are more perticularly to consider of these
points.

First, the circumstances going before. Secondly the words of the
exhortation.
Concerning the circumstances, they be four in number.

1 Who gave the exhortation. 2 To whom it was given. 3 At what time. 4 Before
whom.
All which being opened, will bring greater light into the man or following.

Touching the words of the exhortation they deuyde themselves into two parts
also.

First, to declare the matter of Gods woorship: Secondly, the manner how to
perform the same.
To come to the natures or substance of Gods worship that is double also:

Videlicet, To know (and) serve the Lord God.

The manner is likewise two fold: that is to say with a perfect (...), and a
willing (...).

The reasons to persuade heerunto, are three fold every one more forcible
then other:

The first is taken from the natural qualities proper only unto God, which is
double, that be searches all hearts, and that he understands all
imaginations of thoughts. The second is deryued from the promise of God upon
condition* the condition: Jf thou seek God, the promise follows, he will be
found of thee.

The third and last reason, is drawn wholye from the justice of God executing
his judgments upon just occasion: the occasion, If thou forsake God: The
judgment it self, he will cast thee off for ever.

Of all which deuisions in perticulers, if I could set down those several
instructions that lie hid therein, then should no man condemn my endeavor nor
loose his labor in perusing the same, if with an humble and lowly spirit he
mark what he reads: yet I wish all men first to try ere they judge: John.
4.8.
for the spirit breaths where it list.

Now to speak more largely of every particular before divided, and first
concerning the Author of he whole, we may find by the storye going before,
and by calling Solomon his son, David the King gave this exhortation.
that it was David the beloved king and propher of the Lord which does give us
these instructions: So that if we do estimate of men's speeches according to
their places and special judgments: as if a learned man make an Oration, we
look to hear it learnedly handled, or if a wise Magistrate should give a
charge unto the In rye in some mutter of great importance, we look to see it
wisely performed: The how much more are we to expect, that this exhortation
proceeding from so wise, learned and holy a king (as the like never reigned
either since or before in Jsraell) who was so dear in favor with the
Almighty, that he renewed with him the covenant of grace Psalm. 132.11, 12.
as out of whose kindred, right stock and line the promised Savior should
proceed: this must needs insinuate that the exhortation following does
contain matter of great moment.

2 Solomon the Prince, the party exhorted.
Concerning the person to whom it was directed it is plain by the text, that it
was Solomon son and heir apparent unto a kingdom (though not by birth
right) yet by the Lords apointment as he Genesis 25.23.
dealt with Jacob: which must needs infer the exhortation following to
comprehend some notable matter, for who would once imagine, that David both
King and prophet so excelle^tly qualified as we have heard, would spend his
speech at any time, but to good purpose, namely in his latter years laboring
to instruct Solomon his son.

3 The time when this exhortation was given, viz. upon DAVID his death bed.
To come to the very instant of time, when this exhortation was given by David,
we find it to be a little before his ending, as we commonly say upon his
death bed: and immediately after he had invested Solomon into his throne and
kingdom in his life time to cut of all occasions for Adonias or any other of
his elder brethren to challenge the same after his death as appropriate to
Solomon by the Lords election. 1 Cron. 28.5, 6,


This cannot but commend the exhortation following, for if we consider the
course of all men, what person is amongst ten thousand, who having run riot all
his life time, and being arrested with sickness unto death, God giving the
party grace to repent, but if he have the use of his wits with his tongue to
speak will frame his talk to give good counsel to those that are present?

Oh then how much more surely may we look from David's mouth, for a wise,
goodlye most comfortable exhortation, being chosen of the Lord, yea after his
1 Samuel 13:14.
own heart, and now about to take his leave and last farewell of this wretched
world, withal the pleasure and treasures thereof, as his wife, Children,
friends, lands liberty and life it self, who can I say (in respect of the
promises) but expect the exhortation following to be most excellent.

Now to proceeede unto the last point touching the persons, before whom David
exhorted Solomon, 4 The persons before whom the exhortation was given. viz.
the whole assembly of Duids Nobles. etc.
the words precedent before our text says, it was in the presence of all his
Nobles, sending for them as seems of purpose to be eye and ear witnesses unto
his counsel and last speeches to Solomon his son the rather to put him in
continual remembrance to practice the same after his death this must needs
illustrate the exhortation following to be woorthye the noating of all estates
and callings, for the better manifestation whereof, it shall not be amiss to
repeat David's words concerning the great assembly of all estates, before whom
he exhorted Solomon, which are these: David assembled all the Princes of
Israel, the Princes of the Tribes and the Captains and the bands that served
the king and the captains, and the ruters 1 Cron. 28.1.
of all the substance and possession of the king and of his sons with the
Euunuches and the mighty and all the men of power unto Jerusalem, As it were
calling an high Court of parliament of all Estates: how greatly does this
importe that the exhortation must needs contain matter of greatest importance,
to make the same known unto all his Estates, before God called him out of this
world.

But if we shall search a little further, into the manner and behavior of
this good King before all his Nobles, ere he began to utter these speeches, it
is said, 1 Cron. 28.2.
that David stood up upon his feet and spoke as follows, hear ye my
brethren and my people: preparing them all to a reverent attention to hear
that which follows, and so after some general speeches used to them all
concearning his purpose touching their government: by and by he directs his
speeches to Solomon his son, as the most honorable person in presence, to
move them the more to mark his speches, seeing they all knew that Solomon
should succeed David in his kingdom.

So that if we remember all the circumstances of time, place and persons, by
whom, to whom, and before whom, with all other accidents before the
exhortation, we cannot but expect that it will prove as godly, as grave, as
learned and excellent, as ever proceeded from the mouth of David.

O then consider, seeing we have heard so many notable and heavenly sentences
recorded and registered in the holy Scriptures, of David the King and Prophet of
the Lord. As in the books of Samuel, of the Kings, of the Cronicles, but
chiefly in the Psalms and sundry other places, which approve him so graced
with all kind of good gifts for his place and calling, as the like King was
never in Jsraell (Christ Jesus excepted) how ought these reasons to rouse up
our attention to mark that which follows.

Now let us hear the exhortation is self. And thou Solomon my son, know
thou the God of thy Father, and serve him with a perfect heart, and a willing
minds, etc. What mortal man could give better counsel, concerning the duty of
all degrees in so few speches? In which grave advice, directing the sa^e first
unto Solomon, he does insinuat thus much in substca^e.

O Solomon of all the sons that God has given me, (as I have had diverse and
elder then thy self since I came to my kingdom) yet to thee (abooue the rest)
have I borne the greatest love, and for thee chieflye have I prayed to my God,
that thou might succeed me in my kingdom, whereof already I have put thee
in possession, and do publicly pronounce before all my Princes: that it is
the will of God so to have it, and that thou shall build an house 1 Cron.
28.5, 6
for his worship: Now therefore my dear son, seeing thou art preferred to this
hie prerogative of Gods only favor and mere mercy, and that I am going the
way of all flesh, with full assurance to rise again to glory, hear now the
last words of thy father David, that ever her is like to speak to thee in
this world being such as tend most for thy honor and comfort, look thou
learn therefore to make good use of them, even to know and serve the God of thy
Father: what heart so hard (if it were not of flint) but would have relented to
hear such words uttered from so woorthye a Father, as was anointed the
Lords kingly Prophet?

The Introduction into the matter being spoken off, let us now proceed to
entreat more plainly of the exhortation it self following, which consists
of two parts, to know and serve God: David says not to Solomon know thy God
only, and go no further: Mark this* knowledge and practice, must join
together in a Christian.
or serve thy God, and leave out knoweledge: but knowledge and obedience must
both join together, in the true woorship and service of God: Behold then
what heavenly doctrine, for our instruction does lie in the entrance of this
exhortation, which in four words does comprehend the whole substance of
christian Religion videlicet, To know and serve God, or to serve God according
to knowledge, in which short sentence this conjunction And is to be noted, and
in all such like phrases observed, for it commonly joins either two virtues
or vices together, for the further explaining of the Lords will: As where he
says, He that hears my words and dooh the same I will liken him to a wise
builder* and again, Mat. 7.24
Blessed are they that hear the word of God and Luke. 11.28.
keep it. Again Woe be to them that call evil good Isay. 5.20.
and good evil. with a number such like sentences recorded in the Scripture for
our warning and instruction.

And if we mark well the force of David's speeches, exhorting Solomon to know
and serve his God, we shall find his mind and meaning thereby, to confute
and condemn two sorts of sinners, that should after his time rise up in the
world. Two sorts of sinners reproved


1 All carnal gospellers.
The former sort, do brag and boaste much of their knowledge in Gods word,
but have no care to frame their lives thereafter, whom we call Libertines or
carnal Gospellers.

2 All popish professors.
The latter on the other side, take pleasure in doing but at no hand as God
requires of them, and such we call all popish professors ot professors of
popery, who make their own wills a law in Gods woorshippe.

But to lay open both these kind of sinners to the view of all men, of the
former sort are all such persons of what calling soever, as will be accounted
professors of the Gospel, and perhaps have it on their tunges ends, but not
in their hearts where it should be lodged, A carnal gospeller described.
to rule and refourme their lives thereafter. As David used Psalm. 119.11. for
cast your eyes a little into their proceedings how they carry themselves in
their conversation: and you shall find some of them common prophaners of the
Lords name, and Saboths: some disobedient to their parents and masters, The
unsavory fruits of many gospellers.
and such as be lawfully planted over them: some are malicious and wickedly
minded, some are licentious given to uncleanness, some are beastly Epicures,
delighting only in surfeting and drunkenness, some given to their pleasures,
stage plays and such like, some are ambitious or vainglorious persons, some
are very covetous and merciless persons, some are extorting fraudulent
persons, some given to lying, swearing and blaspheming, some to backbyting,
sla^dering and such like, all which make Religion nothing but table-talke, or
use it as a cloak to cover their filthienes.

But let all such persons know and learn thus much, Who are vain gospellers
and woorshippers in vain.
that except their lives and conversation be answerable unto that Gospel which
they so much talk of, so as their practice agree with their profession, and
both be guyded by the rule of Gods word, in vain do they brag of the name
of Gospellers: Nay the greater show they make of the same, and the less they
regard to frame their lives thereafter: the greater and more sharp shall be
their Judgments: for so the Lord Jesus him self says: That Servant that
knows his masters will and does it not Luke 12.47.
he shall be beaten with many strippes, for as without the light of the
Gospel of Christ, no man can see how to walk to please God, so unless all
men be as careful in their lives to follow that light as David Psalm. 119.105.
did, profess what they please, it is to no purpose: for pure religion and
undefiled, as the Apostle James describes the same, James. 1.27.
is to keep a man unspotted of the world: for not every one that says ( Lord,
Lord) shall inherit his kingdom, Math. 7.21.
but those that withal obey holy will.

It shall be good therefore for every christian to follow Christ's counsel
whilst we have the light to walk John. 3.21. and 12.35, 36.
after the light, that we may become the children of light and so with Christ
inherit his glory. Thus much at this present against all those bad kind of
people, that would be taken for great professors and yet by their lives
profane all religion, practicing those things which are ungodly, Good advice
to carnal gospellers.
their souls and consciences witnessing the same: to the great dishonor of
almighty God, and the like discredit of his glorious Gospel: besides the
danger of their own souls, unto whom I wish from the bottom of my heart
(that as they seem religious in show, and would be so accounted of others) they
would become doers of the word James. 1.22
and not hearers only, deceiving their own souls. Now let us come to the
latter sort of people that have so great a mind still to be doing and yet
refuse to be guided therein by the light of Gods word: If a man should ask a
devoted papist what kind of good works they make most account of, The
Papists good works.
they will answer, to say and sing masses, for the quick and dead, to go on
pilgrimage, creeping to crosses, censing of Images, building of monastaries,
praying to saints, and for the dead, singing and ringing for souls departed,
procuring of popish pardons and in dulgences, with their overplus works of
superrogation, to purchase an higher place in heaven for the^ selves and their
friends: he neither can nor will answer directly that these works are
enjoined by the law of God, for they all know right well that there is neither
commandment nor example of any such expressed in Gods word but the flat
contrary: If one demand further then, why they use them? What opinion
Papists hold of their Church and the scriptures.
they will soon reply, by the church commandment, which they account to be
above the scripture, whereof they hold so base an opinion that to be altogether
ignorant therein, they term the mother of devotion and so the more ignorant
the more devout.

How well all these points agree with the Scripture concerning their
perticulers, mark what follows and first touching the Church: we will
observe these four points chiefly. 4 special points of the Church.


1 First, what the Church is called and whereof it consits.

2 Secondly, whereupon the Church is compact and builded.

3 Thirdly, by whom and what laws she must be governed.

4 Fourthly, Whether those laws may be truly said to be abooue the Church,
or the Church above them: All which points being rightly considered, will
plainly decide this troublesome controversy, between us and the papists,
touching the authority of the Church.

To come to the first point, what the church is called.
the Church is called the house 1 Timothy 3.15.
of God the spouse Ephesians. 1.22. Revel. 21.9, 10.
of Christ the temple 1 Cor. 3.16.
of the holy ghost consisting only of true believing 1 Cor. 3.16.
christians in his word, whom we commonmonly call the Church-millitant, to
distinguish it, from the triumphant, and from that house of stoane and timber
appointed for the place of Gods woorshippe which then was called the Temple of
God.

She is also called Catholic or universal, because she contains the
complet number of all faithful Christians in all ages, and of all callings
through out the whole world.

She is also called one, because all her members are of one faith Ephesians. 4.4,
5, 6. 1 Cor. 14.33.
one religion, one heart and of one mind, to woorship and serve God after one
rule, which is his blessed word.

She is also called holy, Isay. 4.3, 4. Act. 15.9.
because she is purified by the blood of Christ, and ought to be 1 Pet. 1.15.
holy as he her Lord is holy.

She is also called the Pillar 1 Timothy 3.15.
ground of truth because she does not only profess the truth but ought to
witness and uphold the same Ephe. 5.23, 24.
so far as the word of Christ her head does teach her, either for religion
or conversation.

2 Whereupon the Church is builded.
To speak of the second point whereupon the Church is co^pact and builded, the
Scripture bears witness, that the church is builded upon the doctrine 1 Pet
2.4, 5. Ephe. 2.20.
of the Prophets and Apostles, Christ Jesus being the head corner storne: for
the same scriptures that do witness the calling of Abraham: Isac and Jacob and
all the rest of his chosen servants, whom Peeter calls a royal preesthod
and kingly nation, 1 Pet. 1.23. and 2.9.
regenerate and renewed by the immortal seed of Gods sacred word, those places
do witness, that the Church of Christ is built on his word: for otherwise they
had not been called.

3 By whom and what laws the Chruch is to be guided.
Concerning the third point, by whom and what laws the Church is to be ruled,
that is very manifest (according to the scripture) by the Lord Jesus and his
only ordinances: for seeing he alone is her Lord, husband, head, king and
Governor, preserver and protector, unto whom all Math. 28.18.
power in heaven and earth is subject: It should derogate to much from his
honor and glory, to have the Church his spouse guided and governed by any
other laws and ordinances then by his only: John. 10.4.5. and 16.13.14
neither will his chosen hear any other.

4 Whether the Church or scripture must be sovereign.
The fourth and last point, which is the maine ground of the whole controversy,
videlicet, whether those laws and ordinances which Christ has commended and
commanded in his word, are above the Church, and ought to direct her in all
matters touching religion and conversation, or that the Church is above the
scripture, and may choppe and change the laws and ordinances of Christ Jesus
at her pleasure.

Sundry reasons that the Church is to be ever directed by the scripture.
The answer is plain (by many reasons) that Christ and his ordinances must over
rule the Church in all Justice, ought to be received, professed and practiced
of all their subjects, much more the Church, ought to be governed by the Laws
of Christ her Lord and king.

Secondly, if the laws and ordinances given by Moses, Deuteronomy. 17.26. Gal. 2.10.
the displeasure of the Almighty, much less then those laws and ordinances
of the Lord Jesus being the chief Lord and ruler over all.

3 Thirdly, when Christ gave commission to all his Math. 28.20.
had taught and commanded.

4 Fourthly, if Christ Jesus only be Lord, head and The Papist opinion of the
church above the scripture, quite overthrown.
except they hold (against reason and gods law) that the members ought to over
rule the head, or the wife the husband: and so have you this gross opinion of
the papists, that the authority of the church to be above the scripture which
is the law of Christ her head quite overthrown as deuilish and damnable: But
the Papists may reply and object unto me, An objection.
that some laws and ordinances prescribed by Christ, and expressed in his
word (even within the compass of the new Testament) were soon after abrogate
and dissolved, therefore those ordinances expressed in the word are not
perpetual, and so cannot rule the Church in all ages.

To this I answer and grant the president, The answer.
but deny the consequent, What offices temporary.
for the Lord Jesus ordained some callings in the Church to be but temporary as
Apostles, Prophets and Evangelists, which could not continue in the Church for
ever, because they were only extraordinary callinges for the first gathering
together of the Church in all kingdoms, after Christ's assention: But he
ordained other laws and offices, What kind perpetual.
to be as standing and perpetual ordinances for the continual instructing and
governing of his Church and chosen people until his second coming as appears
plainly Romans 12.4.8 1 Cor. 12. Ephesians. 4.8 13. and therefore may at no hand be
altered, chopped or changed by any mortal creature, without manifest
rebellion against the Lord Jesus.

An other objection.
The papists being driven from the former starting hole, by and by they retire
into an other, and reason thus for the authority of the Church: the Church
cannot err, therefore she must needs be above the Scripture.

2 Timothy 3.16.
by inspiration from God can err in any point, which were to accuse Gods son
of error.

But let us see how trimely they prove that the Church cannot err: An other
objection.
they say God has promised unto his church, to send his holy spirit to lead
and guide her into all truth, which he performed when he sent the holy ghost
in Acts. 2.3, 4.
cloven tounges immediately afrer Christ's assention, upon his Apostles and
chosen disciples, therefore the church cannot err, which they transfer to the
Church of Rome, as peculier only unto her holiness.

So long indeed as the Church is guided by Gods spirit she cannot err,
because his spirit cannot err:

That Church which refuses to be guyded and governed by Gods word in all
things, The first sillogisme to prove the Church of Rome to err.
that church is not ever lead by Gods spirit, and so must needs err: but the
Church of Rome refuses to be guided and governed by Gods word in many
things, therefore she is not always lead by the spirit of God, and so must
needs err.

The first part or mayor of this proposition: that the word and spirit of God
are inseparable companions cannot be denided, for the one has always relation
to the other: and therefore our Savior Christ when he promised to send his
spirit the comforter unto his Apostles least they should be deluded by the
spirit of error, he gives them a sure mark how to know the holy Ghost: When
he comes (says Christ) he shall not speak of himself, but whatsoever he
has heard John. 14.26 and 16.13, 14. and 17.17.

Mat. 28.20. John. 20 31. Mark this.


and received of me, that shall he speak and teach unto you: for he is the
spirit of truth, who shall bring unto your remembrance whatsoever I have
taught and commanded you, and those things are sufficient unto life eternal:
so that the spirit of God does always appeal to the holy scripture for her
approbation.

The latter part or minor of this proposition that the church of Rome must
needs err I prove thus: The second argument.
That church which techeth other points of doctrine touching faith and
religion, which is not approved by the holy Scripture, that church must needs
err.

But such a one is the church of Rome: and therefore she must needs err. etc.

The mayor part of this proposition is proved before.

The minor or latter part, that the Church of Rome teaches certain points of
faith and Religion, not warranted by Gods word, is thus proved.

That Church which teaches that her authority is abooue the Scripture, that
she cannot err in matters of doctrine: that in the Church be seven
sacraments: that prayer to saints and for the dead is lawful: that there is a
purging place for sin after this life, before a man can get into heaven: that
to go on pilgrimage, to pray before Images, and to creep unto crosses are good
works that please God, that men may by the works of superrogation merit an
higher place in heaven for them selves and their friends whereof there is no
mention in the word of God: that Church must needs err in matters of
doctrine. But such a teacher is the Church of Room, therefore the church of
Rome must needs err.

The mayor part of this proposition has no warrant in the word of God.

The minor is the practice of the church of Rome as no devoted papist can deny.

Therefore all the former conclusions against the Church of Rome, that she is
not subject to Gods word in all things: that she teaches certain points of
faith and religion not warranted by the scripture, that therefore she is not
always led by the spirit of God, that so of necessity she must needs err,
is manifestly proved, which is more apparent in these points, that she
presumes to prefer her decrees, traditions and authority above the holy
Scripture, as no learned papist can deny.

An other objection our Adversaries makes against the authority of these
scripture,

I answer not the Church, John. 12.48.
us all at the last day, as our Savior Christ does testify, who will deny it
to be of force, to judge all controversies in Religion, yea even such as spring
with in her bowels, Christ and his church, appeal to the scripture.
for do we not all know that albeit Satan alleged scripture in tempting of
Christ, yet only by the Scripture the Lord confuted him, Mat. 4. Luke 4. And so
likewise did the the true Apostles, 1 Cor. 15.3, 4.
all false Apostles.

We se therefore (by Christ's example and his dear Apostles) that the church in
all Ages, and in all causes of cotrouersie, did submit her judgment to the holy
Scriptu^e, as the Lord more plainly answered the Saduces (pleading a deuorse
between man and wife Deuteronomy. 24.1.
by Moses permission) and said it was not so from the beginning alleging the
first institution of marriage not to be dissolved by any but the maker Genesis
2.24. and Math. 19.4, 5, 6
by more ancient authority of the Scripture: whereby they were all put to
silence.

But let us admit the church to have power to decyde all controversies, yet the
same must ever be intended of that communion of Gods Saints which submit their
judgment unto the Scriptures: and not to that malignant synagog of satan: (I
mean the supposed church of Rome) which presumes to prefer her decrees and
decretalles to the word written, which Christ has left as a rule to church,
as before has been proved. Mat. 28.20.


That ignorance of scripture should be mother of devotion, is absurd.
To come to the other point which the papists hold that ignorance of
scripture is mother of devotion, so flat repugnant to this rule of David, who
wills Solomon to know his God, and likewise against the reproof of the
Saduces by our savior Jesus who charged them all with manifest errors, because
they knew not the holy Scriptures, Math. 22.29.

It must needs be an absurd opinion, as to deny an Infant the mothers milk,
and yet hold opinion it should grow the better: for seeing the word of God
is called the very seed of our regeneration, 1 Pet. 1.23. and 2.2.
and that pure and sweeter milk whereby we are norished unto life eternal, how
is it possible that we should grow in knowledge, in faith or in repentance as
the Lord requires, without the right understanding thereof.

Why Popish priests bar the common reading of the scripture.
But if you would know the reasons indeed, why the papists bar the common
people from reading of the Scriptures: It is because the knowledge thereof would
bewray and detect all their wil-^rshipings before recyted, to be nothing else
but their own inventions, without any warrant from the word of God, What is
vain woorship.
which if all Christians knew to be true, (as before has been proved) and
that our Savior rejects the same, saying to all such that they woorship him
in vain, teaching for doctrine men's precepts. Mat. 15.9. they would not suffer
themselves (like blind men) to be led still blyndefolde which way they please:
and heeruppon it comes why they keep the Scriptures in a strange language,
that ignorant people cannot understand the same, and why their seldom popish
preachers do in their sermons allege so little Scripture, and so profane
histories, and why they plant over the people such popish pussles for the most
part, as can hardly read their latin service, only to keep them still in
ignorance.

Yet do the papists (to countenance their error) pretend some places of the
holy Scripture, An objection.
as that of Peeter, where he says, our brother Paul has written some things
hard to understand, which they that are unlearned and unstable, pervert. etc.
2. Pet: 3 16

Whereupon they gather that because Peeter says some places of Paul's
Epistles are hard, therefore the whole body of the scriptures are hard: or
because some unlearned men are unstable in their ways, therefore all the common
people are of that disposition: otherwise they would not seclude them all from
reading the scriptures in their mother tongue.

But to make this more plain, albeit I might answer Peeter with Peeter, even
in the verse before this place alleged, that Paul's Epistles and his were both
directed to one sort of people 2 Pet. 3.15.
and therefore ought to be read of them all, or else to what purpose did they
write unto them, yet will I plainly confute their oppinion by other places of
the holy Scripture; and that by comparing their doctrine together.

The Papists teach, that the whole word of God is hard to understand.
Comparisons


But this our kingly Prophet says, That the law of the Lord is easy to
understand, and gives wisdom unto the simplest.

Psalms 19.7.8.

Again, Deuteronomy. 6.6, 7. Psalm. 119. Coll. 3.16 John. 5.39.
The Papists dehorte simple People from reading the Scriptures: contrariewise
both Moses, David, Paul, and Christ him self do warn all men to search
the holy scriptures that so it may dwell plentifully in them.

Now let all men judge that have the use of reason, whether it is better to
believe the papists upon their bare word in matters of salvation, Whether to
believe papists, or Christ and his Apostles, to be more safe.
or the counsel of Moses, David, Paul and Christ himself being contrary
thereunto: as every one may see by the former comparisons.

But to make the absurdity of the papists reason, to inhibite lay people the
reading of the Scriptures to appear manifest, because some places thereof be
hard to understand, as Peeter says of Paul's Epistles. It is all one, Mark
these comparisons.
as if one should affirm, that because there be some bones in a shoulder of
mutton, therefore it is nothing but bones, and no flesh thereon at all: or
because some places in the river be deep, therefore all the river from head to
foot is deep, and no shallownes to be found therein, which were most ridiculous
to affirm: even so is this opinion of the papists, that because some places in
Scripture be hard, therefore all the whole body of the Scripture is hard, so as
lay people may at no hand read them, expressly against the before alleged
words of David the Prophet and Christ himself, that they are easy to
understand, and whosoever looks for eternal life, he must diligently search
the holy Scriptures Psalm, 19.7. Joh. 5.39. But some papist may object that all
this sore charge laid upon them, An objection
to bar simple people the reading of the Scriptures is most false, for they
caused one Gregory Martin of late to translate the new Testament into the
english tongue, that all sorts of people might read thereof, at their pleasure
and le^sure.

diverse reasons.

1 First in deferring the translation thereof so long a time, videlicet, almost
30 years her Majesty's prosperous reign over us, whereby their good will to
seek our salvation does slowly appear, besides the omitting of all the old
Testament.

2 Secondly, by the barbarous obscurity of the text, which in many places is
so darck and difficulte, as the common people can hardlye understand the bare
text in english without an Interpreter.

3. Thirdly, by the infinite number of strange anotations and interpretations,
fetched from all sorts of former writers how corrupt soever, for the stronger
maintenance of their gross opinions, against the plain text of Scripture in
most places as before aleadged.

4 Fourthly, The council of Trent forbidding all lay people the reading of the
sciptures, who darre read them that would avoid his curse?

Having thus confuted the dangerous errors of both sorts of adversaries
against this wholesome counsel of David the king, to know and serve God. Let
us now proceed to inquire further, what kind of God it was, whom Solomon was
moved so earnestly to serve, was it the God of the Philistines, or the God of
the Amonites Moloch, 1 Samuel 7.3. Judge. 2.13. 1 king 11.7.
or Astaroth: No, no, It was the God of his father, The God of his father, as
if David had said unto him.

O Solomon my son, the God of thy father David is that only almighty and
eternal God, the creator, governor and preserver of heaven and earth and all
things therein, who so tenderly beloved me thy father, that being most
unworthy and the least 1 Samuel 16.11 12 13
and youngest of all my brethren (yet he chose me to be the king of Jrael to
guide and govern his peculier people) even then when I followed the Ewes with
young, Psalm. 78.71.
and as a special sign thereof, before I came to the throne and kingdom, did
only deliver me from a Lion and a Bear 1 Samuel 17.4.51.
but gave me also victory over that mighty and monstrous Giant Goliath of
Gath, that proud boasting vncircumsized Philistine, who disdainfully defied the
whole host of Jsrael, but my God gave me strength to cut of his head, therefore
know that God, that only good God.

Again, this almighty God of heaven and earth has done more for thy father
then so (for though Saul the last king my predecessor, knew and was enfourmed
by the Prophet Samuel, that God had appointed I should succeed him, I being
then his poor son and servant, yet did the seek my utter destruction, (by all
means possible to prevent Gods purpose) but the Lord by his providence did
safelye protecte me from all manner dangers, (though I was pursued from place
to place) and in his good time brought me to this kingdom, and now has
subdued and subjected under me, all mine enemies, prolonging my reign to
govern his people full forty years together: and has further granted my
humble request, that thou my son Solomon shall succeed me in my kingdom,
therefore know thou that God that gracious good God.

Again, this almighty God of heaven and earth, has yet done more for thy
father David then all before mentioned, for whereas all mankind by the fearful
fall of Adam and Eve our first Parents, were justly deprived of all felicity,
and become Satan's vassals subject to all misery.

If then it so pleased his gracious goodness, by his covenant of grace, to
indent with mankind, that the woman's seed should Genesis 3.15.
crush in pieces the head of the serpent: and afterward, the Lord declared in
more special manner to our forefathers Abraham Jsacc and Jacob, that in their
seed (as speaking of one) Genesis 12.18.
the promised savior should proccede: And because the last of these three
Patriarchs had twelve sons, who were all dispersed into twelve trybes,
whereof this great people are sprung as we see, it further pleased his
almighty Majesty to make it manifest unto all posterities, out of which trybe
the Savior should spring, that is to say, from the trybe Genesis 49.10.
of Juda, out of which stock 1 Cro. 23.4.
my father I say came: yea the Lord has revealed and sworn to me thy father,
that out of the issue of mine own body, Psalm. 89.26, 27 and 132.11.
this blessed Mesias shall be incarnate who shall save his people from all their
sins. In whom I believe, (as in mine only Savior) Psalm. 27.1. and 31.5.
and so do commend my soul into his hands: O my son Solomon, know thou
therefore that God, that everlasting good God of thy father David.

This holy Exhortation being given to Solomon, to know and serve his God,
Under the person of Solomon, the duty of all degrees is discribed.
we are to gather thus much, that under his person (as principal) the duty
of all degrees is discrybed: for David speaking to Solomon as chief, in the
presence (as it were of all his Subjects does include and insinuare their
duties also: that every one of them in their place and calling ought
diligently and faithfullye to learn and know to serve this God.

By this rule may some say, you would have all degrees to become Scripture men
and to carry the Bible in their hands to Sermons: but that were a shame, for
men of high estate and calling: it is not beseeming their places and callings
to study the Scriptures.

Solomon: he was heir apparent unto a mighty king and put in possession not
his crown and kingdom, in his fathers life time, and yet his father David
gives him in charge, Great men of necessity must study the scriptures.
that Solomon himself should know and serve his God which can never rightly be
performed, but first of necessity he must learn the holy scriptures, which
contain the matter and manner of Gods woorship and all other duty whatsoever.

An other objection.
But yet by your leave (sir) such as be great men of high estate or calling,
they may well defer the study of scripture until their old age: and in the
mean time follow their pleasures, and toward their latter and then learn to
dye well.

Salomons example, who being a young prince and but newly entered into his
kingdom, Young princes and noblemen must study the scriptures.
was even exhorted by David his father to learn to known the Scriptures, as
in an other place he persuades all young persons by way of a question saying,
where withal shall a young man redress his ways, but Psalm. 119.9.
by guyding the same according to Gods word: the continual holy meditation
whereof, is a sure sign of a blessed man Psalm. 11.2 and 119. wholly
as himself does witness.

And Solomon likewise following his good father does advise all estates and
callings not to forget to serve their God during their young years, before
old age does steal upon them.

Eclesiastes. 12.1.

Thus do you see all excuses removed to hinder great men from studying the
scriptures even during their young: To protract the study of the scriptures
most dangerous.
and youthful years, whom to defer until their old age is most
dangerous: for it is but as a dream for them to dye well, if they have no
care in the mean space live well: or can they at all live well indeed, and
know not Gods law the rule of well doing, or has any estate a lease of his
life to live until old age? or any good assurance beforehand, that then they
shall have grace to know and serve God, having all their former years
rejected the means to attain thereunto in neglecting the study of the holy
Scripture or diligently to frequent holy exercises, oh how sore be such men
deluded. An objection.


But it may be objected by such a great personage if I should be known unto my
superiors, to beco^e a studient in the holy scriptures,

Let all great persons consider better of that which follows: Shall it bring
no dishonor unto their places, to be seen with profane books of pleasure in
their hands, as books of love, poetry and such like: and shall it procure
disgrace to their persons to hold the holy Bible in their hands? None but
careless persons of their salvation will carp at such as study the scripture.
How great an absurdity is this, to immagine that the book of Christ Jesus (in
whom only they look for salvation) should procure their disgrace amongst
their fellow christians: as though it were unbeseeming great men too know the
misery of their redemption, or how they should serve their blessed Redemer,
which no calling will carpe at, but such graceless persons as have no care nor
conscience at all of their own salvation.

And truly if great men were well acquainted with such excellent matters and
variable change thereof, The Holy scripturee before all other writings for
excellent matter, and varitie thereof.
as is plentifully expressed in the holy scriptures, of what point soever they
would be resolved, either touching this world or the world to come: they
would prefer the study thereof to all other pleasures and so daily sever and
sequester them selves for one hour at the least, at morn, noone or night, to
meditate and contemplate the holy word of God.

1 Of the use and end of all things created.
For first, if they would know the course and creation of all things created
within the compass of man's capacity, with the right use and end of every
thing, the first book of Moses called Genesis, with that of Solomon called
Eccle: will satisfy them fully therein.

2 Of the most ancient law and manner of gouerme^t.
If they would be acquainted with ancient laws and statutes, how and by what
ordinances the most ancient forefathers were guyded and governed, either
touching Religion or conversation: The first five books of Moses set down in
the bible do plentifully entreat of all such special matter as cannot but
delight the Reader very much.

3 Of ancient histories, how gods servants have been most strangely protected.
If they take pleasure in reading fine histories, how the Servants of God from
time to time have been most straungely protected and preserved, and that in
greatest and imminent dangers, by the almighty power and providence of God:
the whole body of the Scripture is full of such examples: namely the books of
Hester, Nehimiath, Esra, Ruth and such like.

4 How God in old time, did overthrow his enemies.
If they would understand the course and success of all the Lords battles in
former ages before Christ his birth, how over he defended their cause and
quarrel that put their trust in him, and on the other side discomfited, their
enemies when they thought them selves most sure to prevail: let them over read
the books of Exodus, Joshua, Judges Samuel both the Kings and Cronicles, and
they will confess they never heard the like.

5 Why in all ages, Countries and Kingdoms have been subverted.
If they desire to see and view why Cuntries and kingdoms were subverted in
old time and know the secrets of many hid mysteries heertofore reveled* let
the^ peruse the books of all the ptophets with the revelation of S John, and
they will satisfy their minds in those points, and further of the coming and
reign of Antechriste the arch-enemie of Christ and all faithful Christians.

6 The difference between heavenly and earthly wisdom.
If their minds be eleuate to contemplate heavenly things, or to see into the
secrets of Nature and grace, what difference there is between that wisdo^e
which comes from above, and that which rises from humain reason and where in
all distresses to seek and find comfort, let them with all diligence read and
consider the books of Job, the Psalms, the Proverbs of Solomon and Paul to
the Romans, which will content them fully in those points.

7 Of the incomparable Historye of our savior Christ his birth, doctrine, life
and miracles.
If they take pleasure in the history of Christ to search and find out the
whole course of his life, doctrine and miracles, as of the manner of his
conception, birth and bringing up, with the manifold trourbles, tortures and
torments which he endured for our salvation, and to become a perfect pattern
of patience and obedience to all posterities, let them with all reverence muse
and meditate upon the four Evangelists, which do most plentifully entreat
thereof.

8 Of the virtue of Christ's death, resurrection and assention.
Lastely, if they would gladly know the virtue and power of the Lord Jesus his
death, resurection and assention, how he conquered satan, death, hell and
damnation, satisfied Gods justice, pacified his wrath, and reconciled us into
his lost favor to be made inheritours of his eternal kingdom, and how we
are made pertakers of the same: what difference there is between the law and
grace, faith and good works, merits and mercy, this mortal life and that
blessed life to come, and what good men have suffered for Gods causes: let them
reuoule with all care and conscience, the acts of the Apostles and all the
epistles of Paul, Peeter, James and John with the rest, and they shall gain
such increase of knowledge in heavenly mysteries as they would not forgo, for
all the pleasures and treasures in this life.

But if some great men (for all that has been said) will not be advised to
study the Scriptures, let all such know from the mouth of Christ Jesus (how
great soever they be) that who soever is ashamed to profess him and his
comfortable Gospel in this wretched world Mar. 8.38. Luke. 9.26.
of those persons will the Lord Jesus be then ashamed, when they shall appear
before his heavenly father in his celestial kingdom: which will bring more
grief to their souls at that day then they have had pleasure in their life
before.

Having labored all this while as it were, to prepare the way to the service
of God, let us now come to the substance thereof, what the service of God is,
and of whom to be performed.
what it is rightly to worship and serve God, and how it must be performed of
all both generally as we be Christians and perticulerly in our places and
callings.

To return therefore unto our Text, David the king exhorts all men to know
and serve God, but the way how it must be performed, he discribeth more
plainly in other places, namely in the 119 Psalm. videlicet according to the
Lords own commandments declared in his law, How to know and serve God.
which Solomon terms the sum of man's duty Eccle. 12.13. O then let us
strive by all means possible: first to learn and know these holy
commandments with the true science and meaning of every one, and afterward
to put them in daily practice, as we desire to please the Lord God.

The sum of the two tables o the law.
The ten Commandments of the Almighty, which he gave to Moses in Tables of
stone, is commonly called the law of the Lord, because they comprehend that
most holy and perfect rule of righteousness, which himself prescrided for us to
observe, both in that duty due to his Majesty, contained in the four first
Commandments, and in our ordinary dealing and proceeding one with an other,
as we are all brethren in Christ, and fellow members of his mystical body,
which is briefly expressed in the last six Commandments.

To run therefore speedily over all the Commandments of both Tables, The
first Table contains that service due to God himself*
(for I do not stand fullye dilate fully of them) in the former table which
specially concerns that service or woorshippe due unto God: we have to
observe four special points according to the four foremost Commandments. 1
The first does express what God only is to be worshipped, and the reason to
move us thereunto.

2 The second, with what kind of woorshippe he will be pleased.

3 The third, how and after what manner it must be done.

4 The fourth, of the time and day when the Lord will have his woorship and
service usually performed.

Now let us a little consider in perticulers, of every one of these holy
Comaundements: In the first, it is said, God spoke these words and said, I am
thy Lord thy God which brought thee of Egypt etc.

1 Command.
Thou shall have no other Gods but me etc. In these few words, he plainlye
expresses whom he will have woorshiped, that is him self alone, Why God only
is to be worshipped.
(secluding all other in heaven and in earth) and the reason is added because
he only brought us out of bondage, which by Egypt is meant, from sprituall
thrall dome of Satan and sin by the only means of Jesus Christ.

The second Commaundemet. Thou shall not make to thy self any graven Image etc.
In this Commandment, God does not only forbid all manner false woorship
contrary to his will, 2 Commandment, that God only is to be worshipped
after his word.
but threatens a heavy judgment to such, whom he terms haters of his
Majesty, but he further discribeth the substance of that woorship which he
repuireth, that is to say to keep his Commandments: calling those persons
such only as love him, with promise to show great mercies unto them.

3 Command: That we must woorship God, with entire affection.
The third Commandment, Thou shall not take the name of the Lord thy God in
vain. etc. In this Commandment the manner of Gods woorship is described, that
is to say, not vainly, coldely, disse^blingly or profanely: but truly,
zealously, simply, and sincerely, according to his own prescribed ordinances,
which is here included, though not expressed: for as the commanding of any
virtue excludes ever the contrary vice, so the forbiding of any vice does
ever require the contrary virtue, as in this place.

4 Command: Of the set time when God will be worshipped.
The fourth Commandment, Remember thou keep holy the Sabbath day, in this
Commandment, the Lord appoints one day in every week, to be wholly
dedicate unto his service, In which we must cease from our usual labors: the
use whereof is still observed, though the day was altered upon just occasion,
and changed from Saturday until Sunday, which is more truly called the Lords
day by the first Christians, Math. 28.1. 1 Cor. 16.2. Revel. 1.10.
because as that day Christ rose from his grave: But because this holy-daye is
so much prophayned of all sorts of people: which of all other Commandments
is most necessarielye enjoined to be kept holy: by this word Remember and
the Lords own Example, not that it is greater then any of the former, but
being rightlye sanctified of all, it does make us more fit to keep all the
rest, and so becomes a sure sign and seal of sanctification ^d. 31.13, 14.
between God and us, therefore I will more plainly describe the very right
use of all the Lords Sabaoths.

Jsay in the 58, Chapter of his prophecy, describes briefly the right
observation thereof in these words, speaking as it were in the person of God:
If thou turn away thy foot upon my Sabaothes Isay. 58.13, 14.
from doing thine own will one mine holy day, and call the Sabbath a delight
to consecrate it as glorious to the Lord, and shall honor him, The right use of
every saboth.
not doing his own ways, not seeking thine own will, not speaking a vain
word, then shall thou delight in the Lord etc.

By these few words we may plainly perceive two necessary points to be
observed in the right use of every Sabbath. The former, Two necessary points,
in observing everye saboth.
that we lay aside as that day all our own wills, words and works, as the
Lord commands: The latter, that we usually frequent the Lords Sanctuaries
and there reverently woorshippe and serve him as he enioyneth us. That is to
say, to call upon his name, to hear his word preached, to perticipate his
sacraments, to sing the Lords praises, and to perform such other christian
duties as shall be publicly enioined of all: and in the mean space, to muse
and meditate of that which has been heard, to talk and confer of it one
with an other, to visit the sick, to comfort the comfortles, to releive the
oppressed, and such like: But our old enemy satan (who enuyeth our welfare
abooue all measure) knowing the Lords day to be our market day for the food of
our souls, How satan labors to profane the saboth and to hinder our
salvation, all he can.
does labor to hinder it all that he can, partly by planting insufficient
and ungodly pastors and preachers over Gods people, such as either lack skill or
goodwil to do their duties in due reason, and partlye by making the word
unprofitable in the hearts of the hearers, (thouhh wandering by thoughts) or
keeping the people otherwise occupied, that they should not hear the word at
all, and so does lull both sorts in the cradle of security to their
endless destruction, except they repent and forsake such ways in time.

In regard whereof, how expedient it is, for all such as love God and long for
salvation to observe the counsel which Solomon gives, videlicet, when they
enter into the Lords house Eccles. 4.7.
to look unto their feet etc. whereby our affections are understood, so that
as well the Minister is fore warned to become (as Paul says) 1 Cor. 4 12. How to
carry our selves in Gods house.
a faithful dispense of the Lords secrets, as the people to hark and mark
what is spoken, to refourme their Religion and lives thereafter that so their
endeavors may not be in vain but the Lord our redeemer glorified in both.

For their better prepararion to sanctify each Lords day, it shall be good
therefore for every one privately before public prayer time, How to prepare
our selves to Gods woorship.
to call upon God in their own seceret chabers for grace and direction, to
examine their own hearts in what case they stand, that wherein soever they find
their own wa^ts, the may use all holy means to be furthered and stre^gthned in
the true fear and service of the Lord, which if every Christian would duly
observe, before they went to hear the word of God preached, then should they
be sure to profit thereby* for there was never any that ever sought the Lord
with their whole heart, and begged grace of his goodness to that end, whom we
read to have been sent away empty.

To come now to the second Table, which concerns our duty one to an other, as
fellow members of that mystical body whereof Christ Jesus is the head there be
six commandments belonging thereunto.

5 Command.
The first whereof, which is the fifth in number, does knit us altogether in one
corporation, the magistrate to rule, and the people to obey, as the Lord
requires.

6 Command.
The sixth, does teach us how we ought to live peaceably, and to preserve one
an others life.

7 Command.
The seventh, how to keep the marriage bed undefiled.

8 Command.
The eight, that in no wise we defraude our neighbor of his goods.

9 command.
The ninth, that we impare not our neighbors good name.

10 Command.
The tenth and last, that every person (of what degree soever) content him
self with his estate.

But to speak something more of these latter Commandments (as of the former)
the first, which is the fifth in number, Honor thy Father and thy mother, The
true sense of the fifth Commandment.
that thy days may be long etc. In this Commandment albeit the duty of all
inferiors to their superiors, be specially meant in this word honor, yet
the like duty of all superiors unto their inferiors, is likewise contained
under these words of father and mother, that is to say, of Magistrates to
govern, of Ministers to preach, of Parents to teach, and of masters to instruct
their charge and familye in the fear of God: Then shall both the Church and
commonwealth flourish and every one prosper in his place and calling, as the
Lord promises in his commandment.

The true meaning of the 6. Command.
The sixth Commandment, Thou shall do no murder. In this Commandment is
forbidden all manner violence il-wil or purpose to hurt our neighbor, and
requires unity and amity, to abound in all persons.

The seventh, Thou shall not commit adultery, this commandment inhibiteth
not only the act of adultery it self but also all inordinate lusts tending
to that end, (especially in married persons) and charge each one to keep his
own body chaste for the Lord. or to use that lawful means of marriage, which
him self has ordained for avoiding of sin.

The true meaning of the 8. Commaun.
The eight, Thou shall not steal, this commandment, abandoneth all unjust,
false and fraudulent deling, from amongst all men, and requires all just and
upright proceeding amongst all degrees and persons to the common benefit one of
another.

The true meaning of the 9. Command.
The ninth, Thou shall not bear false witness against thy Teighbour: this
commandment, not only excludes all false oaths, and detracting one another,
but enioyneth on the contrary a tender regard to maintain and defend each one
an others good name.

The true meaning of the 10. Com.
The tenth, Thou shall not covet thy neighbors house. this commandment
forbideth all covetous desire to have any thing that belongs to our neighbor,
(albeit we mean to pay truly for it) except the party be willing to part
with it, which plainlye discribeth before our eyes, the perfect pattern of a
true Christian, videlicet, so contentedly to live in his estate and calling
(how mean so ever) that he has no desire to have the same better din respect
of outward things, but ever to refer his will to the Lords.

Having thus briefly discoursed over the general duty of all manner
christians so far as the law requires at their hands, which every one
ought to put in practice according to the counsel of our kingly prophet, know
and serve God, it follows now by the same rule also to describe the duty of
all manner persons, in their particular places and callings, and to exhort
every one thereunto.

The Prince his duty.
Art thou a Prince or Potentate in this world, as mighty in power as David or
Solomon know what thy God requires of thee in thy place and calling, that
thou profess and prefer true Religion, as the same is prescribed in the
word of God, and to procure so much as in thee lies, that all thy people
afmay learn the same, and specially to serve God thereter, that he may bless
thee in all thy ways.

The magistrates duty.
Art thou a Magistrate in high authority under the Prince? know what thy God
requires of thee: that thou beat down all sin and wilful sinners Romans
13.1.6.
and that thou give countenance to good men and godliness, look therefore thou
serve God thereafter.

The noble man duty.
Art thou a noble man of great estate or calling, know what thy God requires
of thee, that thou go before others in godliness and that virtue, thou live
within the compass of thy calling, that thou be moderate in diet, pleasures
and apparel, that thou become a good benefactor to the Church and
commonwealth, look therefore thou serve God hereafter.

The Judge his duty.
Art thou a Judge in causes and controversies, to give equal doom between
party and party, know what thy God requires of thee, that thou hear
indifferently all men's causes. that thine heart and hands be free from all
brybes, that thou be clean from partial affections, of love or hatred, that
the fear of God be ever before thine eyes, that thou have no respect of
persons, that thy judgment stand with justice and equity, look therefore thou
serve God in this sort, that he may maintain thee to do him much service.

The Justice of p^ace duty.
Art thou a Justice of peace or quorum, know what thy God requires of thee,
that thou punish all peace breakers and vagrant persons with all others that
live disorderly, look therefore thou do so indeed, and seek to serve God
daily more and more.

The man in credit his duty.
Art thou in credit or countenance any way, know what thy God requires of thee,
that thou live soberly without vainglory, that thou ever pity all poor
suitors, that thou favor and further their good dispatch, look therefore thou
serve God accordingly.

The Mayor and Sheriffs duty.
Art thou a mayor, Sheriff, Alderman, or other head officer in City or Cuntrie,
know what thy God requires of thee, that thou have special care and regard
to the common benefit of that corporation where thou art planted, that thou
banish roges and all such persons as live in idleness, gaming or such like, that
thou comfort and cherish all such good members, as being but poor seek to
live iustlye upon their own travel in some lawful calling, look therefore
thou serve God thereafter,

The Ministers duty.
Art thou a Minister and haste a charge of souls, know what thy God requires
of thee, that thou have no more Church-charges then thou can well discharge,
that thou be apt 1 Timo. 3.2. 2. Timo. 4.2.
able and wel-willing to preach and teach Gods word unto them, that thou 1
Peet. 5.2.3.
perform the same duly and truly, that thy life be answerable Mat. 5.16.
unto thy doctrine, look therefore thou serve God in this sort, for fear of
the 1 Cor. 9.16. The Landlord h^s duty.
woe if thou faint or fall therein.

Art thou a Landlord and have Tenants under thee, know what thy God requires
of thee, that thou remember both thou and they are bought both with one price,
and that with God there is no respect of persons, that he detesteteth all
violence and oppression. and appoints each one to live in his calling, look
therefore thou give them no cause to complane least thou and thine do smart for
the same: seek therefore to serve God after these rules.

A^ thou a rich man that has this worlds good, know what thy God requires of
thee, that thou remember to be 1 Timothy 6.17, 18
rich in good works, to releive the poor, the fatherless and widows, to
help poos scholars, prisoners ct such like, look therefore thou serve God in
this sort, so shall thy treasure increase in heaun.

The Lawyers duty.
Art thou a lawyer and pleadest men's causes, know what thy God requires of
thee, that thou do not bolster up naughty matters, neither yet plead
wilfully against conscience: that thou faint not at any time to plead right
and justice, as well for the poor that has no fees to pay, as for the rich
who fills the pursse, that thou deal faithfully in all men's causes, and tell
them truly the state of their case at first, as at the last so uere as thou
can, O look thou serve God after this manner, so shall thou have favor with
him and all good men.

The Merchant his duty.
Art thou a Merchant, a Mercer or such like, know what thy God requires of
thee, that thou deal with sound and substantial wares, and part with the same
at a reasonable price: that thou buy and sell without oaths or lying, and in
all thy dealings use true waights and measures: O then be careful to serve God
in this sort, that he may prosper thy lawful endeavors.

The Father and masters duty.
Art thou a Master, a father or householder, know what thy God, requires of
thee, that thou train up thy servants, children and pre^tises in the true
knowledge and fear God: look then thou serve God and become careful.

The married man's duty.
Art thou a married man of what calling soever, know what thy God requires of
thee: that thou learn of Christ the head of his Church Ephs. 5.25, 26, 33.
to norish and cherish, to guide and govern thy wife in his fear, and ever
bear with her as the weaker vessel, look therefore thou serne God after this
manner.

The wives duty
Art thou a wife of what degree soever, know what thy God requires of thee,
that thou learn of the Church, as the Church does to Christ, Ephesians, 5.22,
23.34.
to submit thy self to thy husband in all things, to be guyded as he will in
all lawful things, that thou love and obey him as thy head and husband, look
therefore thou serve God as he commands thee.

The Artificers duty.
Art thou a tradesman, artificer or such like, know what thy God requires of
thee, that thou make good stuff without fraud or couin: that it, tend more to
proffite then pride, and that thou do not ouerprize it in selling, to abuse
the simplicity of the buyer, look therefore to serve God faithfully.

The schoolemasters duty.
Art thou a Schole-master, and have charge of youth, know what thy God requires
of thee, not to train them up with profane fables, but in such knoweledge as
tendes to godlynes, look then thou serve God thereafter.

The poormans duty,
Art thou a poor man or day-taile laborer, know what thy God requires of
thee, that thou be well content with thy calling, that thou labor faithfulie,
in thy woork, and use not to loyter in thy masters absence, look therefore thou
serve God as he enioineth thee.

The servants duty.
Art thou a servant, an aprentice or such like, know what thy God requires of
thee, that thou purlome not thy masters goods or wares, nor deal unjustly in
thine accounts, that thou seek not to please him only in presence but The
unmarried persons duty 1 Cor. 6 15.16.20.
as well in absence serve him faithfully, look therefore thou serve God in this
sort.

Art thou a single man or woman, know what thy God requires of thee, that thou
keep thy body as his holy temple Ephesians. 6.5.7.8.
that thou abstain from all fornication, and avoid all tempting occassions
thereunto, or else use the lawful means of marriage Hebr. 13.4.
as a remedy against sin and all sinful motions, look therefore in any case
thou seek and serve God after his rule, that he may bless thy lawful
desires.

The usurers duty.
Art thou an usurer or wicked oppressor, know what thy God requires of thee,
to make restitution and forsake all thy sinners, to become a new man out of
hand Amos. 6.3. Eccle. 5.7.
and not to defer the same any longer, least the Lords wrath fall suddenly
upon thee, oh then look thou serve God diligently hereafter.

Having thus briefly posted over the several duty of every person, in his
particular place and calling, let us now come to speak of that other point
touching the manner of Gods woorshippe, with what affections he is to be
served: The second part with what affections God is to be woorshiped
which being duly and deeply considered, will bring no small instruction and
comfort, for the Lord being of a spiritual substance, eternal, infinite,
almighty and merciful, a hater of sin, and lover of goodness, most wise,
most just, most holy and righteous, out of whose fulness we all receive that
measure of grace which we have to do good: he cannot away to be otherwise
served, then best agrees with his own nature, that is to be woorshiped John
4.24.
in spirit and truth, and as David says hear with a perfect heart and a
willing mind: not with a peevish, perverse or partial heart, or with a wicked,
wilful and wayward mind, but with a perfect heart and a willing mind: as that
form and manner of faithful service where withal he is only delighted.

The heart of man, Two fit similes.
is fitly compared to the root of a tree, which being sound does nourish the
branches, and bring forth sound fruit: It is also likened to the head of a
fountain, which being sweet, does send Soorth wholesome and sweet water, but
either of them being corrupted, do bring forth the contrary: Even such is
the heart Genesis 6.5.
and mind of man; by nature, (as we all lie corrupted in Adam) till we be
renewed and regenerate by grace, and therefore as Christ says, can bring forth
no goodness Mat. 7.18.
naturally, for out of the heart proceeds evil thoughts, adulteries,
fornications, murders, thefts, Mark. 7.21, 22.
covetousness, wickedness, deceit, uncleanness, a wicked eye, backbyting, pride
and foolishnes.

But the heart and mind of man, being purged and purified by faith Acts. 15.9.
in Christ, must of force then bring forth contrary fruit, as love, joy,
peace, long suffering, gentleness, goodness, faith, meeknes, temperance as S Paul
witnesses Gal, 5.22.23.

Out of that which has been said, I conclude thus much that the heart of man,
The several properties of the heart and mind.
is as it were the very root and fountain to carry and convey all his
affections to good or evil which way it lusts, and the mind being likewise
the life of the soul, to give life and strength to the sencible parts, powers
and faculties of soul and body, to prosecute that which the heart most
affects: Keep thy heart dilligently.
which being duly observed of all the counsel that Solomon prescribes in
the proverbs, is very profitable and most needful, to keep our hearts with
all diligence, because out of them springs life. Pro. 4.23, and to serve the
Lord with our whole heart, mind, soul and strength Duet. 6.5. and
as we are enjoined in many other places of the holy Scripture.

Psalm. 119.
And whereas David teaches that we must serve God with a perfect heart, and a
willing mind, which secludeth a double and dissembling heart, with a foolish
feyned and froward mind, The papists and carnal gospellers reproved again.
heerby again the temporising papists and carnal gospellers are both very
plainly and roundly reproved: for would any of the papists come to our Church
(but the word preched would root out their errors) were not the danger of law
to compel them, or that they cory favor with superior Magistrates in hope of
credit, Temporizing papists cannot serve God.
preferment or such like, and so long, their consciences must needs give
evidence against them, that they cannot please God, for they do not serve him
with a perfect heart and a willing mind.

Again, all such gospellers, as make a fair show in coming to the Church,
and yet while the word is read and preached, are tatling and talking, wagging
and walking or have their minds otherwise occupied, some about their farms,
Carnal Gospellers cannot please God.
some about their oxen and some about their pleasures or so^e like prophanes
do these men serve God with a perfect heart and a willing mind: there
conciences cry out to the contrary and so long sure they cannot please God.

Oh then in any case let us take heed, that we do not become mockers of God,
to woorship him with our bodies, when our souls are far from him, Who mock
God
we honor him with our tounges, when our hearts wa^der from him: to serve him
in part, some piece of the Sabbath, and to serve sin and satan the rest: for
God will not be mocked, he is ever jealous of his own glory, Gal. 6.7.
who will either have the whole day or no part thereof, he will have the whole
body and soul or no part of them: he will be woorshiped with a perfect heart
and a willing mind, or else not at all.

For if any of us all had a servant that were an idle fellow, forslowed his
business, How we would use a bad servant
minded other matters, or went to his work like a bear to the stake, full
sore against his will: would we be pleased with his service, and not rather set
him packing out of our doors.

Oh then let us learn to become wise-harted, to judge our selves in time, that
except we all amend, our wants, and cast away our coldenes a carelesnes in
Gods service, Let us judge our selves in time.
and seek to obey him faithfully and redely as he commands even from the
bottom of our hearts and souls, we are unworthy the name of his servants or
to continue in his blessed service, for not every one that says Lord Lord,
shall inherit his kingdom, but he that withal Math. 7.21
obeys his commandments as he requires.

Now let us proceed to speak a little of those notable reasons, Three reasons
to move us to serve god.
which Daniel here uses to persuade Solomon to serve his God, which are three
in number every one more forcible to move then other.

The first is taken from the natural insight, knowledge and understanding of
the Almighty: that he searches all hearts, and understands all the
imaginations of thoughts, which points being ever in our remembrance, The
first reason to serve God.
will make us hence forth more watchful to look to oar ways, both to
forsake that which is ill, and faithfullye to follow that which is good: For
what servant (though never so bad) that he serves such a wise master, as will
not only call him to account, how he has wrought and done his business, What
will make a loyterer labor
but will further have such a watching eye into his continual labors, as if
he should but loyter but one hour, should take him tardie, would not such a
master make him stir his stumps, if he either regarded to please him at all,
or hoped in the end to be paid for his pains, how could it be otherwise?

Why all should serve God.
Then I besecch you, let me once again exhort every person, from the highest
to the lowest, from the best to the worste, to walk more vprightlye in their
places and callings seeing they profess to serve that God who searches all
secrets, and will one day call them to make account how they have used or
abused his talents.

If those covetous cormerants that scrape and scratch this earthly pelf
together, by hook and crook, Why covetous men should repent.
right or wrong, they care not how so they can catch it, could remember thus
much, that the Lord God sees all their ill dealings and will one day call them
to account for the same, they would not still wilfully provoke his wrath toward
them by offending his majesty, O then let this reason move them to repentance.

If those carnal minded men, Why drunk^ should repent.
that give them selves to surfeting and drunkenness, to whordome and uncleanness,
would call to remembrance that the Lord God sees all their ways, and will one
day call them to account for the same, it would make them leave all manner of
filthiness: O then let this reason etc.

If the wrangling Lawyers or other petty foggers that abuse good laws and
godly Governors, Why wrangling lawyers should repeat.
by bearing and bolstring up bad men and causes should consider thus much that
the Lord God sees the proceedings, and will one day call them to account for
the same, they would forsake all such evil ways: O then etc,

If the seceret undermining usurer, Why usurers should repent.
and all such coosning deceitful crafts-me^, should wiselye forethinke that
how closlye so ever they convey their craftines, from the eyes of good-men, yet
they cannot hyde the same from the Lord, but he thoroughly sees and searches
the same, and will one day call them to make their accounts: they would then
forth with gave over such wickedness: O then etc.

If all Church papists who carry to faces under one hood, Why church-papists
should repent.
should meditate thus much with them selves that albeit they dissemble and
cloak their hippocrisie never so cunningly from the eyes of the Lord, yet the
God of heaven that hates all hypocrisy he sees and will search the secrets
of their consciences, and will one day call them to account for the same: O
then. etc. And whereas David says the Lord searches all hearts, noating as
well the good as the bad, of of what calling, country or condition soever Genesis
1.26.37 Psalm. 44.9.10.11.
because he only made the heart of man, let every christian learn thus much
thereby, that in all their ways they walk so uprightly, Why we all should
repent.
as all their thoughts, words and woorks may be ever framed after Gods will:
that when they shall lay open the secrets of all men, their consciences in that
day may not accuse them.

O then set this reason move them to repentance.

The second reason to move us to serve God.
Now let us come to the second reason, which David uses to make us serve God,
which is drawn from the blessing that shall ensue thereof: Jf thou seek God
he will be found of thee, wheerin we have to learn these two lessons.

First, what it is to find God.

^wo good points
Secondly, the way and means how we may find him.

Touching the former, (though it be set down by David in the latter places)
yet seeing it is a special reason to move us to seek God, Why I place
finding before seeking.
and moved in other places to go before as in 130. Psalm verse 4, where it it
is said, with the Lord is mercy, that he may be feared, planting mercy
before as the cause of true fear.

The first point, what it is to find God.
I will therefore speak first of that excellent blessing what it is to find
God, which in a word is to find all the treasures in heaven and in earth, and
not only to find them, but also to enjoy them for ever more.

For when as the Lord created heaven and earth, and all things therein for the
use of man, to take and use them at his will and pleasure, yea more, to guide
and govern them as their souerain Lord when nee was fallen from his first
integrity. Then how much more does the right use of them appertain unto us,
when we are reconcyled into Gods favor, and desire to seek to find the Lord
Jesus.

Do thou not want wit or wisdom to guide thy self aright in the duties of
thy calling, Where wisdom is to be found.
all the tresures of understanding, wit or wisdo^e remain in the Lord,
therefore if thou find him, thou can want no wisdom.

Art thou sick, poor or any way distressed in soul or body, all health,
wealth, Where to find health. etc.
and welfare are resident in God therefore if thou find him thou can lack
nothing that is good.

Do thine enemies pursue and persecute thy soul, all power is the Lords in
Mat. 28.18. Col. 2.15.

Where to find safety against al enemies.


heaven and in earth, he has subdued satan, sin, death and damnation:
therefore if thou find him thou can want no strength to conquer all thine
enemies, be they never so many malicious or mighty.

Does thy conscience oppress thee with the weight of thy sinners, the Lord
has nailed them fast unto his cross Col. 2.14.
and fully satisfied his farhers justice for them, therefore if thou find him,
thy sins shall not torment thee.

Would thou gladly have life everlasting and be pertaker of the joys of
heaven? Where salvation is to be found.
Christ Jesus thy savior has purchased and prepared heaven for thee and all
his redeemed, therefore if thou find him thou find salvation.

Thou can not name any thing needful in heaven or in earth, belonging to this
life or the life to come, but the same is in Christ most plentifully for in him
(as the Scripture says) all Col. 1.19.
fulness does dwell: Therefore to find him, is to find all treasures in heaven
and in earth.

Seeing therefore all true joy and felicity is solelye and wholely to be found
in Christ Jesus, The 3 point how to find God
and that no man can compass or comprehend the same, but such only (as know
and find him) let us now come too to speak of that matter which is the second
point here to be handled without the which (whatsoever has been said) all
is in vain and cannot profit us.

A fit simile.
As for example, if I know certainly that in such a word an infinite made of
money were hid, if the owner thereof would give it unto me, yet if by no
means I could find the same, what should the gift of such a tresure profit
me? if it were of value to purchase a kingdom nothing at all: so stands the
case, between Christ and us, Though I know never so well and certainly, that
all kind of treasure is perminent in him, and do belong to such as can find
him yet if can by no means find him what shall the understanding here of
profit me? nothing at all.

Oh then in Gods name give heed to that which follows and lay it up safely in
the cofer of your hearts, for then shall you be sure to find Christ indeed: if
thou seek God (says David) he will be found of thee, so that all the virtue
lies in this word seek, where upon aryseth these two questions. Two
Questions.


First, where to seek Christ. Second, how to seek for him.
Touching the former, Christ him self will resolve us, who teaches every one
that would find him, to Ioh. 5, 39. Christ in the ^cripture.
search the holy Scripture: In the scripture therefore Christ is to be found,
and those that would find him, there must they seek him

For though it be true that Christ is in the heavens, (as touching his
humanity) Col. 3.1.
and that there we must seek him at the right hand of his father: yet
whosoever would know what Christ has done for him to bring him to that glory,
in the Scriptures only there must they find it. Christ's body (...) heaven,
his virtue in earth.


And though it may be truly said also, that the Lord is present in his
Sanctuary amongst the assembly of his servants, Mat^. 13.30.
to direct and guide them by his holy spirit, yet the way and means rightly to
distinguish between Gods sanctuarye, and the sinagoge of Satan: is by
reteyning therein the exercises of religion pure and undefiled, according to the
word, so that still the scripture must be sought unto, being of them selves
only sufficient, for teaching all truth, 2. Tim. 3.16, 17.
for confuting all errors, for instructing in all godliness, and for reproving
all manner vice, that the man of God may be perfect in all things.

Seeing by these proves it plainly appears, that Christ to our comfort (as
touching his offices of king Ioh. 5.39.
priest and prophet) Is truly and effectually to be found in the Scripture. 2.
part how to search the scriptures to find Christ.


It follows now to speak of the latter part, how to search the Scriptures
that we may find Christ, which Solomon teaches us plainly in these words:
If thou seek wisdom as for silver: and searchest for her, as for treasures:
then shall thou understand the fear of the Lord: by wisdom in this place, is
understood, the true knowledge of Christ in the scripture.

Now then we are to enquire, what pains and travel all men take, that seek
and search for silver and treasure, seeing this example is set before us to
imitate and follow: How all men labor for silver.
The merchant ventereth both goods and life to come by this silver, the lawyer
spends his tongue and stumps to get this silver: the science man toyleth his
head and hands to obtain silver: the poor man woorketh both day and night to
earne this silver: but let us come to the other point touching the digging and
searching for treasure, which does more aptly express our duty.

If it be but a moyne of copper, tyn or lead, what pain and diligence is used
by the owner to come by the same, but if it prove a vein of silver or gold,
Oh then how glad is the Lord of that soil, Oh diligence of metal Myners.
how quicklye does he set poyners on work, how egerly then is the vein
followed, with what care, courage and comfort do all men labor almost day and
night in hope to be greatly enriched thereby: all such men know, as have
experience in those matters, that there is no care, no pains, nor any cost
spared to effect their business, and get the said treasure. Yea albeit the vein
sinck down very deep and prove most hard and difficult to win, yet do they
not cease nor slacken their labor, but rather add so much the more diligence,
in hope that their gains do double their pains when the moyen is once won:
for this they hold (as a rule infallable) that the lower any metal does lie
in the earth, The lower the metal lies, the better, it proves.
the better and more gainful it proves in substance.

Even so it is in the study of the Scriptures, the more pains and diligence
thou use therein, the more increase of sound knowledge, wisdom and comfort is
gotten in the end: being that most rich and invaluable moyne wherein Psalm.
119. Pro. 3.13.14.26. and 8.18.19.
all the treasures of wisdom and understanding are to be found co^teining and
compredending all the holy counsels and commandments of the Lord, so John.
20.31.
much as is necessary for our salvation, the estimate whereof is so
inestimable, as our Savior prefers the dear saluaton of one poor soul
Math. 16.26.
to all the treasures and pleasures in this world, neither can it be other
wise, for the blood of Christ (by which our sins are purged) as the Scripture
does witness 1 John 1.7. 1 Peet. 1.18.
is much more precious then all gold and pearls.

Moreover this diversity there is between those that seek for earthly
treasures, and them that study the holy Scriptures, that whereas oftentimes the
former loosse their labor in missing that they seek for, yet there was never
any since the world began that fought the Lord unfeignedly in the holy
Scripture but they found him, as the examples of all the Patriarchs, Prophets,
and Apostles, with all other our forefathers mentioned in Scripture from the
first of Genesis till the last of Apocal^ps does plentifully witness: o then
how ought all men (of what estate soever) to study the holy Scripture?

But the Masters of moyners will object and say, An objection.
we can set others on work to dig metal, and when it is found, take the
gains to our selves, may we not do the like in searching of the scripture.

I answer no, David here tells Solomon his son that if he would find
God, he him self must seek him, and not pass it over unto others, as great
men commonly do in these days: saying, to study the Scriptures belongs
only to men of the church, preachers and such like, as though none but learned
men should be saved, for so they must needs wrest the Lords speeches, where he
wills all that longs for life eternal Ioh. 5.13.
to study the Scriptures.

Let no man therefore saint to himself of what calling soever) that he can get
any other way to heaven, but by the Lord Jesus, and by him only: or that Christ
is at all to be found their Savior: but as the Scripture does testify of
him, or they can possibly find him therein, if them selves do not seek him
with their whole heart, as David did Psalm. 119. Deu. 17.19. Ioh. 1.8.
and as all kings and princes are enjoined. For as no man living can get any
gains or find any moyne of metal or treasure, A fit simile
except he take pains to open the earth, and follow the vein with labor and
diligence: no more shall any man ever attain to find out the treasures that
are hid in Christ, How Christ is to be found or
except he diligently study the Scripture and frequent holy exercises where
the word is preched, then (and not before then) shall he taste and feel how
sweet the Lord is, for so himself instructs us how to find him, saying,
seek Mat. 7.78. Ignorance of dangerous.
and ye shall find him: but he never promised to be found of those that
seek not to find him.

If we should therefore wisely he consider, how many and great inconveniences
do grow through ignorance of the scripture, then would we more carefullye
labor day and night to be conversant in them. What is the cause why millions
of thousands where popery is professed, are so gross idolaters to fall down
and pray before stocks and blocks, which they term holy Images, yet are
called of the Lord and his holy prophets false Images Exo. 20 4 5 Deu. 4 15 29
Ier, 51 17 18
lying teachers, and deceiuable vanities forbidden to be used: but are
altogether ignorant in Gods word, and suffer themselves to be lead blyndfolde
by such blind guydes Mat. 15.14
as will bring them all to fall in the ditch.

What is the cause why so many hundreths, tear and blaspheme the holy name of
God by swearing and forswearing without any cause, but that they are ignorant
of the Scripture, which threatens great judgments 3. Command. Zechas 5 2 3 4
against such vile wretches.

What is the cause why so many persons wilfully profane the Lords holy
Saboths, in prosecuting on that day their ordinary accoustomed causes and
pleasures, but they have not perused the scripture, which plainly denounces 4
Command. Exo. 31 14
great judgments against him.

What is the cause so many wickedly rise and rebel against their own
souerainge Romans 13 16
and superiors but they are ignorant in the scriptures, which threatens great
judgments against such wicked wretches.

What is the cause that amongst all callings some are malicious, some vicious
persons, some drunkerds, some deceitful persons, some covetous, some
contentious persons but that they know not the holy Sctipture, which
ptonounceth damnation 1 Cor. 6 9 ^ Gal. 517 ^0 ^.
to all such wicked woorkers.

I wish with all my heart, that these my examples of so great inconveniences
continuallye accompaning the ignorance of the Scriptures, may move all persons
to take greater pleasure in reading of Gods word, especially seeing so
exceeding benefit is promised to those that delight therein, and labor to frame
their lives thereafter as has been declared.

The manner and way to search the holy scripture without doubt or danger to
fall into errors, is to read the same with an humble spirit, as Christ makes
him self an Mat. 11.29
example) to mark diligently that goes before and follows after, and to
what end the same tends, conferring one place with an other, and rightly
distinguishing between allegories, parables and plain speeches, How to read
the scripture with proffit.
calling continually on the Lord by prayer for his grace and holy spirit: then
shall we know the secrets Psalm. 25.9.
of the Lord, then whereunto if you add a perfect heart and a willing mind, to
refourme your religion and life thereafter, shall you abound in the knowledge of
the Lord, the^ shall his word be most sweet unto your souls, The benefit of
reading the holy scripture to serve God thereafter.
then will you prefer the same to all wordly pleasures, then shall the power
thereof subdue all sin in you, then will Gods spirit woork a change in you, then
shall both your life and religion please God, the^ shall you indeed find the
Lord Jesus, then shall you prosper in all his ways, then will he protect you
against all your enemies, the^ will he preserve you in all extremities, then
will he comfort you in the hour of death and then will he bring you to his
joys eternal, which is the chief blessing of all other blessings. It
follows now to speak of the last reason which David uses to urge us to
serve God, if the former should fail, drawn wholely from the judgments of
God against such as contemn the same, The third reason to move us to serve
God.
which may well be termed the whip-cord reason to cause and compel us to
serve the Lord, or else nothing will prevail, which is only thus much, Jf thou
for sake God he will cast theee of for ever. The whip-cord reason.
As if David should have said unto Solomon, of all the sons that God has
given me, I have ever been most careful of thee ( o Solomon) to know and
serve God because I foreknew thou should be a king to guide this great people
acording to his will: I have plainly told the way and manner how, with a
perfect heart and a willing mind: I have showed thee further two forcible
reasons to move thee thereunto: The first drawn from the nature of God, that
he sees and searches all men's hearts and understands all their secrets: the
other taken from that exceeding blessing which shall ensue the service of god:
if thou seek him he will be found of thee: and in finding him, thou find all
treasures in heaven and in earth: Now if neither of these aleadged reasons, nor
any of my former persuasions, can cause thee to continue in the service of God
yet if thou have any care at all to escape hell and come unto heaven, see thou
seek and serve the Lord God truly according to his word, otherwise I protest
before his glorious presence and here before all my Estates, that if thou
forsake him, he will cast thee off for ever, both from being king, and out of
his favor, which thou shall be sure one day to find: o then let this reason
prevail, to cause thee serve God faithfully.

But to make this reason a little more plain, Two poin^
let us consider of these two points. First, what it is to forsake God, and
secondly who they are that forsake him: before we come to speak of their
judgment. Unbelief is to forsake God.
Touching the former, To forsake God, as the Apostle notes to the Hebrews, is
to have an evil and unbelieving heart. Heb. 3.12. Which imports first, they
must be believers, else how can it be truly said, More plainly revealed.
They depart from that which they never had: so that of necessity this is to
forsake God, a reuolting from that sound faith and religion of the gospel,
which the party once has professed.

Another kind of forsaking God, Solomon describes in the first of his
Proverbs, which is wilfully to hate the knowledge of God, or to be guided
after his word. Whom the Church terms further, Pro. 22 31
such as mock Gods ordinances, which sort of sinners also the Lord will reject.

Now then let us come to the second point; to examine by these rules, who they
are that forsake God.
who they are in deed that forsake God, that is to say, all such as willingly
revolt from that faith of Christ's holy Gospel which they once professed; or
wilfully refuse to conform or reform their lives thereafter, and yet profess
the same.

These definitions of forsaking God, which are grounded on his word, does lay
open the estate of two sorts of people to be most dangerous. The one is, In
what estate the reuolters from the Gospel are Math, 15, 6
of all such Papists, and other reuolters of what state so over, who before
time have openly professed and protested the religion of the Gospel, and now
are Apostates, embracing popery, and their own inventions in Gods worship,
flatly forbidden by his holy word. In what estate carnal Gospellers are.
The other sort is, of such as profess the truth of religion according to the
Gospel in their speeches, but refuse utterly to reform their lives
thereafter, and so deny the power thereof to work in their hearts, as the
Apostle notes Romans 1.18.31. Of which cursed company are all such as we call
carnal gospellers, of what sort so ever.

If al professors within this realm of England should examine their lives
without partiality, whether the same agree in all points with that holy gospel
of Christ Jesus, whereof we make so fair protestations, I doubt many of us,
yea many thousands, shall be found such as forsake God, our lives and
conversation are so abhominabl(...)his s^ght. For, how many of us have often
heard patched, and read in Gods word, That usury and extortion, pride and
oppression, whooredome and drunkenness, lying and swearing, slandering and
backbiting, malice and hatred, covetousness and contention, with all other
gross sins, are flatly forbidden by the word of God, upon 2. Cor, 9, 10.
Gal. 5.19 20, 11.
pain of damnation, and yet do wallowe therein. I do appeal to every man's
conscience, with this caveat, that whosoever does feel himself guilty in any
of them, he seek to forsake them, Who so repents not, must needs forsake God.
and to serve God better, least he be found amongst that cursed company of
such wicked wretches as forsake the Lord God, and then must his judgments
needs ceaze upon them. Which now follows something to be spoken of.

David says to Solomon, If thou forsake God, he will cast thee off for ever.
Now to be cast off for ever, what is it else but to loose the favor of God in
this world, The most fearful iudgme^nts of such as forsake God.
and eternal felicity in the world to come, and not that only, but to be cast
into endless torments of soul and body when this life is ended: yea, for the
most part, as such persons have not any regard to serve God in this world: so
he makes them often subject to his judgments in this life.

As for example, the Apostle says, that as they regarded not to know and serve
God, so he gave them up in to reprobate winds. Romans 1.28. to do those things
that were not convenient, whose end is damnation, 2. The. 1.6.9 which shall
neither have ease nor ending.

But to produce some fearful examples of such as refused either to know God
in his gospel, or to reform their lives thereafter, that such as delight in
the same wicked ways, may either repent, or look for like judgments.

Wilful presumption punished in Adam and Eve.
Adam and Eve our original parents, being planted in paradise, a place of all
pleasure ^hey would needs follow their own wicked will against the forbidden
commandment of God. But what became of them? both they and we their woeful
posterity were banished paradise, a place of pleasure, Gen, 3, 23
and are now subjects to all kind of misery of soul and body: a fearful
example to all selfe-willed discontented persons, O then let this reason
compel us to repent!

Wilful murder punished in Kaine. Gen 4, 1^
Kaine the first of Adam, he not regarding the Lords commandment, did wilfully
murder Abel his brother; but what became of him? both he and all his offspring
became vagabonds and bondmen: a fearful example to al malicious persons, O
then let this, etc.

Wilful worshippers punished. Leu. 10, 1, 2
Nadab and Abihu, they would needs offer strange fire unto God, contrary to his
express commandment, but what became of them? themselves were as strangely
consumed with fire (s) a dreadful example to all worshippers against Gods
word, O then, etc.

Disobedience punished. Numb, 16 31, 32
Corah, Dathan, and Abiram, they would not be obedient to Moses their governor,
as the Lord had commanded: but what became of them, the earth did open (t) and
swallow them up quick, a fearful example to all rebellious persons against
their lawful magistrates, O then let us, etc.

Prophanne punished. Gen, 7, 21
The people in Noah's time, were given generally to all prophanenes, and would
not repent at Gods forewarning: but what became of them? they were all
overwhelmed in the general deluge: a terrible example to all profane persons,
O then let, ctc.

Uncleanness punished.
The incestuous Sodomites, they would needs prosecute their abominations
against the good counsel of Lot their neighbor: Gen, 19, 24
but what became of them, they were al consumed with the stinking fire of
brimstone from heaven, a fearful example to all licentious persons, O then
let, etc.

Covetousness punished 1, King, 21, 9 1, 19,

2, King, 6, 33 36,


Iezabel the Queen did wring N^boths vineyard by violence from him, and caused
him to be killed, eapresly contrary to the eight commandment: but what became
of her? the dogs did afterward cate up her flesh: a terrible example to all
bloody covetous oppressors. O then let us, etc.

Treason punished 2, Sam. 17, 23 Math, 27.25
Ahitophel and Judas would needs betray their own sovereign Lords against Gods
commandment, and their own consciences: but what became of them? they both
became desperate and hanged themselves: a fearful example to all traitors. O
then let us, etc.

Unmercifulness punished. Luke 6, 3, 6, Luke 16, 19, 20.31
Dives the rich man would not show mercy to poor Lazarus lying at his gates,
against Christ's commandment: but what became of him? he was himself bereft of
all mercy, and cast into hell: a terrible example to all merciless people. O
then let us, etc.

Dissemblers punished Act, 2, 12
Ananias and Saphira did wilfully dissemble against their own consciences: but
what became of them? they were both arrested with sudden death: a fearful
example to all dissembling persons. O then, etc.

Persecutours punished Act, 12, 23
Herod the king was a bloody persecuter of poor Christians: but what became of
him? he was miserably eaten and consumed with worms: a terrible example for
all persecutors, O then let, etc.

Malitiousnes punished
The malicious Jews would need^ of envy put Christ to death: but what became
of them? they are now become vagabonds throughout the world, and have no
Country of their own to rest in: a fearful example for all envious persons,
O then let, etc.

The Angels in heaven did wittingly transgress Gods holy commandementes, Pride
punished 2, Pet, 2, 4 Jude 6
and through pride rebelled: but what became of them? they were cast out of
heaven and became devils in hell: a fearful example to proud persons. O then,
etc.

Our savior Jesus the God of all glory, would needs take upon him our earthly
nature, to answer and satisfy the justice of his father for all our
iniquities: but what became of him? Christ Jesus punished for us. Luk 1, 74, 75
Did he not undergo the pains of hell for ever, and all extreme torments of
soul and body, to deliver us from hell and restore us to heaven, that in the
mean time whilst we live in this world, we should truly serve him in holiness
and righteousness.

And shall we once dream or imagine so grossly, that God will spare us
continuing in sin, that spared not his own most dear and only son, the
very jewel of heaven and earth, Will GOD punish his son Christ and spare us
continuing in sin
being clean and unspotted of any sin, when he did seek in love to pacify
his fathers wrath for our sins: O intolerable madness, did the Lord punish
Adam in paradise, and the Angels in heaven when they disobeied, and shall we
escape scot-free? No, no it will not be. O then, if neither the watching
providence of the Almighty can provoke us, nor his exceeding mercies can
allure us, yet if we will not approve our selves reprobates, let this forcible
reason of Gods fearful judgments against sin and sinners compel us to
repentance, that is, even forth with to for take our evil ways, and follow
Gods laws with a perfect heart and a willing mind, so as we may best please
him, then shall he still preserve us in this world, and reserve us after for
his joy eternal, Amen in Christ Jesus.

A brief prayer of the foresaid Text.
O Lord our God and heavenly father, how much are we beholding to thine eternal
goodness, for thy manifold favors extended upon us, namely, for sending thy
son to redeem us, his spirit to comfort us, and his word to direct us, both
in our religion and conversation, so as we may best please thee and profit thy
Church: All honor and praise be given to thee therefore for evermore in Jesus
Christ, Amen. And seeing thy most holy word does chifly teach us to know and
serve then as thou requirest, O blessed Father, instruct us first to know thee
what thou have done for us; when we were not, to make us after thine own
Image: when we were lost, to redeem us by the precious blood of thy most dear
son Jesus: and though we still be sinful, to send thy holy spirit into our
hearts, daily more and more to sanctify us: O give us grace, that we may ever
serve thee as thy word teaches us, with a perfect heart and a willing ^inde^:
and because we are forgetful of our duties, make us mindful to think of
those three reasons, which thy word prescribes to draw us thereunto. The
first, that thou see us and searchest all secrets. The next, that if we seek
thee, thou will be found of us, whereby we are sure to find all things
needful. The third, that if we forsake thee, and follow not thy laws, thou will forsake us and cast us off for ever. O most dear Father, let all these
three reasons be evermore before our eyes, that the first may move us, the
second persuade us, and the third compel us to speedy repentance. If the
sharp in-sight of thy all-seeing nature cannot move us, let the understanding
of thine eternal goodness draw us there^nto: If thy everlasting goodness
cannot draw us, yet let those fearful judgments which thy word threatens,
and heretofore has fallen upon the wicked, compel us to seek thee, by
forsaking all our sins, and following thy laws, with all our hearts and
souls, that so we may please thee, every day more and more whilst we do
live in this wretched world, that when this life is ended, we may be
inheritors of thy glory endlesie, thereto praise thy holy name for evermore,
Amen. O blessed Father, save thy Church universal, our Queen and this realm,
give thy Gospel and the government thereof a more free passage in all
kingdoms and countries, namely in England; that as the rod of Aaron devoured
and consumed all the ^ods of the Sorcerers and Inchanters of Egypt: so the
preaching Ministry of thy blessed Gospel, may beat down and destroy all
false, fained, and idolatrous opinions, sects, scismes, and heresies, contrary
thereunto, in all kingdoms and countries (namely in England) that Sion may
rejoice, and Israel may be glad, our Queen, her Counsel, and all estates may
triumph, when satan and sin are daily subdued, and Christ by his ordinances
reign in his Church, and his Gospel flourish in all kingdoms (especially in
England) that we may all know it and serve him thereafter, to the eternal
praise of his great name of mercy, and our everlasting comfort in Christ, unto
whose most blessed Majesty, with thee O father Almighty, and the blessed
spirit of truth, three persons in one godhead, be ascribed all honor, glory,
power, praise, and dominion from all his creatures in heaven and in earth, more
specially from mankind, and most of all from his redeemed, now and ever.

FINIS.

