The brief content of certain Acts of Parliament, against thinordinate use
of apparel.
Anno xxiiii. Henrici. viii.

(...) Silk of the color of purpure. Cloth of gold Tissue.

But only the King Queen Kings Mother. Children. Brethren and sisters. Uncles
and Auntes
and Except Dukes and Marquesses, who may wear in dublets and sleuelesse
cotes, Cloth of Gold, of Tissue, not exceadyng.v.li. the yard, and Purpure in
mantelles of the Garter.
Cloth of Gold Silver. (...) satin.
Sylke or cloth mixte or imbrodered with Gold or Silver, nor furre of Sables.
Except Earls, and all degrees above Earls, and Uicountes, and Barons, in
Doublets and sleuelesse cotes only: cloth of Gold, Silver, or Tynsell. Woollen
cloth made out of the Realm, but in bonets only. Velvet Crimsin. Scarlet or
Blewe.
Furs Black Ienets. Lusernes.
Embrodery.
Except Dukes. and their children. Marquesses. and their children. Earls, and
their children.
Barons: and knights, being companions of the garter.
Ueluet in Gowns, Coats with sleues or other uttermost garments.
Furre of Libardes. Embrodery. Pricking or pronting with Gold Silver or Sylke.

Except Men of the degrees above mentioned. Barons sons Knights, or men that
may dispende. CC.li. by year. Satin. Damske. Silk Chamlet or Taffata in
Gown. Coat with sleues or uttermost garments. Ueluet, otherwise then in
sleuelesse iackets, Doublets, Coyfes, Partlettes or Purses. Furre whereof the
kind grows not within the Queen's dominions: except Foynes, gray Ienets,
Bodge.
Except The degrees next above mentioned: and Men that dispende C.li. by year.
Sylke, other than Satin, Damask, Taffata, or Sarcenet in Doublets: and
Sarcenet, Chamlette, or Taffata in lynynge of gowns: and the same, or Ueluet,
in sleuelesse Cotes, Iakets, Ierkens, Coyfes, Cappes, Purse or Partlettes,
being not of color scarlet, crimsin, or blewe. Furre of Foynes, graye Ienets,
or other, as the like grows not within the Queen's dominions.
Except Men of the degrees above mentioned. Son and heir apparaunt of a
knight, so son and heir apparau^t of a man of.ccc. mark lands by year. and
Men that may dispend xi. li. by year.


Note that the Lord Chauncelour. Treasourer. President of the (...). Privy
(...)
(...) Ueluet, Satin, or other sylkes, except purpure. Furs, except Black
Ienets.


These may wear as they (...) used hereto fore. (...) any Of the kings
council. Justices of either benche. Barons if the Eschequer. Master of the
Rolls. Sergeauntes at law. Masters of the Chauncery. Of the Queen's council.
Apprentyses of law. Physicians of the King, Queen, and Prince. Mayres, and
other head officers of any towns corporate. Barons of the.v. ports.
Except. Ueluet. Damask Satin.
of the color Crimsin. Uiolet. Purpure. Blewe.


Note that this Act extends not to prohibit a servant from wearyng of any
Cognisau^ce or badge of his master: and in the same statute, Henchmen,
Heraldes, Pursiuantes at arms, Players in Enterludes, runners at Iustes,
Torneys, or such martial feats, and such as wear apparel given by the King
or Queen, and such as shall have license from the king, are priuileged: as by
the Statute appears.

The end of the Statute of.24. H. 8.
Anno. i. and.ii. Philippi and Marie.
None shall wear any Sylke in Hatte. Bonet. Nyghtcap. Gyrdell. Scabbarde.
Hosen. Shoes. Spurrelethers.
Except. The son and heir apparaunt or daughter of a knight, or the wife of
the said son. A man that may dispende.xx. li. by year, or is worth.CC. li.
in goods.


Note that every person above the degree of a knights son or his wise, or
daughter of a knight, and every head officer in towns corporate, and every
servant of the Queen's wearyng ordinary livery, may wear as they might before
this Act.

These be the brief contents of certain parts of the laws now remaynyng in
force: and yet for the larger understanding thereof, the statutes of length are
to be red and considered, by such as be disposed to observe the same: for that
the same can not so well abridged as were necessary.

There be also certain other exceptions in the statutes, which are well to be
considered by them that will claim any privilege thereby.

Imprinted at London in Powles Churchyard by Richard Judge and John Cawood,
Printers to the Queen's Majesty.

Cum priuilegio Regiae maiestatis.


