By the Queen.
WHereas the Queens Majesty, as well for the commodity of her Realm, as for
the benefit of sundry of her Subjects, has heretofore ordained a Lotterie
general to be erected in her City of London for her said Realm, of the which
the furthest day of reading of the same has been also heretofore signified by
certain Proclamaticns to be intended at the furthest, before Candlemas next,
To the end that by the discourse of the same Reading (as it was promised by
the Chart) every one might have knowledge, and to enjoy the Prices that Fortune
shall give unto them: Her Majesty being newly informed, that generally the
people desire very much to have the day of the reading with speed, thinking
Candlemas over long, with diverse other opinions raised among her said people,
as it seems, by disquiet and curious heads, contrary to her Majesty's sincere
will and meaning.

For remedy whereof, and specially to satisfy the doubtfulnesse of the
simpler sort, Her Majesty of her natural accustomed grace and benignity (by
the advice of her Counsel) has ordained and by these presents does give all
persons to understand, that the day of the reading (which should be at
Candlemas next, as before is said shall begin the third day of November next
without any delay: And therefore every one having interest herein may give
their attendance, or other wise direct themselves accordingly. Giving to
understand also to all manner of persons, that the Collection of the Lottes in
any place being out of the City of London, shall not endure any longer than
until the xx. day of September next, and in the City of London until the
last day of the same month of September, and no longer.

And because some may be disposed by themselves or in company with others to
adventure in the said Lotterie some notable sum of Money, if it weregranted
that they should enjoy the advantages that heretofore were given to others,
laying in their moneys within the three Months specified in the Chart (the
which is long past and expired:) Her Majesty of her liberality and benign
grace (as before is said) is pleased and content, that every one that shall
adventure and lay into the said Lotterie thirty Lottes or up ward (according
to the conditions of the said Chart) before the xx. day of September next,
shall enjoy the advantages specified by the said conditions in the said Chart.

Yeouen at our Manor of Hauering the xiii. day of July in the year of our
Lord God, 1568 and in the tenth year of her Majesty's Reign. God save the
Queen.
Imprinted at London by Henry Bynneman, dwelling in Knight rider street, at
the sign of the Marmaide.


