By the Queen.
THe Queens Majesty considering to what extremities a great number of her
subjects are grown, by excess in apparel, both contrary to the laws of the
Realm, and to the disorder and confusion of the degrees of all states (wherein
always diversity of Apparel has taken place) and finally to the subversion
of all good order, by reason of remisenesse and impunitie: Has, with advise of
her counsel, upon good deliberation, thought meet for some degree, toward
a reformation hereof, to cause a Summary of some things necessary to this
purpose, to be extracted out of certain Acts of Parliament: And thereunto has
also added certain orders, devised with thassent of her counsel, for
reformation of further excess in apparel not sufferable. All which hereafter
ensuying, her Majesty wylleth to be published, and to be observed (...),
without hope or expectation of any point of favor to be showed, either to the
Officers that shall be found (...) in the execution, or to any person that shall be
found culpable, in any place within the Realm, after the (...) of fifteen
days next following the Proclamation hereof.

Certain clauses taken out of the Statute made for reformation of excess of
Apparel, the.xxiiii. year of the reign of king Henry the eight.
First, it is ordered, that no man under the degree of a Duke, Marquess,
Earl, and their children, or under the degree of a Baron, unless he be a
knight of the order of the garter, shall wear in any part of his apparel, any
Woollen cloth made out of this Realm, or any of the Queens Majesty's
dominions, except in Bonettes only.

Item, that no man under the degree of a Barons son, or of a Knight, except
he may expende two hundred pounds by year, for term of life, over all
charges, shall wear any manner of Velvet in his Gown, Coat, or other his
uppermost garment: nor any manner of embrodery, or prickyng with gold, silver,
or sylke, in any part of his apparel, or on thapparell of his Horse or Mule.

Item, that no man under the said estates and degree, saving such as may
dispende in yearly revenues, as is af^resayde, one hundred pounds, above all
charges, shall wear any Satin, Damask, sylke Chamblet, or Tastata in his
Gown, Coat, or other his uppermost apparel or garment: nor any Velvet,
saving in sleuelesse Iackettes, Doblettes, Coyffes, Partelettes, and Purses.

Item that no man under the said degrees, saving the son and heir apparaunt
of a man of three hundred marks by year, above all charges, and such other men
as may dispend in yearly revenue, as is aforesaid, forty p^undes over all
charges, shall wear in his Gown, or any other his uppermost apparel,
Chamblet, or Sylke: nor in any other part of his apparel any sylke, saving
Satin, Damask, Taffata, or Sarsenet in his Doblets: and Sarsenet, Chamblet,
or Taffata, in the lynyng of his Gowns, or Velvet in his sleuelesse Coats,
Iackets, ^^^kins, Coystes, Cappes, Purses, or Partelettes. The colors of
Scarlet, Crymsyn, or Blewe, always exc^pted.

Item, that no man under the said degrees, saving such gentylmen as may
dispende in yearly revenues, as is aforesaid, twenty pounds above all
charges, shall wear any manner of sylke in any apparel of his body, or at his
Horse, or Mule, except it be Satin, Tastata, Sarsenet, or Damask in his
Doblet, or Coyffe: and Chamblet in his sleuelesse Iackettes: or points, laces,
or garters, made in England or Wales.

Item, that no person under the same degrees, saving such as may dispende five
pounds by year, as is aforesa^d^, above all charges, shall wear any sylke in
his Doblettes or Iackettes: nor any thing made out of the ^^alme, saving
Chamblet in their Doblettes and Iackettes.

Item, that no Seruyng man, nor other Yeoman taking wages, nor such other as
may not dispende of freeholde forty shyllynges by year, as is aforesaid,
shall wear any Shert, or Shert band, under or upper Cappe, Bonet or Hat,
garnyshed, mixed, made, or wrought with sylke, gold, or silver: nor shall wear
any Bonet, or Shert band, made out of the Realm of England or Wales.

Item, no husbandman shall wear in his Doblette, any other thing then is
wrought within this Realm, F^styan and Canuasse only except.

Item, no Seruyngman in husbandry, or Iourneyman in handycraftes, taking wages,
shall wear in his Doblet, any other thing then Fustyan, Canuas, Leather, or
(...) cloth.

Item, if any man shall use or wear any Apparel or other thing, c^^^^ary to
the honor of the Articl^^^ (...) remembered, then be s^ (...), shall to (...)
the Apparel and thing so worn, wherewith (...) it be garnyshed, or the value
thereof, and also, iii. s. iiii. d. in the name of a ^^ne, for every day that he
shall so wear the same, contrary to the tenor hereof.

Certain other clauses and branches taken out of the Statutes, made in the
first and second year of King Philip and Queen Mary, necessary also to be
observed, to avoid the excess of apparel.
First, that no Englyshman, saving the son and heir apparaunt of a Knight,
or such as may of yearly revenues during life, expende twenty pounds above
all charges, or be worth in goods two hundredth pounds, shall wear any manner
of sylke, in or upon his Hatte, Bonnet. Nightcap, Gyrdle, Scabberde, Hose,
Shows, or Spurlethers, upon pain of three months imprysonment, and fine
of.x. li. for every days wearyng, contrary to the tenor of this Act.

Item that if any person or persons, of any estate or degree, knowing any
servant of his or theyrs to offend, contrary to the Article last before
remembered, do not put the same servant out of his or their service, but shall
keep in his or their service, the same offendour or offenders, by the space
of.xiiii. days next after such knowledge had: or so put out, retain him
again within one year next after such offense, the same person so retaynyng
or keeping in service any such offender, shall forsayte one hundredth pounds.

Provided always, that all and every person and persons, which by any statute
law, remaynyng in force, is licenced or appointed to wear any manner of thing,
contrary to the tenor and meaning of any of the Articles before remembered or
any part of them, shall and may wear the same to him licenced or appointed to
wear, as is aforesaid: Any thing in these Articles to the contrary
notwithstanding.

C^rtaine orders devised by commandment of the Queens Majesty, with the
advice of her privy counsel, to be observed for reformation of the excess
in certain kind of apparel, and other things thereto belongyng
First, that no Hosier or other person, shall put or cause to be put, any more
in the outsyde of the vpperstockes of Hose for any person, but one yard and
one quarter of Cloth, Carsey, or other stuff, not exceedyng the like quantity
of Carsey. And whereof soever the same shall be made, that no one of the said
vpperstockes shall exceed in compass round about, above one yard and half
a quarter, which measure is proved sufficient for persons of the highest
stature. And therefore it is meant, that all other persons of meaner statures,
shall use less quantity, both in stuff and largeness, according to their
statures, without fraud or abuse.

Item, that no Tailor, Hosier, or other person, shall put, or cause to be put
in any of the said vpperstockes, above these kinds of lynynges following.
First, a lynyng of lynnen, or such like stuff next to the leg, and then one
lynyng called a straight lynyng, which shall be made of no manner of stuff, but
of such as is made and wrought within the Queens Majesty's dominions. And if
any person shall be disposed for his ability, to cut and garnyshe the outside
of his Hose, with any thing that he may lawfully w^are, for the pluckyng out
betwixt the panes and cuttes, he shall be so suffered to do according to his
ability, not vsyng any thing therein excessiuely, nor any thing that he may
not wear by the laws of the Realm. And lastly, it shall also be permitted
for any person (being so disposed) to have the panes of his Hose lyned with one
other lynyng only, so as the same be also of stuff made within the Queens
Majesty's dominions. And it is ordered that no person under the state of a
Baron, shall use any mo lynynges in any vpperstockes of Hose, then is next
above mentioned. And that all persons under that degree, shall within ten days
after the publication hereof, reform their Hose according to these orders.

Item, it is further ordered, that no man under the degree of a Barons eldest
son, except that he be of the order of the garter, or of the privy Council,
or that may dispend five hundred marks by year, for term of life in
possession, above al charges, shall we are any Velvet, or Satin, or any stuff
of like or greater price, in the vpperstockes of his Hose, or in any part
thereof: or shall garnishe the same with any embroderye, or any fringe, lace, or
passemayne, of gold, silver, or sylke, nor any other garnishing with any
silk, except it be for the stitching only of the upper part to the living: nor
shall wear any manner of sylke neatherflockes of Hosen, nor any Carsey, or
other thing, made out of the Queens Majesty's dominions.

Item, it is not meant by any of these orders, that such persons attendyng
nere to her Majesty's person in the Court, as shall have special license in
writing of her Majesty, to wear some sylke, to the contrary hereof, shall be
molested for the same: so as the same persons do notify their license unto the
Lord Chaumberlayne, before they shall do any thing contrary to these orders,
and procure their names to be entered into the books of the Chaumber, in the
custody of the gentlemen Ushers, which shall be also duly observed by the
said Ushers.

Item, because it is daily seen what d^^^^^ers do grow, and are lykely to
increase in the Realm, by the increase of numbers of persons taking upon them
to teach the multitude of the common people to play at all kind of weapons and
for that purpose set up scooles, called scooles of fence, in places
inconvenient, tendyng to the great disorder of such people as properly ought to
apply their labors and handy works: Therefore her Maies^^ orderred and
commands, that no teacher of fence, shall keep any scoole or common place of
resort, in any place of the Realm, but within the liberties of some of the
Cities of the Realm, where also they shall be obedient to such orders as the
governors of the Cities shall appoint to them, for the better keeping of the
peace, and for prohibition of resort of such people to the same scooles, as are
not meet for that purpose, upon pain to be punyshed by the said governors,
according to their discretions.

Item her Majesty also orders and commands, that no person shall wear
any Sword, Rapyer, or such (...) weapon, that shall pass the length of one
yard and half a quarter of the blade, at the uttermost: nor any Dagg^r above
the length of.xii. inches in blade at the most: nor any buckler with any point
or pyke above two inches in length. And if any Cutler, or other Artificer,
shall sell, make, or keep in his house any Sword, Rap^^^ Dagger, Buckler, or
such like, contrary thereunto, the same to be imprisoned, and to make fine at
the Queens Majesty's pleasure, and the weapon to be forfayted. And if any such
person shall offend a second time, than the same to be banyshed from the
place and town of his dwelling.

Item it is further ordered, that all the Articles before remembered, shall be put
in execution in all points, by all manner of magistrates and officers,
according to the Statutes, laws, and Proclamations heretofore made and set
forth, concerning the same. That is to say, against the offenders of any of
the aforesaid Articles, extracted out of any of the said Statutes before
mentioned, according to the purport thereof. And for such as shall contemn any
of the orders before mentioned, being devised by her Majesty's commandment,
to attache and commit the (...) to person and to be there continued and
punyshed, as appertains to such as shall wylfully break her Majesty's
comm^undement.

And for that it is seen necessary, to stay the inordinate devises of Hosyers,
for the impugning of these good orders: The Queens Majesty wylleth, that the
Majors and head officers of the City of London and all other Cities and Towns
corporate, and Stewardes and Rulers of all other Liberties, and Justices of
peace in all Counties, shall immediately call before them all Hosyers, and bind
them in good sums of money to the use of her Majesty: and the Infourmer, as
in other populer actions, to observe the contents of these orders, and not to
abuse the meaning thereof with any fraud. And further to proceed therein,
as well against the said Hosyers, as against any other offender, for
thexecution hereof, as was in sundry Articles publyshed and prescribed by her
Majesty's Proclamation, in the fourth year of her reign.

Y^uen at Greenewich the.xii. day of February. 1565. in the eyghth year of her
Majesty's reign.
GOD save the Queen.
Imprinted at London in Powles Churchyard, by Richard Judge and John Cawood:
Printers to the Queens Majesty.

Cum priuilegio Regiae Maiestatis.


