By the Queen,
Where as the Queen's Majesty, by her proclamation published in November, the
third year of her Majesty's reign, touching the valuation of forrayne coins
of gold, did among other things warn all her subjects of an error that
might easily be committed in receyuyng a forrayne piece of gold, having a
prynt and stamp on both sides, like to an English Angel, whereof a number
were before that time brought into this Realm, being not worth. ix. s. iii. d.
and nevertheless, paid and uttered commonly for. x. s. of silver, the printes
of which forrrayne Angels, were then set forth in the margent of the said
former proclamation. Her Majesty now understanding, that there are since
that time certain other forrayne pieces of gold, of the like quantity and
fashion (although of less value) like to an English Angel, brought hither,
and here uttered and paid for ten shyllynges of silver, being for they lack
of wayght, and for the baseness of the allay, not worth. vii. shillinges, to
the great deceit and loss of the subjects of this her Realm: Has thought
good eftsoon to give notice hereof, to the intent her good subjects may
either utterly forbear to receive any such forrayne Angels, or else to take
them according to their weight as bullion, and to bring them to her Majesty's
Mynte, where they shall have ready money in gold or silver at their pleasure,
according to the just value thereof.

And generally, her Majesty would all her subjects to beware how they shall
receive any manner forrayne coin of gold or silver, not being valued by
public authority and well known, for that thereby great loss may come
through ignorance, the remedy whereof, only is to receive them as bullion, at
such value as they contain in finenesse and wayght.

Yeuen at her Majesty's Palace of Westminster, the first of June, the seventh
year of her Majesty's most prosperous reign.
God save the Queen.
Imprinted at London in Powles Churchyard, by Richard Judge and John Cawood:
Printers to the Queen's Majesty.

Cum priuilegio Regiae Maiestatis.


