The brief content of certain acts of Parliament against thinordinate use of
apparel.
Anno. xxiiii. Henrici. viii. None shall wear in his apparel any Cloth of
Gold silver, or tincele. Satyn, sylke, or cloth myxt with gold or silver, nor
any Sables.
Except Earls, and al of superior degrees and Viscountes, and Barons in their
doblets and sleuelesse coats. Woollen Cloth made out of the Realm^ Velvet
Crimsin Scarlet or Blewe.
Furs. Black Ienets. Luzerns

Except Dukes Marquesses Earls or
their children. Barons and knights of thorder.
Velvet in Gowns Coats, or utter most garments.
Furre of Libardes Embroderye Pricking or printyng with gold silver or sylke.

Except. Barons sons. Knights or me^ that may dispend cc. li. by year
Taffata Satyn Damask or sylke Chamlet in
his uttermost garments. Velvet otherwise then in Iakectes, dobletes. etc.
Furre whereof the kind grows not within the Queen's dominions. Except ^rey
^enets. Bodge.

Except A man that may dispende one hundred pound by year.
Anno. i. et. ii. Philippi et Mariae. None shall wear any sylke in Hatte,
Bonet, Nyghtcap, Gyrdell, Scabbard, Hosen, Shoes, Spurlethers.
Except The son and heir or daughter of a knight or the wife of the said
son. A man that may dispende. xx. li. by year, or is worth two hundred
pounds in goods.

These be the brief contents but of certain parts of the laws now
remaining in force, to thobseruance whereof her majesty thinks best to
induce her subjects by this short memorial, and yet nevertheless wishes
that all of inferior estates, should notneglect the rest of the same laws,
lest if they shall be found to contemn these orders here mentioned, they may
feel the pain of the rest.

There be certain other exceptions in the Statutes: as for such as have
license by the Queen's Majesty, or such as shall run in any Iustes, or shall
serve in war, or shall have apparel given the^ to be worn by her Maiestis
and such like. All which are well to be consydred by them that will claim any
privilege thereby, and that at their peril.

And where there is mencio^ made of values of yearly liueloodes and goods, the
best account thereof is to be made by the taxations in this last subsedy, so as
if any will be excused by pretense of his lyueloode or substance, to offend,
it is as meet that he answer to the Prince in subsedye for that value, as
seek defense to break any good law, whereof her majesty gives to all men
admonition.

Anno. M. D. L. IX. Mense Octobris

