By the Queen.
THE Queens Majesty continuing her most gracious purpose, to the reformation
of the base moneys of this Realm, and having already caused to be coined in
fine sterling monyes such quantity, as being added to other fine moneys coined
in the times of her late dear Brother and Sister, King Edward, and Queen
Mary, does furre exceade the quantity of moneys, used of ancient time in this
Realm: Has by advise and good deliberation had with her Counsel, thought
necessary to proceed to the diminution of certain base moneys, yet remayninge
curraunt within her Realm. And because her Majesty desires nothing more then
to dyscharge her Subjects, and specially her poor Comminaltie of all manner of
burden, to be sustained herein: Her Majesty by advise of her said Counsel,
has thus ordered as follows.

FIRST her Majesty gives all her Subjects to understand, that all pieces of
base moneys, latelye valued and now curraunt at iiii. d. ob. shall not be taken
ne allowed as curraunt money, after the ix. day of Apryll next following, which
is xv. days after our Lady day in Lent, and is by her Majesty so specially
appointed, because the Tenauntes and meaner sort of her Subjects, that live
as Tenauntes, and Fermers, may have a convenient time to pay their Rentes at
our said Lady day without trouble, if they shall chance to have prepared
any part of the same in the said sorts of money. And from the said ix. day of
April, the said pieces of iiii. d. ob. to be accounted not curraunt but
Bullion. And because neither the poorer, nor the rycher sort of her Majesty's
Subjects, should take any loss by the converting of the same, at that time
into Bullion: Her Majesty is pleased, that whosoever will bring any of the
same moneys betwixt this and the xxv. of April, to her Mynte in the Tower,
shall have for the same, both the value, according to the rate of iiii. d. ob
the piece, and iii. d. for the pound, in new sterling moneys, within the
space of twenty days, or less. And after that, until the xx. of May, to have
for the same, the like rate, saving and excepting the iii. d. upon the pound:
and from thence forward, her Majesty means to receive no more of the same
into her Minte.

Furthermore, her Majesty thinks meet to admonyshe her Subjects, that
although in the beginning of this refyning and coynage, such difficulities
happened, as the expedition of exchange could not be so spedily made as was
meant: Yet for that it is manifest, that use and experience has taken away all
those difficulties, and that now the ministers of her Mintes, be able to make
spedy return of fine moneys, for the base: Her Majesty would that her
Subjects should not forbear to come to her said Myntes, without doubt there
to be satysfied, for small sums at sight, or within two or three days, and
for greater, within. viii. or ten, and at the furthest not to continue above
twenty, for so her Majesty understands the ability of her officers now to
do it, and so has directed them to execute the same.

Finallye, her Majesty charge all manner her Subjects, to endeavor
themselves to bring unto her Mintes, not only the said base moneys of iiii.
d. ob. but also as they may conuenientlye, the other pieces of i. d. ob. and
ob. q. which her Majesty does permit to remain currante for the ease of her
people, for lack of small moneys, of which sort is meant to have a coynage as
shortly as may be, in good and fine sterlinge moneys. And because it may be,
that diverse of her Majesty's own proper Tenauntes, Fermers, Bailiffes, or
Receauers, may after the said ninthe of April have in their hands percell of
her Majesty's revenues, her pleasure and contentation is, that her officers in
the receipte of her Exchequer, shall receive the same as current money until
the xxv. of May next.

Yeuen at Westminster the xix. of Frebuarye in the third year of her
Majesty's reign. God save the Queen.
Imprinted at London in Powles Churchyard, by Richard Jugge, and John Cawood,
Printers to the Queens Majesty.

Cum priuilegio Regiae Maiestatis.


