By the Queen.
A Proclamation to adiourne part of Midsommer Term.
THE Queen our Sovereign Lady for diverse urgent causes and great
considerations, her Majesty specially moving, and for the high Commodity of
her most loving subjects, by the advice of her most Honorable Council, is
fully resolved and determined to adiourne part of this next Term of the holy
Trinity, commonly called Trinity Term: that is to say, the Vtas of the holy
Trinity, the Quindecim of the holy Trinity, and Tres Semaynes of the holy
Trinity, unto the Vtas of S. Michael next coming, being the first day of
Michaelmas Term: And therefore her Majesty does signify unto all and
singular her loving subjects, that they and every of them, which have cause or
commandment to appear in any of her Highness Courts at Westminster, at the
Vtas, Quindecim, and Tres Semaines of the holy Trinity, or at any of them, or
at any day mean between any of the said three Returns, may tarry at their
dwellings, or where their business otherwise shall lie, without resorting to
any of the said Courts for that cause. And that without danger of forfeiture,
penalty, or contempt to incur toward her Highness in that behalf. And
nevertheless, her Majesty's pleasure is, that two of her Justices, that is to
say, of either Bench one, shall the first day of this next Trinity Term,
called Crastino Trinitatis, according to the ancient order of her Laws, keep
the Essoynes of the said Crastino Trinitatis, and so to keep and continue the
said Courts in her said two Benches at Westminster, until the first day of the
Vtas of the holy Trinity next, to the intent that they may make an order for
the continuance of process depending in the said Courts; And also award Writs
and Records of Nisi Prius, and such other process as may be for the
furtherance of Causes and suits depending before them: At which Vtas of the
holy Trinity Writs of Adiournement shall be directed to the said Justices,
giving them authority to adiourne the said Vtas, Quindecim, and Tres Semaynes
of the said Trinity Term. And that the same adiourenment shall be made in the
first day of the said Vtas, commonly called the day of the Essoynes. And
whereas in the term of the holy Trinity, yearly it has been used and
accustomed, that the days and places of the Circuits of the Queens Justices
of the Jail deliueries, Assizes, Nisi Prius, and Oyer and Determiner, have
been appointed and set up in open places, to the intent that every person
having cause of suite before them, might have knowledge of the said times and
places, for the better and redier expedition of their said suits; Her Majesty's
pleasure is that the same order of appointment both for the times, days, and
places of the said Jail deliueries, Assizes, Nisi Prius, and Oyer and
Determiner, now for this time be appointed and set up, and notice made thereof
this present Term of Easter, for the better knowledge thereof to be had for
them that shall have to do before them. And her Majesty's further pleasure is,
that all matters, causes, and suits depending in any of her other Courts,
between party and party, as in her Highness Courts of Chauncery, Star
Chamber, and Exchequer, and Court of Wards and Liueries shall have continuance,
and the parties shall have day from the last day of this Term, unto the first
day of Michaelmasse Term next coming. Provided always, that all Collectors,
Receauours, Sheriffs and other Accomptants, and all other persons that ought,
or should account or pay any money in any of the same Courts of the Exchequer,
Court of Wards and Liueries, or in any of them, or to enter into any account in
any of the same Courts, shall be bound to appear, pay, and do in every
behalf, as though no such Proclamation of adiornement had been had, Any thing
mentioned in this present Proclamation, or in any Writ of Adiornement to the
contrary in any wise notwithstanding. And the Queens Majesty straightly
charge and commands, that no Clerk or Officer, of any of her said Courts
of Kings Bench, or Common Place shall make any Process for the personal
appearance of any person in any of the same Courts, to be had in Crastino of
the holy Trinity next coming.

Test Regina apud Westminster. xxiiij. die Maij. Anno regni Reginae Elizabethae,
etc. Secundo.
God save the Queen.

