By the Queen.
THE Queen's Majesty, perceauyng by experience, that her enemies the French,
intend to procure by couin certain persons of this Realm, being more given
to lucre, then to their duties, to color and bear the name as owners, though
not in truth, of great quantity of wynes and other commodities, to be brought
out of the French kings countries by indirecte means, into this Realm, to
the great gain of her enemies, and damage to all her good Subjects: Has
thought necessary for the weal and state of her Realm, which ought to be
preferred above any particular men's interestes, to provide for some remedy.
And therefore, least any should excuse them selves by ignorance, does notify
such kind of coloring of French men's goods, to be an aydyng and comfortyng
of her enemies, which by the ancient laws of this Realm, is high Treason.
Whereof her Majesty wylleth all manner her Subjects or any other that have
given their oath of allegeaunce to this Crown of England, to take good heed
for the danger that must needs thereof ensue. And further also, her Majesty by
advise of her Council, does ^rayghtly charge and command all manner her
Subjects, utterly to forbear to bring into this Realm during these wars,
any manner of wynes, of the growth of any part of the French kings dominions,
or to bargayne with any manner of person for any such wynes, upon pain that
whosoever shall do any thing to the contrary thereof, to forfait the whole
wynes, and to be committed to prison, there to remain during her Majesty's
pleasure, as one that being thus forbidden, may duly be charged to be aydyng
and comfortyng to her Majesty's enemies. Provided nevertheless, that such
wynes as shall be lawfully, and without fraud, taken by any of her Majesty's
subjects, as men of war upon the Seas, from her Majesty's enemies the
French: may be brought into any port of this Realm, and sold, as the same
might before this Proclamation.

And yet to the end her Majesty may understand the estymate of the wine so
brought in by men of war: Her Majesty commands all such as shall so take
any, and shall bring or send the same into any port, shall permit the
officers of the port, to take a view and note of the quantity thereof. And
the said officers shall so do, without exactyng any thing of the owner or taker
of the wynes, otherwise then before this time they might have done: And shall
within twenty days or less time, according to the distaunce of the place,
after the view duly taken, certify by writing to her Majesty's privy
Council attendyng on her person, the said quantity of wine, with the names
of the takers.

Provided also, that notwithstanding this prohibition, it shall be lawful for
such persons as in the month of November last, had license of her Majesty
for the quantity only of two thousand Tonnes of wine, to be brought into this
Realm in strangers bottomes, to take the effect and benefit of the same
license for the said quantity of two thousand Tonnes, to be brought in
strangers bottomes, being in amity with her Majesty.

Apud Wyndsor. 8. I^^^^^ii. 1563.
God save the Queen.
Imprinted by Richard Judge and John Cawood, Printers to the Queen's Majesty.

Cum priuilegio Regiae Maiestatis.


