By the Queen
THe Queen's Majesty understanding, that of late time sundry persons being
infected with certain dangerous and pernicious opinions, in matters of
religion, contrary to the faith of the Church of Christ, as Anabaptists and
such like, are come from sundry parts beyond the seas, into this her
Realm, and specially into the City of London and other Maritime towns,
under the color and pretense of fleyng from persecution, against the
professors of the Gospel of Christ: Whereby if remedy be not speedely
provided, the Church of God in this Realm shall sustain great danger of
corruption, and sects to increase contrary to the unity of Christ's Church
here establyshed.

For redress whereof: Her Majesty by advise of her counsel, having
commanded the Archbishop of Canterbury, Bishop of London, and other Bishops
to see the parishes in London and other places here with suspected, to be
seuerly visited, and all persons suspected to be openly tried and examined,
touching such phanaticall and heretical opinions: Wylleth and charge all
manner of persons borne either in foreign parts, or in her Majesty's
dominions, that have conceived any manner of such heretical opinion as the
Anabaptists do hold, and means not by charitable teaching to be
reconciled, to depart out of this Realm within twenty days after this
Proclamation, upon pain of forfayture of all their goods and Cattelles, and
to be imprisoned and further punyshed, as by the laws either ecclesiastical
or temporal, in such case is provided. And her Majesty also charge and
commands upon pain of imprisonment, that no Minister nor other person, make
any conuenticules or secret congregacions, either to read or to preach, or
to minister the Sacraments, or to use any manner of divine service, but that
they shall resort to open Chapels or Churches, and there to preach, teach,
minister, or pray, according to the order of the Church of England, ercept it
be in cases of sickness, or where noble men and such others that have in all
former times ben accustomed to have divine service said in their Oratories
within their houses, for diverse necessary respects, upon pain that whatsoever
persons or company shall make such secret conuenticules, every person to be
imprisoned without bail or mainprise, until the coming of the Justice for
delyuery of the same Gayle, and then to be punyshed by their discretions.

Yeuen at our Castle of wyndsor. the.xxii. day of September, the second year
of our reign. M. D. lx. God save the Queen.
Imprinted at London in Powles Church yard by Richard Judge and John Cawood,
printers to the Queen's Majesty.


