By the Queen.
THe Queen's Majesty perceives that notwithstanding her commandment lately
publyshed for the ceassyng of certain vain and untrue reports touching a
decrye of monyes, yet the same continue still, appoyntyng the same to be done
from one market day to another, whereof arryseth great trouble amongste the
people, and increase of the prices of all manner things both forrayne and
natural, and specially of grain and other victuell: and for that her
Majesty thinks that as well some simple people of doubtfulnesse and without
evil meaning do give occasion to the continuance of the said rumors, as the
greedy and cursed sort do to make an inordinate gain of their wares, grain,
bestiall, and other victuell, thinkyng nothing enough for their insatiable and
merciful greedines. For remedy thereof both to content the one, and to
refourme the other, her Majesty does ^am^ly and sincerely declare to all manner
her subjects, that these foresaid rumors and reports be untrue, and a^ her
Majesty does not determine to alter or decrye her monyes. And this her
Majesty would the honest sort of (...) subjects to accept for truth, and as
to the other whose greediness or curiosity will not allow nor permit credit to
given to this her Majesty's Proclamation: Her Majesty straightly charge all
manner her ministers to see al such shall after this Proclamation published and
notified, by any means set forth any contrary report or speech, to attached
and emprisoned, and so to remain without bail or mainprise during the space
of three full months: (...) being thereof duly convicted, to be set openly
upon the Pyllory as persons that have spredde sedicious rumors, (...) not to
be delivered until he or they shall have found sufficient assurance of good
abearyng, And if any per^^n shall be convicted to have hard any other so
offendyng, and have not enfourmed thereof the next Justice of peace ^^th
convenient speed: the same person also to be committed to prison during one
month, as one that has wyl^^ngly mayntayned a sedicious person, and to be
further punyshed at the discretion of the Justice that shall so com(...) them.
Finally her Majesty wylleth the Justices of peace in every shyre of this
Realm, and other her Ministers ^^all towns Corporate, to consult together,
not only amongst them selves, but also with other Justices and officers other
shires thereto adioynyng, for the furniture of markettes with victuell and
grain, for victuellers and other (...) people, as the season of the year
requires. And if any sort shall wylfully and fraudulentlye hold up or en^unce
the accustomed prices of any manner of thing contrary to reason and good cause:
her Majesty would that the ^^stices of peace and all Majors and other officers
as well within liberties as without, should apply them selves to ^^ourme the
same, as to good order in such cases is requisite. And if the enormitie of the
offendour shall seem so to re^^re^ to send up the offendour to her privy
counsel, to receive such further punyshement as shall be in reason deui(...) for
the same. And if the said Justices and other ministers shall not therein use
the authority to them committed (...) the appearyng of such inordinate
extremities, her Majesty will not fail but have regard thereto, and see
their faults in that behalf supplied by severe punishment, as in such
weyghtye cases reason and order requires.

Yeuen at her Majesty's Pallaice of Westminster the.xiii. of March, the fourth
year of her Majesty's most prospe^^us reign.

God save the Queen.

Imprinted at London in Powles Church yard, by Richard Judge and John Cawood,
Printers to the Queen's Majesty.

Cum priuilegio Regiae Maiestatis.


