By the Queen, A Proclamation to explane the Queen's Majesty's meaning, upon a
former made in March last.
WHere of late upon diverse great considerations, the Queen's most excellent
Majesty, by her proclamation did prohibit the transportation into this Realm
(until a time, as it appears by the said proclamation) of any wares or
commodities out of the low Countries, beyond the Seas. For that as it has
appeared to her Majesty, by letters and message lately sent to her from her
dear Cousin the Duchess of Parma, Regent in the said low Countries, that it
is doubted by the Merchants residyng in those Countries, if any vessel laden
from thens to pass into France, Spain, or Portingale, should by wind or
other necessary cause, be forced to enter into any Port of this Realm for
succor, without dischargyng or puttyng to vent any of their marchandizes,
whether in those cases her Majesty's intention was or is, that the same should
be stayed and deteyned. Her Majesty gives all persons to understand, that
although by many hard, unseasonable, and discourteous proceadynges in these low
Countries and other where, against the intercourse, and to the purpose of
subuertyng of all her Subjects hauntyng those Countries, she has been provoked
to do more for her Subjects, then hitherto she has done: Yet having no manner
of intention to impair the amity betwixt her and the King of Spain her good
brother, but rather to fortify and increase it, she never meant nor now
means, that any manner of person transporting out of the said low Countries,
in any vessel, any wares to be discharged in any other Country, out of
England, and yet by occasion necessarily forced to come with the said vessel
into any Port of this Realm, shall be impeched or molested for so doing, except
the same shall also unlade or discharge any their wares or marchaundizes to
the intent to be put to sale, or otherwise distributed in this Realm by way of
traffic or marchaundize. And so her Majesty wylleth her intention and
meaning, to be by all manner her subjects understood, and favorably
interpreted, toward the subjects of the King of Spain, or of any other
Prince or Potentate, so occasioned to come into any Port or Creek of her
dominiers.

Given at our Manor of Richmone the.xi. day of May, the sixth year of our
reign. 1564.

God save the Queen.
Imprinted by Richard Judge and John Cawood, Printers to the Queen's Majesty.

Cum priuilegio Regiae Maiestatis.


