By the Queen,
THe Queens Majesty understanding the great disorder that of late has been,
and yet is daily used in and about the Cities of London and Westminster, and
especially in and about Westminster hall, and the palaice of Westminster, by
diverse light and evil disposed persons, who in great rowtes and companyes have
assembled them selves together, against such as be infourmers upon penal laws
and Statutes, commonly called promoters. And so being assembled, have not only
beaten, and very evil entreated diverse of the same infourmers: but also have
made great outcryes against the same persons, whereby the Courts and places of
Justice in Westminster hall, and other places thereaboutes, have been much
disquieted and troubled, and the Queens Majesty's peace broken, whereof great
mischief and inconvenience might lykely grow, if speedy remedy be not therein
provided. Wherefore her Majesty does strayghtly charge and command all
persons, that they, nor any of them, do hereafter commit or do, or consent, or
procure to be committed or done, any such disorder or misbehauiour, by any act,
deed, or words, openly or secretly, against any such infourmers, or against
any other person or persons, in any the places aforesaid, or in any other place
within this Realm, upon pain to suffer imprysonment of their bodies by the
space of three months, without bail or maynpryse, and also to have such
further open punishment for their offenses, by whyppyng, standing upon the
pyllory, or otherwise, as by her Majesty's Counsel of her highness Court of
Star chamber, shall be judged and ordered. And further, her Majesty's pleasure
and express commandment is, that diligent inquiry shall be made of such, as
have been offenders in any the premises, to the intent that due and condign
punishment and correction may be to them ministered, according to their
offenses. And that all Justices, officers, and ministers, shall in all places
where such offenses shall happen hereafter to be committed, cause the
offenders, their procurours, and abbettours, to be apprehended and taken, and
presently to be committed to some prison, there to remain in safe keeping,
until they may be brought before her Majesty's said Counsel in the Star
chamber, there to be ordered to such punishment, as by the said Counsel
shall be thought convenient.

Yeuen at her Majesty's Palace of Westminster, the tenth day of November.
5166. in the eight year of her Majesty's reign.
GOD save the Queen.
Imprinted at London in Powles Churchyard, by Richard Judge, and John Cawood,
Printers to the Queens Majesty.

Cum priuilegio Regiae Maiestatis.


