PROVISION FOR the poor, now in penury.

OVT OF THE STORE-HOVSE of Gods plenty: Which they shall be sure to find in
all places, that are endued with his graces, to think seriously on this
sentence following.

Psalm. 41.1. Blessed is he that considers of the poor, the Lord will deliver
him in the time of trouble.

Explaned by H. A.



LONDON Printed by Thomas Creed. 1597.

To the Christian Reader, in what calling soever, Grace, etc.
THe complaint of the poor through penury in England, has continued long,
(good Christian reader) and yet it appears their want grows greater. What
should this import? but either they cry not aright themselves, to him that is
able and willing to help, or else the bowels of tender compassion are shut up
in such as should relieve them. Touching the poor that cry hard for food,
and find small supply: the reason is, for that they do not complain unto God
of their grievous sins (the very maine cause of all their calamities:) which
if they look to have released, and no further increased, they must confess in
manner following. First, that they have misspent much good time in idle roging
up and down, and would not work: therefore the Lord does justly requite
them, that now when they would, they shall not eat (or very little.) Second,
that in the time of abundance, they have been great wasters in bibbing and
belly cheer: therefore now justly they feel the want thereof. Thirdly, That
when God by his messengers, called upon them to leave their evil ways, and
serve him better, they would not hear to follow the same: Therefore does God
now shut up his ears, and others also, when they cry for food. If they would
gladly then find supply, they must resolve to turn to God quickly, to
confess all their sins, to ask him pardon, to promise amendment, and to
pray daily for increase of his grace, that they may perform the same, then
will he shorly send them relief. To come to those that should relieve the
poor, whom God has endued with wealth and ability, whereof some are willing
to supply their wants, and do it in some places to Gods glory and their own
comfor^, but others (alas) are too hard hearted, unwilling almost to part with
any thing (albeit they richly abound with all things, (and they may be proved
to have bin makers of poor) unto who^ I speak in the name of the Lord, Prou.
21.13
That if they still refuse to hear and help the needy when they cry for
succor, they shall cry themselves and not be heard when they would fainest
speed. I wish the^ therefore in time to show mercy (as this book informs
them) least when they look not for it, they find strict judgment without any
mercy: Iam. 2.13.
for shall the Lord Jesus stand at the door (in his needful members) and will
they not relieve him that came to save them? Mat. 25. chapter
Then shall they be rejected at the last great day into eternal torments. Lay
this to your hearts ye rich men of the world, and open your ears and purses to
the poor, Genesis 41. chapter
whilst God gives space and offers you grace, least when you would have it,
you cannot find it. If I could my self as well remove their wants (as Joseph
prevented the like in Egypt) I should not thus sue for succor at your hands.
The Lord open your hearts to extend compassion, that in the end you may find
consolation. So be it.

Your poor welwiller, Hen. Arth.

The Text divided.
Blessed is he that considers the poor, The Lord will deliver him in the
time of his trouble. Psalm. 41.1. 1. The description of a good man. In these
words, Blessed is he, that, etc. 1. The title ascribed to such a person, That
he is blessed. 2. The manifest mark of such a man: That he considers of the
poor.
2. The benefit belonging to such a person: The Lord will deliver him, etc.
1. His safe preservation, in these words: The Lord will deliver him. 2. The
time when, especially, In the time of his trouble.


In the handling of which points, very profitable instructions will appear
concerning the poor, how they may be relieved this dear year in all places,
without surcharging any person.

Provision for the poor now in penury, out of the Storehouse of Gods plenty.
Blessed is he that considers of the poor, The Lord will deliver him in the
time of his trouble.

Psalm. 41.1
THere is no duty of Christianity more commanded or commended in holy
scripture, Then Love out of a pure heart unfeigned, Ioh. 13.15. cha.
because it has relation to both the tables of gods law and therefore is
termed by Christ himself (the fountain of true love) The very badge to know
his disciples from Satan's bondslaues (who delight ever in malice and
mischief) neither can there be any thing wherein the love of Christians may
appear more plainly, then in releeuing one another in their necessity. Ephe.
4.2.15.
In discharging which duty, the most able and willing are flow enough, and
many fair professors murmur thereat, as Judas did at Marie Magdalen, who found
openly a great default with her, for pouring a box of precious Oil, upon the
blessed head of Jesus, (though she did it dutifully, Mat. 26.6 13.
to prepare him to his burial) pretending good will unto the poor, yt it might
have bin sold and given unto them (not that indeed he sought their supply) but
intended to have it to his own use, because he was a thief and bare the bag,
Ioh 13.3.9.
as Christ reports of him, and that the woman had wrought a good work on
him: saying further, They should have the poor at all times with them, to
help them (if they would) giving such to understand that found so great fault
with Mary's fact, Mar. 14.3.9.
that they made a great show to relieve the poor, but when they should seek
for succor unto them, they would be then slow enough to sustain them: which
amongst many is a common corruption in these days, A common default in these
days.
rather to find fault at others well doing, in giving of alms, then to be
liberal that way themselves, to give good alms unto others. To redress which
default (the poor in all places being in penury) I have undertaken to be
their Solicitour, The author the poores Solicit^^.
unto all manner of persons, which ought in equity either to supply them, or
to provide that such as make default (being well able) may be compelled
thereunto by further authority from the Almighty, if this gentle motion in
the words precedent will not prevail, which here I will repeat and explane
unto them, (by Gods assistance) Blessed is he that considers of the poor,
the Lord will deliver him in the time of his trouble.

IN this parcel of holy Scripture we are to observe especially two parts.

1 First the description of a good man or woman in these words expressed,
Blessed is he that considers of the poor. 2 Second, the benefit belonging to
such a person, that is to say, The Lord will deliver him in the time of his
trouble.
In the description of this good man, we are to remember two other points.

1 First, the title ascribed unto him, That he is (blessed) 2 Second, the
manifest mark of such a man, That he considers of the poor.
Concerning the benefit belonging to such a man, we are to meditate of these
two points also.

1 First, His safe preservation, contained in these words, The Lord will
deliver him. 2 Second, The time when especially, viz. In the time of his
trouble.
To begin with the first point, and proceed in the particulars, where the
kingly Prophet David says: Blessed is he that considers, etc. His meaning
is not, that such a good man only is blessed, but such a woman also, Both
kinds blessed.
for in this place Man signifies mankind, that is, both sexes, man and woman.
As our Savior Christ in general terms says: Blessed are the merciful,
naming neither man nor woman, Mat. 5.7.
but compriseth them both within the compass of true blessedness, (if they be
merciful)

Moreover, though in the description of this godly person, or any other in
usual speech, the title is ever set down before, to move others to better
attention of that which follows, The first in use, the second in order.
yet having relation unto the qualities of that person, it must in order follow
the same, and be handled the latter, for in due proceeding, the case stands
thus: He that considers the poor, he is blessed. As if the Prophet should
say, whosoever would know one special mark (amongst others) of a blessed man,
Six parts concerning the poor.
he that considers the poor is such a one. In which short sentence we are
to observe six especial points.

1 What kind of poor the Prophet here means. 2 What it is, rightly to
consider of them. 3 What persons rightly consider the poor. 4 To produce some
examples of the poor considerers. 5 The double effect of considering the
poor. 6 Their dangerous estate that consider not the poor.
To begin first with those poor whom the Prophet here propounds to be
considered of: in a word they be all sorts of poor good and bad, that are in
any kind of necessity: which may be manifested by Saint Paul's words: Do good
to all, Gal. 6.10.
especially to those of the household of faith: containing both sorts within the
compass of our compassion, by the which occasion, Six circumstances concerning
the poor.
these circumstaunces concerning the poor are to be remembered.

1 The several kinds of poor to be helped. 2 That none ought to be idle, nor
yet to beg. 3 Why God will have the poor amongst us. 4 What provision is
made for them by law. 5 Her Majesty's continual care for their supply. 6 What
means to relieve them, is put in practice.
Two sorts of poor.
Concerning these several kinds of poor, that now especially are to be
considered of, may well be divided into these two sorts.

1 The impotent poor. 2 The poor able to work.
The impotent poor four sorts.
The impotent poor, (though many in number) may well be contained within these
four kinds, all wanting wherewith to relieve themselves.

1 Aged persons past their work, 2 Lamed persons unable to work. 3 Little
infants without parents. 4 Poor sick persons during their weakness.
To be relieved in the whole.
All these of necessity, must be maintained in the whole, (if they have not of
their own toward their supply) for touching the sick poor, (though they
have some goods, gotten by sore labor in their health) yet I see no reason,
that they should sell the Cow which gives the children milk, nor the tools
they work with, nor any needful thing belonging to their maintenance: all
which things in compassion are to be spared, as the laws of Moses provided in
that case. Deuteronomy. 24.


Concerning the poor that are able to work, they may be divided into these
two sorts.

1 Such as may earne their whole maintenance. 3 Such as must be relieved in
part,
The poor that are able to live by their labor, are of three sorts.

1 Able to work of three sorts.
1 Such as are willing to take pains, and cannot get work. 2 Such as are young
and lusty, yet unwilling to labor. 3 Such as are committed for some offenses,
and have not wherewith to be maintained.
The poor not able to live by their labor, 2 VVilling to work three sorts.
and yet fit and willing to take pains, are of three sorts also.

1 Orphaned children above seven years old. 2 Such as be ouercharged with
children, having nothing to maintain them but their hand labor. 3 Such as
fall to decay in their works, by reason of their years, weakness or
infirmities.
All which ought to be relieved in part, as their necessity shall require.

The second circumstaunce touching the poor, is, 3 None to beg or be idle.
to provide that none live idly that can labor, nor any beg that are
unable: for both those persons stain our profession by their bad examples.

But some will object, was not Lazarus a beggar, An objection
lying daily at the rich man's door, and yet recommended in holy Scripture to
be one of the redeemed in Jesus Christ.

The example of Lazarus is commended for his patience (not for his begging)
being only constrained thereunto, Answer.
or else to famish. So small regard then was had of the poor, that were
unable to work: for, if begging had been lawful, Christ would have said, You
shall have Beggars always with you, Mar. 14.7
in stead of the Poor.

The strangers in London (if report be true) may be a pattern in these
respects to all our English nation, for they are so careful to keep their
Country people, both from idleness, and begging, that such as can work,
neither want work, How the strangers in London provide for their poor
nor yet wages, and so soon as any fall in decay, their state is imparted unto
their company, and then commonly, they abstain one meal on the next Lords
day, and give the price thereof toward the parties maintenance. And their care
in this case was so great in the primitive Church, Act. 4.34 37.
that many sold their living to maintain their poor Brethren, and kept a
custom every Lords day to lay up some money toward the relief of poor
strangers, 1. Cor. 16.1.5. The care in the primitive curch of the poor.
when a collection should be made for them: so unwilling they were, that any
Christian should beg in those days, to the dishonor of Christ and his
Gospel.

3 Why the poor are scattered amongst us.
The third circumstaunce touching the poor, is to search out the cause why God
has left the poor amongst us, (scattered as it were in all countries) which
may seem to be in two respects, partly to try our love unto them, and partly
to approve our faith unto God, that he may bless us, as Moses declares after
this manner.

Deuteronomy. 15.1.18.
If any of thy brethren be fallen poor, in the City, (as ye shall have the
poor always with you) ye shall lend and give him (as necessity requires,
without any grudging (not looking for it again) that the Lord thy God may
prosper thy proceedings.

The fourth circumstaunce concerning the poor, is to consider, Three statutes
for the poor.
how the laws of this land has provided for them, which consist in three
Statutes made to that end since her Majesty's reign.

1 The first, made in the fourteenth year of her highness reign, entitled,
An Act for the punishing of all rogish vagabonds. 2 The second, made in the
eighteenth year of her highness reign, entitled, An Act for setting the
poor on work, etc. 3 The third, made in the five and thirtith year of her
highness reign, entitled, An Act for the necessary relief of soldiers and
mariners.
1 Statute, how rogues should be punished.
In the first Act, there is restraynt, that none shall wander abroad without
license upon special occasion: all other vagarant persons able to work, to be
taken and punished as Rogues and Vagabonds, The first offense, to be stocking
and whipping: The second, to be burnt in the ear: and the third to be taken
and hanged as felons.

The second act tends, to set the poor on work, 2 How the poor should be set
on work.
that there should be houses of correction builded in all countries, and
stocks in money provided, to set all the poor (that can work) or lack work,
to spinne, knit, or such like, (and all the impotent to be otherwise relieved
by weekly contribution.) If any refuse to work that are able, 2. These. 3.10.
to be punished with want of meat (as the apostle warns) with flocking,
whipping, or otherwise, at the governors discretion.

The third act provides, that all manner of Soldiers and mariners that fall
to be maimed in her majesty's wars, 3 Statutes for relief of Soldiers.
shall be maintained honestly in their own Countries (by general ceassments)
according to the places they served in before, bringing due testimony thereof,
from their general or Captain.

If these three statutes were duly put in execution, Want of execution, etc.
(according to the true meaning thereof, there neither could nor would be so
many poor, nor so great penury, as there is at this day.

The fifth circumstance concerning the poor, 5 Her majesty's chrian care for
the poor in two respects.
to move our compassion toward their sustenance, is the consideration of her
majesty's most gracious regard and forwardness, to have their wants supplied
in all parts, appearing plainly in these two points chiefly.

1 First in releasing her own right by custom for the bringing in of corn
from foreign kingdoms, 1 In releasing her custom.
to serve the want throughout her dominions (which will amount to no small
sum, both to encourage her merchants to venture, and to bring down the price
to relieve the poor, which (God be thanked) it has done already in many
places.

2 Second, in causing her majesty's most honorable council, 2 The councels
letters sent in the poores behalf, by her majesty's means.
to direct their letters in her own name, to the two Archbishops, of
Canturbury and York, to signify her pleasure to all their brethren in both
provinces, that Wednesday suppers should be spared of the more able, and wholly
converted toward the due relief of the poor.

I may not omit here the christian persuasions of the Lords of the council,
The councels care for releeuing the poor.
in their godly letters to the said Archbishop, to move them by all good
means to seek the maintenance of the poor, and withal in setting down
necessary direction to all the Justices in this Realm, for the restraint of
wasteful expenses, and due provision to serve the markets, with corn in all
parts (so much as is possible) to procure relief for her majesty's people,
that none might perish by this great penury.

Whereunto if we add the forfaiture of 12. pence for every householders
absence from Church (man and woman) forenoone and after, Twelve pence a time
for absence from divine service.
sunday and holiday (according to the statute) without sufficient cause
alleged) to be duly collected by Churchwardens and others appointed to that
end, with the like regard for Wednsday suppers: there would be sufficient
relief for the poor in all places (if corn were much deerer) as by
indifferent computation will appear. If we estimate the price of four able
persons (their suppers only) toward the relief of one poor body, that could
not work.

The sixth circumstance concerning the poor, is to search out how those
provisions made by Law for their due relief, What means to relieve the poor
is put in practice.
is put in practice: that is in few words, whether the impotent be provided
for, whether the able to labor have work and wages to live upon, and whether
all idle vagabondes that are able and will not work, be punished for example
sake (according to the statutes before expressed)

It may be spoken to the praise of some well disposed people in some good
towns, Some good towns do provide for the poor.
within some parts of her majesty's dominions, that a man passing through the
same shall see not one beggar asking any alms, (except one or two that keep
the common box, according to the order) to take the benevolence of travelers
and strangers: so well are the statutes observed in those places.

The poor of Wakefield.
For the town of Wakefield, where my abode is, (though the poor be many and
needy) yet thus much in truth I may speak, to my knowledge, that if any be
pinched with penury, the default especially rests in themselves, though some
other persons can not be excused. For, (to the praise of God be it spoken)
there is not only a house of correction, according to the Law, but withal,
The able want no work if they will.
certain stocks of money put forth into honest Clothiers hands, who are
bound with good sureties, to set all the able poor to work, after five
pence, or six pence a pound of wool spinning (as they shall deserve) if they
will fetch it.

For the impotent poor in every street, they have been considered of, (by
the most able and forward men of that Town) and a general ceassement
voluntary made for their supply weekelie, A weekly collection for the
impotent.
which by confirmation of her Majesty's Justices, is still kept of every able
householder, besides the Wednesdayes Suppers, for the which the Churchwardens
take pains accordingly, wherein if every one would discharge that duty
required of her Majesty, to let the poor have the full benefit of their
said Suppers, there should not one person have cause to beg there for all
this dear year. As for the younger sort, fit to learn trades and
occupations, there is order taken to put them to apprentisshippe, or otherwise
to service.

Having thus far only made declaration of the several kinds of poor, and
what provision has been made for them by Acts of Parliament, and new of late
by her Majesty's good means, and special direction from the Lords of her
Counsel: Let us now proceed to the second special point of the former
six. Second point.


What it is rightly to consider of the poor. Concerning this point, there be
six propositions of special importance to be considered of. Six points of
consideration.


1 The proceeding causes of so many poor in all Countries. 2 That God might
have made our estate like unto theirs. 3 That we should do to them as we would
be done unto. 4 Why we all ought to help to relieve them. 5 Those places of
scripture tending to compassion. 6 How their present want may be relieved.
To begin with the first proposition touching the proceeding causes of many
poor in all Countries, though some impute the same to the dearth of grain,
and the occasion thereof to unseasonable weather, 1 The proceeding causes of
the poor.
especially in harvest time, by tempestuous winds which shoake out the corn
when it would have been shorn, yet must we search further from whence those
winds came, and the cause thereof, which were the proceeding causes indeed.

For the former of these last causes, all winds and ill weather proceed
directly from the justice of God, Gods justice.
(as many places of the holy Scripture prove the same) especially in the
Prophecy of Amos, where it is said, There is no evil befalles to any City,
Amos 3.6.
but the Lord has done it, (meaning by evil, all manner of afflictions.

Men's sins provoking Gods justice. Leu. 26. Deuteronomy. 28.
Concerning the latter, the Scripture likewise does make mention, that the
sins of all people do provoke Gods justice, to plague us sundry ways, as
all men may perceive in pervsing the Prophets (especially the book of
Deuteronomie, and Leuiticus.)

The due premeditation whereof, will urge us to consider of those particular
sins, which procure Gods justice to punish us with penury.

1 Partly proceeding from the poor themselves. 2 But more especially from the
poor makers.
Six sins proceeding from the poor.
The proceeding sins from the poor themselves, whereby they provoke the Lord
to pinch them, are these six especially.

1 First, their misspending of former times in idleness, when they might have
wrought. 2 Secondly, their wilful wasting of their goods when they had them,
in bibbing and belly-cheare. 3 Thirdly, their impacient bearing of their
present want, complaining often without cause. 4 Fourthly, their daily repining
at others prosperity, to have so much, and they so little. 5 Fifthly, their
banning and cursing, when they are not served as themselves desire. 6 Sixthly,
their seldom repairing to their parish Churches, to hear and learn their
duties better: all which must be amended, if they would have their wants
supplied.
The proceeding sins from the poor makers, whereby they provoke Gods justice
to plague us with this present penury, The poor makers sins ten in number.
in all places, are many and grievous, especially ten, which may be termed the
breeders of the poor.

1 All excessive proud persons in apparel. 2 The unmeasurable wasters of
meat and drink. 3 The importable oppression of many Landlords. 4 The
unconscionable extortion of all usurers. 5 The insatiable covetousness in
corne-mongers. 6 The wilful wrangling in law matters. 7 The immoderate abuse
of gamming in all Countries. 8 The discharging of servants and apprentises. 9
The general abuse of all Gods benefits. 10 The want of execution of good
laws and statutes.
All which must needs increase the poor, and the increase of poor must
likewise procure penury, and scarcity in all places, as by diligent examining
the former particulars, will appear plainly to the view of all persons.

To begin first with all proud persons, 1 All proud persons.
that keep no moderation in their apparel, neither in cost nor change, and
commonly (far above their calling) must not their maintenance urge great sums
of money? It may be more then either their rents or getting will extend, which
must needs enforce them, either to rack their tenants by fines, or else to run
on score in their creditors books, till they sell them one lordship after an
other, and then must the tenants pay for their pride and will not this dealing
make many poor?

2 Al prodigal persons
The second sort of poor makers, be all such kind of prodigal persons, as
riotously waste their goods and substance, in surfeiting and drunkenness, in
banketting and bellicheare, day after day devouring more meat and drink into
one belly, then would well serve two or three persons: and must not this
dealing make all grain and victuals the scanter, which in the end must needs
pinch the poor, through want of the same?

3 Oppressing landlords.
The third sort of poor makers, are all unreasonable oppressing Landlordes,
and that by three hooks, either by turning their Tenaunts out of doors, to
enlarge their Demaines with their tenements, or inhauncing of their rents, or
else in making them sell all their goods, that they are not able to till their
land, but let it cut to others: and must not this dealing make many poor?

4 Extorting usurers.
The fourth sort of poor makers, are all kind of Usurers, whether it be in
money or wares, who deal so vnconcionably with men in these days, that they
are not ashamed to extort twenty, thirty, or forty pounds in the hundredth,
so they can defraude the law: and will not this dealing make many poor?

5 Covetous corne-mongers.
The fifth sort of poor makers, are all sorts of covetous Corne-mongers, who
commonly keep one years store before hand, closely laid up in their Arkes
or Garners, and rather then they will show themselves so loving to bring it to
the Market, to make corn cheaper, can be contented to see their neighbors
famished: and must not this dealing increase their penury?

6 VVilfull wranglers in law matters.
The sixth sort of poor makers, are all wilful wranglers in Law matters,
consuming their substance in wreaking their wicked wills one of another (and
sometimes brether with brother, about very trifles) as I could name a couple
that might once have been accorded under twenty Nobles, within this few
years, and new have quite spoiled one the other, with suites in law: and
must not not this dealing increase the poor?

The seventh sort of poor makers, Unthrifty gamesters.
are all immoderate unthrift gamesters, (at dice and cards specially) which (if
they be lawful) ought only to be used for recreation, to make them more apt
to walk in their vocation, and not to make gamening an occupation to get their
living thereby, (and that for the most part to others destruction, their wives
and children) loosing possibly more in one night, then they can recover all the
year after, and force great men sometimes to sell whole Lordshippes to
satisfy their lusts: and will not this dealing make many poor?

The eight sort of poor makers, are such, 8 Discharging of servants.
as unlawfully dismiss their Servants and apprentises before their term end,
and break up housekeeping for saving of charges, being well able to maintain
them still: and will not this dealing increase the poor?

The ninth sort of poor makers, 9 Abuses of Gods benefits.
is the general abuse of all Gods benefits (almost in all estates) very few
keeping any moderation, besides our unthankfulness, which must needs increase
the prices of all things, so as the meaner sort can hardly get maintenance:
and must not this dealing make the more poor?

The tenth sort of poor makers, 10 Want of due execution of good laws.
is the want of execution of those Laws and orders made for their provision,
which fault rests in Magistrates and officers appointed to that end, and in
many ministers, who ought publicly and privately to reprove abuses, and put
all persons in mind of their duties, yet either they cannot, or will not
perform the same, whereby the most do live in disorder: and will not this
dealing increase the poor?

Now if one of these poor makers may breed many poor, (as the oppression of
Tenants by one cruel Landlorde) how many will they breed all ten together?
I think they will fall out to be innumerable, namely if we consider how
many such poor makers every country has, yea every town in one respect or
other, (for what town is there but has some gamesters, alestakes, and such
like, that daily increase the poor) which they would not do if they did but
often think of this one point, Luke 16.2.
That every person at the last day shall give an account of his own
stewardship. etc.

The Lords proceeding iniudgeme^^
The meditation hereof, will make them more careful to walk in Gods fear, if
they look at that day to find his favor, when every person shall be
adjudged according to the using or abusing their gifts, Mat. 15.
to the helping or hindering of the poor (as Christ the great judge shall then
proceed with them) receiving the merciful into his kingdom, How all poor
makers should judge themselves.
rejecting the merciless into hell torments, to be damned for ever with Satan
and his Angels, except they judge themselves in time (to prevent the judgment
of the Lord) in manner following.

The vaineglorious person may thus think, I have procured Gods justice to
plague us, 1. How all proud persons should judge themselves.
by spending so much in change of apparel (above my calling) and so little or
nothing to relieve the poor: if I should hold on this course I shall be
condemned, therefore (by Gods grace) I will hereafter go more soberly in my
apparel, to do the more good to such as need the same, that Christ may
receive me into his kingdom.

The prodigal unthrift may say in like sort, I have procured Gods plagues upon
us, 2. How all prodigal persons should judge themselves.
by wasting much money in bibbing and bellycheere, that others now do feel the
want thereof, therefore (by his grace) I will be more sparing in time to come,
that the poor may have more plenty, and I escape damnation which I have
deserved.

The oppressing Landlord may likewise say, I have provoked Gods justice to
plague us, How al oppressing landlorde should judge themselves.
in spoiling of so many of their goods and livings by incroching upon them,
by inhauncing their rents, and by excessive fines, whereby I have brought them
to the beggars staff, therefore (by Gods grace) I will no more do so, but
hereafter deal more mercifully with them, least I be damned with devils in
hell.

The devouring usurer may say in like sort, 4. How al Usurers should judge
themselves.
I have procured the Lord to plague us, by my extorting much money from many,
and getting my goods with polling and pilling of other persons, and thereby
have brought them into poverty: but (by Gods grace) hereafter I will leave
that trade, Psalm. 15.
(and rather seek to make restitution) otherwise I cannot inherit Gods
kingdom.

The covetous cornemonger may likewise say, 5. How al cornemongers should
judge themselves. Prou. 11.26.
I have provoked Gods justice to plague us, being a mean to inhaunce the price
of all grain, by withholding my corn from the market this dear year, and so
have procured the poor to curse me, but henceforth (God willing) I will help
to bring down the price again, least I be cursed for evermore.

The wilful wrangler may say in like sort, 6. How al wilful wra^glers in
suits should judge themselves.
I have procured Gods plague upon us, by wastefull misspending much money in
law, to my own great damage and others also, which would have done much
good to the poor, toward their relief this dear year. But (by Gods grace)
I will hereafter further the same, by leaving law suits, and live in charity,
that Christ may receive me into his kingdom.

The unmeasurable gamester may likewise say, 7. How all wastefull gamesters
should judge themselves.
I have provoked the Lord to plague us by my wilful wasting much time and
money by immorderate gamening, which would have helped the poor very well: but
(by Gods grace) hereafter I will leave that lewd course, that I may spare the
more to relieve them, and so (through his mercies) come to salvation.

The niggardly house keeper may say in like sort, 8 How al bad housekeepers
should judge themselves.
I have procured Gods plagues upon us, by putting away my Servants and
apprentises this dear year, (to spare charge only through covetousness)
whereby the poores want has been the greater: but (by Gods grace) I will
hereafter become more liberal, to relieve their necessity, that I may
inherit eternal felicity.

He that enjoys his ease and pleasure, 9. How al ca^eful persons should
judge the^selue^.
may likewise say, I have provoked the Lord to plague us, by my unthankfulness
and idle expenses, more then I laid out to relieve the poor, in most places
almost pined through penury. But (by Gods good grace) I will hereafter set
less by my delights, and more to help the needy (as God requires) that I
may be received into his heavenly tabernacle, when this life is ended.

The careless magistrate or minister may say, I have procured the Lord to
plague us, How all careless magistrates should judge themselves.
both by my own default of duty, and little regard to call upon others to
look to their charges, toward the relief of the poor this dear year. But
(by Gods grace) I will be more careful henceforth of my duty, and see them
supplied, so as none (through my default) shall be famished, that I may show my
self blessed of Christ, both in this world and that to come.

If every one would mend one al should prosper the better.
If all able persons to whom God has given the gifts of this world, would thus
judge themselves and amend that is a miss, (as we are all bound) the poor
should then be well provided for in all places, and God be so pleased with our
compassion to his needy members, as we should procure (from his liberal
bountifulness) more plentiful increases of all things needful, to fill our
mouths full of his deserved praises, for his merciful proceedings with his
poor servants, that depend upon his providence.

The second chief point that all able persons are to consider of, 2 point of
consideration*
is only thus much, that God might have made our estate like unto the poor:
that his more bountiful dealing with us, should open our hearts to be so much
the more beneficial to them, or else we show our selves unworthy of his
blessings, and deserve in justice to be deprived of them. Mark this well.


The third chief point that all able persons are to consider of, 3 Point of
consideration. Mat. 5.12.
is the words of our Savior, That we should do to others as we would be done
unto: which implies thus much, that as our selves would wish to be helped in
our need, so should we be ready to help all others in their necessities (so
much as we may) then are we assured God will supply us in our necessities.

The fourth chief point that all persons are to consider of, 4 Point of
consideration.
is, the especial causes moving, why we should be careful to sustain the
poor: which may be contained within these four kinds.

1 God has commanded in his holy word, that we should be careful of their
sustentation. 2 They be our own flesh and natural kinsfolks, both by
creation, and regeneration, and left amongst us to try our compassion. 3
Christ Jesus shed his precious blood for them, as well as for us. 4 They be our
fellow heirs, of Christ his most blessed and everlasting kingdom.
The often and diligent premeditation of these few points, should lead us all
to this consideration, Mark these points well
that if we tender Gods holy commandment, if we have any love or compassion
in us, if we make account of Christ's precious blood, or if we ourselves
look to inherit his kingdom, after this life ended, then must we be
mindful to relieve his members, Mat, 25.
that is, the poor, who at this present are in great penury, in most places,
and are in danger to be famished, without help.

5 The fifth chief point: 5 Point of consideration. Twelve places of scripture.
that all able persons are to consider of, are those persuading places of
Scripture, which do most urge us, to the due relieuing of the poor in all
places, whereof I will only set down twelve, under which all the rest may be
contained.

1 Cast thy bread upon the waters, Eccle. 11.1.
and after many days thou shall be sure to find it. 2 He that gives unto the
poor, lends unto the Lord, Pro. 19.17. and 28, 27. Romans 12.31. Heb. 13 16.
2. Cor. 9.
who will recompense it in due season. 3 To do good, and to distribute unto the
needy forget not, for with such sacrifices God is pleased. 4 He that gives not
sparingly unto the poor, God will give liberally unto him, for he loves a
cheerful giver. Psalm. 112.9.
5 He that distributeth unto the poor, his righteousness shall remain for
ever. Luke 14.13.14.
6 Call the poor, the lame and the blind to thy Table, so shall thou be
blessed of the Lord, and be recompensed for the same at the last day. Luke
12.33
7 Give alms to the needy, so shall ye get a treasure in heaven that never
shall decay. Psalm. 41.1
8 Blessed is he that considers the poor, the Lord will deliver him in the
time of his trouble. 1. Ioh. 3.17
9 He that has this worlds good, and sees his brother want, and shuts up
his compassion from him, how dwells the love of God in him. Pro. 21.13.
10 He that stops his ears at the cry of the poor, shall cry himself and
not be heard. Matt. 5.7.
11 Blessed are the merciful, for they shall be sure to obtain mercy. Iam.
2.13
12 There shall be judgment without mercy, to those that show no mercy, but
mercifulnes reioiceth against judgment,
Consider of this conclusion.
There is no heart so hard (if it be not of flint) but will relent, and show
some compassion to relieve the poor, upon the pervsing of these places, if he
either take God to be just, or merciful, to perform his promises: or believe
there is a hell and a heaven, after this life ended, where they shall remain in
sorrow or joy that shall be endless. For all these exhortations alleged, are
within the compass of Canonical Scripture, and written for our instruction,
Romans 15.4
as by examining them in their particulars will appear, and by application
become more profitable.

1 Place. Eccle. 11.1. Applied.
The first place: Cast thy bread upon the waters, etc. are Salomons speeches,
the wisest king that ever was, and a figure of Christ, where water signifies
the poor, (as weak as water.) Now he does assure such merciful men, that
their alms so bestowed shall not be lost. What able person then but will give
the more, if he trust Salomons words to be true, that himself shall find it.

The second place: 2 place. Pro. 28.27 Applied. Pro. 29.17. Matt. 10.42.
He that gives unto the poor shall not lack, etc. are Salomons also, which
should encourage all able persons to give the more, because thereby they shall
procure the Lord to bless their provision, that they should not want: because
he has promised to recompense the same, (if it were but a cup of cold water
given in good will) accounting the same as done to himself, so well he
lyketh the works of charity.

The third place: 3 place. Heb. 13.16 Applied.
To do good to those that stand in need forget not, for with such sacrifices
God is pleased. The Apostles speeches: wherein we see how the Lord accounts
of such works (as sacrifices) acceptable in his sight, which should move all
able men to double their alms, if they desire to please ye lord.

The fourth place: He that gives liberally unto the poor, 4 place.
God will give bountifully unto him: the Apostles speeches also. And further,
that God loves such a person. 2. Cor. 9. Applied.
Which must needs move able persons to give freely to the poor, if they
either tender their own benefit, or to show themselves to be such as God
loves.

The fifth place: He that distributeth unto the poor, 5 place. Psalm. 112.9.
Applied.
his righteousness shall remain for ever, are the words of the Prophet
David, which will inform all able persons thus much, that if they desire to be
accounted, and continue righteous in Gods sight for ever, then must they of
necessity be liberal distributers unto the poor, according to their several
wants.

The sixth place: Call the poor, etc. to thy table, 6 place. Luke 14.13.14.
Applied.
and thou shall be blessed, and recompensed for the same, at the resurrection
of the just, These be the words of our Savior Jesus, which should be as a
spur to all rich persons, to prick them forward in giving of their alms, if
they take Christ to be ever faithful in performing promise.

The seventh place: Give alms to the needy, 7 place. Luke 12.33. Applied.
so shall ye get a treasure in heaven, that never shall decay. These be ye
words of our savior also, which of all other should move worldly rich men,
Applied.
to liberal alms giving, that they may get great store of treasure in the
world to come, as they have in this world, if they take Christ to be true of
his promise.

8 place. Psalm. 41.1.
The eight place: Blessed is he that considers the poor, the Lord will
deliver him in the time of his trouble. The words of David the kingly Prophet,
which must needs persuade all those able persons, Applied.
that know they have been, or shall be in trouble, to be beneficial unto the
poor, if themselves desire to find any comfort in their distresses.

9 place. John. 3.17.
The ninth place: He that has this worlds good, and helps not his brother,
whom he knows to want, how dwells the love of God in him? Applied.
(meaning, it is impossible.) The words of S. John whom Christ loved so
dearly, which should provoke rich men to grow rich daily in the works of
mercy, if they would show themselves, John 4.30
either to love God, or to have the love of God dwelling in them.

10 place. Prou. 21.13 Applied.
The tenth place: He that stops his ear at the cry of the poor, shall cry
himself and not be heard. The words of Solomon a figure of Christ which should
enforce rich men to listen well to the cry of the poor, and help to relieve
them, or else they shall one day cry themselves, and not be heard, which
assuredly will once come to pass.

11 place. Mat. 5.7. Applied.
The eleventh place: Blessed are the merciful, for they shall obtain mercy,
The words of our Savior Jesus also, which should allure men to show
compassion unto the needy (especially the wealthyer sort, that have gotten
their goods by indirect means) if they look that God should show them
mercy for their sins, in that respect, when they sue for the same.

12 place. Iam. 2.13 Applied. The whip cord reason
The twelfth place: There shall be judgment without mercy, to such as show no
mercy, etc The words of S. James the Apostle of Christ, which may be called the
whip cord reason, to urge and compel all able persons to perform daily the
works of mercy, and never to be weary in doing so well, if they would not
exclude themselves from mercy, at the last judgment day, when they shall most
stand in need thereof.

But to confirm the same of certainty, that the merciless shall then want
mercy, and cannot come by the same, let all such persons mark betime the
manner of Christ's proceeding with them. Mat. 25.4^.46. Christ's manner in
proceeding against the merciless.
Depart from me (ye cursed) into everlasting fire, etc. For I was an hungered
(in my needy members) and ye gave me no meat: I thirsted, and ye gave me no
drink: I was a stranger, and ye lodged me not: I was naked, and ye clothed me
not: I was sick and in prison, and ye visited me not. Thus even for their want
of perfourming the works of charity (as the bowels of compassion should
compel them thereunto) they shall be condemned to everlasting torments.

The sixth point of consideration, 6. point of consideration how the poor may
be supplied.
for all able persons to think upon, is, how the poor may and must be
relieved, if we will show our selves to be true Christians, or ever look that
Christ should comfort us at our last ending, when death shall arrest us, to
carry us either to joy or pain, and that everlasting.

The serious consideration therefore of these points is most needful: for, Al
in vain hitherto, if this present penury be not provided for.
though we lay open the naked estate of all poor people never so barely, and
produce never so manifest reasons of great importance to move all able men unto
compassion, yet considering their present want is so much, and the means so
scant wherewith to relieve them, with the time so long till God send new store
(the ware corn seed in the most cold countries being yet vnsowen) which
threatens a further famine to follow, without due provision now in time: Let us
then consider of this maine point.

1 How the want of the poor may be still relieved.

Concerning the want of the poor, 1. How the poor may be relieved
it may be supplied two manner of ways.

1 First by remoouing the cause of their wants. 2 Second, by adding a further
supply.
Concerning the causes of the poor (as has been plainly explaned before) the
same does proceed partly from themselves through their idleness, etc. The
double cause of the poor: want.
but more especially from the poor makers, (whereof there be sundry sorts
before named) who if they would surcease their immoderate excess (as has
been moved by many sound reasons) the poor would get daily relief
thereby. The double cause of the poores want.
For, as it is a tried rule in Physic, Take away the cause of any malady,
The cause taken away the effect ecaseth.
and the effect of curing will follow of it self: for as the one is in
remoouing, the other is in coming, (the one as it were following the other)
the like is the cause concerning the poor: for if the wastefull expenses in
their makers, (as it were all drawn out of their purses) were again restored
into the same, they should have little cause to complain, for both they should
have more store of money to buy what they need, and vittels then would be
more plenty.

Restraint of expenses, a supply to the poor*
As for example, the very overplus of prodigal persons, ye misspent so much in
bibbing and bellicheere, which breeds diseases in the^: if that were spared
hereafter in all places, how many thousands throughout al England might be well
relieved, it would be incredible, seeing every town will afford some such
unthrifts.

How many thousands might be supplied.
The like may be said of all other sorts of excessive persons, that if they
were drawn to due moderation, and their overplus converted to the use of the
poor: it would appear by computation that maintenance enough might be had for
almost innumerable poor persons, if corn should bear the double price in all
markets.

Provision of corn brought in from beyond the Seas.
Touching the second point, which is the procuring of supply in corn from other
countries, that care has hitherto manifested it self in her gracious
Majesty and most honorable Council (as the great abundance of white rye
brought into England from beyond the seas, does demonstrate, the Lord grant it
may hold out still.

3 Chief point to consider rightly of the poor.
The poor man's want, and means to supply, being thus far revealed, let us now
proceed to the second chief point concerning the poor (what persons indeed
consider rightly of them) that is in few words, all those men of substance that
suffer no able workma^ or woman to want work or wages to live on this dear
year, nor any of their impotent neighbors to be vnreleeued (so much as they
may) and those that do see the youth set on work, and al able persons that are
unwilling, or else do punish the^ as the law appoints, 4. Chief point to
produce some examples of poor considerers, ten in number.
these do indeed perform the same accordingly, to the good example of all
other persons.

The fourth chief point concerning the poor, is to produce some special
examples, of such as kept good hospitality, or otherwise used to relieve the
poor, which shall stand as patterns to all posterities, of liberal
considerers of the poor, contained within the canonical scriptures, which are
ten in number.

The first example shall be a couple of brethren Abraham and Lot by name, who
were so much given to hospitality, as scarce they would suffer any poor
traveler to pass by their doors, 1. Abraham and Lot. Genesis 18. and 19.
but did entertain the^ liberally: a good example to great housekeepers

The second example is Nehemiah that noble governor, who finding the Jews
sore oppressed at his return from Babylon, 2. Nehemiah. Nehe. 5.
did not only remitte a part of his own right assigned unto him, but also kept
at his table daily an hundredth and fifty of them, which before had been
banished amongst the heathen, and moved others to the like compassion: a
worthy president to all superior governors.

The third example, is Job the just, a wealthy man of the land of Husse, who
was so pitiful unto the poor, 3 Job the just. Job. 29. and 31.
that he became the eyes to the blind, the feet to the lame, and as a father
unto the fatherless, never denying the needies request, nor being once weary
in supplying their wants: a notable pattern for all rich persons.

The fourth example, is David the king, David the king. Psalm. 16.2.3. and. 37
25.
who took such pleasure in providing well for all poor people (especially
such as delighted in godliness) that he would not suffer, neither ever did see
either them or their seed to beg in his days: a most famous president for
all kings and princes.

The fifth example, is repenting Zacheus, ^. Repenting Zacheus. Luke 19.1.9.
who sometimes had been an extorting usurer, yet when he was truly converted
by Christ, at the first offered the half of his goods to relieve the poor,
and to restore four fold to all manner persons whom he had pinched any kind
of way: a memorable pattern for all oppressing usurers to follow in these
days, if they would please God.

6. Dorcas. Act. 9.36.42.
The sixth example is one Dorcas, a notable woman, who was full of good works,
and charitable alms, giving many gowns and coats to the poor, as was showed
by sundry to Peter the Apostle: a most worthy pattern for Ladies and
gentlewomen. 7 Captain Cornelius. Act. 10.1.5.


The seventh example is Cornelius the captain, a very religious devout man,
fearing God greatly, and always bountiful in bestowing alms: a rare example
for Captains to follow.

8. Able christians in the primitive church Acts 3. and 4.
The eight example, were the first Christians in the primitive church (after
Christ's ascension) who were of so tender compassion in those days, that rather
then they would see their brethren to beg and discredit their profession,
those that had possessions willingly sold them to supply their wants, which
stood in need, and so brought their money to the Apostles, to divide the same
accordingly. A forcible pattern to persuade able men to be liberal releeuers
of the poor.

9. The citizens of Corinth. Romans 15.20 2. cor. 8. chapter Philip. 4.15.18.
The ninth example, the godly Citizens of Corinth of Philippi, and other
places, who were not only willing to relieve their neighbors, but in the time
of scarcity in other countries, did freely bestow their alms in money (above
their ability) and sent the same to supply their wants that were converted and
become Christians. Most worthy examples to move able Citizens at the least,
to have special care this dear year, to relieve their needy neighbors.

10. Our Savior Christ. 2. Cor. 8.9 Philip. 2. ch
The tenth and most worthy example of all, is our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ,
who was so replenished with the bowels of compassion to relieve our estate in
great perplexity, that rather then we should be utterly lost (though he were
Lord of heaven and earth, yet willingly (as it were) renounced his right, and
abased himself to the very lowest degree of a Servant, for our sakes and
safety (being his servants) that we might be endued with all his blessings,
Romans 8.
and made heirs with him of his celestial kingdom. A perfect president of that
compassion, which all true Christians should seek to imitate toward the
distressed, so much as we may.

If none of the former alleged examples, can prevail with us, Our saviors
example of force.
to part with any portion toward the sustentation of our needy neighbors,
yet if we will not show our selves past grace, our Saviors example will procure
the same from us, and that in bountiful measure. For, Coll. 2.13.14 15.
shall he willingly spoil himself to pay our debts, when we were unable to
discharge the same? and shall we be unwilling to give some part of that plenty
he has given us, upon our needy neighbor for his sake? God forbid. If the
speeches of John the Apostle be true, 1. Ioh. 3.16.
That we ought to lay down our lives for our brethren, (after Christ's
example): as no man can deny the same that has grace in him. Mark this
diligently.
Then much more ought we to relieve their want with some of our wealth. O then,
seeing their case at this instant is very lamentable for lack of relief, let
us not shut our compassion from them, like the hard hearted Priest and Leuite,
Luke 20.30 37.
but let us resemble the kind Samaritan, that never left helping the wounded
man, till he was restored again to health: even so should we do unto the
poor, if we would approve our selves kind Christians.

The fifth chief point concerning the poor, is, to search out the double
effect that will follow the due considering of them. First, their great want
shall be well relieved: and their Releeuers (in what degree so ever,) approve
themselves to be those true Christians in whom the Lord delights, both of
them rebounding to further his glory.

The sixth chief point concerning the poor, Is, to consider of their dangerous
estate, that do not seek daily to help their supply (being now so needful)
and they well able, Luke 16.
who stand all in danger of endless destruction, to be damned with Dives (as you
heard before. All which inducements (and specially this last) should draw on
all able men, (and namely the poore-makers) to become more liberal in
releeuing their want, for if such simply as do not supply them, The poor
makers estate dangerous. Mat. 25.
be in danger of damnation (as Christ himself witnesses) then how can the
poore-makers escape most fearful plagues, except they in this life make
restitution, which grace God grant them.

Now let us proceed to consider of that title which the Prophet here ascribes
to all such persons as duly consider of the poor, The alms giuers title
blessed. Mat. 5.7.
whom he truly terms to be blessed, which is confirmed by the Lord Jesus,
where he says, The merciful are blessed: which imports thus much in few
words, that such a person is In Gods favor, and so known to others: which is
the greatest honor that any of his servant can attain unto in this life, as
we commonly call him, A happy man.

The courtiers phrase
For, as Courtiers use when one is advanced, to term such a person in high
estimation with his Prince, and as the speech runs, Well graced of all men:
so the case stands with all good alms giuers, Mat. 25.
especially such as rightly give the same, that they are not only blessed with
Christ, for whose sake chiefly they bestow the same, but so accounted of all
his servants, which is the highest title that David a King, does usually
ascribe unto any of the Chosen, and ought so much the more to move us to mercy,
to pity the poor, and relieve their misery, for that we shall not only
approve our selves thereby, blessed of God, but to resemble him our heavenly
Father, Luke 6.36.
which should the more enlarge our compassion toward the needy.

An objection.
By this occasion, the poor may object, If such persons only as consider of our
estate, be accounted blessed, then it may seem that we are accursed.

Answered.
To this may be answered, That David does not say, He that considers of the
poor (is only blessed,) But that (He is blessed) setting a mark as it were
on such a man, (That he is blessed of God) to encourage others to follow his
example in helping ye poor, that they may so show themselves blessed also.

Both sorts blessed. Math. 5.3.6.10.
Note that David excludes not the poor from being blessed also, (especially
such as be poor in spirit, and meekly bear their appointed burden) for well
he knew that such are blessed also as Christ reports of them.

By the which rule, every poor person may truly try, whether he be blessed of
God, or no: How the poor may try if they be blessed.
for if any of them grudge at their low estate, or use words or gesture showing
discontent, or any unlawful means to better the same, then they are in danger
of Gods displeasure: but if they meekely bear his burden laid upon them, do
neither inwardly nor outwardly murmurs at the same, nor use indirect means to
better their estate, but patiently wayt the Lords will in all things, then
assuredly they are blessed of God, as well as their releeuers.

But an other question may hereupon arise, A question.
whether all the poor releeuers be blessed or no?

The answer is easy, Answered.
That all releeuers of the poor are not blessed, (howsoever the world do
account of them,) as ye proud Pharisie will approve who was rejected
(notwithstanding his good works,) because he abused them to Gods dishonor.
Luc. 18.


By whose example, we are to learn thus much, That it is not always a
certain sign of a blessed man, to be liberal in good works or giving of
alms, (except other circumstances be therewith considered, Six circumstances
of acceptable alms
) which I will comprize under these six kinds.

1 That the giver thereof, be the servant of Christ. 2 That he give it simply
for his sake. 3 That he be in charity with all persons. 4 That he give it in
compassion, without vainglory. 5 That he do not boast thereof afterward. 6
That he do not seek to merit thereby.
All which Circumstances are to be observed in giving of alms, if the party
seek to please God thereby, for he that fails in any one point, cannot
assure himself to blessed.

For, touching the first, it is very manifest, that as the branch cannot bring
forth fruit, except it be, and abide in the vine, Ioh. 15.
no more can any person living please God, except he be and abide in Christ,
and so become his obedient and faithful servant, as himself witnesses: whereby
all Infidels are abandoned with their alms, because they are not the members
of Christ.

The second circumstance to be considered, Is, that we give our alms simply
for Christ's sake only, Luke 12. Mat. 25.
to help and relieve his needy members (without any other sinister respect)
for so has he commanded, (as before is showed) neither may we do otherwise,
if we consider the goods we have are his, to use to his glory, Luke 16.
and that we must one day make account of them.

The third circumstance, Is, that we be in charity with all manner persons,
when we give our alms. For, (as the Apostle truly affirms) if we should give
away all that we have to the use of the poor, 1. Cor. 13.
and our bodies besides to be burned to ashes, yet should all be lost, (except
we both live and die in charity) for God is charity, 1. Ioh. 4.16
and he that lives in charity, dwells in God, and none but such persons.

The fourth circumstance, is, That we give our alms freely in compassion,
(without all vainglory) for, although the Pharisees were liberal in alms, Mat.
6.3.14.
yet because they did all to be seen of men, and recommended by them, they
lost their reward at the hands of God. Therefore Christ teaches all his
Disciples, (so much as is possible) not to let their left hand know in these
cases, what the right hand does: so will God one day reveal it to their
comfort.

The fifth circumstance, is, That when we give our alms, we may not use to
boast thereof afterward, Luke 18.
as the proud Pharisie did, that he had given so much, and others so little,
least we loose our labor as he did, (who was rejected (not for his alms) but
for his unlawful bragging of the same.

The sixth circumstance, is, To take heed in any case that we do not seek to
merit by our alms, least we exclude our selves from Gods mercy, whereby alone
the elect are redeemed in Christ Jesus. Job. 3.
But when we have done the best that we can, humbly to confess (as he has
taught us,) That we are all unprofitable servants) so far should we be, Luke
17.10
from seeking at all to merit thereby.

If the Papists and others would think of these points, that make so much
vaunting of their alms giving, they should be soon rid of two bad opinions,
both touching the manner and end of their alms. For, (as the Apostle says,
Gal. 3. Ephesians. 2
) If the perfect law of God could not bring us life, (because we wanted power
to perform it) shall we once imagine to merit an higher place in heaven, by
our imperfit good works, (the best whereof are polluted with sin, as before is
showed): it is impossible.

Neither let the Papists untruly reproach us, that we deny good works, or
deeds of charity, for (as they may perceive by that which has bin said) we
urge them to all Christians, upon pain of damnation to those that refuse them,
because they cannot without them approve themselves to be true believers, Iam.
2. Hebr. 11.
and without faith no man can please God, yet we do not put them in Christ's
place, as the cause or matter of our salvation, but as effects only proceeding
from faith, whereby we make it manifest, that we do belong unto his redemption,
Luke 1.7.4
because we desire in all things to please him.

Now are we come by course to consider of that assured benefit which he shall
reap, that is, rich in good works, and giving of alms, which is set down in
this sentence following, The Lord will deliver him in the time of his trouble.
Wherein we are to note (as before is remembered) these two special points.

1 His safe protection, That God will deliver him. 2 The time when, In the
days of his distress.
Concerning the former point, The Lord will deliver him, who has compassion on
his needy neighbor. Oh how strong a motive must this needs be, to move all
good Christians to that work of mercy (namely if we consider these two points.)

1 Who the Lord our protector is. 2 How many and great our dangers are,
Touching the former, If we either cast up our eyes to the heavens, or conceive
his goodness to all his creatures, how he created, nourishes, preserves and
guides them, Psalm. 19.^6
by his Almighty power and providence, to serve our use, and to set forth his
glory, we should then know who the Lord our protector is. But if we look
inwardly with the eyes of faith, into his most holy and immortal word, Gods
power manifested. Genesis 1.
which he has left amongst us, to instruct us further of his power and
goodness, how he created all things of nothing, and that with a word
(without other instrument) and how he caused the sea to give place, for the
safety of his servants, and after to return and swallow up their enemies.
Exodus 14.
Then shall we behold the power of that God who is our protector.

But, which surpasses all the former testimonies of the Lords powerfulness,
as far as heavenly things exceed all earthly things, if we rightly consider
of our own woeful estate and condition, The Lords powerfulness most of al
appearing in our redemption. Ephesians. 2.
how (through the fall of our first ancestors) all we their posterity, were
not only deprived of his protection, but became bondslaues to sin and Satan,
without recovery (as of our selves) or any cause in us to move the Lords
mercy, to redeem us all from their intolerable thraldom and tyranny, save
only our misery, we being all rank rebels against him, by our continual
practice.

Behold, notwithstanding, the goodness and greatness of Gods love and
powerfulness, for our restoration into his lost favor, appearing most of al,
in sending his only begotten son Jesus, the very jewel and heir apparent of
heaven and earth, to take upon his person our weak and frail nature, The
power of Christ Jesus in our weak nature. 1. Cor. 15. Collos 2.
and therein to encounter with sin and Satan, and all their partakers, whom
he in his manhood so mightily confounded, that he led away captivity captive,
and triumphs over them in eternal victory, and all for our sakes, to bring
us to felicity. Oh then how safe are we, that have this almighty God, for our
protector?

To come to the latter point, how many and great our dangers are, Three kinds
of danger.
may be considered in these three respects*

1 The malice of our enemies, how many and mighty. 2 The perils we stand in,
how great and variable. 3 Our daily sins, how many and monstrous.
All which approve the providence of God to be the more powerful in our
protection, notwithstanding.

Concerning our enemies, for those that are outward, whom we term bodily, I
refer them to every man's consideration, 1. Our enemies: Bodily: Ghostly.
how they are any way vexed by them, and only will nominate those that be
ghostly, which seek the subversion of our souls and bodies, in eternal
confusion, who are termed in scripture, devils and damned spirits, which are
innumerable, 1. Pet. 5.8.
and withal so mighty and malicious, that if God did not restrain their rage
against us, we should be destroyed all in one moment.

Touching those perils we daily stand in, 2 Our perils.
they may be considered by others destruction.

Some by storms and tempests.

Some by fearful fires.

Some by flowing waters.

Some by sores and sickness.

Some by dearth and famine.

Some by wars and battles.

With a number such like, whereunto we are subject, and should incur them
without Gods protection.

To come to our sins, 3. Our sins.
which may be termed the very hook which pulls these dangers daily upon
us, how many and monstrous they are in Gods sight, (especially our pride,
excess, and extortion) may partly appear in their particulars before touched,
but are made much more manifest, by the Lords plaguing us at this present with
scarcity and penury in most places, so as the poorer sort are like to perish,
without better provision.

Thus far having showed the dangers we stand in, 2 The time when God will
deliver his. Psalm. 50.15.
let us now more precisely point out the time when God will deliver all those
persons, that are found careful to relieve the poor: that is to say, in the
days of their trouble: So that they fail not to call upon the almighty
Lord: for so himself says, Call upon me in the days of thy trouble, and I
will deliver thee, etc. Two points


Whereby we may learn these two chief points.

1 When and from what troubles the Lord will deliver us. 2 How we may be sure
and certainly know, that God will deliver us.
1 Touching the former, when and from what troubles God will deliver us: that is
to say, when we our selves are in any danger, either of inward or outward
enemies, or otherwise, by water, by fire, by tempests, by sickness, by famine,
or such like: and then (especially) when we are in extremity, and in danger
to die, the Lord will either send present remedy, or else take us unto his
mercy, and make us partakers of his felicity, for evermore to magnify his
great name.

2 The means how to know that God will deliver us from al^ ex^^emities, Iam.
5.16.17.18.
is, by our constant calling on his name, with faith and firm hope that he
will deliver us, which in the end will prevail with his majesty, to deal
with us graciously, and send us supply, as he knows most to further his glory.

To conclude therefore, seeing at this present the hand of God is heavy upon us,
in most places of this Realm of England, appearing plainly in this great
penury, amongst the poorer sort especially, Faithful prayer, a special means
to prevail with God, which was never more needful.
and threatened further in greater measure, by several signs from heaven, by
strange diseases on earth, and by foreign invasion of devoted enemies, our
sins most of all provoking the same, which will in the end procure our
desolation, without speedy conversion, which we can never attain unto, (what
means soever be used for the same) without Gods especial grace and direction,
which must be obtained by earnest petition: Let us all then incessantly, ask,
knock, seek and sue for the same continually, at the footestoole of his
mercy, in the name and mediation of Christ Jesus only, with assurance to
speed, so shall we not only remove his displeasure, but be assured to procure
his favor, for evermore: So be it.

FINIS.

