By the Queen.
WHere in the Parliament begone and holden at Westminster the eight day of
June, in the.xxviii. year of the reign of the noble king of Famous memory
king Henry the eight, father to our Sovereign Lady the Queen's Majesty, ^ne
Act and statute was then and there made, entitled, an Act limittynge the
pryses of Wynes: And where also in the Session of the Parliament holden upon
prorogation at Westminster, the.xxii. day of January, in the.xxxiiii. year of
the reign of the said noble king, one Act and statute was then and there
made, entitled, an Act to aucthorise certain of the kings Majesty's
Counsel to set pryses upon wynes to be sold by retayle. By the which said
several Acts and statutes, authority is given unto the Lord Chancellor
of England, Lord Treasourer of England, the Lord President of the kings
most honorable Counsel, Lord Privy seal, and the two chief Justices of
either Benche, or.v.iiii. or.iii. of them by their discretions, to set the
pryses of all kinds of Wynes, yearly, from time to time when they shall be
sold, in gross, and by retayle, and thereof Proclamation to be made in the
City, Borough, and Town, where any such Wynes are to be sold. Which said
order for the retaylyng of Wynes, is further limited and appointed by the
statute made in the fifth year of the reign of our Sovereign Lady the Queen's
Majesty, entitled, an Act touching certain politic constitutions, made for
the maynteynaunce of the Navy, as by the said several Acts and statutes
amongst other things more at large it does and may appear.

Forasmuch as the Lord keeper of the great Seal of England, the Lord
Treasourer of England, and the two chief Justices of either Benche, in the
execution of the said several Acts and statutes, have by their deliberate
aduises, taxed, limited, assigned, and appointed the pryses of Gascoigne and
French Wynes, to be sold within this the Queen's Majesty's Realm in gross:
That is to say, every Tun of the best Gascoigne wine, to be sold after the
custom and impost paid to the Queen's Majesty, at the price and rate
of.vi.li.vi. s. viii. d. the Tun, and not above. And every Tun of the best
French wine, to be sold in like manner after the same rate of.vi.li.vi. s.
viii.d. the Tun, and not above. And every Pipe, Hoggeshed, Puncheon, Terce,
and other vess^ll of the same several Wynes, to be sold after their
quantities, according to the same rates and not above: And for small and thin
Wynes, to be sold under the same rates, as the buyers and sellers thereof can
agree. And for the retaylyng of the said Gascoigne and French Wynes, the said
Lords and Iustic^^ by authority aforesaid, have assigned and appointed the
pryses, as follows. That is to say, eu^ry Gallon of the b^st Gascoigne Wine to
be sold for.x.d. the Gallon, and not above: And every Gallon of the best
French Wine to be sold also for.x.d. the Gallon, and not above. And also that
every Pott^^, Quarte, and Pynte, shall be retayled and sold after and according
to the same several rates and pryses. The Queen's Majesty our Sovereign Lady
therefore straightly charge and commands all and singul^r her subjects,
and others, puttyng any manner of Gascoigne or French Wynes to sale within this
her Majesty's Realm, that they, ^e any of them, in any manner of wise, by any
craft, couin, or pryuate agreement, shall sell any Gascoigne or French wynes
otherwise, or at any higher pryses, then is above limited, upon pain to
forfayte and pay such penalties, as are contained and expressed in the said
several Acts and statutes. And further her hyghnes pleasure and commandment
is, that all and singular Majors, Sheriffs, Bayliffes, Constables, and other
her officers and ministers to whom it appertains, that they, and every of
them with diligence, cause and see that this her Proclamation be put in due
execution after the tenor of the same. And also according to another Act of
Parliament, made in the.xxxvii. year of the reign of her Majesty's said
father King Henry the eight, against such as will refuse to sell their Wines at
pryses taxed as is aforesaid, as they will answer thereto at their perilles.

God save the Queen.
Imprinted at London in Powles Churchyard, by Richard Judge and John Cawood:
Printers to the Queen's Majesty.

Cum priuilegio Regiae Maiestatis.


