By the Queen.
THe Queen's Majesty understanding, that of late time sundry persons being
infected with certain dangerous and pernicious opinions, in matters of
religion, contrary to the faith of the Church of Christ, as Anabaptists and
such like, are come from sundry parts beyond the seas, into this her Realm,
and specially into the City of London, and other Maritime towns, under the
color and pretense of fleyng from persecution, against the professors of the
Gospel of Christ: Whereby if remedy be not speedely provided, the Church of
God in this Realm shall sustain great danger of corruption, and sects to
increase contrary to the unity of Christ's Church here establyshed.

For redress whereof: Her Majesty by advise of her counsel, having
commanded the Archebyshop of Canterbury, Bishop of London, and other Bishops,
to see the paryshes in London and other places herewith suspected, to be
seuerly visited, and all persons suspected, to be openly tried and examined,
touching such phanaticall and heretical opinions: Wylleth and charge al
manner of persons, borne either in forreyne parts, or in her Majesty's
dominions, that have conceived any manner of such heretical opinion as the
Anabaptists do hold, and means not by charitable teaching to be reconciled,
to depart out of this Realm within twenty days after this Proclamation, upon
pain of forfaiture of all their goods and cattels, and to be imprisoned and
further punyshed, as by the laws either ecclesiastical or temporal, in such
case is provided. And her Majesty also charge and commands upon pain of
imprisonment, that no Minister nor other person, make any conuenticules or
secret congregations, either to read or to preach, or to minister the
Sacraments, or to use any manner of divine service, but that they shall resort
to open Chapels or Churches, and there to preach, teach, minister, or pray,
according to the order of the Church of England, except it be in cases of
sickness, or where noble men and such others that have in all former times ben
accustomed to have divine service said in their Oratories within their houses,
for diverse necessary respects, upon pain that whatsoever persons or company
shall make such secret conuenticules, every person to be imprisoned without
bail or mainpryse, until the coming of the Justice for delyuery of the same
Gayle, and then to be punyshed by their discretions.

Yeuen at our Castle of wyndsor the.xxii.day of September, the second year of
our reign. M. D. lx.
God save the Queen.
Imprinted at London in Powles Church yard by Richard Jugge, and John Cawood,
Printers to the Queen's Majesty.


