By the Queen.
THE QVENES most excellent Majesty, being infourmed, that there is presently
growyng and encreasyng in certain evil disposed persons, in and nere the
city of London, such an inordinate boldness, as they having knowledge of
Process sent forth out of sundry Courts of Record, to attache them by their
bodies, to answer unto Justice: do not only arm themselves privily to
withstand in forcible manner, the officers having charge to execute the same
Process: but do also make assaults and open frayes upon the said officers,
both to the manifest contempt of publyke authority and to the danger of the
lives of the said officers. Whereupon her majesty having it brought also to
her remembrance, in what sort the Noble king her majesty's father, king Henry
the eight, upon the like disorder grown about the xxix. year of his reign,
did provide speedy remedy by a very straight proclamation, under great and
mortal pains to the offenders therein. Whereupon also manifest quietness did
ensew, to the execution of all the like process by Seriants, Bailiffes, and
such other ministers.

For these considerations, her majesty having also regard to maintein her
authority given her by almighty God, over al manner of persons within her
dominions, and to preserve due reverence to her laws and to the ministers
thereof, straightly charge and commands all manner of persons, of what
condition soever they be within any of her dominions, quietly and peaceably to
obey and yield themselves, to the Arrestes (...) attachments of al Majors,
Sheriffs, bailiffes, seriantes, and other ministers, without refusal,
rescues, or resistance, upon pain that as well the principal offenders, as
their ayders, mainteyners, and procurers in any such rescues or resistance,
shall be committed to prison, there to remain close without any manner of
liberty. And to be further severally chastised and punished for the same
contempt (besides the punishmente due for the cause, whereupon the attachment
was awarded) as shall be expressly devised, limited, and appointed by her
majesty's own special direction, with thaduise of her Counsel. And in the
mean season not to be bailed or delivered out of prison by any manner of
officer without having special warant therefore, from her Majesty: for so does
her highness mean to take the care to her self, to punish such a notable
contempt. And to devise such several manner of punishments, for terror and
example, as shall be requisite to the manner and other circumstances of the
offense. And further her Majesty commands, that all other persons being
present or nere to any such rescues to be made, shall do their best endeavor
to aid the public officer, and to attache the offenders and their adherents,
upon pain to be likewise imprisoned, until her majesty's pleasure shall be
therein specially declared. Or that the Justices of the Assisse, or of Oyer and
terminer at their next coming nere to that place, or the president and
counsel (if the case shall so require) in the Marches of Wales, or in the
North, shall otherwise order therein, according to the quality of the fault.
Wherein her majesty charge the same Justices, Presidents and Counsel, to use
such severity as to the cause shall appertayn, and move others, by thexample
and terror of punishment to forbear from the like.

Yeuen at Westminster the xxi. day of March. 1564. The seventh year of her
Majesty's Reign. God save the Queen.
Imprinted at London in Powles Churchyard, by Richard Jugge and John Cawood,
Printers to the Queen's Majesty.

Cum priuilegio Regiae Maiestatis.


