The several Rates and Taxations for wages, ^e and set forth by the Justices
of peace, of the Countye of Northampton.
WHere in the Parliament holden at Westmynster the.xii. day of January, in the
fifth year of the reign of our sovereign Lady the Queen's Majesty it was
enacted by the Queen our said sovereign Lady, the Lords spiritual, and
temporal, and the commons in that parliament assembled, that the Justices of
the peace of every shyre, Riding, and liberty within the limits of their
several commissions, or the more part of them, being resiaunt within the same,
and the sheriff of the county if he conuenientlye might, and every Mayor
Bayliffe, or other head officer within any City or town corporate, wherein is
any Justices of the peace within the limittes of the said City or Town,
should by force of the said act, yearly after Easter at times convenient
appointed by the same, assemble them selves together, and calling before them
such discrete and grave persons of the said County, City and Town, as they
should think meet, and conferring together, respecting the plenties or
scarsitie of the time, and other circumstances necessarily to be considered,
should by virtue of the said Act, within the limittes and precinctes of their
several Commissions, limytte, rate, and appoint the wages, as well of such and
so many of the said artificers, handie crafts men, husbandmen, or any other
labourer, servant, or workmen, whose wages in times past has been by any law
or statute rated and appointed, as also the wages of all other laborers,
artificers, workmen or apprentices of husbandry, which have not been rated, as
the same Justices, Mayors, or head officers within their several commissions
or liberties, should think meet by their discretions to be rated, lymytted,
or appointed. And the same rates and taxations should certify into the Queen's
highness court of Chauncery, before a certain day, limited in the said act.
Whereupon it should be lawefull for the Lord Chaunceloure or Lord Keeper of
the great seal of England for the time being, upon declaration thereof to her
highness, her Heirs, or Successors, or to the lords and others of her
Majesty's privy council, to cause Proclamations to be printed and sent down
into every of the said shyres and places, containing the several rates
appointed by the said Justices and other head officers, commaundyng thereby,
in her highness name, al persons straightly to observe and keep the same, upon
the danger of the punishment and forfaytures limited and appointed by the said
Act and statute.

And where also it is further enacted by the authority aforesaid, that all
manner of person and persons after such Proclamation made, should observe and
keep the said rates for wages, upon pain of the forfaitures and penalties
contained in the same estatute, until further order by proclamation, according
to the purport of the same estatute, it should be otherwise ordered and
proclaimed, wherefore the Queen's Majesty having received into her said Court of
Chauncery amongst diverse other Certificates, from sundry of her hyghnes
Shieres, Cities and Towns, one certificate from her hyghnes County of
Northampton, conteynyng the Rates for wages hereafter following, made and
appointed by the Justices of this her said County of Northampton, according to
the tenor of the same Act. And myndyng to have the same rates put in execution
in all points, as by the process of the same act is prescribed, like as her
Majesty has and intends to do in all other her hyghnes Countyes and Shyres,
and other places of liberty within this her Realm: ^^^^refore her highness
straightlye charge and commands all manner of person and persons within her
said County of Northampton, to keep and observe in all points, the said
rates, taxations, orders, and appointmentes for wages hereafter following, and
set forth, upon the pains and forfaitures appointed by the said estatute,
and upon pain of her highness displeasure.

And further her hyghnes pleasure and express commandment is, that all
Justices of peace, Sheriffs, and other head officers of her said County of
Northampton, shall see, and cause the same Rates duelye and seuerelye to be
observed and kept in all points: And this Proclamation to be used in every
behalf according to the tenor and effect of the same act. And her Majesty's
further pleasure and commandment is, that if any question, scruple, or
doubt, shall arise upon my of the taxations or rates for this her said County
of Northampton, herevnder mentioned: That then the same shall be resolved and
determined by her hyghnes Justices of peace that did make and ordain the same
taxations and rates: and that all persons shall perform and keep the same
resolutions orders and determinations (...) resolved and determined by her
hyghnes Justices of peace that did make and ordain the same taxations and
rates: and that all persons shall perform and keep the same resolutions,
orders, and determinations, so by them to be made and determined touching the
same.

The County of Northampton.
Hereafter ensues the certificate of the Justices of Peace within the County
of Northampton, touching thorder and rate taken by them, concerning the wages
of Artificers, Laborers, and Servants of husbandry, and of other workmen,
according to the act made in the last Session of Parliament holden at
Westminster in the fyfthe year of the reign of our Sovereign Lady the Queen.

Artificers.
FRee masons, Carpenters, Ioyners, Caruers, Sawiers, Whelewrightes, Ropers,
Collar makers, Brickelaiers, Roughe masons, Bowiers, Plumbers, Canners,
Glasiers, Curriers, Bakers, Boochers, Shomakers, Plasterers, Tylers, Slaters,
Tailors, Glouers, Turners, Fletchers, Sadlers and Coupers, the best sort, by
the day from the midst of September unto the midst of March, with meat
and drink.iiii. d. without.vii. d. From the midst of March unto the midst
of September, with meat and drink.vi. d. without.viii. d. By the whole year
with Liuerie.xl. s. Without Liuerie.xlvi. s.viii. d.

The second sort by the day from the midst of September to the midst of
March with meat and drink.iii. d. Without.vi. d. From the midst of March
to the midst of September with meat and drink.v. d. Wihout.vii. d. With
liuerie xxxiii. s.iiii. d. Without.xl. s

Master Carpenter, Plumber, Freemason having three or four men, and able to
take charge of work with meat and drink.vi. d. Without.x. d. according to the
rate: and in Winter.iiii. d. with meat and drink, and without.viii. d.

Laborers all the year.
Common Laborers by the day, from the midst of September to the midst of
March, with meat and drink ii. d. without.iiii. d. From the midst of
March unto the midst of September with meat and drink.iii. d. without.vi. d.

Thatchers, Latherenders, Moletakers, by the day from the midst of September
unto the midst of March with meat and drink.iiii. d. without.vi. d. From
the midst of March unto the midst of September with meat and drink.iiii.
d. without.vi. d.

Servants.
A Carter which uses carriage by the high way, with livery.xl. without
liuerie.xlvi. s.viii. d.

A Servant able to be a Bailife of Husbandry, with liuerie.xxxiii. s.iiii. d.
without liuerie.xl. s.

A Hind servant of the best sort, with liuerie.xxvi. s.viii. d. without
liuerie.xxxiii. s.iiii. d.

A Hynd servant of the second sort with liuerie.xx. s. Without liuerie.xxv. s.

A Maid servant of the best sort with livery.xvi. s. Without liuerie.xx. s.

A Maid servant of the second sort, with liuerie.xii. s. Without liuerie.xvi.
s.

A Mowier by the day.
A mowier of Corn or Grass, with meat and drink.v. d. without.viii. d.

A man reaping Corn, with meat and drink.iiii. d. without.vii. d.

A woman reaping Corn, with meat and drink.iii. d. without.v. d.

A man for Haie or harvest works, with meat and drink.iii. d. without.vi. d.

A woman for the like works, with meat and drink.ii. d. without.iiii. d.

A mowier of Grass well grown, for every acre.viii. d. Barley and Otes, for
every acre well grown.iiii. d. Beans Pease, Fetches, and such like, for every
acre.v. d. Wheat, Rye, Stoble, and Hawme for every acre.v. d.

A Reaper for reaping, bynding and laying in shockes, Wheat and Rye, for every
acre.v. s.

A Thresher of Wheat and Rye, for every quarter.vi. d. Barley and Otes, for
every quarter.iiii. d. Beans and Pease for every quarter.v. d.

For making a quick hedge well plashed, for every Pole containing.xviii.
foot.ii. d.

A dead hedge well made, for every Pole containing.xviii. foot.i. d. ob.

For making a Diche out of the ground, being.iii. foot deep.iiii. foot wide,
and one foot wide in the botome, and double set with quick set, for every
Pole.v. d.

And for a dyche of.iii. foot wide and.ii. foot and a half deep, with like
quick set, for every pole.iiii. d.

A Plowe wright for aring every Carte.iiii. d. And making every Ploughe.vii. d.

A Lathe render, for every. C. Lathe well made.ii. d. ob.

A maker of Fagottes, for every. C. Fagottes.ix. d

Sawiers for sawing of Bordes, for every. C.xvi. d. for sawing of slit work,
every. C.xviii. d.

A Myller that can take charge to cogge and round, and to lay on new
Mylstones, and all other things perteyning to a Myller.xl. s.

A Myller of the second sort.xxxiii. s.iiii. d.

A Sheparde of the best sort for the Fallowe field.xxx. s.

And it is thought good by us the Justices, that in that part of the Sire
where any less wages of late time has been usually given or taken then is
above limited and appointed, that the same less wages to be continued. Any
rate of wages herein lymitted and appointed to the contrary notwithstanding.

God save the Queen. Anno. 1566. Mense Iunij.
Imprinted at London by Richard Judge and John Cawood Printers to the Queen's
Majesty.

Cum priuilegio Regiae Maiestatis.


