By the Queen.
ALthough the Queen's most excellent Majesty might according to the good
example of good and wise Princes, levy great sommes of money at this present,
by ^ue execution of sundry wholesome laws, upon great nombre of her subjects,
for transgressyng the same, and namely for the weryng of such excessive and
inordinat apparel, as in no age has been seen the like, whereby also should
ensue such notable benefit to the common wealth, as hard it were by any other
ways to deuyse so great. yet the singular goodness of her Majesty's nature is
such, to forbear thextendyng of any sudden and unlooked for extremity, that
in these caces her Majesty has thought rather necessary by this Proclamation
to notify her hyghnes determinacion, with her privy counsel, among many
other her weyghtie affairs for this that follows, then suddenly textende the
penalty of her laws.

First her Majesty's said counsel, by her commandment, shall and will
presently take order that the statute made in the first and second years of
king Phyllyp and Queen Mary, and certain other branches of an other Statute
made the.xxiiii. year of king Henry the eight, against excessive apparel,
shall be put in execution both within her Majesty's court, and in their own
houses, with a certain favorable proceadynge, touching such as can not
presently without their ouergreat loss, change their unlawful apparel
which they presently have. Wherein because her Majesty trusts that thexample
shall enduce the rest of her subjects to reform their disorders: Her Majesty
has wylled her said privy counsel, to publyshe by her authority their
decree and order in this behalf.

And for like tolleracion toward such as live in the country out of her court,
her Majesty charge forthwith all Majors and governors of Cities and Towns
corporate, al Sheryffes and Justices of peax in shires, all noble men of
thestate of Barons and above, al governors and heddes of any societies or
companies, either Ecclesiastical or Temporal, fourthwith, or at the furthest
within the space of.xii. days after the publication hereof, to devise,
accord, and take order, either according to thexample of her Majesty's
counsel, or else after some other better manner, as the place shall require for
thexecution of the foresaid Statute and branches specified hereafter, in a
brief abstract and draught annexed to this Proclamacion within the limitte of
their charge, so as her Majesty may take some comfort of her tolleracion, and
the common wealth some relief of the great damage hereby sustained. Wherein
if her Majesty shall see her expectacion deceived, she shall thereby have just
occasion to proceed with execution of her laws, both to the benefit of her
common weal, and to the chastisement of such disordred subjects, as being
favorably warned, will not amend. Which thing her Majesty purposes
certeynely to do in more effectual sort than heretofore has been. And
because the tolleracion of these abuses shall not be drawn to any sinister
occasion of continuance of this abuse:

Her Majesty charge and commands that there be no tolleracion had, nor
excuse allowed, after the xx. day of December next, as touching all the
contents of the said Statute, in the first and second years of king Phyllyp
and Queen Mary, neither after the last of January next, as touching the
branches of the other Statute of the.xxiiii. year of king Henry the eight, noted
hereafter in thend of this Proclamacion, other then is contained in the same
Statutes and branches. Except it be for certain costly furs and rich
enbroderies bought and made by sundry gentlemen, before this Proclamacion, to
their great costs, with which her highness is pleas^^ ^o dispense.

Yeuen at her highness palace of Westminster, the xxi. day of October, the first
year of her Majesty's reign.

The brief content of certain acts of Parliament against thinordinate use of
apparel.
Anno.xxiiii. Henrici.viii.

None shall wear in his apparel any Cloth of Gold silver, or tincele.
Satyn, sylke, or cloth (...) with gold or silver, nor any Sables.
Except Earls, and al of superior degrees and Uiscountes, and Barons in their
doblets and sleuelesse coats. Woollen Cloth made out of the Realm Ueluet
Crimsin Scarlet or Blewe.
Furs. Black Ienets. Luzerns

Except Dukes their children. Marquesses their children. Earls their children
or Barons and knights of thorder.
Ueluet in Gowns Coats, or utter most garments.
Furre of Libardes Embroderye Pricking or printyng with gold silver or sylke.

Except Barons sons. Knights or me^ that may dispend cc.li. by year
Taffata Satyn Damask or sylke Chamlet in his uttermost garments. Ueluet
otherwise then in Iakectes, dobletes. etc Furre whereof the kind grows not
within the Queen's dominions. Except Gray Ienets. Bodge.

Except A man that may dispende one hundred pound by year.


Anno.i. et.ii. Philippi et Mariae.

None shall wear any sylke in Hatte, Bonet, Nyghtcap, Gyrdell, Scabbard,
Hosen, Shoes, Spurlethers.
Except The son and heir or daughter of a knight or the wife of the said
son. A man that may dispende.xx. li. by year, or is worth two hundred
pounds in goods.


These be the brief contents but of certain parts of the laws now
remaining in force, to thobseruance whereof her majesty thinks best to
induce her subjects by this short memorial, and yet nevertheless wishes
that all of inferior estates, should not neglect the rest of the same laws,
lest if they shall be found to contemn these orders here mentioned, they may
feel the pain of the rest.

There be certain other exceptions in the Statutes: as for such as have
license by the Queen's Majesty, or such as shall run in any Iustes, or shall
serve in war, or shall have apparel given the^ to be worn by her Majesty
and such like. All which are well to be consydred by them that will claim any
privilege thereby, and that at their peril.

And where there is mencio^ made of values of yearly liueloodes and goods, the
best account thereof is to be made by the taxations in this last subsedy, so as
if any will be excused by pretense of his lyueloode or substance, to offend,
it is as meet that he answer to the Prince in subsedye for that value, as
seek defense to break any good law, whereof her majesty gives to all men
admonition.

Anno. M. D. L.IX. Mense Octobris

Imprinted at London by Richard Judge and John Cawood, printers to the Queen's
Majesty.

Cum priuilegio Regiae Maiestatis.


