The several rates and taxations for wages, made and set forth by the Justices
of peace of the County of Rutland.
WHERE in the Parliament holden at Westminster, the xii. day of January last:
It was enacted by the Queen our Soueraygne Lady, the Lords spiritual and
Temporal, and the Commons in that Parliament assembled, that the Justices of
the peace of every Sheere, Rydyng, and liberty, within the limittes of their
several Commissions, or the more part of them, being there resiaunt within
the same, and the sheryffe of the County if he conveniently might. And every
Mayor, Baylyffe or other head officer within any City or town Corporate,
wherein is any Justice of peace, within the limittes of the said City or
town, should by force of that act, assemble them selves together according
to the tenor of the same act. And thereupon should lymyt, rate and appoint
the wages of Artificers, Handicraftes men, Husbandmen, Laborers, Servants,
and workmen, as by their dyscressions should be thought mete, and according
to such authority as is given them by the said Act, and the same rates and
tarations should certifye into the Queen's hyghnes Court of Chauncerye, before
a certain day lymytted in the said act: Whereupon it should be lawefull for the
Lord Chauncelour, or Lord Keeper of the great Seal of England for the time
being, upon declaration thereof to her highness, her heirs or Successors, or
to the Lords and others of her Majesty's preuye counsel, to cause
proclamations to be made into every of the said shyres and places, co^teyning
the several rates appointed by the said Justices, and other head officers:
Commanding thereby in her highness name, all persons strayghtly to observe and
keep the same, upon the danger of the punishment and forfeytures, lymitted and
appointed by the said Act and statute.

AND where also it is further enacted by thauctoritie aforesaid: That al manner
of person and persons, after such proclamation made, should observe and keep
the said rates for wages, upon pain of the forfaytures and penalties
contained in the same estatute, until by a second proclamation, according to
the purporte of the same estatute, it should be otherwise ordered and
proclaimed.

Therefore the Queen's Majesty having received into her said court of
Chauncery, among diverse other certificates from sundry of her highness Shyres,
Cities, and Towns, one certificate from this her County of Rutlande,
conteininge the rates for wages hereafter folowinge. And made and appointed by
the Justices of this her said County of Rutlande, according to the tenoure
of the same act: And mindinge to have the same rates put in execution in all
points as by the process of the same act is prescribed like as her Majesty
has and entendeth to do in all other her highness Counties and Shyres, and other
places of liberty in this her Realm.

Therefore her highness strayghtlye charge and commands all manner of person
and persons, within her said County of Rutland, to keep and observe in all
points the said rates, taxations, orders appointments for wages hereafter
following and set forth upon the pains and forfeytures appointed by the said
estatute, and upon pain of her highness dyspleasure. And further her highness
pleasure and express commandment is that al Justices of peace, Sherifes, and
other officers of her said County of Rutlande, shall see and cause the same
rates, duly and severely to be observed and kept in all points, and this
proclamacion to be used in every behalf, according to the tenor and effect of
the said act.

AND her Majesty's further pleasure and commandment is, that if any
question, scrupule, or doubt shall rise upon any of the taxacions or rates
for this County of Rutlande, here under mentioned. That then the same shall be
ordered and determined by her highness Justices of peace, that did make and
ordeyne the same taxations and rates. And that all persons shall perform and
keep the same resolutions orders and determinations, so by them to be made and
determined, touching the same.

God save the Queen.

