THE ANCIENT Order, Society, and Unity Laudable, of Prince Arthure, and his
Knightly Armory of the Round Table. With a Threefold Assertion friendly in
favor and furtherance of English Archery at this day.

Translated and Collected by R. R.

Psalm. 133. verse. 1. and verse. 4. O how happy a thing it is and joyful for to
see,
Brethren together fast to hold the Band of Amity.
Eue^ so the Lord bestows on the^ his blessings manifold
Whose hearts and minds without all guile, this knot do keep and hold.
LONDON Imprinted by John Wolf dwelling in Distaffe lane near the sign of
the Castle 1583.

To the Right worshipful M. Thomas Smith Esquier chief Customer to her
Majesty in the port of London, and to the worshipful Socyety of Archers, here
yearly celebrating the renowned memory of the magnificent Prince Arthure and
his Knightly train of the Round Table, Grace, Mercy, Peace, and Plenitude of
temporal and eternal Beatitude in Christ Jesus our only Lord and Savior,
Amen.
ISAAC the Son of Abraham and child of promise signified Joy (Right
worshipful Patron and worshipful good Citizens.) And Jacob his son
otherwise called Israel signified strong with God, also by interpretation.
Wherein as we see Isaac the father, Joy goes before, and Jacob the son
strong with God follows: This makes a most apt mystery of Gods almighty
power and will, and a most convenient order in accomplishing of the same. For as
in those ancient Ludis Saecularibus dedicated in honor of Apollo and Diana,
the Trompeter joyfully going before sounded the signification of some great
Nouel which should ensue thereupon, when he also said unto the people, Come to
the games which no mortal man has seen or shall see the like: So here
semblably portendeth this Joy in the father before going some strange or rare
event in the son strong with God following him. Genes 32.
And so in deed it was. For, Jacob as we read wrestled with the Angel of God,
and by prayer prevailing with him, bare away the blessing. And what was that?
verily that he should thenceforth Prevail both with God and man. This
wrestling then may be a famous example, and an earnest trial of all the
faithful children of God, by excellent enterprises and exercises of life even
in the beholding eye and sight of the same God of Abraham, Isaac and Jacob. The
12. Tribes of Israel proceeding from Jacobs loins were the Lords elect and
Gods peculiar people, and so mighty a Nation as none more mighty under the
sun, in whom the oracle of Gods Angel promised to Jacob, was altogether by
Gods providence performed. Exodus 18.
These had a Ruler, even Moses ordained by God himself, and one which spoke
face to face with God: He was commanded also to choose men of courage over them
as his Substitutes, namely Rulers over thousands, Rulers over handreds, and
Rulers over tennes, and it is written, that they made Israel a holy nation. The
Lord him self also commanded these to set marks on the mountain of Sina,
Ibidem.
and sanctify it. He enioined them yearly to celebrate the feast of the
Lords passover, Exodus 12.
to observe that day in their posterity for ever. And in their peace (...) in
the day of their gladness that they should blow their Trompets over their
sacrifices and over their peace offerings, Numb. 10.
that they might be a remembrance for them before their God. Likewise in their
wars to blow an alarm with the Trompet, to the end they might be remembered
before the Lord their God; Ibidem.
and be saved from their enemies. Ibidem.
And then did the same Moises as grand captain and guide go before them with
the Arc of the Testament, the foresaid 12. Tribes marching orderly after the
same: for whose defense against their enemies on a time he prayed thus unto
God. Rise up Lord and let thine enemies be scattered, and let them that hate
thee fly before thee. And when the Arc rested he prayed thus for them. Return
Oh Lord unto thee many thousands of Israel. Hercules in peace was famous among
the heathen for ordaining those games of wrestling, running and learned
exercises at Olimpus by him dedicated to the honor of Jupiter. Caesar in peace
time provident for wars was also famous among the Romans for ordaining those
sword plays to the better exercise and encouragement of young men against the
time of nedeful wars the more boldly and skilfully to encounter with their
enemies. And Anthonius surnamed Pius, in time of wars was more famous among
them for exercising al manner of mighty and savage beasts to be rid upon and
trained for the battle, as well as his own soldiers fearcely to foil his
enemies: who of him self also was said to be so coragius and valiant, that he
slew with his shafts 100. Lions of his enemies power at one bickering. But
Apollo above al others was most famous (in war times for recovery of peace) at
Delphos when being named the God of wisdom and Prince of Archers with his
1000. shaftes slaying and nailing to the ground that perilous serpent Pithon,
he delivered the people from peril thereof to live in peace afterward, and
betaking himself thereupon to his pleasant pastime accustomed of hunting Dear
and Goat, did also institute by this his cheualry, those games in Latin called
Pithij after the name of the serpent slain. All these four (I say) were
famous in their estate and condition, for maintenance of cheualry and actuity
in peace time and wars: and have their due commendations accordingly as it
stands with credit: But because these were without the knowledge of god, and
mere profane, therefore their actions, fame and memory are the more obscure
and less permanent with glory. But contrariwise immortal Fame follows the
noble ordinances and actions of the Faithful which always have been, are and
shall be within the watch of Gods heavenly Eye, within the help of his holy
hand, and within the precinct of his almighty and eternal protection. As it is
most notably verified by Ecclesiastes 10. cap. where it is said, He that is
chief among brethren is honorable, So are they that fear the Lord in his
sight. ver. 21.

Here is that indissoluble band of amity between God and goodmen which the
wiseman affirms of Sap. 7. For she is an infinite treasure unto men, which
whosoever use become pertakers of the love of god, and are accepted for the gifts
of knowledge. ver. 14.

Here is that everlasting knot of peace and love which the princely Prophet
David so highly praises between Brethren in and for God their father. viz^.
Psalm. 133. As the dew of Hermon which falls upon the mountains of Sion, for
there the Lord appointed the blessing of life for ever.

And here is that Round Table of cheifest Cheualry ordained by the Lord of
Lords, and King of Kings, even Jehovah the God of hoastes before whose
heavenly presence (of immense majesty and immortal magnificence) environed
round about with Patriarckes, Prophets, Princes, Apostles, Evangelists,
Angels, Archangels, and Souls of the righteous, incessantly shall be sounded
Amen. Revel. ^^.
Praised be God, praise ye our God al his holy ones, and ye which fear him,
small and great.

Amongst which number of mighty Kings, Conquerours and warriers in sacred
histories most famous. (Right worshipful Patron and worshipful Citizens) let
not I beseech you the noble ordenance of that princely Prophet and Conqueror
King David dye in oblivion, but live in your perpetual memories, 1. Cron. 11.
and 12.
how he for maintenance of princely chiualry and knighthood, had not only
about him 30. Mighty men of arms, and of the 12. Tribes with him retaining a
mighty number as it were like the host of God. 2. Reg. 2.
But also the first statute that ever he enacted after he was King, was
instituted, that all the Children of Israel should learn to shoot in the
Bow: which exercise by so noble and chosen a King established as he mencioneth
thereof many times in his Psalmody. So I beseech you remember how he promised
the Lord of hosts, Psalm. 119. verse. 15.
That he as at a mark would aim to walk in the ways of the Lord.

Our ancient Arthures noble ordinance order and famous memory like as your
worships do yearly with worthy solemnity celebrate as the Israelites did their
days of gladness in their peace time. So if I were worthy with Cicero to exhort
you, Lib. 2. de offic.
to prefer al duty auailable to maintain Neghborhood and fellowship of men
above that duty which consists in knowledge and science. I would herein
encourage your worthy good wills to way and consider what our most noble and
famous Kings of England in that your famous accustomed exercise of shooting,
have most renowmedly enterprised and eftsoons renewed. But touching your
famous order and fellowship of knights in shooting, Ann. 1279. 5. Edw. 1.
though in K. E. 1. his time A valiant Knight and manly Mortimer at Kenelworth
appointed a knightly game, which was called the Round Table of 100. knights
and so many Ladies (names not expressly shooting to be one) yet for exercise
of arms thither came many warlike knights of diverse knigdomes. And the most
famous and victorious king E. 3. builded at Winchester an house called the
Round Table of an exceeding compass, Ann. 1344. 18. Ed. 3.
to the exercise of like or far greater Cheualry therein: when he also was
the first king (for memory thereof most magnificent) which instituted even there
also the most noble order of S. George his knights of the honorable Garter yet
used: whose perpetual fame for his princely actions, encouragement and event
by the exercise of shooting in his wars as I have in this book inserted as
most worthy: So the most famous, Ann. 1485. 1. Henr. 7.
prudent, politic and grave Prince K. Henry the 7. was the first Phoenix in
choosing out a number of Chief Archers to give daily attendance upon his
person, whom he named his Guard. But the high and mighty renowned prince his
son K. H. 8. not only with great prowes and praise proceeded in that which his
father had begone: Ann 1509. 1. Henr. 8.
But also added greater dignity unto the same, like a most roial renowned
David, enacting a good and godly statute for the use and exercise of shooting
in every degree. Ann. 33. H. 8. cap. 9.
And furthermore for the maintenance of the same laudable exercise in this
honorable City of London by his gracious Charter confirmed unto the worshipful
Citizens of the same, This your now famous order of Knights of Prince Arthures
Round Table or Society: Like as in his life time when he saw a good Archer in
deed, he chose him and ordained such a one for a knight of the same order.
After the conquerous David ensuing the days of a most prudent and peaceable
Solomon, we read he had also a puisant power, Cantie. 3.
60. valiant men of the mightiest in Israel, and 24000. Lords of the Tribes of
Israel monthly by course serving through out the year: 1. Cron. 27.
his peace and prosperity in all respects so surpassing his princely
Progenitors, as the Queen of Saba seeing the same was astonished thereat saying:
3. Reg. 10.
Thou exceedest the fame that I hard: Blessed be the Lord thy God which loved
thee to set thee on his throne as king in the stead of the Lord thy God. ver.
8. The like whereof (for the time he lived) as it appeared in that gracious
Prince and blessed K. E. the 6. So since that time God has for these many
years much more manifested as well to us at home, as our neighbors about us,
the incomparable peace, prosperity and blessed estate of our sacred Solomon
Queen Elizabeth and this her Majesty's Israel even the allotted inheritance of
the Lord most admirable. This then being so true, as none can justly deny,
Oh what Causes have we al and every one of us highly to praise God therefore,
and pray unto him for the long continuance of the same. What causes of mutual
gratulation and reioising thereat have we in all degrees, and to study for the
augmentation and preservation of this abundant blessedness. Herein for one
minimus exminoribus, I acknowledge my self (Right worshipful Patron and
worshipful Citizens) answering with poor Pederectus, Plutarchus in Apophtheg.
not worthy to be chosen in the number of 300. which in this City for this
purpose excel others in worthiness of learning, liberal art or humane
dexterity, but yet cherely and friendly I will take my leave of your good
Worships, reioicing that this City has 300. such persons better then my self
am in any point able to satisfy your so worthy and notable expectation:
Notwithstanding thinking my self as much bounden herein as the best, and as
much beholding unto my country as the most which can do better, I have brought
forth at this present this simple show of my best ability and sincere good will
toward the premises. And as an addition unto my last years translation of the
assertion of Prince Arthure incident in purpose and convenient in order. I
dedicate this ancient order, society and unity of Prince Arthur and his
knightly armorie, unto you the famous and worshipful president and to you the
knights of English Archery in the same order with a condign commendation and
encouragement unto my native country universally thereunto. Humbly and heartily
beseching you to accept in good part this my poor pains, as partly in favor
and furtherance of the lawdable exercise of shooting in this our prosperous
peace time, under the blessed government of this our so sacred Solomon Queen.
The continuance whereof with continual prayer let us all crave at the hands of
the highest Iehoua that it would please him many mo years to multiply the
same in his manifold mercies, to the continual honor and glory of his blessed
name, our mutual consolation in this our happy Israel, and to the public
comfort and commodity of his universal Church. And finally that we with our
neighbors and they with us Famously continuing in the Concord and Unity of
Christian Faith, and true religion of the Gospel of Christ Jesus. May in fine
by his merits and mercies enjoy those blessed Ioies celestial which Eye has
not seen the like, ear has not heard the like, nor heart has not conceived
the like: which God in mercy has ordained for them that love him. To whom be
al power, dominion, praise, honor, and glory, for ever and ever, Amen.

Your worthy good worships most humble and dutiful Orator Richard Robinson
Citizen of London.

A Praise of the Bow and Commendation of this Book, written by Thomas
Churchyard Gent.
IN foreign land and native soil, where soldiars I have seen:
And chefly in the martial dais (when youth was fresh and green)
I have beheld both Bow and shot, the Bow for Archers meet:
The shot for use of powlders force, and lads of lively spreet.
And judging by experience great, in place where both were tried:
I found where shot was granted good, the Bow was not denied.
First ere we found out shot aright, the Bow great battles won:
And long the Bow great glory gate, before we knew the Gun.
As lo this Book does mention make, and shows in verses good:
For murdering shot came in of late, when Bovv in honor stood.
In elders days when manhood shone, as bright as blasing star,
And christian heart and noble mind, disdaind this turkish war.
The Bow was used as force of man, and strength of arms might draw
To glad the friend and daunt the foe, and hold the world in awe.
But when that strength and courage failed, and cunning crept in place
The shot and roaring Canon came, stout people to deface.
The Bow not fit for cowards hand, for cowards strength does fail:
When man draws arrow to the head, and then does foe assail.
with sword and dagger Lion-like, that bends both brow and tail
And grins and gapes with gnashing teeth, to make his enemy quail
The shot lies lurking in a hole, and spies advantage great:
Then bullet, match, and powders force, do work a wicked feate.
The Archer shows a manly face, in field and every where:
And when his arrows all are spent, he dies with courage there.
The shot no sooner all discharged, but legs for life must shift:
These bold and venterous nimble boys, can find no further drift.
But give the charging horsemen place, the Archers do not so:
For four and twenty headed shafts, belongs to every Bow.
And surely shoot the Archers may, at many a thing ye know.
When men in broils and battles doubt, how wars and world will go.
There is a knight a soldiar great, in court does white staff bear:
That knows what Bows have done in field, against both shield and spear.
Yea many more are yet alive, that honors Bovv indeed:
And can record what noble acts the Bow has done at need.
I saw in sundry soyles my self, much shot discharged in vain:
Yet grant we must that through the same are thousands daily slain
But enterlard the shot with Bow, and tell me then your mind:
A gallant course of wars unknown, in field then shall you find.
Five thousand Bows that shoots still, in Battle may do good:
They gall the horse, or kill the man, or draw some desperate blood.
And thick as moates in air they flee, which hinder much the sight
And happily makes when horses is hurt, the mounted man alight.
Well, speak of shot what best you may, the Bovv is brave in field:
And sure in skirmish Archers often, makes f^^ble shot to yield.
A rare devise I will set out, to strengthen Man and Bovv,
And when the plain device thereof the world shall see and know.
The Bovv shall come again in fame, and win his wonted grace:
Look out of hand for my discourse, til then come Bovv in place,
And take thine Ancient, rowme and use, as Arthures Knights thee gave,
Thou art a fearful fore in field, and yet a pastime brave.
That brings up youth, and pleasures age, a noble thing in view
An ancient art, a worthy guise, that scorns all practice new.
An exercise that all men love, an use of Arms and strength,
And to this English soil of ours, wilt bring great fame at length.
So cease I here, in praise of Bovv, think of me what you please,
A longer matter shall I show, before I cross the Seaes.
Finis quoth. T. Churchyard.

THE AVTHOR his French Preface, thus Englished.
WIlling I am to set down (for the beginning of this TREATICE) a brief
declaration and advertisement unto the READERS, for their more easy
understanding of the state and Condition of ARMORY: And to know how one ought
to Blason the said ARMORIES, Escuchons and Enseignes, and such other things of
Semblable state and manner. But first of all, we will speak and treat of him
or them, who first found out and invented the deuyse of ARMS, and for what
cause the same was done.

Eccles. 10. The Glory of the Rich, Of the Honorable, and of the Pore, is the
fear of God.

Of the Invention of ARMS: and for what cause the same were found out: And of
what Nacyon they have been established.
THE most valiant and victorious Alexander Surnamed the Great, for the
excellency of his Noble deeds in Battle, and who was King of Macedony:
Likewise the pollitike Julius Caesar, and many other Noble Kings, Princes and
Lords (desiring to know how their Vassailes and Subjects might bear them
selves valiantly, and in communication treat of all deeds of Arms, and also
to the end to ratify their prowesses and valiencies, and that every one were
truly and justly recompensed, according to his deseruinges, and that he had
well deserved the same,) vouched safe to ordain and institute, that in their
Escucheons should be painted or purtrayed Some certain Figure, or likeness of
any thing: whereby one might more easily know and discern their deeds of
Arms, and also for the better discerning and Judgment of their excellent
valiantness. This Figure, Sign, Marcke or difference was called Arms: Which
Arms have been assigned by the said Princes and Lords, not only of those
same valiant and courageous Personages, but also by those of their blood and
posterity: To the end, that in Remembering the foresaid valiancies, they
should be the more inclined, and encoraged to ensew and Imitate the Noble
exploites of their Auncetors, which have gone before them.

Of the Matter of substance of ARMS, and whereof they are made.
ALL Arms are composed of Three things only, that is to say, of Metal, of
Couloure, or of Pens, alias Furs, or of any the said things. In Arms are
only two Metals: That is to say, Gold and Silver. Five Couloures are there
also: 1. Gueules, or Red, which is of vermilio^ color, 2. Azure, which is of
Pers or Blew: 3. Sable, which is Black: 4. Sinople, which is Green: and 5.
Pourpre or Purple, which is made of Azure and Vyolet. And there are also two
Pens, or Furs, only: That is to say, Vair, and Hermines.

And it is to be noted, that one ought to blazon on this manner. saying. vizt.

Such a Lord bears of GOLD, of AZVRE, or of HERMYNES: and also the same
COVLOVRES and the PENS or Furs: And although that the Hermyne be of Silver
and of Sable, and the Vair, be of Silver, and of Azure, yet, notwithstanding
in blazoning, them we must name them by Hermynes, of Silver and of Sable, and
not (only) the Vair, of Silver and of Azur: But we say only, Such a LORD
bears of HERMYNES, or he bears of Vair, seeing that the Hermyne is of
other Metal or Color then Silver, or Sable is: And that Sable and the Vair
is of other Color then of Silver or Azur. In which case we say: Such a Lord
bears Vair and Hermynes, or Synople, or other like.

Of the signification of Gold in Arms.
1.
GOLD in Arms sygnifieth sour Virtues. vizt. Noblenes, (2) Good will, (3)
Restora tyue, and (4) Hautynes or Magnimity.
In Stones, it signifies the Carboncle.
Of Planets it has the Son.
Of the four Elaments the Fire.
Of Gomplexions: The Person Sanguyn.
Of the xii. Signs, Aries, Taurus and Sagittarius.
And Of the Days in the week: The Sunday.
Of the signification of Silver in Arms.
2.
SILVER in Arms signifies five Virtues. vizt. (1.) Humility, (2.) Beauty,
(3.) Purity, (4.) Clearenes, and (4.) Innocence.
In Complexions: The Person Flegmaticke.
Of Planets: The Moon.
Of the four Elaments. The Water.
Of the xii. Signs: Cancer, Leo, Scorpio and Pisces.
Of Precious stones: The Pearl.
And of the Days in the week: Mondaye.
Of the Signification of Gueles or Red in Arms.
3.
GVELLES or Red in Armories, signifies Valyantnes
In Complexions: The Person Cholerique.
Of Elaments: Fire.
Of the xii. Siges: Aries, Leo, and Sagittarius.
Of Precious stones: The Ruby.
In Mettalls: The Latin Copper, and
Of the Days in the Week, Saturday.
Of the signification of AZVRE.
4.
AZVRE in Virtue signifies Renown and Beauty.
In Complexions: The person Sanguyn.
Of the Planets, Venus.
Of the xii. Signs: Gemini, Libra, and Aquarius.
Of Precious stones, The Saphyr.
Of the Days in the week: Friday.
Of the four Elaments: The Air.
And of Mettalls, the Silver: whereof we make Azure cullor.
Of the signification of SABLE.
5.
SABLE, sygnifieth in ARMS, Mournyng and Sorrow:
In Complexion, the Person Melancholique.
Of the seven Planets, Mars,
Of the xii. Signs, Taurus, Virgo and Capricornus.
Of Precious stones, the Dyamant.
Of the Days in the week: Tewsdaye.
Of the Elements, the Earth.
And of Mettalles, Iron: whereof, we make Black Color.
Of the signification of SYNOPLE.
6.
SYNOPLE, or Green, in Virtue: signifies, 3. poinctes,
Honor, Love and Courtesy.
Of the Seven Planets, Mercury.
Of Precious stones: The Emeralde.
Of the Days in the week: Wensday.
Of Mettalls: the Quicksilver, whereof green couloure is
made: And it signifies also: Plants, Trees, Herbs, and all green things
that grows upon the earth.
Of the signification of PVRPLE.
7.
POVRPRE or Purple in Arms signifies moderation: and has in Virtue 3.
poinctes,
Liberality, Abundance, and Riches.
Of the Seven Planets, in has Jupiter.
Of Precious stones: The Balay.
Of the Days in the Week, Thursday.
Of Mettalls, it has Tynne.
Of Nine things which are in the Escucheon making The third Part thereof.
NINE things there are in the Escucheon to be considered of. Vizt. Cheef, Pal,
Band, or guard; Fesse, Cheuron, Gyron, Orle, Cross, and Saultoir: These thnges
ought to contain the Third Part of the Escucheon. And you shall also note,
that Six of the said Nine things, that it is to say: Band, Pal, Fess. Gyron,
Cheuron and Orle, when they are of many pieces they do blason them selves from
one only moity or quantity, as if we say: Such a Lord bears of GOLD, in one
BAND of SABLE, of v. or vi. pieces.

Also more, when the Cross and the Saultoir only makes the Third part of the
Escucheon, Yet, notwithstanding, if he have in one Escucheon many Crosses,
then ought he to blason, according to the number which is there.

Of the nombre where until a Man may number all Things which are in Armories:
And when one ought to mencyon any thing without Number, or Strawyng.
TORTEAVX, or Pellets: Besans, and Cotices, Do number themselves until, VIII.

Loze^ges or Dyamont sqwares, and Checquers, number themselves ontill, VI.

Beasts, Birds, Flowers and Fishes, and generally all other things which are
in ARMS: Number themselves until, VI.

And if they pass the said Nombers: we blazon them with out nombring or
Strewyng, As in the Ariues of Laual where one mentions D'or, to xvi. AEgles
d' Azure: And in those of Peulle, where one mentions D'or enterlased with
AEgles, d'Azure without nombring. So, as one may find them by the Figures
tricked, and described in the blazon of Arms. Who so will know more, he
shall there find written more largely, and also in the blazon of Colors.

Thus much concerning knowledge of Arms blazoned: Whereof (the French Author
uncertain by name) on this manner introduces.

Now, To the Armorie of Prince ARTHVRE and the KNIGHTS of his Round Table
flourishing by the fame of English Archery, at this day. A^ 1583.

ELIZABETH (Gods Fulness) He grant our QVEENE to Reign With long and
Perfect Blessedness, His glory to Mentaine.
Prince Arthures Arms for that Society of Archers in London.

M. Thomas Smlth Cheef Customar for her Majesty in the Port of London.



Among praiseworthy Monuments which English KINGS have made
For maintenance of Manly acts, whose Fame shall never fade,
King HENRY the 8* has condign praise and Princely memory,
(For choosing Knights of ARTHVRES train to mentaine Archery):
Anno. 1543. S. W. Bowyer Mayor.
Whose Majesty at Mile end with his NOBLES used this game,
That Citizens and Subjects all might exercise the same.
But specially for CITIZENS he made this Order theare,
Anno. 1544. S. Martin Bows. Mayor.
One Cheeftayne chose and certain Knights to sport them once a year.
His Daughter dear. ELIZABETH our Sovereign QVEENE likewise,
Confirms this Order still, and does mentaine this exercise
Each Subject pray and praise GOD for her long and prosperous Reign;
Job. 29.
Our Bows in our hands stronger then with Honor shall remain.
S. Lancelot du Lac
1. H. O.


IN Silver Shield, Three Bands of Blew
He bare, full valyant he,
And ventrous was, one of the Cheifest
Approved in Cheualry:
Of Knights which did the Table Round
adorn with condign praise:
His factes and fame in books compilde
Are found in these our days.
S. Boort de Gauues
2. H. K.


IN Silver Sheelde with Hermynes Black
He bare Three Bands of Red:
Valyant and hardy was this Knight,
His Chronicles have spread:
Who more of him will know, let them
Read of the Table Round:
Eke Lancelot his book and those
Which vertewes feign forth sound.
S. Gowainede Orcany
3. E. D.


IN Purple Shield, an Aegle spled
All Gold, Sir Gawayn gave
One of the Knights most conquerous
He merits tame to have
Amongst them which the Table Round
Enobled with Renown
By deeds of Arms in Contreyes cause,
To bring her foes a down.
Messyr Tristran de Lyonis
4. G. T.


IN Sheeld all Green one Lion of Gold
And armee Gules he bare
That no less worthy is this Knight
Of fame, then others are,
For he so virtuously behaved
Himself in all assayes,
And valyant in his conquests, that
A Book his fame displayes.
Sir Lyonnet de Gauues
5. W. C.


IN Silver Sheelde nine Stars Sable
Three bands of Red bare he:
A warlike wight, and worthy Knight
As any others might be:
And who considers well his Arms
Including vertewes rare,
May him with the most valyantst Knights
condignely hear compare.
Helyas le Blanc
6. H.


IN Silver Sheeld 3. Bars of Red
One Lambeau overthwart
Of Sable, with three feet, he bare,
As one which played his part,
About the Table Round Renowned,
And ever ready pressed
For noblenes and honors state
To do his very best.
Hector des Mares.
7. W. O.


IN Silver Sheelde Three Bars all Red
A mids the same The Son
All Azure, bare this noble Knight,
Which high Renown has won
By valyancy and venterous deeds
Exploited far and near:
Who does deserve dew memory
As fame may witness bear.
Blyomberyes de Gauues.
8.
IN Silver Shield with half Moons set,
Three Bars all red he bare.
About the Table Round he was,
A conqueror most rare:
Who for his warlike prowess and
His Martial mighty skill,
Was much esteemed, and of his Prince
beloved with great goodwill.
Messire Gaherryet.
9.
IN Purple Sheelde, splead Aegle Gold
With feet depainted Red,
A Bar all Red overthwart, he bare
Whose valiant acts compted
Amongst those of the Table Round,
As Lancelot and the rest
May seem to calenge condign praise,
and fame even with the best.
Keux le seneschall.
10.
IN Azure Sheelde Two silver Wings,
(By office Seneschall
Or Steward) bare this Noble Knight
To whom might well be fall.
With dew Renown enregistred
For prowess rare to be
Amongst them of the Table Round,
Renowned by valiency.
Messire Iuaine.
11.
IN Azure shield, A Lion Gold
Arm with Red, this Knight
Did bear: who sought to amplify
By all dew means and might
The Table round: he valiant was,
And hardy found in proof:
Therefore he merits memory
Unto his dew behoof.
Bruor le Noir.
12. W. B.


IN Silver Sheelde, a Lion Rampant,
Y checquered Black and Red
(Of warlike nature conquerous)
He bare, eke Reputed
Amongst them of the Table Round,
Coragious, sierce and bold:
He was, with prowess ever pressed,
Dame Honor to uphold.
S. Segurades.
13. T. T.


IN Golden Sheelde, this gallant Knight
A Rock all Sable bare
One of the Table Round, he was
Of estimacyon rare,
Firm as Rock amiddes the Seayes
Eke steadfast he of mind
was, all adversities to dure
from time to time enclyned.
S. Patris le Hardy.
14. I. A.


IN Silver Sheelde a Freture Red
of pieces six bare he,
A true and perfect Practizer,
Of Noble Cheualrie,
About the Table Round eke one
full well which understood.
Each trick and travel longing to
Cheualrie and Knighthood.
S. Saphar le Mefcogneu.
15. I. E.


IN Sheelde one half part Gold and Green
Ychecquerd, the other Vair,
Of great estate this Knight did bear,
With hauty courage raire.
And though as tuching Parentage
Unknown, so named he was:
Yet by his deeds he was discernd
Most valiant in each case.
S. Sagremor le Desree.
16. B. S.


IN Sheelde (whereof Sable 3. parts)
Two Golden stars fixed there:
The fourth part Silver with a star
of Sable) did he bear.
Both by his name and arms therefore
It does appear full well,
That he one of the Table Round,
In prowess did excel.
Le Roy Ban de Benock
17. I. W.


IN Silver Shield Three Bands of Blew
Did bear this Kingly Knight
And for King Arthures dew Renown
expressed his force and might
Dulce and debonaire he was
To serve at all assay
In every Noble feate of arms
And bear the bell away.
Le Roy de Claris.
18. T. H.


IN Sheelde of Gold one Cross Potence
All Red this Noble King,
And Kingly Knight of Table Round
Did bear, most flourishing.
In factes and fame both far and near
For the magnificence
Of Princely prowess, prick and praise
To get by valyence.
Le Morhoult de Ireland
19. T. M.


IN Silver Sheelde One fesse of pieces
Five through out the same
He bare a Lion Rampant Red,
and arm green, whose name
Might seem to signify in truth
Each mighty enterprise
A pray most fit for his Courage,
As is the Irish guise.
Danayn le Roux,
20. I. L.


IN Shield all Red a Porpentyne
Of Gold arm Azure,
This Knight bare, (of the Table Round)
One bold and hardy sure.
Of quality he has his name
Of courage venterous,
Of Policy and power also,
To be most conquerous.
S. Brallain, surnamed, as ye would say: Le Cheuallier aux deux Espees.
21. T. C.


In Sheelde all Silver Sable Bore
With three Blew Stars bare he
Whole faith and factes with glistering fame
Shine in the highest degree,
As one whose virtues amplesied
His Princes high Renown
Amongst those cheef in Cheualry
About the Table Round.
Galehault,
22. R. B.


IN Silver Sheelde with Azure Stars,
A Lion Red Rampant
Arm green this Knight did bear,
as and of force puissant
Which did the Table Round adorn,
And amplify also
With hautynes and valyancy,
As others many mo.
Lamorat de Listenoys
23. W. H.


IN Purple shield, with Crossets Gold,
A Leoperd Silver he
Arm Red, did bear as one
Descended of degree
Both Noble bold and valiant
In feats of arms yfound
As other famous Knights eke which
were of the Table Round.
Messire Gullat.
24. W. D.


IN Silver Sheelde, One Cross all Red
full Christian like he bare
Of heart and courage conquerous,
A knight he was even rare
Thus admirable was he held,
Well we may eke suppose
He wanne his arms, as Christ's friend
Ageanst unchristened foes.
S. Gueherries
25. C. B.


IN Purple Sheelde bordered about,
With little rondles Red
Spled Aegle Gold with Silver feet
He bare emblazoned:
Of valyant courage prompt he was
For to atcomplish tho,
All Noble feats of arms, and gain
Dew fame that longd thereto.
Aggrauain le Orguelleux
26. W. M.


IN Purple Sheelde, spled Aegle Gold
With Members Red bare he
Overthwart the breast a Bar of Green,
As one that seemed to be
Of nature like unto his name
Both fearce and promptly pressed
With Martial might still to surmount,
For fame and do his best.
Dodynel le savage
27. W. D.


IN Silver Sheelde Aegle Azure
He bare with Golden feet
Full Noble. mighty, valiant,
And therefore one most meet
For constancy and courage great
Enregistred to be
Amongst them of the Table Round,
Renowned by valyancy.
Osement Coeur hardy
28. I. E.


A Sheelde yquartered Silver, and Red
He bare in deeds the same,
Of valiant and coragius heart
as he was calde by name,
Whose virtues meet to be aduaunst
Dame Honor has assigned,
After his death by fame to live,
And to be borne in mind.
Mador de la Port
29. N. G.


IN Sable Sheelde Seven Apples so
of Silver colored Red
This Knight did bear, whose nature well
to his Arms answered.
Dulce and debonaire, in virtue
One which was fruitful found:
And therefore meet amongst the rest
To adorn the Table Round.
Dynadem d'Estrangore
30. T. C.


IN Silver shield, a Lion Black
With Green all arme^ he
Did bear one of the Table Round
Which eke in his Degree
Endeavored with his Comperes
The state thereof t'aduaunce
Not letting for any labor Toylle,
nor any one mi^chance.
Eglantine Rochemont
31. T. B.


IN Silver Sheelde the Ragged Staff
All Red did bear this Knight,
One of the Table Round he was,
which showed his force and might
Strong and steadfast put in trust,
By try all firm and sure.
A staff of stay in all as^ay.
With honor to endure.
Guallogrenant de windesor.
32. R. B.


IN Sheelde all Red Two Gemmels Gold
And Sable this Knight bare
Coragius eke and conquerous
He was reputed rare:
Not shrinking to show forth his force
And puysance allway pressed
Aduenterusly and valyantly,
For fame to do his best.
Sir Brandelys
33. T. C.


IN a Red Sheeld 3. Swords Silver
Handles and pommells Azure
Thintitulation of his arms
Hear signify for sure
That he was active, warlike and
Could weelde his weapons well
To advance Dame honors dew renown
Her froward foes and qwell.
Sir Leonard le hardy
34. W. B.


IN Silver Shield Three Lozenges
Of Silver and Sable
He bare and was a worthy Knight
about the Round Table,
Whom though both God and Nature made
Deformd of Personage:
Yet by his doughty deeds he was
Most famous in that age.
Bruyant des Isles.
35. T. B.


IN Sable Sheelde a Ronning Dog
Of Silver armee Red
This Knight did bear, of noble race
For he was descended:
Loving all honor and prowess,
Dispaching eke with speed
By course and recourse to and fro,
What so he had decreed.
Henry le Ioyeux
36. H. S.


IN Silver Shield Three Crosses fixed
Of Sable all bear he,
And not without cause had he name
As joyful one to be:
For pleasantly and courteously
He could himself demene:
And in his Matters quite himself
Full manly this is plain.
Meliadus del Espinoy
37. I. B.


IN Golden Sheelde Three Crosses Red
Called Florones did he bear,
And was Surnamed del Espinoy
By difference to appear
From King Melyadus in race:
His Arms full Noble tho,
And of great approbation were
In Christian faith also.
Meliadus le Noir oeil
38. I. R.


IN Silver Sheeld 3. Cheurons all
Of Sable, bare this Knight.
Who in each warlike enterprise
Did show his force and might:
Though he Meliadus so was
Surnamed with the black eye,
His vertewes clear and sinceare yet
Were famous far and nigh.
Surados des sept Fountains
39. I. W.


IN Sheelde half Gold, half Azure eke
With Silver drops beset
This Knight did bear, as one which was
in estimation great:
Surnamed Knight of Fountains seven,
By reason in each place
Betweeue those Fountains several
He ran his Martial race.
Lucan le Bouteiller
40. I. M.


IN Golden Sheelde A Wolf passant
Red, armee eke Sable,
This Knight the Butler called did bear,
One of the Round Table:
Ferce and greedy of his pray
whom that he did pur^ew,
And prompt again with prowess wheare
And whom he would reskew.
Persides le Gent
41. VV. C.


IN Silver Sheelde, with Gonstones set
Of Azure, bare this Knight,
Though he Surnamed Ientle was
Yet, theare no martial might
Or warlike force did want in him,
To abandon furious foo,
With shot of gonne to shake or rend
Their force and overthrow.
Tuscane le Roman
42. T. P.


IN Golden Sheelde a Hand Sable
Holding a Sword All Red
This valyant Roman Knight did bear,
Is Rightly reputed.
Of heart and courage Conquerus,
Ready for Friend and foes
Both to defend, and to destroy,
His shaking sword he shows.
Godfry le Lacois
43. I. P.


IN Sheelde All Red a Tower of Gold
Masonned with Sable.
This Knight did bear and worthily well
Was of the Round Table:
I Fortress of fidelity,
And tower of trust was he,
To save his Friends, withstand his foes,
And purchase dignity.
Thor le Filz de Arez
44. I. VV.


A Golden shield, most seemly set
With Sable trosses short
This knight did bear, at which his arms
might trewly well import,
That he was valyantly inclyned
To seats of arms, no less
Studing honor to augment,
His ^ame and to increase.
Perceual de Galls
45. VV. A.


A Purple Sheelde with Crossets Gold
Beset this Knight did bear,
As he in void allotted place
Of the Round Table theare,
Which sat him down in seat ordained
As for A Bachellour:
Of whom a Book compild there is
With fame and dew Honor.
Sadoc de Vencon
46. I. N.


A Shield, wherein a Sea was set
Of Silver and Sable
This Knight did bear, which signified
A mystery admirable.
Some great and profounde prowess sure
Theare seemed in him to be,
With ebbes and floodes of prosperus state
And of adversity.
Gringalois le Fort
47. W. R.


IN Sable Sheelde, an Unicorn
All Silver, bare this Knight
Beloved for his vertewes ra^e,
And for his Martial might.
Strong, valyant, and victorius
Agenst his noisome foo
Comforting and rescewyng Friends,
Which were distressed also.
Malaquin le Galoys
48. W. T.


IN Silver Sheelde, A Silver Cup
ycouered this Knight bare
Which with those of the Table Round
For virtue might compare.
Ne could they want his Company,
Nor Prince his prowess miss,
In all those conquests, deeds of arms,
And other seats of his.
Talemor le Volant
49. I. R.


IN a Green Shield, A Silver Dove
Members Red this Knight
Did bear, so swift in valyant race
As Dove was in her flight,
Embracing honor with both wings
Deuoide of Enuyes gall,
Aduauncing vertewe, love and fame
Surmounting therewithal.
Arain du Pin
50. H. B.


A Green Sheelde with 3 Pyneaples
All Gold this Knight did bear
Why he so called was, (The cause
Not small) may well appear.
First for his lofty of spring, next
For honor, vertewes hyre,
Thirdly for fame most flourishing,
Whereto he did aspyer.
Messire Palamides
51. A. VV.


A Sheelde of Silver and Sable
Ychequered hare this Knight,
Is what he was, and whence he came
By name that so he hight:
It seems he was by valyancy
An Imitator true,
Of that Noble Palamydes
From Troy, which did issew.
Sir Hebis
52. VV. B.


IN Sheelde, two parts Sable with
Two Bars thereon Argent
The third part Azure with demi pale
Yeallow and Blew content.
About the Table Round although
One of the last he be,
Yet for his service just and true
Not least was his degree.
S. Lamwell of Cardyff
53. E. P.


A Sheelde Red, where (a Lady fair
In Mantell clothed Green,
On Silver palfrey mounted is,
As though she were some Queen)
This Knight did bear: as one which did
By service dew attend,
Or else in some distressed case
His Lady dear desend.
S. Phetipace of VVinchelsey
54. T. C.


A Sheelde sour partyed Gold and Blew
A pale Argent downeright,
With 3. Red Crosses overthwart.
A Bar of Sable pight
This Knight did bear: betokning well
Noblenes and Renown:
Which lives aloft by lasting fame,
Though Death and Dolor frown.
S. Plain de force
55. P. D.


IN Golden Sheelde a Fesse all Red
With an arm armee Argent
Holding a Silver Column broke
He bare, whereby is meant
To his Surname, as full of force
His nature right did gree,
Wrestling with one which was most strong,
By strength got victory.
S. Bodovier of VVinchelsey
56.
A Sheeld half Argent with a Fesse,
A Tryangle, therein eke Red.
With three mullets Azure, the other half Gules
A Silver Arm holding a Sword armed,
The handle of Gold, this Knight did bear:
As one which was of high estate,
Idding thereto such valyant acts,
Which dubbed him Knight twice fortunate.
S. Degraine sans Mal
57. I. P.


A Sheeld, the first part Red, an Arm
Silver armed, with Ring of Gold,
The second part vert and Azure, the third
Gold and Azure, the 4 part Gules does hold.
He bare these, as by valyant force,
Reaping Reward for verte was rare,
Detesting all vice (thus reuyded fame)
May him with most worthiest knights compare.
S. Pryamus
58. T. H.


IN Sable Sheeld Three Gryffons Gold
Passant Carbonckled with eke Gold
This comely Knight condignely bare
For his demerites manyfold,
As whether he were S. Pryam of Troy
Or else from whence he have his name,
Great was his force, his foes to anoy,
Defending his Friends from harm and blame.
Here end the Knights names and their Commendations.
Retain the Good, Refrain the ill.
Repute not amiss of my Goodwill.
quod. Richard. R.

A Brief Repetition of the Table Round.
IN so much as we have spoken of the Noble Knights of the Round Table, which
were in the time of the most Magnificient King Arthure of Great Brittayne, and
that we have in brief and roundly explained the devise of every their
Escucheon and plain Armories: It is good as me seems and of great congruity
to declare also some what, of thestate and institution of that Round Table.
Because peradventure many which have seen those Armories, may yet be ignorant
what thing yt Round Table was. I say therefore yt the Round Table was one
ordenance and institution which King Arthure of great Britayne made and
ordained, (as I have laid): And it was on this manner made to defend the Island
of Malogres within the said Kingdom of Great Britain. By this ordenance
ought and were bound to come and assist him once in the year at ye feast of
Whytsontyde all trauayling Knights, and theare to enranck themselves at the
said table, and were set down in great honor and reverence, feasting in the
presence and Company of the said King Arthure. And moreover, every Knight of
this order was bound to rehearse and recon up all his feats of arms, valyant
acts and conquestes which they had exployted, by the labor and trauaill of
their Bodies for the honor of Nobility, and estate of Knighthood and as well
for the honor of their Ladies as for other purposes tending unto al honor and
glory: In such sort that they all, and every of the^ so aspired to that estate,
that they mightily amplified the said Round Table, whereby the number of them
was very great. Like as one may see by their Armories and Escucheons, which
have been assembled together, and so blazoned: to the end that they which
saw and beheld them might take good Example thereat, and better understand
the condition of the Art of War: And so know what the estate of Nobility
and Knighthood were for the augme^tation of vertewe and attainement of Glory
and praise. Whereby many young Princes and Lords might come to more great
perfection in following the feats and deeds of them which were also nombred
and named The Knights of the Round Table, or trauelings Knights. And it was no
marvel made amongst them if such personages (as exploited every excellent
deed of arms and matters of prowess) were be loved: Because Honor and Glory
are the Rewards of Virtue, as says the Philosopher. And for so muchas (every
one seeing him self to be beloved and reverenced) that same vertewe which in
him is loved or embraced of others, increases and is augmented more and more I
speak thus much for the Imitation of those which are vertewous. and for the
nature of the Imitation of virtue it self. Ye have here seen in open
appeara^ce therefore thescutcheons, devises and Armories of the noble and
valiant Knights of the Round Table, which you may behold and consider of to
the same effect and end.

Psalm. 145. Verse. 11. and 12. Gods Saints do bless him, and they do His
Kingdoms Glory show,
And blase his power to cause the Sons of men the same to know.
Psalm. 149. Verse.. 2. Let Israel rejoice in him, that made him of no thing,
And let the Seed of Syon eke be Joyful in their King.
THE FIRST ASSERTION and is Sacred Historical.
GOD the Author of Peace and Love did so therein delight,
That of one Man he Members twain did make and them unity:
To whom when Children twain he gave, Genes. 2. and 3
the more to multiply
This Peace and Love, Satan possessed one of them by and by.
Cayn it was who did malign His Brother Habell so,
That he ne ceast by cruel Death this bond to break in to:
Wherefore when he had issew left, the Lord of love decreede,
That Cayns hatred should be rewed for that his filthy deed. Chap. 4.

As learned Lyra writes thereon how Lamech old and blind: ^G. Alleij. (...).

With Bow and shafts did walk the woods, some wished pray to find.
His Boy that lead him through the same (as seemed him) espyde
Some beast, which nathles Cayn was, where he himself did hyde,
So that (says Lyra, Genes 5
) Lamech slew a man there in his wound:
Lo hear was harmles Abels death with his revenged found.
If Lyra thus we may believe, Lo here the Bow and shaft,
Ordained Gods weapon of revenge on Murders cruel craft
Lo here the Bow and arrowe, was first chosen instrument,
As guerdon dew for wicked deed by Gods most just judgment.
A Figure of Gods Peace and Love the rain bow yet was set, Chap. 9.

As covenant twixt him and the earth that he no more would let
The furious floods consume the Land, which fruitful afterward
He made for human use to serve his chosen and sauegard.
Ismael in the wilderness an infant crying lay, Genes. 23.

Gods Angel heard the same, and did unto his Mother say,
Hagar see thou be of good cheer, thy Child up forthwith take,
And cherish it for God will sure a People great him make.
So this Child grew, and it is said an Archer he became
And afterward in the wilderness did dwell, called Paran.
Isaac waring old did bid Esaw his eldest Son, (...). 27.

His Bow and quyuer for to take into the feeldes and run,
To kill some venson, which he did, but yet in the mean while,
Jacob the younger brother could full kindly him beguyle:
Whereby we see whom God does love, unlikely though they seem,
Are soonest blessed, when worldlings of their will are frustrate cleene.
Joseph the son of Jacob so found favor with his God, Genes. 49.

That He was reconed as a branch which should increase abroad:
Of him it is said, His Bow bode fast, his arms eke strengthened were,
Even by the hands of Jacobs God as did full well appear.
Ruben, Gad, and half Manasse Tribes three elected, in field
With manly might did shoot in Bow, and carry sword and sheeld: Leuit. 1.

What time with Hagarites Iethur, Nephis, and Noab they
Fought valiantly, 1, Paral. 5.
the Lord did them assist in all assay.
Iosuah discomfiting five Kings, Iosuah. 10.
(though Tribes that did him aid,
As there to handle Bows and shafts are not expressly said)
Yet there a Book is mentioned, Verse 13.
even Iashar so by name. Or Liber

Not now in use (which some affirm) showed shootings ancient fame.
And sure the Lord Iehoua himself does mean thereby his power, Deu. ^ 32.

When threatening wise the wicked ones he brings thus in terror,
His Arowes on them he will send (he means in angry mood:) Verse. 33.

And eke His Bow that he will bend, Verse. 42.
And dye his shafts in blood:
These shafts of his so sharp no stone can cause them to rebound,
But through the threefold armed coat they pearce with mortal wound.
Balaam in his prophecy of Isreal's happy state, Nume 24.

Says, that his force the Unicorn in strength should coequate. Verse. 42.

The Nations, he should eat also, and broose his enemies bones:
Yea, He should shoot his Arowes through those great and mighty ones.
Debora she even Baracks wife who judged Israel, Judges. 5, ^^.

In that her song for victory, which God gave her, does tell,
How God delivered Iabin King of Canaan to her hand,
Whose Archers noise was so appeast each were throughont her Land.
That where none erst could water draw, now all deuoid of fear,
Might have enough since those their foes so happily vanquished were.
Whereby we note, although the wicked such defenses have,
Yet for because in use of them Gods goodness they deprave,
And arrogate unto themselves, all glory, hope, and praise,
Therefore their good things turn to evil sometime, if not always.
Hanna the wife of Elcana when she did pray so ioyed, 1. Samuel 2.

The Bow with mighty men was broke to her rebuke employed:
And waykeilngs girded forth them selves with strength (she said) like me^
As who say God makes simple souls do great things now and then.
Ionathas, the Son of Saul king David's mortal foe,
Was David's faithful Friend, when he this watchword gave him to,
That he should three days hyde him by the stone Ezel by name, 1. Samuel 10.
Cap.

Duriug the time of Saul his wrath and furious raging flame.
Then Ionathas said he would shoot three Arrows at that stone,
As at a marck, and after he would make a Boy to rome,
And seek the shaftes, when if I say unto the Boy once, (See,)
The arrows are on this side thee, bring them and come, says he,
The matter then goes well for thee, no hurt as lives the Lord:
But if I say unto the Boy, (Behold:) by this watchworde,
The arrows are beyond thee, then, make haste and get thee away,
For God has so dismissed thee, This Ionathas could say.
Saul and Ionathas his Son, 1 Samuel. 31. Cap.
with his two Brethren mo,
When the Philistyans fought with them, felt God his judgments so
By the Archers and Bowemen of the vncircumcysed theare,
Saul wounded was, but his three Sons outright dispatched were.
David then before he was of Judah anointed King.
Over Saul and Ionathas moarned, thus lamenting,
The Bow says he of Ionathas turned never back in vain,
Neither Saules Sword once empty went from the blood of the slain:
See theare the mind of Gods elect, in doing good for ill,
See pity showed for cruelty, for mallys eke goodwill.
David enduring yet long wars even with that house of Saul, 2 Samuel. 1. Cap.

By Gods goodwill exalted was, when his foes had the fall,
And prospered so that he was King over all Israel:
He conquered Jerusalem and Iebusytes so fell,
Who did deny him to come theare, when yet victoriously,
He wan the Castle of Syon, which he called his City,
When he made Ioab general, 1. Croun. 11.
which Iebusites first smote,
With whom were mighty Men of arms even many a one to note:
When one or other of twelve trybes came to him day by day, 1. Croun. 21.

Until he had a full great host, Like the host of God to say:
Who does consider well all this most amply may behold,
Gods favor toward David thief and mercies manyfold.
So as He again A man was found even after Gods own heart, Psalm. 89 D
Luthers Words.

Yea a King to whom both faith and promise God did sure imparte:
Whose Psalmody his sacred zeal to God wards did declare,
Whose Regiment did show for his a Princely prudent care,
As when he first enacted that each Child within his Land, 2. Sam.

Should be instructed for to shoot, their Enemies to withstand. 1. Chap. verse
18.

In peace time provident for wars (he said): He was at peace, Psalm. 119.

With them that hated peaces: In wars, he did at no time cease,
To serve his God, that he would grant assured state and stay,
As at a mark that he might aim to walk each godly way. Idem. ve. 15.

For why, he had experience good, whom God does so elect,
Ought not to fear what ever fall, his duty to neglect:
But trusts, Psa. 7. ver 14.
God has mortal Darts, yea arrows keen and sharp,
For them that him do persecute, whiles they do mischief warp:
And though the wicked bend their Bows, Psalm. 11. ve. 2.
and make their Arrows pressed
To shoot in secret, and to hurt the sound, and harmles breast:
Yet God his fiery Thunderboultes can cast them hear and theare, Psalm. 18.
verse. 13.

And with his fiery lightning shafts can foil his foes with fear:
And as a mark he will them set, in a most open place, Psalm. 21 verse. 12.

And charge his bow-strings readily against his Enemies face.
Gods Arrows sharp and keen which are, Psalm. 45.
their hearts so sore shall sting,
That Folk shall and kneel to him, Verse. 6.
as to the mightiest King:
In Syon brake he shaft and bow, Psalm. 76.
the sword, the spear and shield,
And brake the Ray, Verse. 3.
to overthrow the Battle in the field:
So that his Children shall not fear, Psalm. 91. verse. 5.
nor yet become afflight,
For all the shafts that fly by day, nor terror in the night.
Yet for an ordenary mean King David does advance,
The Bow and shaft, as man's defense, and for his foes noyance:
Extolling eke the exercise by that same troop or train,
Of Shooters, which in peace or wars Gods glory do maintain.
As when (...) Children come to age (says he) and actyuenes,
Oh well is he whose quyuer with such shafts the Lord does bless: Psalm. 127.
verse. 4. and 5.

Whether Prince so peopled be, or Parent Children such,
And so many be blessed with all, they need not fear the gruch,
Or grievous force of Enemy, Rom 8.
If God be on their side:
In which respect the prayer of David may be applyde,
When for Gods safe deliverance from each such Enemy, Psalm. 147.

(Thine Arrows shoot and them consume) unto the Lord prayth he. Verse. 6.

Then sees he, God taking his part, it naught his foes shall boot,
For, Psalm 58. verse. 7.
They no hurt at all shall do, when they their shafts shall shoot:
So David and his Princes all after his wars, offered,
Toward the building of Gods house* and thanks to him rendered,
And when he had reigned.xl. years just over Israel, 1. Croun. 29.

In his own City he slept and lay, which Zyon was to tell.
Whose Son that wise King Solomon succeeded in his throane, 1. Reg. 2.

A Prince of peace and glory such, as like was never a one:
Him all the foresaid Potentates, in each thing meet obaide.
His charets.xiiij C. tho, and Horsemen, it is said,
Twelve M. were which he nothing so much had care upon, 2. Croun. 1. 2. 3. 4.
5.

As for to build the Temple, and to pray in Gibeon,
To keep the Arck yield peace offerings, and still advance Gods word,
With instruments of music sweet lauding the living Lord:
The race of whose Reign.xl. years then being consummate, 2. Croun.

In the City of David eke he slept intumulate.
Asa King of Judah did destroy all Idolles theare,
Commanding his, the living God truly to serve and fear:
Ere he with the Ethiopian King and his huge host would feight, 2. Croun. 14

He prayde unto Iehoue, and he did hear his prayer straight:
Of the trybe of Beniamyn, which bare both Bow and shield,
A valiant hoaste he had which got the victory in that field.
Iehosophat of Judah King, 3. Cro 17.
his fathers rowme possessed,
Who prospered trusting in his God, and was with riches blessed,
He took of Strangers tribute, and had of Beniamyns trybe
200000 warlike wights with Bow and sheeld to bide.
Ahab, King of Israel, in following the advice,
Of those 400 Prophets did but fondly enterprise, ^. Crou. 18.

At Ramoth theare in Gilead geanst the King of Aram,
To feight regarding not Michah, even then a certain Man
Drew a Bow and smote Ahab between his joints and eke
The Brigandyne, that so he dyed to late for help to seek.
Vzzia chosen to be King of Judah did obey
The Lord Iehoue, ^. Cro. 26.
and on a time did give a bold assay,
To war against the Phylistens, with bows and arrows fell,
And God in each his enterprise did prosper him full well.
Iosyas King of Judah, was a Prince of godly mind,
The temple he restored, and his prayer heard did find,
When he a covenant made with God. ^. Cro. 35
But when vniusty he
Genst the AEgiptian King would feight neglecting Jeremy,
And that same King which did dehorte him from that wilful feight
The Archers shot and wounded him unto the death there straight.
Iehu anointed of the Lord, 2 King. 9.
took bow and arrows keen,
And strongly smote Iehoram tho, his armed arms between
The arrowe pearst even through his heart, God would it so to be,
The whordomes of their Iesabell, and wich-crafts plagued he.
Elysha said unto Ioas, 4. King 13.
then king of Israel
Open a window Eastward and, shoot as I shall thee tell:
The Arrow of health that it may be, The Arow of the Lords health,
Against all Syria to subvert them and their common wealth.
Job, Job. 16.
when the Lord afflicted him, by Metaphor did moan
The Lord has set me as a mark (says he) for him alone,
And that his Arches hemd him in, and compassed him round,
They spared me no whit (says he) but sore my loins did wound:
When eke Gods judgments in his wrath upon the ungodly,
He proves does light to their deserts, he says, though they do fly
The Iron weapons warlike yet, Job. 20.
with the Steel bow they shall
Be shot, and on them shaftes most sharp by lots must light and fall:
But nombring up Gods benefits on him then multiplide. Job 29.

His bow, with honor stronger did in his own hand abide.
Esaias, Esaias. 5.
the Prophet of the Lord, when he did prophecy
Of Ierusalems Kuine, and of her captivity,
Pronounced unto her Gods wrath, in these words verament,
That all Gods arrows sharp should be, and all his bows eke bent.
Fortelling how Jerusalem for sin, Chap. 7.
beseged should be
With arrows and with bows shall one agenst her come, says he.
Ere that the Medes and Persians should Babylon destroy: Chap. 13.

With Bows (says he) they shall assail thy Children to anoy.
Of Idumeas ruyn and, of all Arabyas too:
He verifiyng said, Chap. 22.
they fled from drawn sword and bent Bow,
And that the residew which were even their own Archers strong,
Of Kedars Sons a few or none should them befound among.
The same Esaias reports eke, when Hezekiah King
Of Judah heard the blasphemy of Rabsechas railing. Chap. 37.

Sent from Senacherib, he asked counsel of Esaias.
Who promisd him the victory, and that without delay.
But as for the Assyrian king, he never enter shall
This City, nor once shoot a shaft (says he) to worck her thrall.
This Prophet tellls when as the Lord would choose his people so, Chap. 41.

Subdewing kings he gave them as The dust his sword unto.
And scatered them unto his Bow as stuble, signifiying.
No power can escape his mighty hand, him to resist applying.
He prophecyeth in the person of (Christ) the faithful to assure,
That God his secret favor, and his fervent love should dure,
Toward them. Under the shadow of his hand, he has hyd me,
And in his quyuer a chosen shaft he me has hydd, Chap 49.
says he,
Lastly, I read that Esaias says, God will his Church enlarge,
By the Apostles, Chap. 66.
Ministers, and his Disciples charge:
In Africa, Cilicia, in Parthia, and Italy.
To them (he says) that draw the Bow, not knowing his glory,
Nor have not heard his fame as yet, ne yet his glory seen,
To those same Gentiles preach he will, that they may him esteem,
Jeremy, Chap. 50.
in prophesying of Babylon that whore,
Her wickedness and Idolles (says) God will them plague full sore,
And that of mighty Nations, he, a multitude will bring,
Out of the North (in batle array,) themselves enarmouring:
Their Arrows shall be as of one that is most strong certain: Verse 9.

And expert too, for none of them shall once return in vain:
He shows, the Lord commands, they shall Put themselves in array,
Geanst Babell round about, Verse. 14.
all ye (that bend the Bow) I say.
Shoot at her (says he) spare no shaftes, for she against the Lord
Has sinned, so that he the same has grievously abhorde.
The voice of them that flee and escape from out of Babylon
Shall be, Verse 28.
To show (Gods vengeance great over her) unto Syon.
Call up the Archers geanst Babell, all ye that bend the Bow,
Besige her round about, let none escape, not hye nor low.
Reward her after her own works, for she has sinned. Thus
Says Jeremy, shall she be served for sins flagitius.
Yea, more he adds that: Many Kings from the earth shall raised be
Against her, Verse. 41.
they shall hold the Bow and Buckler, eke says he:
But drawing nearer to her end (To him that bendes the bow, Chap. 51.

And him that lifts up brygandyne, Verse. ^.
by these words he does show,
The Lord will say, spare not her youngmen, but slay all her host,
Make bright the Arrows, Verse. 10.
gather the shields, as if ye spare no cost:
The Lord has raised up the spirit in the King of the Medes:
His purpose is geanst Babell, to destroy her feet and heads.
And afterward, he veryfieth: Chap. 5^.
The strong men of Babell
Are taken, Verse. 5^.
and their bows are broke: God grant it hap so well:
But in his Lamentacions yet, Lamentat.
this Prophet does auowe,
God bent his bow, Chap. 11.
and made him as a mark for the arrowe:
The arrowe of his quyuer he caused to enter into my raines. verse. 12. and. 13

This speech does show the Prophets grief, for his friends grief and pains,
Ezechiel much alike foresheweth of Gog and Magogs fall, Ezech.

Which fought against Gods People sore, Chap. 39.
and that with power not small
Wherefore, the Lord of hoastes by him does fearcely thus inuay
Gogs Bow out of his left hand, he will smite and dasshe away.
And out of his right hand will cause the Shaftes to fall down flat.
A fire on Magog will he send, so as forthwith on that,
They which inhabit Cities do, throughout all Israel
Shall go forth and set fiery flame upon his weapons fell,
Upon his shields and Bucklers, and upon each shafte and Bow,
Yea upon their staves even in their hands, to burn them on a row,
For seven years space: Thus says the Lord, at my table ye shall
With Horses, Charyots and valiant men of War be filled withal,
So that the Lord himself does say, by this Prophet Ezechiel,
Jacob I will redeem and show mercy on Israel:
Oseas the Prophet well concludes then this said prophecy, Ose. 1.

With bow nor sword God his will save, but with his mere mercy.
Zacharias zealus in the Lord confirms a truth twofolde, Zacha. 9.

Threatening Gentiles destruction, Verse. 10.
which are so wilful bold,
To war against the Lords Judah, he tells them therefore
The Bow of their Batle shall be broke, and God will then restore
Peace to the heathen folk on earth, which had unquiet rest.
And so where wars did work much woo, Gods peace shall make them blessed
But when he speaks of Iudaes bliss, Verse. 11.
enlarged, he does show,
That God his chosen Judah has bent out even as a Bow.
In raising up of Syons sons, O Grecia, then says he:
Behold even as a Giants sword, Nehem.
so strong I have made thee.
Nehemyas chosen of the Lord Ierusalems wall to build,
By Sanballat, Chap. 4.
Tobyas, and the Arabians then withhyld
Was hindered much, verse. 16.
yet with the one half of Iudaes young men there,
And with the other half, which held, the Bow, the shield and spear,
With manly courage Reard, it was the wall and prosperous stood,
The Rulers saw the same with joy maugre the enemies mood.
Fsdras prophesying (against Asia and Babylon, Fsdras,

Egypt, Chap. 9.
Syria, and of each grievous affliction,
Which upon all the world shall comme by Gods decreed judgment
Says, Strong is his righ hand by whom his Bow shall so be bent,
His arrows which he shoots, are sharp and shall not miss, he says,
When they begin for to be shot into the latter days.
Judith a worthy Wydow was, and handmayde of the Lord
Which prayde to God in her distress, Judith. 12.
and walked in his word
What time that Tyrant proud assailde Nabuchadnezer he
With Olophernes his Cheeftaine, and all their huge army
To come against Gods Israel, Tuelue thousand Archers stout,
And sixescore thousand others mo of that his Rakehell Rowte,
Behold God heard this woman weike, when she for hers so praide:
Thy power Oh God in multitude consists not, she said,
Nor thy might in strong men remains: But thou the hope only,
Of humble minds deffendst wayklyngs and which forsaken be,
Those thou protectst. Her prayer so did please the living Lord
As by his might this woman weyke conld use the pearsing sword
That she cut of the Captains head, so mighty in mischeef,
His members quayld, Gods will preuaild, and hers found joy for greef.
Judas Machabeus, he, the first which bare that name,
One of the Worthies nine so called deserves immortal fame
For valiantly encountering with Demetrius and his host, ^. Mac. 9.

Whose Archers marching in forward, for all their heathnish boast.
Judas in the Lords quarrel, yet his Brethren did comfort,
Though there he lost his life in feelde the same for to support,
John the deuyne Reuailes to all those that true Christians be, ^euel. 6.

Firm consolation in distress by Christ our Lord says he,
Behold a white Horse, and he which upon the same does sit,
A bow had ready drawn in hand: A Crown and given him fit,
And he should go forth conquering, and overcome each wheare,
This Christ our King does signify, which such a rule shall bear,
Through out the world, that he shall shoot the shafts of his gospel,
To save for ever his elect, conquering sin, death and hell.
THE SECOND ASSERTION and is Profane Hystoricall.
PASS on my pen from Pristine soil of sacred Parnasse mount,
And raunge the Rural profane feeldes to show of what account.
The Bow and Shaft have been to fore in learned Writers days:
Let Claudianus first infer thereof his friendly praise:
He says that Nature first of all the use of Shooting gave,
In the Porpentyne, that beast, who seems sharp pricks to have,
Which strongly smite what so they hit: whereby some learned men
In finding this did imitate with Bows and shafts as then.
Pliny referres to Scythes, this, the Son of Jupiter.
Plato, Chalimachus and Galen more Noble writers ferr
Affirm Apollo, pattern chief and Patron first to be,
Of Shooting in the Aethnickes days: as they in one agree.
So Ovid iumpes with their accord, Lib. 1.
wen lo in that his fable,
He tells how the earth brought Python forth a serpent admirable
What time the Delyan God which never used before that drift, Metamor,

Thou Art of Shooting, but at Dear and Roes which run so swift:
A thousand shaftes did spend upon that ugly monster theare,
And none of them but forced the blood to issew out of her.
So that his quyuer almost void, he naild her to the ground,
And did her nobly at the last by shooting sharp confound:
Wherefore that he more famous might make this his enterprise,
A great and solemn game he did thencforth himself deuyse
Which of the Serpent slain the name of Pythians sports did bear,
Who for mastry in feats of force should oken garland wear.
Moreover, Lib. eodem.
Ovid does declare Apollo, after that
With Gupid (for his Archery) the god of love did chat:
And seemed to chyde him as a child with martial might to mell
Thy bow and shafts more meet (says he) are with me for to dwell,
But Cupid thought this uncouth speech, and to contend with him
Did nothing bash (at beast says he) I grant that bow of thine
Thou freely use: And so at thee his shafts shall spend my Bow,
And look how much inferior is each beast to God, so know
And hold for truth, that even so much thy glory less shall be
In shootings noble exercise, then mine is in degree:
Apollo afterward approved these Cupides words most true
When he was wounded with his shafte as sequel did ensewe
When he, which God of phisicks art and surgery was calde,
Could make no medicyn for releef of himself so enthralde,
In Daphnes love: who for because a Virgin she would be,
He proffering kisses sweet in vain, the Gods then prayed she,
The Earth might rather her devour all quick even as she was.
Then yield unto Apolloes love: But see the altered case,
Well says this God, since thou my love thus scornful do abuse,
Into my Tree thou changd shall be, and thee I Will always use
Thou shall adorn my golden looks, and eke my pleasant harp.
Thou shall adorn my Quyuer full of arrows keen and sharp.
The valiant Knights and Emperors thou shall adorn also.
Before the Capitol eke stand, with triumphs stately show
For Conquerours and victors such, as valiant acts have done,
Before Augustus Pallaice door, as brave as is the sun.
This Poet eke full conningly in covert wise does show,
Examples virtues to embrace, and vices to eschew.
As where he does on fained Gods and Goddesses there treat,
Sometimes he touches their revenge, for crimes and vices great.
Like, as when Jove had company of the Nymphe Parhasis,
A Knight of Phoebus troop, Lib. 2.
which bare, a bow sometime ywis,
She drawyng near a certain wood vnbending there her bow, Metamor.

Laid her quyuer under her head, and coucht her self a low,
Soon Jupiter spyed her and, with her strove for some play,
(In'haste her quyuer almost forgot) as then she fled away.
Whom when Dyana so discryde, as she was following dear,
By Iunoes justice was transformd into an vggly Bear.
Phoebus hearing that his love Coronis, Eodem.
on a time.
The fairest Nymphe in Thessaly, with one Isthis had line.
A Gentleman although he were, Phoebus this brookt not well.
But threw his garland from his head, his harp toth'ground eke fell.
His color changed his fury flamed, his bow and shafts he takes,
To slay the Mother and the Child, all mean and might he makes.
Phebe or Diana she, Lib. 3.
the Goddess of hunting game.
To bath her self in Cristall stream awearied once came, Metamor.

And being (with her troop of Nymphs about her) in the deep.
Her bow and quyuer did betake to one of them to keep,
With that comes Cadmus nephew by, a huntsman even that way,
Whom wandringly (whiles to behold this Goddess) he did stay,
She cast an angry look on him, as though she would have shot,
A shafte at him, had her bow been bent, as she had it not.
Yet Nathles water sprinckling she, his face, and head upon
Apaire of old Hearts horns, his head had growyng up anon,
By which this metamorphose he, who was a Man of late,
And Huntsman two, to beast is like, whom his own bounds did hate
So that of them he chased was up hill and down the dale,
Who after those his hounds before, did hallow loud and hale:
With turn, and return, skip and skud, they follow him as their pray,
Whose folly causd his fate so ill with final death that day.
Salmasis Dianas nymph (but water fairy) went
Often times unto a certain poole, Lib. 4.
to hunt was her intent: Metamor.

Yet she with love of Mercuries son surprisde, in pleasures past
Her youthful years: (unknown to Phoebe) her sisters at the last
Would often persuade her painful life, which profit might procure,
Her idle time in casting dart, or shooting to enure,
But she neglecting their advise a wanton still would be,
And strive with him her lover so, until both he and she
Were changed from their former shape, one monster made, and were
An Hermaphrodite which both man and woman did appear.
Alpheys (a River called) described her race of ancient Love,
Which would not leave her, Lib. 15.
till she cride unto Diana above,
Help Lady dear: for I thy true and trusty squire (says she)
Which have thy Bow and arrows often times carried after thee,
Am now attacht of Cupids Knight, preserve my Virgins state:
Therewith the Goddess being moved, a cloud did dissipate,
And cover so her Nymphe therewith, that she in safety was.
Her Lover frustrate of his will, away from her did pass.
Ceypheys Lords within his Court a while at quiet were, Lib eodem Metamor.

But when a sudden rumor they (I wot near what) did hear,
Ceyphey affirmed himself to be no occasioner of the same,
One Atis nimble with the dart, but which did better frame
In handlyng Bow and shaft, forthwith at Persey began to bend,
Whom Pallas shrouded with her shield, and did from harm defend.
Then Persey took a fierbrand and dashed in Atis face,
Be baltering him about therewith that slain outright he was:
Whose death Lycab of Assure Land reuengd with Atis Bow,
And with his shaftes, that Persey then quite dead he laid allow.
Of discord and dissension here lo thus they rewed the end,
With mischief they are ouermacht which mischief do pretend.
And though the party which begins, when he has mischief done
Has his pertaker evil, yet God his wrath can no man shone:
(...) what the guyltlesse want in power, the same perform God will,
(...) take their quarrel as his own, the Killers for to kill.
Phoebus bright and Mayas son (says Ovid) both time when
Came the one from Delphos, and the other from the mount Cyllen.
Apollo Phoebus yet so close could step to Chyon, where
He pleasure took which was forspoke by Mercury his Compere
Which Chyon in Appolloes ears dispraysing Dame Dyane,
Herself unto him to prefer, it so to pass then came.
Phebe offended therwithall, her venging Bow straight bent
And shot her through the tongue as for her worthy punishment:
Of Ovid I omit here more, as touching tales to write,
And now to other Writers pass of Archery which recyte.
Apollo, Cheifest of Archers was by Poets doom enstalde
Whom they the Bearer of the Bow and mighty Shooter calde,
Whereupon Claudianus says.
Mars Clipeo melior, Phoebus prestantior arcu: In English. vizt.
Mars with ye Buckler better was: But Apollo him with the Bow did pass.
And Valerius Flaccus: says.
Arcupotens aduerte precor nunc denique Apollo.
Apollo mighty Archer how? Turn thee I pray thee to me now.
Hyppochoon, Mnestion, and Eurytion all three
Were Archers, which (as Virgill says) contendted valiantly,
Even for the garland all at ones, when pastymes funeral
By AEneas were celebrate for his Father natural, Virgill.

Namley Anchyses: when AEney forsaking Africa,
And sailing so through Italy, came into Silicia,
Eke Coryney of Italy (says Virgill) shot full well,
But Asyla the Troyan did in shooting far excel.
Acastus, he the Hunter was, an Archer tall and good,
Who went with Meleager for to kill the Bore in wood.
Which spoylde the Cuntry Caledon (of whom Ovid pardy
Says) fierce Leucippus, and Acast with shafts so Noble he.
Paris an Archer strong so was, that he did overthrow
Achilles with one shaft only and wounded him also. Virgill. Ovid in Epistell.

The same Paris is of himself so said to make good proof,
His shaft was not more to be feared, then when she flew aloof.
Lycota conning Archer, Ovid. lib. 12
was more conningly cast down
Mopsus of Crete for shootings skill of Silius has renown
Ilerdes such an Archer was whose shaft so surely aimed, (...)

That Birds hye houering in the air, Sil. 1^.
he killed more then maimed,
Ne was he only warryer stout, but huntsman skillful so
In every course that he could kill the hynde, the bucke or do.
Alcon an Archer was of Crete, Vale Fl^c.
whose child a Dragon fell
Perforce had caught away from him: Lib 1. Argo.
at which he did level,
His shafts with such delivery sure, that he the Dragon slew,
His child harmless and from that beast did manfully reskew.
Enarus, Saxo Gram maticus.
was an Archer so endewed with strength and art,
He bent his Bow with such a force, naught could his shoot reuert.
Deucaleon, Hypereseus Son, by Hypso the Nymphe was
An Archer which in shooting far did others much surpass. Vale. Fl^c.

AEthalides an Orator was, Lib. 1. Argo.
which for his eloquent tonque
Men did believe of Mercury, Lib. 1 Arg.
he was the only son,
And that this Man in Archery had fortune joined with fame,
Valerius Flaccus in his book does verify the same.
Catenos, Quint Cur. Lib. 6. de gest Alexander.
he a Soldier did his shaft so surely level.
That birds hye mounting in the sky he down starck dead could fell.
Toco a certain Soldier was an Archer of such skill,
Although in Cups his tongue could walk more void of wit the^ will, Saxo.
gram.

That he at banquets often would boast an apple very small
A far of held he fech of could even his first shaft withal.
Aspares one inhabitant in Garamantia Land, Pontanus.

By fine delivering of his shafts, is praisde for eye and hand.
Euritus, Idem.
King of Ochaly, and Father of Ioles,
The art of shooting taught unto the valiant Hercules.
Hercules, a Shooter such did show himself to be
So strong in stroke, Pontanus
so sure sure in aim, so certain with the eye,
He Centaur Nessus overthrew though from him far he stood:
And of the hearts (as swifte as wind) he bathde his shafts in blood,
Besides these he the Harpyas (a Ravenous bird by kind)
Could cause to tumble out of the air, as feathers tossed with wind.
Comodus the Emperor, Herodia.
Son of Marck and Faustine, was
So sure a Shooter coumpted, that when beasts aloof did pass, Lib. 1.

Or swiftly run he never mist, but one or other sure,
He slew with shafte, and none escapte nor could his (...) (...)
But wat his eye once destned had if so he might yt see,
The same was sure with Bow and shaft his pryzed pray to be.
Domitian the Emperor he in shooting so excelled, ^x. Aurel.

That now and then a child which forth his fingers streched held,
He made his marcke twixt fingers twain aloof held up and wide:
The Child unharmed was, and eke his shafts did surely glyde.
Again two honderth beasts he did with arrows kill most sharp,
Some of their heads two shafts had like the horns of a wild heart. Tranquil.

Eight Contreyes, Geta, Scithia, and with them the Ithurians,
The Parsij, Parthi, Sarmati, Cretii, Arimaspyans,
And almost all the Countries of the world toward the east
Were noted much in archery to have their skill encreast.
And these by several Epithets had several properties,
Each one his own pertaining to this shootings exercise,
The Poets term the Ithuryan Bow: the Parthyans shafts they name:
The Getian string, Sabellicus in Oraculo.
and Quyuers eke were attribute by fame
Unto them of Sarmatia, and so semblably ensewed
In all the other Contreyes their own propertyes renewed.
And though in shooting each of these skillful and practiced were,
The Parthyans yet and Persians cheef prick and praise did bear:
So excellent Archers were they deemed, that as they ran the way,
They shot behind them, that therewith their Enemies they could slaye:
And turning even from them they could so hurt them which pursewed,
As if with wachfull eyes they had even face to face them vewed.
Whereof Lucane the Poet thus mencyoneth. Lucanus.

Ocyor and missa Parthi post terga sagitta: That is in English.
More swifter then Parthyan shaft so quick: behind their back which is let
slipis
Cyaxares King of the Medes, Herodian in Clio.
which great Grandfather was
To Cyrus, kept of Scythians, (which did with Bow surpas)
A sort of shooters for the nonce, even to enstruct and teach
His Son Astyages, that art most skilfully to reach.
Cyrus a Child, in this art was so deligent educate,
That Xenophon who writ the same, Xenophon in institut. Cyri.
would never have nominate
The use and proffit greatly so with Princely state to gree,
Had not nature experience and effect enforst to he,
As Tully says most congruent, not only for to show
What Cyrus did, but what a Prince by dewty ought to do,
Both in pastimes for pleasure, and in seryous matters when
The same may proffet Prince, himself and also other men.
Darius King of Persia, the first that name which bare,
Did show how fit a thing it ought to be, Strabo.
and nothing race
A PRINCE to practice Archery, Lib. 15.
as for the same pretense
He left for worthy memory on his tomb this sentence.
DARIUS the King lies buried hear,
Which in shooting and ryding had never his pear.
Theodosius the Emperor had commendations Dew, Themist. in Orat. 6.

Given him by Themistius his Philosopher true,
For three things which he of a Child did use especially,
As Shooting, Ryding well on Horse, and feats of Cheualry.
Cyrus what time he conquered in manner all the world, Herodianus in Clio.

Among his Persians made this Law, and left it sure enrould,
Their Children should from five years age until the year twenty
Learn three things well, To ride, To shoot. Tell truth and never lie.
Leo the Noble Emperor did full Christianly ordain
A Law, Leo de Stratagem. 20.
each man in time of peace should shooting so mentaine:
Till he were xl. years of age, and that each house private
Should have a Bow and xl. shafts in order like and rate,
Ready for each use of need: The omitting of which Law
(Says Leo) among the youth, has been th'effycient ouerthrawe
Of Roman glory erst so brave, with loss of a great deal
Of The Empire self, and hynderance of our flourishing public veale.
AEthiopians of the world the furdest Southward are,
Whose excellency in shooting, Herodo. in Thalia.
that same history does declare
When to their King, Cambyses King of Persia once did send
Ambassadors with many gifts: Their subtle drifte and end
Th'ethiopian King discust to prove them very spies,
And blamed their King Cambyses for such unjust enterprise:
But princely intertaining them, a Fowe he took (which bent
And drawn by him unbent again) unto their King he sent
The same with greeting (and says he) deliver it him from me,
And say when any Persian can shoot in the same that he,
Then set on AEthyopians, but in mean time let him yield
Thanks unto God, that has not given the Persians force in feelde
To conquer other men's Contreyes. The bow when as it came
Among them, none at all was found which once could stir the same:
Save only Smerdis Brother to Cambyses who, the string
Two fingers styrd, and further could not, for the which doing,
Cambyses him so sore enuyed, as does the story say,
That his own Brother Smerdis he therefore outright did slay.
Sesostris, Herodot. in Euterp.
the most mighty king that Ruled AEgipt Land.
Overcame a great part of the world, and that by Archers band
The Arabyans, Jews, and Syrians he brought in subjection,
And further into Scithia went, then elsse did any one:
He over came eke Thracya till the Coasts of Germany,
In token wheare of every such obtained victory,
Images he did erect after his own likeness
In the one hand Bow, in the other shaft holding for to witness,
What weapons in his conquest, he did use in those his days,
Whereby he gained glory condign, and eke a lastingpraise.
Teweer amongst the Graecians for his shooting bare the bell
Who (when Hector the Graecyans ships by fire thought to quell: Diod, Sic.
)
With his Bow drove them back again: Neither could noble Troy
Have been destroyed by Graecyans, if with shootings dire anoy
Of Hercules shaftes, it had not been assaulted as it was,
Whereby the ruyn of the same the sooner came to pass.
THE THIRD ASSERTION English Hystoricall.
RElinquishing those profane feats and fautors, now my pen
Approach theprowesse and the praise of native Elglishmen:
From Brute the Troyans time, who as he used shooting theare
When unawares he his Father slew, in forest hunting dear.
After he had by that mischaunce his Syluius dear bereft, Anno ante Christ.
1108

Aryued in this our Albion then his native Troy so left.
The Brytons his successors ruled this Land, till Caesar he
Conquered the same, not long before Christ's nativity:
The Romans held the Britains in their rule and tribute long, The Romans
continewed. 483. years

Agricola a Capteyn (sent the Romans from among)
With shot of arrows and of darts did grieve the Brittons much
They with huge swords and bucklers small eke kept the Romans tuch.
Hengist a Saxon hither came, Post Christum. 490.
in kent whose Kingdom was.
And ward upon the Brytons till he lived in quiet case
ARTHVRE the mirror of manhood, Anno post. Xpu^. 518.
and Champion of Cheualrie.
Subdewed the Saxons to him tho, with many a victory
Among the Brittons after his time, west Saxons still bare sway,
Alfird, 872.
a Godly learned King a Saxon, stories say
By cruel pursuit of the Danes which troubled then this Land,
Did wander with his Bow and shafts their force and did withstand:
For God not only victor him full many a time did make
Over the Paganes, but by him enforst their force to slake.
Harolde the Dane usurped and took on him to reign as king,
Until the time of Willyam Duke of Normandies coming:
Whose powers together being met Haroldes was ouermatcht,
And he (a shaft shot into his head) at once was so dispacht.
Willyam the Duke had conquered there this Land and ruled the same, An. a xpo^.
nato. 1066.

But not in bondage would she live thoug he her overcame
It Is worth the reading therefore hear to show how Stigand then
Archbishop, 1. W. 1.
and how Egelstyn that Abbot playde the men: Archb. and Abot of Cantirbury

For freedom of their Cuutrey, thus therefore they did devise,
A power of Horsemen and footmen should for time exercise
Along their feeldes as't were lanelike long boughs and large to bear,
To make the Duke should thither come, when he thereof did hear.
And as they said it happened so, the Duke came with his train,
Who seeing this thought it had been even moving trees certain:
Whereto approaching with mean space (discomfited in mind)
He pawsd, the Kentish power a far did smell him in the wind.
Who (when within their army him enclosed got they had)
Down cast their boughs up bent their Bows their shafts to shoot most glad.
The trompets sound, their Banners wave, their weapons busied were,
To feight with whom they so desyrde in Euntryes quarrel there.
So he, who thought he had in his fist the whole land late so fast,
Began his life now to despair, affrighted and aghast:
Then they oracion friendly framed, conditions grant he should,
Their wonted freedom that they might in certain order hold:
He thereto grees, confirms the grant by pledge sufficyent so,
That by this means those liberties continwed hitherto.
Willyam Rufus was his son, Anno 1100
who ruled not so well,
As that men could not weep for joy of his death to hear tell, 13. W. 2.

To his own subjects wicked he and so to strangers was:
But most wicked unto himself when Gods will taking place
In Hamshyer that new forest, as he hunted on a time,
A Knight in shooting at a Dear gave him his fatal fine.
But now of Noble Princes I will pen the noble praise,
Even such as worthy Archery mentained in their days.
Henry the First of England King, Anno. 1105.
fought many a battle strong
Agenst the French with Archers stout, Anno. 1119. and 1128. 6. 20. and 29. of
H. 1.
his other powers among:
A victor eke he still preuaild in wars: and in peace time,
His People unto shooting did them selves greatly enclyne.
Stephen, King of England stoutly did with Archers in his hand
As also by his other powers the Scottish broylles withstand: Anno. 1139.

He made wars eke genst Robert then the Earl of Gloucester
Who did invade his Kingdom with ten knights and in number
Of Archers just so many, 4. St. 1.
which on horseback passed through
The midst of all the Realm, but yet resisted well enough.
Henry the second valyantly adventured Irelands soil
With warlike power, Anno 1171.
some Archers were, 17 H 2.
with labor small and toil
The Archbishops and Bishops did receive him for their King,
And he them ruled like worthy prince in love and peace tendering.
Richard Coeur de Lion called a king and Conqueror was,
With Phillip king of France, Anno. 1191.
who did unto Jerusalem pass:
Old Chronicles report, 2. Ric* 1.
his power had Archers them among,
Whose force confounded Pagans fell and laid them dead along.
In this Kings time was Robyn Hood: that Archer and outlawe,
And little John his partener eke, unto them which did draw
One hundred tall and good Archers, on whom four hundred men
Were their power never so strong could not give onset then:
The Abbots Monks and Carles rich, these only did molest
And reskewd women when they saw of thieves them so oppressed,
Restoring poor men's goods, and eke abundantly relieved
Poor Travelers which wanted food, or were with sickness grieved.
And, hear because of Archery I do by pen explane
The use, the proffet, and the praise, to England by the same,
My self remembers of a child in Contreye native mine: (1553.)

A May game was of Robyn-hood and of his train that time
To train up young men, (7. E. 6.)
stripplings and, each other younger child
In shooting, yearly this with solemn feast was by the Guylde,
Or Brother hood of Townsmen done, with sport, with joy, and love
To proffet which in present time, and afterward did prove.
John King, 1210.
subdewed Ireland with manly force and might
Of Horsemen, Archers, spears, and such as put their foes to slight.
Edward the second that valyant Prince, 1513.
when Scotland he reseewed,
From them, 7. E. 2.
whose force his Father had not long before subdewed,
In his host for his second ward had Archers and footmen, Scotland.

But many of the Enemies were slain by Archers then.
Edward that victorious King the third so called by name, Anno 1540

When his noble Navy agenst the French Kings navy came, The Batle on the Sea.

He had the wind most wishfully and son so at his back,
His purpose and his enterprise that he no time did slack: 13. E. 3.

A shower of English arrows sharp from long bows powered down,
Upon the Frenchmen, whereby fell to our men great renown,
When at that Bickering Frenchmen there to leave their ships were feign,
And leap into the seayes for want of landing place certain.
Therles of Northampton, 1544.
and of Oxeford fought also,
With Charles Duke of Brittayne, 17. E. 4.
as the Chronicles do shoe:
At Morleys where our men of arms, Batle at Morles.
and Archers valyant might
Subdewed that Country, foilde their foes, and wan that field outright.
That year the King the noble Earl of Darby eke did send, Gascoyne.

Newly create first King of Man, with an army to thend
He Gascoyne by strong power might win, Anno. dicit.
which he with great goodwill,
And Archers aid, (as God would give him leave) did so fulfull:
For many a walled Town he theare and castle also won,
With skermishes which made his foes to flee away and run,
So that he dubbed there. 50. Knights as Chronicles declare,
And to his King with honor dew did homewards then repare.
The noble King in person came agenst the French at length,
And made the English Dragon mount in feelde with force and strength: Cressy.

When Oleflam that Frenchmen bare, went flittering to and fro,
Which aided was at Cressy feelde by other Kings twain me,
Of Boheme and of Malogres: their men innumerable,
The English fifteen hondreth scarce nothing like comparable.
K. Edward he corageously endured from noone to night,
The English Archers did their best with arrows long and light.
Their Footmen (being plast among their Horsemen grieved and gald,
With Archers girdes) were trodden down and so sore ouerhalde,
That great and grievous was their cry, but greater was the showte,
Which in pursuit our Shooters gave th'enimies host throughout:
Their array was broke, they scattered were, and by our armed men
Were many of them beaten down, the rest did flee as then.
And see, Anno. dict.
about that present time. The Scots with power invade
This Realm as far as Dyrham come, Dyrham.
with weapon and with blade:
Th'archbishop of York and States there left as then which were,
With the Archers tall a number good and shout of Lankashier
Encountering with the King of Scots and all his host, in fine,
David their King sore wounded was with shafts that present time.
A number of his cheef Lords and Knights were taken there captives,
Of common Soldiers most part slame, a few fled with their lives.
K. Edward yet did understand Calys betrayed should be, Anno. 1349.

He therefore as a valyant Prince gathered an Army,
Of horse and man, ^4. E4.
of bills and bows, of spears and swords also,
Embarcked in an Navy meet, and Calys comes he to:
About their Kingly Conqueror this English Army clings, Callys.

As who (next God) would cleave to him above all earthly things,
He with a Kingly courage does likewise unto them call,
He places them in Batle ray and princely cheares them all.
But specially to his Archers which, stood on the hills there dry
Do well ye Archers play the men, and know (says he) that I
Am EDWARD of Windsore: herewith, themselves they did prepare,
To set upon their Enemies, no force nor might they spare.
The shafts from hills so hye sent down into the valleys low,
Did wash the Frenchmen every wheare like mighty flakes of snow,
But such a washing as that was with wounds and woeful plight,
They seldom saw, which with the same were foyld and slain outright.
God giving him this victory, the King does order take,
For all things meet, and his return to England straight does make:
Wheare he the first Feast did ordain of S. George the Marter,
And made the First most noble Knights of thorder of the Garter.
After this yet even that year the Spainyards did beset
The Britain Sea, Winchelsey.
with Forty and four Ships like Castles great:
The King again 50. great Ships with Pynnaces preparde, The 2. Batle on the
Sea.

More like unto small Cotages. He then and Prince Edward
His Son with Nobles Knights and Squiers, and their retenue small,
Amongst whom (lo the Archers were not least nor worst of all)
Embarckt them selves and Cross the Seays till such time as they meet
With their provoking Enemies, I mean the Spanish fleet:
To bickering and then they fell on both sides for best game,
Twenty and seven Spanish ships by night did fly with shame,
Which left Seauenteene for English spoil, and prise the eeuen before,
The Realm fared better by the same against their wills full sore.
Edward the Black Prince so syrnamed King Edward the 3. his son, Anno. 1356.

(Who lately with the Spaniards fought) as General now is come, 29. E. 3.

With men of Arms four thousand, and one thousand soldiers such,
As Armor bare, of Archers eke, two thousand which kept tuch,
Under conduct of Earls three, 30. E. 3.
of Oxford, Salisbury,
And Suffolk, which to meet the king of France did make them ready:
By Poytiers Town, in pitched field the Prince himself does take, Poyters.

Look at large in John Stowes. Chronicle.
Chief charge upon himself, And does a grave oration make
To his Soldiers all, but specially, his Archers worthiness
He does extol, from time to time, Exhorting them no less,
To hold on their fidelity and proved Prowess still,
Which they did seem most dutiful at that time to fulfill:
When they so fast their arrows shot upon the French that day,
Their quiuers emptied were apace, then catch that can or may,
From every wounded corpse a shaft, in haste and it bestowed,
Upon another where he could, to pay the debt he owed.
Thus passed they the time with toil, when all their shafts were spent,
To lay on load with Sword and Bill, to hand strokes toot they went,
The French King and his son they took, and almost all his pears,
And Thirty thousand slew besides in those their warlike fears.
Prince Edward (God thus giving him a valiant victory,)
Returns to his Father straight, and with him his army.
Richard the second in his time (the Scots inuading so
His land, 1385.
so far as Warck Castle) to stop his faithless foe, 8. R. 2.

Who now had brent within his land, Warck Castle.
his promise likewise broke,
Against him sent a chosen power, to give him battle stroke.
The Earl of Buckingam did lead a thousand Launses tall,
Two Thousand Archers, made his host, most faithful and loyal,
But when they came into the field of the enemies to have sight:
They never showed their faces, nor once sign that they would fight.
Wherefore the Earl with his power pursued them homewards then,
Burning their Country as he could, and so made hither again.
Again the King to Scotland ward his power did address, Anno. 1385.

Of Knights, 8. R. 2.
of Squiers, and Archers stout, whose number to express,
The like not heard of in those days, which enterd Scotland Road:
Who thither come, Scotland.
their Enemies fled their sight and not aboade.
The King and all his states holding a Parliament as then,
At Westminster a stur began, 1369.
through Criminal causes, 18. R. 2.
when
Four thousand of the Kings Archers (the parliament about)
Encompassed, Westminst.
as though some evil were worcking in the rowte:
Their Bows were bent, and they ready the same for to withstand,
But that the King in person was even presently at hand,
Which did appease the sturr supposde that afterward would fall,
So all was hwisht, and every man went well apaide withal.
The king in Person went with power over into Ireland
To Diblyn, 1399.
where he being come did straight way understand, ^1. Ric. 2.

His common Enemy Mack more so savage ferce and fell, Ireland.

Against all dewty did resist, and others made rebel:
His grace thought meet to make out then the Earl of Gloucester,
With Lances tall two hondreth and 2000 Archers thither:
The Enemy and all his power to bring under his band,
For I will have him, (says the king,) or else out of this Land
A live hence will I never go. The Chronicles at large
Declare what thereof did ensew in that enjoined charge.
Henry the 4. of England King, 1402.
a certain power sent forth. 3. ^. 4.

The Earl of Nor thumberland, Scotland.
and others in the North,
With armed men and Archers tall appointed all aright,
Who with the Scots their army and their Archers eke should feght.
Our Archers with theirs changed no ground, and both did manly well:
(So as the nobles and the rest on both parts truth to tell,
While they did stand as lookers on) our English Archery
Slew many a Scot and look the flower of all their Cheualry:
Henry the 5. that pereles Prince and Conqueror puisant
Agenst the French at Agincourt about him attendant
Had but 7000 feighting men, Anno. 1315.
and many of them sick, 2. H 5.

Yet most of them a yeard in length their shaftes there drew to prick,
Even all the Cheualry in france, and downeright so them slew,
Which 40000 coumpted were: 26. persons.
Of our Men slain but few.
To Troys in Campaine Championlike this King with army came
Of 16000 Soldiers and the most part of the same
Were English Archers which behaved them with the rest so well, An 1420.

And valyent, ^. H. 5.
that the victory unto the king then fell.
Richard the third and Henry Earl of Richmond met in feeld
At Bosworth where both parts were strong with horse, Anno. 1485.
sword, bow, and sheeld
Richard, 2. R. 3.
two for wings had, in midst of whom his Archers were
The Earl 2. wings of horsemen had and Archers few, did bear
Themselves each unto others so, that after long fell fight
The King was slain, and to the Earl the victory did light:
Who there was Crowned King in feeld, as God him grace did give,
Not suffering Tyrants longer then he thinks good hear to live.
K. Henry the 7. that noble Prince (the Earl of Richmond yore, Anno. 1490

Sent Sir Humfrey Talbot but, 5 H 7.
with Archers just sixeschore
To Newports seege in Flaunders soil: these Archers every one
An arrowe shot which made the flemings groueling for to groan:
So that 8000 of them slain by shafts and gonne shot were,
Of Englishmen in all the host, and not one hondreth theare.
At Black heath feelde the King his power with Cornish rebels met, Anno. 1497.

Whose Archers drawing a clothyeards length of force were very great: 12 H. 7.

But greater was the power of God (assistant with the King,
His Army, and his Archers eke,) those Rebels conquering:
Of whom 2000 stain there was, and infinite captives,
Which had (their guerdon dew to such) the loss of all their lives.
Henry the 8. that mighty Prince and mirour of Majesty
Aided the Douches of Sauoy with power of Archery, Anno. 1511.

Fifteen hondreth tall good men men, 3. H 8.
genst Duke of Gelderland
Which did full great good Service there her Enemies to withstand
Sir Edward Poynings did conduct this Army to and fro.
Of whom the Chronicles much fame and valyancy do sho.
This mighty Prince did, also aid the King of Aragon
Agenst French power where as I read our Archers many one
Of the French Horsemen galled so, Anno 1522.
that foundring, 4. H 8.
down they fell,
And chasing their footmen also, slew many, as stories tell.
K. Henry's Ship, Anno. dict.
the Regent called with Carik French grapling,
Our Archers geanst French-crosbowes shot and held them such tackling:
So as in fine the Englishmen the Carick laid aboarde,
Where unto them the pryze and pray the Lord God did affoard.
Arde and Gwynes, Anno 1513.
and Turwyn too with Turney testified
Our Archers force, 5 H 8.
which freshly shot, as then was veryfied:
King Henry in his Camp at Arkes, by Culpepers Conduct
Did cause 200 Archers stout to be at fall instruct, Turwyn and Turney.

Under the Banner of S. George to issew manly owte, Anno. dict.

Which set to fercely on the French and flew so through the rowte,
That (they forthwith disconfited) twice twelve of them were slain,
And Twelve score taken Prisoners were, not small yet was the gain
Our English got, when as the brason ordeinance and feelde pieces,
Before time lost they wan again, with bootyes spoil and fleeces.
Whiles the King in France was on this manner busied theare, Anno. 1513.

The Scottish King began as fast his broils in England hear: 5 H 8.

Genst whom the noble Norffolke Duke with Northren noble hearts
Of Archers Cheshyer, Floddon Feelde.
Lankasshyer, and others played their parts
Even brant against that Flodden-hill so swift their arrows flew,
K. Ieamy and many a noble Scot whereby they downeright slew.
Two Knights I read wanne worthy praise in France, at the Turn Pike
Near Hames, with xvi. Archers and no mo which put to flight
So many Frenchmen as then sled: Anno. 1520.
Both English Knights these were, 12. H. 8.

Sir William Walgraue and Sir George that Somersets name did bear
These turned so many owte of their Iacks at Turnepike nere to Hame
All France it turned to reproach and, them to perpetual fame.
Among that thousand Soldiers which the City of London sent. Anno dict.

Archers, Harquebushes, Pikes, and Bills convenient,
Which past from Dover to Calys: what service Bowemen there
Performed, the Chronicles thereof at large do witness bear.
But to be, breef, what Archers have accomplished Cheualry?
In this Kings days to Gods dew praise and Contreyes vtility? 1523. 1524.

The Duke of Suffolk passing Some, 1542.
and Earl of Surrey then
Which Iedworth brent. 1543.
And those two Knights withal the Northern men
Which overthrew the Scottish power. 1544.
And those to Laundersay
Sent by the King. Eodem.
As also under Lord Edward Seymer they
To Scotland which embarcked were. To Mutterell eke in France
Which sent were, and the same beseeged, by (Gods will,) not by chance
All these and every hoaste of them (I say) in this Kings time
Some part of prowess, praise, and proffet to the Bow resine.
K. Edward the 6 that Mirror myld and pearl of Princely grace,
His Uncle the Duke of Somerset did send in rightful case,
With Army under his conduct agenst the Scottish power, 1549.

Each Army other did affront with countenance stern and stower:
Our Archers marched in array at Muskeleborow feelde,
They shot their shaftes so sharp to foil the Scots or make them yield,
God gave our men the victory, such they 14000 slew
Of Scotts, and 1400* were taken Prisoners of their crewe,
Many of them Gentlemen: and but English threeschore
At that time slain, the rest alive did praise the Lord therefore.
Queen Maryes days most miserable and troublesome though they were
Of Archers acts (nothing or small) the Chronicles witness bear.
ELIZABETH Gods Vizegerent our Gracious Sovereign dear,
Which Rules now in Righteousness her Subjects every where:
Whom God a Mother over us has made in mylde mercy,
A Nurce of Peace and Amity eke to Nations far and nigh:
Began her reign with Rooted truth. whence blossoms all proceed
Of Blessings, as the Blissall God does Blessed make in deed.
Whose Fruits appearing at the first of Amity, Love, and Peace,
First to her own, to Others next, do more and more increase:
First to her own, Gods tender milcke of Gospel true gave she,
To us, as Mothers Children give by God his gift most free:
To Others next as Nurse she gives to Nacyons far and near,
The pappe of Peace and Amity the fruits of Faith sinceare
In One respect our prosperous state so long possessed, this shows,
In The Other a bettered state from worse to better by her grows:
To witness this our public Wealth and Peace Domestic Calls,
Her Treasures spent in our defense geanst Foreign foes and bralles.
Her Ancient Laws and Lyberties, and League she firm maintains
To keep in Mutual Amity us with Neighbors, oh what gains,
Is ours yt is not hers? what pains, what cares, what cost, what cost, what
charge?
Has she not had in foreign soil, to set the bond at large?
Witness hereof, our Neighbors Woes, her Grace, and we may be,
That their welfare with ours also might in one will agree.
The state of France of Scotland, and of Contreyes so distressed,
May witness this, that they with us by her are better blessed:
When woe to welfare altered is, when bale to bliss is chaungd,
Who from this Bond of Brotherhood now in Christ would be estrangd?
Ye Children then of Jacobs God, as Branches fruits which bear,
Pray that your Bows may still fast bide and arms strong every wheare: (...)

Pray that this threefold Bond of Bliss never infringed may be,
Of Natural love, of Public peace, and Mutual amity:
Pray that our firm defense from God and Prince contenewe may,
Pray, that yearly; from year to year and many a year I say,
God her will grant us Nestors years A Mother in Israel,
And that we all Coheyres with Christ in Heaven above may dwell.
So be it. quod R. Robinson.

Luke. 2. Glory to God on hye, On Earth Peace,
And to Men a Goodwill.

At London Printed by R. I. for John Wolf: Dwelling in Distaffe Lane,
Oueragainst the sign of the Castle.


