A Proclamation against the deceyptfull wyndyng and foldynge of Wooles
FOr reformation and redress of many deceites, and falshoddes used and
practysed in wynding and foldyng of wooles. The Queens most royal Majesty,
by thaduyse of her most honorable Counsel, strayghtlye charge and
commands, that no manner of person or persons, whatsoever he or they be, at
any time hereafter, go about, or take upon him or them, to wynd or fold any
manner of wooles, in any country, where any end wooles are accostomed to be
wrought, or in the Counties of Lincoln, Leicester, or Rutland, before he or
they shall be admitted and allowed by the Master and Wardens of the company, and
fellowship of the wolmen of the City of London, or one of them for the time
being, or before the Mayor of the Staple of Bostonne, for the time being, for
the wooles of the grothe of the counties of Lincoln, Leicester, and Rutland,
aforesaid, by thaduise of a sworn Packer. And that every person or persons,
so allowed and admytted, for an able and lawefull workman, or workmen in form
aforesaid, shall have a Testimonial or Certificat of his alowaunce and
admyttaunce, under the Seal of the Mayor of the Staple at Westminster, for the
time being, or of the Mayor of the Staple of Boston, for the time being, for
the wool of the growing of the counties aforesaid: And that none of the said
persons so allowed and admitted, or that shall be so allowed, and admitted, shall go
about or take upon him or them, to wind or fold any woolles, before he or
they have taken a corporal oath, before one of the said Majors, for the time
being, according to the eutent above lymytted, that he or they shall truly
and w^ly without deceyt, wind or fold, all and synguler such wool or
woolles, as he or they shall take upon him, or them, to wind or fold, ne shall
use any deceit, craft, fraud or guyle therein, upon pain that every
person, which shall take upon him to wind or fold any manner of wooles, being
not admytted, and sworn as is aforesaid, shall suffer imprysonment by the
space of ten days, and to be set upon the Pylory, in the next market
Town, with a fleece of wool hanging about his neck.

And her Majesty by the assente aforesaid, further strayghtelye charge and
commanndeth, that no grower, breder, brogger, or gatherer of any end wooles,
or other wooles within the Counties aforenamed, shall at any time hereafter set
on work any wool folder, or wool winder. to fold or wind his, or their
wool, or woolles, unless the said woolfolder, or woolwinder, bring with him
or them a Testymoniall or certificat under the Seal of the said Mayor of the
Staple of Westminster for the time being, or the Mayor of the Staple of
Boston, for the time being, in form as is aforsaid, testifying him or them
to be sworn and admytted, for an able workman to fold and wind wooles, in
manner and form as is aforesaid, upon pain of Imprisonmente and fine at the
Queen's Majesty's pleasure.

And further where by an act made in the xxiii. year of the reygne of her
Majesty's most dear father, King Henry the Eight, yet standing in force: It
was enacted, that no manner of person do wynd, or cause to be wound any fleece
of wool, not being sufficiently, ryuered or washed, ne wynd or cause to be
wound in any fleece, any deceuable thing, whereby the fleece may be the more
wayghtie, to the deceit and loss of the buyer, upon pain the sellor of such
deceiptfull wooles to forfeite for every such fleece, six pence. Her Majesty
being informed that notwithstanding the said good Act, much deceit is used in
wasshyng, windyng, and foldyng of wooles: Does strayghtiy charge and command,
all and every her Subjects, to observe the true meaning of the said act, upon
pain of forfeiture, of the penalties therein contained, and as they will
avoid her hyghnes further dyspleasure: And for the auoydyng and eschuinge of
further craft and deceit now of late used.

The Queen's most Royal Majesty with thaduise aforesaid, strayghtlye charge
and commands, that fromhenceforth, on grower, or breder of wooles,
whatsoever he or they be, shall permytte and suffer, his or their sheep, being
washed and dried again, ready to be shorn, to go above.v. or vi. days
unshorn or vnclypped, if the wether be dry, upon pain of imprisonment and
fine at the Queen's Majesty's pleasure.

And further her Majesty by thaduise aforesaid, strayghtly charge and
commands al and every Justice of Peace, Majors, Sheriffs, Bayliffes, and
all other officers and ministers, as they will aduoide her hyghnes displeasure,
and answer to the contrary at their perils, that they and every of them
cause every such offender and offenders to be punyshed for such offense or
offenses, according as is before expressed and declared.

Yeuen at our Manoure of Greenewich the.x. of August, in the forth year of our
reygne. Anno.M.D.LXII.

Imprinted at London in Powles Churcheyarde, by Rychards I^gge, and John
Ca^^^d, Prynters to the Queen's Majesty.

Cum priuilegio Regiae Maiestatia.


