BE it known unto all Devout and faithful people that there has byne and is
erectede four Hosspitals in and about the city of London, that is to sae the
one is for the poor people that be strykene by the hand of God sum be
straught from there wits thuse be kept and mayntend in the Hospital of our
Lady of Beddelem vntyle God caul them to his marty or to there wits again.

The Hospital of.S. Iohne bapste of Halywell.S. Nonne and.S. Sonndaye in
Wodstocke.S Antonye of Wynsore where ar kept.ii. C. scolers and pur me^ with
meat and drink which do dayli pre for the Queen's highness and her Counsseal and
al other Officers and subjects B^yfactors brythern and sustern and the other
Hospital is for Lame and Impotente people that miscarye in the Quens wars or
other throw sycke^s or desesyed. There they shall have sucoure and Realyfe.
And those scolers and poor people aforesaid do Pray upon there knife tweys
every day for the Queen's estat and the Realeme of England. etc.

ELizabeth by the grace of God Queen of England France and Irlande defender
of the Faith. etc. Understande you our Officers and subjects, that we having
parfect knowledge by ye information of credible and also worshypfull men, that
the forsaed hosiptals is not sufficiently endued with Lands, Tenementes
Rentes, or othere revenues to the sustentation and mayntenance or releyfe of
the poor and impotent men, the grammar schools in the said Hospitalles, the
scolers found in Oryall College within the vneuersite of Oxforde nor for ye
reparations of the Churches and there mantion houses. We moved partelye by the
hum^le suplication of the masters and the rest of the said Hospitalles? And
chiefly for the intere affection we bare toward the continuacion of the sa^
good deades, trusting that you our well-beloved subjects will the rather by our
example do the like. We have granted and gyuene unto the said hospitales full
aucthortie and fre lyberte under our brod sa^le of England, to send foth
their trusty and well-beloved Procter Robart ap Thomas ap E^anes and his deputes,
he special and general in all Walls and the marches of the samme, as well in
places exempte as not exempte there to ask gather and receue of the devout
people there charitable alms, and othere there gifts and bequeste toward the
saed poor men the studyentes at Oxforde, and the scoleres of the grammar
schole, being comunly to the number of towe hondreth. We do will and desire you
Beshopes Parsones vicares and Curates and all other ecclesiastical persons,
when soever the said proctor or his depute shall come unto you. You gentilye
and favorably receive him and his depute into your churches or chapeles and
there openly to declare and expound his priuelege permiting and sufferyng hyme
freely to ask, gather, recyue and carry away the charitable gifts and
bequestes of good people. Moreover we requere and desire you all Justices of
peace, Mayres, Sheryffes Baylyffes, Constables, Churchewardynes and other
officers, to aid, help, assiste, defend and maynteine the saed proctore and
his assigns. And that the said constables or Churchewardens do help the
said proctor or his depute to colecte and gathere the charity of the good and
loving people.

And also we desire you all Iustys of peace to subscrybe your names herunto.

Given the day and year expressede in the queen's letters patents herofe, to
continue for xxi. years as appireth by the samme.
God Save the queen.

