THE SEDVCTION of Arthington by Hacket especially, with some tokens of his
unfeigned repentance and Submission.

Written by the said Henry Arthington, the third person, in that woeful
Tragedy.

Psalm. 34. verse. 16. and 17. The face of the Lord is against them that do
evil, to cut off their remembrance from the earth.

But when the Righteous cry, the Lord hears them, and delivers them out of
all their troubles.

Idem. verse. 21. and 22. Malice shall slaie the wicked, and they that hate the
righteous shall perish.

But the Lord redeemeth the souls of his servants, and none that trust in him
shall perish.

fleur-de-lis

Printed by R.B. for Thomas Man, dwelling in Pater noster row, at the sign of
the Talbot

The Contents of this book.
First, To consider of the greatness of Hackets sin, in rebelling against
Christ Jesus the only son of God.

Secondly, What means hevsed to bewitch my poor self, to become one of his
false Prophets, etc.

Thirdly, To ponder the greatness of my sin in proclaiming him Christ Jesus,
etc.

Fourthlie, To observe the greatness of Gods Almighty providence in my
preservation notwithstanding.

Fiftlie, To note the great favors I have found at her Majesty's hands and her
Honorable Council, to spare my life, etc.

Sixtlie, To move all people to thankfulness on my behalf, and to pray that
my life may tend to Gods glory.

Seuenthlie, To admonish al people (by my woeful example) to take heed and
beware of Satan's temptations.

Hereunto is added certain meditations in Meter, which the said Henry
Arthington penned in prison, since his enlargement.

To the Right Honorable, the Lords and the rest of her Majesty's most
Honorable privy Council, increase of all graces and blessings needful. etc.
IT may be deemed an intolerable pride in a poor prisoner (my very good
Lords, etc:) to presume to write unto your Honors after this manner, during
the time of my restrainte, (Namely being (as I am) a man without credit,
having not as yet her Majesty's pardon: but if my case be duly considered (as
I nothing doubt but it is with your Honors) how that my trespass being
great, mine offense public, and my fact prejudicial to the whole common
wealth: there is none (save such as are deuoid of reason) but will allow it to
be my bounden duty, to pen and publish my unfeigned repentance, so soon as my
liberty would permit: There has not as yet three weeks ouerpassed, since
the same by your Honors was granted unto me (for the free use of the prison
only) during the which time I have added my endeavor, uor (the Lord bearing
witness, with a single heart) to set down the story of my fearful fall,
that all others (if possible) might by my example be warned betimes to foresee
and prevent the practices of satan, who seeks by all means to bring men to
destruction, as by this discourse shall more plainly appear, which being now
finished (by Gods good direction) I could not bethink me unto whom more fitly
to dedicate the same, then unto your H H. and that for two respects: The
former: that next to her Majesty, having more deeply trespassed against your H
H. then any other men, I should labor to be reconciled into your favors,
before others. The latter, that having found more favor at your H H. hands,
then ever did any, (my case well considered) both reason, conscience, and duty
requires, that your H H. should receive the first fruits or testimony of my
true repentance, because in hope thereof you extended your favor, eve to spare
his life, that judged himself most worthy of death, and still do from the
bottom of my heart, for so deeply dishonouring my fauiour Christ Jesus, and
so greatly abusing her Majesty, your H H. and all Christian people: But as
David says in the 32. Psalm, I did confess my sins unto the Lord, Psalm.
32.5.
and he forgave the iniquity of my sins: Even so has it fallen out with my
unworthy self, and I still live in hope to receive more mercy, that the same
God will move the heart of my sovereign, to grant her gracious free pardon
also, to so woeful a wretch as sueth for the same continually, upon the bowed
knees of my heart and soul, expecting daily to hear good news thereof: That
both I and all my friends may have the greater cause to pray for her Majesty,
and all your H H. That her highness may long reign, and your H H. rule over
us, with much increase of glory to God, of renown to her Majesty, of honor to
your persons, of comfort to the true subject, and either of conversion or
confusion to all traitors, which the Almighty grant: that his gospel may
flourish, and this Island abound, with all wished peace, prosperity and comfort,
to the good example of all other kingdoms: So be it in Christ. Thus humbly
praying pardon, etc. From my poor chamber in the Counter, this 25. of
February. 1592.

Your H H. humble suppliant: Henry Arthington. prisoner.

To the well disposed Reader, The peace of a good Conscience. etc.
CHristian Reader, I am to give thee to understand, that the Epistle before,
and the book following, were both perused and allowed by authority: and after
sent me again to examine, that I might see and testify what upright dealing
I found therein. In very truth, I find nothing in substance added to the
original, but certain words and sentences changed for the better. The rest
(I protest) is mine own doings, as I was directed by the spirit of God:
concerning the which work, I do only crave thus much: that thou will take
some time to peruse the same, And if God persuade thy heart, that I have dealt
faithfully in displaying his mercies and mine own unworthiness; that thou will
not forget to sound out his praises, and further to entreat his almighty
Majesty, even still to preserve his unworthiest servant, that my life and
death may redound to his glory so much as is possible, by giving forth
testimonies of vnseyned repentance, daily more and more.

The very special end, why the Lord God does spare and prolong my life,
concluding with this worthy sentence of saint Paul, (which I may with comfort
and a good conscience justify, so long as I live) viz. That Christ Jesus came
into this world to save sinners, 1. Tim. 1.15.
of whom, (I am chief) beseeching his goodness, that (as my fearful fall,
may be a warning to all people, to beware and avoid the practices of Satan) So
my true repentance may give a good example for every one to imitate. And so I
commend thy desires and endeavors unto his most gracious direction and
blessing, who is able and willing to help all such as call upon his name in
spirit, and in truth, Amen.

Thy poor welwiller, unworthy the name of thy brother in Christ. Henry
Arthington, Prisoner.

stylized lion
Arthingtons seduction and Repentance.
BE it known to al Christian people, of what condition or calling soever,
that I (Henry Arthington prisoner) for my dangerous offense committed in
proclaiming Hacket to be Christ Jesus, etc. Have long desired and from my
heart requested, to show some testimonies of my unfeigned repentance, either by
word or writing, but could not be admitted till of late, that the liberty of
the prisonne was granted unto me: Hear now therefore with patience my humble
confession in manner following.

As it cannot be denied, which Peter the Apostle, has recorded that Satan the
old Arch-enis wie of Mankind seeks 1. Pet. 5.8.
continually like a roaring Lion whom he may devour: So it must needs be granted
of all, which the Apostle Paul notes, That to the end he may the more easille
deceive, Satan transformeth himself 2 Co. 11.16
into an Angel of light. So did he seduce Genesis 3.1, 7.
the woman in Paradise, so did he abuse 1. Samuel
Saul the King, in the likeness of Samuel the Prophet of God, and so did he
of late most pitifully misuse Coppinger and me, in the likeness of the
holiest manne living in the world, closely represented before our eyes, in the
person of that wicked Sorcerer William Hacket the instrument of Satan, or
rather himself a devil incarnate, raised up to seek the dishonor of Christ
Jesus, and both our destructions so much as he could: As by the true report of
his story ensuing shall more manifestlye appear.

In the discourse whereof, though I must of necessity blaze abroad mine own
infamy to all posterities, yet had I rather do the same to detect Satan's
practices, that others might be admonished in time to take heed, then that
any manner of person should through my silence (in concealing that knowledge
which I have gained by my woeful experience) fall into that pit of endless
peridition, by Satan's temptations; out of the which (by Gods Almighty
providence) I am escaped.

It is not unknown throughout all England, there were two false Prophets set
on work in London, to proclaim that Christ Jesus was come to judge the world
with his fan in his hands, Hacket that curssed condemned wretch, was that
supposed Christ Jesus the Judge, Edmunde Coppinger the one prophet, and I the
other, The one of mercy, the other of judgments falsely so termed: Three
unlikely instruments to effect so great matters as were pretended, viz: either
to bring all men unto repentance, or else to judge and condemn the obstinate.
Good matters pretended.


How my brother false prophet and I, behaved our selves in Cheapside, 16. Iuli,
1591
etc. running both into one Cart, to proclaim our curssed new Judge, etc:
Because the manner thereof was commonly known, and that I suppose the Chronicler
of this land, has long before this time discoursed more at large upon our
whole proceedings, I mean not to trouble thee gentle Reader with new
repetitions, but only to dilate of the greatness of our sins, with the manner
how my self was drawn into this action, wherein I hope to supply more
fully, whatsoever the Chronicler has left untouched, for want of true
notice.

First therefore, I will endeavor to the vttermoste of my skill, co describe
the greatness of Hackets rebellion against the Lord Jesus.

Secondly, what means he used to bewitch my poor self to be one of those
false prophets.

Thirdly, to consider how deeply, I have trespassed in proclaiming the
villain, to be Christ Jesus the Judge, and other wise also.

Fourthlie, to observe notwithstanding, the exceeding greatness of Gods
Almighty providence, in my preservation.

Fiftlie, To set down thesubstance of that Christian to passion, which I have
found at the hands of her excellent Majesty, and most honorable Council.

Sixthly, To move all manner people to be thankful unto God on my behalf, and
further to assist me with their prayers, that my preservation may tend to his
glory, and the good of his Church.

Seuenthlie, To admonish all people (by my woeful example to take heed and
beware of Satan's temptations.

To come to the first point, concerning Hackets wilful rebellion against the
Lord Jesus: I can deem it no less (in my poor judgment) Then to be a deep
sin against the holy ghost, The first point of Hackets rebellion.
which may be the more plainly discerned, both by comparing it with the
sin against the holy ghost (according to the Scripture) And with the like
fact committed by Judas, in betraieng Christ Jesus the Lord of life himself.

The sin of the Holy ghost as it is defined by Peter and Paul the Apostles
of Christ; The sin against the Holy Ghost defined.
Is A wilful sinning against the known truth, and a man's own conscience,
making a mock thereof Which may be the more aggrauated, Heb. 6.4.5, 6 and
10.26.29
By spiteful reproching the said known truth, in contempt of Christ Jesus the
Author thereof. 2. Pet. 2.20.21.


Oh then how groslie and greeuouslie may it be feared that Hacket did commit
this great sin against the Holy ghost, not only in Wilful proceeding
against the known truth and his own conscience, but in obstinate rebelling
against the very person and office of Christ Jesus, (peculiar only to the
everlasting Son of God in heaven) by causing and compelling us poor souls
(for so we were enforced by a Deuilish spirit within us) amongst other things
to proclaim him) Christ Jesus, the Judge of the world. Which purpose he had in
heart before, as apeareth by giving us in charge to proclaim him, etc. Hackets
presumption, a deep sin against the Holy ghost proved.


Whose sin is hereby the more enlarged, by the hardness of his heart, that
could not in man's judgment repent at his latter end, nor so much as utter one
Word to that end: for if such as refuse the knowledge of God, and hare to be
guided by his holy counsels, shall not find mercy at their latter ends Pro.
1.24.30 Isay. 1.15.
(though they beg hard for the same with tears) as the Scripture does record:
O then, how fearful is his case, That at his last end was so far off from
asking pardon (being moved thereunto upon the ladder) that euan then he fell to
banning and cursing, uttering these or such like speeches. Oh fearful example.
These words only by report, for I was then close prisoner.
If there be a God in Heaven, he will either rid me out of these villains
hands, or else I will pull him out of his throne, and within one month
destroy this City with fire and Brimstone.

O most abominable and blasphemous wretch, who durst have once uttered such
horrible speeches, but he that had soulde his soul to Satan. Hacket worse then
Judas in three respects.
Behold yet more testimony of the greatness of his sin (I fear) against
the Holy ghost, which exceeded Judas in three respects.

First, Hacket rebelliouslie took upon him, the titles, person, and office of
Christ Jesus, but Judas durst never presume so high.

Secondly, Hacket exalted himself above the Lord lesus, for whereas Christ
Jesus, had only but one Prophet to go before his face, ( John Luke 1.76.
Baptist by name) Hacket had two, but Judas none at all.

Thirdly, Hacket did neither repent, nor yet confess his sins before his
death, but Judas did both Mat. 27.34.
after a sort.

Wherefore it appears most evidently, that in these respects before
mentioned, Hacket was a greater sinner then Judas, yea the greatest sinner that
ever was heard of since the world begun, who no doubt if he had been in
Judas room, (and his power answereable to his desire) would himself have
killed the Lord of glory, as might appear by his before noted most horrible
speeches upon the ladder. Wherefore as his end was the most fearful and
desperate that ever was red of, so (if indeed he repented not) it may greatly
be feared his torments are most grievous, of any that ever were condemned,
(even by the most powerful and upright doom, of that eternal and Almighty
Judge, whose office he sought to usurp in this world.) And here an end of
him, though his pains happily be endless, for his pride and presumption
against the Lord Jesus, after the example of his graund-captaine Lucifer, who
was banished heaven, and made prince John. 14.30 Jude. 6.
of devils for the very like offense.

Touching Coppingers death and temptations, (by report of himself) he had
chambered in bed with Hacket, whereby I gather that (by gods permission) the
Sorcerer did more deeply inchant him, to be a means to take away his life.
As for his death master Young told me, that before his end he detested Hacket
and asked pardon of the almighty, who no doubt received him to mercy, for so
has he promised, that at what time soever a sinner repents from the bottom
of his heart, he will put al Ezec. 18.23.24. and 33.11.
his wickedness out of his remembrance. And so an end of his story also, not
minding to speak any further of either, then as shall necessarily fall out,
within the compass of mine own Pageant.

To come to speak of mine own story, how I was drawn to become a Stager in
this fearful Tragedy: it is holden of diverse both godly and learned, Satan
has two ways to deceive by fear and trust.
that albeit Satan have many waiees to abuse all people: yet has he two chief
and esspeciall means to seduce the simple; the one, if men fear him, the other
if they trust him.

1. Touching the former (albeit I have been a very grievous sinner manifold
ways) yet since I came to the knoweledge of the truth, That Christ Jesus only
has conquered Satan, death, hell and damnation; Ephe. 3.17. Philip. 2.11. and
3.8, 9. Col. 2.13 15 1. John. 5.4. 1. Pet. 5.9.
and that by faith in him, he has made us also more then conquerours, I did
never fear the malice of vile Satan, no not even then when I was his vassal.
In the latter point therefore was I overtaken, viz. in crediting Hacket the
instrumente of Satan to be so honest a man, whereunto I was drawn by six likely
reasons. 2. I was drawn by six resons to believe Hacket.


First, by the good report that was given of him.

Secondly, By joining with him in his exercises.

Thirdly, In that he pretended the detection of traitors.

Fourthlie, By giving credit to his blasphemous history.

Fiftlie, In feeling my self possessed with a burning heat within.

Sixtlie, By master Coppingers report of his vision from heaven, that we were
both Prophets, and Hacket greater.

And first, concerning the report that was made of Hacket to be so honest, The
first assalt, by the good report of Hacket.
(who I now know, was a more wicked wretch, then either Simon or Acts. 8.15
Elimas those notable forcerers, mentioned in the Acts.) About Easter term
last, the said master Coppinger sent for me to come unto him at a friends
house in London, where (by his means) I must needs be acquainted with this
goodly guest, which was the first time that ever I knew him, where he kept the
Table talk against Papists and Seminaries, how dangerous they were to the
Queen and State: upon which occasion one person in company said he was
welcome, because the party took him to be an honest man, If I be not honester
then you take me (quoth Hacket) The Lord confound me. Se here the practice of
this Sorcerer, to curse himself that we might credit him.
Which speech I noted, and deemed most dangerous, but having no time then to
admonish him thereof, soon after dinner I departed, and did see my companion
no more till Trinity Term following, being that vacation time in Yorkshire,
about mine own particular occasions, (as hundreths can witness if need
required) during the which space (as I was informed afterward) master
Coppinger and Hacket had begun their Tragedy, and did write certain letters
to great estates, to detect pretended Traitors against her Majesty: The copies
whereof were afterward found in Hackets Chamber, the same day we rose and were
carried I think to her Majesty's Council.

After my business done in the Country, I returned again to London, about
the midst of Trinity Term: to dispatch certain causes of mine own and my
friends, and for obtaining the great Seal of England for the foundation of a
Free School at Wakefield, according to her Majesty's grant. So soon as I was
known to be in the City, master Coppinger comes unto my Chamber, and
begins to tell me (after salutations) that he was in my abse^ce become well
acquainted with the holiest man that ever was borne, ( Christ Jesus excepted)
he durst boldly avouch it before whom soever. Unto whose speeches
(notwithstanding his confident protestations) I gave small regard at the
first, (because I had (...)) (...) him not long before, to be far over
reached with his own affections in matters of love, building to much upon
uncertainties, and in some other points, (needless here to be stood upon) but
continued willing to join with him still in our old exercise, vizd: to keep a
private fast upon every Lords day, for some special causes best known to our
selves, choosing that day commonly, the better to be furthered by public
exercises; keepping M. Gardiners, and M. Coopers Lectures for the most part, to
visit mistress Hon^bod in the mean space, who has been long and
greeuouslie afflicted.

Upon the Lords day (about one fortnight before our arising) when the
afternoon exercise was finished, master Coppinger would needs draw me to
Hackets chamber, whither immediately he resorted (as himself said) from M.
Edgertons Lecture: and forthwith begun to pray, using as good words as any
other Christian yet denouncing the Former curse against himself, Vizd. the
lord confound him as he did indeed,
if he sought not the honor of Jesus Christ simply. The varlet (as I since
conjecture) meaning himself, and I in charity judging the best, that he meant
indeed the Lord Jesus in heaven. After prayers ended with some renewing of our
first acquaintance at Easter Term before, we parted company for that time,
being then returned unto mine own chamber, and meditating about the curssing
of himself if he sought not singlie the honor of Christ Jesus: I did resolve,
that he must either be a wicked man wilfully to condemn himself, if his
heart were not upright, or else he was a very rare man, and tendered the
honor of Christ Jesus highly: and (as in Charity I could not but hope the
best) So master Coppingers words began to settle with me, The first assault
by M. Coppingers report.
that he was a rare man indeed. Thus did I make the first way for the wretched
Caytise to assault me, who knowing my good opinion of him by master Coppinger,
the next time that he had intercourse between us, Hacket ceased not to move him
to draw me the second time into his company: and that was by making me
acquainted with, their proceedinges in my absence; for about two or three days
after, comes master; Coppinger unto my chamber, and brings with him a packet
of writings, which I must needs be made privy unto, but I refused at the
first, and said I would not enter into their secrets, yet after that master
Coppinger told me, they were only copies of certain letters which they two had
written and sent already to some of great account about the Court, for the
detection of supposed Traitors, unto the Queen and State: Then I thought
there could be no danger at all in pervsing of them: wherein when I see them so
bold, as to name the persons suspected, and to auouche their accusasions
upon the hazard and perrill of their own lives, I deemed neither of them so
mad, or deuoide of grace, or careless of their own estate, (master Coppinger
being sworn to her Majesty's service) so hotly to prosecute so dangerous a
suit, which must either turn to their own, or their betters destruction: but
that they could justify what they had written: and so gave the rather credit
unto them, The second assault by writings.
which was the second means for Satan to assault me.

After this time I was the more willing to frequent Hackets company (as a man whom I thought true hearted to her Majesty) who then discoursed unto me
at large, what troubles and afflictions he had endured at the hands of Papists
for the Gospels sake: all to make me believe he was single minded that way,
All lies.
and sought the honor of Jesus, no man more: which I was the easlier persuaded
to grant, by his holy exercises and conversation (which were all Saint like,
See Satan's subtletie to seduce the simple minded: which was my 3. assault.
whilst I was with him) complaining much of the iniquity of the time: that
Religion was profaned of all sorts of people, by a general infection of
sin in all places, which could not but procure some plague upon the land,
without speedy repentance, whereunto I condiscended, and further to credit
him, which was the third way for him to seduce me.

Shortly after, master Coppinger comes again unto my chamber, and brings
other writings penned by himself from Hackets own mouth, which was the
discourse of those supposed intolerable torments, which the villain persuaded
him he had endured for the trial of the Gospel to be the true religion,
against Popery and all other sects and Heresies: And for the preservation of
our Dear Sovereign, Behold the fourth way how Satan did assault me, to
believe Hackets torments, in manner following.
and al other Princes professing the Gospel; M. Coppinger assuring me, that
for the outward torments they would be justified, by an hundred good witnesses,
if need required: vizd, That Hacket should be tied the first time twenty days
upon a bed, his arms and legs to the four corners, and beat with a cudgel:
The second time, bound twenty days with Iron chains, and cast into a
sinck-hole upon his back, and swinged daily with birchen rods: and the
third time, bound other twenty days upon a bed again, in his own dung and
urine (with reverence be it spoken) and whipped dailye with a dog whippe:
during all which times (as the story imported) The Pope, the King of Spain
and all other Princes, And yet before his death he called all such Heretics.
that were enemies to the gospel, (upon a certain curse that Hacket had
made God to confound him, if it were not the true Religion) had raised up all
sorts of witches, inchanters, Sorcerers and Coniurers in all kingdoms, to
practice upon his body and soul by all kind of torments, either to make him
renounce the Gospel, or else to destroy him: upon condition that if he endured
constant with his life, they would all yield unto the Gospel, (as the true
religion only) and make him chief king over all Europe, all other kings to
hold their crowns of him.

Now the report of Hackets outward torments appearing so strange, and the
storye so certain (by master Coppingers testimony) as he said from a
prencher of the Gospel, etc; I was not only induced to credit the same, but
to resolve further, that the effects for Hacket to become the King of Europe,
and to reform religion were likely to follow: for I considered that neither
could such great torments be endured, See here the reason of my great folly:
which was the 4. assault
either of soul or body as was mentioned without special assistance from God
or Satan, (little suspecting he was a satanist) neither yet ouerpassing the
same with life, but needs he must be dear unto God, and preserved to some good
use in the church: for I nothing doubted of the troth of the story, because
besides M. Cappinger report, there was diverse great witnesses named therein: By
all which means aforsaid, I gave the villain interest to infuse his curssed
filthy spirit into me in manner following,

The last Lords day before our arising, we all concluded to keep a private
(...) master Coppinger and I frequenting our old exercises, and left Hacket
at mistress Honiwoods in the mean space, who said the wicked spirit Satan, was
fled into her only for a refuge, but she should be dispossessed of him shortlle:
where the villain prayed, that the same wicked spirit might be given unto him,
master Coppinger and I thinking he did so in good will to the woman, as one
pitieng her woeful estate, Mark here another way that satan used to circumuent
us.
and able to cast him out at his pleasure: having endured so much before.

Then we all returned to Hackets chamber, where we finished our said exercise
by prayer in course: when the ssme came to my poor turn considering the
supposed intended treasons (as you have heard before) I did to the uttermost
of my ability, entreat for her Majesty's safe preservation; (as the secret
searcher of all hearts knows) and so did master Coppinger, which the Traitor
perceiving, the next time himself did pray for her Majesty, Another way how
Satan abused us.
and that with great affection as seemed to us: after all done, he embraced me
in his arms, protesting that he tendered the safety of her Majesty every
way, (as much as either M. Coppinger or I did:) at the which instant I think
I was filled with Satan's spirit, for before we departed, I felt my self very
hot within, which I verelie then thought had been an extraordinary motion of
the holie-ghost, (as Christ's Disciples had going to Emaus; Luke 24, 3^.
which the Lord had sent down as a blessing of his love upon our exercise, so
I departed a very glad man,

The next night following as I lay in my bed, I found my self moved to pen a
curssed Prophecy against the city of London, Curssed I call it, both in
respect of the author (the spirit of Satan in me:) and in regard of the matter,
for the most part false and wicked. And because I was not thereunto called by
the Lord (though my intention to bring all people to repentance were never so
holy) for the mind and knowledge with a lawful calling, Good points.
must all join together in the service of God.

But before I durst presume to go about so weighty a business; needs must I
go to Hackets chamber to have his direction in the matter, who persuaded me
easily, that I was moved thereunto, Mark here the vile practice of Sata to
abuse,
by the very spirit of the Lord Jesus: (The villain I doubt meaning
himself) And thereupon kneeling in his shirt upon the bed, praieng for the
blessing of Gods holy spirit to direct and prosper my travel and labors, and
after gave me very good council, not to rely upon mine own knowledge, but to
depend for direction from above, for the Lord Jesus whose cause it was,
Meaning himself
would not fail to affist me therein and minister sufficient matter unto me
(especially against all hypocrites) who^ he avouched the greatest sinners in all
England and the most dangerous enemies both to religion and to the state.

Then I returned unto my chamber, where (as the Lord knows) I prosecuted that
work with watered plants, See my affection to London.
that I sinful wretch, should denounce so heavy and fearful judgments,
against that great city which I loved so dearly, even for the exercises of the
word therein, fearing (or rather expecting the event, with out speedy
repentance) which I did finssh and had twice written it over, before the
wednesday at night following. Wherein I remember that even then (with a good
conscience) I set down my self, to be the greatest sinner, etc: Oh how true
has it since fallen out. During the which aforesaid space, vizd: between the
Monday and the Thursday: master Coppinger had penned the story of Hackets
torments in a more ample manner, the which the villain was very desirous
should accompany prophecy, (which we meant out of hand to have put into
print) that I must needs sit up all Thursday at night to write it fairer
against the morning, Note how Satan's spirit still set me forward.
which I performed without any weariness or desire to sleep, having waked
almost the whole night before.

In the morning which was the same Fridaie we arose master Coppinger and I met
at Hackets Chamber about eight of the clock, the beastly Epicure lieng then in
his bed, where M. Coppinger (after a solemn sort) began to declare what manner
men we were, viz: That it was showed him by vision from Heaven, that himself
was endued with the spirit of the Father; to be the greatest and last prophet
of Mercy, The sixth assault of Satan by supposd vision that Coppinger and I
were Prophets.
that ever was or should be in the world: and that I was the last and
greatest Prophet of Judgments, that ever was or should be: both of us endued
not only with Prophetical, but also with Angellicall spirits, and should
separate between the sheep and the Goats before the Lord Jesus at the last
day: as for Hacket he was greater then either of us, and that we were
appointed to attend upon his person, in this world, whereupon I gathered and
then fully believed that he should indeed be the king of all Europe as his
story imported but not once dreaming, neither as yet heard any speeches that
he durst take upon him the title and office of the Lord Jesus: which now
follows in order to speak of. After he had thus brought us out of order to
abuse us at his pleasure: M. Coppinger having ended his speeches of our
callinges, we both kneeled down at the beds feet to pray: where M. Coppinger
began, and standing somewhat upon his unworthiness and great unfitness for so
high an office: The villain Hacket start^ out of his bed, and interrupted M.
Coppinger, (himself praieng at the beds side in his shirt only) that the honor
of Christ Jesus might be advanced, See how satan abused ^s by prayer.
meaning himself, (but we the Lord in Heaven) Then he skipt into bed again,
M. Coppinger still going on with his own unworthiness, etc: which the beast
perceiving, he came the second time out of the bed, prayeng as before in
effect, and that we might have regard to honor Christ Jesus: meaning still
himself, (but we the Lord in Heaven) and after slipped into bed again, master
Coppinger still going on with his prayer, which my self the next time
interrupted, for seeing Hacket twice before to arise and pray so earnestly for
the honor of Jesus, I was enforced through the spirit of Satan within me, to
bid my new fellow Prophet arise, and anoint the King with the Holy Ghost.

Whereupon M. Coppinger arose immediately, and kissing both his hands three
times, Behold hear the presump^ious manner how Hacket termed him self Christ
Jesus.
fell down flat upon his face three times also, and kiste the chamber boords
under his feet, and after (with low obeisance) put forth his arm toward
Hackets beds head, who forth with clasped hands with him, and said you
shall not need to anoint me with the Holy Ghost, for I was anointed by the
Holy Ghost himself when I was in Heaven (as his story imported.) Then
answered Coppinger what is your Majesty's pleasure to be done. Oh intollrable
blasphemy.
You are both the Lords prophets said the villain, Go your way therefore in
his name into the City, and proclaim that Christ Jesus is come to judge the
world with his fan in his hands, Se the instant of time when he proclaimed him
self Christ Jesus: so as we could not do otherwise, being both be witched by
his spirit.
and if the people ask where he is, you may tell them I am he, and where I
am, and if they will not believe you, bid them come kill me if they can: your
Majesty's pleasure shall be done quoth Coppin and down the stairs he goes,
who^ Arthington followed in such have, that I assure you I left my gloves
behind me (so small time had I to think of the matter.) But before I got down
the stairs, my fellow false prophet had proclaimed news from Heaven, that Chapter
Jesus was come to judge the world, etc, At what time I was compelled in spite
of my heart, to tune the same note: we both going beyond our commission; he
crieng repent, and mercy; and I repent, or Judgment is at hand: which the
Lord knows wroong many salt tears out of my poor eyes, for fear of the
event upon the whole City.

After we had thus played our pagent in Cheap, and had so monstrouslie abused
the Lord Jesus in Heaven, by proclaiming an usurper of his office in earth,
All three thrown into sundry prisons.
giuinge further exceeding great offense, against her Excellent Majesty, her
Honorable Council, and all Christian people, we were all shortly after clapped
fast in close prisons severally: there to bethink our selves what answer to
make when we should be called to give an account of our proceedings: since
which time I did never see either of my companions, but the Wednesday after, at
Sheriff Brooks house as I suppose, where I could not for my life reframe, but
kneel down to Hacket (before some of the Council) And bid God save the king
of Europe: thinking still in my mind he had been so indeed: neither could I
be discharged either of his wicked spirit, Se the force of Satan's spirit in
me.
or to take him for the special adopted son of GOD, Christ Jesus in earth,
to represent the person of, Christ Jesus in Heaven, so long as the breath
was in the villains breast: but as John the Baptist was the forerunner of
Christ's first coming, to bring repentance unto Salvation: so I deemed Hacket
to be the forerunner of Christ's second coming, to prepare his Judgments
against all such persons as would not repent.

If any should demand, why I did not discover Hackets intended villainous
practices against the Queen and state: (seeing he was known to be a
Sorcerer, An objection.
and condemned for high Treason against her Majesty.) Truly (as I mean to be
saved at the last day) both those matters were unknown to me so long as he
lived, Answered.
(and to master Coppinger also as I think) Neither was I ever any further
acquainted, with any sightes, visions or speeches towching these matters, then
as before in substance is declared: but as I heard by master Young, since his
death, etc: Therefore as on the one side, I should deeply offend the Majesty
of God, if I should conceal any danger intended against her Majesty, Though
it were true, I knew not so much.
(falling within the compass of my knowledge.) So should I displease the Lord
on the other side, by speaking more then A truth of any, yea if it were of the
Devil himself Protesting thus much in the presence of God, that if I were
privy to one evil word (other then I have revealed) spoken against her
Majesty, by my self or the dearest friend that I have, if I should not
discover it to her Highness Council, and put them or my self in her Majesty's
mercy: I should think my self unworthy of any mercy, either at God or her
Majesty's hands.

What favor the Lord has made me find of her Highness, and her Honorable
Council, since I did reveal the worst against my self, shall appear more
plainly (GOD willing) hereafter, when I come to speak there of in
particulers.

In the mean time, how I demeaned my self, from the day of our arising, till
the very hour of Hackets execution, diverse of good credit that heard my poor
prayers, The form of my daily prayers.
can truly witness, how continually I besought the Almighty, that he would
bring shame and destruction upon us all three or any of us, If we did
Wilfully seek, Note this word wilfully.
either the dishonor of Christ Jesus in heaven, or the hurt of his anointed
Queen Elizabeth in Earth, which the Villain perceiving, and that he could not
enforce me to pray for Gods vengeance to fall upon the City, when he knew
himself condemned to die. Then he sought to be revenged upon my person: by
accusing me to master Young, See the malice of satan when he cannot compass
his inteut.
to be the chief Conspirator, and so to bring me into like danger: but the
Lord that knew my heart (though I were greatly misled) he did preserve me
from all extremyties.

The night before he was to be executed, he set his wicked Spirit so on
work within me, to pray for vengeance to consume the City, that for one
hour at the least about Mydnight, I prayed so loud, that I awaked most of the
Prisoners in the house, But as Balaam being hired to curse God people, did
notwithstanding Number. 23.8
bless them. So fell it out with me, rather to pray for them and against
their enemies, which I am sure, did sooner help to set the villain into hell,
then hurt the City of London, for thus I prayed all the said space, O Lord,
when thou will, save thine elect, confound thine enemies. My prayer when Hacket
moved me, but not as he expeted.
And truly the spirit carried my mind throughout all the world, yea into
Gods secret predestination and reprobation, to save his Elect and confound his
enemies: in the which prayer I continued so long, till the Master of the prison
came up to threate^ me harder restraint, if I would not cease from disquieting
the household.

The next day upon which Hacket was executed, I was compelled to be more
instant in prayer then before: but still I kept within one compass, My prayer
always within one compass.
that if any of us did Wilfully intend dishonor to Christ Jesus, or hurt to
Queen Elizabeth, shame and confusion might cover their faces. About the height
of the day, my next neighbor prisoners having intelligece that Hacket was
hanged, they gave me notice thereof through the door, and what a desperate end he
made.

Then said I he was no man sure, but a Devil incarnate, appearing to me as an
angel of light. And suddenly I felt my self quite dispossessed of that hot
spirit; and of all those gross and palpable errors which I held so confidently
in his life time, thinking indeed I had not oftended: Even so good was God to
his poor and sinful servant, that knowing me to be so subtlelye seduced by
the malice of Satan, as to abuse my understanding knowledge, and memory,
^ealens, volens, to sin so fearfully, that now humbling my self truly before
his presence, and expostulating with his merciful Majesty, whether I was
Reprobate, or no: presently the Holy ghost did assure my heart That I was no
reprobate: But that my case in effect, was much like S. Act. 9,
Paul's, both wishing to do God good service, yet when we thought our selves
best occupied, then did we most dishonor his nam: Neither would not the Lord
once suffer Satan to assault my conscience either with the fear of
desperation, or once to doubt of my salvation, Oh how truly might I say with
David, I did confess my sins unto the Lord, Psalm. 32.5.
and he forgave the iniquity of my sins. Selah

Thus having briefty touched the most horrible Rebellion of Hacket against the
Lord Iesuts, with the manner of his deluding me, to proclaim him as before: I
conclude thus much of this first point, that if we either consider the purpose
of the man, the manner of his proceeding, or the sequel of his ending, we can
behold no better in Hacket then fearful signs, so far as mortal man can
discern. In the mean time I Wish all christians to beware, Of Reprobation.
how they flatter and bolster themselves in their sins, upon a vain and
foolish persuasion, that Hacket (so vile a wreteh) might be saved, because
forsooth it is reported, that albest he could not, or would not ask God mercy:
yet before he died he held up his hands; for the very pains and panges of
death will enforce a man to cast up his hands when he cannot otherwise help
himself: I pray God bless me and all good men, from such a bad end or manner
of ending, that having his tongue, and requested to pray, does refuse prayer
and fall to cursing: I hope (by Gods grace so long as I live) that his example
shall be Lots wise unto me, to be admonished how to trust any man in matters
of Religion, (further then he has warrant from the word) what visions or
revelations soever he pretend, A necessary admonition.
which rule heretofore, if I had well ovserued, (as my heart still intended) i
had not committed so great an offense in the Church of god. To the greater
dishonor of Christ Jesus, the grief of the godly, and rejoicing to the
adversary, and to the imminent danger of mine own soul, and body, whereof
it follows to discourse in perticulers. First, concerning the greatness of
mine own offense, in proclaiming Hacket to be Christ Jesus the Judge of the
world, as I cannot deny it (in respect of the public scandal given) to be
so little, as the rebellion of Korah, Number 16 1.35
Dathan, and Abiram, who notwithstanding were all three swallowed up into hell;
Nor yet as the presumption of Nadab and Leuit. 10 1.2
Abihu, in offering strange sacrifice unto the Lord, whereby themselves were as
strangely consumed with fire from heaven; Neither yet as the wilful murdering
of Abell, Gen 4.8.12.
which brought a perpetual curse of Kaine, and all his posterity: Nor yet as
the treachery of that Traitor 2. Sam. 17.1.2.3. and 23.
Achitophell, against his Sovereign, who afterward desperately hanged
himself: Neither yet as the hot persecution by Saul against poor christians,
Act. 9.3.9.
who for the same was stricken stark blind: All which offenses, though they
were great, and their examples fearful: yet (in respect of their outward
facts committed) the same extended no further, My sin greater the^ the sins
of Korah, Dathan, Abyram, Nadab, Abihu, etc. very plainly proved.
then either against the commandementes of God in his required worship, or the
good of his saints. But mine offense touched directly the person of Christ
Jesus, the eternal son of the Almighty God, which must needs be so much the
greater, As the person of Christ, is above a mortal man, or God himself above
his commandments; So that of necessity I must either compare it with the sin
of Judas, or the fall of Peter: because they were both committed directly
against the very person of Christ Jesus, the Lord of life, and the king of all
glory. My sin not so great as the treason of Judas by these reasons following.


But as I may not grant at any hand, that my sin was as great as the fact of
Judas: No more can I estimate it to be so small, as the sin of Peter, both
which shall appear the more plainly by these comparisons following.

Comparison.
First, concerning Judas fact; It proceeded especially of a covetous desire to
enrich himself, Luke 23.4.5.6.
as the scripture bears witness: both in asking the high priest etc. Mat.
26.14.15.16.
what they would give him to betray the Lord Jesus, Ioh. 12.4.5.6.
and in taking money to perform the same. Truly, I should accuse my self
wrongfully, if I should grant there was any such matter sought or intended on
my behalf: or any talk among us, to any such purpose.

Comparison
Secondly, Judas transgressed wilfully against the forewarning admonishion, and
threatening of the Lord Jesus, saying, Math. 26.23:24.25.
woe be to that man by whom the son of man is betrayed: telling Judas when he
asked, that it was himself.

The Lord knows I had no such forewarning that Hack. meant to proclaim
himself Christ Jesus the Judge, til the very instant as before is declared when
I had no power nor grace to resist, being sore bewitched and possessed with his
devilish spirit, to be led like a dru^kard which way he would.

Comparison
Thirdly, Judas the traitor, sinned presumptuously, against his own knowledge
and conscience, for he knew Christ Jesus to be the savior, and so had himself
professed and preached Mat. 10.1.16.
with the rest of Christ's apostles. Contrariwise, I thought indeed I had not
offended, Luke 9.1.10
but highly pleased God in that which I did until the sorcerer Hacket was
hanged.

Comparisson.
Fourthly, there is no mention made in the scripture, that Judas wept for his
offenses, or once asked the Lord pardon: on the other side, it is not unknown
both unto God and many of his servants, that I have often wept since, even for
offending so good a God, still asking, seeking and knocking for pardon, and not
without comfort I thank my lord Jesus.

If any man object, that the scripture records how Judas repented and Math.
27.3.4. An objection.
confessed his sins: and yet was damned, Therefore not all that repent are
saved.

I answer, that is most true, for his repentance was only carnal, Answered.
proceeding of fear to be damned in hell, which 2. cor. 7.10
after brought desperation with it, and enforced him afterward to hang up
himself Mat. 27.5. John 17.12.
like a desperate reprobate so termed by Christ. As for his confession, it was
only to man (and not unto God) neither did he ever ask God or man forgiveness.

But l thank God in Christ, my sorrow was such, (as the Apostle speaks
should be in true Christians) which brought forth 2. cor. 7.10
repentance unto salvation: for that my grief especially arose from these
causes; (not for fear of torments) but for displeasing the almighty Godhead:
for greeuing his spirit, for offending his little ones, The true causes of my
sorrow.
for discrediting my profession, etc. With full assurance notwithstanding, that
my savior Jesus would forgive me all my sins, and grant the grace hereafter
to serve him better, for the which I daily pray; Therefore I know, my sin was
not so heavy or great, as the fact of Judas, if they be balanced with the
weights of Gods sanctuary: That my sin cannot be so light, My sin greater
the^ the fall of Peter, by these reasons ensuing.
(but far more heavy then Peter's denial) I will easily grant.

Comparison.
First, for that as the scripture reports) Peter did but thrice deny his
master Christ.

But I proclaimed (the suborned Christ, Hacket) at the least threescore times:

Peter only denied his master before a few secretly: but I proclaimed the
usurper Christ. 2. Comparison.
openly, before the face of all manner people, and that in the greatest City of
England, about the vary height of the day.

Peter no doubt of frailty denied his master, only for the preservation of
his life, which otherwise might have been in danger. 3. Comparison.


But there was no such danger to be feared of me, if I had renounced Hacket to
be Christ Jesus.

Peter immediately repented of his sins at the very crowing of a poor cock:
4. Comparison.


But I could not be brought to know that I had sinned, See the force of Satan's
spirit in me.
(much less to repent) for twelve days together: viz. so long as Hacket lived
after our arising: Till by his death I was discharged of his devilish spirit.
Therefore my sin cannot but be greater then Matthew. 26.74.
Peter's fall, who though he cursed himself twice or thrice, yet did I far
exceed him therein also. In cursing my self threescore times at the least.
Thus albeit Peter's fall was very great in denying his master, yet you see
mine to be many ways greater.

It may be then demanded, how great my sin was, seeing A question.
I avouch it to be above peter's; And yet not so great as the treason of Judas,
which was the sin against the holy Ghost, Act. 1.18.
as the Scripture does testify, Psalm. 99.
and might evidently appear by his bowelles gushing out, when he hanged
himself.

To resolve this question, thus much I protest upon my very conscience, The
solution.
that as before I have noted the sin of Hacket to be the greatest that ever
was committed by any reprobate: So I take mine to be absolutely the greatest
that ever was done by any of the elect; How great my sin was.
And as I note Hackets rebellion, to be a sin in the highest degree I fear
against the holy ghost: So do I estimate my sin in proclaiming him, to be in
the highest degree against the lord Jesus, as he was man.

By this account may some say, you make your fact, greater then the sin of
Judas, which he committed only against the Lord Jesus. An objection.


I answer no: for Judas, The answer
though he sinned directly against the very person of the Lord Jesus: yet he
sinned against the Holy Ghost also: In that he knew Christ to be the savior
of the world, and yet did wilfully betraie him to death, as before is noted:
wherein his sin did far exceed mine, as I have plainly proved by many
reasons, he sinning of knowledge, I of ignorance: he of wilfulness: I of
weakness: he against admonition and threatening, I having no such forewarning
at all. Therefore to balance my sin to be equal with his, (who did
persecute his treason, flat against his conscience, which I did not) is
directly unlawful.

An other objection.
But it may be further objected: that I sinned likewise against my knowledge,
having read the forewarning of the Lord Jesus: To take heed of all such
wicked persons, as should falsely take upon them Math. 24.4.5.
the titles of Christ Jesus.

I confess the same to be true indeed, but yet so, The solution.
as this is true also, that at the very instant when Hacket bid master
Coppinger and me to proclaim him Christ Jesus: he had quite expelled the
former sentence out of our minds. And having once proclaimed him, etc. I could
not be dispossessed of that devilish opinion so long as this erroneous spirit
was within me, that is to say, during his life.

Thus do I with all reverence and humility defend my self not to have sinned
against the Holy Ghost: and yet as willingly I do confess, My sin the
greatest that ever was committed by any of the elect.
that my sin is the greatest, that ever was committed by any of the
redeemed: Protesting from the very bottom of my heart, that if I should lie
in Cheynes all the days of my life, What penance I deem my self worthy of in
this world.
in the deepest Dungeon about all LONDON, and should continue there so long as
I live; (or rather so long as the world indureth, if it could be possible)
yet were that punishment too small a penance, for so grossly abusing my Savior
Christ Jesus, and so an end of this point, touching the greathesse of my
sin, and what punishment I have deserved in this world (besides eternal
torments, in the world to come) If God should but deal with me in his
justice, as I am fully assured he will not; But freely extend his mercies still
unto me, whereof now follows brieftly to discourse:

To speak as I should of Gods mercies toward me, Truly (as David says)
they be so many and great every way, Psalm. 103.
that I am not able either to number them, or rightly to consider of those
which I know; But will add my best endeavor to express my present feeling in
both.

And first to speak of Gods providence over me, during Hackets life: Secondly,
to speak of his like favor toward me after his death.

Concerning the former point, touching the mighty and merciful providence of
the almighty, Of Gods providence over me, during Hackets life.
in safe preserving me from intended destruction, and at many dangers, during
Hackets life time: If I either consider the greatness 1. of my sin: or the
want of grace: then 2. to acknowledge the same; or the hard event 3. that fell
on master Coppinger: or the malice of Satan 4. that sought my destruction: or
compare the greatness of Gods mercies toward me. 5. with his former favor
extended to others: Then shall all men perceive the more plainly, the goodness of
God in my preservation.

1. To begin with the first point, touching the greatness of mine offense, I
have already noted it before, (according to my conscience) to be the greatest
sin that ever was committed (excepting the sin against the HolieGhost. The
want of grace that appeared in me, was manifest to all men, In that I was so
far off, from showing any signs of true repentance, (during all the time
that Hacket lived) that I could not be brought to see mine offense, in that
particular action. 3. Concerning the hard event that befell master Coppinger,
with the loss of his life (thorough that wicked Inchanters means especially)
I spare to speak further, considering the same is touched before. 4. That
Satan sought my woeful destruction, not only of soul but of body also,
as well in this world, as in the world to come, can be denied of none, that
rightly consider what my sins deserved, both by the laws of God and her
Majesty, which by his means I was plunged into. 5. What favors heretofore
the Lord has extended unto grievous sinners, is plentifully recorded in the
book of God: As in healing the man that had bin 38. Ioh. 5.5.9.
years bedridden: In casting seven Devils out of Mary Magdalen, and in curing
all manner diseases: But to none of them all has the Lord showed so great
compassion, as he has done to me: and that I will prove by two plain reasons,
that cannot be refelled. Luke 8.2.

The former is, in preserving me so strangely

(...) should thereby take occasion to sin, Romans 6.1
(because he has preserved so monstrous a sinner: but that it might appear to
all posterities, that God has no delight at all, in the death of poor
sinners that are ouerreached with Satan's practses: But rather that they should
convert Ezeeh. 18. and 33.
and live, to set forth his praises. Thus was it his good pleasure to preserve
me safely from all dangers of soul and body, Psalm. 54.17 ^^ and 50.15
that his great name of mercy might be magnified for ever, which I still
wish, and with all my heart long for: that all his creatures in heaven and in
earth, may duly and truly found out his praises for his mercies, to me, and
all other his servants world without end. What mercies the Lord has extended
unto me since the death of Hacket appears in these payntes. What favor
since Hack death


First, in dispossessing me of his hot devilish spirit, and of those hellishe
opinions before touched, even the very same hour that he was executed.

Secondly, in restoring me to my former loundnesse in the knowledge of the
truth, without the help of any man mortal.

Thirdly, in: giving me a sight of my sins, with grace to judge and condemn
my self for them:(Namely, for rebelling against my savior Jesus).

Fourthly, in keeping me notwithstanding from all open shame, and consigne
punishment not once to hold up my hand at the bar for all my transgressions.

Fifthly, in assuring me of his futher favor and protection against the malice
of Satan and all Satanistes, which shall1 hereafter seecke my destruction.

Sixthly, in preserving my health and soundness of body from all sickness
etc being about 30. weeks close prisoner.

Seventhly, in supplying my wantes, and relieuing my necessities in outward
things sufficiently, when I knew no way how to help my self.

Eigthly, and lastly, which is more then all the rest, in that God has
forgiven me all my sins, and reserueth me for salvation in Christ, Whereof I
am assured by these tokens following.

First, by the exprience of Gods almighty providence, in still Preserving me
from all imminent dangers of soul and body, Tokens of Gods favor. Judge. Gal.
when I was the vassal of Satan, bewitched to dishonor my sovereign lord
Jesus, and wanted grace to acknowledge my sins.

Secondly, in that God has sent his sprit into my heart to cry Abba To. 8.15.
Gal. 4.6.
Father, and to saele up the assurace of my salvation in Christ.

Thirdly, for that God does still increase my faith, and strengthen my hope, in
the only mercies and merits of Christ Jesus, for the whole work of my
salvation.

Fourthly, in th^^ I know my faith to be found, lam. 2.18 Fruits of true
faith.
by thy fruits of Gods spirit proceeding from the same.

As first, the aknowledging of my sins, with a broken heart, (not for fear
of Gods judgments, but for offending his blessed majesty, Psa. 130.4.
who has be he so good to me every way.

Secondly, in begging pardon daily for my sins, with assured confidened to
obtein mercy.

Thirdly, in hating and detesting all my former sins, with daily request to
serve God better.

Fourthly, the digesting of my present afflictions, with patience, Romans 5.2.3
4.5. and 8.19.
meekness, constancy and comfort, whereby I know they work for my best.

Fifthly, By my lothing of Phil. 3.8.13.
this world and love to Gods kingdom, with a pitiful Math. 5.7.
regard to such as be in misery, Ps. 119.67.
which God has wrought in me by his holy spirit together with her
chastisements.

Sixthly, the continual comfort of my conscience, ever since God gave 1. Cor.
11.31.
me that grace to condemn my self: whereby I am sure to prevent his
judgments, (...)
(not for my judging) but for his promise sake.

Seventhly, my continual desire to do good to all, (but chiefly no those of
the household of faith:) Call. 6.10.
and that my life and death may witness the same to the glory of God in Jesus
Christ.

Eighthly, my daily prayers for all sorts of people, 1. Tim 2.1.
that God may be glorified in all our repentance, by loving and living together
like brethren, according to the rule of Gods holy words, wishing no worse unto
my very ennemies, then to mine own soul.

By these, and sundry other sauors which the Lord has showed me since my
restraint: namely, in commanding his angels Psalm(...).
to pitch their tents about me: to protect and preserve me from all
extremeties, and in sending his holy spirit and word, (...)
to comfort and confirm me in all my distresses.

I do gather thus much: That as I am most bounden unto the Almighty, for my
safe preservation all my life hitherto: and for giving me these tokens of his
further favor toward me, whereby I do certainly know my self, to be surely
resrued for salvation in Christ, Romans 8.3 39
So as neither things present, nor things to come, Principalities nor powers
life nor death, Satan nor Hell gates, shall be ever able to separate my soul
either from the love of my God in Christ Jesus, or from praising his Majesty,
with his elect in glory, when this mortality has put on immortality, 1.
Cor. 15.42.43.52.54
and this corruption has put on incorruption. So in the mean time I shall
desire and with all my heart and soul, do hungerland thirst: that the honor,
and Kingdom of my dear Lord Jesus, The sum of my daily requests unto God.
may be more and more advanced in the highest degree in the purest manner: and
in the largest measure that possible may be, both in this world, and in the
world to come, so be it. in testimony of my thankfulness for all his benefits


Concerning the great favors, (which poor man) hauc found of my Sovereign, and
at the Migistrates hands (especially of her most honorable Council, whom I
did so much abuse in my specehcs, when I Wanted grace to guide my selse better)
and for proclaiming Hacket to be the king of Europe etc. What I have deserved
for abusing my Sovereign etc.
Alas what can I say for my exeuse, (though I was seduced by his wicked
spirit, and most blasphemous story) but confess freely (as I do from my
heart) that I deserved a most shameful death.

See then the goodness of my merciful God, in moving the hearts of Christian
Magistrates, to pity my body, (as he did my soul) father then to suffer any
further torments to fall upon either, (save a gentle restraint to my good for
the time) wherein I observe the providence of GOD, (through their honors great
wisdom, and grave council) in keeping me close prisoner so long, to redound
most to his honor and glory. For if they should have admitted the godly and
Wise to have conference with me, whilst I was possessed with the spirit of
Satan, I might so possibly have done them hurt: Sure I am, they could have me
very small good, until I was parted as it Were with my familier, which was
the same hour that Hacket suffered.

Or, if they had sent me the blessed book of God, during the said time (as I
did continually crave the same) surely I should have wrested the Scripture for
the stronger maintenance of my errors: and so have increased my sins the more.

Or if they had suffered some godly men to have access unto me, when Hacket
was executed, even then to comfort my sorrowful soul, when I deemed my self
forsaken of all, How God has incresed his glory by my restoration.
and worthy to be accurssed both of God and man. Assuredly, the glory of God
should not thereby so brightly have shined forth: as in restoring me to my
former comfort in Christ, by the special working of his own holy spirit,
without the help of any mortal creature, that all the glory of my
restoration, might redound wholly unto himself.

But to speak of some particular savors, which I have already received of
their Honors, Thus much I do most humbly confess. That whereas I deserved
continual restrainte, their Honors are pleased I should have the liberty of
the prison. That all my friends may come and see me: and where I deserved a
most shameful death, they have consented (as I am informed) that I might sue
for her Majesty's pardon.

O then, how great cause have I and all my friends to speak good and
reuerentlye of her Majesty and Honorable Council, for so great favors
extended unto me, the which, because some wicked wretches it may be, will
carpe at, (as wishing rather to have seen my death) albeit their Honors have
sufficient reasonne to warrant their proceedings in that behalf: yet with
their favors I humbly pray pardon, Diverse reasons to move their Honors to show
me favor.
that I may set down some special reasons for their Honors just defense
their, to stop the mouths of all gainsaiers.

1. Note.
First, That ever since the Northern rebellion and before, I have professed the
true Religion (according to the Gospel) And not only to favor, but also to
defend the Gospel of Christ, by all means possible.

2. Note.
2. It is not unknown unto her Highness Council established in the North parts,
that I have been a detector of Seminaries, old massing Priests and Jesuits,
with such like devoted enymies unto her Majesty, and have been in commission
for such purposes.

3. Note.
Thirdly, when as I penned that curssed prophecy against London, etc: I set
down her Majesty, to be exempted from those plagues thretned, (by the very
special providence of God) which himself best knows, rejoiced me
greatly, as fearing some fearful judgments indeed, to befall upon that
City.

4 Note.
Fourthlie, In that I have not only used to pray daily for her Majesty's
preservation (as before is partly noted) but even then when as I was the
massenger of Satan, I protested (and the Lord knows it proceeded from my
heart) that if I had ten men's lives within me, they should all die in defense of
Queen Elizabeth, This I protested before the Lord Mayor, etc: as diverse heard.
against all her enemies: in tender regard whereof, I do humbly sue and not
without comfort for her Majesty's pardon: wishing to my self no favor at all,
if I have not desired More hard conditions unto mine own soul (for her
Majesty's safety) then all before spoken of, howsoever my tongue was enchanted
for the time to roue at randon as before is noted. God show me no mercy if
this be not true.


Thus having plainly and truly set down diverse special great favors
extended unto me, both from God Almighty, her Majesty, and their Honors,
even since the time of my horrible fact committed in Cheap, etc. I do humbly
entreat and exhort all people, to think and speak reverently of the Lords
proceedings with me, who no doubt has preserved me to a holy purpose, (even
to make his love appear in my want: his power in my weakness, and his
strength in my deliverance, above the malice and force of Satan to manifest his
mercies unto al posterities to be the thing he chiefly prefers Mat. 9.13.
Psalm. 1^3. Why God showed me so great mercies.
and most delights in:) that all the whole world might found out his praises,
for extending so wonderful great compassions, to so unworthy, most wicked,
and wretched a sinner: for with reverence be it spoken in the ears of al men,
greater mercy to a mortal creature, was never heard or read off, since the
world began as I conceive.

For, neither the deliverance of the Israelites through Ex 14.13.22
the red Sea: neither the escapinge of Lot, Genesis 19, 16.22.
from the Sodomits destruction: neither the preservation of Shadrach, Dan.
3.13.33.
Mesach, and Abednego, in the hot fiery furance: neither the safekeeping of
Daniell in the den Dan. 6.16.24.
of Lions: or the Prophet Jeremy in the mierie Ier. 38.6.13
pit: Nor yet the miraculous escaping of Peter Acts. 12.6.19.
out of prisonne: Though all these and many such extraordinary examples, of
the Lords mighty providence in protecting of his servants, are recorded in the
Scripture, for his glory Romans 15.4.
and our instruction: yet again and again with all reverence be it spoken to
the wonderful works of God: not one of these examples before recited, nor
any other recorded within the book of God, (the most holy history of our
Savior Christ Jesus only excepted) does more commend the mercy, goodness,
and power of God, as the same has appeared in my preservation: for neither
were any of them so great a sinner, Mark these points.
as I have bin, neither were their deliverances so strange as mine: they being
only preserved from bodily dangers, but I, most mightily protected from
imminent danger of eternal destruction both of body and soul. And that when
I wanted grace to acknowledge my sins, as before is mentioned, which does so
much more enlarge the Lords exceeding mercies and compassion over me.

And albeit the Scripture records, that our Savior Christ cast out of one
man, a Legion of Devils, The casting of a legion of devils out of one man, not
so great favor as is showed to me, by three resons
(which imports six thousand at the least, as the annotations in those
places notes) yet, (in my conscience) was not that so great mercy, as God
has showed me: as may be gathered by these reasons.

First, It is said that the party, was most miserably tormented with them:
Insomuche, 1 Reason.
as the Devils kept him still amongst the mountains and Mar. 5.2.13 Luke
8.27.32
graves, naked and bare, and yet was so ragious, that no man could bind
himfaste with irons, still beating himself with stones, etc.

Answered.
But the Lord would not suffer me to be so tormented, no nor to be once tempted
of Satan, to hurt my self any way.

2. Reason.
Secondly, if he had a great favor showed him, to have so maine devils cast
out of his body, which did so torment him.

Answered.
How much more I, to be altogether preserved from the same, having so deeply
trespassed, as before.

3. reason.
There is no record nor likelihood, that the sin of that man was so great as
mine.

Answered.
Therefore, in sparing me altogether from such torments, (who rather deserved
them doble upon me) the same must of necessity prove the Lords mercy, to be
far more extended upon me, then toward this poor man, notwithstanding the
casting out of so many Devils.

And now (my Lord God) how much is thy Servant beholding to thy Majesty,
surely I cannot tell, nor no man living, for as thy mercy is infinite in it
self, so is thy reward bestowed upon me, far above the reach of mortal man's
conceit.

Shall I say with Paul, that albeit I was a blasphemer, a persecutor (or a
Rebel against Christ) yet because I did it 1. Tim. 1.13
ignorantly, Therefore thou (Lord) had compassion upon me: or shall I with
our first Parents Adam and Eve, ^en. 3.12.13.
excuse my fact and lay the whole default upon others as they did: No,
(God-forbidde that I should do either) for though my conscience clear me to
be innocent in will, from any intention to dishonor Christ Jesus or abuse my
Sovereign, yet 1. cor. 4.4.
am I not to be justified thereby: neither will I excuse, but accuse my self
so log as I live, to be worthy of all torments of body and soul, both in his
world and in the world to come: that the whole glory of my preservation may be
still ascribed to the Lords only mercy, that the same may be magnified for
ever and ever, Amen.

O what reward shall I give unto the almighty for his so manifest and great
favors extended unto me: truly I must needs acknowledge, What shall I give
unto God but acknowledge his mercies with thankfulness.
(and I wish all people to do the like with me) that there was never any
mortal creature so much beholding to his Creator, as I humblye confess my self
to be; the most sinful wretch of any man living, and yet have found more
favor at the hands of my God, then any mortal man that ever yet lived, as
none can deny, that rightly consider of the Lords proceedings and providence
over me.

For is it not a miracle most strange to behold, that the one of my Companions
being stricke^ stark mad as was informed, and ending his life in a pitiful
manner: the other arrained, condemned and executed for high treason against her
Majesty, etc: and dieng most desperately like a damned Reprobate: that I
notwithstanding (being the third person in that woeful pageant) should be
safely preserved from all dangers, not once to be brought before the bar of
justice. O then let all tongs confess the Psalm. 107.8
goodness of the Lord to his, unworthy servant, and say with David, This is
the only work of the Lord, Psa. 118.23
and it is marvelous in our eyes: yea let all the celestial creatures in
Heaven, Psalm. 148
and all sorts of people living on the earth, extol the Lords mercies and
sound out his praises world without end, Amen.

But consider yet more deeply of the lords mercy toward me, by a temporal
comparison: If that woeful wretch would think himself happy, that having
rebelled against his Sovereign, should notwithstanding receive his pardon,
and be admitted not only into the kings special favor, but also to behold
his countenance daily so long as he lived.

O then (poor soul) how much am I bon^d and beholding daily, to the eternal
goodness of my Savior Jesus, the king of all glory: that having double
trespassed, both against mine own Sovereign, Specially to the repentant.
and his glorious Majesty. In the highest degree that ever did any now
living upon the earth, yet for all this, is not only pleased to move my said
Sovereign to spare my life hitherto, and to put me in hope of further favor:
But as a blessed example giver to all Superiors, ( To delight in mercy, more
then in justice) does (for his own names sake) not only remit and release all
my sins, but further assures me of his eternal favor, to enjoy his
presence for evermore, which does as far surmount all earthly Princes
favors, as Christ excels all temporal Princes, and the joys of Heaven,
all the vain pleasures of this mortal life. How truly then may I say with
Paul, O the deepenesse To. 11.33.36.
of Gods wisdom and mercies, how unsearchable are his judgments, etc. to him
be all glory for ever, Amen.

And if we compare the dealings of the Lord with the usual proceedings of
worldly Pry nces, we shall further behold Gods great favor toward me, to
exceed all the favors of mortal Magistrates: who commonly upon the
knowledge of the Treason by what means soever, Princes sildom pardom without
tokens of repentance.
do after proceed to condemn the party: and hardly pardon any (as there is
no reason) without some tokens of outward repentance.

See and mark well then, The incomparable greatness of the Lords kindness
toward me: who was not only pleased to receive me to mercy, Se hear how
Gods mercies still preuente me. For Christ Jesus forgave me, and moved the
Magistrates likewise to pity me, when I wa^ted grace to confess my sins.
upon my true and unfeigned repentance. But even then most of all did he show
me greatest favor, in safe preserving me from all extremities of soul and
body, when Hacket my companion was condemned for Treason, and I wanted grace
to acknowledge the same.

But the Lord had respect to the innocence of my heart: for (albeit in regard
of the outward offense given) I deserved no favor of God nor of man: yet I
protest before his holy Majesty. That when I was busiest in serving of Satan,
I did think then most of all to please the lord Jesus. And when I pronounced
the heauiest judgments against the City of London, then did I most of all
bemone their mysery. So innocent and guiltless was I in my will, Woe is me
for London did I cry in the streets, as diverse can witness.
either from wilful dishonouring Christ Jesus in Heaven; or to hurt the least
of his Servants in earth. Oh how truly then may I say with S. Paul, Though
with my members I served Satan, To. 7.25.
yet in my mind I served Christ Jesus, having my whole intention to please him.

It was not I them, that pronounced Hacket to be Christ Jesus, the judge of the
world, but Romans 7.16
the spirit of Satan, (which that wicked wretch had infused into me, as you
have heard before) for touching the inward man, the Lord and my conscience
will still bear me record, that I had no mind to dishonor Christ Jesus, or
to hurt any creature: therefore had the Lord compassion upon me (not for mine
innocenoie) but for his own names sake.

If I should observe further, the circumstance of time, The circumstance of
time to be considered when the (...) extended his favors toward me.
in the which the Lord extended his favors. Therein his providence does
greatly appear in my preservation for Wednesday this year, being the
ioyefull day of her Majesty's happy and prosperous reign over us: whereby the
Lord has extended his blessings (as well apperteining to our souls as bodies)
more bountifully over this poor Hand (his name be everlastingly praised
therefore) then ever was showed to any other Nation since Christ was
incarnate, Even upon the wednesday did the Lord destroy that Sorcerer Hacket,
and cast his Deuilish spirit out of my body. (...)
The same day also even the very day of her Highness coming to the Crown,
was my brother and wife admitted by their Honors to have access unto me: and
upon Ashwednesday the last (so called) did their Honors further grant unto me
the liberty of the Prison. The same day twelve months past, having put up to
her Majesty an humble petition for a free-schoole at Wakefield, which through
M. viz my brother, wife and servant.
Doc. Awbraies good care and diligence was obtained under her Majesty's hand
very shortly after.

If I should note further the poor and weak means which the Lord did bless in
managing my cause: It would amplify the greatness of Gods favor toward me.

Thus may al men plainly see and perceive, No mortal creature can rightly
describe how much I am bounden un to the Lord.
that I am very deeply bounden to the Lord: but neither they nor I can tell
how much, or sound the bottom of his compassions toward me (except we could
describe the torments of hell, from which by Christ's power I am safely
delivered) or rightly consider of the joys of heaven (which no mortal heart
is able to 1. Cor. 2.9
conceive) whereof, through the only merits of Christ Jesus, I am most
assured to be made partaker, because his holy spirit 2. cor. 13.5.
dwells within me.

O my soul therefore praise thou the Lord, and all that Psalm. 103
is within me bless his holy name: O my soul again magnify the Lord, and
forget not his benefits, extended unto thee, but talk and meditate Ps.34.1.2.3
of his louinge kindness all the day long, yea let his praises be ever in
thy mouth, and provoke all others to magnify the Lord for delivering thee from
the Psalm. 30.3.
nethermost hell, which thou so justly had deserved.

And now what should I say for her Majesty's pardon, Concerning my pardon
the book being drawn up for her highness to sign, I know (O Lord God) that
the blessing thereof must proceed from lam. ^.17.
thee: if thou will be pleased the grant shall pass, thy holy name be
blessed: and if that thou will not have the same to pass, Thy Name be ever
blessed: If her Majesty will freely sign the same, the Lord preserve her
Majesty: and if her Majesty will not sign the same, yet (the Lord my God)
still preserve her Majesty, whither she be pleased to take or spare my life,
I do freely offer it to her Majesty's pleasure, protesting unfeignedly in the
presence of God (as I have done already unto all their Honors: That if it
shall please her Majesty to spare my life, I will become an enemy to Satan
and his kingdom, My protestation with humble request, that al Christians will
retain me again into their favor.
and oppose my self against all Heretics, Scismatikes, Sectaries and Enemies
to God and her Majesty, even to the uttermost of my power, so long as I live.
And whatsoever shall be wanting, to express my love to God, his Church, my
Sovereign and Country, during my life, I do humbly desire my death may
fulfill: that more glory every way may redou^d to the Lord in my preservation.

To this end only, I do further crave the daily assistance of all Gods
servants, to be thankful unto God for my preservation, and to pray in like
sort, I desire all people, to give god his due praise.
that the same may redound to his further glory. For howesoeuer I confess my
self unworthy any favor, yet is God most worthy of all honor and glory,
yea even for his almighty strange protecting me. And those that in this world
will approve themselves to belong to his kingdom, ^. Point.
they cannot but rejoice for the bringing home Mat. 18.11 14
of the wanedring sheep, and the safe return Luke 15.31
of the prodigal son, who humbly desires that his woeful fall may teach
others wisdom, to stand so strongly against all the mighty assaults of
Satan, that if it be possible 1. Cor. 10.12.
they may not fall, or being cast down of weakness, etc. They may be again
raised up by the Lord, that himself alone may have the whole praise of their
preservation. And because satan, is by name, nature, and continual practice,
the mortal ennemie to all mankind, bearing malice chiefly against those
persons, Satan, does most malice those, that be most godly
(to bring them to destruction) who live most uprightly, and seek the honor
of God unfeignedly: as may appear by his first assaulting our Parents in
Paradise: by his false accusing Job. 1 8.10.
the just man Job: and by his tempting of our Mat. 4, 1.
savior Christ, (who only was able and overcame his forces, that he might
deliver us in all distress:) so as we (being comforted 2. Cor. 1.3.4.
and supported) might be able and ready (after his good example) to comfort
others in their extremities, so much as we may.

Therefore according to my small ability, having more experience of mine own
weakness, and the malice of satan, then any other mortal creature, (as by
reading of this story may plainly appear,) I will endeavor to discover some
practices used by satan to abuse the simple, either by foul or fair means,
as they say.

And first, concerning the gross manner of temptations, Satan uses two ways
to assault al
satan has two ways to assault all people, the one is, people by a corrupt
religion, or a bad life.
to professed false religion contrary to Gods word: The other is to profane
true religion, with a corrupt life, if he get a man once into either of these
holds, he will hardly be cast out.

As for example, the profession of Popery, is a false Religion, The religion
of Rome described.
contrary to the word: because it g^^eth the honor of man's salvation in
part, or in the whole, either to man's own merits in this life, (...)
abominatio^.
or else to his sufferings after this life.

As their doctrine of the works of supererrogation, and their feined purgatory
does approve, (being both derogatorie to the precious merits and mercies of
Christ, Ioh. 3.16 (...) 18. Act 4.12. and 10.43 Romans 5.6.11.
wherein only the scripture planteth man's salvation)

The former is falsely called the treasury of the Church, which teaches that
men may live so holily in this world, as they may deserve a higher place in
heaven for themselves and their friends. The Apostles concluding with the
Prophets, that all (...) like a (...) Isa. 64.6. I John 1.10. Prou. 24.16 The
Lords prayer: Forgive us our sins.
(...) being ^^^oght of our Savior to pray, (Lord forgive us our isinnes)
which should be in (...), if the doctrine of men's merits were (...).

(...) what perfection soever a man wants in this world, (...)
he may fulfill the same, suffering in purgatory when this life is ended: Add
then the doctrine of Christ's only sacrifice to cleanse us from all sin, should
be in vain. ^ Heb. 9.26 28. and 10.14 18.


If the devil make men drunk once with these poisoned cups, (which the Pope
persuades them to be well spiced,) And yet with his pardons can wipe away
all: then does, the (...) man possess these men's house how holy soever they
seem in their lives but they will cavil crookedly against this the plain
text; and turn the holy scripture like a Shipmans hose, whereof I mean not
to stand in this place. I John. 1.7. The popes pardons can take away all sins,
If, etc. And al merits also.


If satan cannot prevail in this point but that true religion gettes the upper
hand and all men flee from their own merits, and appeal only to the
mercies of Christ, As before is noted: yet if he can persuade me to presume
to much of mercy, an they may still prosecute their beastly, affections, to
delight in drunkenness, To continue in sin and presume of mercy, is dangerous.
whoredom, pride, oppresson, usury, extortion, or in any other gross sin
whatsoever, under pretense that God is ever merciful, and will forgive all
men, so flat contrary to his holy word, which denounces the sentence of God
Galat. 19.20.21
curse and ven Cor. 6, 9.10.
geaunce, to all such profane and graceless persons (who are also possessed
with the spirit of satan, Ephesians. 5.5.
profess what religion soever they please) of both which kind of sinners, I
mean to speak more herenster God willing.

I will only at this time, dilate a little of satan's manner of tempting the
better sort, who (by Gods special favor) are freed and discharged from all
those gross corruptions of religion and life, and desire unfeignedly so to
serve the Lord as they may best please him: and that by mine own poor woeful
example.

The first assault was, by seeking my discredit, My first assault, by love and
hatred.
id planting my affections of love and hatred, as the Lord required: for satan
seeing me to love the preaching ministry, and to stand with them in their
just defense, against all such persons as sought their injury: And further,
how I labored to get some notorious offenders punished: He did so procure my
discredit with the worst, that they had almost cost me my life.

When satan could not prevail this way, My second by compassion.
but that my credit still increased with the best, who did ouermatch his
malice against me. Then he fought quite to spoil my estate, for ever to
disable me from doing any good, in the Church or commonwealth: and that was by
abusing my affection of compassion, in seeking to relieve a poor distressed
gentleman beyond my ability, which has brought no small discredit to the
Gospel, and that greeueth my soul most of all.

For though it should be granted, My conscience faith so.
that the ground of my affection was laid in Gods fear, to seek to restore a
decayed meber of the church and commonwealth: yet that I should so far pity
his estate, as in laboring to uphold it, I should overthrow mine own, and so
make my self to be worse 1. Sam. 5. 8.
then an infidel (so directly contrary to the holy Scripture) was more then
I ought to perform to all Christians, (namely having my self, etc. But in
drawing great sums out of other men's pursses, See how far Satan prevailed
against me in my compassion.
to maintain a port and needless expenses, more then we both were able to
bear, or to see repaid in any time, building our vain hope upon a good
dispatch of his Court suites, wthout any warrant from God at all. Herein I
say did Satan groslie tempt me, to enter so great bonds, for the repaiment of
round sums, without any certeintie how to perform the same: or as yet can
tell, which has often times, and as yet daielie wounds, my sore broken
heart, for discrediting thereby my holy profession.

What means I have used to discharge all my self, I have of^^ offered the sale
of my living and cannot prevail.
even by offering the sale of that living I have (to leave almost nothing for
my wife and my self) the Lord best knows, and others can witness of credit
and worship, yea and some of great honor if need required. But I could not
prevail (save to my great loss) my living standing only, by means of a
Patent for term of my life. In regard whereof, I do humbly entreat all our
Creditors, The Lord move their hearts to grant my lawful ie. quest.
to bear with me for the principals to take it as I may pay it, by process
of time: And if God spare me life, I will see it discharged all in time, though
the party tie himself for whom I was bound, should preten(...)t to perform
the same.

How I was served at his hands (having consented to part with all we had, to
discharge our conscience with all our creditors) when he see I had gone so far
as I could, I spare to speak for diverse respects, wishing rather our
repentance, might inlaie our credit with GOD and man (as I daily desire of the
Lord in my prayers) then by continuing still in our sins, to hinder the
blessing of the Almighty upon our endeavors, seeking by lawefull means our
repair every wale.

Concerning that point which has been often objected against me, An objection,
why I left my charge.
by those that are godly, grave and learned. For leaving mine own charge, and
accompanying the party to further his causes, I cannot see (with submission
be it spoken) that I have therein trespassed otherwise then of frailty, as a
man may do in his best endeavors. For if a Christian may lawfully hazard,
Answered.
or rather yield his life for the brethrens sake, (...).10 3.16
(as the Scripture does approve) then I hope it will not prove unlawful, for
one child of God to do for another in cases of necessity, (not hindering
thereby the duties of his calling in the Church or Commonwealth) or rather
having no special charge ^t all, but such as may spare a man to perform such
duties.

Indeed I confess, for a minister of the Gospel, Who may not leave
a Schoolmaister, a Mayor of a City, or a nie such like person, that has a
public charge in the Church or Commonwealth, their charges.
to leave his public calling, and be take himself priuatlie to follow the
causes of one private person, is simply unlawful.

But for a man that has only a charge of a wife and family (providing well
for them) or to come to my self, My charge only a wife and few servants
without children.
having no further charge, then a company of wild dear to attend upon, the
which (by virtue of my patent) may lawefullie be discharged by others (and
better then by my self, my infirmities considered) I see no reason to the
contrary, (except all love duties should surcease, etc.) But that to do more
good to the church and commonwealth, by seeking the repair of a decayed
profitable member of the same, I may well be spared for a time from my charge,
to manage his cause, or to help him with my bonds (if I had kept within my
compass therein) namely considering these reasons following.

When Satan my old enemy, could by no means prevail, neither to discredit
nor disable me utterly, but that (by Gods providence) I was like in short time
to pass through al dangers: then did he seek to abuse my simplicity by the
affection of trust or credit in an other respect, The third assalt by abusing
my credit.
and so to plunge me at once over head and ears, into the pit of woeful
perdition, to destroy my soul and body for ever, if he could possible: and
that was by making Hacket his instrument, (...) all men could see no other
likelihoode but present destruction of soul and body was like to fall upon
me, (my self preparing continually for death, 1. Cor. 1.9.
whenever I should be thereunto called, which I expected from day to day)
Behold the great goodness of Almighty God toward me, in moving their H H to
take compassion of me, not once to suffer me to come in place of judgment, but
further to consent that my life should be spared.

O then how truly may I say, with the Prophet David, The Lord is my
shepherd: therefore can I lack nothing, for though I walk within the shade
Psalm. 23.4
of death: yet shall I fear nothing for with his rod and shepheardes staff, I
am still comforted, yea he will still preserve me from every evil work
intended against me, and reserve me safely to inherit his kingdom: r 2. Tim.
4.28.
to whom he all praise for ever, Amen.

Now have you heard inbriefe discoursed, the substance of satan's seducing
me, touching that most horrible action committed, of proclaiming Christ Jesus
in Cheapeside, etc. With the manner of his deluding my affections from time to
time, wishing and admonishing that my woeful fall, may i teach all others in
time to beware, and by all good wisdom to prevent satan's practices for I can
tell them (by tried experience) that when they themselves do least suspect him,
in may be he seeks most of all to entrap them: The Apostle says truly,

Resist Satan, and he will flee from you: But all the cunning lam. 4.7.
lies how to know when he does tempt us, with what weapons we should
resist him, and at what time to put the same in practice: whereof (God willing)
you shall hear more hereafter, as time and opportunity will permit: In the
mean space let all manner people know thus much, that seeing satan has sought
so instantly my death and destruction, I protest my self his devoted enemy,
(by the grace of God) to oppose my self against him and his kingdom, so much
as in me lies, even so long as I live: desiring further, that it may not be
forgotten what Christ has done for me, that all sorts of people may sound out
his praises world without end. And now my poor soul, conclude and say with
David, Whom have I in heaven but thee Psalm. 73.25 26.
( O Lord and in earth I have none besides thee. When mine heart fails, and
my strength also: even then art thou my strength and my portion for ever. To
this Almighty God I desire, that all his creatures in heaven and in earth, may
ascribe all honor, and glory for ever, Amen.

FINIS.
I humbly crave that as my fall,
Has much offended each degree,
So my restore, may comfort all
That love the Lord vnfrinedlie.
And to that end I wish this book,
In all men's hands accordingly,
That who soever on it look,
May praise the Lord eternally.
Amen, quoth. H. A. prisoner.

Arthingtons Lamentation being close prisoner, some what augmented since his
enlargement, not unprofitable for the use of others.
1
O Heavenly Lord O father dear, how down thine ears to me,
A woeful wretch that in my grief do only seek to thee.
2
Remember (Lord) thy promise made to all that stand in need,
that when they call upon thy name, thou will them help with speed.
3
The weight and burden of my sins, do press me down full sore,
therefore (O Lord) I come to thee, that mercy have in store,
4
Confessing from a broken heart my grievous sins (O Lord,)
in that I have not led my life according to thy word.
5.
Not only in my youthful years, when frayltie bore the sway,
and led me captive to his lusts, most apt to run astray
6
But since even at this present time when knowledge does abound,
I feel my self most prone to sin, which seeks me to confound:
7
There is no branch of thy just law, but I have broken quite,
In heart, in thought, in word, in deed, with all my whole delight:
8.
Yea, every day and every hour, O glorious God of might,
thy holy laws I do transgress most vilely in thy sight.
9
For why, there is within my flesh, a secret lust of sin,
which still resistes thy work of grace, and wounds me with his sting Romans 7.
14. 23.

10
So that the good which I would do, and gladly would fulfill,
I am not able to perform, but evil is with me still Romans 7. 14. 23.

11
Which does enforce my sinful soul, with sorrow to complain,
that I (as captive unto sin) in bondage should remain. Romans 7. 14. 23.

12
Yea (Lord) freely do confess my best endeavors here
deserve thy earthly plague, and lasting death elsewhere. These verses are more
proper to me, then to any (...)

13
O then most vile and wicked wretch, what vengance is my right,
For my so late most fearful fall, in all thy peoples sight. These verses are
more proper to me, then to any (...)

14
Assuredly (my sovereign Lord) my heart cannot conceive,
the horror of those torments great, that I deserve to have: These verses are
more proper to me, then to any (...)

15
So that if thou should throw me down, the cursed feendes among
I must confess thou have been good, in sparing me so long. These verses are
more proper to me, then to any (...)

16
For never since the world began, was ever heard or seen,
the like scandal in any age, as our offense has been; These verses are more
proper to me, then to any (...)

17
A mortal man for to presume, as thou do understand,
to call himself (Christ Jesus (Lord) the Judge with fan in hand. These
verses are more proper to me, then to any (...)

18
And I my self (distract in mind) a Prophet false by name,
should be so mad this cursed wretch Christ Jesus to proclayme. These verses
are more proper to me, then to any (...)

19
Woe is my heart, woe is my soul, and all my senses woe,
for to abuse them selves so much, to make thee Lord my foe. These verses are
more proper to me, then to any (...)

20
And to rebel with shameless face against thy majesty,
whom I have found a loving Lord, in still preseruyng me. These verses are more
proper to me, then to any (...)

21
If I should weep both day and night, so long as I do live,
my tears could be no cause (O Lord) why thou should me forgive. These
verses are more proper to me, then to any (...)

22
Or if I should in fetters lie, whylst Sun and Moon do last,
and as unworthy of the light in dungion deep be cast. These verses are more
proper to me, then to any (...)

23
Or if I should be daily whypt in open market place,
to warn all people to beware how they abuse thy grace. These verses are more
proper to me, then to any (...)

24
I do protest vnfeygnedly these were to little pain.
so that I might be reconcild into thy love again. These verses are more
proper to me, then to any (...)

25
Oh then (dear God) what should I do thy Justice to withstand,
or where shall I a Savior find, to rid me from thy hand.
26
If I should sue unto thy Saints, or holy Angels move, In heaven

to beg me pardon for my sins, they would me all reprove.
27
If I could flee as feathered foul and hide me Psalm. 39.7.13
in some hill,
even there thine eyes would spy me out, to work on me thy will.
28
As for thy creatures in their kind, they can not help my case,
but rather storm because I sought their maker to disgrace
29
And all the damned ghostes in hell, they watch (already bent)
when thou would give them leave (O Lord) my soul for to torment.
30
O wretched man should I despair, because my sins are great,
or fear thou wylt not hear my playntes, when I do thee entreat.
31
No (Lord) thy word and spirit says, although men's sins abound,
yet have thou no delyght at all, Ezec. 33.11.
poor sinners to confound.
32
Namely such wretches as in heart, their grievous sins lament,
and strive by all good means they may, the same for to repent.
33
But to that end such sinners may find comfort in distress,
thou chargest them to call on thee Psalm. 50.15. Mat. I. 18.
and thou wyle send release.
34
Then look upon thy servant (Lord) whylst there is time and space,
for from thy justice I appeal unto thy throne of grace:
35
Beseeching thee (O father dear) some pity on me take,
and save me (not for my desartes) but for thy mercies sake.
36
Alas what glory should thou gain in damning me to hell.
or who shall there thy noble factes, Psalm. 88.10.11.12
and worthy praises tell:
37
O blessed God thou have delyght thy mercies to extend
unto all those that judge them selves 1. Cot. 11.31.32
and would not thee offend:
38
In truth (my Lord) I do confess of all that know thy name,
I am the least that have done well, and most deserving blame.
39
O therefore in thy justice (Lord) Psalm. 143.2.
do not contend with me,
for why as gylte in thy sight I yield my self to thee:
40
Requesting one thing at thy hands, that thou would think upon
thy covenant made in Jesus Christ, for man's salvation.
41
And as it then so pleased thee, when we were all thy fooes,
to send him down for us to die, thy mercies to disclose.
42
That where our sins (by thy just dome) Romans 5.6.8. 1. Pet. 3.18.
deserved lasting pain,
his merices might restore us all into thy love again.
43
Of all those fooes I do confess my self for to be chief,
then magnify thy mercies (Lord) to send me some relief.
44
And though my sins in number pass the stars above the sky,
yet (Lord) thy mercies far surmount Psalm. 103.11.13
thou can it not deny.
45
O then incease my faith in Christ, Luk, 17 1.
so strongly to abound,
that neither Satan, death, nor hell, my wounded soul confound:
46
But that when justice grypes my heart, and cries vengance for sin,
to Christ his merits I may fly and plead my light therein.
47
O father make the power thereof, transform my barren heart,
that sin may Romans 6.1.
die that grace may live, and still my soul convert:
48
Give strength (O God) to spend my days according to thy word:
and after this life, grant me heaven through Jesus Christ my Lord.
49
And seeing Satan seeks still Christ's glory to deface,
by castyng how to griue his saints almost in every place. A prayer for the
whole church.

50
O father dear prevent his rage and let him not prevail,
but though his purpose be to hurt, yet let his power quayle.
51
Lord send thy Angels from above to pitch Psalm. 34.7.
their tents below,
to save all such as trust in thee, from Satan's overthrow.
52
Beat down his kingdom into hell, fro whence sin first did spring,
and still exalt thy holy word, that Christ may reign 2.Petition.
as king.
53
Be good (O Lord) to Israel, thy poor despised flock,
even such as suffer for thy name, and build upon the Rock.
54
O Lord, be good unto all those that love thee in their heart,
and front the ways of wickedness, do more and more depart.
55
So shall thy people all abroad, fall down before thy face,
and quite forsake their former sins, thy Gosbell to embrace.
56
O blessed Lord, grant this request, thy glory to advance,
and still regard for to maynteyne thine owneinher taunce.
57
Increase the number Psalm. 28.9.
of thy saints, defend them from all evil,
Lord give them grace to watch and ward still to Ia. 4.7.
resist the devil.
58
And as salvation is thy Psalm. 3.8.
gift (O heavenly God above)
bestow upon thy little flock that blessing of thy love.
59
Then shall we al with cheareful voice, sound out thy worthy praise,
and in thy Church with one accord sing Psalms to thee always.
60
All laud and praise (O Lord of hosts) I do ascribe to thee,
for sending Jesus Christ thy son, my savior for to be.
Give God his dus, q, H. A. prisoner.

Arthingtons Thankfulness, for the Lords exceeding kindness extended unto him.
1
OMightie God thou Lord omnipotent,
who only rulest all things at thy will,
Whose throne is far abeue the fyrmament:
and whose great power both heaven and earth does fill,
Shall dust and earth beg of thy Majesty,
to show how good thou have been unto me.
2
How good (my God) grant pardon I thee pray,
for neither I nor any mortal wight,
Thy goodness (Lord) can any way display,
as I do feel it working day and night.
Yet give meleaue to tell the best I can.
what thou have done for me (poor simple man)
3
Poor man, I may not stand on every point,
for so I should too much thy patience move,
But so far forth thy doings to acquaynt,
as others may thy goodness daily love.
Now then with comfort let my tongue entreat,
what thou heart done for me (poor wretch of late.
4
Of late my (Lord) thou know I was possessed,
with Satan's spirit cast into my soul,
Which was as hot as fire within my breast;
and did my scenses for the time control,
Enforcing heart and soul for to begin,
and most of all my cursed tongue to sin,
5
To sin (dear God) the like as never seen,
so great a dinner since the world began
To live with breath as I vile wretch have been
against Christ Jesus thy beloved son:
Oh mercy graund that grace may still abound
for my supplies as I have always found.
6
As I have found (good Lord) thy mercies great,
they far surmount the greatness of my fall:
For thou from heaven (even from thy mercy seat)
did give in charge to save my soul from thrall
And would not let the tempt or work his will
as he did seek my life by death) to spyll.
7
My life to spyll (dear Lord) thou know it well,
that Satan sought to work me further pain,
My soul and body both to bring to hen,
that I should there in tormantes still remain:
But thou (my God) would not it should be so,
but did revenge me of my deadly foe.
8
My deadly foe (HACKETT the Sorcerer)
thou have destroyde and cast into the sake,
For his great pride against my Savior,
that durst his name and office undertake.
But I (poor wretch) thou God of all glory,
how mightily have thou preserved me.
9
Prese^^^^^^e (...)
of soul and (...) (without excuse)
And that most strange for man's eyes to behold,
that I should be restorde to former use
Of under standing wit and right reason,
without all help save Jesus Christ alone.
10
Christ Jesus only did cast Satan out.
Christ Jesus only saved me from woe,
Christ Jesus only compast me about
that Satan could not my state overthrow
O Jesus Christ what should I give to thee
for all thy mercies manifold to me?
11
Thy mercies (Lord) in stinting all this strife
thy mercies (Lord) in shylding me from shame
Thy mercies (Lord) in saving of my life
that I might live to praise thy holy name:
O blessed Lord give grace and strength I pray
thy mercies great yet further to display
12
Thy mercies great my mind for to convert
when worldly means did fail me in my need
Thy mercies great in comforting my heart
when as my soul with inward woe did bleed
Thy mercies great which does therest (...)
in saving (Lord) thy servants soul from shall
13
My soul from hell I freely do confess
and body both (my Lord) thou did me serve
Yea furthermore when I was in distress
thou did provide thy servant should not sterue:
So far thy kindness did extend to me,
but (Lord) how should I thank thy majesty.
14
How should I thank thy goodness (O my Lord)
for all these tokens of thy constant love:
(Especially, for sending me thy word)
to strength my soul that nothing could me move:
Assuredly, my heart can not conceive,
what thanks thou (Lord) deseruest for to have.
15
Desetuest (Lord) no mortal wight can tell,
the worthy praises that belong to thee.
Except he (...) the pains of hell,
And toys of heaven that last eternally:
(Which is man could) yet does thy praysd excel,
as far as heaven in goodness passes hell.
16
Thy goodness (Lord) it reaches over all,
It fylleth heaven, and earth, and all therein,
It norisheth all living things mortal:
it does preserve the state of every thing,
Then as thy goodness all thy works surmount,
so can no man thy praises just recount.
17
Thy praise (Lord) thy works express the same.
The Sun the Moon, the Stars in firmament,
And all the host of heaven in such good frame,
do show thou art a God omnipatent:
But what a God in thine eternity,
these things created can not testify.
18
Thy creatures (Lord) do all with one consent,
say blessed be thy holy name therefore.
But forasmuch as they must all relent,
they can not yield thy praises evermore.
O then (dear God) how should I praise thy Son,
for working forth my dear salvation.
19
Salvation (Lord) since that shall haur no end,
I know not how to praise thee for the same,
But still to pray that thou would condiscende,
that I may live to glory sie thy name.
And when this life is flytt and worn away,
with thine elect to praise thy name for aye.
20
For aye (sweet Lord) yea and for ever more,
let me (poor wretch) sound out thy prayres still,
For all thy mercies kept for me in store:
and for all thine that, do obey thy will,
O ler the number still be multiply do,
that thy great name may be more magnified.
21
Thy name be magnified (O glorioue Lord)
both in this world, and in the would to come,
Of all thy creatures with one accord,
that are or shall be altered in form:
Let heaven, let earth let every thing living,
sound out the praise of Christ our heavenly king.
Give God his due quod Hen. Arth. prisoner.

A meditation of the exceeding mercies of God, the father, son, and holy
ghost, in the creation, salvation, and sanctification of the redeemed. etc.
1
O Mortal man, regard and see,
what God in love has done for thee:
When thou wast naught but dust and earth,
he put into thee life and breath,
And made thee like his Majesty,
in wisdom and integrity.
All creatures he made for thy sake,
to govern, use and thereon take: The work of the trinity in forming
mankind.

What heart could think for thy safety,
he did it grant most wyllingly.
2
When thou through sin wast fallen from grace,
and so cast down from pleasant place,
into this vale of misery
subject to all calamity:
And of Gods friend was made his foe,
in bondage seyll to sin and woe,
God in great love sent down his Son,
for thy salvation to be borne: The love of God the father toward mankind
decayed.

That so he might in thy nature,
his favor lost again procure.
3
So that when sin did still abound,
and Satan sought thee to confound,
Gods justice yielding to the same,
to throw thee down to endless shame:
Behold the great exceeding love,
of Jesus Christ that did him move,
Thy sauegarde man to undertake,
and so to suffer for thy sake, The willing obedience of Christ Jesus to
redeem mankind.

The pains of hell, and to fulfill
in every point his fathers will.
4
If thou belong to God above,
then do thou feel his greatest love.
His holy spirit assures thine heart,
that in Christ's sufferinges thou have part:
A steadfast faith in Christ his death,
this spirit in thee sealed has,
A constant hope by him alone,
for to obtain salvation.
None other Savior do thou crave, The assurance of salvation in the elect,
wrought by the holy ghost.

but only Christ thy soul to save.
5
Thus must we all Gods people dear,
confess the love he does us bear,
In chosing us before the rest
and loving us his children best,
In whom he reigns by his word,
and keeps us from the enemies sword: The love of God in general, toward
all his servants.

Whose providence still does well supply,
for to relieve our misery.
Who in all need does us suceour,
that we should serve him eucrmore.
6
Then let this great love of the Lord,
move all our hearts to learn his word:
To worship first his Majesty,
with heart and soul most constantly.
And next our heighbour in like sort,
to love, maynteyne, and still comfort.
And why lst we live with heart and mind,
to praise Gods love to us so kind.
So long as heaven and earth does last, The duetle of all Christians for all
Gods mercies to wards the.

and when this world is gone and past.
7
Let all Gods works found out his praise,
most chearefully now and always:
Not only those that are mortal,
but those much more Caelestiall.
And most of all his own dear flock,
that are sure huylt on Christ the Rock. Thankfulness due in all, chiesly in
the elect.

O let us all with one censent,
praise this our God omnipotent.
for working our salvation,
through says in Jesus Christ alone.
Give God his due, quod H. A. prisoner.

Certain in fallible tokens of a faithful Christian, taken out of the 5. of
Mat. etc.
1
HE that is poor in spirit and in mind, Math. 5.

and rightly deemes his virtues to be small. Verse. 3.

He that in his soul no goodness can fiode,
but does adiudge himself the worst of all.
O happy man preferde before the rest,
All thingesh all work together for his best. The vndersong.

2
He that does seele the burden of his sin, Romans 8.28.

to press him down into the lowest hell: Mat 5.

And even from thence with woofull playnt begins Verse. 4.

to mourn, that he so deeply did rebel.
O happy man etc.
3
He that is meek and humbled in his soul,
for greeuing God by former time mysspent. Verse. 5.

He that does strive his lusts for to control,
and from within does all his sins repent.
O happy man etc.
4
He that does hunger after righteousness, Verse. 6.

to know the Lord and his most holy will.
He that in life does stuey to express,
what God his word enioyneshim to fulfill.
O happy man etc.
5
He that is merciful, to remit all wrongs, Verse. 7.

and tenderly tespectes his neighbors poor.
He that supplies what so to them belong
that so they may pass by the (...) door.
O happy man, etc.
6
He that is pure and single in his heart, Verse. 8.

to seek the Lord and his (...) hear.
He that from his word will in no wise start,
for loss, for gain, for favor, or for fear.
O happy man, etc.
7
He that does seek to end debate and strife, Verse. 9.

twixt man and man, so much as in him lies.
He that himself does lead a holy life,
which God does love, and Satan much enuyth.
O happy man, etc.
8
He that does suffer for the Gospelles sake, Verse. 10.

the loss of freedom, goodee, or life it self:
And chearefully his cross with Christ up take,
regarding not this world; nor worldly pelf.
O happy man, etc.
9
He that can put up all reproachful words, Verse. 11.

with lesus Christ, and for his holy (...),
Although such tongues do cut like pearcing swords,
to wound the just, that wysh and would none ill,
O happy man, etc.
10
He that does watch and pray unto the Lord,
to redeem all those that suffer for his sake:
And for to give free passage to his word, Mat. 9.38.

our souls by preaching (...) for to make,
O happy man, etc.
11
He that does hate the wicked ways of sin, Psalm. 34.

and sets his soul to seek the truth aryght. verse. 14.

He that forsakes this world and all therein, 1. John. 2.

and on the Lord does free his whole delyght. verse. 15.

O happy man, etc.
12
He that does (...) the pleasures of this life, ^^. Pet. 1.

as knowing them to sighe against his soul. verse. 11.12

He that does strive to stynt such fruitelesse strife,
and all his lusts by wisdom still control.
O happy man, etc.
13
He that in all distress can freely say,
thy will (O Christ) be ever done in me.
I do believe thou wylt not me denay, Job. 19.25.27.

but save my soul (...) eternally.
O happy man, etc.
14
He that does long to be with Christ the Lord,
where his elect his blessed name adore, Philip, 1.23

That he with them, and all with one accord,
may magnisie his goodness euerniore.
O happy man preferde (...) rest,
All things shall work together for his best.
FINIS.

