By the Queen
THe Queen's Majesty being infourmed, that in some parts of her Realm,
sundry either ignorant or malicious people do spread rumors abroad, that
the base Testons of four pence halfpenye should not be current after the end of
January next: Has thought meet (lest the like false and sedicious rumors
might be further spread) to do all manner her subjects to understand, that it
has been always and so is meant by her Majesty, that all manner the base
monyes, which has been of late decreed by Proclamacion, saving the Testons of
twopence farthynge, should continue and be current still, and so taken and
paid from subject to subject, at their values as they be rated by former
Proclamacion, and so to continue until the same may be by her Majesty's
subjects brought to the mynt at London* and there exchaunged for new
sterlynge monyes, with thallowaunce to the brynger, of three pence in the
pound. Wherein such expedicion is made, as in a matter of such a moment,
possible hitherto could be, and shall be now from day to day much more.

And as for the pieces of two pence farthyng, it is and was meant and declared
in the Proclamacion, that they should be taken as current monye until the
last day of January, that day being the end of four months from Michaelmas
last. And yet nevertheless, because within that time it shall be hard to bring
up and make exchange of the same in the mynt with new moneys: Her Majesty is
well pleased, that whosoever shall bring any of the same Testons of two pence
farthyng after the said last day of January to the said Mint at London,
within the space of three months after, shall have for the same in new
silver two pence farthyng: So as her Majesty means, as much as in her shall be,
to bear herein with the burden of her poor subjects. And her pleasure is,
that this should be notified to all her loving subjects: geuyng also straight
commandment, that no manner person do refuse to take in payment any of the
said base monyes, that is to say: the fourepence halfpeny, the threhalfpence,
the threfarthynges, at the values rated by the former Proclamation, at any time
hereafter: neither the other base Testons of twopence farthyng at the same
rate, until the last day of January. And in any wise to cause all persons
doing the contrary, to be severely punyshed as obstinate and sedicious.

And further, her Majesty charge all manner of officers and ministers,
diligently to see to the attachement and punishment of certain lewd and
sedicious persons, that from town to town, and Country to Country, do carry
and spread sedicious and slanderous tales, importynge to simple people a
fear, that Cattle unmarked should be forfeited: or that all people
Chrystened or Married, should pay for Christenynges and Maryages certain
sums of monye to her Majesty, with such like vain and sedicious follyes,
never meant, nor within the compass of any meaning of her Majesty or her
counsel. The stay whereof, by speedy and severe punishment, her Majesty
strayghtly requires of all manner of Iusticiaries, as they will or ought to
answer to the contrary, and from hence forth to give order, that as soon as
any such lewd tale is uttered, that the reporters thereof may be either
punyshed with speed, or else produce the aucthours.

Yeuen at her highness Palyce at Westminister, the.xxiii. day of December.

God save the Queen.
Imprinted at London in Powles CHVRCHYARDE, By Richard Judge and John Cawood,
Printers to the Queen's Majesty.

Cum priuilegio Regiae Maiestatis.


