By the Queen.
THE Queens Majesty gives all manner her subjects to understand, that of
late at Bruges in Flaunders, the Commissioners sufficiently aucthorised on the
part of her Majesty, and of the King of Spain her good brother, have
suspended, proroged, and continued the treaty lately had there for the matters
of Entercours of marchaundize, until her Majesty and the said King, or
either of them, shall by their letters declare to the other, that the
prorogation of the said treaty, shall cease and take end. During which
time, and until the said declaration shall be made, as before is said, by either
of the Princes. it is also accorded by the said Commissioners, that nothing
shall be changed concerning the agreementes for thentercours made heretofore
betwixt her Majesty, and the Duchess of Parma (...) of the low Countries,
the.xviii. of December, the year of our Lord God. 1564. but that the same
shall remain sure and fyrme, and in that state wherein hitherto the same has been. And that the subjects of both sides shall be honestly, friendly, and
favorably treated. And that it be provided to have the Seas kept free from
Pirates. And if any thing shall be attempted, contrary to the agreementes, the
same shall be forthwith remedyed, according to the laws and thentercours. And if
both the Princes or any one of them, shall declare their pleasure to have the
prorogation of the treaty to cease: In that case it shall be lawful for the
Subjects of either Prince, during the space of forty days next following the
knowledge of the said declaration given to the other Prince, to depart freely
with their goods, wares, and marchaundizes, and to dispose of them at their
wills. All which agreementes were also ordered by the said Commissioners to be
notified and proclaimed in the Cities of London and Andwarpe the.xx. of July.
For perfourmaunce whereof, her Majesty gives al her Subjects to understand
the contents of the premises, to the intent that the entercours and traffike
of marchaundize may be continued betwixt her Majesty's dominions, and the low
Countries of the said king of Spain her good brother, and both their
subjects, as hitherto they have. Which her Majesty wylleth to be observed,
until her Majesty and the said king or either of them, according to the
agreementes aforesaid, shall declare their pleasures in any thing to the
contrary.

Yeuen at our Manor of Saint James, the.viii. day of July, the.viii. year of
our reign.
GOD save the Queen.
Imprinted at London in Powles Churchyard, by Richard Judge, and John Cawood,
Printers to the Queens Majesty.

Cum priuilegio Regiae Maiestatis.


