By the Queen,
THE Queen's Majesty calling to her good remembrance how well this Realm is
furnyshed with good laws and orders, for redress of many enormities, and how
through negligence of officers, and presumption of offenders, the same
nevertheless do rather grow then abate: has thought mete at this present to
deuyse with her counsel, how some few necessary laws very beneficial for
this time, might be duly executed and observed, as they were meant, to the
weal of the Realm, and comfort of her Majesty. For which purpose her
Majesty gives all manner her subjects to understand, that like as the last
year a certain abbreuiat of Statutes was made and publyshed by order of her
Counsel upon her commandment, and was by the Justices of peace in diverse
countries diligently regarded, and in a great part put toward execution,
though in some other parts for lack of time, the same took not so good
effect:

So her Majesty charge all manner her Justices and other ministers to whom
the same shall belong, to take in hand again their former charge given to
them the last year, for thexecution of the said Statutes, hastenyng their
assembles for that purpose, now in the beginning of this Summer, so as their
doings may be certified in such sort as they were commanded and prescribed
the last year.

And besides these, her Majesty fyndeth like cause to have two other great
enormities daily increasyng in this her Realm to be spedely reformed, for
which there do remain in force good laws. The one is, the monstrous abuse of
Apparel almost in all estates, but principally in the meaner sort. The other
is, the decay and disfurniture of all kind of Horses for service within the
Realm. And because her Majesty perceaueth, that although the laws be very
penal in both these cases, yet without some special direction given for
thexecution thereof, the reformation will not ensue: Her Majesty has caused
the statutes remaynyng in force for both the said purposes, to be briefly
collected, and presently by this her Proclamation, charge all manner her
Sheryffes to publyshe the same jointly with this Proclamation, and to fyx the
same up in places accustomed.

And for the manner of the spedy execution of the Statutes for Apparel and
other enormities incident thereto: Her majesty has caused certain good
ordinances to be devised, and accorded by her counsel, which also her
Majesty's pleasure is, to be well regarded, straightly kept and observed,
according to the several limitations thereof: wherefore there is good hope
conceived by her Majesty of a spedie redress by means of the said good
orders. And if in any point of the same statutes or orders, any doubt shall
arise for the understanding of the same: her Majesty wylleth that the advice
and answer of her privy counsel be required and followed. And for the other
default tendyng to the decay of horses within the Realm, which partly ryseth
by stealyng and carrying numbers of Horses, Geldynges, Mares, and Coltes out of
the Realm, and by neglectyng the breedyng and keeping of Horses within the
Realm, according to the laws provided.

For redress of the former part concerning carrying out of Horses out of the
Realm: her Majesty charge al manner her subjects, and others within her
Realm, to take knowledge of the laws now publyshed for that purpose, and not
to trust in any remission of penalties therefore provided. For the spedier
observation whereof, her Majesty means shortly to direct her several
Commissions under the great Seal, to such parts of her Realm where the
conueyaunce has accustomably been, or hereafter may be, to enquire thereof
diligently and streyghtly by order of law, and thereupon to proceade sharply
to thexecution, as the cases shall require.

And as to the latter part tendyng to the decay of breedyng and keeping of
Horses: her Majesty does likewise charge all manner her subjects to take
knowledge of the laws remaynyng in force, and now publyshed at this present
time. And for that it is thought by her Majesty, that the same laws has been
by diverse persons so long forgotten, that it will seem hard to have the same
spedely put in execution: her Majesty of her gracious disposition, means to
proceade to thexecution thereof in this manner following.

Her Majesty intends to direct her several Commissions to special persons
in every county of the Realm, to enquire by order of law, what persons shall
not have before the.xv. of August next. Horses according to the Statute by
reason of their wives apparel mentioned in the Statute, and what other persons
chargeable to breedyng or keeping of Horses by force of the Statutes, shall not
before the.xv. of December next, pertourme the meaning and intent of the said
Statutes, as well for breedyng as keeping. And for the more certain execution
hereof: her Majesty also means to cause a special vieu to be taken through
the Realm in September next. of the number inquirable by the foresaid.xv.
day of Auguste, as is above expressed: and a like muster and vieu to be taken
in Ianuarye next at one instaunt time, both of the same number, and of all the
rest whereof inquisition shall be made by the said Commission, to be provided
before the said.xv. day of December.

After which views and musters taken: her Majesty intends at every half
year to have the same severely executed by officers specially appointed, until
the Realm be replenyshed with such number of Horses, as may be well kept and
mayntayned for the service of the same.

Of all these her Majesty's determinations, tendyng only to the weal, good
order, and strength of her Realm: her Majesty has thought mete in this
plain manner to give notyce thereof by this Proclamation to all manner her
subjects, to avoid the pains that otherwise thereof must and shall ensue.

Yeuen at her Majesty's Pallaice of Westminster the.vii. of May, the fourth
year of her hyghnes reign.

God save the Queen.
Imprinted at London in Powles Church yard, by Richard Judge and John Cawood,
Printers to the Queen's Majesty.

Cum priuilegio Regiae Maiestatis.

