By the Queen.
WHereas the Queens Majesty our Sovereign Lady by reason of the plague and
pestilence in the city of London, did lately by her proclamation adiourne part
of the Term of S. Michael, that is to say, from the vtas thereof unto Crastino
animarum, the^ to have begun at the city of Westminster, as at the place
accustomed: Her Majesty had very great hope that the said sickness through
the favor of Almighty God, and by the coldenesse of the year, and other
occasions by that time would have ceased, nevertheless her highness is
credibly enfourmed that the said sickness yet continues within her said
city of London, for the which her Majesty is right hartyly sorry. Her
highness is therefore forced as well for the preservation of her other good
subjects of all degrees that should repair to London by reason of the
term, as also for many other great considerations to adiourne the rest of the
said term. That is to say, from Crastino animarum aforesaid, until the
Octabis of S. Hillarie next coming, then to begin at Westminster as has been
accustomed. Which her Majesty signifies to all and singular her loving
subjects of this her Realm, to thentent that they and every of them which
has cause or commandment to appear in any of her highness Courts (...)
Westminster, in or at any day or time from and after the said Crastino
animarum, may tarry at their dwellinges, or where their business otherwise shall
lie, without resorting to any of the said Courts for that cause, before the
Octabis of S. Hillarie next coming, and that without danger of forfayture,
penalty, or contempt to incur to wards her (...)s in that behalf. And
nevertheless her Majesty's pleasure is, that two of her Justices, that is to
say, of either benche one, shall the said Crastino animarum according to the
ancient order, adiourne her said two Courts at Westminster, at which day
writtes of adiournement shall be directed to the said Justices, to adiourne the
same in and from the said Crastino animarum, until the Octabis of S. Hillarie
as before is said. And her Majesty's pleasure is, that al matters, causes, and
suits, depending in any of her other Courts between party and party, as in
her highness Courts of Chaun(...) Star chaumber, and Exchequer, Courts of
wards and Liueries, and Duchy of Lancaster, shall have continuance, and the
parties shall have day from the date of these presents, until the Octabis of
S. Hillarie as before is said.

Provided always, and her Majesty's pleasure and commandment is, that all
Collectours, Receauers, Sheriffs, and other accomptantes, and all other
persons that ought or should account or pay any some or sommes of money in any
of her Majesty's Court of Exchequer, Courts of Wards and Liueries or of her
Duchy of Lancaster, or in any of them, or that should enter into any account
in any of the same Courts, shall at their days appointed repair unto the
accustomed places at Westminster, where her hyghnes has appointed such
officers and ministers as for that purpose her Majesty has thought expedient:
and there to pay and do in every behalf, as though no such Proclamation of
adiournement had been had or made: Any thing mentioned in this present
Proclamation, or in any writ of adiournement to the contrary not withstanding.

And her hyghnes further pleasure and commandment is, that all Shiriffes
shall return their writtes and process against all such accomptauntes and
detters at the days therein appointed: and if any person or persons, who ought
to account or pay any sum or sommes of money to her Majesty in any the
Courts and places aforesaid, do make default therein: that then her hyghnes
writtes and process shall be awarded and sent forth against every such person
and persons, and the same to be duly and orderly served, and returned by the
Shiriffes and officers thereunto appointed, in such like manner and form, as
the same should have been, if this present Proclamation had not ben made. And
if any Shiriffe or other officer shall make default, or be negligent in
serving, executing, and returning of any the writtes and process aforesaid
that then every such Shiriffe and other officer, shall incur such pains and
penalties, as by the said Courts, or any of them shall be taxed and assessed.
Wyllyng and commanding all and every of her Majesty's Shiriffes, officers, and
ministers, and subjects, to whom it does or shall appertain, to observe and
keep their assemblies and apparaunces, with all their returns and certificates
in her highness said Courts at Westminster in the Octabis of S. Hillarie next
coming, then and there with the favor of God to be holden and kept, and there
to do their offices and duties in every bebalfe, in like manner and form, as
they should or ought to have done if this present Proclamation had not ben had
or made, as they will answer to the contrary at their perils.

Given at her Majesty's Castle of Windsor the.xxiii. day of October, in the
eleventh year of her Majesty's reign. God save the Queen.
Imprinted at London in Powles Churchyard by Richard Judge and John Cawood,
Printers to the Queens Majesty.

Cum priuilegio Regiae Maiestatis.


