HONI SOIT Q^^ MAL Y PENSE DIEV ET MON DROIT royal blazon or coat of arms
September xxvij. Anno xviij. Reginae Elizabethae.
The orders appointed for the government and order of the Eschaunge, that the
same may be used and kept according to the laws and statutes of the Realm,
which are now ordained to be observed by the Queens Majesty's Proclamation.
First, all Merchantes, English and Strangers, and all other her Majesty's
subjects, are to understand, that by the Laws and statutes of this Realm,
no man ought to make any eschaunge, or rechaunge of money, but such as her
Majesty shall aucthorise, or their leefull Deputies, to keep, make, and
answer for such eschaunges and rechaunges, upon pains contained in the same
Statutes.

And to the intent the same may be used for the necessary uses of leefull
eschaunge and rechaunge in cases requisite, it is at this present time ordered
for the usage thereof, that Edmonde Calthrop, Thomas Dalton, of the City of
London Haberdashers, and John Wanton, of the same City Grocer, men well
acquaynted with the manner of eschaunges and rechanges, from and to the City
of London, and to from forra^gne parts, shall and may make and give sufficient
warrant to all persons for eschaunge and reeschaunge, in such sort as shall
be agreeable to the observation of the laws for that purpose ordained. And
therefore from henceforth al bills of eschaunge or reeschaunge, endorced or
subscribed with the name and hand writing of them, or any one of them, shall be
sufficient warrant both for the deliverer and taker. And whenever any others
shall be appointed to occupy and exercise the same rooms, for the keeping of
the said eschaunge, there shall be thereof from time to time notice publicly
given in places thereto requisite.

Item, It is to be regarded, that none go about by any fraudulent color or
device, to alter, or to discontinue the ancient manner of delyueryng or taking
of money by eschaunge, whereby either the intention of the laws provided
therefore, or her Majesty's prerogative for her fynes and duties answerable
for the same, be abused or defrauded.

Item, though there have been always answered in former times to her Majesty's
progenitors, and to the Masters and keepers of the eschange, from time to
time, as by many records is very manifest to be seen, upon every English
Noble, of the deliverer one penye, and the like of the taker, which was upon
every pound six pence: yet for the more ease, and less burden, of such as
shall have necessary cause to deliver and take by eschaunge, there shall not be
for this time, nor until greater cause shall move for her Majesty's service,
and more be taken but one farthyng of the said Noble, or the value thereof for
the deliverer, and one other farthyng of the taker, which shall be upon the
pound, but penie halfpenie.

Item, It is to be considered, that the eschaunge and reeschaunge shall be so
ordered, that as near as possibly may be, and as times of trade may suffer,
the moneys of this Realm may not be delivered under the just values of their
standerd, neither that any eschaunges of money to be used, but for the use of
known Merchants, or for such as otherwise by the Queens Majesty's license,
or leefully by the laws and vsages of the Realm, have or hereafter shall have
cause for their needful business, to make their eschaunges of moneys of this
Realm, for moneys in foreign places.

Finally, if there shall hereafter appear any further matter needful to be
ordained or declared for the better and more perfect usage of the eschaunge, or
for the avoiding or explaning of any doubts that may arise: the same shall be
with advise of wise and expert men in the trade of merchandise, and of
eschaunge, notified in like tables from time to time, to be seen and read in
this place.

God save the Queen.

