By the Queen.
FOrasmuch as within these few days there have been certain infamous Libels
full of malice and falsehood spread abroad, and set up in sundry places about
the City and Court, tending to sedition, and dishonorable interpretations of
her Majesty's godly Actions and purposes, and especially invented of cankred
malice colourably, to the destruction or ruin of some of good estimation and
fidelity to wards her Majesty, by lewd persons not worthy to enjoy the
benefit of this her Majesty's quiet government, no more then evil and corrupt
limbs, which for lack of speedy remedic may infect more of the body; The
sufferance whereof cannot but breed a further disorder to the good quietness
of her Majesty's most peaceable government. And because her Majesty would have
such villainous, treasonable and seditious attempts both repressed and punished,
and also would come to some certainty for the discovering of the Authors
thereof, whereby she would not enter into any scruple of suspicion of any other
manner of person then the offenders or their partners: Therefore her Majesty
wills, that whosoever can, and will discover the Authors or partners of those
Libels, and will open it to her Majesty, or to some Attendant about her
Person, the same shall be rewarded in this sort: If the party that shall
discover the same be under the degree of a Gentleman, he shall have forth with
forty pounds; and if he be a Gentleman, he shall have one hundred pounds: And
if hereafter it shall be proved, that any person has been in any wise privy
hereto, and shall not now very shortly after this Proclamation discover it, the
same shall at no time hereafter be thereof pardoned. And furthermore, her
Majesty charge all manner of persons that shall hereafter at any time find
any such seditious Bills, to bring the same to the Lord Mayor of London, or to
some special officer of London, or of any other Town where such shall be
found. And if the same shall be found in or about the Court, then to be
secretly brought to some of her Majesty's Councellers, or other her faithful
servants attendant about her Person, upon pain, that if any be found remiss
herein, then the same to receive such like punishment as the Author of
sedicious Libels ought to do. For her Majesty cannot think that these things
are so much given out in respect of any private persons as they are in contempt
of the present government and proceedings, wherein her Majesty cannot but find
her self touched.

Given at her Majesty's Palace of Westminster, the 26. day of March 1576. in
the xviij. year of her Majesty's Reign.
Imprinted at London by Richard Judge, Printer to the Queens Majesty.

Cum Priuilegio Regiae Maiestatis.


