By the Queen.
THe Queens Majesty consydering that notwithstanding that by great and mature
deliberation of the wysest of this Realm, a godly a good order of public
prayer and administration of the Sacraments has been set forth and allowed by
Parliament, and commonly through the whole Realm, in all the time of her
Majesty's reign received and used: yet some persons of their natures unquietly
disposed, desirous to change, and therefore ready to find fault with all well
established orders, do not only refrain from coming to the Church, where the
divine service and common prayer is orderly used, but also do use of their own
devises, other rites and ceremonies then are by the laws of the Realm
received and used: and besides that, some of them have rashly set forth, and
by stealth imprinted certain books under the title of an admonition to the
Parliament, and one other also in defense of the said admonition, the which
books do tend to no other end, but to make division and dissension in the
opinions of men, and to breed talks and disputes against common order. Her
highness therefore, both to repress such insolent and inordinate contemptes
of such as refuse to come to common prayer and divine service, according to
the order established by Parliament, to the evil and pernicious example of
others, and to keep her subjects in one uniform, godly, and quiet order
within her Realm, to avoid al controversies, scismes, and dissentions that
may arise: does strayghtly charge and command al her Majesty's faithful and
true subjects, them selves to keep, and to cause others such as be under
them, to keep the order of common prayer, divine services, and administration
of the Sacraments, according as in the said book of divine service they be
set forth, and none other contrary or repugnant, upon pain of her highness
indignation, and of other pains in the said act comprysed.

And as concerning the said books, called, The admonition to the Parliament,
and al other books made for the defense of the said admonition, or agreeable
therewith, the which books do cheefely tend to the deprauyng and fyndyng
fault with the said book of common prayer, and administration of the
Sacraments, and of the orders received here in this Church and common wealth
of England: Her highness strayghtly charge and commands al and every
Prynter, Stationer, Book bynder, Merchant, and al other men of what quality
or condition he or they be, who has in their custody any of the said books,
to bring in the same to the Bishop of the diocese, or to one of her highness
privy Counsel, within twenty days after that he shall have notice of this
Proclamation, and not to keep any of them without license or allowance of the
said Bishop, upon pain of imprysonment, and her highness further displeasure.

Given at our Manor of Greenewiche, the.xi. day of June. 1573. the fyfteenth
year of our reign.
Imprinted at London in Powles Churchyard, by Richard Judge, Printer to the
Queens Majesty.

Cum priuilegio Regiae Maiestatis.


