The effect of certain branches of the Statute made in Anno.xxxiii. Hen.
viii. touching the maintenance of Artillery, and the punishment of such as
use unlawful games, very necessary to be put in execution.
FIrst, that all fathers, governors, and rulers of such as be of tender age,
do teach and bring up them in the knowledgee of shooting: And that every man,
having a man child or men children in his house, shall provide, ordain, and
have in his house for every man child being of the age of. vii. years and
above, till he shall come to the age of.xvii. years, a bow and two shaftes, to
induce and learn them and bring them up in shooting, and shall deliver all the
same bow and arrows to the same young men to use and occupy: And if the same
young men be servants, that then their masters shall abate the money that
they shall pay for the same bows and arrows, of their wages. And after all
such young men shall come to the age of.xvii. years, every of them shall
provide and have a bow and four arrows, continually for him self at his
proper costs and charges, or else of the gift or provision of his friends, and
use and occupy the same in shooting, as is before rehearsed. And if the
master suffer any of his servants taking wages, being in his household, and
under the age of.xvii. years, or the father suffer any of his sons being in
his household, and under the age of.xvii. years, to lack a bow and two
arrows, contrary to the form of this estatute, by the space of one month
together: then the master or father in whom such negligence shall be, shall for
every such default forfaite. vi. s. viii. d. And that every servant passing
the age of.xvii. years, and under the age of. lr. years, and taking wages,
which can or is able to shoot, and shall lack a bow and four arrows by
the space of one month together, shall for every such default forfaite and
lose.vi.s.viii.d.

Item, that no person by him self, factor, deputy, servant, or other person,
shall for his or their gain, lucre, or living, keep, have, hold, occupy,
exercise, or maintain any common House, Alley, or place of Bowling, Coytyng,
Cloise, Coiles, half Bowl, Tennis, Dising* Table or Carding, or any other
manner of game prohibited by any statute heretofore made, or any unlawful new
game no we invented or made, or hereafter to be invented, found, had, or made,
upon pain to forfaite and pay for every day keeping, having, mayntayning, or
suffering any such game to be had, kept, executed, played, or mayntayned,
within any such House, Garden, Alley, or other place, contrary to the form
and effect to this estatute.xl.s. and the players so taken to pay for every
time.vi.s.vii.d.

Item, that the Justices of peace, and every Mayor, Sheriff, Bayliffe,
Constable, or other head officer, have authority to enter into all places
as well within fraunchesis as else where, and the persons offending in any of the
premises, to take and put in prison, until such time they put in suerties no
more to suffer, occupy, or commit the said offenses.

Item, that the Mayor, Sheriffs, Bayliffes, Constables, and other head
officers within every City, Borough, and Town within this Realm, where any
such officers shall fortune to be, as well within the fraunchises as without,
shall make due search weekly, or at the furthest at all times hereafter once
every month, in all places where any such Houses, Alleys, play or plays
shall be suspected to be had, kept, and mayntayned. And if the said Majors,
Sheriffs, Bayliffes, Constables, and other head officers, within their Cities,
Borowes, and Towns, as well within fraunchesis as without, do not make due
search at the furthest once every month, if the case so require, according to
the tenor of this act, and do not execute the same in all things according to
the purport and force of the same: that then every such Mayor, Sheriffs,
Bayliffes, Constable, or other head officer, to pay and forfaite for every
month not making such search, nor executing the same.xl. s.

Item, that no artificer or handicraftes man of any occupation, Husbandman,
Apprentice, Labourer, servant of husbandry, Iorneyman or servant, or
Artificer, Mariner, Fissherman, Waterman, or any seruingman, may use any
unlawful game.

Item, that all that play at Bowls or any other unlawful game in the fields,
to lose for every such time.vi.s.viii.d. and to be committed to prison, unto
such time they put in suerties no more to use the same.

Item, this statute to be proclaimed four times every year, and the like to be
done in all assizes and sessions, and to continue for ever.

Memorandum, that there is a prouiso in this statute, for all men of worship
which may dispende.C.li. yearly and vpwardes, may use these games with
discretion at their pleasures.

GOD save the Queen.
Imprinted at London in Powles Churchyard by Richard Judge and John Cawood,
Printers to the Queens Majesty.

Cum priuilegio Regiae Maiestatis.


