To all and every the Queens Majesty's Officers, Churchwardens, Sidemen,
Swornemen, and others, having any government or oversight for the time being,
of or in any Church, Chapel, or Parish, within the Province of Caunterburie.
WHERE the Queens Majesty, being very careful for the good government of her
Realm and Dominions, in all godly and wholesome religion agreeable to the word of
God, and being very desirous to have both her laws and orders well and
faithfully observed, and her loving subjects reposed in godly quiet, concord,
and unity, and specially in matters of religion: We vndernamed of her
Majesty's commission Ecclesiastical, with other our associates, as our duty
is, advisedly consydering her good zeal worthy to take place, to the honor of
God, and the godly quiet of her subjects, have thought good to signify thus
much, and also to charge you and every of you whom it may concern. And
therefore we will and require you, and in the Queens Majesty's name straightly
charge and command you, and every of you, that in no wise ye suffer any
Parson or Minister to minister any sacrament, or say any public prayers in
any your Churches, Chapels, or other place appointed for Common prayers, in
any other order, manner, or sort, then only according to the prescription of
the book of Common prayers, and the Queens Majesty's laws published in that
behalf. And that in no wise ye suffer any person publicly or priuatelye to
teach, read, or preach, in any the said Churches, Parishes, Chapels,
Private houses, or other places, unless such be licenced to preach, read, or
teach, by the Queens highness authority, the Archbishop of Caunterburie
his license, or by the license of the Bishop of ye Diocese: and that he be
such a Minister as is licenced to preach after the first of May last, and not
removed from the Ministry by us, or any other lawful authority: And that
you have a diligent care in the accomplishment of this her highness service
and pleasure by us thus to you declared, as you and every of you will answer
to the contrary.

Yeuen at Lamheth in the County of Surrey the.vii. of June, in the year of the
reign of our Sovereign Lady Elizabeth, by the grace of God, of England,
France, and Irelande Queen, defender of the faith. etc. the thirteenth.
Matthewe Cantuar. Edwinus London. Robart Winton. Richard Ely. Nicolas
Wigorniensis. Richard Cicestren. Gabriell Goodman. Thomas Wilson. Thomas Bromley.
George Bromley. Peter Osborne. Thomas Yale. Richard VVendesley. John Mershe.
With other assistens.


