D^ALOGVES IN THE ENGLISH AND MALAIANE LANGVAGES: OR, CERTAIN COMMON FORMS OF
SPEECH, FIRST WRITTEN IN Latin, Malaian, and Madagascar tongues, by the
diligence and painful endeavor of Master GOTARDVS ARTHVSIVS, a Dantisker, and
now faithfully translated into the English tongue by AUGUSTINE SPALDING
Merchant, for their sakes, who happily shall hereafter undertake a voyage to
the East Indies.

AT LONDON, Imprinted by FELIX KYNGSTON for WILLIAM WELBY, and are to be sold
at his shop in Paul's Churchyard, at the sign of the Swan. 1614.

TO THE TRVLY HONORABLE AND RIGHT WORTHY KNIGHT SIR THOMAS SMITH, Governor of
the East India, Muscouia, Northwest Passages, SUMMER Islands Companies, and
Treasurer for the first Colonie in Virginia: AUGUSTINE SPAVLDING wishes all
happiness, and increase of honor.
Honorable Sir, the world has just occasion to take knowledge of your
continual travels, cares and endeavors for the good of those sundry Companies,
whereof by public assent you have been chosen Governor. Your erecting of the
Lecture of Navigations at your own expenses, for the better instruction of our
Mariners in that most needful art: your setting down of better orders in
dispatching forth of our East-Indian fleetes: your employment with
extraordinary entertainment of skillful Mathematicians and Geographers in the
South and North parts of the world: This your providence and liberality is
like, in time to come, to work many special good effects. Lastly, you have
caused these Dialogues of the languages of the Isle of Madagascar and of the
Malaian tongues, presented unto you by Master Richard Hackluyt, a singular
furtherer of all new discoueries and honest trades, to be set forth in our
English tongue: because of the special use and benefit which your Factors and
servants, residing in all the Southeast Islands of the world, may reap
thereby. And that nothing might be omitted on your behalf, it has pleased you
further to ask mine opinion, and to enjoin me to take special care for the
correction of such errors as were committed in the first edition, because of my
eleven or twelve years employment in those Countries, as servant and Factor
for your Worship and the Company: which your commandment I have performed in
the best sort I can. If this my small service be accepted in good part, I hope
hereafter to give your Worship a true relation, as leisure and opportunity
shall permit, of the chief things, which I have observed and performed in the
time of my continuance in your service, in those remote parts of the world. And
in the mean season I shall not cease to pray to the Almighty for the long
prosperity of your self, and all the Worshipful and worthy Company.

Your servant always to be commanded, Augustine Spaulding.

DIALOGVES IN THE ENGLISH AND MAlaian Languages.
English. A DIALOGVE OF THE COMING of a certain ship, to wit, how the Master
thereof appeared before the King and what was done there besides, written after
the Indian manner, with seven persons, whose names are, David, Abraham, a
Messenger, the Porter, the King, a Woman, and the Master of the ship.
D. GOd save you Abraham.


A. And you David.


D. Whence come you so early?


A. Out of the market place.


D. What news? have you heard nothing of the coming of any ship?


A. I heard the thundering of Ordnance, which is a sign of ships coming.


D. And I heard that a ship was come from Guiserat.


A. But what Marchandizes does she bring?


D. She is laden with rice, almonds, and raysons, she brings also many
clothes of all sorts, and very much bombace.


A. Is this so? surely this news is very much desired.


D. I heard it so affirmed for a truth.


A. If therefore God assent, clothes and other Merchandises will be easily
gotten.


D. Yea (God willing) this will be profitable for many poor men, who go ill
apparrelled, seeing clothes have been a long time of great price.


A. This is true, because rice also, as well winnowed, as not winnowed, and
other meats, as flesh, fish, and other victuals.


D. We now hope better, for it is time, that the ships come from Bengala,
Noselipatan, and other places, all which bring clothes, and winnowed rice.


A. What is he who comes thence, carried upon a mighty Elephant, and guarded
with so many men accompanying him?


D. That is Sabandar with the Secretary.


A. I see also strange men sitting upon him, who are they I pray you?


D. It is the Guiserat Captain who came lately with his ship, and is now to
be brought unto the King.


A. What means it, I pray you, that a certain Elephant goes covered with
red cloth, before which drumsters and trumpeters go?


D. The Elephant which you see, and the man who sits in the little house set
upon him, are a token, that they bring their Kings letters unto our King.


A. But who has those letters?


D. That man who sits upon the Elephant.


A. Who is it that sits upon him?


D. It is one of the Kings Nobility, chosen by him for this purpose.


A. But to what end are these things?


D. For the honor of the King from whence the letters are brought.


A. But what is it, that I see so many men and young striplings follow him,
every one whereof carries somewhat in his hands fairly covered with a
colored cloth?


D. They are presents, which the master must give unto the King.


A. Does he present them in stead of a tribute for his goods, or is he
compelled to pay more in stead of custom?


D. No. seven for an hundred are paid in stead of custom.


A. What honor does the King give these men again?


D. When they are come in, he honorably entertaineth them.


A. What therefore is done?


D. They eat and drink, and al kind of delicates and fruits are set before
them, they play, dance, and al manner of pleasures are exercised, they sound
the Trumpets, Cornets and other Pipes, and strike up the Drums: And further,
the King causes a garment, made after the manner of that place, to be brought,
and gives it to the Master.


A. Is this the manner of this Country?


D. I, this is the manner with this King, and has bin also with others.


A. Does the King any more?


D. No: for when these things are done, the King causes them to be brought
home again with the Elephant.


A. I would desire to see al these things.


D. Go too therefore let us follow them.


A. Are they not already entered? we have stayed here a long time.


D. They are not, for they cannot enter into the gate, unless a ken be first
given from the King.


A. Come therefore, Is it so? let us go quickly.


D. Do you see? They all stand yet at the gates.


A. It is true, but who is he that comes forth, holding a gilded knife in
his hand?


D. He is the Kings messenger.


A. Whither must he go with the knife?


D. He comes to bring in the Captain.


A. How is that knife called? is it not called by another name?


D. Yes, for it is called Si'ap, which is as much as if you would say, a token
from the King.


A. Unto whom has he any commandment?


D. Unto the Master of the gates.


A. I see that he delivers the Si'ap to him.


D. It is true, but come, let us hear what he will say.


The Messenger, who carries the Si'ap, speaks unto the Porter. M. Ho, where
are you Porter?


P. I am here, what will you with me?


M. Receive a commandment from our Lord.


P. I will hear, God willing.


M. The Kings, commandment (and if it please God) is, that you let the
Captain in with his people.


P. In the name of the Lord, praise be to our King.


The Messenger speaks unto the King. M. Let your Majesty know that the
Captain is present here at the gate.


K. It is well, he shall presently be let in, but go you, and call forth the
woman first.


W. What does your Majesty desire?


K. Are all things ready for the receiving, and well intertaining of strange
guests?


W. My Lord King, all things are prepared. For first, we have hung up that
blew silken cloth garnished with gold, over head, in stead of a canopy or
covering, and have covered all the pillars with silk. Furthermore, over the
Kings Majesty's head we have hung up that red velvet cloth leafed with gold,
and for the strange guests, that green velvet cloth intermingled with the
Rhinoceros and Tigers of gold. The women that shall dance we have attired with
red and green silken apparel, hanged golden chains about their necks, put
tablets to their breasts, garnished with precious stones, gold rings on their
fingers glittering with Carbuncles and Diamondes, and have put golden bracelets
upon their arms and legs.


K. It is well, see that al things be so prepared, that I be not disgraced.


W. By Gods help all things shall be well and carefully provided.


K. Let in the Captain.


M. Behold, the King is at hand.


K. Call the Interpreter to me, that I may speak with the Captain.


M. He himself understands the Malaian language very well.


K. Is it so? what, has he bin here before?


M. Yea King, for it is Captain Solomon, who was here two years since,
brought hither from Mecha with two ships.


K. Lay down that vestment, and spread a mat made of taffetie for him, that
the Captain may sit thereon.


C. Praise be to the King, he is entreated by me his slave, that I may lawfully
speak unto him.


K. Speak what you please.


C. After that, through the grace of God, I arrived in this haven of your
Majesty, and had fastened mine anchors, it came to pass, that when I departed
from my King to bring these letters to your Majesty, he gave me some other
thing in charge besides, which I should deliver in your Majesty's presence,
although the same also be contained in these letters: to wit, that if your
Majesty stood in need of any ships of war, or galleyes for your defense,
you should signify the same unto him by your letters, seeing in our countries
all things are abundantly found which appertain to warlike preparation, to
wit, ships of war, gunnes greater, and lesser, spears, swords, daggers,
iron co^slets, gunpowder, matches, bullets of all sorts, iron, lead, brass,
tin, and whatsoever may be devised.


K. Praised be God, seeing your King does so comfort me, I pray God to
recompense it unto him.


C. Amen.


K. Give unto the Captain that he may eat of the fruits, cause the Music
to be exercised, and let there be dancing, strike up the lesser Drums, play
on the Flutes, and let the Drumster perform his duty well, set meat before
the Captain, reach him some of the roasted capon, and of the boiled hen, with
the broth, and let him taste the fishes taken in our waters, power out wine,
and carry it to the Captain. Ho, Captain, be merry, eat and drink, although
I will not drink, for I have taken physic to day.


C. I thank your Majesty. Surely I do nothing else, but eat and drink, and
make my self merry.


K. Go, bring certain garments for the Captain, to wit, a red coat, a
taffatie girdle edged with gold, a yellow garment shining with intermingled
gold, a girdle having Arabian letters wrought in gold, and a dagger with a
golden pummell garnished with precious stones, the have whereof is made of
black Coral. Cause the Sabander to clothe him with this attire.


C. Glory be to the King.


K. Cause the Elephants to fight, let a Bufala be killed, and let the half
thereof be distributed among the Captains mariners, seeing they have eaten
little fresh victuals in the voyage.


C. Glory be to the King. But I entreat your Majesty that I may depart, seeing
night now approaches.


K. Well, when you will: but my pleasure is that you daily come unto me and
visit me.


C. If God so please.


K. Let ye Elephant be brought forth, that the Captain may be carried home.
But give him these sweet Oranges, and sweet Pomegranates.


C. God preserve and keep your royal Majesty.


K. God, the fountain of all goodness, be also with you.


Malaian. SATOE BERKATTA SAMMA DERry sampey capal: derri manna Nachgoda, datan
adappada Sultaen: Lagi appa datan deire negry Oost Indien: deng' an touiouh
orang', bagi, Daoedt, Ebrahim, Satoe Syda' da, Pongolo, pintou: Sultaen, Satoe
parampouan iang Capitaen Capal.
D. ES salemalecom Ebrahim.


E. Malocom selam Daoct.


D. Derri manna datan pagi hari?


E. Beta datan derripakan.


D. Appa ach gabar? tieda gabar barou derribarang cappal?


E. Souda beta deng'ar boenij bedil, iang itoe alamat derri cappal dagang.


D. Lagihamba deng'ar catta iang satoe cappal derri Guiserat souda datan.


E. Appa peruiniaga de baua di'a?


D. Ini ber' isi, ken bras, ken gorma, zebibt: lagi bauadia baniakaym alus
derri samoe' a ienis: lagicapas bania.


E. Begitou? itoe gabar bania baick.


D. Iabeta deng' ar catta sach begitoe.


E. Iang datan (Insialla) kayin, lagi barang barang lain iadi morra.


D. Ia, (Iusialla) lagi iadi baick ken orang kassieen, iang tieda berkayin:
carna kayin lamma mahal.


E. Itoe songo: lagi pade, bras, deng' an sommoenia macca nan lain poen mahal
bagi daging, ikan iangla oucklain.


D. Sakaran baick poelang: carna sacaran moesim cappal^ derri Bengali,
Moeselipatan lagi beniaer itoe datan; ian de a baua sammoenia, kaijn deng' an
bras.


E. Siappa itoe iang datang sini^tas Gayia besar, iang adda orang bania de
ekoet de' ea?


D. Itor Sabandaer deng' an Pongolo Corcon.


E. Beta liat lagi dondoc at as orang dagang, orang appa tacok itoe?


D. Itoe la Nachgoda Guiserat, iang barou datan deng' an cappa^ de'a, iang de
baua de' an' adap pada rayia.


E. Appa alamat itoe, iang satoe Gayia, ter packay ken sakelat miera, iang
gendrang orang namfieri, daen oraeng serener ialaen dou louw?


D. Iani Gayia tun liat, iang orang doudock dalan rincka atas Gaeyia, itoe
alamat dia baua soerat derrirayia di'a aken Tuankyta.


E. Syappa baua soerat sakaraen?


D. Oraeng dodock atas Gayiae.


E. Orang appa itoe doudoc de atas?


D. Itoe saetoe Orang kaya derri sultaen terpilleh.


E. Carnae appa karyia lioe?


D. Carna de gormat rayia, iang poenia soerat.


E. Lagi appaitoe beta liat datan bania orang daen boudae^k baua commedyen sa
oraeng dalam tang'an, deg'an pertiae berlukis ter toutoup?


D. Itoe toeffa sombahan pada Nachgoda iang dia somba aken raya.


E. Add itoe carna ousour arta diaattoeu baeyar dea ou sour layn?


D. Tieda, ousour lagi derri saratos touiou.


E. Appa gormat de bry rayia carna itoe ken du'a?


D. Itoula, manua calla di'a masock pada rayia de bry gormat bang'ia.


E. Maya beheria sana?


D. Sana de'a maccan mynom, de baua berang maccanan lagy barang ienis bokayou,
lagy dia bermeyen, narry, deng'an soucka bania adda sana, bagy ken tyop
nanfiry, daen serreney, deng'an, de tyop bansi daen de gissing harbab, lagy
soeroh ambil tuan kyta satoe salim tiere negry sini, ^an de bryken Caepitain.


E. Itoe adda tierre negry sini?


D. Ia, begitoe addat tierre raija sini, lagi rayia iang doulceu addat poen
begitoess.


E. Bekerija raija barang lain?


D. Tieda: ianij sonda iang samoenia itoe, de soeroh Tuankyta deng' an Gaija
combal^ pada roemadi'a.


E. Beta sou^ka. deliat itoela sammoenia.


D. Baick mary kita ekot di'a.


E. De' abelom ke dalam? kita lambat bena ternanti.


D. Tieda: carna de'a tieda dapat masock pintou, attou mau doulou d^tan derri
dalam alamat raija.


E. Adda begitoe boeta kita, ialan lekas.


D. Adda kita liat? sini dieri largi samoenia de nanti.


A. Itoe songo:lagi siappa itoe^, iang datan deng'an pissou bermas dalam
tang'an.


D. Itoe satoe sida sida raija.


A. Manna ija pegi deng'an pissoum itoeu?


D. Iia datan carna massock Capitan.


A. Appa nama pissou itou? tied' a adda namma lain?


D. Ia namma ini chi'ap, iang artienia alamat pada raija.


A. Aken siappa dia ioeniong sabda?


D. Aken Pongolo Pintoeu.


A. ^eta liat dia bri Siapk^n orang itoeu.


D. S^ngo itoe: boela kita deng'ar appa i a berkatta.


Besida attou orang bauat chiap cat^a aken Pongolo Pintoeu. G. Hou, manna tun
Pongolo Pintoeu?


P. Beta sini appa mau kamoe?


G. Samboet sabdae Tuan kita.


P. Hamba deng'ar (insialla.)


G. Sabda raija (insialla) kamoe bri Nachgoda deng' an orang dia masock ke
dalam.


P. Bismilla: daulat Tuankyta.


Sesida berkatta aken rayia. G. Daulat Tuankoe iang Nachgoda adda sini de
pintoeu.


C. Baick itoe: di' a massock sahat lagi: rowa iang parampou' an sini.


V. Appa mau serpada?


C. Adda assil sammoenia? carna de iamoe orang dagan bay baick?


V. Adda samoenia assil tuankoe: moela mocla adda kita gantong iang kaijn biroe
sultro, ken kasap bermas, ken lang'it at as Capalla: lagi tiang sammoenia ken
sultra miera terb. ilut, la'in de at as cappalla serpada, satoe ka'in mockelmal
myra, ken kasap mas berbong'a, lagi tempat orang dagang iang doedock satoe
kaijn moc kemal yiou, adda dalam satoe Harrimou mas deng' an satoe Badack, lagy
parampou an iang bernarry, dalam sultra miera daen yiou tet packey deng' an
tali mas de la here daen boelan mas pnoh ken parmatra de at as dada bergantong,
lagy tijntijn, deng' an parmatta poedi beram, bobo de iary, lain de kaky daen
tang' an poenia glang mas.


C. Baick karyia samoenia maielis deng'an baick iang' an ako brulle ma louwan.


V. Insi alla samoenia adda moesleyt.


C. Soroh Nachgoda massock.


G. Adda sini Tuankoe.


C. Soroh massock iurebassa, carna ako dapat berkatta ken Capitaen.


G. Iia taeu dirinia bassa Maleyo.


C. Begitoe? adda yia lagy kemaree?


G. Adda, Tuankoe, itoe Nachgoda Soliman, iang adda siny lepas dua tawon, tat
call yia ken dua cappal derri Mocka datan.


C. Bobo k^ijn ytoe de baua, bobo satoe tykar dualapis iang alus deatas soeroch
doedock ken Nachgoda.


C. Daulat Chayalam: somba hamba Sirpada aken somba hamba.


C. Katta souka kyta.


C. Bag i beta deng' an a noggerha alla sini de tlock Sirpada datan, sana poen
berlabo: adda tatcalie amba tingal reyia beta, ken baua de siny ken Sirpada
iang estemy kyrim' an, soroch dia beta sombah ken moelot, wellahin boenij
soerat begitoe, ijckellou sirpada barang cappal gorap, fusta, attou sampan
prang adda borgoena, sirpada ham ba de bry taeu ken sourat: carna dalam negri
kyta, adda samocnia mamoot, iang siniata prang: bagi bedil bessar, espingard,
tomback, pedang presey, zyereh, oubat bedil, sonboebedil, bo' a bedil barang
ienis: Lagi tieda coerang bissi, tima itam, tambagga tima poutee, lagi appa
dapat tijnta.


C. (Alhem de lilla) iang rayia kamoe kassche haty ken^ d'ia poelang.


C. A mien.


C. Bryla ken Capitaen ^o kayou ken maka^, soeroh beianiu deng' an narri,
soeroh poukol narfanadeng' an tiop bansi, soeroh orang harbap gassing harpap,
bobo mackan adapan Nachgoda, bry ken di' a derri itoe cambing pangang, derri
ayam reboes ken quach, bry rassa deri pada ekan song'ey bobo arack sanarken
Nachgoda hou Capitaen souka, mackan minom, ijckako tieda minom, sabab amba ber'
oubat.


C. Daulat dergaheyo Tuankoc, beta tieda kerrija lain ke mackan minom deng' an
soucka.


C. Pegi ambil salin aken Nachgoda baua satoe baiou sultra miera, satoe
tanckollock warna, ken kassap mas, satoe ka' in koning bersonij ken mas, satoe
ekat ping gang deng' an soerat mas t iere Arab, satoe cris deng' an bawar mas
penoh ken parmatta, capalla cris de khalbar itam soeroh Sabandaer, packey de'a.


C. Daulat Tuankoe.


C. Soeroh Gayia berlawan, soeroh satoe karbou sommeleh, br^ seting' ach aken
Gallassi Capitayn: carna dalam laoet dia tied^ mackan daging iaop.


C. Daulat derga heyo Tuankoe, somba de parhamba Sirpad^mehon cambali, car^a
hari patang.


C. Baick pegy souckaka ^^oe. wellakin datan sahari hari.


C. Insi alla.


C. Soroh bry aken Capitaen satoe Gayia, carna ija poelang keroema, bry kendia
itoc limoen manis, deng' an boa delyma manis.


C. Alla de toelong ken Sirpada cheyalam.


C. Alla te Ala adda sarta kyta.


THE SECOND DIALOGVE FOR THE BVYing of victuals and diverse provision, when you
come to a strange country. And the persons talking together are a certain
Germane, an Indian, and a King.
G. GOd save you my Lord.


I. God save you also.


G. Pardon me my Lord, that I speak unto you.


I. What will you have with me? let me hear.


G. Does not my Lord know, whether certain soraine ships were lately here,
which came from strange countries?


I. Yea, three ships were here, but they are again departed.


G. Is it long since they departed from hence?


I. No, three weeks since.


G. But what did they here?


I. Nothing but provided themselves of victuals, buying Oranges, Lymons,
Bananas, Honey, Rice, Oxen, Buffalas, Goats and Sheep.


G. How long stayed they here?


I. About twenty days, for they had many sick men, whom they brought into
certain houses.


G. Are there many of them dead?


I. Six, as far as we know, for many of them recovered health again.


G. Did they also take fresh water?


I. Yea, out of a certain river issuing forth behind that hill.


G. Is that water good and wholesome? and may a man go unto it by boat?


I. Yea, you may conveniently go and return from thence in your boat.


G. Know you not whither they directed their course?


I. They determined, surely, as they seemed, that they would sail to Atche or
Bantam to buy Pepper or Cloves.


G. They must therefore, of necessity, be Hollanders.


I. But who are ye? and whence come you?


G. We are good men, and brought from far countries.


I. What is your countries name?


G. Our country is called Holland.


I. But wherefore came you hither?


G. We came hither driven by contrary tempest, to buy some fresh victuals, for
we have been long tossed in the sea.


I. It is well. I will declare unto the King, that strange ships are come.


G. If you please, I will send two men with you to the King.


I. Go to, do as you please.


G. What means so great a multitude of armed men coming hither? what sound
of trumpets and cornets do I hear?


I. The King comes there with all his princely train.


G. If this be so, I my self will go to meet him, that I may give him honor
and reverence.


I. Go to, let us go together.


K. What are those men, who come to meet us?


J. O King, they are men, from far countries, driven hither through
tempestuous weather, and they come to buy provision for their people.


K. Bid them come, that I may hear them speaking.


I. It is well O King, behold they are present.


K. Who are you, and what came you to do here?


G. O King, we surely are Merchants coming from far countries, and driven
hither through the injury of the winds.


K. Have you bin long at sea?


G. About four months.


K. Whither therefore do you determine to go?


G. We determined to sail to Bantam to buy Pepper, Cloves, Nutmegs, and Mace.
But seeing we are driven hither, we entreat your Majesty to give us leave to
take fresh water, and buy certain fresh victuals.


K. What merchandises therefore bring you?


G. We bring gold, silver, clothes, Coral beads, iron, lead, black and
white, and other merchandises of all sorts, as looking-glasses, knives,
sizzars, combs, spectacles, Jews harpes pipes, glass, and whatsoever may be
imagined.


K. It is well, and here you shall receive as many kine, oxen, goats, and diverse
fruits as you please. For I will command my subjects that they sell unto you
whatsoever you shall desire.


G. God preserve and defend the King.


IANG DVA BARCATTA SAMMA TATCALla moela sampey dalam satoe negri dagang, ken
bly maccanan satoe orang Hollande, satoe orang Indiaen, deng' an rayia di'a.
D. ESsale malecom Tuan.


I. Malecom selam.


D. Sentaby tuan beta berkattaken tuan.


I. Appa mau kamoe bertainia ken amba? byer amma deng' ar.


D. Tieda tauw tuan hamba, ijcke barang cappal dagang barou adda siny, iang
datan derrinegry iauw?


I. Ia adda la tyga capal siny, Wellakin souda ballayer poelaug.


D. Adda dia lamma ballayer?


I. Tieda, barang tyga ioumat.


D. Appa dia kerryia siny?


I. Dia tieda bly la' in ke maccanam, bagy lymoen manis, lymoen cap' as,
pissang, aycrmadoe, bras, lemboe, karbouw, cambing, deng' an bierebiry.


D. Barrapa lamma di'a asiny?


I. Barang dua poele hary, carnae adda bania orang sak it, iang de tancko siny
dalam satoe roema.


D. Matty bania orang dya?


I. Barang nam orang deng' an taeu kyta, wellakin bania adda sombo poelang.


D. Dya adda de ambil siny air manis?


I. Adda dalam Song'ay debalaacan ouiong ytoe.


D. Adda air baick? dapae ampir ken sampan?


I. Ia, tun dapat deng' an sampan kelouwar massoc.


D. Tieda tuan tau manna dya mau poelang?


I. Kbandack dya adda, bagy catta dya, k' Atche attou ke Bantam ambil lada.


D. Itoe la orang Hollanda.


I. Orang appa kamoe? derri manna datan kamoe?


D. Kyta orang baick, datan derrinegry iaou.


I. Appannama ne gry kamoe.


D. Negry kyta namma Hollanda.


I. Appa bowat engkou de siny?


D. Kyta datan siny carna angin sallach, iang mau bly maccanan, carna kyta adda
lamma de laoet.


I. Baick beta pegy somba ken Sultan, iang cappal dagang adda datan.


D. Iicka tuan mau, beta socroh dua orang sarta mce pada rayia.


I. Baick beta kaboel.


D. Boat appa datan bagytoe orang banta sammoenia tanggong siniata? lagy beta
deng' ar boenij namsuri deng' an seroney.


I. Itoe S^itaen deng' an rayat di'a.


D. Bagitoe? beta pegi diry hamba ken somba aken dia.


I. Baick* pegy dua kyta.


C. Orang appa itoe datan sini?


I. Tuankoe itoe orang datan, derri negri iauw, sini carna ang'in sallach, mau
mackanan ken orang* dia.


C. So roh kem^^ee, ijcka ako^ dapat deng' ar berkatta.


I. Baick tuanko: adda syni.


C. Orang Maya ankou? appa datan kamoe chiary sini?


D. Tuanko kita orang soudagar iang datan derri* ne* gry iauw, karna tossaen
goegor sini.


C. Adda tun lamma delaoet?


D. Barang ampat boelan.


C. Manna khandak kamoe poelang baleyer?


D. Khandack kyta mau ke Banta^ ken lada, Bong' a lawang, chengke, Boapalla,
Bas bas: carna kita sakaran gougor sini, mehon aken dulli serpad^, kon aixbil
de sini barang ayermanis, lagi ken bli barang mackanan.


C. Appa paruiniaga kamoe baua serta?


D. Kyta baua mas, perack, sackelat, polam, bissi, tima itam, tima poutee: lagi
barang ienis ienis paruiniaga bagi i'ijerement, pissou, gonting, sisir,
t'ijrment matta, gingong, bansi, kacha, lagi barang dapat t'ijnta.


C. Baick itoe, sini poen adda bania barang bagi lemboe, karbou, cabing, iang
boakayou, adda bania barang bergoena kamoe: lagi ako soroh orang beta de iuwal
ken kamoe samoenia.


D. Daulat Tuankoe.


THE THIRD DIALOGVE, FOR THEM THAT will buy provision of victuals in the indi^^
countries. The persons speaking together are a Germane, and un Indian.
G. GOd save you my friend.


I. Likewise, you also my Lord.


G. Have you nothing that may serve for my use?


I. What manner of men are you? and whence come you?


G. We are Merchants coming from far countries, to exercise traffic here.


I. What merchandise will you have?


G. I desire provision and meat for my companions, whereof many are sick, seeing
we have now been four months in our voyage.


I. This is too long to be at sea, I should certainly dye, if I had continued
so long at sea.


G. Unless there were men, that would sail in the sea, this world should not
be viewed.


I. It is true, but yet there must be some to till the ground.


G. Tell me, I pray you, have you goats, sheep, kine and any fruits to sell?


I. If you please to go with me, I will show you plenty of all things.


G. Is the journey long? I would not willingly go through the woods, seeing we
often meet with many wild beasts there, as Tigers, Rhinocerotes, and Serpents,
which I greatly fear.


I. It is near, as soon as you have passed this valley, there are no wild
beasts here, whereof you may be afraid.


G. Go too therefore, let us go.


I. Tell me now what you desire. For I will sell you whatsoever you will have.


G. I desire oxen, goats, and diverse fruits, as Oranges, Limons, Pomegranates,
Bananas, Milk, Honey, Sugar, Sugar canes, Rice bruised and vnbruised.


I. It is well, all things are had here.


G. How do you value this ox?


I. What will you pay for him, silver? or will you change him for other
merchandises.


G. I will pay you silver for the ox: but for the fruits I will change other
merchandises.


I. You shall therefore pay for him, if you please, five ryals of silver.


G. This is too much, I will not buy so dear.


I. How much therefore will you pay?


G. I will pay you three and a half.


I. You shall pay me four, and a fourth part.


G. I will not spend time in cheapning: will you have four, bating the fourth
part of a ryall?


I. Go to, take him.


G. You must needs bring him to the boat.


I. I will do this, when you have bought the rest.


G. What do you desire for a thousand Oranges, and Pomegran^tes?

You shall give me two great looking-glasses, four cups of glass, and fix
rasers.


G. I will give sour small looking-glasses, six knives, seven trumpets, and
ten sizzars.


I. I dare scarce sell them for so little, for I shall incur the reprehension
of my master.


G. Go too, I will add these two pair of spectacles besides.


I. Take them therefore, that we stay no longer here.


G. What shall I give you, for a measure of this white rice, milk and honey?


I. You shall give in all, one yard of red cloth, and two yards of black
cloth.


G. I will give you one ell of green, and one ell of yellow cloth.


I. Take them therefore, but will you have thing else?


G. Not now, for it grows toward evening: but you must needs carry all
these things for me, and bring the ox well bound into the boat.


I. There are laborers here present, who will perform this service to you
for reward.


G. Yet I agreed with you before, that you should do it your self.


I. Was it so? be it therefore done.


G. You must of mere necessity, bring us daily such things as we want.


I. Return again to morrow, and I will sell you all things at a reasonable
price.


G. But tell me, I pray you, before I depart, is there not any house here to be
hired, into the which we may bring our sick men?


I. Have you many sick?


G. Twenty, more or less.


I. Of what disease are they sick?


G. The most part are troubled with the laske, and some also sick of the fever.


I. There are many here who can cure them, and an house may easily be had for
them.


G. Go too, to morrow, when the boat comes to fetch fresh water, I will also
come.


I. Come whensoever you please, I will always be at home.


G. It draws to the evening, I must therefore go, we shad scarce come unto
the ship before midnight, for it is a long journey by the river.


I. Go, God be with you.


G. God also keep you.


IANG TYGA BERKATA SAMMA, AKEN bly ma^kanan dalan negri India, satoe orang
Flandris daen orang Indiaen.
D. ALla bry salamat sobatko.


I. De kamoe begitoe quiha' by.


D. Tieda adda barang mau beta?


I. Orang appa enkou? derri manna tun datan?


D. Kyta orang soudagar derri negry taau, mau viniaga de siny.


I. Arta maya chiary kamoe?


D. Beta chiary maccanan, ken maccan orang beta, adda bania sakit: carna kyta
ampat boela^ dalam laoet.


I. Itoe lamma bania doudock de laoet, beta lecas matty poelang, ijckelou beta
bagy lamma de laoet.


D. Iickelou tieda adda orang iang tieda maau pegy de laoet, iang dunya tieda
siappa lyat dya.


I. Songo itoe: lagy poen mau orang iang de nang ala tannah.


D. Catta sobat, adda tun barang cambing, byrebiery, lemboe attoeu barang
bokayou?


I. Iicka enckou mau ialan sarta beta, barang barang amba toeniock kamoe.


D. Adda iaau de ialan? beta tieda sou' a de ialan dalam outan, carna bania
kaly adda benatang iahat, bagy Harymou, Badack, attou Oular, iang de manna amba
takot.


I. Adda siny ampir lepas padang, siny tied adda benatang, ken adda takot.


D. Baick boela kyta dua.


I. Catta beta appa khandack more sakaran, beta beriuwal kamoe barang souka?


D. A^o adda bergoena lemboe, cambing, lagy bokayou, bagy lymoen manis, lymoen,
kapas, bodelyma, pissang, sousou, ayermadoe, sakar, teboe, bra^, deng' an padee.


I. Baick siny adda samoenia.


D. Barrappa tun harga lemboe itoe?


I. Appa tun maau bry ken itoe, perack, attou mau tocker ken harta?


D. Amma bry perack ken lemboe, iang bokayou beta toukar ken arta lain.


I. Kamoe bry, ijcka mau kyta, lyma ryael besar, perack baick.


D. Itoe bania bena, beta tieda dapat bly begitoe.


I. Barrapa tun man bry?


D. Amma bry ken kamoe ting'a ampat.


I. Enkou bry ampat se soekoe.


D. Tieda beta dapat tauwar lamma, tun mau coerang sesoukoeu ampat?


I. Baic ambilla kamoe.


D. Tun oeniock dya ke sampan.


I. Amma boat begito, tarkalla souda kerija kyta.


D. Barrapa seriboen it ce lymoen kapas, lymoen manis, hea delyma?


I. Enkou bry dua tijrrement besar, ampat kacha mynom, nam pisso^ penioukor.


D. Beta bry ampat tijrrement ketijl, nam pisson touiou gingong, lagy sepoelo
gonting.


I. Itoe morra basia, pongolo beta de bakeley ken amba.


D. Baic beta bry itoe dua tijrrement matta lagi lebeh.


I. Ambil, amma tieda dapat dyri lamma.


D. Barrapa beta bry pada soukat bras poutee, air sousoe, dong', an ayermadoe?


I. Tun bry samma satoe gas sackelat miera, dua gas itam.


D. Hamba bry kamoe satoe gas sackelat i^ou, satoe gas koning.


I. Ambil la: mau tun barang lain?


D. Sakran tieda, patang hary datan, tun soroh tangong siay samoc' a, lagi lem
boe, terekat tegoh de^Bana da^am sampam.


I. Adda sing orang Oopahan mou brousalen denham.


D. Beta bro' at, deulocu, iang diery kyta bowat i^oe.


I. Baick adda bagitou, beta soeroh bowat?


D. Tun d^pat s^hary ary bana barang bergoena^yta.


I. Datan issock beta bry morra ken tuan.


D. Lagy catta doulou amba ialan, tieda adda siny satoe roema bers^wa, ken
doedock orang sakit kyta.


I. Adda bania orang sakit?


D. Parang dua poelo orang.


I. Sakit maya adda dia?


D. Bania adda sakit prot bedarah, adda poen iang adda de mam.


I. Adda siny orang iang tan ken oubat, lagy poen dapat satoe roema.


D. Bitick issock tatkal^e sampan daton ken ambil air beta dai^^^ sarta.


I. Datan manna mau kamoe; amma ^ngal de roema.


D. Klam la ^mba mauialan, ^ady ting' a malum trudalla kyta datan k^ capal,
carna song' ay paniang ken hylier.


I. Pegy, Alla sarta kyta.


D. Tingal ken Alla.


THE FOVRTH DIALOGVE CONCERNING one who wandered in a wood, and is brought into
the way again. The persons talking together are James a Germane, and Gabriel
an Indian.
I. HO, ho, does no man hear? Ho companions, ho where are you? how fearful
am I lest I have wandered out of the way in this wood, surely I see no way,
whereby I may escape: it were best, that ascending this mountain, I look
about on every side for a way to get out, for in this valley I seem to see
certain little houses or cottages. I must pass this way, me thinks I hear
men there. But very fitly I see a certain man here, I will ask him the way:
God save you my friend.


G. God bless you my man. But whence come you so deformed in color, and
through sweat?


I. I will tell you this Sir. Entering into the wood with our me^, to take
birds, I wandered out of the way, and therefore I sought some body, that might
show me the way.


G. What is your name?


I. My name is James: but how are you called?


G. They call me Gabriel.


I. This is a good name.


G. Tell me James, whither do you intend to go?


I. To our ships which ride at anchor in the haven.


G. You have therefore gone far out of the way, and you can not come thither
before the evening.


I. I would not willingly lodge all night on land, for our men would suspect,
that some misfortune had besalne me.


G. Stay with me, I pray you, here to night, to morrow I will go with you, and
show you the way.


I. Seeing I cannot do otherwise, I will obey you.


G. You cannot travel by night, without danger, by reason of the Tigers.


I. I will therefore tarry as you persuade me: but I am weakened with exceeding
hunger and thirst, for wandering long through the woods and bushes, I have also
torn my skin here and there with very sharp thorns.


G. Enter into my house, I will give you meat, and will kill an hen.


I. Give me drink of the wine of the Palm, and some fresh Cocus nuts to eat.


G. Let us go, for supper is prepared.


I. Sit you first, I will afterward sit down.


G. Let some body bring water to wash our hands. Eat now James, you eat
nothing.


I. I do nothing else but eat.


G. Eat of the sodden or roasted hen.


I. This meat has a good smacke, so that I had much hunger.


G. It is well, but drink at length of this wine.


I. It seems to me, that it is burnt wine.


G. It is so, for it is made of Rice.


I. But when shall we go to bed, for we must rise early to morrow?


G. Whenever you please, for your bed is prepared.


I. Ho Gabriel, when do we rise, that we may begin our journey?


G. It is too early, you may yet sleep an whole hour.


I. No: for it is day, let us rise.


G. It is well, I will presently come.


I. What way shall we go?


G. We are to pass through this wood, then we shall come unto a river, over
which we must also pass.


I. Is the depth thereof great?


G. It reaches to the knees.


I. Are we to go further when we have passed the river?


G. From thence through a very high mountain, we are to descend into a valley.


I. But, do there no thieves stay in this wood, who spoil men of their goods?


G. Sometimes our enemies use to make their inrodes hither, who take men, and
put them to a fine of money.


I. Is there not much danger therefore here?


G. Sometimes also they kill men.


I. Tell me Gabriel, when we have passed this mountain, may we see the ships?


G. Surely, we shall then see them by and by, but we are then to turn unto
the right hand.


I. Whether unto the East, or toward the West?


G. A little toward the South, and so forth.


I. I now see the shore, and the sea, I therefore rejoice, and hope that
shortly (God willing) I shall be in the ship.


G. What reward will you give me because I have brought you again into the way?


I. This service shall be well recompensed unto you when I shall come to the
ship.


G. Go too therefore, I will return to morrow, for now I must hasten home.


I. Depart, God be with you.


IANG AMPAT BARCATTA SAMMA, DE satoe orang berouetan dalam ouran, lagy poelang
ialan de toeniock otang. Iaackoeb orang duyts, Iebrail orang Indiaen.
I. HOU, hou tieda syapa deng'ar? how teman, hou manna kamoe? takot amma
beroutan siny dalam outan, tieda beta lyat ialan siny ken calouwar, baick amma
ialan atas boukit siny, kenlyat tieda beta lyat tempat calouwar, takot
ammakelih dalam padang barang roema attou bobarong, beta dapat ialan pada rimba
siny, takot amma deng'ar orang: siny terdyry se orang dya beta tania ialan,
Essalemalecom kya'y.


G. Alla bry salamat kyta tuan, derry manna tun sekeen myerab deng' an ber
plouch.


I. Amma bercatta ken tuan, beta souda serta teman kyta dalam outam ken boenoeh
boerong, beta berout an de ialan, carna ytoe betatiary barang siappa, iang mou
toeniock ialan ken amba.


G. Appanaema tuan?


I. Namma beta Ia'ackoeb, lagy bagy manna namma tuan?


G. De bry namma beta iebrail.


I. Itoe namma baick.


G. Catta beta Ia'ackoeb manna mau anckou?


I. Souka beta dalam cappal kyta, iang de tlock siny berlabo.


G. Anckou siny iaau de ialan, tieda tapat petangytoe datan dalam capal?


I. Soukar beta bermalam ke darat, teman kyta takot baraniahat patan, ken amba.


G. Tingal siny tydoor malam yui issock beta begy samma kyta kentoeniock ialan.


I. Iickelou tieda dapat lain appa daya beta.


G. Carna adda miskil malam berialan ken horrimou.


I. Amma tingal bagy katta tun, wellakin beta bania lapar deng'an daga, carna
lamma beta lary dalam outan daen timba, lagy amma louka pada doery.


G. Massock de roema beta soero bry makan, iang de soero sommele ayam sokoer.


I. Bry beta sakaly tnack ken mynom, deng'an satoe Nyoer mouda ken maccan.


G. Baela kyta maccan, maccanan souda ader.


I. Doudock tun doelou, kyta doedock comedian.


G. Hou bry la air ken basso tang'an kamoe, mackan Iaackoeb, tieda maccan.


I. Beta tieda bowat la'inke maccan.


G. Rassapada ayam reboes, attou ayam pangang.


I. Iang maccanan adda se dap rasa, carna lapar beta bania.


G. Baick itoe iang my nom sakaly derry arack ytoe.


I. Amma fikir itoe arack apy.


G. Ia, de brousa dery bras.


I. Tieda kyta pegy tyrdoor, carna issock kyta bankyta derry pagy?


G. Tarkalla souka more, tempat tydoor souda assil.


I. Hon Iebrail tieda kyta banck it, ken pegy de ialan.


G. Barou hagy, tun dapat lagy tydoort seiam.


I. Tieda, seang la, banckit kyta.


G. Baick beta datan.


I. Ialan appa kyta pegy?


G. Kyta dapat ialan dalam outan siny, poelang kyta satoe songey, iang kita
ialan sibran.


I. Song'eyitoe adda dadam?


G. L^pas soetut.


I. Ialan kyta iaau derry sana?


G. Derry sana ialan kyta de atas bonkit tingy, e poelang dalam satoe padang.


I. Lagy dalam outan siny tieda adda orang merbodt iang de ambil arta orang.


G. Ia, siny datan orang soutroe kyta, de tangkap orang daen de souro teboes.


I. Iicke begien addamiskil besar siny?


G. Barang caly poen de boenoh orang.


I. Catta Iebrail, ijcka kyta lepas boukit siny? dapa kyta lyat cappal?


G. Kyta dapat lyat sahat lagy, derry sana kyta ialan ke kanan.


I. Dapat kyta ialan Tymoor attou ke Barat?


G. Sekit ke Salatan, commedien ke Outara.


I. Beta lyat pasir deng'an luoet, ken manna beta soucka banin, amma (Insilla)
sakaran lacas dalam capal.


G. Appa tun bry ken beta carna ammatoenlock ialan?


I. De bayar baick ken tun tatcalla beta dalam capal.


G. Baick issock amma poelang, sakaran beta combaly ke roema.


I. Pegy, Alla serta kamoe.


THE FIFTH DIAlogue, for buyers and sellers.
Luke, John, Moses. L. GOd bless you John.


I. And you also Luke.


L. What do you here so early in the cold? have you bin long here?


I. Almost an whole hour.


L. Have you sold many wares to day?


I. What should I sell, I have not yet begun, or taken any money.


L. Nor I.


I. Be of good comfort, it is scarce day, God will send chapmen enough.


L. I think some man now comes: Sir, what will you buy? will you please to
buy nothing. See whether I have any thing that may serve your turn. Come into
the shop: I have red scarlet clothes, and also black, yellow, green, purple,
and briefly of all colors, that any man may desire. I have also linen cloth
of a small third, and silken clothes, as the best velvet, branched velvet of
all sorts, Damask, Taffetie, Grogriane, small Coral beads, Coral rings,
saire looking-glasses, pots of glass of all sorts, paper, spectacles, for men
of diverse ages. If you desire a gunne, or a good sword, behold they are here,
ask for what you please, I will show you whatsoever you will, and that freely.


M. For how much is an yard of this cloth sold?


L. One ell is sold for Taiela.


M. It is more costly then is sit for me. For how much is an yard of Chamlet
sold?


L. You shall pay me if you please, six Maesas for enery ell.


M. It is too much, for it is but of a course third.


L. By your leave, behold it better, it is of a fair third, and of a goodly
gloss.


M. Does it not leese the color?


L. If it keep not the color, I will restore you your money.


M. Go too therefore, tell me how much I must give?


L. I said, six Macsas.


M. I will not give so much for it.


L. What will you therefore give, will you lay down nothing?


M. Whatsoever I will lay down, you have demanded too much.


L. I demanded, but not In that sense, as if I could not abate any thing, and
sell cheaper. Say, what you will give for it?


M. I will pay three Maesas, and three Coupangas.


L. I cannot sell it for so cheap a price, for otherwise I should lose my good
fortune. I have surely of another sort, which I can sell for that price, but it
is not of that goodness. I will let you see that, which I can sell cheaper,
but you cannot do better then if you buy the best. If we were brethren, I
could show you none of a better mark.


M. Will you take my money?


L. I cannot upon that condition.


M. I will yet add one Maesa, and one Coupang.


L. I cannot, I should loose somewhat of mine own.


M. I will pay no more.


L. Go too, on Gods name, go see somewhere else, whether you can buy cheaper,
surely you shall have none any where for a less price, for I can sell for so
much as any other in the city, but yet it is needful that I gain somewhat, I
sit not here to leese any thing of mine. You know all things are at a great
price, one thing therefore must follow another: unless you will pay five
Maesas, I cannot help you, for you are too hard.


M. So I am.


L. Surely no man shall gain any thing by you. If all men were of that
niggardly disposition, I should certainly be compelled to shut up my shop, for
I should not gain my maintenance.


M. So surely you say.


L. Truly it is so, as I say.


M. Yet hear one word.


L. Speak, I will hear.


M. I will pay five Maesas, abating one Coupang.


L. It is little, I cannot so sell it.


M. What then, shall IN not have it?


L. Not for that price.


M. Go too then, God keep you.


L. Go, God be with you. Ho, return and take it. I cannot let you go, and
see, that you return another time, and buy again of me: but yet it is too low
a price.


M. Surely in your judgment, but I say it is too great a price, and that I am
deceived by you.


L. I discharge you of the buying, if you repent you thereof.


M. It were a dishonest part if I should do this; take your money. How much
do I owe?


L. I have cast it into one sum, and found that eleven Taielas, eight Maesas,
and three Coupanges are due to me.


M. Is the account rightly made?


L. Yea, it is truly made.


M. Well then, receive and tell your money.


L. This money is not good.


M. Wherefore is it not good?


L. Because many pieces of money are cracked, and broken in it.


M. Go too, choose out those broken and faulty pieces of money, and restore
them unto me.


L. I will do so.


M. Restore me one Coupang, which remains unto me.


L. I have not yet received any Cassias to day.


M. That therefore we may pay, I will take these little pots for a Coupang.


L. Take them, but another time you shall pay somewhat more.


M. I will do it, God willing.


L. Will you, that any one carry your wares? I will commit them to my servant
to be carried.


M. It is not needful I my self will carry them, God preserve you.


L. I heartily thank you sir, when you will have any thing else, return unto
me, and you shall have it at a reasonable price.


M. It is well, I will return.


L. God be with you Sir.


Let the Reader know that Taielas, Maesas, Coupang as, and Cassias, whereof
mention is here made, are the money of Atche. But the Taiela of Sum^tra is of
the value of sixteen Maesas, and a Maesa amounts to the value of four
Coupang as, and one Maesa contains four thousand five hundred Cassias.

IANG LYMA BERcatta samma, ken bereyor bly daen iuwal.
Sy Lucas, sy Johan, sy Monsa. L. ALla de bry salamat Johan.


I. De tu' an poen begytoe Lucos.


L. Appa bowat pagy hary dalam sod'iock? Adda tun lamma de siny?


I. Barang se'iam.


L. Adda iuwal bania hary yuy?


I. Appa dapat iuwal begien hary, belom beta tryma barang harga.


L. Lagy beta poen tieda.


I. Iang an tijnta, lagy hary barou, alla de soeroh barang sonda^ar ke maree.


L. Takot beta siny datan satoe, tuan appa man bly? mau bly barang barang?ly at
ijcka beta tied? adda khandack kyta, massock dalam kedey, amma adda siny
sakalat miera baick, lagy itam, koning, yiou, lambayong, poelang barang warna
kamoe mau, adda poen par amba kaijn iang alus, kaijn sulira baick, mockemael
baick, mockemal barbong'a derry barang ienis, mossayiar, attelas, souf, polam
miera bertesbeh, polam bertiabang, tijrrement baick, kachia permynom an barang
tenis, cartas, tijrment matta ienis ienis, ijcka tun mau satoe bedil pedang
baick, adda par beta iang baick, pintabarang khandack more, beta bry lyat, ken
lyat tieda bry harga.


M. Barrapa hargase gas sackelat ytoe?


L. Hargaenia setayeel s^ gas.


M. Harga besar pada beta, barrapa harga segas soufyny?


L. Tuan bayer ijckelou mau kamoe nam maes se gas.


M. Mahal bania, carna cassar.


L. Sentaby, lyat bay baick, adda alus iang air poen baick adda.


M. Tieda beroubah warnaenia?


L. Iicka tieda tingal warnaenia, amba poelang deraam kamoe.


M. Baick, catta barrapa beta bry?


L. Souda beta katta, nam maes.


M. Tieda beta dapat bry sekien.


L. Barrapa tun harga ken amba.


M. Appa tauwar beta? besar tun harga ken amba.


L. Tieda adda, lagy tieda tat katta iang beta tieda bry coerang, catta barrapa
tun mau bry?


M. Beta bry ken ytoe tyga Maes, tyga Coupang.


L. Tieda beta dapat brp begytoe, ijcka beta bry sekien, amba moroegy, amba
adda iang de siny, beta bry kamoe harga begytoe, wellakin tieda adda baick bagy
ytoe, beta bry liat ken tuan, ako bry coerang, wellakin tun tieda dapat bowat
lain baick k^n bly barang iang baick, ijcka kyta poen soudara, beta poen tieda,
dapat bry iang baick lain.


M. Mau tuan terham beta?


L. Tieda begytoe tuan.


M. Beta bry lagy Sames se Coupan lebeh.


L. Tieda dapat, amba moroegye.


M. Amma poen tieda bry lebeh.


L. Baick bismillaa, pegy tempat lain liat ijcka dapat bly morra, tieda tuan
dapat dempat lain harga coerang, amma dapat bry harga sekien bagy barang orang
dalam bendar, wellakin mau beta laba sedekidt, beta tieda doudock siny dalam
keda; ken morougy, man beta ydop! en yny, tun tauu barang barang adda mahal,
carna ytoe satoe ekot lain, ijckeloutieda mau bry lyma maes, tieda ako dapat
topo, tuan kykir bania.


M. Songo beta begitoe.


L. Tieda dapat barlabba pada tuan, ijcka sammoenia kykir begytoe bagy kyta,
beta dapat la toetoep kedey amma, carna tieda dapat brulle maccanan beta.


M. Bagy kata kamoe.


I. Itoe songo.


M. Eaela deng'ar sepattah.


L. Baickkatta, beta deng'ar.


M. Amma bry coerang secoupang lyma maes.


L. Sedekit iouga, beta tieda dapat bry begytoe.


M. Begy manna, iady ken ako?


L. Harga begitoe tieda.


M. Baick tingal ken Alla.


L. Pegy, Alla sarta more, maree ambilla, beta tieda dapat ialan kamoe, carnatum
lain kaly pada beta, poelang ken derham, wellakin morrabania.


M. Itoe tun katta, amma catta iang mahal bania, tun souda berdeng' oed'ako.


I. Ako lepas enkou, ijcka tieda soucka kamoe.


M. Itoe malou ijoka a beta ^eryia begitoe, ambil derham tun, berrapa iady?


L. Souda beta bekiera, iady seblas. Taycel, delapan maes, tyga coupang.


M. Adda baick kekierabegytoe?


L. Ia, begytoe betoel.


M. Baick ambil la derhamkamoe.


L. Derham itoe coerang.


M. Carna appa coerang.


L. Carna bania tijrah, sombing, lagy pattah.


M. Baick pilleh iang tieda baick poelang ken amba.


L. Beta keryia begitoe.


M. Se coupang combaly ken beta, iang adda lebeh.


L. Betabelom tryma kas hary iny.


M. Carna tierey dua kyta, beta ambil mauko kechil pada coupang iny.


L. Ambil, kamoe lain kaly tun bry sek it lebeh.


M. Hamba bowat begien (insi Alla.)


L. T'nan mau souro baua barang barang kamoe, beta soero pada sakey hamba.


M. Ticdang appa hamba dapat baua, tingal ken Alla.


L. Somba beta ken tuan hamba, tarkalle tuan barang bergoena, datan pada hamba,
beta bry harga morra.


M. Baick hamba datan.


L. Alla adda sarta tuan hamba.


THE SIXTH DIAlogue: how debt may be required.
Joseph, Adam, Isaak. I. GOd save you Sir.


A. And you likewise friend.


I. You know without doubt, wherefore I am come, do you not?


A. No surely.


I. Do you not know who I am?


A. I know not, who therefore are you?


I. Have you forgotten, that you lately bought certain wares of me?


A. It is true in good sooth.


I. But when shall I receive my money?


A. Surely, I have no money now, for I have laid out all which I had among men,
of necessity therefore you must stay yet eight days longer.


I. But I can stay no longer, it is necessary that I be satisfied, I have
waited long enough, see that I have my money, or I will cause you to be cast in
prison, else give me a surety.


A. How much therefore do I owe you?


I. You know very well.


A. Surely I have forgotten, certainly I noted it, but I know not in what place.


I. You owe me ten Taielas, and four Maesas, is it not so?


A. Verily, I believe, that it is so.


I. You promised to give me money within two months: Is it not true? Is it not
so?


A. It is true surely, but I could not wrest money from them, who ought it me.


I. I care not for that, see that you be satisfied.


A. Seeing they are men, they have money ready, what shall I do to them?
Surely I am compelled to stay while they receive it, I must not proceed so
strictly, I must have patience and mercy, which God has commended unto us.


I. That surely is true, but I have stayed long enough. I can not wait any
longer, for my Creditors also urge me, otherwise I would stay longer.


A. Come friend, this man will be surety for me.


I. What he? Is it true friend? will you undertake for this man?


I. Yea, how much does he owe you?


I. Ten Taielas, and four Maesas.


A. What say you? That debt is not great.


I. It is surely.


A. You truly say so, but I will be sworn that it is not so much.


I. How much therefore is it?


A. No more then ni^e Taielas, for you told me so your self.


I. Did I say so unto you? what I?


A. You surely.


I. Well, be it so, yet it seems unto me that they are ten, but I will put
you in sure, seeing you say that it is no more: but when shall I receive
payment?


A. In ten days space.


I. I will therefore stay so long, but see that you perform your promise.


A. That I will do, God willing.


I. If he satisfy you not, I my self will satisfy you.


I. I am now contented, God keep you.


I. Depart, God be with you.


IANG NAM BERkatta samma, ken minta outang.
Ioesoef, Adam, Isa'ak. I. EEsselamkya yi.


A. De kamoe begytoe sobat.


I. Tun taau carna appa beta datan (my, tieda tauw?


A. Song o tieda.


I. Begy manna tieda kenal ken acko?


A. Tieda siappa enckou?


I. Adda loupa iang tun arieen viniaga ken beta?


A. Itoe songo.


I. Mannacalla beta brulle derham?


A. Beta tieda adda sakaran derham, hamba souda bry derham, samoe'a pada beta
aken orang, mau tuan nanty lagy delapan hary.


I. Tieda beta dapat nanty lagy, bayerken beta, amba lamma bania bernanti,
ketija beta brulle derham attou beta souro tankap, attou bry orang audale.


A. Barapa hamba beroutang kenkamoe?


I. Tau la kamoe.


A. Songo beta loupa, ako souda souda soerat iang tieda taau kemanna.


I. Outang tuuken ako sepeelo Tayeel ampat maes, adda benar? tieda begitoe?


A. Takot songo begitoe.


I. Souda kyta beianiy ken bry derham beta moela daw aboelan, lagy kata
tuntieda sach,


A. Itoe songo, wellakin tieda beta brulle derham derry tang beroutang ken
hamba.


I. Maya hierou hamma ytoe, socro bayar ken tun.


A. Ia manna calla orang tieda berderham, appa dapat keryia ken dia? beta dapat
nanty tatcalla dia adda, tieda baick orang nakalken lain mau kyta sayang samma
samma, bagi labda Alla.


I. Benar la wellakin lamma bania beta nanty, tieda dapat beta na^ty lagy,
carna orang hamma outang, tieda is man nanty lagy, ijcka tieda begijtoe, beta
nanty lagy.


A. Maree tuan, orang iny tingal enkouwy beta.


I. Mau dia? songo itoe tuau? tun enkouwy orang iny?


I. Ia, berrapa dia beroutang ken kamoe?


I. Adda sapoelo Taycel, ampat maes.


A. Begy manna adda bania? t^eda adda jekien.


I. Adda.


A. Songo ti^da, beta mau barsompa tieda adda se^^en.


I. Iang barrapa adda?


A. Tieda adda lebch sembylan Tayeel, tun kata diery ken amba.


I. Adda beta katta? tieda adda?


A. Adda.


I. Baicke begitoe, iang pada sikir amba adda sapoelo, wellakin kaboel hamba,
carna kamoe katta tieda lebeh, manna kalla enckou bayer beta?


A. Dalam sapoela hary.


I. Kaboel beta, iang'an tieda.


A. Begytoe iouga (insi Alla.)


I. Iicka dia tieda bayer ken tun, beta byer ^en tuan.


I. Kaboel beta, t^ngal ken Alla.


I. Pegy, Alla sorta kamoe.


THE SEVENTH DIALOGVE, FOR INQVIring of the way, and other common things.
Peter, Robert. P. GOd be merciful unto you Robert.


R. God give my Lord long life.


P. How have you done in the mean space, since I saw you last?


R. Even as well, as then.


P. But it seems not to me, that the world goes so well with you now, as for
the most part it was wo^t.


P. Whereby do you gather this?


P. By your face, which is altoget^er pale.


R. I have had a sharp fit of an ague five or six times, and I am so weakened
thereby, that I have no appetite at all.


P. This is an evil disease: but whither are you carried upon so quick an
horse?


R. Toward A^che, to their solemn feast.


P. I also go thither, if you please we will ride together.


R. Surely it would please me, but you go much faster then I.


P. We will therefore ride as you please, it is all one to me, for my horse
goes gently.


R. But mine has a very hard pace.


P. In Gods name let us ride.


R. Who are these that go before us?


P. I know them not, they are Merchants, let us set forward a little faster,
that we may overtake them: for I fear lest we have wandered out of the right
way.


R. We have not gone out of the way, fear not.


P. Yet it is good that we ask some body.


R. Enquire of this shepherd.


P. Which is the way (my friend) that leads unto Atche?


S. You must go forthright, and neither turn to the right hand or the left,
until you come unto a certain huge tree, then bend your course unto the left
hand.


R. How many miles are accounted from hence unto the next village?


S. Two miles and an half, a little more.


P. Let us therefore go somewhat more slowly, for I am without all fear, and
I see the tree, whereof he spoke. It is a dustie soil, and the dust has
almost blinded me.


R. Take this Taffatie, and put it to your eyes, for it will defend you both
from the dust, and also from the heat of the Sun.


P. It is not needful, for the Sun is now gone down, and I fea^e that we
shall not come into the city before it be night.


R. That is very ill, because this way is dangerous by reason of thieves, who
spoil travelers of their goods. It is not long since a certain rich Merchant
was risled here. This causes me to fear, lest the same may happen unto us,
and surely it may easily be done, unless we look to our selves.


P. There is no cause why you should fear, for I now see the ^urret, set upon
the great Church of the City.


R. I^ draws toward evening, surely the darkness will overtake us before we
come into the City.


P. By your leave, the gates are not shut before eight of the clock.


R. Therefore it is the better, for I use not, willingly, to stay without the
gates.


P. No^ I.


R. Let us ask these men for best I^ne in the City.


P. Leave that care. I know the best place in the City, is at the red Lion in
Portugal street. But let us proceed, I pray you, for me thinks I see y^
Porters, which are about the shutting of the gates.


R. I am so weakened, and weary with riding, that I can go no further.
Besides, which is more, my horse halteth, peradventure hurt in the foot with a
nail, or else he is gauled on the back, for he goes so heavily, that I
think all the ribs of my body are broken.


P. Let us go in.


R. God be praised, that we are come into the Inn. Let us go thither where
we may find the best wine.


IANG TOVIOH BERCATTA SAMMA, Akentania ialam deng'an betKattakata ianglain.
Pedro, Robert P. ALla de toesong kamoe tuan Robert.


R. Alla bry ken tuan tuan idop lamma.


P. Begy manna adda toebo kyta, sedano hamba kelih iang douloeu?


R. Sahaia bagytoe.


P. Pada fiker beta tieda adda bagy baick iang bagy doulou.


R. Carna appa tun liat itoeu?


P. Aken mouka more, poechiack roupa.


R. Beta adda lyma attounan caly sang'at de mam, de manna letehken hamba, iang
maccanan tieda loclus.


P. Itoc peniakit iahadt, lagy manna kamoe barkouda poelahan?


R. Atche dalam hary befar.


P. Beta poen, ijcka mau tuan, dapat berkoeda samma samma.


R. Mau la pada beta, wellakin kyta bekouda pant as bania.


P. Ialan bagy souka tuan, iang de kamy samma la carna kouda pantas sedap.


R. Lagy de kamy ialan sakitan.


P. Bismilla ialan kyta.


R. Orang appa ytoe, iang ialan adapan kyta?


P. Amma tieda kenal diae soudagar, ialan lecas agar kyta dapat dya, carna
takot beta kyta delouwar ialan souda.


R. Tieda la, iang'an takotila.


P. Wellakin baick bertania.


R. Taniaken combala ytoe.


P. Tuan manna ialan ken ialan ke Atche?


S. Betoel adapan kyta, lang an ialan ke kanan attouke kiery, selamma tun
datan, ampir satoe pohon be sar tingy, de sana kyta ialan ke kiery.


R. Barrapa iam adda lagy derry siny, iang moela campong?


S. Tinga tyga iam, sedekidt lebeh.


P. Ialan kyta poelehan, carna hylang la takot, beta hat pohon kayou, iang dia
kata tain, adda dulli bania, clam matta beta derry dulli.


R. Ambit taffataytoe ken ekat adapan matta more, iady berdiding kyta ken about
tannah lag, ken matta hary.


P. Tieda ang appa, carna matta hary mossock, beta takot kyta pada se'ang hary
tieda massock band^r.


R. Iang iahadt adda ialan itoe addamiskil deripada orang merbot iang de ambil
arta orang, de siny ary cendoa merbot satoe soudagar kaya, ampir pohon kayon
siny ken itoe amba takot de merbot kyta, ijckelon kyta tieda kewal baick.


P. Tieda ang appa, beta lyat pyel, iang adda dalam bandar atas moskit besar.


R. Songo hary petang deng 'an clam tatcalla kyta massock bandar.


P. Sentaby, tieda de toutap pintoeu a tou pada de lapan iam.


R. Baick toe, carna beta sonker bermalam delouwar bandar.


P. Lagy hamba poen tieda.


R. Tama kyta aken orang mannapinda baick dalam bandar.


P. Iang'an shinta ken ytoe, beta taau iang tempat baick, dalambandar, adda
alamat sing'a micra, dalam campong frangy baela kytae passang konda, akosomba
tun, carna dakat de toutop pintou.


R. Beta kidiang begitoe, iang amba tieda dap't i^au lagy, lagy kouda beta
chiapick la, takot la barang ber sallab massock, attou loucka de ba laccan
carna, ytoe dia ialan sakittan, tang amba tassa pattah rousack beta.


P. Massock lakyta.


R. Alhamde Hillakyta de siny sonda sondahan pegy mynom pekan.


THE EIGHTH DIALOGVE, FOR THE Receiving and weighing of Pepper.
David, Abraham, the King, Sabander, and the Weigher. D. HO, Abraham awake* it
is now day, let us arise.


A. My head aketh, mine eyes smart, let me sleep yet a little.


D. You will be better when you are risen. We must needs go unto the King and
get the Siapp, that we may receive Pepper.


A. Go too, I am now ready: but have we bags in a readiness, to fill with
Pepper?


D. If any be wanting, buy more.


A. Shall we take no silver to carry to the King?


D. Yea, take two bags every one whereof contains three hundred great Ryals.


A. When we come to the King, must we stay until the King sit down, before
we speak unto him?


D. I now see the King, give him honor, I will speak unto him, that he would
consent to weigh Pepper.


A. Well, do so.


D. Praise be to your Majesty, I humbly entreat your Majesty that it would
please you to cause these Ryals to be told, and accepted, and withal that you
would command the Sabandar to deliver us Pepper, for the time is nigh at hand,
wherein we are to depart hence.


K. How much time remains, until you are to begin your voyage?


D. Two months yet remain, then the monson of the East wind will be come.


K. Go too therefore, let the Sabandar receive these Ryals. I will command
him that every day he cause Pepper to be weighed unto you, until your ship be
laden.


D. Praise be to the King. But how much shall we pay for a Baer of Pepper?


K. The Sabandar shall set you down the price.


D. I would desire that it might be done before your Majesty.


K. Go too therefore, you shall pay twelve Taielas for every Baer, and about
four Maesas and an half, every Ryall.


D. We will pay eight Taielas, accompting every Ryall for five Maesas and a
three fourth part.


K. Strangers of Guiserat and Arabia pay more, but ye shall pay ten Taielas,
accompting every Ryal for five Maesas, and you shall pay no custom.


D. We heartily thank your Majesty. We will pay so much willingly, so that
we may lade our ship in six weeks.


S. Come, we will weigh you some part of the Pepper. Are your Mariners ready
with boats to receive the Pepper?


D. They will presently be here with bags, wherewith they may receive the
Pepper.


S. Go too therefore, I will go bring the key to the house, where the Pepper
is laid up, with a Notarie to set down the weight of the Pepper. The weigher
also shall be brought, with weight necessary for this purpose.


D. Must we use a balance, or other instrument?


S. With another Instrument for weight, which they call a Beam, weighing every
time half a Baer, we shall quickly dispatch the matter.


D. Go too therefore, let us weigh, our people are now come, let us hang up
the hundred pound weight or Beam, let Pepper be brought.


S. Pepper also shall presently be brought unto you from foraine places, and
shall be weighed unto you.


D. We will also take that together, so that it be not corrupted.


S. Look to it whether it be not good.


D. This Pepper is common and vile, that was plucked from the stalk unripe,
this is moist with water, and seems to have been purposely moystened, and
has both sand and also stones intermingled with it, yt it might appear to
much the more weighty, I will not therefore receive this, lest the other which
is better should be corrupted therewith.


S. Go too* let some therefore be weighed ^or you out of the storehouse,
which is greater, and better cleansed.


D. Ho, Weigher, make ready to weigh, I will note the waights, but see yt I
receive good weight.


W. Well, where are they that lift up the sackes, and fasten them to the Beam?


D. Behold, they are present, and stand round about you both before and behind.


W. Go too therefore we will weigh, attend and hearken: the first has an
hundred and three, another, an hundred and five, and also, an hundred and seven.


D. Ho, Sir, weigh right, you let not the beam go out of your hand, see that
we receive that which is just.


W. I give you that which is due unto you, I will not defraud any man of his
right.


D. Nor do we desire any thing more, then that which is right.


W. Take away the sackes, lest they hinder me, seeing they are all laid
together in one place.


D. Come Sabandar, let us enter into account, and see how many Baers we have
received, for the boats are laden, and the water abateth, that it may be
feared that we cannot get out of the river.


S. You have received according to my account, fifty Baers, and seventy five
pounds; is it not so? have I not rightly said?


D. Your account is just, we have received as much as you say, but we must
depart, it is evening, we will return to morrow.


S. Go your ways, God be with you.


IANG DELAPAN BERCATTA SAMMA, KEN socroh timbang lada, lagy de tryma.
Daoet, Ebrahim, SAltaen, iang Sabandaer, lagy oiang tymbang lada. D. HO
Ebrahim iagga, seiang souda, baela kyta banckit.


A. Cappalla beta sakit, lagy matrabeta berpening, bayer amba tydoor sekit lagy.


D. Sombo poelang tatcalla tun souda banchi^, maukyta pegy massock dalampada
rayia, iang minta satoe chiap, iany kyta dapat tryma lada.


A. Baick kabocl beta, baela dua kyta wellakin adda kyta lagy karong soh, ken
bobo lada dalam.


D. Iicka tieda pada bly lagy.


A. Tieda kyta ambil perack sarta ken baua pada sultaen?


D. Ia, ambil dua kekandry serta, pada satoe kekanda tyga ratos ryael besar.


A. Tatcalla kyta massock sakaran, adda Sultaen doedock isma'em ken somba?


D. Beta souda lyat dyae, somba ken dya, beta somba, ken soeroch tymbang lada.


A. Baick kerijia begytoe.


D. Daulat derga heyo tuanko, somba de par hamba serpada, mehon serpada soeroh
riael ytoe ter bylang iang tryma, lagy ken sabandaer serpada soero, ken tymbang
lada aken kyta, carna moesim kyta datan ken belayer.


C. Barrapa lamma adda lagy, iang de kamoe mau belayer?


D. Kyta ada lagy dua boelan, adda la moesim ken ang'in tymoor.


C. Baick soeroh, Sabandaer tryma ryael ytoe, ako soeroh dya bry ken kamoe se
hary hary tymbang lada, se lamma capal kamoe souda sarat.


D. Daulat Tuanko, ken barrape se Bhara lada kyta bayer?


C. Sabandaer de poutos harga ken kamoe.


D. Iickelon dapat iadi ada pan serpada.


C. Baick kamoe, bayar duablas Tayeal se Bhara, iany ting' a lyma maes satoe
ryael.


D. Kyta bayer delapan Taveel, iang satoe ryael ken lyma maes tyga soukoe.


C. Orang dagang de Guyserat deng'an Arab men bayer lebeh, wellakin tun bry
sepoeloh Tayeel, iang satoe ryael harg a lyma maes, lagy tieda kamoe bry
choucke.


D. Daulat ken serpada kyta bayer begytoe, iang kyta dalam nam ioumat souda
sarat.


S. Baela kyta soeroh timbang lada, adda orang kalassi kamoe ken sampan de
siny, iang de tangong deng'an bowat lada?


D. Dija daton sahat lagy de siny, deng'an karong ken bobo lada,


S. Baick beta soerob ambil annac conchiy de mandel deng'an ^^rkon, iang de
soerat timbang lada, lagy orang timbang deng an d'aijng ken timbangan.


D. Dotimbang ken naracha ettoen deng' and' aching?


S. D^^g' and a' aching, iang sakaly ting' a bhara de timbang, agar lecas souda.


D. Baick timbang ^yta, orang beta adda siny, soerob gant^ng a' aching, daen
an^k^^ lada.


S. Sahat lagy lada derry lou^ar datan, de ^^mbang, ^oe^ ken iuan.


D. Kyta poen tryma poelang, ijcka adda baick.


S. Lyat la ijcka ^ieda adda baick.


D. Lada ytoe adda such daen ring' an, adda (...) ^e^po^^tir derry pohon, daen
yny adda basla ken air ^ang adda roupa berind^^^, adda po^ kresick be^ch^^mp^r
daen batou, agar adda ^mpang bradt carna ytoe tieda beta man tryma, carna dya
beenassa poelang lada iang ba^ck.


S. Baickbeta soerch derry pada mandah ber^mbang, iang ytoe besar daen lada
chioechry.


D. Sakiran porgolo ti^bang timbang la, beta socras b(...)bang, wellakin
timbang baick.


W. Baick manna orang iang de anokat karong, ken gantong pada d' achijug?


D. Siny adda ampir tun berdiery debelaccang daen adapan kamoe.


W. Baick la beta timbang deng'ar daen lyat la, ^ang moela timbang saratos
tyga, lagy saratos lyma, lagy saratos toeio.


D. Hou tuan timbang betoel, tun tieda lepas d'achijng derry tang'an, bry
lahack kyta.


W. Beta bry hack tuan, beta tieda ambilhack barang siappa.


D. Lagy kyta tieda mau po^n lebeh ken betoel.


W. Bawa la karong iny, agar beta dapat tymbang kamoe betaroh samaen^a
satoetempat.


D. Marro Sabandaer, kyta berkiera kiera, bara pa bhara kyta tymbang souda,
carna sampan souda sarat, iang air soeroet iany tieda dapat kelouwar song'ay.


S. Tun souda tryma ken kiera kiera hamba, lyma poelo bhara, toioeh poelo lyma
katy, tieda tun adda? tieda betoel begitoe?


D. Baick tun bekiera kiera, adda hadt bagy kata kamoe, kyta mau pegy petang
hary la, iang poelang issock combaly.


S. Pegy, Alla sarta kamoe.


THE NINTH DIALOGVE, FOR THE CELEbrating of a feast, with ten persons, which
are,
Herman, John, Mary, David, Peter^ Francis, Roger, Anne, Henry and Luke. H. GOd
give you good day John.


I. And you also Herman, God give you good day.


H. How do you?


I. I am in good health, I thank you that you ask. But how fare you Herman?


H. I am very well. But how does your father, and mother?


I. They are well, God be praised.


H. What do you up so early?


I. Is it not yet time for a man to rise?


H. Are you yet fasting? have you eaten nothing?


I. Nothing surely, for it is unseasonable yet. But have you eaten any thing?


H. What else, an hour since, should I fast so long? But whence come you?


I. From whence should I come? I come from the school, the Church, from the
market place.


H. But whether go you?


I. I go home.


H. What a clock is it?


I. It is almost twelve.


H. What is it so late?


I. I must be gone, I shall incur the displeasure of my mother. Farewell
Herman.


H. Do you make such have? did our Master ask for me?


I. I heard it not. But I cannot stay here any longer. Farewell.


H. Depart, God be with you.


I. I pray God give you good evening my mother, and all the company.


M. John, whence come you? where have you been so song? why come you so late?
is this according to my meaning? I commanded you to come at four of the clock,
and now it is upon the stroke of six. Tell me where you have been: for it is
now a long time since you came from school, I know this, and I will tell it
unto your master.


I. Be not displeased mother, for I now come first from school, I knew not
that it was so late, I was no where else, for my part you may ask our master,
whether this be not so.


M. I will do so, for it is necessary that I know the truth. Go your ways
now, lay the cloth, make more haste.


I. I will my mother, but where shall I find the tablecloath?


M. The tablecloath lies in the chest. Set the saltseller down first, can you
not remember this? I have told you more then twenty times, you learn nothing,
it is a foul shame for you: go fetch trenchers, earthen pots, and napkins.


I. Well my mother, but where shall I find them?


M. You can find nothing, behold they are here, why do you not seek? go
fetch bread.


I. Well, give me money: how many loaves shall I bring?


M. For two cross pennies, for the one white, for the other, ordinary: but
bring them all new baked,


I. It is well, I go, behold I bring bread mother.


M. Well done, go bring wood that I may kindle a fire, make clean the knives,
fill the Ewer with water, ha^g up a clean towell, make a fire, your father
comes; and David your cousin with him, go forth to meet them. Uncover your
head, and bow your knees unto them.


I. It is well my mother, I go: I am glad father, that you come safe, with
your company.


D. Peter, is this your son?


P. Yea, it is mine.


D. It is a fine child, God make him to grow in virtue.


P. I thank you heartily.


D. Does he not frequent the school?


P. Yea, he learneth the French tongue.


D. Does he learn? It is well done, John, can you speak French?


I. Not yet very well, but I learn.


D. What school do you frequent?


I. In the Lombard Castle.


D. How long have you frequented it?


I. About half a year.


D. Do you also learn to write?


I. Yea, cousin.


D. This is well done, learn diligently.


I. So I will, God willing.


M. Kinsman, safe be your coming.


D. I heartily thank you kinswoman.


M. Kinsman, does it please you to stay here? why come you not in? warm you at
the fire, and afterward we will go to the table.


D. Do you think that I am a cold, it were a shame for young men, such as I
am to be a cold.


M. Kinswoman, how do you?


D. Well, God be thanked.


M. Where is my Aunt? why brought you not my Aunt with you?


D. She is sick in some sort.


M. Is it so? is she sick? of what disease I pray you.


D. She is sick of a fever.


M. Is it long since she began to be sick thereof?


D. Almost eight days.


M. I was ignorant thereof, to morrow I will go and visit her, God willing.
Francis bring a stool for your cousin: Kinswoman, come to the fire. Francis
see who knocks at the door, It is Roger, this I certainly know.


F. Well, I go, who knocks at the door?


R. Friend, open the door.


F. Are you Roger?


R. I am: Is your father at home?


F. He is, and my mother also, come in, I will show my father that you are come.


P. Francis, see that all things be ready, that we may sit down.


F. Father, all things are prepared, you may therefore sit down whenever you
please, Roger also is come.


P. It is well, I will come presently, call the children.


F. Well father, John where are you? come to eat, where stay you? what do you
there?


I. What shall I do, have I any business here?


F. Do you not know that you must come to the table, come, say grace.


I. Well, I come now.


P. John, why do you not hasten, when you are called? bring stools hither.


M. Peter, let us sit down, for it is time.


P. It is well, I am content.


M. David, take you this place.


D. Who am I? does it not please you, I will not do it, bid Peter sit here.


M. Peter uses not to sit there, he shall sit here, this is his place.


P. John, say grace I pray you.


I. Well father, God bless you my father, and you my mother, and all your
company.


M. Francis bring meat, set down the Cucumbers and the beef, power out that
we may drink, carry it to your cousin, and to the rest of the guests.
Francis sit down with us, John, bring milk for your brother, and command the
rest to be made ready, run quickly.


I. Brother, take your milk, is it not too much?


F. It is too much.


I. Eat not all, send it away when you will have no more.


P. Why do you not eat your milk, while it is yet warm?


F. It is too hot yet.


M. John, bring bread, Roger desires bread, bring a trencher, set down some
mustard.


P. Give me the flagon of wine.


R. Hold it fast.


P. Let it go, I hold it.


M. Peter, drink not when you have eaten your milk, for it hurts the health,
first eat somewhat else before you drink. Peter, cut me a little flesh, and
cut me bread, set somewhat before Francis that he may eat, for he has
nothing.


P. Am I appointed to be his servant? can he not cut for himself? You are now
of that age that you may provide for your self. I will not wait upon you, for
I serve noue but my self.


M. Reach him somewhat, for being ashamed, he dares not touch any thing, that
I see.


P. Go too therefore, take it. Bring somewhat else.


I. It is not yet ready.


M. Go, bring the roasted flesh, power in wine here, power out first for your
father, you make the cup too full, power not in to much, do you not see what
you do? you waste the wine, Roger has no wine, do you not see?


I. I pray you make room for the placin^ of this dish.


M. With these meats I will lingly entertain you all.


A. We all give you thanks with all our hearts, you have be stowed too much
cost.


M. I have not, I am sorry that there is no more here, it is neces sarie that
you take these in good part.


C. Surely you have done enough for us.


M. Peter, take this shoulder of mutton, set down the radishes, reach David
some of the Hare, and Conies, take the Partriges, you stand us in no steed. Be
merry, I pray you all.


R. Here is very good victuals to eat.


P. John, power in for us, that we may drink.


I. But there is no more wine here.


P. Go, fetch more. What do you think of this wine?


D. Me thinks that it is good.


P. Shall we therefore cause some of the save wine to be brought?


D. As you think good.


I. Whither shall I go to fetch it.


P. From whence you had this, or go into the Market place to the white flower,
or where you hear that there is better, inquire a little.


I. How much shall I bring?


P. Bring a gallon and a pint with one sextarie, but see that they give you
good measure, hasten, and return speedily.


I. Yea father, I will make have.


M. Francis, rise you now, and wait at the table, see whether anything be
wanting, will you have any more meat, speak boldly?


F. No, my mother, I have eaten enough now, (praise be to God, and thanks
giving)


M. Drink therefore, is there any ale in your little pot?


F. Yea mother, there is enough.


M. If there be none, go and fetch.


A. Does any knock at the door? see I pray you.


F. Is there any one present?


H. Yea, open, I have waited here above half an hour.


F. What do you desire?


H. Good even friend, is your master at home?


F. He is, why ask you? do you desire to speak with him?


H. Yea, where is he, I pray you?


F. He sits at the table, if you pl^ase, I will show him: but who shall I
say would speak with him?


H. I must speak with him my self, tell him that I am his cousins servant, or
that I am sent hither from his cousin.


F. It is well, I will tell him this, stay here a little; my lather, here is a
certain man present that would speak with you.


P. What man is he?


I. I know him not father, he says that he comes from my cousin.


P. Demand what he would have.


I. He says that he would speak with you.


P. Well, let him therefore come in.


I. My friend, come in.


H. Who is with him, are there many men there?


P. No, only three or four.


H. God bless all the company.


P. Are you come Henry, what good news do you bring?


H. Peter, my master sent me hither to entreat you, that you would dine with
him to morrow.


P. What does my cousin how fares he?


H. He is yet in good health, through the grace o^ God.


P. How does his family?


H. They are all well.


P. I ^ea e nothing more willingly, but I would have you m^ke h^^ this and
were, that I gave him thank^s with all my heart, and that it is impossible,
that I should dine with him at n^^ne for I have promised to be in another
place, although I had rather be with him: yet I will meet with him to morrow
without fail about one^ of the clock.


H. I will therefore tell him this. God give you good night.


P. Stay H^nry, ^rinke before yo^g e.


H. S^r^ly I am not thirsty, I hear i^ ^ch^k^ you.


F. S^dy, you (...) needs ^rinke once.


H. I mu^t needs be gone.


M. l^^o. I (...) yet ^etur^ed, (...) be ^o l^ng?


F. If ^o com^^th.


P. John, w^e e stay you so l^^g?


I. I could ^ot come sooner (...), ^o^ very ma^y men were gn^^e, I have made
great have father.


M. Well power in wine here.


P. D^u^d, prove whet^er ^^ be good.


D. I will do it, power in for me, the other was better.


R. Surely as you say, this is better, in my judgment.


M. A^ne, you are not ^er^^ie, ho^ chances it, that you speak nothing?


A. What shall I speak, it is better to hold my peace then to speak a^^s^e. I
cannot speak French well, and therefore I hold my ^eace.


M. What say you? you sp^ak as well as I, ^ay, and better the^ I.


A. What I? surely I could wish it, and would pro^ure it even with twenty
Florens.


M. David, you eat nothing, eat of that this slesh is too much roasted, is it
not?


D. So, surely, it seems also unto me.


A. Roger, lend me your knife I pray you.


R. Here, take it, but restore it to me again, when you have eaten.


A. If I restore it not unto vou again, lend meit no more.


R. No surely.


A. This knife is good, for how much did you buy it?


R. I bought it for three stiuers.


A. This price is cheaper then is fit. Give me it at the same price, I will
restore you the money.


R. As you please.


M. Roger, you eat not, I know not what you may do, help your self, what are
you ashamed?


R. Why should I not eat? I eat more then any other of them who sit with us
at the table.


M. Surely it seems not so unto me.


A. You your self eat no*


M. I have done ons part. hitherto.


P. Let us drink well, seeing we have eaten euilly.


A. Good God what say you? is there not meat enough here? this meat is
sufficient even for twenty persons, you have bestowed too great cost.


P. I have not: Go too, I drink this draught unto, and in the behalf of all,
but especially of your neighbor, I entreat t^a^ you would pledge me.


A. I will do it with a good will, (if God please) drink therefore. The pot is
not emptied, it is needful that I fill it for you again.


P. Why will you do this? is it not emptied? I will drink off all, see now it
is emptied, now pledge me. You go about nothing else but that you may deceive
me.


A. I shall not be able to empty this, you have powered in too much.


P. Why should you not be able? mine was fuller.


A. You had not so much, for your pot was nor so full.


P. Yea verily it was.


A. You say so.


P. Surely it is true, but my pot is much bigger then yours.


A. Go too, let us therefore change.


P. As you please, give me your pot.


A. What shall I? I will keep mine, keep you yours.


P. Drink therefore.


A. Go too, it shall now be done, see whether al be not drunk up.


M. It is so, why will you be so entreated? to whom did you show it? drink
also to me sometimes, what? are you angry with me?


A. Why should I be angry with you?


M. Therefore because you drink nothing unto me.


A. I drunk unto you.


M. I heard it not. But now we have drunk enough, it is needful that we also
eat; I feel great hunger, cut me some flesh.


A. Have you no hands your self?


M. I have surely, but I cannot reach to the dish.


P. Go too, I will serve you, have you now enough?


M. I have nothing yet.


P. Hold therefore, have you enough now?


M. See what you reach me. How should this content me? keep it unto you, and
eat it your self. Roger, cut me a piece of the shoulder of mutton.


R. Well, here take it.


M. I heartily thank you.


P. John, fetch bread, power in wine, power in to all.


M. Some body knocks at the door, do you hear nothing?


I. I go to see mother, It is Luke, the servant of Andrew.


M. What will he have with me?


I. He brings somewhat.


M. Is it so? bid him come in.


I. Luke, come in.


L. God bless the whole company.


P. Luke, are you come?


L. Yea Peter.


P. What n^^es do you bring?


L. Not much Peter.


P. How does your master?


L. He is in good health Peter, he recommendeth himself unto your favor, and
sends you this present, entreating that you would take it in good part, and
that you would not respect the smalnes of the gift, but his mind, for he
sends it unto you in token of his love, and therefore that you would accept
it.


P. Heartily thank your master, and tell him that I will recompense it, God
willing.


L. It is well, Peter.


P. Give Luke drink, and carry a light before him.


L. God give you good even, Peter, and your company.


P. Good even Luke, but have you drunk?


L. Yea Peter.


M. John, snuff the candle, see whether all things be done, take away all
things, and bring somewhat else, change the treuchers, and set down the fruits
with the cheese.


F. All things are here father.


P. Remove the dishes.


A. David, drink to me.


D. I will do it willingly, I drink to you with a good heart.


A. Let it be your health, I expect it from you, I will pledge you.


A. Roger, have you no news?


R. No surely, no news, but that which is good.


D. Is there not much speech of peace?


R. Surely I think that peace is yet far off.


D. Have you not heard, that the King of France is overcome in fight against
the Spanish king.


R. I heard it surely, but so many lies are spread abroad, that you know not
what you may believe. Many marvelous and wonderful things are reported, but
God only knows what shall be hereafter.


D. Surely you say true.


R. If we would make peace with him, war verily would not continue long.


D. This also is true.


P. John, take away all these things, and say grace.


I. I am present my father, what you have eaten my father and my mother, those
things God bless unto you, and all your company.


P. Let us now drink after the giving of thanks, that we may obtain pardon.


R. You say well, but it is needful that yet we give other thanks. Peter, how
much wine was brought, we will pay for the wine.


P. What will you? you shall give nothing at all, for I who could give you
meat, why should I not be able to give you drink?


R. What is this? wine is now at a great price.


P. You heard what I have said.


D. Go too therefore, we give you hearty thanks, and we will see how we may
recompense you for it.


M. This has been long since done.


P. I heartily thank you, that it pleases you that we shall be familiar
friends me. Francis bring wood, and make a fire, that we may warm us.


F. The fire is now made father.


D. We are not a cold, it is time to be gone.


M. Why make you such have?


A. I believe it has stricken ten.


M. It has not yet stricken.


R. It has surely.


M. John, bring a candle.


D. We will have no candle, it is a moonelight night, and there is no danger.


H. God give you good night.


P. And you also, I commend you unto God.


IANG SEMBILAN BERKATTA SAMMA DEri satoe maccanan de sapoclo orang.
Si Harms, Si Ian, Maryem, Daoet, Francozs, Rugie^, Taneken, Hendrick, daen
Lucas. H. ALla bry salamat Johan.


I. De kamoe poen begitoe Hermes, ary baick de bry Alla kamoe.


H. Begy manna adda pa^aniera?


I. Beta adda baick, somba ken alla, iang somba pacaniera, de tuan Hermes adda
baick kamoe?


H. De beta poen baick, begy manna adda bappa deng' an indong more?


I. Dya adda baick sombaken Alla.


H. Appa bowat pagy hary ter bankit?


I. Belom hary ter bankit?


H. Lagy poasa kamo^, belom tun maccan?


I. Belom lagy, lagy hary baroe, lagy tun souda maccan?


H. Souda lepas seiam, sek^n lamma beta poasa? derry mann^ tun datan?


I. Derry manna beta datan, amba datan derri bandersah, derry mosegit lagy
derry pakan.


H. Manna pegy?


I. Beta pegy keroema.


H. Barrapa iam adda?


I. Adda ampir duablas iam.


H. Adda lamkat bagitoe?


I. Dapat ako pegy, maa beta gousar ken amba, tingal Harman.


H. Mautun ialan lecas begytoe? tuan kyta tieda taniaken beta?


I. Ako tieda deng' ar beta tieda dapat nanty lagy, tingal ken alla beta pegy.


H. Pegy alla sarra tuan.


I. Alla de bry hary petang baick indong daen tuan tuan samoenia.


M. Johan derry manna more datan, manna tun nanty sekien lamma? carna appa datan
lambat? tieda bowat baick. Ako soeroh tun datan de ampat iam, adda sakaran
ampir nam, catta beta sakaran, manna tun sekien lamma? carna souda lamma, tun
calowar pad^^ bandersah, taan beta itoeu, amma kattala aken goerou kyta.


I. Sentaby kyta, beta iuga datan sakaran derry bandersah, tieda beta taau
lambat begitoe, amba tieda nanty barang tempat, kamoe dapat soeroh tania ken
goerou kyta ijcka tieda begitoe.


M. Amma keryia begytoe, beta maau taau iang benar, pegy, bobo, pertia mac^an
at as papan lecas.


I. Baick indong beta, bowat begien, manna pertia maccan?


M. Pertia maccan adda sana dalam at as pity, bobo garam doloe, tun tieda tau
ing'at ytoe? souda beta katta, ken tun lebeh, dua poelo caly, tun tieda
beraiyar, maloeu besar, pegy ambil tiypir piring daen sap tang'an.


I. Baick maa de manna adda?


M. Tun tieda taau brulle, sini adda, tieda baick tun adda chiary? pegy
ambilroty.


I. Baick bry derham ken beta, barrapa beta baua?


M. Baua ken dua stuuere, ken sato stauer poutee, deng'an satoe stuuer itam,
ting'a satoe, ting'a lain, iang baua samoenia barou massack.


I. Baick beta pegy, lyat siny adda roty maa.


M. Boat baick kamoe, pegy ambil kayou apy ken brousa apy, pegy assa la pissou,
lagy bobo air dalam commedelam, gantong la satoe kaijn pontee, tyopapy, bappa
tun datan, iang Daoet mama tun datan sarta dya, pepy kelih dya ankat do dong
kamoe, iang somba baick baick.


I. Baick indong beta pegy, baick kyta datan bapa, daen soebat soebat tuan.


D. Pedro ytoe annack laky kamoe?


P. Ia, ytoe annack laky beta.


D. Adda baick annack, Alla de bry ken dya salamat baick lamma.


P. Somba amba ken tuan.


D. Tieda dya pegy ke bendarsah.


P. Ia, dya beraiyer berkatta Francis.


D. Boat dya? ytoe bawat baick, Johan taau kamoe berkatta Francis?


I. Tieda bania, beta beraiyer lagy.


D. Manna ialan tun ke bendarsah?


I. De Ialan de Lombaert.


D. Adda lamma ialan ke bendarsah?


I. Barang tinga tawon.


D. Kamoe poen beraiyer menioerat?


I. Ia, mama.


D. Bo'at baick begytoe, beraiyer sebagy baick.


I. Baick beta bo' at begien (insially.)


M. Kemon adda tuan datan besselam.


D. Somba ken amba tuanna.


M. Kemon mau tun tingal sana carna appa tieda massock kyta maree bedyang,
kamoe, iang kyta pegy maccan.


D. Mayatakot kyta beta souioeuk? tang maloeu besar i^dy, tang orang monda bagy
beta adda soniock.


M. Senini begy manna adda?


D. Adda baick somba Alla.


M. Manna common beta? carna appa tuan tieda bawa common sarta?


D. Dya adda sakit.


M. Songo? adda sakit? pen iakit appa adda dya?


D. Dya adda de mam.


M. Adda lamma dya?


D. Barang delapan hary.


M. Tieda adda taau pada beta amba pegy issock lyat dya (insi Alla) Francoys
bawa kursi satoe ken mama kyta, Common ampirken apy, Francoys pegy de pintoeu,
de pokolorang, lyat siappa sana, ytoe Rogier taau la beta.


F. Baick beta pegy, siappa de louwar?


R. Orang baick bouca pintoeu.


F. Adda kyta Rogier?


R. Ia, adda beta siny, bapa tun adda de roema?


F. Ia, adda iang maa beta poen adda, massock dalam sana, amba catta bapa beta
souda tuan datan.


P. Franceoys bro^sa sommoenia addil ken pegy maccan.


F. Bapa soud^ addil, tuan dapat pegy maccan ta^calla souka tuan, Rogier souda
datan.


P. Baick beta datan sahat lagy rowa iang annanck annack.


F. Baick bapa, Ian manna tun: maree maccan, de manna tingal tun? appa bowat de
sana.


I. Appa beta bowat, adda beta bergoena siny?


F. Tun tieda taau iang de pegy maccan? maree bachia dowa.


I. Baic datan beta.


P. Ian carna appa tun tied^ datan, iang de rowa ken tun? bawa iang kursike
maree.


M. Pedro baela doedock adda hadt.


P. Baick kaboel ako.


M. Daoet doedock sanna dalam.


D. Beta, ampon amba, tieda bowat ytoe, sorroh Pedro doedock sana.


M. Pedro tieda beassa de doedock sana, dya doedock siny, ytoe tempat.


P. Ian bachia dowa.


I. Baick bapa, Alla de toelong kyta bapa maa deng'an teman kyty sammoe'a.


M. Franceoys baua kyta maccannan, baua tymon deng'an dagin sapy, bobo kyta
siny ken myno^, bobo ken mama kamoe lagy linckar poelang, Francoys doedock
sarta kyta, Ian ambil sousoe ken soudara tun, iang soero broesa ader lain, lary
lecas.


I. Ade ambil la air sousoe kamoe, adda tun bania bania?


F. Ia, adda bania bania.


I. Tieda maccan sammoenia, antar tatcalla tieda mau lagy.


P. Carna appa tun tieda maccan so^soe kyta sedang adda hang'at?


F. Adda lagy bang' at bania.


M. Johan bawa roty siny, Rogier t^eda adda roty, ambil satoe tijpir, baua de
siny sassaue.


P. Bry beta iang sera' arack.


R. Iabat tegoh.


P. Lepas, amba iabat baick.


M. Pedro iang' an mynom commedien sousoe kyta, iady peniakit, maccan doeloeu
sedekit doeloe tun mynom, Pedro sayat daging ken amba sayat poen roty bry
maccan ken Francoys dya tieda adda maccan.


P. Amma tompo dya? tieda dya taau tompo dierinia? sayat diery kyta, tun souda
besar, tompo diery more, carna tieda beta tompo tun, tieda beta tompo orang
lainke diery ako.


M. Bry maccan ken dya, carna maloeu dya, dya takot ken maccan beta lyat.


P. Baick ambil la, bowa barang lain de siny.


I. Belom adir.


M. Pegy ambil maccanan pang' ang, daen bobo arack de siny, bobo ken bapa more,
bobo p^^h, iangan bobo p^^h bania, iang ti^da lyat kery^a more tun tompa, Rogier
tieda adda arack, tun tieda lyat ytoe?


I. Brousa tempat sana ken bobo bing' an any.


M. Souka beta ken datan tu'an sammoenia.


T. So^ ba kyta samoe'a de h^ty baick, kamoe adda m^ccanam bania.


M. Songo tieda adda. soegoel beta tang tieda adda lagy, wellakin nasip kyta.


C. Songo baick ytoe cataa.


M. Pedro sayet pada ba' ou ytoe, bawa siny bo moula, bry Daoet pada plandoch
besar ytoe lagy derry pladock ketijl, sayat derry ayam outau, tun tieda bry ken
kyta souka maccan sammoenia beta somba.


R. Adda siny bania ken souka maccan.


P. Ian, bobo ken mynom kyta.


I. Tieda adda arack lagy de siny.


P. Pegy ambil lain, begy manna rassa arackiny?


D. Betae rassa baick.


P. Kytamau socroh bawa ytoe iong^?


D. Souka tuan.


I. Manna beta pegy ambil?


P. Tempat tun ambil yny ionga, attoen ambil de pakan dalam bong'a poutee,
attoeu manna tun de^g'er cae^ta iang adda baick, taniaken.


I. Barrapa beta baua?


P. Baua satoe bamboe, es tioupa deg'an sekal, iang soeroh sonkat baick pegy
l^cas poelang poen lekas.


I. Se bagy ambalary bapa.


M. Franceoys bankit s^karan, iang oenioek de siny, lyat ijcka adda barang,
begoena, mau lagy maccan, kattaken la?


F. Tieda indong, kiniang'labeta (do' aken Alla.)


M. Mynon la sakaran, adda bier dalam kendy kamoe?


F. Adda maa, padda.


M. Iika tieda adda, pegy ambil.


A. Tieda pokolde pintoeu? pegiliat.


F. Adda barang orang?


H. Adda bouka, lebeh tinga iam beta de siny.


F. Appamau tun?


H. Tabe kyta'y pongolo adda de roema?


F. Adda carna appa? mau tuis ber katta ken a'ia?


H. Mau manna a'ia?


F. D'ia doedock termackan: tun man barang'appa? batak ^utakend^, siappa beta
katta, de tama a'ia?


H. Man ammakatta diery ken a'^^, katta ken d'ia tang beta* s^key mama a'ia,
attou katta d'ia betan derry pada mama d'ta.


F. Baick amba pegy kattaken, nanty siny sedekit, Bapa, adda sini sa orang iang
maa berkatta kn tu'an.


P. Orang appa aedda?


I. Beta tieda kenal Bapa, d'ia katta, datan derry pada mamaako.


P. Taniad'ia maya mau d'ia.


I. D'ia katta iang maau berka^taken kyta.


P. Baick soero masseck dya.


I. Tuan maree massock.


H. Syappa dalam? adda orang bania?


P. Tieda tyga ampat orang bas.


H. Alla b^y sulamatken ^uan samoen^a.


P. Adda kyta datan Hendrick appabaick tun katta?


H. Ped^o, pongolo, amba soeyoh beta kemaree somba ken tuan man, ^ss^ck ting a
hary datan samma dya.


P. Begy manna adda mama beta?


H. Adda baick do' aken Allah.


P. Iang sammoe a orang de roema?


H. Adda poen samoenia baick.


P. Itoe beta souka ken deng'ar ian tun katta dy^ amba somba ken dya ken hat
betoel, ^ang tieda beta dap^t, datan ting'a hary carna beta de soroh orang ma
an, tempat la'en: carna ytoe b^ta souka ken datan, wellakin amba datan ken dy^
issock lepas ting'a hary, songo songo.


H. Baic^ beta katta ken dia; Alla de bry mal^mba^c.


P. N^nty Headrick, mynom doelou tu^^ begy.


H. Beta tieda berdagah somba ham^a.


^. Na^ty dapat tun myn^m sakaly.


H. Beta dapat ialan.


M. Adda Ian belom datan, manna a dya nanty seken lamma?


F. Dvadatan.


P. (...) aban, manna tuntingal se^ien ^amma?


I. ^ang ^oda beta dapat datan doclou ^apa, (...) adia orang bania sana, sebagy
mama lary bapa.


M. Baic^ bobo arack de siny.


P. Da^^t rassa ijcka ^adda baick.


D. ^eta ^eryiaytoe bobo sana dalam, ia^ng la^ adda baick.


R. Tieda alda songo, iny adda baick, pa^a (...) beta.


M. Anna en^ou tieda souk^ maccan, carnappa en^^ou tieda b^rkatta?


^. Maya beta berl atta, adda b^ic d^emiang katta iahat, tieda beta tau berk
^tta Frances baick, carna ytoe amba diem.


M. Mayakatta ^amoe? kyta katta bagi baick, ke beta, iang baick poen adda.


T. Tieda? ytoe maula pada beta, iang adda bry pada aua poelo' guldens.


M. Da^et, enkou tieda maekan, sayet derry itoe, Itoe bania toen^^u: tieda
begitoe?


D. Pada* f^k^r beta poen begien.


T. Rogier, pyniam beta piss^u kamoe, an^ba somba.


R. Amb^l, wellakin poelang ken amba iang souda maccan kamoe.


T. Iicka beta tieda poelang, iang' an kyta pin^am lagy.


R. Songo poen tieda.


T. Itoe passou baick, barapa tun bly?


R. Iang harga ken beta tyg^^ stuuers.


T. Itoe morrae bania: bryken dea^o harga begitoe, ako poelang derham kamoe.


R. Beta ^aboel.


M. Rogter tun tieda mackan takot kamoe diem, tempo diery apa tun, ^aloeu?


R. Tieda beta mac^an, baick? amba mackan, lebeh iang barang orang docdoc ter
mackan.


M. Songo kida meliat kyta.


T. Diery kamoe tieda mackan.


M. Sebagy souda b^t^ mackan.


P. Baelae kyta mynom baick, sekit inga kyta mackan.


T. Alla, appa katta kyta? tieda adda maclan baic^ de siny? mackana^ bania
bania pada kamoe, ken dua poelo orang, mackanan bania bania pada amoe.


P. Tieda adda: baela beta mynon ken tuan sakaly, iang beta somba ken tuan
sammoenia, iang moela moela, ken orang sisy k^ta balas kyta ben beta.


T. labeta ken hary benar, (insi Alla) mynom sa^aran, tun tieda mynom abis,
amba bobo sakaly lagi pnoh.


P. Carna appa tun karija itoe? tieda beta adda mynom abis? barapa farack adda?
beta mynomabis, liat la, abis la sa^aran, baelae balas ken amba: kamoe chieda
tiari lain ke berbohong betae.


T. Beta tieda dap at mynom, abis itoe, beta adda bania bania.


P. Carna appa tieda? amba souda mynom abis.


T. Tun tieda sekien bania bagi beta pyala tun tieda pnoh.


P. Adda.


T. Tieda adda.


P. Songo, wellakin pyala beta, bania lebe derry pada kamoe.


T. Baick toekar dua kyta.


P. Kaboel amba bry pyala kamoe.


T. Tiedamau? de beta tingal inga, taroh la de kamoe.


P. Mynom la.


T. Baick sahat lagy, sakaran kelih ijcka tieda abis.


M. Ia, carnappa tun soroh somba sekien? ^en siappa tun mynom? mynom sakaly ken
amba, addatun gussar ken beta?


T. Carna apa beta gussar ken tuan?


M. Carna tun tieda mynom ken ako.


T. Beta souda mynom aken tun.


M. Tieda amba denger, sakaran suda de mynom, maccan poen kyta, lapar depar
hamba, sayet sattoe yeris daging.


T. Tieda adda tang'an kyta seudiri?


M. Adda, well a^in tieda beta dapat sampey ^ep ng'ang.


P. ^aick, amba bry^en tun, padda?


M. Belom adda beta.


P. Ambil sakaran, padda more?


M. Lyat appa dya bry ken beta, appa goena ytoe? ambil kamoe, maccan diery
kamoe, Rogier, sayet beta pada baouytoe.


R. Baick ambil la.


M. Somba par amba.


P. Johan bawa rotty, bobo arack, iang bobo ^^kar.


M. De pokol de pintoe, tieda deng ar lan?


I. Beta pegy maa, adda Lukos, sa^ey de Andries.


M. Appa mau dyaken beta?


I. Dyae bawa barang appa.


M. Begytoe? soeroh massock kedalam.


I. Iukos, massock dalam.


L. Plyara, Alla samoenia.


P. Adda ^yta Lukos?


L. Adda amba Pedro.


P. Appa tun kabar?


I. Tieda bania Pedro.


P. Begy manna adda pongolo kamoe?


L. Adda baick Pedro, dya somba ba ken kamoe bania, iang de kierim iny, somba
kamoe kyta mau tryma deng'an kasseh haty, iang'an tryma inga tang sombabam
ketijl, iang kasseh haty dia, carna d'ia kyrim ken alamat kasseh: carna itoe
tun teryma.


P. Tun somba bania aken pongolo kamoe, ian tun kataken di'a beta balas poelang
(insialla.)


L. Baick Pedro.


P. Bry mynom ken Lukos, bedien ken plita.


L. Petang baick Pedro; deng'an teman kyta.


P. Baick petang Lukos, adda tun mynom?


L. Adda Pedro.


M. Ian sepit dian, liat iang lain adda addil, ambil sommoenia, bawa siny
barang laein, bawa lipir Iouchiy, iang bawa boa kayoe^ deng'an panir.


F. Adda siny samoe'a Bapa.


P. Ambil pingan siny.


T. Daoet mynom sakali'ken amba.


D. Itoe beta kerrija souka, Beta mynom kamoe ken kasseh haeti.


T. Baick Iady kamoe, beta trima de kamoe, amba ballas poelang.


T. Rogier tieda taan barang berit^?


R. Songo, amba tieda (...) iang baick.


D. Tieda katta orang ken dammey?


R. Beta parchiayia ^ang ken dammey iaan lagy.


D. Tuan tieda dengar, berkatta begimannarayia Negry Francies, iang alla prang
ken rayia Kastyla?


R. Adda babar beta ytoe, wellakin de katta doesta bania iang tieda ^yta taau
appa perchiayia, d^ katta heraen bania, iang alla iuga taau appa datan.


D. Songo katta tun bewar.


R. Iickelou kyta mau dammey ken dya, iang prang tieda tingal lamma.


D. Itoe sorgo.


P. Ian, ambil, siny sammoe'a, daen maree bachia do'a.


I. Beta datan bapa, yang tun mackan baick iady kenkamoe bapa indong, deng'an
sahabat kyta samonia.


P. Mynom la sakaran commedien do'a ken broelle maaf.


R. Itoe baick katta, wellekin kyta dapat katta do'a lain kaly. Pedro brapa
arack adda de kyta, kyta mau bayer iang arac.


P. Songo tieda tun? tun tieda bry satoe poen tieda, ijc^a beta dapat bry
macoan kenkamoe, amma poen dapat ken bry mynom?


R. Appa begitoe? arack mahal sa^aran.


P. Tun deng'er appako katta.


D. Baick la, somba kyta ken tuan, mau kyta balas poelang.


M, Souda ballas.


P. Beta somba kamoe, iang adda mau kyta iadi ken bersahabat ken kamy.
Francoys, bawa kayoeu apy, broesa apy baick sanaken berangat kyta.


F. Souda nijala apy bapa.


D. De kyta ticda adda soinoeck, de kytaman pegy hat la.


M. Appa lecas begytoe?


T. Adda la sepoelo iam.


M. Beloni lagy.


R. Adda.


M. Ian ambil dian.


D. Tieda kyta mau dian, adda terang, boulan tiedeng appa.


H. Alla bry salamat malaminy.


P. Iang de kamoe poen, Alla sarta more.


THE TENTH DIALOGVE.
D. GOd give you good day Peter, what do you here so early?


P. I expect Merchants.


D. Is it long since you came?


P. I came even now, I have not bin here above a quarter of hour.


D. You prepare your self timely to your labor, as I see.


P. It is a thing repugnant to health, if a man sleep all the long night.


D. You are too diligent.


P. So I am verily, I could surely give my self to sleep willingly as long as
others, but poverty raises me out of my bed.


D. The day is very gloomie.


P. When it shall be changed it will end in rain.


D. Do you yet dwell there, where you were wont before?


P. It is now three months and more, since I changed house.


D. Have you received no money yet?


P. Nothing, no not the least farthing surely.


D. The same also has happened to me.


P. It is yet timely, the Merchants wait till our shoppes be opened, and the
wares set forth.


D. It is better to hope, then to reject all hope.


P. There are many beholders and cheapners, but few who purpose to buy.


D. See, there comes some body, does it please you Sir, to buy any good
thing?


A. What merchandises have you?


D. Come into the shop, the beholding shall cost you nothing.


A. I will willingly come in, if you be ready to sell your wares at a
reasonable price.


D. See whether there be any thing which may serve your turn, I will sell it
you at a reasonable price, for I had rather have money, then the corrupting of
my goods, through want of sale.


A. Tell me the quality and price of your wares.


D. You shall scarce devise any merchandise, which I have not, and surely of
diverse prices; demand only what you want, and you shall have it.


A. Show me English clothes.


D. Behold, you have a cloth like silk.


A. I desire to have them of diverse colors, and well and fairly smoothed.


D. Behold I have here for you white, black, blew, yellow, green, read, of a
good color, thick, broad, of a small, indifferent, and great price.


A. What kind of kersey have you?


D. Of diverse sorts.


A. Have you not a better?


D. I have surely, but it is not yet unfolded out of the packs.


A. What does a whole pack cost?


D. Without circumstances, to speak in a word, it costeth seventy pounds.


A. This is too much, speak at a word which may make for the purpose.


D. I have said as the matter is, you cannot buy it for less.


A. Will you that I pay sixty pounds?


D. Surely I will not abate one mite.


A. You are too hard and covetous.


D. He that desires good wares, it is needful that he spend money.


A. You commend your wares too much.


D. Surely he is an unwise Merchant, that praises not his wares.


A. Let me see a cloth made of colored wool.


D. Behold, here is a cloth made of the best wool.


A. It has a great thread, and ill wouen, and the cutting shows that it was
burned in the dye.


D. Behold it again, and you will say otherwise.


A. For how much will you sell it, if partly with ready money, and partly I pay
you with time?


D. In few words, and not to lose time, it is sold for 60.pounds.


A. Sell it me at a reasonable price, I will deliver you an obligation
wherewith you may be content.


D. I had rather have ready money.


A. He that has a good bond, may easily get money.


D. What man's bond will you give me, do I know him?


A. He is rich and wealthy enough.


D. What is his name? by your leave, what countriman is he? is he citizen?


A. No, he is of Gaunt.


D. In what streere dwells he?


A. He dwells near the new Church.


D. What sign has he set forth?


A. Hard by the sign of the Elephant, over against the Dove.


D. I will deliberate, and inquire of him until to morrow.


A. It is well, enquire of him, and then tell me your opinion.


D. I will do ^o.


A. I should make a conscience to deceive any man.


D. You know not now whom you may trust, for they who seem honest men, often
times think no other thing in their mind, then how they may deceive men.


A. You shall leese nothing by me (God willing) although you should sell me
ten times more merchandises.


D. You shall lose nothing with an honest man. Go too, that we may make an
end, how much will you pay?


A. I will speak at one word, five and fifty pounds.


D. It is little, but you shall give fifty eight.


A. I will give no more.


D. You shall have it at that price which you have said, although it be very
little: for he is as well a Merchant, who leeseth, as he that gains.


A. Go too, you may keep these wares for me until tomorrow morning, for then
I will give you such a bond, for the rest that shall easily secure you of the
debt.


D. Have you no familiar friend in the city?


A. I have surely, here is master Antony Motten, I know not whether he be
known to you.


D. He is well enough known to me, if he will pass his credit for you, it is
sufficient, for I acknowledge him to be an honest man, whom if need required,
I would easily trust with all my goods.


A. I will cause him to speak unto you to morrow.


D. Do I pray you.


A. I commend me unto you, God keep you till to morrow.


D. I will always be ready at your service.


IANG SEPOELO BERCATTA.
D. ALla bry salamat kamoe Pedro, appa b^wat ka more de siny pagy hary?


P. Beta nanty or ang soudagar.


D. Adda lamma tun datan de siny?


P. Beta sahat iuga ke maree, tieda adda iang lebeh derri pada se soekociam.


D. Tun adda pagy hary dalam keryia, bagy beta lyat.


P. ^dda tang tieda baick* ken bad in: orang satoe malam besar tidor.


D. Tun adda raijn sang' at.


P. Songo benar souka beta tydoor bagy lamma ken orang lain iang kassien ako,
de toelack beta de loewartydoran.


D. ^ang roupa hary adda matti.


P. Iicka adda ganty adda ouian poelang.


D. Roematun adda lagy tempat doeloeu?


P, Adda lebeh tyga boelan beta ganty roema.


D. Belom kamoe tryma ba^ang derham?


P. Tieda, iang harg a poen tieda.


D. Beta poen tieda.


P. Lagy hary pagy, iang soudagar de nanty tatcalla kyta bouka kedey, iang
berdagangan kyta ter bouka.


D. Adda baick ternanty, iang soukahan terliniap.


P. Adda soudagar bania ken tauwar, iany sedekit de chijnta ken bly.


D. Lyat siny datan satoe, Tuan mau tun bly barang baick roupa'?


A. Arta maya adda kamoe?


D. Massock dalam kedey, keltatan tieda tun bry harga.


A. Baick mau amba massock sana, ij^ka tun artamoe maau iuwal aken harga sedang.


D. Lyat ijcka adda barang appa iang, khandack kyta, beta bry harga baick,
carna lebeh souka ken derham iang ken arta, benassa derry pada tie-da iuwal.


A. Catta ken kyta ienis arta kamoe deng' an hargaenia.


D. Tun tieda dapat ing' at barang ienis arta, iang kyta tieda adda barkas,
lagy barang harga, minta barang begoena kamoe, de bryenia ken tuan.


A. Bry beta lyat sackelat engrees.


D. Lyat la satoe s^^kelat alus bagi Sultra.


A. Beta mau bania ienis, warna iang baick brousahan baick.


D. ^^at de siny adda poutee ytam, byroeu, coning, yiou, miera, lagy warna
baick, tebal, pitick, daen lybar, de ketijl sedang daen besar harga.


A. Appa ienis sakelat ketijl adda more?


D. Bania ienis.


A. Tieda lain baick?


D. Adda, wellakin belom boeka.


A. Barappa satoe farda?


D. Iang' ang berbarga besar, ken satoe patta toeioe poelo pont.


A. Bania bania, katta beta satoe patta iang adda baick.


D. Souda beta katta kamoe, tun tieda dapat coerang.


A. Man kamoe nampoelo pont ako bry?


D. Beta tieda more ber corang satoe myte.


A. Mahal kyta, deng' an kykir.


D. Syappa mau barang baick mau dya bry derham.


A. Tun berharga baick har tamoe.


D. Iang orang gyla siappa tieda berharga hartania.


A. Bry lyat satoe sackelat. iaxg dalam rambot bert^lap.


D. L^at adda satoe iang ramboet yia baick.


A. Iang benangnia adda kasar, iahat poetar d^^^n tanty, dalam krat roupa
tertoe nocu.


D. Lyat baick lain kaly, kamoe kata lain.


A. Barrapa tun mau ken ytoe, se^ing' a sukaran, lain ting' a bertango?


D. Ken patta sedekit, iang' an liniap hary, harga nampoeloh pont.


A. Bry ken beta harga baick, iang beta bry soerat satoe, 'ken appa tun mau
souka.


D. Beta souka lebeh ken derham.


A. Syappa adda soerat baick, dapat broelle derham.


D. Orang appa adda? tieba beta kenal?


A. Dya kaya deng' an', arta bania.


D. Appa namma dya sentaby? derry manna dya, adda de bandar siny?


A. Tieda, dya derry Gent.


D. Campong manna dya doedock?


A. Dya doedock ampir musegit bar^eu.


D. Alamat maya bergantong?


A. Sysi iang t'iap gaija, betoel niabrang borong merapaty.


D. Baecaber sikir daen mefakat de sakaran ken issock.


A. Taniaken dya, commedien katta beta khandack tun.


D. Beta keryia begytoe.


A. Sayang beta ber keniaya barang orang.


D. Sa^aran tieda tan siappa dapat perchiayta, carna pada fikir orang baick
iuga, de chijnta baniae kaly, tieda lain ken berkeniaya orang.


A. Tieda tun meroegy de kyta (insi Alla) ijcka adda de kyta iuwal pada
hartamoe sepoele kaly lebeh.


D. Tieda murogy aken orang, baick, baela agar kyta berp^u^os barapa tun bry?


A. Ken patta, satu lyma poelo, lyma ponden.


D. Adda sedekit baick bryla tun bry lyma poelo delapan.


A. Beta tieda bry lagy.


D. Tuan ambil ken harga bagy katta more wellakim harga sedekit iuga, carna adda
poen bernamma soudagar iang moroegy, samma deng' an berlaba s^bagy.


A. Tun tarroh ken arta iny ken issock petang hary, iang akou datan bry soerat
pada ou^ang beta tingal kamoe iang tun tieda chinta outang.


D. Tieda adda dalam bandar barang orang iang de kenal?


A. Ia adda songoe, adda siny Tuan Antonius de Motten, tieda tau beta, ijcka
tun kenal dya.


D. Ia ako kenal ken dya ijcka tuan ytoe nau, catta pada derry kamoe, mau la
beta, carna beta kenal dya bagy orang baick, ijcka lou^ dya adda begoena
samoenia arta beta, beta mau bry ken dya.


A. Beta soeroh issock berkatta ken tun.


D. Ako somba boat.


A. Somba amba ken kamoe, tingal ken issock.


D. Beta sebagy ken soero tuan.


THE ELEVENTH DIALOGVE BETWEEN two persons, which are David and Richard.
D. GOod day Richard.


R. God save you David my friend.


D. How have you done since I saw you last?


R. Very well (God be praised) I thank you sir. But how do you?


D. As you see, being healthie in body, yet light of money; but it is a long
time that you have not been here.


R. I do trade in another place.


D. When came you hither?


R. I came yesterday, about the evening.


D. Came you by land?


R. No, I came by water, and was in so great danger, that I know not whether
any greater ever besell me.


D. How came it so to pass?


R. There was so great a tempest, and so mighty a storm at sea, that we al
thought we should have been cast away. For, there was no other hope of safety
left, then in God, who delivered us out of that danger through his grace.


D. You terrify me with your speech.


R. It is so, and I give God thanks, that being delivered from the danger, I
am now on the shore.


D. And I also heartily rejoice, seeing it is so as you have said, you have had
good luck: but let us sometimes meet together, and make our selves merry with
drink, if you please, before you depart.


R. What else, we must begin again, and renew our old friendship, I will
always be ready at your back, when you shall command,


D. It is not my part to command you, but I desire that you would abase your
self so much, and perform this friendship unto me, that you would sometimes
see me.


R. I heartily thank you.


D. What is here reported?


R. Nothing but good.


D. Have you no news here?


R. Nothing that I know.


D. Are clothes at a small price?


R. They were not a long time at such a price. And yet the price of them will
be increased, before it be diminished.


D. For what cause, I pray you tell me?


R. There is such abundance of things appertaining to the maintenance of life,
that the common people refuse all labor. And that which is more, you your self
know that the tributes, fraights, and other charges, are great enough.


D. Yet I understood y^ wool was not very ^leare.


R. This cannot help us, for they cost us dear, and it is risen to thirty or
forty shillings a pack.


D. What profit therefore and gain shall Merchants receive?


R. It is needful that serving the time, they sell as dcare as they can.


D. When do you expect your ships?


R. Our ships began to be laden, when I departed.


D. They are now almost laden.


R. I hope that upon the first fare wind they will begin their voyage.


D. It is now a great calm, and a good season, for no wind almost is
perceived.


R. The wind is altogether contrary, but it will shortly be changed, God
willing.


D. The wind at sea is very dangerous, inconstant, and mutable.


R. He must commit all to fortune, who desires to be rich.


D. It is better to commit half to fortune, then for the hope of great gain,
to endanger all that a man possesses in one voyage.


R. It is well said of you, for he who loses all, arises not easily any more.


D. But to our discourse, will there many ships come?


D. Surely I hope so, for I know that many ships are laden with merchandises of
diverse sorts.


D. Do you want nothing, either wax, or c^oath, or yarne, or, ^otton?


R. I am well furnished with these things.


D. Shall you receive fine cloat^es, vpou the first ships that comes?


R. You shall have, if you please, the very first sight of them: but I have
three timbangs of tin re^ maining, about forty timbangs of lea^, a pack of
leather, and cert^ine sacks with Cotton.


D. When will the time come for v^lading of the ships?


R. If the Master shall yet return this ^uening from our Governor, I hope we
shall begin to unlade the ships the next monday.


D. Where have you your shop?


R. Near unto the English house.


D. At what sign?


R. At the lesser Lion, unto the which, on the one side, the Rose, on the
other, the red Goat, join.


D. Is it not over against the golden Falcon?


R. A little further.


D. I will visit you, and bring certain of my friends with me, who also
themselves will buy somewhat.


R. You shall be very welcome come together with your money.


D. At what hour shall I come?


R. Come between seven and eight, for then you shall find me in the English
house.


D. Shall it be so without fail?


R. It shall, if God grant me life.


D. I recommend you unto God, until I see you again.


R. And I commend me to your favor.


IANG SABLAS BERCATTA SAMMA, DERry dua orang, Daoet, Reijckaert.
D. TAbe pongolo Rijckaert.


R. Alla bry salamat kamoe Daoet, sahbat ako.


D. Begi manna adda sedang beta lyat tun doeloeu kalla?


R. Adda baick (do' aken Alla) son* ba beta ken tuan amba. Lagy de kamoe begy
manna adda?


D. Bagy lyat kamoe baick de badan iang ring'an ken derham, wellakin lamma la
tun tieda datan siny.


R. Beta tempat lain beruiniaga.


D. Manna kalla tun de siny datan?


R. Beta datan kalmarijn petang hary.


D. Datan kamoe ke darat.


R. Tieda, amba ke laoet datan, lagy beta dalam miskil besar souda, tieda
begien se lamma ydop beta.


D. Begy manna ytoe?


R. Adda toffaen besar begytoe lagy sang' at ang' in kras delaoet, iang kyta
takot samoenia matti, lagy tieda lain perchiaya ken Alla, ytoe la de toelang
kyta ken kaseh dya.


D. Tun be tackot beta ken catta komoe.


R. Adda begytoe, lagy do' aken Alla beta lepas ytoe derry sekien miskil, lagy
beta souda sampey ke darat.


D. Amba souka sang' at adda begytoe iang bagy becherita kamoe, tun adda
broelle ontong baick, mau bytamynom samma doeloeu tun pegy derry siny, deng' an
poen souka souka, ijcka mau kamoe


R. Apa laen dapat kyta iang kaseh, tuah kyta barouken, sebagy beta'mau iang
bekeriya, appa man kyta soeroh beta.


D. Tieda amba dapat soero, de kyta, iang beta somba kamoe ken tuan mau
berkechijl kamoe, kekaseh ken beta tun datan lyaet ken amba.


R. Beta somba ken tuan.


D. Appa de catta sini?


R. De katta tieda lain ke baick.


D. Tieda habar baroeu?


R. Tieda ken tau beta.


D. Iang sackelat adda morra?


R. Lamma^la dya tieda mahal begytoe, iang roupa mahal lagy datan daen harga
lebeh, ken toe ron dya.


D. Carna, appa catta ko, somba?


R. Iang maccanan adda bamorra, iang orang massing massing tieda mau brousa,
adda lebeh, tun tau iang oupeti daen oupahan, lagy belania samoenia, adda besar.


D. Beta adda tau iang ramboet domba adda harga sedang.


R. Tiedang appa ytoe, iang sackelat kyta bly mahal, iady souda naick terlebeh
tyga ampat poelo sockoe satoe fardah.


D. Appa de laba iang soudagar?


R. D^a kerija bagy datan de tuwal poen bagytoe.


D. Manna calla kumoe nanty capal?


R. Kapal kyta barou de mo' at tatcalla beta derry sana.


D. Adda la sakaran ampir sarat.


R. Pada fi^ir beta dya pegy belayer ken moela ang' in ^aick.


D. Sakaran tedduh berang' in hary baick, deng' an satoe ang' in tieda.


R. Ang' in adda barsallah, wellakin adda ganty, insi Alla.


D. Ang'in de laoet adda miskil, tegoh daen berbalick.


R. Mau kyta nanty ontong, siappa mau kaya datan*


D. Adda baick seting' ab pada harta kyta terontong, iang sammoenia sakaly ken
pichiayia ken laba bania.


R. Tau la baick de kamoe, carna siappa liniap sakaly artaenia soukar sang' at
broele lama.


D. Wellakin ken catta, kitta adda cappal bania datan?


R. Fikir beta adda, amba tau cappal bania adda addil ken arta viniaga bania
ienis.


D. Adda tun tieda bergoena barang ka' in lylin, benang dan kapas?


R. Beta adda lagy derry sammoenia.


D. Adda kamoe poelang sackelat alus deng' an cappal lagy datan?


R. Tuan adda ijcka tun mau, iang moela bouka daen terkelih, adda lagy paramba
tyga timbang tyma poutee, barang ambat poelo timbang tyma ytam, satoe bar kas
coelit, lagy barang carong ken capas.


D. Manna calla adda hary terbouka capal?


R. Iickelou pongolo capal poelang dery pongolo bandar petang ini iany beta
perchiayia iang kyta boucka arta hary isna' en.


D. Manna adda kedey kamoe?


R. Ampir rouma Engerees.


D. Dalam alamat appa?


R. Dalam sing' a ketijl, datan seblah, sisi bong a mauwar, seblah lain sisi
cambing myrah.


D. Adda niabrang reyia wally mas?


R. Adda iaau sedekit lagy.


D. Beta datan kelih kamoe, amba poen bawa sarta barang sahbat beta tang maubly
barang.


R. Baick tun adda datan, deng' an derham kyta.


D. Begy manna hary beta dalan?


R. Datan barang toniou attou delapam iam, ta^g dapat par b^ta diroema engrees.


D. Adda songo begitoe?


H. Adda, ijcka alla bry yd^p beta.


D. Baick tingal k^n Alla ken lyat lain kaly.


R. Somba beta ken tuan amba.


THE TWELFTH DIALOGVE, OF A certain voyage by sea.
A. TO the ship, ho friends, who will come into the ship?


R. Whither will you direct your course Master?


A. Am I the man whom you desire?


R. I must call one named Adam.


A. Go too therefore, I am present, what do you desire?


R. What do you take of any one, if you carry him from hence to Lisbone?


A. I take as much as I can get, and not as much as I will.


R. What therefore shall I give for that passage?


A. For the most part, twenty crowns are paid for the freight, besides
provision of victuals.


C. Pay as much as others, and take ship, while there is yet place in it.


R. It is 'needfull that I first know the price, otherwise I will not enter
into the ship.


C. Let the sack be tied together with a cord.


A. You shall therefore pay fifteen crowns.


R. But what if the ship perish, and I perish being drowned in the waters?


A. Then shall you pay no freight.


R. My parents exposed not their lives to so great dangett.


A. Where therefore died they?


R. In a fair and soft bed.


C. They are to be lamented surely, for if they had taken ship, they had not
died there.


R. Is your ship sufficiently prepared, and furnished with necessary things
for the wars?


A. Surely there lives not any man borne of a woman, that ever saw a ship
better prepared and furnished with Ordinance and other munition, then this is.


R. I will provide me biscuit, and other provision, while you in the mean space
fit the mast, and spread the sails.


C. You shall have of me, at a reasonable price.


A. Have you any thing which you may carry with you?


R. Nothing but a small vessel, and a certain little fardle, which I will
presently cause to be brought hither.


A. Have you clearly dischar ged the tribute and custom?


R. I am homebred and a citizen, look upon my wrighting.


C. Go into the head or wast of the ship.


R. Is the wind West North or South?


C. I think that the Northwest wind does arise.


A. I find it well enough. The wind blows from the East toward the West.
When do you think we shall come to the haven?


A. If the wind be fit, we shall quickly sale it.


C. If the wind blow right into the sail, we shall shortly be there.


N. It is a calm sea.


O. It is calm, by reason of the slaking of the winds.


A. This calm is a forerunner of misfortune, tempest, and shipwreck.


C. Take an oar, and row with it.


R. Let any man row that can, I am not able to perform that labor.


A. By practice one shall soon learn.


C. He that will go to Sea, must be obedient to the governors of the ship,
as well as the sick patient to the Physician.


R. Either the water is not deep, or else the sea ebbeth.


A. I cast the plummet into the deep, and found the depth of the water to be
above five fathomes.


N. Either the wind is calm, or the ship lies at anchor.


C. If the winds arising should move the sea, surely they would easily pluck up
the anchors.


R. See what the mariners do in the top of the ship?


C. They hoyse their topsailes.


A. Stir your oar, and row.


R. I am almost burst with tugging at an oar.


O. See, how the waves arise.


E. The water does flow, and the sea swells.


N. I fear lest some tempest beat hand.


C. See how the flag flies.


A. It is best that we strike fail, and loose the tackling. For the storm
and tempest troubles the whole firmament.


R. I pray you for Gods sake let us put in to some haven, that we may go out
of the ship. I will willingly give you whatsoever I possess.


N. God will help us.


E. How dark and mighty a tempest is this?


R. Set us upon the head of some tiuer, or on the land.


A. Where is the gunner, let him discharge a piece of Ordinance, for we are
safe.


R. I now come to my self.


N. Let us heartily thank God.


C. How does sailing please you?


R. I do still tremble with fear.


O. Were you near death.


R. I was scarce two fingers distant from death, for death was so near, that
it was no further then the thickness of a planke.


A. He that has not been at sea, knows not what fear is.


R. My hair stood upright through fear, that I should have been wholly
overwhelmed of the waves.


E. I thought I had been buried in the waves, and that I should have been food
for the fishes.


A. Seeing you Peter are a great deuourer of fishes, wherefore do you fear?


P. The greater devour the lesser.


O. Why do you not commit your self to the will of Pirates?


R. To have consulted after the deed is done, had been profitable unto none.


IANG DVABLAS BERKATTA SAMMA balayer ke capal.
A. KE Kappal, hou orang baick siappa mau ke capal datan?


R. Ke manna maau tun pegy beleyer nachgoda?


A. Adda ken beta tunrowa?


R. Beta rowa disatos bernama Adam.


A. Baela, beta adda siny, appa addatun mao?


R. Barrapa tun ambil pada orang derry siny ke bandar Lisboen?


A. Beta ambil appa dapat berolo, iang tieda maya mau beta.


R. Ken barrapa tun mowat amba?


A. Do bry masing ken oupa dua poelo croon macoanan lain.


C. Bry baegi orang lain iang pegy, naick ke capal sedang adda tompat.


R. Beta mou betao barharga doulou, attao amba tieda massock dalam capal.


C. Iang taly ter ckat karong.


A. Bry amba lymablas croon.


R. Iickelou capal berlemas attou tingelam, lagy beta mat^y lemas.


A. Iany tun tieda bayer oupa.


R. Iang indong bapa amba tieda de soeroh beta pegy, de iala^ tempat soukat
daen miskil so lamma aydop.


A. De manna iang dyamatty?


R. Atas mytie tydoor iang lembot daen chlouchy.


C. Dya mau songo sayang ken, carna ijcka dya adda bleayar ke capal dya de sana
tieda matty.


R. Capal mo^ adda siniata bania?


A. Tieda adda manusia barannack pada indong, iang de lyai satoe capal delaoer,
lebeh spingar ken siuiatannia lobch, poen adda bedil bessar.


R. Beta ambil roty daen maccauan lain se lamm^ de kyta, bedyery cyang capal,
iangh ela layar.


C. Beta poen de bry ken tun, iany, harga sedang.


A. Adda barang barang terbo' at?


R. Tieda lain ken satoe doelang deng' an satoe bonckys, iang beta soeroh sahat
lagy.


A. Adda tun bayer, ousoeur daen addat?


R. Beta doedock siny amba poen orang bandar, lyat la soerat beta.


C. Pegy tun de capalla capal, attouting a cappal.


R. A^da ang'iu barat, outara attou de salatan?


C. Takot beta iang ang'in outarabarat datan.


A. Beta adda berassa, adda ang'in bertyop, derry tymoor balickike barat, manna
calla tun sikir kyta sampe ke cowalla?


A. Adda ang'in baick, lekai ken belayer.


C. Iicke dya datan dalam layer, de kyta lecas kesana.


N. Laoet addarata.


O. Draberdiem, iang tieda tyop anginan.


A. Iang hary tieda berang'in ytoe alamat, ken ontong iahat, k^lyat, toffaen,
daen kelem capal.


C. Ambil satoe dayong, iang berdayong.


R. Dayong siapa tau berdeyong, beta tieda taau dayong iang berdayong.


A. Dalam bekariya de boraiyer.


C. Siappa mau pegy ke laoet maoe dapat deng'ar ken malim capal, bagy orong
sakit aken Tabih.


R. Adda takot air ketijl, attou air soerot.


A. Beta souda iang tyma lempar dalam laoet, iang air tingy daen dalam lebeh
lyma depa.


N. Tieda berang'in, attou capal berlabo.


C. Iickelou ang'in bertiop, daen laoet berchia boel, mura dyae dapat bongkar
sangh.


R. Lyat la iang kalassi at as tyang capal?


C. Dya hella layer pung opo.


A. Bergra dayong daen berdayong.


R. Beta ampir matty ken berdayong.


O. Lyat gelonbang bertingy.


E. Ayar passang, daen laoec beraboe.


N. Beta dapat tackot bertoffaen*


C. Lyat la tongol terbang.


A. Batck kyra toeron layar, daen lepas taly saugh, carna ang'in daen toffaen
beky sar lang'it.


R. Carna Alla tanc^o siny ke darat iang kelouwar capal, beta bry ken tun
samoenia beta adda dalam duni'a.


N. Alla de mau toelong kyta.


E. Begy manna toffaen daen ang'in besar?


R. Tanko kyta de kapalla song'ay attou ke darat.


A. Mana pongoloe bedil souro passang bedil satoe, carna soudae ontong ydop.


R. Beta poelang ydop.


N. Beri kyta do'aken Alla.


C. Begy manna tun rassa belayer?


R. Amba berketar lagy derry takot.


O. Adda tun ampir matty?


R. Coerang dua iary, dya souda sekien ampir de lyta, iang tieda adda lain
farack, iany tang tebal pada papan.


A. Barang siapa tieda belayer, dya tieda tau derry takot.


R. Ianny rambot beta berdiery derry pada takot, iany ken glombang ter maccan
beta.


E. Beta poen takot ken de tannam beta dalam glombang, daen ijadimacanan yckan.


A. Iickelou tun Pedro sa harry mau yckan, carna appa tun takot?


P. Iang besar maccan iang ketijl.


O. Carna appa tieda bry kamoe dalam tang'an orang mossoe?


R. Komedien menfakat tieda addda menfa'at.


The end of the Dialogues in the English and Malaian tongue.
A DIALOGVE WRITTEN IN THE ENGLISH AND MADAGASCAR LANGVAGE, FOR them who
arriving at the shore, light first upon men: and the persons speaking together
are, a Germane, an Indian, and a King.
English
G. GOd give you good day friend.


I. And you likewise Sir.


G. Saw you no ships here, arrived hither from foraine places?


I. Yea, three ships were here, but now they are gone again.


G. Are they long since gone?


I. Not two weeks since.


G. What did they here, I pray you?


I. They bought water here, Rice, Lymons, Oranges, Citrons, Oxen, Goats,
Honey, and such other like things.


G. The same also we willingly would buy here.


I. Whence come you, and what are you?


G. We are good men arrived here from far places.


I. What is your Countries name?


G. Our country is called England.


I. I must first go unto the King, and certify him of your coming.


G. I will join two men with you, who may speak with the King.


I. Do as you please: but behold the King coming with his train.


G. Is he the King? I may therefore speak with him my self.


K. Who are you?


G. We are Merchants, arrived here to buy provision of victuals, seeing we have
many sick men.


K. Go too, here is provision enough: but what merchandises will you bartar
for it?


G. We have silver, gold, clothes, Coral, glasse-beades, blew, red, white,
green, black, ash color, Copper, Iron, white lead, black lead and brass.


K. Go too, it is well. I will command my subjects that they sell you
whatsoever you will, so that you be honest men.


G. We heartily thank the King, we will satisfy them for all, for we are
Mercha^ts, not thieves, we will deceive no man.


K. Three ships were here, which did us great hurt: for being brought hither
in boats, they drove away ca^^ell, and men captives, having burned their
houses.


G. We are no such manner of men, we will traffic in friendly manner with all
men.


K. Go too therefore (in the name of God) come with your ship* into this Bay,
for here you shall have good ground, not stony, but consisting of sand and
clay.


G. We will therefore come into this haven, either this evening, or to morrow,
God willing.


K. Depart, God defend you and us all from danger.


Madagascar.
D. HAannau mandick keney.


I. Hannau ho kenoy keney.


D. Hannau smyhyte laccan, oulun tany bauw?


I. He, laccan te lo auy, tetoeu many' ongo.


D. Ising hoy naha swasi?


I. Tsiary, roo fitou.


D. Innou tsenabbe?


I. Meuydy hanin malerano varre, wa^socky, vangeby, watte longo agonbe, beng'
ou, tintelly, nalack henny bou meu ydy.


D. Iahye meuidy henny bou.


I. Lehataia nou? oulum nim inou iany?


D. Iahb^^ oulun tsambats, iahey vohauy labebey.


I. Innou angarre tany?


D. Taniney magebey Engreete.


I. Iahongo any nendy'en, mangabare oulun saffe auy.


D. Iahou oulun roy mangame hy voulang amen rariga.


I. Iahou maiute, iama hyta ranga auy any noulun maro.


D. Tehoy tsambats? aiyuo amediry langits.


C. Innou oulun yno?


D. Iahey iereu ampy, apeuydy ingy henny bou meuydy, tahey marary oulun.


C. Sambats, iahou mangnang mareu, iacte innou iany innou amee?


D. Iahey pellan, brahing, tasse, hangy, toulang fiendaue, meytse, merahits,
foetsi, hahy, oudits, meytin, soukansans, iahey ma^ang kissou, vy, woulla,
woulla mabem, die se ambo.


C. Iahou tsambats iahou mangabara noulun nahy anou jack maro, hanau oulun
tsambats.


D. Iahey rauo Ranga, iahey mangesse, iahey ampeuarots semis ampang'alats
pemisse ara^ck masiack accombing.


C. Laccan tello nyoulou auytetou, auytetou na here nyady namonou, auytetou
amynil laccan hallehal, oulun tsiken onbe'entendy, nangalets agombe, pitsang'ou
noro'en nasien asfou.


D. Iahy semis hyte oulun, iahey maiont mehauan.


C. Tsambats (Auyla uw kony) auetony laccan meongo mang'a bey, ankerong hoy
anketsi semissi vatou, alang tkorack ioock voutack.


D. Iahey alin anijeu yieock hamerein ankehoy nanimbo.


C. Meorgo, iang hary mytahy, at siken aby mahing.


ANOTHER DIALOGVE FOR THE BVYING OF FRESH VICTVALS, AMD THE persons are, a
German, and an Indian.
English
G. GOd save you my friend.


I. And you likewise friend.


G. Have you nothing that may serve my turn?


I. Who are you?


G. We are Germans, who willingly would trade here.


I. What merchandises do you desire?


G. We desire Oxen, Goats, Rice, Milk, Honey, Oranges, Limons, Cinamom,
Cloaues, and the leaves of Cloaues.


I. There is enough of those things here, choose what you will.


G. For how much will you fell me this Ox?


I. You shall pay me for him fifty blew glasse-beades, three chains of beads
of a red color, six knives, and two else of black cloth.


G. This is too much, I will not pay so much.


I. How much therefore?


G. I will give you one ell of green cloth, two else of linen cloth, three
knives, and one pair of sizzars.


I. This is little, I cannot sell it for so small a price, lest I incur the
displeasure of my master.


G. I will add this looking glass besides.


I. Give me yet two tin spoones, and I will give you this measure of honey
besides.


G. Take it therefore, but it is needful that you bind the ox well, lest he
may escape away.


I. I will lead him into the boat, and will bind his feet together, with a
cord cast about his horns.


G. Do so, my companions shall help you. But when will you bring me Rice and
Limons?


I. I will bring you daily whatsoever you will.


G. Bring us daily two measures of milk, and three pots.


I. Well, in the name of the Lord, God preserve and defend you.


Madagascar.
D. RAnga rsaboy nau keney.


I. Hennau hokenoy keney.


D. Hannau tsemits sabo?


I. Oulun ynou iany?


D. Iahey vaiaha, meuatouetou.


I. Innou iacy?


D. Iahey milla agomee. osse, vare, rononne, tintelle, wankesey, waetsoery,
boedits saiy mamy, vo'a, rauintsary.


I. Tsiang abie, misia ia houteen.


D. Fiery ny'a angombe?


I. Iahou mangamme hannau diny poelo toulang medaue meytse, tollo tadiny
merehets, enny kissou, toe ^rang taffi maintin.


D. Feno loats, iahou we leing hangamey maroloat.


I. Fiery amenauw?


D. Iahey mang'a mey arais erang tafsi roorsambou roe erang moussi aranou,
tello kissou, araic fehete.


I. Aning hele, iaho semang' amey, venien iaho me voulang, iahey mang' amey
morra varots.


D. Iaho mang amey anauw fiten indong'an.


I. Amahey sorock wolle ray ytoy tauoy tintelly meko hannou.


D. Alou, hannauw affehonya gombe vauy asia ellef.


I. Iaho manrosso nylaccan hannau, mesehiny hohots angoy anfasi anni tandock.


D. Tsaboio, atsicken metahy oulun, onion hannauw mandesse wary watsoery?


I. Iahoy ande fabande mandose, mandeng wontong hannere.


D. Ande fahande mandose tononne, rooy tauo, tello vylangy feno.


I. Tsaonbats Auilau kony, iang hary mytahy.


ANOTHER DIALOGVE OF ONE WHO WANDERED OVT OF THE WAY IN A WOOD: the persons are
a Germane, and an Indian.
English
G. GOd give you good day friend.


I. Whence come you so red, and full of sweat?


G. I will tell you this friend, I went out with our people into the wood, to
kill some birds with a piece, but I went out of the way: wandering therefore,
here and there, I seek whether I could find any man that might show me the
way, for I would willingly return unto the ships while it is yet. day.


I. You have wandered too far out of the way, and you cannot return unto the
ships to day, for you are too sarre off from them.


G. I would not be absent from the ships by night, lest my companions might
suspect that some danger had befalen me.


I. Tarry with me this night, I will go with you to morrow, and show you the
way.


G. I am exceeding thirsty and hungry, for I have wandered very long in the
wood.


I. Come into this house with me, I will cause meat to be prepared for you, an
hen to be killed, and roasted.


G. Reach me wine of the Palm that I may drink, and a nut that I may eat.


I. Come, let us go to supper, for it is ready, and afterward we will go to
bed.


G. Sit, I pray you, I will presently return.


I. Power out water to wash our hands. Eat, you eat nothing, take some of
this boiled hen, and of the broyled fishes.


G. I do nothing else but eat, for it is meat of a very pleasant taste.


I. It is well: (God bless you) but drink also of this burned wine.


G. I will do it. But when shall we go to bed? for to morrow we must begin
our journey betimes.


I. When you please, your bed is ready.


G. Ho, friend, when do we arise? It is day.


I. It is too timely yet, you may yet sleep an whole hour.


G. It pleases me not, it is time to rise.


I. It is well, I will come presently.


G. What way shall we go?


I. We must go this way through the wood, for then we shall come unto a
certain River, and having passed over it we shall come unto a very high hill,
over which we must also go.


G. But do there no thieves stay in this wood, who lie in wait for men?


I. Yea, for certain enemies of ours use sometimes to come hither, who take
travelers, and spoil them of their goods.


G. But, when we are come to the top of this hill, shall we see the ships?


I. Yea, we shall presently see them, and then we must bend unto the right hand.


G. I see the shore and the sea, I therefore rejoice, and hope that I shall
shortly see the ships.


I. What reward shall I receive, for that I have brought you into the way?


G. I will satisfy you with a thankful mind, when I come unto the ships.


I. Go too therefore, do so, I will return unto you to morrow, for now I
must go home.


G. Go in peace, God be with you.


Madagascar.
D. HAnnau nandy kenay.


I. Wohauy taia hannou? nahoen hannou merehets iahou sedingits?


D. Iahou meuoulang hamy nou keney, iaho auitcho oulun tsika angahits mammal
vorong, iahey nisserack nyiengy myala iahou myla^ it sangou, mile iahy fou wit
ingy oulun mampito ahy, iahou mengo anda myiahy amyny laccan.


I. Hannau lauits fiengoon, haunau andaen nieu siombe andaken laccau, lauits
fangoon.


D. Labou maleyn tommort^etou oulun iahou tone voll^ick iaby ady ahy.


I. Mande eton nyalun anijen, hamere in iahou ombat manpit toro hannou.


D. Iahou ouneoin maing mandetaheta, iahou lauits lehee.


I. Mainckatouy ensang' ou, iahou wadins hannin, mamonnou akoho tsabo at tounou.


D. Amebo iabou taho pare mommeko, ameho ahy araiek tanneke voenijeu hannick^.


I. Ingo at siken homman, nyhanin massack* naha at siken wandy.


D. Tura iahou avy bydy hannau.


I. Alou inrano angoniaen nytaugan hommanna, bannau syhommau, manganre atoukou
est nekoho* henanatounou.


D. Iahou houman, hanin sambats mangit.


I. ^ohoy sambats (tomp^kou tsiara) mommeko ana^ tuy thao mafana.


D. Iahou mitsabou. Etsika souhandy? hamoreyn vintelangits mefouha souhou
meysing mingo.


I. Anillau isi, mandy assack nyfony.


D. Okeney, hannou semifo? nyanda maiaba.


I. Nyandy poela mareyn, wit vety boande naba mefoha.


D. Tsiary, ansaen nyande laua.


I. Auillou, iaho hauy bydanou.


D. Adia arahy atsichgan?


I. Et^sucka arrahee mang yuack niahits, naha omby areyck ongey yiou bary
tsiken, myuoock ^aha at siken ombet any wohits, myho' at attsiken.


D. It ou ahits simis si oulun ampanboenoch, ingy oulun adien?


I. He, auito andinde attsiken tassick, hinghe anketou oul^n ^ho mangeffe.


D. Amba rau ahy, daen attsiken ta^akets aniyn wohits, d^en attsiken ni^accan
hytae?


I. He, attsiken witt^uety hyten tsigen siany attsiken meuadick a^kana.


D. Iahou mehyte nyanlg'an alaoet, nahoen iahou nara vou, iahou mellacky ^uy
a^iny nillackan.


I. Iack^ ^nou hounaby, iahou nyongo bauaiay?


D. Iahou mangeffe hannau, iahou onbekou anlaccan.


I. Tsaboi ay, iahou amereyn auy, iahou mai^to houdy andang' ^u.


D. Mengoaiange hary mitihy hannou.


FINIS.
Soli Deo, Trino, and vni: honos, laus, and gloria.

