By the Queen.
THe Queens Majesty being infourmed, that where the last year in the month
of August, by her special proclamation given at Otelande, her Majesty
directed sundry good orders to her Ports, for the remouyng and expellyng of
all Pirates out of the narowe Seas upon the coasts of her Realms, whereupon it
followed that sundry evil persons having ben apprehended in her Ports, by
means of the said Proclamation, have been (as it is notorious) of late time
executed as Pirates, so as though no manifest Pirates are known at this
present to resort to any her Majesty's Ports, yet it is supposed that by the
fraud and greediness of some negligent officers in some small Ports or
Creekes of the Realm, certain goods and Merchandise are secretly brought
into the said Ports (as it is said) from some Ships of war of other
countries, being upon the high Seas, and out of the danger of her Majesty's
Castles or Bulwarks to be stayed, and are thought to be there taken by the
said Ships of war by force of arms from Merchants passing through the
narow Seas: a matter much mislyked by her Majesty. For remedy whereof, her
Majesty does eftsoon most straytly charge and command al manner persons, to
have a more earnest regard to the observation of all things contained in the
foresaid Proclamation, upon the several pains therein contained: and that ye
same Proclamation be in every Port of her Realm newly published and observed.

And thereunto this her Majesty presently adds, that if any officer in any
Port or Creek, shall have any knowledge or information given of any person,
that directly or indirectly shall bye, or any wise attain to any manner goods
or Marchaundize brought in, otherwise then ordinaryly and publicly by
Merchants Ships, as lawfully tradyng Marchaundize: that the said officers
for not apprehendyng the offenders, and for not withstandyng such frauds,
shall be both deprived of their offices, and committed to prison without bail,
if their offices be of her Majesty's gift. And if they have continuance of
their offices or jurisdictions by grant of corporation, the whole liberties of
the corporation for such misuses shall be seized into her Majesty's hands, and
be extinguished. And whosoever shall give any true information to her Majesty's
privy Counsel against any such officers so offendyng, the same shall be duly
and largely rewarded to his comfort and satisfaction, and to the encouragyng of
others to detect such offenses and frauds.

Given at Hampton Court the sixth day of June. 1570. in the twelfth year of her
Majesty's reign. God save the Queen.
Imprinted at London in Powles Churchyard by Richard Judge and John Cawood,
Printers to the Queens Majesty. Cum priuilegio Regiae Maiestatis.


