Arthur of Brytayn.

The hystory of the most noble and valiant knight Arthur of little brytayne,
translated out of frensshe in to englushe by the noble Johan bourghcher knight
lord Barners, newly Imprynted.



Here follows the translatours prologue.
FOr as much as it is delectable to all humayne nature to read and to here
these ancient noble Hystoryes of the chyualrous Feats and marcyall Prowesses
of the vyctoryous Knights of times paste whose tryumphaunt deeds if writing
were not should be had cleue out of remembrance. And also because that
ydelnesse is reputed to be the mother of al vices, wherefore somewhat in
eschewynge thereof and in the way of lowli erudycyon and learning I John
Bourghchere knight lord Berners have enterprysed to translate out of frensshe
in to our maternal tongue a noble hystory making mencyon of the famous deeds
of the right valiant knight Arthur son and heir to the noble duke of
Brytayne and of the fair lady Florence daughter and heir to the mighty
Emendus king of the noble realm of Soroloys, and of the great trouble that
they endured or they attained to the perfourmaunce of their virtuous amorous
desyers, for first they overcame many hard and strange adventures the which
as to our humayne reason should seem to be incredible, wherefore after that I
had begone this said process I have determined to have left and given up my
labor for I thought it should have be reputed but a folly in me to translate
beseming such a feigned matter wherein seems to be so many vnpossybylytees, how
be it than I called again to my remembrance that I had read and seen many a
sondrye volume of diverse noble hystoryes wherein were contained the redoubted
deeds of the ancient inuynsyble conquerours and of other right famous knights
who acheued many a strange and wonderful adventure the which by plain
letter as to our understanding should seem in a manner to be supernatural,
wherefore I thought that this present treatise might as well be reputed for
troth as some of those. And also I doubted not but that the first auctour of
this book devised it not with out some manner of truth or virtuous intent, the
which consyderacyons and other gave me again audacyte to continue forth my
fryste purpose till I had fynysshed this said book, not presumynge that I have
reduced it in to fresshe ornate polysshed english, for I know my self
insuffycyent in the facondyous art of rethoryke, nor also I am but a lerner of
the language of frensshe how be it I trust my simple reason has led me to
the understanding of the true sentence of the matter, according to the which
I have followed as nere as I could desiring all the reders and herers thereof to
take this my rude tra^slacion in gre and if any fault be to lay it to mine
uncunning and derke Ingnorau^ce and to mynysshe, add, or augmet as they shall
find cause requysyte, and in their so doing I shall pray to god that after
this vain and transytory life he may bring them unto the perdurable Joy of
heaven. Amen.

Thus ends the translatours prologue.
Here after follows the table of this present history.
The first chapyter makes mencyon of the birth of the noble kynght Arthur
sone and heir to the duke of Brytayne. Capitulo.i. Folio.i. How ye duke of
brytayne delivered his so^e Arthur to the governance of a prudent knight named
sir Gouernar who did ensygne hi^ in all goodly manners and deeds of arms so
that afterward there was none like unto him. ca. ii. folio.i. How Arthur found
in the forest a noble lady without socour, and with her a fair young maid her
daughter named Iehannet before a little lodge the which they had made of ye
branches of the trees And how yt Arthur was amorous of the said Iehannet.
caplo. iii. folio.i How Arthur caused to be delivered to Ieha^net and her mother
the revenues that bleo^ged to the slange or ponde of the foreste, whereby there
stood a fair goodly place of pleasure, and afterward Arthur did oftentimes
resort thither to pass the time with them. cap. iiii. folio.ii. How
within.viii. days after Arthur and Gouernar went to ye stange to se ye lady
and Iehannet her daughter. ca. v. folio.iii. How that the duke and duches took
counsel to mary their son Arthur, and how they sent their steward to the
lady Luke of ostryge for to demand her daughter for Arthur. cap. vi. folio
iiii. How the seen shall demanded ye daughter of ostrige for Arthur of
brytayne, the which request with great joy was granted him. capitulo.vii. fo.
eodem How yt Arthur was sore displeased for that his fader would mary hi^ to ye
daughter of ostrige because it was said she was of ill governance. ca. viii.
folio.iiii. How yt Arthur went to se Iehannet and declared to her how the duke
his fader should mary hi^ whereof he was sore displesed for the love of her. ca.
ix, fol. v. How yt Arthur and Hector his cousin germayne were made knights for
the love of Arthur, who than did ensure Pe^ron daughter to the ladi luke of
ostrige, and of ye great tournai yt was there done at nau^tes for the love of
arthur. ca. x. folio.v. How that Arthur wedded fair Perron daughter to the
lady Luke of ostryge. And of the protestacyon that he made before all the
barony. ca. xi. fol. vii. How this lady Luke of ostryge sent for Iehannet and
caused her secretlye the first night to lie with arthur because yt perro^ was no
maid, to thentente that arthur should not perceive it ca. xii. fo. vii. How yt
Iehannet who was a bed with arthur in the stead of his wife Perro^, and or she
would suffer him to touch her she demanded her endowrie. ca. xiii. fo. ix. How
that arthur Hector, and Gouernar went erly in the morninge to se Ieha^net at
the stange, who showed unto ar^hur all the treason of his wife, and how that
she had layne with him all that night instead of Perron, whereof he meruayled
greatly^ cap. xiiii. fol. eodem How ye Gouernar vaynquisshed in battle sir
Au^sel caused hi^ to make knowledge of this treason and co^fe^sed how yt he
brought Ieha^net fro the stange for to ly all night with Arthur. ca. xv. fo. xi
How arthur demanded license of his father and mother to go play him out of his
own country for he would go seek adventures to show thereby his force and
prowess. cap* xvi fol. xii. How the mighty king of Soroloys called Eme^dus
held open court in his realm, where as was four puyssau^te kings, who were
al his subgectes, and there ye shall here of things right meruaylo^s.
capitulo.xvii. folio xiiii (...) ^^scrypcyon of the facyon and sytuacy^^ of the
mount peryllous the which was conquered by the prowess of Arthur. capitulo.
xviii. folio.xiiii. How it was determined that the queen Fenyce should take her
chaumber in the palace beside the castle of the port noyre. capitulo.xix.
folio xv. How that the daughter of the mighty king Emendus and of Fenyce his
queen ^ is destenyed over the fountain in ye herber of the m^unt perilous
by.iiii. queen's of yt fayry, the chyefe of them was named Proserpyne, who was
the most fairest creature of all the world. ca. xx. fo. xvi. How ye king of
valefou^d sent his son to ye city of Sabba for to be brought up in the company
of Florence. ca. xxi. fol. eo. How yt the queen Fenice mother to Florence dyed,
and how she made her testament gyuyng to her daughter a ring in puttyng her
thereby in possessyon of the realm of blaunche toure. ca. xxii. fo. xvii. How
the queen Fenyce mother to Florence was nobly buried. ca. xxiii. fo. eod. How
ye the emperor of ynde the more demanded of king Emendus the fair Florence
his daughter in marriage. And of the answer ye king Emendus made to him And
also of the term yt was taken to m^ry Florence, and how that master Steven
knew by the regarding of the planettes that their was coming out of the west
a knight, who should achiefe the adventures of the port noyre And how he
should have and enjoy the white shield and the swerd and obtain Florence in
marriage, whereof she was greatly comforted, for in no wise she loved the
emperor. ca. xxiiii. fo. xviii. How that Arthur slew twelve knights, who
had taken a way a young, damoysell fro her father and mother, and had tied
her to a tree, there to have defouled her virginytye, who was saved by Arthur.
capitulo.xxv. folio.xx. How that Arthur Hector and gouernar slew.xxx. thieves
in a great forest the which was a great wealth to all the country, for they had
pylled and wasted the country all about. Capitulo.xxvi. fo. xxi. How that sir
de la launde showed to Arthur the occasyon why that this tourney was first
taken by the lord Beauten capitulo.xxvii. folio.xxiii. How that Arthur had the
honor in the tourney that was made at Oyen between the Marshall of Mirpoys and
the earl of Beauieu, where as was diverse great kings, earls, barons, and many
other good knights right valyaunte, whereby Arthur gate him great thank and
praise and was greatly honored of all ladies and damoyselles there assembled.
capitulo.xxviii. folio.xxvi. How yt Arthur the second day had the honor of the
tourney, and so with him abode the price of the fyelde. ca. xxix. fol. xxix. How
that the Marshal of myrpoys for envy that he had because that Arthur had the
honor of the tourney and because he had beaten him down, for he had wend him
self to have been the b^st knight of the world, therefore he defied Arthur and
challenged him to Just. And how that Arthur vaynquyshed him and did break one
of his arms and two rybbes in his sides. capitulo.xxx. fol. xxxi. H^w that
Arthur was crowned to be king of all the knights of the tourney and they
promised him faith and trou^h to serve him in deeds of arms always and in
every place where as it seemed him best, and the young king of Malogres did
crown him. ca. xxxi. fol. xxxii. How that arthur after his crownacio^ took
leave of the yo^ge king and of all the other lords and knights, ladies and
damoyselles, who conuayed him on his Journey ward, and had great sorrow to leave
his company. ca. xxxii. fo. xxxiii How arthur and his company arrived in the
erledom of brewle marching against the land of sorolois and entered into the
city of brewle, the which was besyged by the duke of orgouie named maiaquis
because the earl would not let hi have his daughter in marriage, whereof by false
treas^^ he slew the earl. ca. xxxiii. fo. xxxiiii How yt Arthur went alone to
the duke of Orgoule and gave him his answer and had hi abide no longer for the
rayre alice For he showed him how yt he had given her to hector his co^^n. And
how that he had promised to her his head because he slew her father by treason,
with the which answer the duke was sore displeased so much that there was
between them a great battle. ca. xxxiiii. folio.xxxvi. How Hector and Gouernar
and sir Oaths rode out of the City well accompanied to rescow arthur, who all
alone assailed the duke of Orgoule and all his army. cap. xxxv. fo. xxxvii How
Arthur, Hector, Gouernar, and sir Oaths discomfyted Peter the cornu, brother to
the duke who was comen to him wi^h, iiii. C. knights, and there this cornu was
slain, and al his people slain and taken prisoners, and how Arthur took the
dukes horse named assyle, the best ^orse as tha^ of the world ca. xxxvi. fo,
xxxviii How that arthur and his company utterly discomficed the duke and struck
of his head, and did send it by Gouernar to the fair ladi Alice and to her
mother as he had promised before. ca. xxxvii. fol. xl. How arthur and his
company went to the city of orgoule for to take it by force, but the
burgeyses thereof br^^ght unto him the keys, and did unto (...) homage, and so
did all the nobles of that country as unto their chief sovereign lord. cap.
xxviii fol. xli How yt arthur made his cousin Hector duke of Orgoule by the
assent of all the lords of ye country. ca. xxx^x. fol. xliii. How that Arthur
and Gouernar departed a souder, and of the terrible adventures that each of
them found or they met again. cap. xl. fo. eodem How Gouernar after that he
was departed fro Arthur found in a great forest two knights armed who had
beaten and wounded an other knight and would have rauysshed his sister, and how
he rescowed her and did vaynquysshe at her enemies. ca. xli. fo. xliiii How
that Gouernar came to a strong castle called the brosse, and vaynquy^shed the
knight that kept it. And how that afterward he was kept in that ca^tell
against his will in great danger of death till at the last Arthur deliue^ed him
as ye shall here hereaf^er. ca xiii. fo. xiv How yt Arthur conquered the castle
of the port noyre by his prowess, and slew all them yt kept it, and how
after that he entered in the halles of the palace, where he was assailed of two
great and horyble lions and of a great giaunt, and how he overcame them al with
great pain, and acheued all the meruaylous adue^tures of the castle, the
which are right wondrous to rehearse. ca. x^iii fol xlv. How arthur after yt
he had acheued ye adue^tures of the palace and delivered the prisoners, and
after how yt he acheued the adventure yt was in the galery going in to the
gardin of the mount perilous, and by his might with a great bar bet down ii.
massyue images of coper each of the^ holding and flayle yt was of such wight yt
x. men might scant lift one of them fro the earth, wherwt they we^e ever betinge
with great strokes made by enchau^tement, to thentent that none should pass
into the ga^dins of the mount perilous, and so tha^ failed and ended all the
enchau^tmaentes of that place. cap. x^iiii. fo. xlix How master Steven went
with arthur in the palace wtin the castle to the enten^ to se the wonderful
adue^tures yt arthur had there acheued. ca. xlv. fol. l How proserpyne queen of
the fayry about mydnight appeared to Arthur with great light of torches, and how
that she showed him that wtin the mount perilous there was the white shield and
the good sword enchau^ted called ^larence, and how that he should have them
with much honor if his heart durst serve him. And how the next day master
Steven led Arthur into ye herber where as the white shield was, the which
could never be remeued fro the tree whereon it hanged, and how that Arthur took
it at his ease and cla^ence the sword also the which could never before that
time be drawn out of the shethe, nor it would help no body but al only Arthur
who drew it out lightly, and after that it did him much help as ye shall here
after. ca. xlvi. fol. lii. How master Steven showed arthur how ye Gouernar ^is
knight was in the castle of brosse, and how yt the custom of ye castle was
first begone. ca. xlvii. fo. liii How that arthur when he was departed fro the
port noyre for to go to deliver Gouernar out of the castle of the brosse and
also for to fight with the monster^* he found in a fair meadow the neuew of
the duke of bygor accompanied with.xiii. other knights, who assailed him right
fyersly, but he defended him self so valiau^tlye yt he slew.iii. of them and
wounded so the dukes neuew that he was feign to be carried away in an horse
litter. cap xlviii. fol. i^iii How that arthur fought with the monster, the most
foulest and horrible figure that ever was seen with man's eyes and so
vainquished him by his valiau^t prowess, and struck of his head and did send
it to the fair Florence ca. xlix. fol. lvi How that the king Emendus sent a
knight named Brisebat accompanied with a thousand men of war to thentent that
he and his company should go fight with the monster, and how the said knight
arrived at the monsters pytte the same season while that Arthur and the monster
were fighting together, and there he and al his company did se how that Arthur
slew the monster without help cap. l. folio.lvii. How sir Isembartes cosyn
enbusshed him in a great forest with a great multitude of me^ of war to
thentent to slay Arthur by treason, and were Arthur did with his hands such
deeds yt in a manner it was incredyble. And how that Gouernar and Brysebar were
taken prisoners and led forth to a toure, and there Arthur slew of his
enemies.v. hundred and mounted into the toure, and so rescowed the prysone^s in
the spite of all the town and there wanne the palace. ca. li. fol. lix. How
Arthur and his company were besyged in ye palace by the duke of bigor, but
thanked be god they escaped by the subtle art of mast^r Steue^ clerk to the
fair Florence of Soroloys. ca. lii. fol. lxi How master Steven by the virtue
of his art o^ nigroma^cy delivered arthur and his company fro peril and
danger of yt duk of bygor and his neuewe. cap, liii. foli. lxiii. How the
neuewe of Brysebar aryued at the court of the mighty king Emendus with the
head of the monster, and did salute the king and also the Emperor of ynde who
was still in the court attendynge that the king should give him in marriage
his daughter the fair florence and to her the head of the monster was
pres^nted from Arthur, and ^hewed her how that al only by his noble prowess
he had slain the terryble monster of the brosse. capitulo. liiii. fo. lxv. How
that Arthur and master Steven went to the garden pertaining to the palace of
the portenoyre; and entered in to the rich pauylion where as ye image was
holding in her hands the chaplet the which she did set on Arthurs head^ in
sygnificacion how that he should have the fair Florence to whom the image was
resemblable, for there was non that should have Florence in marriage with out he
should dye an evil death, without it were he that the image did give unto the
said chaplet. ca. lv. fo. lxvi How that Arthur slew and dyscomfyted.xv.
knights right mighty and puyssaunt, who were com to assayl his host, who was
called the squire of the plashes. capitulo.lvi. fo. lxviii How the great vilayn
brought Arthur where as he fought with a great and a terryble lion, but
finally Arthur slew him And how after he fought with a great gyauntesse and an
horryle gyaunte, and by his prowess he conquered them both, and after that
fought with a great gryffon, and this was the beginning of the adventures of
the toure tenebrous, wherein ye shall here many terryble and meruaylous things,
the which were all achyeued by the only prowess of the valyaunte Arthur.
capitulo.lvii. folio.xx. How on the next morning the vylayn brought Arthur to
an other adventure nigh to the toure tenebrous, where as he was first assailed
with terrible monstrous birds and great gryffon^ without nombre, and after that
he was assailed with xxiiii. knights, and how he by his prowess slew them
all. And also he bette down the great machomet of bras out of the which there
issued such a wynd that it turned about great mylstones like powder, and
also how that he entered into the castle tenebrous, and quenched the fire which
was the cause of the great deckenes the which contained the cyrcuyte of.v.
leges compass as ye shall h^^e afterward. ca. lviii. fo. lxxiiii. How arthur
bette down the great machomet sitting in the vessel of brass, and thereby the
wind ceased. ca. lix fo. lxxiiii How that Arthur entered into the toure
tenebrous, and how he there quenched the fire, whereby all the terryble
enchantement ceased. ca. lx. folio. lxxv How after yt Brysebar and master
Steue^ were departed fro Arthur fro the port noyre they aryued at cornyle
where as king emendus was, and in his company the emperor of ynde, and his
other^ in kings holding the same time a great sumptuous open court, and
there master Steven and Brysebar recounted to them all in open audye^ce the
noble ^hyualry of Arthur, and this same mean season there came into the court
a knight all armed and brought tidings to the king how all the adventures of
the toure tenebrous were acheued by the only prowes of one noble knight. ca.
lxi folio lxxvi How the Emperor was aferde least Florence should cast her
love on Arthur, wherefore the demanded of the king her father to have her in
marriage without any longer delay, wherewith the king was content, but Florence
would not agree thereto, wherewith the king her fader was with her right sore
dyspleased as ye shall here afterward. ca. lxii. folio.lxxviii. How Florence
when she knew yt master Steue^ was come to ye court she was right glad, and
how yt he by his policy gate her longer respyte, yt was till bartilmew tide
next after. ca. lxiii. folio.xxix How that Arthur was received of the fair
lady Margarete into the city of Argence. capi. lxiiii, folio, lxxxii, How that
the next day the master answered for the lady, and Arthur took her quarrel in
hand against ye du^es neuew sir Asembarte, cap, lxv, fo, lxxxvi, How the same
season while the king of orqueney and al these other noble people were at dinner
in great joy and myrthe there came in a messe^ger fro the wounded knight to
Arthur desyryng him to come and help him or else he would wit him of his
death, wherewith all the court was sore troubled, and seized all their Joy for
the love of Arthur, for incontinent he departed fro the court and went forth with
the messenger, and how yt all the court fered greatly Arthur for that
enterprise, for there was never none yt ever returned again alive fro that
adventure, cap, lxvi fol, lxxxx, How that Gou^nar in serching of Arthur had the
honor of a tourney, yt was made by the earl of the isle perdue, and there
Gouenar was amorous of the countess And how yt the earl charged the countess
yt she should not speak to gouenar, whereof evil came to him, for the next day
Gouenar did beat him well in the tourney, and lay al night after with the
countess his wife, cap, lxvii, fol, lxxxxii, How that Gouenar did beat down
at the tourney the earl of the isle perdue, capitulo, lxviii, fol, lxxxxv. How
that after Arthur was departed fro Argentou to go to the castle of hurt byse
to the wounded knight who had sent or him, in his way at the last he found at
the entering of a fair forest three ladies of right excellent beautye of whom
the chief was called Proserpyn queen of the fayry who greatly desired Arthur of
his love, but in no wise he would agree thereto, and there^ he lost his varlet
that was his guide, wherefore it behooved him to tarry there all ye nyght^ for it
is dark and wyste not whether to go, cap, lxix fol, lxxxxvii, How Arthur
conquered the castle of hu^tebyse the most strong place of the world next
to the port noyre, where as was the damoysell by whom the wounded knight was
hurt and there Arthur did so much by his prowess that the said knight
recovered health ca, lxx, fo, lxxxxix. How that Arthur when he was departed fro
the queen Proserpyne it fortuned him to take his lodging with the neuewe of sir
Isembarte, who take Arthur and locked him fast in a toure to thentent to have
slain him by night, but there Arthur did so valyauntly that he brake out of
the toure and slew the knight and al his people, capi. lxxi, foli, c, ii, How
that Gouernar in serching of Arthur by adventure he passed for by ye same
Castle where as Arthur had slain the lord thereof, and there he was assailed
of the friends of the said knight, and there did so valiauntly that he slew
the most part of them, cap, lxxii. fol, c, iii, How that Arthur found, xl,
knights who had taken a damoysell the which they found in a forest, and they
would have rauysshed her, and there Arthur rescowed her and slew all the.xl.
knights who would have pylled and robbed the ladies castle and have slain
all that had been within. cap. lxxiii. fo. c. iii How that master Steven
departed fro the port noyre to go to the tournaye at Corni^e and took with him
the noble Florence rich pauilion, wherein was the image with the chaplet who
resembled in all thing unto the lady Florence the most fair creature that was
as tha^ in all the world. ca. lxxiiii. folio. c. vi How sir Rowland of Bygor
apeched Arthur of treason because yt he had slain his cousin at Argence, and so
defied him at the vt^raunce, but Arthur at the first stroke drove him down
horse and al to the e^ch, and brake one of his arms and two ribs, whereof
Florence was right joyous and specially wha^ she saw her lover Arthur whom she
never saw before. And how after sir Rowlandes servants assailed Arthur to
have slain him, but he valiau^tly defended himself and slew many of them cap.
lxxv. fol. c. vii How that duke Philip and master Steven went for to fetch
Arthur to the king of Orqueney and to the fair Florence. cap. lxxvi fo. c. xi
How a great and a puissant knight defied Arthur because he sat by Florence and
did pull down a corner of her kerche^e the which the wind had blown up, and
so Arthur did Just with him and did cast him to the earth so rudely that he was
not able to leye on horseback. v. months after. ca. lxxvii. fol c. xiii. How
Florence and Arthur spoke togiat good leyser at the end of the forest, and
there promised to love each other, and there the queen Prosepyne appeared to
them and showed to Florence how that Arthur loved her truly, and how that they
should have each other by the way of marriage but first they should endure
great pain and trouble cap. lxxviii. fol. c. xiiii How yt Arthur had the
honor of the tournay the first day the which was made for the fair Florence
between ye king Emendus and the emperor who would have had Florence to his
wife, on the which day arthur gat him self great praise among all the barony,
in so much that every knight was glad to be in his company, whereof the fair
Florence was right Joyous, for she loved him above al other. ca. lxxix, fo c,
xviii How that Florence feigned her self to be seek to the ent^nt that arthur
should not tournay the next day, for she was infere that Arthur had been weary
because of the travail that he had en^ured the first day of the tournay. And
how that the emperor when he knew yt he went to se her^ and so did her father
king Emendus, and al other kings dukes earls and barons, and all the hole
chyualry. capitulo.lxxx fol. c. xxii How that the tournay the next day was
deferred because of the disease of Florence. Cap. lxxxi fol. c. xxiii How the
image in the pauilion did set her chaplet on Arthurs head in the presence of
the emperor and of.x. other kings and of all the hole ^ssembly, wherewith the
emperor was right sorrowful because he thought to have had Florence in marriage,
but he failed of his purpose, for the image ^oke no regard nether to the
emperor nor to none other there, but all only to Arthur to who^e freely she did
give her chaplet. ca. lxxxii fo. c. xxiiii. How that Proserpine qeune of the
fayry who resembled to florence laid her down in Florence bed in florence
stede^ and she sent her unto the Port Noyre with the archebysshop and al her
knights. caplo. lxxxiii. folio. c. xxvi. How that ye lady Margarete of
Argenton with all her hole barony went and met Florence and received her in to
Argence with great feast and Joy. ca. lxxxiiii. fo. c. xxviii. How that
Proserpyne was ensured to the emperor in the stead of Florence, and how that the
king banysshed out of his country the king of orqueney, and also the king of
valefounde and master Steven and Arthur. caplo. lxxxv. fo. c. xxviii. How that
Proserpyne queen of ye fayry was led to the church to have been wedded to
the emperor wenynge that it had been Florence, but when the bishop H^d thought
to have put the wedding ring on her finger, suddenly she vanys^shed away,
so that none wyste wheder she became, and so than they stood all abashed as
though the clouds had fallen from heaven. caplo. lxxxvi. fo. c. xxx. How that
Arthur sent Gouernar to his cousin Hector duke of orgoule desy^i^ge hi^ to come
and help and socoure him against the emperor of ynde, and against ye king
Eme^dus, who would besyege hi^ in the castle of the port noyre. ca. lxxxvii.
fo. c. xxxi. How that Hector as he went toward the port noyre to socour
Arthur, he encountered one of the kings that was coming toward the emperor,
and had in his company well to the nombre of.xviii. thousand men of war, the
which king Hector slew and all his people, so that there was none that ever
escaped saving two, and so they fled away, and there Hector was a great
botye* and much tresour and great habou^daunce of vytayle the which was al
brought in to the port noyre. ca. lxxxviii. folio. c. xxxii How that
the emperor of ynde and the king Eme^dus accompanied with.viii. kings. and well
to the nombre of.iii. C. M men of war laid syege about the castle of the
port noyre where as florence and Arthur were, whereof ill turned to
the emperor, for there he lost three of his kings and well an hundred thousand
of his men. caplo. xxxix. fo. c. xxxiiii How Phylyp duke of sabary and master
Steven sone to the king of valefou^de were made knights, and of the
dyscomfyture that Arthur made on the emperor, caplo. lxxxx. folio. c. xxxvi. How
that the emperor spoke with the queen Proserpyne wenynge to him that it had been
the fair lady Florence, but h^ was deceived, for she did set a great discord
between hi^ and the king Emendus as ye shall here after. ca. lxxxxi. fo: c.
xxxvi^ How that after the emperor was thus departed in dyspleasure and had
defye^ the king with mortal war the next night following by the subtle
art of master Steven all ye kings host was brought every man fast a sleep,
and in the mean time the master and five other knights with him bare ye king
Emendus fast a sleep as he lay, bed and all up in to the palace of the
Castle of the port noyre. ca. lxxxxii. folio. c xl^ How that king Emendus
when that he awoke forgave all his ill will to Florence his daughter, and did
put all the gouernynge of his realm in to her hands. capitulo. lxxxxiii.
folio. c. xli. How that Arthur demanded congye and license of king Emendus
fader to his lady Florence to depart in to Brytayne to se the duke of Brytayne
his fader and the duchess his mother, the which license they gave him with
much pain, and Florence was in great sorrow for his departing. ca lxxxxiiii.
fo. c. xli^i How Arthur in the way as he went^ to brytaine he aryued in a
fair medowe that was Ioyni^ge to the town of Lion sur le rone, and there he
found the king of malogre accompai^ed with diverse earls and other barons, and
they had there cried a great tournai, and there Arthur and his company were
friendly received and had great there both of the king and of al other lords
and knights. ca. lxxxxv. fo. c. xliiii. How that Arthur and Hector his cosyn
with all their company arrived at Blois and how the earl of Bloys father to
hector and the countess his mother, and all the hole barony of the realm met
them on the way and received them with great joy, for they had been before in
great fere y^ arthur their neuew and Hector their son had been dead. ca.
lxxxxv^. fo. c. xlvii How arthur aryued in Britayne and how the duke his father
and al his chyualry met and received arthur with great honor and triumph, and
how yt the duchess his mother sowned for Joy when she saw her son arthur,
and in likewise did Iehannet his old love, whereof the master and Philip had
great fere l^est yt Ieha^net should draw, away arthurs heart fro Florence
because of the great love yt they saw between the. ca. lxxxxvii fo. eode^ How
after that arthur was departed fro king Emendus and Florence to go se his
friends, Florence than departed fro the port noyre and the queen of orqueney
and the lady Margaret of Argenton with her and went to sport her in her own
realm and castle of clear toure, where as the emperor came and besyeged her
for she was ware thereof he and his company were inide round about the town and
they were to the nombre of two hundred thousand, what of emperiens and of
sarasins. ca. lxxx^viii. fo. ^.xlix How that Arthur was right sorrowful because
that his horse did stomble under him, and how the master showed him how that
Florence was besieged by the emperor in her castle of the clear toure, whereof
arthur was in great fere and trouble. cap. lxxxxix fol. c. l. How that Arthur
and the master, Hector, Gouernar, and sir Brysebar entered into the clear toure
where as Florence was besyeged, and they.v. disco^fited a puyssaunt king
sarasin who was called ye sowdan, who was come thider to help the emperor,
and there were all the sarasyns and turks slain. ca. c fo. c. li How that
trewse was taken for a month between the emperor and arthur cap. c. i. fol.
c. liiii. How that the young king of malogre and of the duke of Brytayne, with
diverse other earls and barons, and accompanied with a great army of men of
war aryued at the clear toure, to the intent to socour Florence and Arthur
who were besyeged by the emperor, who had nigh enraged out of his wit when he
knew that they were come into that country Cap. c. ii. fol. clv. How that
king Jonas all alone came to the castle of the clear toure, and there did his
message fro the emperor of ynde the more. cap. c. iii. fol. c. lvii How that
the emperor and king Jonas accompanied with fyfty thousand men of war came
to the clear tour for to have made assaute thereto, and than they found the gate
open and entered both in to the town and in to the castle, for they thought
verily that all the frensshe men had been fled, but they were deceived for
than the frensshe men lepte out from their enbusshementes and she fast the
gates, and there slew king Jonas and all the fyfty thousand, so yt none
escaped alive but one and the emperor who was token prisoner. ca. c. iiii.
folio. c. lviii. How Gouernar went in to the realm of Soroloys to the^^ent to
give knowledge to king Emendus how ye the emperor had besyeged his daughter
Florence in her castle of clear toure desiring him to haste his host to
rescowe her at that time. capitulo c, v. folio. c. lxi How that Arthur
accompanied with the frensshe men dysco^fyted king Florypes brother to the emperor
and slew all them yt were in his company. ca. c. vi. fo. c. lxii. How master
Steven by his art and conning caused themperyens to goo a wrong way from
Arthur, and so encountered the myghti king Emendus and al his host. ca. c.
vii. folio. c. lxiiii. How that the emperor dyed in prison for sorrow when that
he knew that his kings and people were al slain and dyscomfyted. ca. c.
viii. folio. c. lxvi. How that king Emendus came to ye blaunche tour with all
his noble company to ye buryenge of the emperor and of the other.iiii. kings.
ca. c. ix. of. c. lxvi. How after ye dyscomfyture of the emperor and al his
people ye king gave license to all his host to depart every man home, and
went himself to Argence there to make the wedding between Arthur and
Florence, and how that Florence went to the port noyre to make chere to the
duchess of britayne and to the other ladies and to bring them to Argence to
her fader king Emendus. ca. c. x. folio. c. lxvii. How Florence because of the
doubt yt she had leest y^ Iehannet should take fro he^ Arthu^ she gave her to
Gouernar, and gave them the realm of mormal, and caused them to be ensured
together the same hour, and also the same time she caused The lady Margarete
to be ensured to master Steven. cap. c. xi. fol. c. lxviii How Arthur wedded
the fair Florence daughter to the mighty king Emendus with great honor and
triumph, and king Gouernar wedded the fair Iehannet, and master Steven
wedded the fair Margaret of Argenton all in one day and one hour, ca. c. xii
fol. c. l^x. How the frensshe knights, and those of Soroloys, of Argence, of
Orqueney, of Mormall, of Ismaelite, of Ualefou^de and of Sabary did tornay
togeder whereof Arthur and gouernar had the honor ca. c. xiii. fol. c. lxxii.
How that after the marriage of Arthur the barons and ladies of France returned
into their own countries, except king Alexander whom king Emendus kept
still and made unto him great chere, and he tarried there so long till ye
Florence was delyued of a fair son who king Alexander held on the font
cap. c. xiiii. fol. c lxxiii. How king Alexander returned into his country and
led with him Arthur, Gouernar, Hector, and master Steven and tarried in
brytayne so long till Florence sent for Arthur because that her father king
Emendus was departed out of this life, wherefore she made great lamentacion. ca.
c, xv. fol. c. lxxiiii How that arthur was sent for because of the death of
king Eme^dus, and how that he was crowned king of Soroloys. cap. c. xvi.
folio. eodem Here is devised how long that the noble arthur lived and how that
he was buried. ca. c. xvii. fol. eodem
Thus ends the table of this present hystory.
The first Chapyter makes mencyon of the birth of the noble knight Arthur
son and heir to the duke of Brytayne. Capitulo..1.


AFter the death of good king Arthur who was right noble and gentle,
specially in cherys^hynge and enhaunsynge of nobylnesse, and mayntaynyng of the
chyualrous knights of the world. As was Gawyn and Lancelotte and many other
noble kng^htes as it is more plainly contained in diverse ancient chronicles. It
is of troth that in tho days in Brytayne there was a duke right prudente and
above all other right virtuous, rich and puyssaunte both of hauyour and
friends, who was come and extraughte of the noble high lygnage of the valyau^t
knight lau^celot du lake who was in his days of right hight and noble prowess
as it is more at large comprised in the books making mencyon of his chyualrye.
This Duke had to name Johan and was so endued with sappence yt the king who as
than governed all France loved and honored him above all other in so much
it was said where so ever he went behold yonder is the wise man of britain,
he was sworn of the kings preuye and streayte counsel so that the king was
only governed by his noble advise because of the great ^^ou the and
steadfastness yt was ever found in him, this duke hadd a right noble lady to
his wife of good and holy life who was daughter to the earl of Leycester in
England, and they loved together right fervently by cordyall love al their
life, and in accomplyshing between them the works of marriage ordained by
nature fynaltye it pleased the good Lord to send them a fair son, who in
the remembrance of good king Arthur and of his hye renown was named Arthur.
This child was goodly and of full great beauty For afterward he grew to be the
most fair creature that than was found in all crystendome and the dukes and
duches loved him so well that they intended to nothing but all only to the
prouffyte of their child, and specially to enhaunce his honor and rych^sse.

How the duke of brytayne delivered his son Arthur to the governance of a
prudent knight named sir Gouernar who did ensign him in all goodlye manners
and deeds of arms, so that afterward there was non like unto him. Ca. ii.
ANd wha^ this child Arthur was nine year of age than the Duke his fader
delivered him to be kept under the governance of a noble and a gentyl master
named Gouernar who was right prudent, puyssau^t and hardy, virtuous ^ vygorous
of body and well proved, who among other things did teach this noble
child Arthur the play of the chesse and tables so yt non was in co^ninge like
unto him. And wha^ he was of.xx. year than his master taught him the man^re of
skyrmyshe so that wtin a little season there was none able to be compared with him.
Thus amended this child from day to day and grew so goodly yt in all the
world there was none seen like him nether so fayre^ so gracyous ne so cou
reyse in so much yt the king of France desired ofte^tymes yt he should have
be noryshed and brought up with his one children. How be it ye duchess his
mother could in no wise suffer it ne scant to let him be out of her presence
never a day she loved him so enterly. So long this child soiourned with his
mother yt it was gretlye noyful to his heart, in so much that thereby he became
right pensyfe ^ sore troubled in his mind. So that gouernar his master
demanded of hi^ what was the cause of his sorrow. In good faith master said
Arthur this long soiorning and abiding at home greatly noyeth me, for I would
gladly go and play me in yo^der fair forest. And to hunt and chase after a
great heart. For it has been now a great season sithe I went any where forth.
Se^ t^ynly said gouerner fair Arthur it pleases me right well your noble
mi^d. There go to my ford pour fader and desire his lyce^ce that ye may go
chase in ye forest. Th^n arthur went forth to y^ duk his fader and demanded of
him license wha^ the duke hard this tydyng and will of his son he had great joy
and right sweet did grant him his request and commanded and desired Gouernar
that he should take good head to him and not suffer him to ^enne ne to follow to
fast after his dysport. Gouernar answered that he would take good head to him.
Than arthur caused ye hu^ters to be warned and to make ready his greyhou^des,
hounds and other raches for he wo^de go the next day be times to chase in
the forest. And the next morning Arthur and Gouernar mounted on their horses
with great Joy and.x. other gentylmen to keep them company. And arthur was
mounted on a great courser his hat hanging on his back by a lace of sylke,
his bonet on his head and the hunters went before ledinge his greyhoundes and
hounds. Thus they ride forth toward the forest in great joy.

How arthur found in the forest a noble lady without socour, and with her a fair
young maid, her daughter named Iehannet before a little lodge the which they
had made of ye branches of the trees, and how that arthur was amorus of the
said Iehannet. Cap. iii.
IN this time there was in the real me of desert a knight of great power and
right rich of hauiour and friends, and he was Lord of a castle called the
toure. This knight was named Vyciers and was of such virtue that he douted
nothi^ge.x. knights armed, and was of so valiant courage that sin the time that
he could first bear arms he was never but there as he knew where as the fayte
of arms were occupied, and employed himself ever in iustes and tornayes and
in deeds of arms and did so to be allowed yt there was no speki^ge of him but
that he was the noblest knight of the world, but finally he led so his life
that he spe^ded and wastest his goods so largely to the^te^r to get him laud
and praise that at the end he became thereby very port and tha^ was faint to
fell and to make shyfte of all y^ he had both of his own and of the good lady
his wife. And so dyed in great pouerte. And when he was buried such persons
as he was detter unto, took all the lands and goods that perteyned other to
him or to the lady his wife, so y^ there by the good lady his wife fled and
departed pryuely out of ye country, so y^ non of her friends wyste where she
was become, for she thought she had rather to live poorly in a strange
country far fro her fre^des and aqueyntaunce tha^ to endure pouerte in her
own country where she had been nobly brought up in before. So this lady went
and her daughter with her, who was of the age of.xiiii year right beautefull,
how be it she was porely arrayed and had to name I^hannet. And they trauayled so
long by their Journeys y^ by adventure they came in to the forest where Arthur
and Gouernar were used to chase and to hunte. And in a desolate place of the
forest far from any hye way there these two ladies did rest them and made
them a lodge to abide in of boughs and of such things as they could get
Thus they continued the space of a month. And this lady went eueri day right
porely to the next vylage for to get suthe things as she and her daughter
neded. And so it fortuned yt ^he same day y^ Arthur and gouernar departed fro
the court of his fader and was entered into the said foreste anon his hounds
had found a great heart, And a noble knight yt was in his company named the
lord Olyuer of I^y^c followed after this heart on a great courser and all the
other hu^ters after him. And this young Arthur began to follow after, how be it
Gou^r^ar took head y^ he should not follow to fast^, so y^ this said lord
Olyuer and ^ll other were past f^rth by him and were gone so far into the
thick of ye foreste y^ Arthur and Gouernar had clean lost both sight and
heringe of the^ and of their hou^des. And so by ges they followed fair and
esyly after, so long they followed y^ by adventure they came to the same place
where as the lodge was made for the lady and her daughter, who were both the
same time sitting without the lodge door. And as soon as Arthur saw them he
lyghted down of his horse and Gouernar with him. And wha^ this lady saw Arthur
she was greatly abashed for she thought well y^ he should be some great man and
there with she rose and Arthur right swetely saluted her. And the lady in like
wise again to him. And at y^ time it was about three of the clock. And when
the lady saw Arthur and Gouernar dyscende from their horses, she remembered
the state of her fader and of other ge^^^lmen y^ she had seen before in her
own country where as she had be norysshed up u^ whereof her heart was gretely
ashamed and troubled. Than Arthur took her by the hand and her mother also and
set them do^ne all together. Than Arthur demanded of the young maid and said
fair sweet damoysell what is your name. As our lord help me sir I am called
Iehannet, Ieha^ne^ good love where were ye borne certain sir I was not born in
this country. Than her mother said sir truly my daughter says sothe, for
truly she was borne in the lo^d of desarte in a castle called the tour. Truly
said Arthur to whom was she daughter. As God help me sir to a knight right
strong and puyssau^t who in his time loved ever deeds of arms and was
acque^ted with many noble men How be it his fortune was such or he dyed yt he
lost away and wasted both his lands and goods and mine that was his poor
wife. And were brought so far under that little or nothing was left us. And
after his death such persons as he owed any thing to, and peradventure some
other yt he owed nothing to. They were tha^ so importune on me that I was feign
to sell al yt I had. And when I saw that I was so far brought under and yt I
had nothing left me whereby to live The occasion thereof caused me to steal
away by night* for I thought I had lever go like a poor woman a beggynge in a
strange country tha^ there where I was lady and governor. And therewith right
pyteously she wept and said a gentyl^ knight now am I come in to this country
a lonely accompanied with this yo^g maid my dear daughter, who was wo^t be
brought up in fair places and rich halles and chambres, and to lie in the bed
incorteyned with sylke. And now it be ho^eth her to lie on the moss in this
lodge covered with grene boughs. Than Arthur answered and said a fair lady
why did not ye require your friends to help and socour you in your necessite
At least to give you mete and drink and clothing. In my mi^d that had be more
honorable for you tha^ thus desolate to come in to this strange cou^trye. As
god help me sir said this lady pore folks has but few friends, how be it I
ought to have many, but between the rich and the poor there wants friends,
for the rich makes his friends of his money and the pore is ever put out in
every place. And as to me sorrowful creature who has been a great lady and
much honored and have had much people under my obeysau^ce, thought great
shame to require any creature in my own cu^tre to help or soccoure me. And
specially for this young maid my daughter, she is come of goodly lygnage. Alas
as for me I am old and always she has served me right well, and now she is
like with me to lose her time, and there with she began again to weep. And when
Ieha^net saw her mother so weep she could not abstain her self from weeping
tenderly. And when Arthur saw them so full of sorrow, he had great pity and
said to the lady. My right dear lady weep ye no more but set your heart in
rest for fro he^sforth I will be in the stead of your old lord, and in all
good honor to lu^e and cherish you to the best of my power. And all this
while Ieha^net made still great la^entaco^. So there Arthur took the young
maid in his arms, and right swetely said. My right dear ^adye and love
abandon your heart to joy and leave this sorrow for as god be my socoure I
shall cause you have more honor and wealth than as yet eu^rcame to you, for I
am and shall be your own good loue^ and will take you in to my hands to
deliver you fro all pouertye, faithfully assuryng you to keep the honor of you
and of your body as much as your own p^opre brother would or might do.

How Arthur caused to be delivered to Ieha^net and her mother y^ revenues yt
belonged to the stang or ponde of the forest whereby there stood a fair goodly
place of pleasure, and afterward Arthur, did often tym^s resort thither to
pass the time with them. Capit. iiii.
IN this season yt Arthur had this co^munycacio^ with these ladies, there came to
the^ the master forester named Pyere who was also receyuer the revenues of
the forest and he had al ye day so^ghte his master Arthur and by adventure
there he found him talking with these ladies, And inco^tynent yt Arthur saw hi^
he called him by his name and demaundyd of hi^ if he had received at yt
mawdeleyn tide ye revenues of the forest, and Piers answered and said, sir I
have already at your commandment to the some of. five. C. pound, well quod
Arthur I command the incontynente to deliver it to this lady and to her
daughter. Also the manner place pertaining to the stang of this forest wherein
thou have dwelt to this time. It was so that in this sta^ge or water the wild
beasts of the foreste did ever thither resort to drink. and Ioynynge to this
water there were houses and manners the which the duke had given to arthur his
son to play hi^ in the forest, and this pyers was keeper thereof to Arthurs
behoue. Than said Arthur to Pyers I deliver to y^ these.ii. ladies. And I
charge the y^ truly y^ keep and honor them and bring them to my manner and to
deliver to them such as is apertenau^te to so goood by ladies as they be. And
as such a man as I am have taken into my hands and keeping. Therefore keep the^
well and truly. For by the faith yt I owe to my lord my fader if I know y^ you
entende or ymagen against this lady or her daughter any dyspleasure. I shall
cause the to suffer foul death. And I warn the look yt they lack no thing.
Sir said Pyers I trust I shall so demane me yt both you and they shall be with me
content. And so wha^ Arthur had been there a great season, he took his leave
there of this lady and of her daughter. So Pyers did conduyte them to the said
manner and bought for them abylementes and Iewelles, mete and drink of the best
yt could be gotten, and all other things yt was co^uenyent for noble ladys to
have. And garnysshed every office in ye house with plate of silver and with all
other necessary things. And when Arthur and Gouernar were departed fro these
ladies they rode after the tracke of sir Olyuer of Iryac and his company, and
at the last they mete together far in the forest in a great deep valey where
as sir Olyuer had killed three great hearts, and was brekynge of them. And
therewith Arthur came to him and laughed right swetely. Than resorted other of
the hunters fro all parties. And so there Arthur commanded a servant
belonging to the said Pyers to take one of these hearts and to bear it fro him
to the said lady and to her daughter. And the second Arthur did give to an
abbotte that was come to them by adventure. And the third he commanded that
it should be conveyed to the duke his fader, who had great joy thereof.

How within.viii. days after Arthur and Gouernar went to the stange to se the
lady and Iehannet her daughter, Capitulo..v.
THe eight day after that Arthur was come fro the foreste he rose erly in a
fair morninge and said to gouernar, friend let us go leap upon our horses
and goo se our damoysell in the forest we two alone, gladly sir said Gouernar.
So Arthur took a sparhawke on his hand, and Gouernar a gerfawcon. And Arthur
aparayled him self all in grene silk, and his hatte auayled with a fresshe
chaplet of flowers on his head. And they rode so long that by the son
rysynge they came to the stang and found the lady and Iehannet ready aparayled
right nobly. For Pyers the forester had purueyed them of all things necessary
to such ladies. And as than Iehannet had dronken good wynes and taken her
sustenaunce of good metes, and had forgote^ all her sorrow. Whereby her beauty
was newly renewed. And when Arthur saw her, she pleased him much better tha^
she did when he saw her first. And so took her by the fair hand and set
them down together a part. And in the mean season the lady her mother and
Gouernar were talking together. And the morning was very fair and clear. And
the earth all bedewed with clear silver drops. An^ the byrddes sange
m^lodiously on every branch so that these.ii. young lusty lovers greatly
reioysed, and had great myrthe in their hearts because of the sweet season as
it was metely for such young people to play and to laughe. And they loved
together with good heart without thinkinge of vylany or shame each to other.
Than Arthur said to her al laughyng. My sweet damoysell have ye any manner of
lover. And half smili^g and beholdynge Arthur right swetely she answered, by
the faith that I owe to you my owen dear lord, I have one right fair and
gracyous. And where is he my sweet Iehannet. By my faith ^yr he is of a country
whereof he is lord. And fair love how is he called, sir you not dyspleased,
this that I have said is suffycyent at this present teme. How be it sir I
would ye knew that king Arthur was a noble knight and of great virtue And sir I
would my lover were so good if he be not better all ready. But one thing sir I
assure you he resembles more to you than to any other under the son living,
both going, and in coming of body and all other things that one person
may be lykened to an other. My own sweet and fair damoysell said Arthur I
would feign se him. And by the faith that ye ow to me if it be to you no vylony
I pray you show him to me and I promise you faithfully I shall love and
cherysshe. him right derely. And for the love of you if yt he will he shall be
one of my house, if he be no greater of lygnage ne of richesse than I am. My
^ight dear lord said this damoysel humbly I thank you how be it he is no
grea^ter gentylman than ye be, but he thinks well to have as great honor and
friends as ye have, but as now ye may not se him* but it may well be that here
after ye shall have knowledge of him. And so thus they comoned together of many
things till it was time that Arthur should return to the court, for as than
it was about pryme. Than Arthur took his leave of the lady and of Iehannet. And
so he and gouernar mounted on their horses and rode forth always deuisyng of
the manner of this damoysell Iehannet. And at the last Arthur said. Master how
say you by the swetnesse of our damoysell and of the frenes of her heart, and
how sagely and gracyo^slye she answers to every demand, remembrynge also
her gentle manner and noble countenance, her beawtefull facyon of body and of
vysage. As god help me master all these things and many other that saemeth
of virtue to be in her, causes that I love her hyrtely. Sir said Gouernar as
God help me all that ye say is of troth, how be it mine own dear lord take
good head to your honor and remember how great a lord ye be, both of lygnage,
honor and of friends. And think how that she is but a poor gentylwoman as
to your knowledge. And if ye do her any vylony to her body, as in taking from
her that he can not render again, sir it were t^ you a great sin. And ye
ought therein to be more blamed than a another means person. Master said
arthur I pray to god never to help me if I think to go about to dysshonoure
her, but I will love her and keep her honor faithfully in like case as she
were mine owen proper sister without ever desyringe onye velany to her body. So
they rode forth talkyng til they came to the court, and than went to dinner
for it was by that time nere upon two of the clock.

How that the duke and duchess took counsel to mary their sone arthur and how
they sent their steward to the lady Luke of ostrige for to demand her
daughter for Arthur. Cap. vi
IN this wise Arthur soiurned a great long space so yt there was no we^e but
that twyse or thri^e he and Gouernar would ride to the stange with out any
other company. And it fortuned one day he tarried there longer tha^ he was a
customed to do, wherefore he was sought all about by the commandment of the
duke his father how be it no tydinges could be herd of him but that he and
Gouernar were gone togider to sport them, but no man wyste whyther. And than
the duchess said to the duke, sir I wot not what means that our soon thus
goth forth so pryuely every day and no man can tell whyther, for he takes none
with him but Gouernar^ veraylye I doubt me of our child least that he should
set his heart and love on some person whereby we should have any velony, sir he
is now of years sufficient to perc^iue and to know the fair perteyning to love
wherefore I would he were nobly married for it is time, he is.xxii. years of age.
Madame quod the duke ye have right wisely said. And I acorde well thereto, but
to whom think ye best it were to give him in marriage. Sir said the lady in
my mind it were well doon^ that we should demand the fair Perron of os^ryge,
and I trust my lady Luke her mother will be thereof right glad, verily madame said
the duke I have hard say that this lady Perron has not wyselye demeaned her
self* but has had great blame for her nyse keeping company w a knight of her
country. And I would for no good yt we should demand such a person as has
deserved blame. A sir said the lady believe not ye the reports of them that
lusts to say y^, for as god help me she is slaundred wrongfully. for I am
sure the eis not a better maid living, wherefore they are in great sin that
reports ot^erwyse of her. Dame said the duke if it be so I am right joyful.
Than let us send thither in all have Than was called to them sir Olyuer yt was
senesshall. And the duke said to him, sir Olyuer I will ye go to ost^yge to my
lady Luke and desire of her in my b^ha^e Pe^ron her daughter to be given in
matrymony to a^thur my sone. T^a^ sir Olyuer prepayred him to ride forth
And.x. other knights in his company. and so departed and rode forth so long
that the wednesdaye after Mawdeleyntyde they came to ostryge. And when sir
Oliver was in the great hall where as the lady Luke was acompanyed with many
great barons ladies and damoysels. He did right reverently salute her and all
the other lords and barons as a messenger sent fro the duke and duchess of
Britayne. And this lady Luke right honorably did receive him and all his
company. And demanded what was the cause and the occasyon of their coming.

How the senesshall demanded the daughter of ostryge for arthur of Brytayne,
the which request with great Joy was granted him. Cap. vii.
THan sir Olyuer began his proposicion and said. Right hye and myg^ty
princes. My lord and lady of brytayne has se^d us hither to publishe unto
you their ententes for they are right desirous to have love and affinity with
you as it well appears, for they have hard such bruce and fame of my lad^
Per^o^ your daughter. Wherefore they have sent me hither to your presence to
require you in their behalf to give your daughter perron in marriage to arthur
their sone, who is right gentyl, noble and valiant. Madame this is the effect
of our request. In the name of god said the lady luke humbly I thank the duke
your lord yt it will please him to have with us acquentaunce, whereof I have
right great Joy. And wi^h a good heart I give freely to him my daughter Perron
to be all holly at his comau^deme^t Madame said Oliver this deed ought greatly
to be thanked. And how say you fair lady perron, do you acorde to this
marriage. Sir said Perron I shall ever fulfill the pleasure of my lady my mother.
Certainly fair lady than do you wisely for I ensure you ye shall be coupled
to him yt is both fair and goodly. Than this ladi luke and her daughter did
give to sir Oliver and to his company many noble Jewels and other things.
And their apoyntment was to be at nauntes within.viii. days of the middell of
the next August.

How yt arthur was sore dyspleased for yt his father would mayr hi^ to ye
daughter of ostryge because it was said she was of ill governance. Ca. viii.
THan the senesshal took le^e of the lady Luke and of the fair Perron and
returned into brytayne. At which time he found the duke than risen fro diner
and the duchess with hi^ And arthur and Gouernar were playing at the chesse,
and as soon as the duke saw sir Oliver he made him good cher^ and the knight
right humblye saluted them and thanked them greatly for the great love and
gifts that the Duchess of ostrige had done to him for their sakes, and showed
them how the lady Luke would be at Nauntes and bring with her Perron ready
ap^^ayled to be given to Ar^hur about the middell of August next insuyng. And
wha^ Arthur herd that his fader would mary him he stepped forth and left his
play. And said what is y^ right dear fader, will ye marie me. Ye fair sone
said the duke right nobly. And good fader unto whom will ye give me, Fair
sone unto the gentil perron of ostryge. What sir as it is noysed she has
trespased with a another knight^ set ye so little by me that ye will now give me
perro^ who is of ill name and fame. Certainly it is not your worship ne honor
so to do nor to none of my friends. Therefore in no manner of wise I will take
her. Fair sone said his mother be not displesed ne believe no evil reports yt
is said by this lad^ it is great sin to say such things as cannot be proved
for I am in certain that she is a clean maiden. And therefore we will that ye
shall have her or else ye shall greatly dysplease my lord your father and me also*
well madame said Arthur since that it behooves me to take her and that it is your
pleasure y^^ I so do I am content, how be it if she be of such conditions as
is said of her I shall never love her. Than said gouernar to the duke, sir ye
will that Arthur shall have this damoisell. Nevertheless pleases you sir to
know that if this case be found true tha^ let Arthur leave and forsake her. And
if that she did never such trespass tha^ let arthur keep her as he ought to do
his wife, but how shall this be known said the duke for where as wisdom is
such things are lightly done so covertly that it is hard to know, sir said
Gouernar let it be inquired wisely of such as to presume should know of the
matter. Also let the damoysell her self be wisely examyned, and if she be good
she will keep her self, if she be otherwise perauenture it will be espied. I
am content with this said arthur. And for that time they left their commi^g of
that matter. Than the duke sent out his commandments to all his barons,
knights and damoysels that they should be al ready at nauntes by the mids of
august for tha^ he would keep open court and make arthur his sone knight, and
marye him to the fair Perron of ostryge. The duke also did write to the earl
of bloys brother germayne to the duchess his wife. And also sent for the earl
of Aniou who was nere of kin to the duke^ and also to the archebysshop of
^ou^s desyringe them to be at n^untes at the said day.

How that arthur went to se Iehannet and declared to her how ye duke his
father should mary him whereof he was sore dyspleased for ye love of her. Cap. ix
Arthur.


THa^ arthur and gouernar took their horses and rode to the strange in the
forest where as they found Iehannet and her mother, who made great Joy and
feast and Ieha^net beheld arthur who was as than right pale for dyspleasure
and demanded of him what was the cause of his displeasure. Certainly my love
said arthur greater displeasure could never have fallen. For my lord my
father will now mary me the which I forthinke with al mi heart because of the love
yt I have to you for I think verily ye will not be content therwt. And your
displeasure perseth mine heart. A min own sweet lord said Ieha^net for gods
sake trouble not your self for no cause for in certain I am in like case
fallen in a treaty to be married. A good love said Arthur I prai you to whom.
Sir so god help me to him of whom I have spoken to you of here before is yt
of a troth fair damoisel quod arthur and I require you wha^ shall ye be
married, in troth the same propre day that ye shall married, now fair damoysel
by the faith the ye o^e to hi^ I desire you let me se hi^ sir ye may not se him
as yet, but for certain he shall be aperayled in ye same clothyng and suit as
ye shall be the day of your wedding. In the name of god said arthur I have of
this great marvel for ye have said here before to me that he is as great of
lignage as I am and as greatly endued with hauyour and frendes^ and how y^ he
resembles to me in all points, and also how that he has a rich and a
puissaunt uncle. I wot not whom I should think without ye mean all this by my
self, for I know well the earl of Bloys is my uncle by my moders side. well sir
said Ieha^net nor I will not show you at this present time. So thus they
commined together of that and of other things till finally arthur took leave
of her for that time and ^etourned to the court of his father. And thus daily
he rode to se this fair daymoysel Iehannet til it came to the next day before
his wedding. And the earl of Aniou and the archebys^hop of tours were come, and
also the earl of Blois who brought with him Hector his son who was a gentill
and a fair creture and was ^xtr^ught of the lineage of brytayne, and was cousin
germayn to arthur and also of one age for they were borne both in one year.
And as Arthur saw him he made him great joy and feast, and al ways kept
company together. And so there came f^o al parts lords knights ladies and
damoysels by great flocks for to go mete the ladi perron of ostryge. And than
mounted the duke and al other barons and knights ^o go likewise to encountre
Perron. who was as than come within the space of half a lege and brought wi^h
her a great company of lords knights, ladies and damoysels.

How that Arthur and Hector his cosyn germayne were made knights for the love
of Arthur, who tha^ did ensure Perron daughter to ye lady Luke of ostrige. And
of the great tornay that was there done at nauntes for the love of arthur Cap.
x.
ANd when all these noble people were ass^bled together the duke and duch^sse
and all other lords made great joy and feast at the metynge of this lady Luke
and Perron her daughter. And the duchess took her in her arms, and said a
mine own sweet daughter ye be into this country right welcome and kissed her
oft^ntim^s weeping for Joy For she was so fair a creature yt the duchess
could not absteyne her self fro clypping and kissing her. And therewt called
to her arthur and said fair sone arthur behold here this fair lady who is
and shall be yours. Madame said arthur will it please you to suffer her to
mount upon her horse and we shall speak of this matter well enough here after.
So they went all to horse and rode forth to nauntes. And there lords, knights
and other took up their lodginge in the city and some were harbored in the
palais with the duke. And when it came to the time to speak of the marriage than
arthur said in open audyence. My lord my father, and also my lady my mothe^
ye will cause me here to take this damoysell. And yet I know not what name or
fame that she is of. How be it sir I say surely b^the to you and also to you my
Lady Luke who is mother unto her that I take her against my heart because of
the suspeccyons, noise and ill renowmes the which that I have hard say and
reported of her. Nevertheless it behooves me to take her to exchewe thereby the
displeasure of my lord my fader, and of my lady my mother and other of my
friends for I perceive well it is their minds. How be it I say openly here to
you all if yt I find such noise as renneth on her to be of troth I ensure you
yt while I live she shall never have one good day with me in rest. A my fair
sone said the duchess what and ye find her good and true. And that all such
ill noise as ye have hard of her be untrue and false. Well madame said arthur
^han shall I love her as I ought to do my wife. Than the duke called forth the
archebysshop of nauntes and so caused arthur to be there openly fiau^ced to
Perron and on the next day to be married. Tha^ began great feast and joy in the
palace. And dau^syng of ladies and damoyselles, and frusshyng of speres and
bateryng of harneys with swerdes in every street of the city. Than the duke
^ayde that who so ever would take the order of chiual^y with his son Arthur the
next day with a good will he would give them the order. Tha^ arthur said to
hector his cosyn sir I require you to morrow take the order of knighthode with
me and fro hensforth let us keep company togider in iustes and tornay^ and in all other things as sworn brethren. Fair cousin said Hector I require you let
us go know the pleasure of my lord my father whither that he will agree to this
or not. ^e say well said arthur. Than arthur ^^ before the duke his fader and
al other lords and held his cosyn Hector by the hand and said openly to the
earl of Bloys, m^ lord my uncle I require you my let cosyn hector be made
knight to morrow with me for we shall love togider the be^ter ever after certainly
said the earl fair neuew, hector has as yet to little land to sustain
therwyth the noble order of knighthode. And yt he said because he would not yt
is sone should be made knight so sone. Truly sir said arthur he has richesse
enough to be a knight for as loge as ye live he can not fail. And though he
fail of you yet god has so provided for him yt after your days he shall be
earl of Blois. Ye fair neuew quod the earl we may both be disceiued by that,
for it may ^o fortune that I may lose all my right in the erledome of bloys and
his also. Nor let not my sone He^tor ^oke to be lord over me for as long as I
live one foot of the land of the e^ledom of bloys geteth he not, no sir said
arthur and tou^ned to hector and said fair cousin it s^old seem well by the
saying of my lord your fader how that he is very pore. How be it I desire you
to be kni^t with me and I faithfully promise you ye I shall give you as much
lord or more as my lord your fader will give you^ an^ I pray you fro he^sforth
let us be togider as c^panions ^n horse, in abilime^tes, in land, in house and
in every thing. And so I retain you fro this present time forth^ard. As god
help me fair so said the duke. Who had hard what arthur had said to Hector I
am well co^^ent that ye thus retain Hector your cousin. Also I r^quyre him that
he will be your companion. and to the earl of Bloys he said^ Also sir I desire
you to give license to your son Hector that he may be knight with his cousin
Arthur. Tha^ the e^le of Bloys did laughe thereat and said to the duke. Sir as
god me helm I am right well conte^te. But ^f one thing let him be sure that as
long as I live he shall never be the Earl of Bloys. Than arthur said to his
cosyn Hector. well sir we be young enough. therefore we shall seek to get our
living for I trust god shall help us. Than he said to the duke his father sir
gouernar has served and norisshed me up swetelye, therefore I require you let
me make him knight and when I may I will do better to him, certainly fair son
it pleases me right well. So than they were made knights with great tryumphe*
and there was made great Joy and fest both with lords and ladies, and a great
tornay was there ordained for the love of these new knights. And while this
triumph and tornay endured Arthur said to h^ctor. Fair cosyn come on with me
and we will go se the most sweet and gentyl damoysel yt ever ye saw. In the name
of god quod h^ctor I am well content And so art^ur, hector and gouernar mounted
on their horses and rode forth to the manoyr of the sta^ge where as they found
Ieha^n^t and her mother lening in a wyndow talkyng together, and when they saw
arthur they came to him and made great ioye^ And than ^eha^net demanded of
Arthur, sir quod she what gentyl man is this that ye have brou^ht with you.
Fair love said Arthur he is son to the earl of bloys, and he is my cosyn
germayne. In ye name of god said she he is h^ther welcome for your sake. Than
Iehann^t behel^e well Arthur and she p^rceyu^d b^ his countenance yt he was
tr^ub^^d, the^fore she desired of him to know what he eylled in good faith god
love this day have I made a dolorous Journey for I have fyaunc^d a woman against
my will, yt which I sore repent because it is grefull to me to leave your
company, ce^tayne fair love Arthur quod she take no dyspleasure though y^ it
have fiau^ced a lady for certaynlye in the same propre hou^e that ye fyaunced
your lady I was fyaunced to my love. And my dear love quod Arthur I require
you who is that and where is he. By the faith ye I owe unto you sir I knoweful
well where he is. well fair lady said arthur I pray you than show him to me^
surely sir that ^yll I not do as yet but I promise you to show him to you
within these three days next coming. And sir know you for certain that he
resembles to you both in coming in goinge, in hauioure, in friends, gentylnes
in facion of body and in all other things. ^n the name of god said Arthur ^
marvel g^eatly for by your words it should appear yt it were myself for there
cannot two persons be resembled togider but their must be some fault and
difference. I believe ye devise these words for me, how be it I am troubled
again wha^ I think how ye say that ye were fiaunced to day, and how that ye
shall be married to morrow the same propre hour that I shall be wedded in. As
god help me sir said Iehannet it is of ^routh he resembl^th to you without
faylyng of any point, verily said arthur I cannot think whom it should be.
And so they talked together so long til it was time for arthur to depart for
he doubted to be blamed of his fr^^des. So he took l^ue of the ladies and
departed and as they rode hector said to arthur sir undoubted this is a fair
young lady right gracious, sweet and fair behauing as god help me fair cosyn
said arthur she is mine own how be it she is a poor damoysell nor has no
thing but yt she has of me. But by the faith that I owe unto my lord and
father the duke of brytayne I love her better al naked than she that I shall
have wtall the ^iches of the world, for I must take her agenst my will. And
therefore cosyn I am verily purposed that as soon as th^s tryumphe is passe^,
and all strangers be departed, and mine uncle your fader and all gone, than I
thynk^ to ask^ lyce^ce of m^ fader to go^ s^ke adventures in some strange
countries and to take with me alon^lye Gouernar and to abide f^o hom^ the space
of.v. or.vi. years. And so shall I leave her that troubles me, for in her
company in no wise I can abide. Truly sir said Hector and if yt ye will thus
god by the faith that I owe to you I will d^parte with you, and never to leave
you while that I live. A good cosyn Hector qu^d Arthur it pleases me ver^ly
well to have your company, and her^ely I thank you thereof. How be it I
beseech you keep this thing secret that i^ be not known till the time of our
departyng^. And as soon as Arthur was ^^part^d from Iehannet, she did senne
all about for mynstrelles and instruments of musyke. And caused a^l the house
to be hanged with sylke, and commanded all her folks to make as g^eate Joy
and feast as they could ymagen. And so this Arthur rod forth always til he
came to N^unt^s where as the tables were ready covered to souper. And the duke
se^ to him down and all other lordes^ every man in his place, and they were
served right rychely with gre^e Joy, and after souper they played and sported
the^ ^uery m^n as he b^ste l^^ed till it was se^son to go to rest. For than it
was past mydnighte. And so the duke than entered in^o his chamber. And Arthur,
Hector and Gouernar went to se Iehannet, and when they came nere to the place
of the s^ange they herd great noise and myrthe of instrumentes^ and ^ound all
the house newly hanged. And the ladies arrayed with vestures of pleasure. And they
found as grea^e apparayle as though a king sh^lde have come thither. And
Iehann^t was apparayled as though she sh^^^e have be m^ryed inco^tyne^t. And
wha^ she hard that Arthur was come thither ^^e came goodly unto him. It was
marvel than to behold her she was so fair. And as soon as Arthur saw her
coming his heart smyl^d and sa^de unto himself. A Jesus, a gentle and a
gracyous metynge is this. As god h^lpe me I had rather to have your company
than to ^e encombred with her that I must have And therw^t he clepped her in
his arm^s and said. My sweet love god that fou^med all the world s^nd you a
bett^^ day than I have had a nygh. Sir sa^de Iehannet god give you as good a
day as he has done to me. For this sam^ nyg^t I shall be with my lover. And
god (...) you in likewise with yours. Certayn^ly said Arthur I repute her not
for my love that I shall be with. But ye yt i^ all be as ye say with your
lover shall be nerer to my heart than she shall be. But I pray you swete^
I^ha^net show me your lover, sir I have all ready promised ^ou yt ye shall se
him within these three ^ayes, therefore I beseech you to abide till that season.
With a good will said arthur and so tarried there so long till it was fair
day and than it behooved him for to depart.

How that Arthur wedded fair Perron daughter to the lady Luke of ostryge. And
of the protestacion that he made before all the barony. Capitulo. xi.


NOw shows the history how yt wha^ arthur, Hector and Gouernar were d^parted
from Iehannet they came to the court. And by that time were all lords
knights and al other risen fro their rest. And the archebyshop of toures was
ready to sing mass and solempny se the matrymony. And than the duke and the
duchess and all the other lords, knights ladies and damoysels did convey
Ar^hur and this lady Perron to the church. And there in the sight o^ all
people and in open audyence Arthur said. I will that it be known yt if ever I
find true such words as I have hero say of this lady thought I were
wedded to her a houdred thousand times yet I will leave and utterly forsake
her. And on that condycio^ her I am now content to take her to my wife and
none other wise. And thereto was well acorded her mother and all other of their
friends. And so with great solemnyte they we^e wedded together, and great was
the feast add Joy that than was made in all the cite, ladies damoyselles did
dance and made gret^ joy and myrthe and made chaplettes and tokens and did
give them to lords and knights in the sign of love.

How this lady Luke of os^ryge sent ^or Iehannet and caused her secretly the
first night to lie with Arthur because y^ Perron was no maid, to the ^ntente
yt Arthur should not perceive it. Ca. xii.
WE must know how that dame Luke during all this season that this great Joy
and mirth was made, she was in great thought in her heart because she knew well
yt her daughter. Perron was no maid, therefore she doubted greatly to have
vylonye.

And therefore she wyste not what was best for her to do. So at the last she
called to her one of her own knights in whom she trusted best in all her
business. And than she showed unto him all the demenoure of Perron, and
desired him to give her in that behalf the best counsel yt he knew, for
she saw well how that arthur would feign find some cause by her to the
^ntente that he might be departed fro her company. For sir quod she if Arthur
find that she be no maid, than I doubt me of vy^any. Therefore I require you
for gods love to counsel me in this case. Than this knight who had to name
sir Aunsell, answered and said, madame sith it is thus the case must be
suffered as easily as it may be. For when the deed is done than it is time to
take counsel both sage and secret. I shall tell you what we shall do, here is
by dwelling at the stange in the forest a poor damoysell right fair and
young, who has a mother a right good ancient lady. And I think verily she be
a good maid. Send unto her mother part of your silver and gold, an^ promise
to do for her many other things so that she will ^ende you her daughter for
this first night to lie with arthur t^ll mydnyght be paste. And I think
verily ye shall have her if she be wisely entreted and secretly. And than if ye
have her wha^ Perron should be laid in the bed she shall be in her stead till
that arthur be a sleep and than she shall rise. And so than Perron shall lie
down by arthur. A sir said the lady for gods sake think on to bring ^his
matter about. Take my charyot and five hundred pounds of gold and bear it
unto her mother and show her how I shall give her large lo^des and rentes, and
shall mary her daughter right hyghly so that I may have her this night. So
tha^ incon^inent this knight clepte on his horse, and took with him the gold
and the cha^yot and caused it to be covered and robe unto the stange where as
he found this fair lady and her daughter, and did salute them right swetely
and drew them aparte, and said to the lady. M^dame I am come hither to you
fro my lady Luke of ostryge, who right ^enderly sends gretynge unto you. As
she that fro he^sforth will be your enspecyall lover and friend And above all
other will love and honor you. And in the sign of love she has sent you
five hondreth pounds of gold. And ferthermore promyseth you to give you
great lands and goods and to mary right hyely Ieha^net your daughter, so
that ye will do her that bounte and pleasure now at this time as to send your
daughter to her to the entente to lie this first night with Arthur of Brytayne
till mydnyght. For the case is so that Perron her daughter is not insoo good
point as she would she were for ^^e has trespaced with another knight
Therefore good lady I humbly require you for to be her special lover and friend
in this matter, great charity it is one lady for to save ye worship and honor
of another. Than said the lady I thank my lady Luke for the great love and
honor that she prese^teth to me, if their were either love or honor in this
case, sir knight as me thinks here lacks love when she requires my shame
and dyshonoure, For she would that I should sell to her my daughter for her
money. Certainly that I shall never do it to dye therefore. I pray you bear
her again this money, and god give her good adventure. Than Iehannet said unto
her mother. Madame for gods sake be ye not dyspleased with my words, for
saving your grace, this desire that this knight m^keth is no selling of me,
for my lady Luke is a great and noble a pryncesse. Therefore her velony should
be more spoken than if she where of a meeuneestate And all women ought to put
their pain to cover and to hyde such matters. And also every woman to help
and sustayn the blame and defame of other. And this lady requires not your
vylonye for she does it to hyde her own dyshonoure. Truly dought^r quod the
lady, the mother yt demeneth not wisely her child is to be blamed, and if my
lady Luke have not kept this lady Perron her daughter as curyouslye and as
wisely as I have done you, and by the which neclygence now she is run into
folly and danger, let her take it a worth and thank no body but her self.
Madame said Iehannet it is a hard thing to overcome youth, for if this lady
Perron have done amysse, yet remember how has be easily she and swetly
noryshed, and every creature desirous des sake madame behold the might of
love by whom she was overcome. For to serur her floryshyng yougth. For god she
loved and was loved again, remember also the great case wherein she has all
her yougth been noryshed. The which one cam^ and pur^e in to her heart amorous
and love. Madame if I trepas I are mercy, for by the faith yt I ow to you I
will fullfyll yt pleasure of my lady luke. In saving of her honor I shall put
mine in Ieopardy. How be it sir knight take again your money, for if I should
take money I should sell my body the which I will not do. For yt I do is
freely f^r the l^ue of my lady Luke. And she shall do me good when it shall
please her best. Than her mother said to her, sith ye will needs to as ye list,
and if he d^ folly take the adventure that will fall thereof. For much better is
worth a woman to be poor and true, than to be folysshe and rich. Ye shall not
go for me nor by my will. For honor surmou^teth al things Madame yt ye say
is of troth, how be it I require you suffer and let me alone. Sir knight let
us depart, we tarry very long. Mine own fair damoysell said the knight I
humbly thank you and for certain I ensure you ye shall be right hyely
rewarded, and thereto I will be pledge. Than the knight left the gold there
for any thing yt Iehannet could do the contrary. And so Iehannet mounted in
to the chariot and rode forth* and when they were com^ to the cour^e the lady
Luke received her right pryuely and kept her till it was time to go to bed
and than pryuely they lady Ieha^net in the bed in the stead of Perron, and
the courtaynes of the bed were hanged between the light and her. And than came
Arthur and the duke his fader. And tha^ the duke said, sone Arthur ye shall
give to Perron your wife this night yt charter of her endowry, wherein is
comprysed the land of the cite of saints and of Poys attenynge to the bounds
of gasgoyne. And also ye shall give her this ring with this rich and precious
emeraude, this endowry mounteth well to the some of.x. thousand pound by
annual rent, than it was time for Arthur to go to bed and when he was going
thereto the lady Luke said to him good dear love Arthu^ I require you that ye
speak this night as l^tle as ye may do to Perron my daughter, for she is
somewhat shamfast. Ve^ryly madame quod Arthur with a right good will, and so
went he to bed.

How that Iehanne^ who that was a be^^e with arthur in the stead of his wife
Person, and or she would suffer him ^o touch her she demanded her endowrye.
Capitulo. xiii.
ANd wha^ that Arthur was thus a bed he began to draw nere to his wife as
to his knowledge. Than Iehannet counterfayted her speech and said softely. Sir
it is so or ye touch me I will know what shall be min endowrye, I require you
sir assygne it to me. And than shall I be ready to fulfill all your
commandment. Than Arthur took the charter and the ring and delivered them
to Iehannet. And said my love Perron ye shall have a fair endowry, for it
draws nere to the some of.x. thousand pound. And so did put the ring
upon one of her fyngers^ My right dear Lord said Iehannet I humbly thank
you. And so took the charter and the ring and laid them up privily under the
beds side. So thus was Ieha^net most part of the night with Arthur in
great Joy and myrthe until the time that Arthur fell a sleep, for he had not
slepte of al y^ night before. And while that he thus^s^pte Iehannet pryuely
rose and took with her the charter of Perrons endowrye and came to the lady
Luke. And ncontinent she w^as co^ueyd again pryuely to theistange to her
mother. And than was Perron put softly in to the bed to Arthur, who woke not
till it was fair day. And when he was waken he saw where as Perron lay
fast a sleep by him, for she had not slepte of all the night till than.

How that Arthur, Hector and Gouernar went erly in the mornyge to se Iehannet
at the sta^ge, who showed unto Arthur all the treason of his wife, and how
that she had layne with him all that night in the stead of Perron^ whereof he
gretely meruayled. Cap. xvii.
ANd when Arthur saw her so sleep, he let her lie and rose fair and
softely. And at that time there were none in all the palace out of their
beds for it was than about three of ye clock save all only Hector and
Gouernar And when Arthur saw them goodlye he gave them good morrow. And said
syrs I pray you let us lepe upon our horses and go so Iehannet, wherwyth they
said they were well content and so rode forth till they came to the stange at
which time Iehannet wa^ lade on her bed in her (...) and were fallen a sleep
and was covered with a mantell of grene. And therwyth the wooke and when she
hard that Arthur was come she rose up half slepynge and set her upon her
bed side and therwyth Arthur came in to the chamber and incontynente that she
saw him she waxed greatly ashamed and blusshed read and cast down her look
to the earth whereof Arthur had great marvel and said what chere make you
fair love Iehannet ye were wont to come clippe and kiss me, and to make me
great feast, and now it seems ye be half slepynge, what is the cause ye be
risen so early and thus to sleep clothed ^n your bed, sir sayd^ I^ha^net it
behooves me me so to do, for I was nere to my lord and lover when it was
conuenyente for me to rise. And how fair lady was it yt your lord and lover
did not retain you still for I marvel that he would suffer you to rise
from him so erly, certaynely sir wan I (...) he was a sleep. A sweet love, why
did ye not than wake him, certainly sir. I thought not to do him so much
trouble. Than it seems fair Iehannet that ye love him, C^rtainly s^r that it
is true more than all the world. A fair love Ieha^net is that he that ye have
said should marye you, Certainly sir ye and this night (...) has lain with
me, well fair lady I pray you what has he given you to your endowrye, sir as
God help me he has endowed me right rychelye, ^or he has given me well x.
thousand pound^ by annual rent. Ten thousand pound fair love said Ar^hur
that is a great gift. Than it seems he is a ^yght great man and a rich, and
has right great friends. Patron my wife (...) no gre^ter indowrye. Sir I
cannot say what she has, but I am put in possess^^^ thereof by a charter and
by a fair ryng^, by my faith quod Arthur th^a same possessyon have I given
unto Perron my wife. And I pray you dear heart show me your charter and ring
sir with a right good will. Than she took a box yt was at her beds side and
did open it and delivered it to Arthur. And when he saw it he knew right well
the seal of his fader and so looked on the ring and knew it right well, whereof
he had great marvel. And than he called unto him Hector and Goue^nar and
demanded of them if they knew that seal or not, sir without fail this is
the seal of my lord your fader. A mercy god quod Arthur sweet love Iehann^t
where had you you this ring and charter, sir ye delivered it to me out of
your own hands in to mine, of my delyueraunce quod Arthur. I pray you fair
lady where was that, ce^taynly sir in your bed. In my bed fair lo^^^ and
when was that^ (...) god help me for this same night pas^^. And how fair
lady may I have perfect knowledge thereof. Mine own dear lord and love may it
please you to remember that when ye were a bed ye would have had me to have
fulfilled your pleasure, but first I desired of you to know what should be my
endowrye. And ye answered me that ye had g^uen me the cite of Saints and of
Poys and all the country attaynynge to the bountes of Bascoyn and this ring
ye did put on my finger and than delivered me this charter. In the name of
god quod arthur these tokens bears wytnes that all that ye say should be of
truth, but I req^yre may sweet love tell me how ye came into my bed, sir
know ye for truth that Perron your wife was no maid for before that time
she had done a forsay^e. And so there she showed unto him how that dame Luke
of ostryge doubted gretely to have velony, and said sir the fore she sent sir
Aunsel her trusty k^ight unto my mother and me. And five hundred pound of
gold, the which all ready is here as ye may see. And ferthermore she showed
to him all the demenoure of the knighte and of he^ mother. And how in
conclusyon she went to the court, and so by the lady Luke was brought into his
bed in the stead of his wife ^erron. Add how about midnigh^e when that he
was a sl^pe she privily rose from him and than was P^rron put in to the bed.
And when that Arthur had heard all this process, he maruayled greatly
thereof, how be it he had great Joy thereof in his heart. And swetely clepyd
and kyssed Iehannet and said, fair love, ye said full true to me when ye
showed me that you had been all night with your l^uer, for truly so have ye
don, for I en^u^e you I am you^ ^aythfull lover, and I am right grand of this
adventure, for now shall ye abide still with me and she that has wr^ught this
treason to me shall depart wi^h sorrow and shame I (...) you keep sur^ly this
ting and charter. And wha^ I send for you be no^ dysmayde but boldly come to
me apparayled in the best manner that ye can be and your mother also, sir with a
right good will said Ieha^net. How be it I require your nobleness not to be
miscontente with m^ for this deed, nor to think that I did it for any wanton
sensual appetite, for sir I take god to record I did it or none intent but
only for the singular love yt ^ have to you. And yt by that means (...)
knowledge of the false demenour of your wife for I should rather have suffered
to have be drawn with wild horses than ever I would have consented to have
done this deed with any other creature living for other lover ^ha^ ye be will I
not have never had. A my ^ight dear her^ said arthu^ I pray to god I live never
longer if I should for this matter think any ill in you, for of very right I
ought to thank you as much as al my pleasure in this world comes to for now
and ye had not ben my days I should have be continewed with dolour^ and
Ielousy whereof I am now dyscharged by your means. For I will now vtterli
forsake her company and so shall I live out of doubt and trouble and me shall
ye have as faithful and true as ever ye had and better if it might be, and so
right swetelye he took of her his leave and departed, and rode forth deuysing
and talking with Hector and governor of this adventure. And Hector said to him
as god help me fair cousin Arthur this great treason yt is don to you shall
surely be quit, for by y^ g^a^e of god yet before Easter nex^ coming I shall
over run her country with baners dysplayed and shall not leave s^^ndyng
neither easter nor toure up right but I shall bruise them down to the earth.
And by the faith yt I owe unto god almighty if she were a man as she is a woman
I would neither drink ne eat till I had stryken her head ^ro her shoulde^s
well frend^ quod arthur this besiness^m^^ wisely be demeaned. And so these
gentil knights rode forth^ deuysynge on this matter till they came to Nauntes.
And than they went to the palace at which time all ^ordes and knights were
redye apparayled, and there was so gr^^t joy and feast that it was maruayle to
think thereon* And when the duke saw arthur his son he began to smyle and
demanded of him whether that his wife were ded nay sir quod the earl of Anlou
I think she slepeth fast in her bed, well well syrs quod arthur fair and
easylye, there is other things that ye know full lyt^e thereof, and said to
his father^ sy^ and i^ please you it is of troth ye have married me and given
me the charter of the dowry of Perron my wife and also a ^ynge with a flaming
emeraude, sir I know not whether there be in this cha^ter any thing the
which that ought to be amended. Therefore I would not though otherwise come of
me tha^ well that Perron should lose her endourie for luck of formal making.
Therefore I require you let the charter be brought forth and read openly in
the presence of mine uncles and of the arche^ysshop. And if it ought to be
amended I beseech you let it be reformed by the^, it is well said sone quod the
duke and where is it. Sir Perron has it for I delivered it to her this night
past. Let it be sent for fair neuew said the earl of Bloys. So than y^ lady
Luke and Perron were brought forth to the duke, who said Perro^ fair daughter
arthur your husband thinks well on your profit, therefore bring for^he your
charter of your dowry that arthur gave you this night, and it ought to be
reformed it ^hal be amended, sir said Perron it suffyseth me right well as it
is, for I am therewith right well content, well daughter said the duke, yet for
that it pleases me that it shall be seen and read. Sir quod she in good truth
I have it not, why where is it than quod the duke, sir surely I have sent it
by a trusty me^^enger into my own country well fair daughter quod the duke
ha^dly have ye no doubt nor fere thereof, for here is none that would begyle
you, and therefore hardly and boldly bring it forth before me. And therewith
Gouernar stepped forth for his heart was so great and mighty for velonye that
was done to Arthur his master that he could not absteyne ne forbere himself
no longer, but in open audience he said to the Duke, sir it is of truth ye
have married my lord arthur your son to such a woman that the which ought not
to be received in matrimony with so great a gentylman and of so hie a lygnage
as my lord your son is, for she is a woman di^honoured in every noble man's
cour^e as she that has aba^doned her will unto an other man than to my lord
Arthur, as it well appears. For she has defouled her bodi with a another
knight. And therefore this night she caused an other damoysell who was a true
maid to lie by my lord arthur. And to prove that this is true that I say
behold here this knight sir Aunsell who conveyed this damoysel, and left with
her modes five hundred pound in gold the which dame luke of ostryge did send
unto her and when she had brought this damoysel she was laid a bed with my
lord Arthur. Howbeit she was not so folish but or she would suffer my lord to
touch her she demanded of him her dowrye. And so my lord arthur delivered to
her the charter and the ringe as he thought none ill. And in deed sir to
certefye this thing send for the damoysell. And than shall ye know by her own
mouth all the troth how my lord was betrayed So than incontine^t this
damoisel was sent for and her mother also. And when that Iehannet was come there
openly she declared all the matter and showed forth the charter and the ringe.
Than was the duke and duchess g^eatly dysmayed and all other lords and
friends of arthur. Than stepped forth ^yr aunsell and cast his glove against this
damoysel Iehannet, and said yt he never * to fetch that maid, he brought
never the foresaid money to her and that ^e prove against any that would say
the contrary. Therewith the gentil Hector can^ forth and cast his glove against
the knight in the damoysels quarrel. And said how that he would prove yt he
falselye lied and delyed like a false traitor. And as to you dame Luke of
ostryge I ensure you ye have not in all your country castle nor could never so
strong but I shall break them down ^o the ea^che, and fro henceforth repute
me for your enemy surely for so am I and will be. And sir duke I beseech you
receive my glove against this knight, who has falsely and traytoursly deceived
my cosyn arthur, sir quod Gouernar ye shall not do so for it is against reason
that so hie a person as ye be should do battle with such a false traitor
sithe there be other to take the quarrel in hand, this matter touches my
lord and I am his man and have norysh^d him up in his youth, therefore I ought
to defend his right. And therewith he cast down his glove and said gentil and
honorable knight Duke receive my guage and do right to my lord your son, for I
say that this damoysell Iehannet says truth in every thing and this knight
falsely lies. And that I will prove my body against his, and so therewith the
knight received Gouerna^s gu^ge. And also the knights and the battle was
iudg^d to be done the next day ensuyng without longer delay.

How y^ Gouernar vaynquysshed in battle sir Au^sel and caused him to make
knowledge of this treason and confessed how yt he brought Ieha^net fro the
stange for ^olie al night with arthur. Cap. xv.


When the battle was thus determined to be the next day, Hector was not
content in his mind because his gu^ge was not received so in this manner as for
that day they went^ to there restes. And the next morninge by times arthur and
Gouernar and all other lords his friends went to ye chir^he to here mass. And
there gouernar did first off^e, and after him all other. And when the mass was
ended Arthur ledd^ forth Goue^nar to his chamber to be armed. And when he was
surely armed he lept on a mighty courser. And arthur and Hector were armed and
mounted on their horses to keep the feelde to the intent that there should be
no treason and the earl of ^loys went to the place whereas they should fight.
Than by y^ time was armed sir aunsell and came in the plase, so tha^ there was
brought forth saints and books whereon Gouernar did swear y^e falsely and
untruly Iehannet the damoysel of the stange was brought by sir aunsel unto the
court and by his advise she was put into the bed to arthur in the stead of
Perron his wife. And wha^ he had thus sworn he kyssed the saints and rose
like an hardy knight* and than sir au^sel d^d swear with great fere and
trouble. How that gouernar said by him untruly. And so he r^se with great
trouble and pain, and all the people yt saw him said that he had an evil
countenance and be semyng should be in the wrong. And wha^ they were both
mounted on their horses. Than was it cried by an haraude of arms yt each of
them should do their best. Than said arthur to Gouernar, now mine own good
friend quite you like a valiant knight. And so these two drew aparte fro
other and dressed their speres to the restes and da^^e^ their sportes to the
horses sides and met togider so rudely yt they frusshed their speres to their
fi^tes like hardye knights and full of great valor, howbeit sir aunselles
valor was not to be compared with Gouernar, fo: Gouernar had been a man greatly
to be redoubted. And after the breking of their speres they past by. And in the
retorninge they set their hands to their swerdes. And Gouernar stroke sir
Aunsell so rudely that he did ryu^ his shield to the bocle, and brake a great
part of his harneys, so that the sword entered deep into the flesh, and sir
aunsel stroke again Gouernar on the helm and brake with the stroke many
^arces thereof, and the stroke glented down on the lift side and ^^ate a way a
great part of his harneys to ^he ba^e sadell, but god kept him that it entered
not into the flesh. Than Gouernar florysshed again his swearde and st^oke sir
aunsell on the heyght on his helm and cut it to the hand sercle of stele* and
the stroke glenced down by the shield so rudely that he claue it ^o the
mids. And with the same stroke the sword did light on the neck of the horse
where with the horse was so sore wounded that be fell down to the e^the. and
when sir aunsell felt his h^rse fallen under him, he lep^ on his feet with his
s^erde in his hand. wherefore he was of some gr^atly praised. And some other
did greatly praise the stroke of Gouernar. And wha^ Gouernar saw him on the
earth he thou got yt he would not run on his enemy with his horse, he being
on foot. Therefore incontinent he did a ^yght down o^ foot and put his shield
before him (...) wen^e seeking his enemy. And gave him (...) have (...) that he
struck a wa^e parre of his cheke and the stroke dyscended to his sholder and
wounded him to the hard bones wherwt sir aunsel was constrained to knele and
right ne^e to have fallen Than all the lords said yt their was no could long
endure the strokes of gouernar. There with arthur laughed with a good heart so
that gouernar hard him whereby his he^te douwbled in courage and when sir
Aunsel felt himself thus hardly bestad, he swear in his mind y^ he would be
au^nged of that stroke, and therewith lift up his swerd to have st^^ken
Gouernar, but when he saw the stroke coming he put his shield before him ^
aduysed well how that sir aunsell had his arm up a loft and with an nawke stroke
he stroke at sir aunsell under the armor so ^udely yt the arm and sword and
all ^^ew into the field. whereof sir aunsel had so much pain that he fell to the
earth in a trance. And than gouerna^ lept to him to have stryken of his head,
but h^ cried for gods sake mercy. Than came the duke and Arthur, Hector, and
other lords and knights and there in the pr^sence of them al he recounted all the tre^son, and how that he went for Iehannet and brought her to his lady
Luke. And how that he was of counsel that she should be put a bed with
arthur in the stead of Petron. Than he had Judgment for his trespace such as
he had deserved so than Gouernar was led home by arthur and H^ctor and caused
to be unarmed whom they found without any hurt whereof they thanked god. And
than Iehannet had as great Joy as any creature could have, and she clypped
and kyssed Gouernar oftentimes wi^h good he^te. Than all the other earls and
barons came to gouernar and demanded hi^ how he did. He answe^^d and said
right well thanked be god and felt none hurt the same propre hour the lady
luke departed suddenly out of the court and her daughter Pe^^on with her great
shame and foul rebuke. And when they were in the field on their way than this
lady Luke said unto her daughter. This great shame that we have have thou
caused, for now we shall never have honor nor be reputed honorable. And
therewith hertely she wept, whereof Perron took so great inward thought that
she dyed within.xx. days after. And so thereby arthur was again at his
liberte. And Ieha^net fro then forth remained still in the court with the
duchess and was right well beloved with every creature And the duke and
duchess were well acorded that she should keep still the endoury that arthur
had given her. And so she kept it till such season as arthur caused her to be
crowned a queen. And gave her Gouernar in marriage as it is more plainly
contained in this present book.

How arthur demanded license of his fader and mother to go play him out of his
own country for he would go seek adventures to show thereby his force and
prowess. Cap. xvi.


AFter the end of.v. days tidinges came unto the duke and to Arthur that the
fair Perron was decessed and passed out of this world, of the which tidinges
arthur had right great Joy. And specially Iehannet, how be it the king for
his honor and worship caused her obseruyce to be done right solempnely in
the church And than after this the court departed and every man repaired to
in their own countries. Saving all only Hector who remained still with
Arthur And so in great Joy and mirth they co^tinewed with the duke. And arthur
wha^ it p^^ased him to take his pastau^ce with the fair Iehannet. So it
fortuned on a nyg^t that Arthur, Hector and gouernar were all three lodged in
one chamber. And on a night a^thur was sore troubl^d in his sleep and turned
and sighed many times. So yt Hector and gouernar hand him, and said each to
other, a^thur is not well at his case* let us go wake him. And tha^ Gouernar
^oke hi^ and axed him what he e ylled. ^ friend Gouernar said Arthur. I have be
sore troubled in m^ sleep for I dremed that I was fer^e out of this coun^rey. A
sir said Hector we ought to go into strange coun^reys for before this time ye
have prom^sed so to do. Th^rfore set your mind no le^ger to tarry at home, but
shortly let us depart. As god help me to syn said arthur the day is come,
that for to have ^he city of paris I will tarry no longer* ^or to mo^ow will I
are license of ^y fader and of my mother. And will have with me no more company
but you and gouernar and I^k^t my squyre. Sir said Gouernar ye say well, for a
young man wtoute pain is little worth, how be it sir I doubt me gr^atly y^ ye
^hal get no leave. Uerely sa^^ ar^hur I shall ^^ay to morrow next And so they say
^^ill all that night till it was day. Than rose arthur and his c^^pany. And
when the duke was by ar^hur (...) before him with his bonet^^ his ^ande and
kneele^ down to ^he e^the and humbly required both his fade^ and mother yt i^
would please them to g^ue by ^^icence to go pl^y him a season out of th^^
count^ey wherewith in there mynd^^ ^hey werefore dyspleased. And en^ysed him as
much as they might to leave his ente^pryse, but in no wise they could ^orne his
mind. and at the last with sore weping they gave him license and inquired of
him with whom he would be aco^panied. Righ^ dear father I will have none other
company, but alonely my cousin Hector and Gouernar and Iaket my squyre. well dear
son sith ye will not abide take with you gold and silver at your pleasu^e. Than
Gouernar came to arthur and demanded of him what spa^^ it would be or he would
return into his own country. Uerely quod Arthur ^he space of fiu^ years. So
then anon these tidinges were sprad a broad in the court and all abou^e the
count^ey how that a^^hur would depart ou^ of that country, and ^a^y out five
years, and at the last Iehannet herd^ there of, whe^with al her blood tr^mbled
and quake and ran out of her chambr^ to ^he palace where as ^he duke and
duchess were together ^ight sore weping. And than she p^rceyued well how that
it was of troth, wherw^th (...) her lif had past, and therwt she fell down in
a deadly tr^unce in the arms of her mother. And when she reuyued she cried
and said a arthur my swear love wi^h this Journey ^^all this poor orphely^e
lose her good lord and chief father. A arthur my dear he^te will ye thus love
me. And wha^ the duke saw her make this great lamentac^on than opened his heart
and rendered many a saite ^ere wi^h hi^ ey^n. And in thi^ season Goue^nar
ap^rayled all such necessary things as was metely for their departing. Than
Arthur took leave of his father and mother who were ^ight sorrowful of his
d^party^ge. And than he went ^o Ieh^nnet to take his leave of her, and as soon
as she saw him she ran and took him in her arms and said right pyteously a
right swear sir the end of my heart and love, how can you find in your heart
to leave this poor orphelme. And when arthur hard her speak so swetely it
touched nere to his heart than of all the sorrow both of fader and mother and of
all his kynne. But finally he commanded her to god, and said fair sweet love
I require you to pray to god for me. For I promysse you if I live I will do
you more good and honor than as yet ever ye had, and so kyste her swetely and
departed and mounted on his horse, and he was in a garmente covered al with
grene, gyrte about with a read lase, and both he and Hector and Gouernar were al
in a suit in scarlet hosen. And each of them a chaplet on their hedes like
young lusty lovers. And they roode so long till they were out of the town.
Than Arthur entered in to a great thought and rode musing a great space. And
when Hector saw him in y^ case he called Gouernar to him and said friend se ye
not how arthur rides musyng. I hold it best we break him out of his
thought, therewith Hector called Arthur and demanded of him what him ayled to
ride so sadly. And when arthur hard him he turned his head to him ward and
said, fair cosyn I pray you come ride here by my side and Gouernar on the
other side. And when arthur was between them he said, friends I have mused all
this season of my dream that I had this last night when ye woke me I ^olde
you part but not all and surely it is the chief cause wherefore I have take on
me this iorneye. Harken to me and I shall show you all my hole dreme for no
thing can I hyde fro you, this last night when I was in my first sleep me
thought I was in the most fairest place in all the world, where I saw a
fresshe fountain and me thought the beau^te thereof caused me to sit down on
the brym thereof, and with the fair clear water thereof washed my face and
hands, and finally I cast up mine eyes alofte, and on my right hand me thought
I saw the richeste pauilion pyghte that ever was seen, and in the hight of
this pauylyon was an egle of gold the richest and the fayreste that could be
devised and properly me thought I saw this egle come down and light on my
bosom and showed me so great sign of love that it pleased me so much that I
coudle not be satysfyed with beholdynge thereof, and me thought it flykered about
me with her wings in the sign of great love, and at the last me thought I
saw where came to me ward a great griffon foul and horrible and he brought
with him a great multitude of serpents: wherwt all the earth about me was
covered, and me thought they would have taken fro me mine egle who was right
ferde and covered her ever by me and looked on me swetely. In manner as though
she would have said arthur keep me. And than me thought I took my sword in
my hand and so fought with this gryffon and al these serpents, by whom me
thought I suffered much pain in great peril, but at the last me thought
there came a turtyll to help me and brought with her many douues. And out of
an other part I saw where came a sparhawke accompanied with many faucons. And
all these did me such socoure that we slew yt gryffon and all the other
serpents. And sodaynely than me thought that the egle and y^ turtyll and I
were in a hye toure, and both you Hector, and Gouernar with me. And to us me
thought came people without nombre and me thought there was a lion and four
great leopardes. And all they did enclyne them self to me ward and did
me great honor. And they were al crowned with gold and me thought they gave the
egle freely to me, And she pleased me so well that I would never have departed
by my will fro her company. And ever sith I woke my heart and love has been so
set on ye egle that I can not draw my heart fro her. For I love her so entyerly
y^ aalonge as I live I shall never cease to travel and labor till I have
found her And this is the very cause wherefore I am departed out of mine own
country. Uer^ly sir said Gouernar this be^okeneth ye great honor shall come
to you, for sir ye know well the lion, who as ye thought did give you the egle
is a be tyail. For the lion is king of all beestes. And the egle is king of
all fowls. So the sygnyfycacyon thereof is that a king shall give you a
queen, how be it great pain shall ye first suffer. And the griffo^ yt would
have taken fro you your egle, betokens some great man y^ would have her that
shall be given to you. Therefore it shall behoue you to conquer her with the
sword, and sir I Gouernar your servant am here yt never shall fail you while
I live, no more shall I fair cosyn said Hector by the faith that I awe unto my
lor^e my father. Friends said Arthur I heartily thank you. And so they rode
forth on their way. And because ye shall understand the sygnyfycacyon of the
egle and the lion. Therefore we shall leave for a season spekyng of arthur and
his company rydyng on their Journey, and ye shall hear of this egle till time
shall be that we return again to Arthur.

How the mighty king of Sorolois called Emendus held open court in his
realm where as was four puyssa^te kings, who were all his subjects and here
ye shall here of things meruaylous. Capitulo..xvii.


IN the season that arthur thus rode as ye have herd here before there was in
the realm of Soroloys a king, the which realm is in Ind the more. Joining to
the great see called Betee. And also to the read see between Mesopotanye and
perse. This king had to name Emendus, right puyssaunt of hauydur and friends.
And he had under him four kings mighty and puyssaunt, who were under his
obeysau^ce, and held all their realms of him. Whereof the first was king of
orquany, the which is on the side of babylon, the which realm extends to the
read see, and this land was full of gyauntes. The second was king of the
realm of Mormall the which is in the land of Sodom and gomorre, and it
extends to the lord Ioynynge to the dead see. And this king might well
bring in batayl better tha^ a ho^dred.M. fighting men. The third has the
governance of the realm of Valefounde, a very obscure and dark land and the
people thereof as black as sote, and it exte^deth into the oryent where as the
son ryseth, the which people were greatly doubted in battle or war, for
they were without pity. And did eat raw flesh like dogs. The fourth
king was of the realm of Ismaelyte the which extends into eghypt and unto
the land of Femene. These.iiii. kings were subjects to the mighty king of
Doroloys Emendus. who had to w^se a noble lady named Fenyce by the reason of
the country yt she was borne in For it was named fenyx because in that coun^ree
bredde a bird yt was called fenyx. And in all the world there is never but
one, and as it is said when she is old and ancient there she makes her
neste of dry thorns on the heyghte of an hye mountain as nere the son as
she can so y^ by the hete of the son the nest quickens and flameth on fire,
and the she in bre^neth herself, and of her ashes there is another fenyx
^ngendred. This said lady Fenyce wife to king Emendus was queen by
enherytaunce of the clear toure the which was a noble rich cite. And by
great force she had subdued ^he city of co^meyne and of constantinople of
cornite of Macedonye, of Phesale, of Bo^me and of all the country of denmarche.
She was a right hye and a mighty pryncesse, and right good and virtuous, so yt
it was hard than to have found any lady comperable to her. And so it
fortyned in the fresh merry month of may, as at the feast of pentecost ye
king Emendus held open court at the cite of cornyte, at the which feast
were these four foresaid kings and all the seven perres of his realm and this
feast was great, and the court full of people And the first day of this feast
the king Emendus was in his palace lenyng on a rod of gold yt he held in
his hand and about him stood these four kings and his.vii. perres accompanied
also with the hye and mighty duke of Alatre and.xxiiii earls. And his noble
queen Fenyce satte by him great with child, and nere to her time of
delyueraunce. And the king of orguany beheld her well, who was her ne^e cosyn
and said. Madam^ me think it should be metelye for your grace fro hensforth
to draw to the place where as the king will y^ ye shall take your chamber,
for I think your time approaches on fast. In deed fair cosyn said the queen
ye say right truly, how be it I know not as yet where as my lord will I
shall lie. And thereto the king answered and said. In deed as yet I am not
determined in what place she shall lie in. Than said the king of Mormall, who
was a sage prince, sir I will counsel you let the queen lie at the port
Noyr, and when she is delivered let the child be borne to the hill of
adventures. And sir if ye do thus I think ye shall do wisely. By my faith quod
the king of Ualefounde I wo^e not what to say in this matter whether it were
better to bear the child thither or not, for this is your first child. And
it is hard to tell what destynye ^he child shall be of, if it shall be good
than were it well ^one yt it were borne thither But peradventure ye adventures
of this child may be such that it were better they were hid and kept
secret than to be openly known. For in adventure lies often times as well
ill as good. Well quod the king Emendus. Madame I will that ye go to the port
Noyre And when that ye be delivered I will that the child be borne up to the
mount perylons, there to know what destyny that the child shall be of.

The dyscrypcion of the facyon and sytuacyon of the mount perylous the which
was conquered by the prowes of Arthur. Capitulo. xviii


IN this mou^te perylous there was a castle named the port Noyre, This
castle was right strong and of great suyrte. And it was made and ordained by
proserpyne, who was on of ye queen's of the fayry and the cytuacyon of this
castle was such that.x. legs of length there ran a gre^e river about the
cyrcuyse of this castle, the which was so ^epe fro the earth, and ba^kes so
hye that sca^te the water might be seen rennynge underneath, and it ran so
rudely that who so ever entered in to it was utterly perysshed, it was bl^cker
than smythy w^ter and it smelled a^homynably. Al^o it was full of cu^tyng and
^harpe rocks swarmynge f^ll of ve^myn, ^his river enuyronned this c^stell over
an sides, and Ioynynge to this river there was all about this castle
mountains so hye that no creature could mount upon them, neither on horse nor
on foot, and they were so bare and hard that the birds with great pain coud^
scant reyse or get onye gresse or su^tenance thereon. And among ^hese mountains
there was a passage of the largeness of a charyot way, whereby one might go
and enter into the castle. And in certain places there were barbycanes that
defended the enter fro al people. And under these mountains there was a great
marys deep and foul So that none might enter into it, but incontinent he was
lost and peryshed. And there were pyttes of water in numerable yt it seme^ in
a manner to be an a^me of the sea, ho we be it there was another bark ne ship
that mygh^ abide it, And this m^res was so deep y^ i^ might well be thought
that it attained down to the absy^e and swalowe of the earth the w^iche mares
endured well the larg^nesse of.ii. legs, wherein th^re was a passage of the
bred of a spear length made by ^^gramancye, whereon there were.x^x. draw^
brydges. And so this mares e^uy^onned the castle over all part^es, (...) the
mountayn^s cyrcu^d the ma^es. And the ryuers, the mount^ynes, so that it was
imposs^ble to be assauted, besyeged or wo^ne The castle also was closed with
d^uble walls made of chalk stone and sand, and great bars and crampones of
yre^ and stele fyxed in led. The walls were.xv. foot thycke. and.xxxv. of
heyghte enuyronned with there hundred toures cramponed and knyt together with
great chains of yren, and the barbycanes were bended and bordred with stele. To
say the troth this castle of y^ port. Noyr doubted not all the world. And in
this castle were halles of v^hement adu^tures where as no creature might enter
without death, and many knights had be there peryshed such as took on them
to fo^^o the enchauntementes of that place. But at the conclusyon all such
there dyed and fynyshed there mortal lives. For none could n^uer bring the
aduentur^s to an end save alonely Arthur of britayne as ye shall after here.
And before the gates of this castle a little hyer on the hyl there were palace,
halles and chambres with great and hye strong batylmentes, where as four
kings might well have been harbored, and to these palace m^n might go surely
without any peril, for thither came all such as passed through the country. And
out of this palace men might go to the mount of adventures, whereas four
queen's of the fayry walked ^uery night and did much hurt to them that came
thither agenst their wylles. And to this hill acustomable these ladies came
nyghtly. The chyefe of them was called pros^rpyne a fresh young lady and a
fair without co^paryson. For if all the beauties of al women in the world^ had been as^e^bled together in to one person, yet she should not have had the
fourth part of the beauty that proserpyne was of, who was queen and lady of
the other three, and was chyef lady of this castle of the port Noyr, and of
the mount peryllous where as she had pyght a rich pauylyon with a splayed egle
of gold in the top there of, the which was the same egle that Arthur saw
in his dreme, and in a another tent by was the white shield of the fa^rye, and
the goo^ swer^ named Clerence the which ^hel^e was of such force an^ m^ghte
that it could not be hurt nor enpayred, neither for Iren nor st^le nor for
non^ other thing. The which shield was ordained too ^ea^pe no creature, but all
on^lye him that it was d^stenyed unto, nor the swe^de should not be pulled out
of the ^h^the nor healpe no man but alonely by him that it was predesty^ate
unto.

How it was determined that the ^u^ne Fenyce should take her chamber in the
palace beside the castle of ye port Noyre. Capitulo.xix.
SO thus as ye have heard before the mighty king Emendus was agreed that
Fenyce his queen should lie a chyl^bedde at the port Noyre, and that her chy^de
should be borne up to the mount of a^uentures. And he ordained that the king of
Orq^anye her cosyn german should go with her, and the archebyssh^pp of
Cornyte, who was brother to the king Emendus. And also the queen of I ma^lyte,
and many other ladies and damoyselles, ^ords sand knights should acompa^ye
this q^ene F^nyce. And so there they made to the kings and the.xii perres of
the realm faythfu^l assurau^ce that they wound make true report of every
thing that they should here or see in the mo^nte of a^uentures. And also ye
king Emendus and the twelve per^sswa^e and made fa^thful assurance that what
so ever should be d^st^nied of that child that they should not wythstond i^
on^ p^ynte the childs desteney b^^ to keep and to maintain the child like ye
son of a king. And of this promise there was made a ^hater sealed by king
Emendus and by his twelve perres of his realm, and was delivered into the
k^pynge of the arch^byshoppe of Cornyte. And so^ by that time it was season to
her mass. And when the mass was fynyshed the ^ables were laid, and there they
were served right rychely as it apertayned too the honor of such a noble
king. And this feeste and tryumphe endured the space of.xv. days. Than the
king Emendus did give great plente of gold and silver, horse and harneys to
lords and knights, and every person aft^r their degree, and so every man
repaired into there own countres, and the q^ene Fenyce prepayred al her be
synesse for to remove to the mount perilous. And so ^he took her leave of the
king and took with her all such compan^e as ye have heard d^u^sed hear
before, and labored so long in her journey that at the last she a^yued at
the port Noyre, and went to the palace before the gate of the castle, and
there she remained till by pro^ces of time that ^he was brought a child bed
with a fair daughter. Than the archeb^shoppe took the child up in his arms
and went there with to the mount peryll^us. And w^^he him was the k^nge of
Orqua^^e and the queen of Ismaelit And when they were above on the hill they
found there a fair and a goodlye ground and saw where there was a
ma^uayllous fair founta^ne round a boute the which there were set four
rich chayres, and on every fountain there was pyghte a pere on of stone where
in there was ordained a p^ace for a child te lie in. In the which place they
laid fair and eas^ly this noble child. And than they with drew them self
into a pryue place there by her, and se what should fortune after. Than anon it
began to ware de^^e. And within a little space they saw where there came four
the fairest ladies of the world two and two together with great torches and
lyghtes before them, and where al crowned with gold like noble queen's the first
was so excellent fair that the beauti^s of the other three were nothing to be
compared to her, who was queen and lady over the other three, and the castle of
the port Noyr was perteyning to her. And also the fair pauylyon with the Egle
of gold wherein was an image holding in her hands a chaplet made of pauncees,
the which image in all points resembled to this fair queen proserpine wherein
was also the white ^^elde and sword enchaunted, the which pauylyon was not
fe^^e pyght fro the fountain where as this child was laid in the pereon. An^
so than these four queen's wrapped in mauntelles of silk set them down in the
said four chayres, and the child was in the mids between them all four.

How that the daughter of the mighty king Ga^^nd^s, and of ^e^ice his queen
was destyned over the fountain in the herber of the mount peril^ous by four
queen's of the fayry the chyefe of them was named prose^pyne, who was the
most fairest creature than of all the world. Cap. xx.


THan this queen Proserpyne began first and said. I perceive well here is the
daughter of our dear fre^des the king Emendus whom he has sent hither to us
with great triumph therefore it is good reason that we do him some good and
pleasure. Madam said the other three queen's begin you. And we shall follow,
certainly said she with a right good will. First I will yt this child be named
Florence, and that she shall be flower of beauty of all other c^eatures as
long as ever she shall live and properly I will she shall resemble to me both in
face, in body, in countenance in goinge, and coming. And in all other
things so like* that whosoever se us both together shall not consider nor
dyscerne the one fro the other. And also to her I give this my castle of the
port Noyr, and my pauylyon with ^he Image holding the Chaplet. And also my
why^e shield and sword. And therewith she held her peace. And than the second
queen said. Madame sith that ye have made he^ to be fair with out co^paryson. I
will also that she shall be gracious and amyable. well quod the third queen sith
I see that she shall be exceeding fair and gracious without comparison. And
madame seen she shall have your semblaunt and your shield and sword. I will
that the best knight of the world shall have her marriage. And I will that he
shall bear the white sheld and the sword, and that they shall help none other
creature but alonely him. And I will that he shall achyeue the adventures of
this castle, and shall put to death Malegra^e the Monstour, and to him I give
the sheelde and the sword and the chaplet yt the image holds in the
pauyl^on. And also I will that he shall have this maid Florence in marriage.
Than the fourth queen said, well sister sith ye have given this maid to the
best knight of the world. I will tha^ that if any other be so bold to take
her, that incontinent he shall die or he have power to touch her. And therewith
all these queen's rose and went there ways. And than the queen of Ismaelite
and the king of Orqueny and the archebysshop took the ch^^de and bare it to her
mother and there openly recounted to her all yt they had hard and seen of
these queen's of the fayry. Than the archebysshop did christen this child, and
gave her to name Florence. And than the queen of Ismaelite and the king of
Orquenye held her on the founte^ the which child was kept up with four
norses. And she grew and amended daily so that she was toward to be fairest
creature of ye world And when the queen was pu^ified she went to the city of
Sabba where as the king Emendus was accompanied with his kings, and the seven
peers of his realm. And this was at all halowentyde where as he kept a great
open court. And when the queen was come the king met her with great triumph.
And she was led to the pa^ays with a king and an archebysshop. And there openly
recounted all the destyny of the child, and how that she should be given in
marriage to the best knight of all the world.

How the king of Ualefounde sent his son to ye city of sabba for to be
brought up in the company of Florence. ca. xxi
IN this time the king of Ualefou^de had a sone who was named Steven, and he
was sent to sabba to be norysshed up in the company of Florence And so
these.ii. children were brought up together so long til this child Steven
could go to scole* than the king Eme^dus sent him to the scole, of Athenes
there for to learn. And by process of time this child the^e le^ned so well
and profoundly that he became a sovereign clerk, specially in astronomy and
n^gr^omancy that in no part there could ^e found none like him in conninge.
Than the king Emendus did send ^or him to be in his court. Than Florence
desired of her father that he might be her clerk, and of her counsel and the
k^g with a right good will did grant her request, and florence lover him right
well for he served her right nobly and t^ulye and she had after right great need
of him as ye shall here more plainly wha^ time shall be to speak thereof.

How yt the queen Fenice mother to florence died, and how she made her testament
giuinge to her daughter a ^inge ^ p^ttyng her thereby in possession of the
^^^lene o^ blaunche ^oure Cap. xxii.


THis queen Fenice loved greatly her daughter Florence, who was the most
fairest creature that as than could be found in all the world. For there was
none that ever saw her, but incontinent they were rauysshed with her persaunt
b^au^^. And the queen her mother kept her so derely that there were but few men
that had any sight of her, for y^ king her own father saw her not so often as
he would have done. In this manner she was kept till she was.xviii. year of age.
Than it fortuned on a season that this king Emendus held open court at
Pantopone. And to him were come al his other kings and noble baronage at which
time the queen his wife was right sore dyseased of the fever and every day
inpayred more and more, and so the second day of this feast this noble queen
Fenyce than as she lay in her bed she saw where as her daughter Florence stood
sore weeping before her beds side where with she began to make a pitefull
lamentacion and said. A dear daughter Florence I have kept and cherished you
unto this day with great honor and joy. And now is the season come yt I must
n^des leave you. And I fer^ me yt after my death ye shall have need of me. And
therewith she sent for the king Emendus her husband, and for other four
kings, and for all the seven peers of the realms. And when they were a^ come
into her presence she said to the king Emendus her husband. Right dear lord
I am sure it is not out of your remembrance the desteny of our daughter
Florence, therefore sir now in my last days I humbly require you that ye ^il
keep and up hold the promise and other as ye have made in that behalf
heretofore to the which ye are bound to by your seal and wrytinge. And
suffer her never to be given to other lord in marriage but to him that she is
predystinate unto. In the name of god quod the king madame I faithfully assure
you to uphold all that I have promised well than to you syrs quod the queen ^o
ye other kings and.vii. peers. How say ye will ye all uphold the same, and al
they answered al yt they would never agree to ye contrary. Tha^ y^ queen took a
ringe of her iing^r and openly she said. Florence my fair daughter I give you
my realm of blau^che toure. And put you in sesenyng and possession thereof by
this tinge. And so Florence took the ringe and delivered it to the archebysshop
her uncle to keep. Tha^ the queen said to the king of or orqueny And to the
archebysshop. Fair lords I leave in your kepinge my de^e daughter Florence
praying you to keep her well and truly. For sir bishop she is your own ^ese.
And to you sir king of orqueny she is cosyn and goddoughter, therefore ye ought
to take good head to her. And to you my own de^e lord and husband and to all
other I humbly require pardon for any thing that ever I have trespaced against
any of you besechinge you all to pray for my soul, and to the sauegarde of the
blessed trinite I you commit. And therewith she marked her with the sign of the
cross and commended to god her spirit. And therewith lost her speech and
mortal life. Than began in the court so great sorrow and lamentacion that it
was pity to behold and here for the king foundred all in teeres, and al other
that was there present. Than Florence step p^d forth all in a rage and piteosly
cried and said. Alas I sorrowful and poor or pheline of mother side. A her^e why
do thou abide any longer in my woeful body. A dear lady and mother how is it
that ye be thus gone and leave behind you your sorrowful daughter Florence,
therewith she wrange her lyly white hands and said. Alas I sorrowful and
desolate creature. And therewith she would have lepte and ^yssed the dead corse
of her mother, but her heart failed her and so fell down to the earth in a
deadly trance. And every body took so much head on there own sorrows so
that no body took head of the woeful Florence, til at the last the archebysshop
and master Steven took her up in his arms, and so revived her and bare her
out of the sight of the dead corse, and than to her there came the abbes of our
ladies monestery in that city, and al her covent for to comfort her. And so
these sorrowful tidinges anon tanne over all the city, wherefore all the belles
in every church began to sound. And every creature made great sorrow for the
death of the queen. And the king caused her bodi to kept above the ground.ix.
days for to abide the barons and knights of the realm of blaunche toure for
then^ente that they should be at the entierment of their queen and lady.

How that the queen Fenice mother to Florence was nobly entiered. Cap. xxiii
About the end of.xx. days their came a knight to king Emendus fro
the emperor of Inde the more. who had heard tidinges how that the queen Fenice
was departed this transitory life, and he desired the king to prolonge four
days longer the enterme^t of the queen, for he sent word that he would be
with him by that season where of king Emendus was very glad that so hie a
person as the Emperor was would take on him for to be at the beryenge of the
queen his wife. And when the day came of his coming he was received fulright
and honourabl^ and tha^ the service was ministered to the dead body full right
hi^ and solemp^ely and so she was laid in the cathidral chirch of all the
city. And this Emperor abode there still a great space afterward wy^h the
king to the entente to put him of his great sorrow. And all other kings
earls and barons deparparted every man into his own country. And also the
archebisshop returned to cornite. And so took his leave of the king his brother,
and led with him Florence his nese. And also Florence took leave of the king her
fader and of the Emperor who was as than all bedewed with we^ping, and not
araied as perteined to her estate, but after the manner of a sorrowful morner.
How be it in such state as she was in, she was of great beauty whereby this
Emperor was stricken with so great joy that he lost al his cou^tenau^ce. And
fro hensforth he loved and desired so much Florence that he thought on nothing
but alonely on her. And thus departed Florence with the archbishop her uncle,
and travailed so long til at the last she arrived at Cornite on a friday about
the hour of euensong time, and there was received honorably, and there
remained a great season. And master Steven ever ^^rued her well and truly, and
she trusted more in him than any other after the death of the queen her mother.

How that the Emperor of Inde the more demanded of king Emendus the fair
Florence his daughter in marriage. And of the answer that king E^mendus made
to him. And also of the term that was taken to mary Florence, and how that
master Steven knew by the regardyng of the planettes that their was coming
out of the west a knight, who should a cheue the adventures of ^he port Noyre.
And how he should have and enjoy the white shield and the sword and obtain
Florence marriage, whereof she was greatly comforted, for in no wise she loved
the Emperor. Cap. xxii^i.
THus the Emperor abode still with the king Emendus, and departed together
fro Pantopone and went to masedone, but ever the emperor was in great trouble
and thought for the love that he had in Florence ^oo that the king Emendus
demanded of him what he eyled to be so sad, and the Emperor answered and said
sir I shall tell you the troth. For I can not send to you a more certain
messenger than I am my self for ye must believe mine saying rather tha^ any
other mean messenger. Sir it is of truth how that ye be a great prince and
of right great power, and also sir it is well known how that my strength is
not small, for I think as now we two at in manner the greatest men that reygneth
in any place of the world. Therefore it is a great wealth to us to continue
together as faithful fre^des. And truly fro hensforthe I will be your friend
and your lover. Certaynlye sir it is so I am a man to marye, and I think I
cannot set mi love in no place so well and nobly as on Florence your daughter,
therefore sir here with mine own mouth I desire you to have her in marriage. A
sir quod the king it may not be, for she may have none other marriage but such
as she is desteined unto, for if that any other presume to take her he is but
utterly lost and dead. And also I have sworn and set to my seal to uphold
her destiny, and never to break it. Sir said the Emperor believe you them of
such fantasies as is the fayry, surely sir they have no power nor might, but I
require you give me your daughter, and so we shall be together as fre^des:
truly sir said ye king I will be glad thereof: but I promised to my queen to keep
faythfullye the promys that I had. In the name of god said the Emperor, sir
your queen is dead and past, who shall never return again, she shall never
demand nor sew you for the brekyng of any couenaunte made to her, and their
is none other yt will be so hardy to reprove your deed. For if they do they shall
lose their heads, wherefore sir I require you fulfill my desire And than ye
shall bind me to be your faithful friend, well sir quod the king if my
daughter be content therewyth it shall please me right well, wherefore let us
^ide to morrow toward cornyte, and speak with her and know her mind in this
matter. So be it in the name of god quod the Emperor. And on the next day be
times they lept on their horses and rode forth to Cornite, and rode so long
that on a wednesday they arrived at the city of Cornite, and so went to the
palais. Than the archebysshop came to se the king, and brought with him
Florence. And than they all together went up in the palace and entered into a
fair chamber. Than the Emperor and the king set them down together, and
between them the fair florence. And at the last the king Emendus said. Fair
daughter your mother is departed this life, and it is now time that fro
hensforth that I provide for your noble estate, ye be a great lady and a
puyssaunt. Therefore I will mary you to this noble Emperor here prensent. And
when Florence hard her father speak to her of marriage all her blood began to
quake and trimbil, for she hated the Emperor ever since the beginning of her
youth, how be it she answered right wisely and said dear lord and father ye
know well that it is not yet.iii. months since the death of my lady my mother.
And if I should mary me so newly I should be greatly blamed. Therefore sir I
require you let this year pass, tha^ sir I will take counsel and tell you
what I will do. And wha^ the Emperor hard her speak so reasonably he could not
endure to charge her any ferther as than. and acorded to abide the term of her
desire. And beheld well how that she changed colors and sore trembled, and so
did the kings her father also. How be it he made no semblaunt. And so they
were together a long season, till at the last she took license of them and
departed into her own chamber sore amassed and so abode till the archebysshop
and master steven were comen fro the court. And as soon as they were entered
into the chamber of Florence, they saw well where as she was sitting sore
sighing and wepinge. Than the bishop took her by the hand and demanded of her
why she made that lamentacion. As help me god uncle said Florence, my lord
my fader keeps not well the couenauntes that he made to my lady my mother, for
now he is in the mind to marye me unto this Emperor. And there is no thing
that I hate so much as I do him. Certaynlye I had rather to suffer death than
to have him. And I have no longer respyte tha^ the end of this year, why
madame quod master Steven have ye purchased so long a respyte. In faith I
faithfully ensuyre you that I will give you two year longer, for I waraunt you
that two year after your day ye shall not be married to him. Maystre said
Florence I thank you of your good comfort, well quod the bishop the Emperor
does folly to demand you against your will. For perauenture there may fortune
little good come to him thereby. Than the bishop took her by the hand and led
her into a fair gardyne to ^porte her. And so on a fair grene benche she
satte her down between the bishop and master Steven, and so passed the time
with many goodli sportes. And than it began to wax sat and the evening was
very clear, and the sterres shone full bright. Than master Steven did behold
the^ a gretere space and at the last he said, madam^ for certayn^ I know by
the course of the planet^es that there is a knight coming in to this country,
and is now well onwarde on his way, who shall achyue the adventures of the
castle of the port Noyr or this year be passed. And surely it is he that
shall have the white shyelde and the sword Clarence, verelye said the bishop
if this be of truth the Emperor may goo fysshe in an other place for here
he has well failed, for I am sure it is the sam^ knight that my lady Florence
is predestynate unto, there fore I am right Joyous of the hurt of the
Emperor. And how say you master do you not hate him, yes sir thereof he may
be as sure as that a nell of clothe will make his head a hode, whereat the
bishop did laughe. And thus they were long together in this talking t^ll it
was season to go to rest. Tha^ they brought Florence to her chamber and
departed to their own lo^gynges, and about mydnyght this lady awoke. And tha^
fell into her remembrance the dyspleasure that she had to the Emperor, and
as she was thus thinking she beheld the four mortees of wax y^ stood
brennynge before her beds fete, therwyth she saw where th^re came in to the
chamber a fair lady white as the lylly with a mantell of grene, hanging
about her sholders with a l^se of gold, and a crown of gold on her head, and
she held an other lady by the hand, and said unto her Fair sister saw you
not well the Leoparde with the seven heads all crowned with gold, who has
the look of a brim bore, and the heart of a lion, the body of arms of led,
and the foot of a white ha^te And when she had thus said the other lady
demanded of her what all this might mean. For herein are diverse things to
be considered. Than she answered and said, sister this Leoparde shall have the
eagle of gold that is on my pauylyon, and by him shall the gates be opened of
my castle of the port Noyr. And than shall all the enchauntementes fayl And
therewyth both these ladies vanysshed away, so that Florence wyste not where
they were suddenly become, wherwyth she was ^ighte sore afraid for she wist
not what it might mean. In like case the same vysyon came the self night to
the archebyshop. And also to master Steven where as they lay severally each
fro other, whereof they had great mernayle what their dream might sygnyfye.
And within a little space after the light of the day began to apere ^han the
archebyshop rose and master Steven. Also to do their atte^dau^ce on their lady
And when it was time to sing mass. master Steven w^nte fro Florence who was
than ready apparayled and so wen^e to church. And there the archebysshop song
mass, and when it was fyn^shed the bishop saluted Florence, and demanded
what good rest she had taken that night paste. As god help me dear uncle said
Florence never as yet came to me such a fortune as did this night, nor I was
never so afraid, for about mydnyght I awoke, and as I lay wakyng I saw
properly before my bed the most fayreste figure of a lady that ever I saw,
and she had a crown of goulde on her head, and be semynge there was an other
queen in her company crowned in like wise, who was also as me thought a very
fair lady, but nothing to the regard of the other queen. And such words me
thought she said unto her fellow. And there Florence recounted word for word
as ye have hard h^re before of all herre hole vysyon, and how that they were
sodayn^ly vanysshed away fro her. And when the bishop heard this he said.
A fayrenese Florence by the faith that I owe unto you eue^ in like case as ye
say it fortuned to me this same night, and for certain I thought properly it
had been you. For by my soul the queen that I saw if ye were both together I
could not dyscerne the one fro the other, ye res^mble so nere together. In the
name of god said master Steven this vysyon appeared also properlye to me in
every thing as ye have rehearsed, and verily also I thought it had been my lady
Florence hear present, ve^elye said the bishop this thing is not thus
fortuned to us all three without some reason, master I require you go look what
significacion it may be of. Tha^ the mayester went from them and entered in
to his chamber and took his books and looked on this matter so long till he
perceived finally the mystery thereof. And so came again to Florence, and said
to the bishop sir let us set our hertes in Joy and rest for verily my lady
hear needs not to care for the Emperor as in being of her husb^nde for
there is an other free knight swet and fair, who is the fou^tayne of all
chyualry, for his prowes surmounteth and shall do all other. Therefore know for
certain that where as the vision showed us how that out of the west should
come a Leopard yt which signifies a gentle knight borne about the country
of France. And where as this Leoparde has the look of a bore, and the hert^
of al^on. In likewise this knight is the hardiest y^ ever was boorne. And where
his bodi should be of stele, betokens that there is no knight so strong and
hard to abide a brounte as he is, and where it is said yt his arms be of leed
the which is a heavy thing, betokens the heavy strokes of this knight the
which cannot be sustained. And as for the fete of the heart the which is a
light be and a mighty. In like case this knight is strong and light and
quycke to go toward his enemies and where as he shall have the egle y^ ^hiche
is sovereign and king of all fowls. In like form this knight shall have my
lady Florence who is queen and sovereign of al beauty and richesse above all
queen's of the world the which shall be the confusion of the Emperor of Inde, ^
^here as he b^reth.vii. hedes crowned with gold s^gnyf^eth that this knight shall
bear the c^ownes of.vii. kingdo^es the which he shall co^quere with his swerb.
And where a^ that gates of the castle of the port noyr^ shall be opened by him.
And that al thench^u^tementes shall than fail, represents the hye prowes of
him that shall beat down all the adventures of the port Noyre and ^urely this is
the signyficacyon of our hole dream or vysyon. Therefore it is necessary y^ I
repair to the palats of the port noyre to know when this knight co^eth And
too see by his estate wha^ man^r a man he is, verily said the bys^oppe I
allow well that ye so do as ye have devised, and that ye r^moue thitherwarde
as hastily as ye can. And when Florence herd tidings of this knight she was
so daynely stricken with so love great that fro that hour forward she gave unto
him her heart. Thus she loved him truly and wist not how, and A^thur loved the
egle and as than had never seen it, so than this lady Florence made great feste
and Joy all that day. And the next day betymes master Steven arose and
prepaired for his departing, and than he took license of king Emendus to go to
the castle o^ the port Noyre for matters perteynynge to his lady Florence, and
the king gave him leave. Than the master came to Florence, and to the bishop
and took leave of them, and so than Florence took him by ere and said, gentle
master if yonder knight come to the port Noyre bring him to me if it may be
possible, for verily I have great will to se him and know of his estate. Madame
said the master with right a good will if I can bring it about. And so
departed and four other knights with him. And rode so long that on a
saterdaye he came too the port Noyre and took his lodging at the palais
without the castle gate. For there was none that entered into the castle without
death. And so in this palais this master Steven remained a great season nigh a
hole year. Now let us leave too speak^ of the master and Flor^nce, and of the
court of king Emendus, and of the emperor of Inde. And now let us return
to Arthur and his company.

How that Arthur slew twelve knights, who had token away a young damoysell
fro her father and mother* and had tied her to a tree, there to have defouled
her vyrginitye, who was saved by Arthur. Capitulo.xxv.


ARthur Hector and Gouernar were riding after they departed fro the court of
the duke his fader.xv. days without abiding in any place, or fydinge of onye
adventures, whereof any mention is made. And rode so long that at the last they
came in to the country of 'noma^the and entered into a great thycke couerte the
which endured a great space, and at the last they found a great stange or water
and a fair grene medowe Ioynyng thereto the which contained the space of two
miles and a half, and so they rode still by the side of the medowe finally in
the botome of a great valey. Than thee espied a strong and our closed with
mighty wailes And arthur saw well how the gates of the place were open and so
they lyghted of there horses and entered into the toure and went up into the
hall, and all the way they found no creature, whereof they had great marvel,
and at the last Arthur hard the voice of a woman in a little chamber beside
him, who cried right pyteously and said. A lady vyrgyn mary help me and send
me some manner of so^our And therewith arthur lept into the chamber and there
found a right fair lady who had been drawn all about the chamber. And her
yelowe here drawn and cut of her head. And she was so sore b^ten yt she had
no power to help her self. And in this chamber there stood a table ready
covered, wherreon there stood wine and met great ple^te, whereof arthur had great
marvel and demanded of the lady who it was that had done so much trouble
and shame* And when the lady saw arthur and herd him speak, she was sore
abashed, and all afraid said. A gentle knight I require you do me no more
hurt for I have harm enough all ready. Fair lady said Arthur be nothing
afraid for I will warraunt and defend you fro all enemies, therefore show
unto me who has thus entreted you. Than with much pain the lady rose upon
her feet and said, sir as god help me there departed fro hens right
now.xii. knights all armed and they have thus pyteously arrayed me as ye se.
And I think they have slain my lord my husbonde. And have away with them my
dear daughter to defoule her virgynyte if God do not pouruey some remedy for
her. well fair lady quod arthur where is the lord of this place, sir I cannot
say whether he be alive or dead. I beseech you s^ke about for him, for I
think I shall find hi^ other quycke or dead. Than Arthur sought a^l about
the place. And at the last in a little house he found him and his hands bound
behind his back sore wounded in the head and on the sholders. Than Hector
did lose his hands, and Gouernar dy^ search his wounde^, and Arthur
demanded him why he was so dealt with Sir in good faith quod the knight I know
none other cause, but y^ the last day there was a stranger did overthrow the
master of the said.xii. knights whe^fore thus they have arrayed me without
cause, and they have led away^ my daughter to do her shame and velany, and as
they thus talked together the lord of the placr saw where his squire and
clerk lay dead whereof he had great ruth. Well quod Arthur this a great
outrage, come on friends get us our harneys, and when they were all armed, they
followed after these knights and rode so long till at the last they found the
chyef master of them at the entering into a fair forest who was besy about
this damoysell to have fyled her. Than Arthur escred him and said. A ill and
shameful knight not so hardy yt thou ones touch her, for I ensure thou shalt
come to her fader in the sp^te of th^herteto th^ntente yt he shall take
ve^geaunce of thy trespa^. And therefore I the defye, therwt he and all his
company lept on their horses, and the capytayne of them broched his horse
agenst Arthur and stroke him so rudely that he brake his spear to his fyste,
but A^thur stroke him so pussauntly that his spear head^ en^red clean th^oughe
his body, wherewt he fell down dead to the earth. Than Arthur drew out his
sword and smote the second ^^o feruentely that he p^r^ed his her^. And the
third he stroke so that he cut him do ^^e to the sadel. And from the.i^^i he
roke his head fro the sholders. And Hector for his part stroke one of them so
^udely that he entered his spear into his body more than a fot. And than he took
his sword and stroke among them so rudely that he made them al before him to
knele. And also Gouernar made.ii of their heads to ^^ee into the feldes. And
when there maunt saw that their company were thus delate wythall they took
them to flight for dread of death and as they fled they said each to other,
let us save our self fro these deuylls of he^l for they be none erthelye
creatures. And so arthur followed them no ferther but came to the damoysell
where as she was fast bounden to a tree and did ^owse her and caused her too
mount on a horse of one of the knights that was sla^ne. And than brought her
again to her fader. And when he saw his daughter, his heart reuyued and
kneled down before Arthur and rendered to him many great than kings. Than arthur
took him up by the hand, and so remained there all ye day and night, and the
next morning he and all his company took leave of their host and of the
damoysel, who loved Arthur with all her heart. And so they departed and entered
in to their Journey, and ro^e fo^th so long till they came in to the country of
Uienne, where as they met a ^^ssenger having by semynge great haste with a
I^nelyn in his hand a scochen of arm^s on his breast, and a boget with leteers
hang^ng at his sadel bow And there Arthur curte^^sly did salute him, sir
said the verlet God g^ue you right good aduentur, good friend quod Arthur to
whom do you pertayne. Sir I dwell with my lord the Earl of B^auiewe, gentle
friend quod Arthur c^^ ye tell us onye nouell^s, sir I can not tell if ye know
any thing of the ^orney that my lord of Beautew ha^^e taken agenst the marshal
of ^yrpoys the which shall be ho^den on the monday next after ^oly rode day.
As it of a truth good frend^ quod Arthur that ^he earl of Beau^w has taken
on him this enterprise. Ye sir without fail. And good friend I pray you what
manner of man is your lord, sir as God help me he is a noble man for the earl
of For^s^es is his uncle. And the earl of mount Belyale is his cosyn germayne,
and as of him* self he is as curteys, as gentle, as tre^ an^ as meke as a
dove. But the marshall of Myrpos is contrary, for he is ^^^^s and cruel, and a
dyue^se man to dwell wtall how be it he is a good knight of his hands, and is
of that hardyn^sse, and of so fy^^s a courage that he fereth nothing three or
four knights to fight agenst them all wherefore my lord does puruey him of
the best knights hat he can g^t^e. therefore he has sent me to a knight of
his who is reputed right valia^n^ and sage and well proved in deeds of
chyualry, w^o is named sir Delalaunde, good fellow I pray you how far
dwells the knighte hens sir his house passes not two leges fro this place,
wherefore fair lords if ye think to be well harbored ^^is night bo my
counsel get you to a litell castle here by the which is called roche^yse,
wherein there is a val^aunt and a rich ancient knighte therefore siers the best
that ye can do is to r^payre thither, for this forest is dangerous to pass
through, the ways be so diverse that it is hard to keep the right way wtoute
a gyde, and specially be night. And as now it beg^nneth to wax very late.
well good friend quod Arthur I thank you for your good wyll^ keep on your
Iornaye and god send you good adventure. And we shall do as well as god will
suffer us. And so the v^^let departed and went to the knight sir Dela^aunde
and did his message, and delivered him his letters to the earl of Beauieu.

How that Arthur Hector and gouernar slew.xxx thieves in a great forest the
which was a great wealth to all the country, for they had pylled and wasted the
country all about. Capitulo.xxvi.
ANd when Arthur was departed fro the varlet he and his company rode so long
till they entered i^o the same foreste that the varlet had showed them of
before. And rode all the day and could find no house nor mete nor drink for
them nor for their horses, and than it began to wax late. And in this forest
acostomable there did repair.xxx. thieves who did rob all about where as
they could get any pray, so that no creature durst stere nor pass through
the country, and specially through y^ forest if it were any thing late. And
so by fortune these thieves encountered the stuff and caryages perteynynge to
Arthur and his company. And incontinent they took all the stuff and did bette
and intrete them that were conductours thereof, till at the last Iaket Arthurs
squyre drew his sword and to his power did help and ayed to defend his
masters stuff, but they were so many on him that he was sore wounded. And
therwyth Arthur and his company came to them. And when Arthur espied his
servant Iacket sore wounded and in great leoperdy, he drew his sword and
stroke so the first that he claue h^s h^d down to the chynne. And fro the
second he stroke of the head and fro the thyr^e he share clean away the
sholders with the arm. And than Hector and gouernar right strongly laid on every
side among these thieves. And so by the help of arthur they slew and killed
all that ever were before them. And they were all dead than arthur commanded
to search for his people where as they were wont to resort unto. And so thus by
the prowes of these th^e knights these.xxx. thieves were brought to death and
confusion, and at the last they found a fair ancient man under a trelienge
all naked bound fast with two theynes so that he could not help himself Than
arthur did louse him and gave him all the abylmentes that was on the dead
bodies, of the said.xxx. thieves whe^foreth^ good man humbly th^ked arthur, and
specially for saving of h^s life. Than arthur and his company rode forth and
trauayled so long ^^a^ the last they found a strong house, and knocked so
long at the gate till there came to them a varlet bare l^gged ready to go to
bed, for all other in the place were as than gone to their restes, and than
this foresay^e varlet demanded of them who it was that knocked so fast at the
gate that time of night. Good f^eende quod Gouernar it is a knight that would
fai^ this night have lodgyng for him and h^s c^pany. Sir said the varlet if it
please you to tarry I will go speak with my lord and master, and show him
your mind, how be it I think he be now at his ^est for he is old and
anc^ient, and has been in his days a very good knight, and as yet he is glad
to here speking of good knigh^es, and ^ou^th them that haunteth noble deeds of
a^m^s, ^ therw^^h y^ varlet departed and went ^o his master ^ said Sir the^^ is
at your ^a^^s.iii. knights armed. And are be semyng going to vienne to the
tornay. And they desire by way of gent^ln^ss^ this (...)gynge. How say ye sir
shall I open to them ^he gates hie the and pace quod the lor^^ for I am not
con^en^ that thou have made them to tarry without so long. And wh^ they be
ent^ed come again to me and bring me word what manner of ^e^ yt they be and
what har^^ys and arms they bear, than the varlet went a^ayne to the gate and
set is wide open, and su^^^d arthur and his company to enter, whereof they had
great need and m^^ter. Than the varlet beh^lde Arthur and saw w^l that he was
^^^e a gentl^man, b^ing long and well fornysshed and me^uaylously fair a^ o^e
a^ his company. And next him he saw Hector, who was tyght fair, hie and well
made. And also he beheld Gouernar, who was in all points like a man big and
brown of color. And also he p^rc^yued well how all their ha^neys were fair
and rich. Tha^ was there t^r^^es brought forth and var^e^s ^aune t^r ^^eyr
horses. Than the f^^st va^let ^^t^rne^ again to his lord an^ said. Sir s^th
yt I was borne I never saw so goodlye knights as they be and specially the
chief of ^he^, ^ as for their a^mour it is both fair and ye^e, for I ensure
you it should seem that they be right great^ men and ^^men of a noble lygnage.
well quod the lord look that thou in all haste appa^ayle their lodginge. And s^e
that they be served right honorably. well sir quod the varlet it shall be done
incontinent. Than the lord said to the lady his wife who was as than lyenge a
bed by him, madame by reason of your honor and gentylnesse ye should rise and
keep company ^ith yonder noble knights, for I thin^^ they be some great men
for it shall g^ea^ly anoye them and they se not the ^h^ e^e o^ the house to
make the^ some ^here for ^s god help me I would have great joy to speak with
them yt I might a ^yse and not hurt my self, therefore madame in mine a^sen^e I
pray you go and make to them the best chere that ye can sir said the lady
with a right good will ^y^h it please you I shall so do. Than this lady ^ose
and apparayled her self rygh^^orsship, who was a right fair young lady of the
age of.^xi. year. And when Arthur and Hector saw her they rose and cu^teysly
each of them did salute other and she sat her down between them. Than arthur
said madame ye have taken a great pain to leave the company of your lord to
come to se us, sir it pleases my lord that I shall do so. And therefore I am
come to you in the stead of him, for he would with a right good will have come to
you him self if he might so have done, but syres he is ansient and it would
sore anoye him to have broken his rest. And so thus they talked of diverse
things. And in the mean season there was mete provided for them, and than the
tables were spread and covered, and so than they washed and sat the^ down
arthur and the lady together, and Hector and Gouernar^ but Hector had his eyes
on the lady and ^^o neither eat nor drink, the which Arthur and Gouernar
(...) well espied. Tha^ arthur said to him friend it is yours al yt ye se, sir
said hector I have seen some things of yt which if I might I would feign be
master. A Hector quod Gouernar a manes will ought ever to follow the order of
reason. And so I believe ought yours to do. And therewith they left these
words, how be it all that little or nothing refrayned Hectors look, for
always still he beheld this lady till it was time for the^ to go their
restes, and so they took their leaves of the lady and thanked her for the great
ch^re that she had made them. And on the next day be^ymes they departed and
entered into the forest the morninge was fair and clear and warm, for it was
as than about the end of apryl. So these lords rode forth in great Joy till
at the last Gouernar said to Hector, sir was your will acco^plysshed this last
night, where as ye said ye would gladlye fulfilled your will, to say the
troth I think your will was on our hosts, who was both fair and young. By
my faith quod Hector I would have been ^ight glad to have fulfilled my will with
her, for undoubted she is fair and gracyous and I love her with all my heart.
And sir what was your will quod Gouernar, by my faith said Hector, yt she
should have been all night in mine arms and I in hers, now truly sir said
gouernar yt will was neither good nor honest for it was against reason for ye
good lord her husband did cause her to rise from him to the entente to honor
us and to keep us company, remembering also how honestly she received us, and so
good there as we had of her. And sir would you have than done velanye to ye
good lord as to have had to his wife unto his dishonor in his own house,
by the faith that I owe unto god it had no^ ben well done, nor yet it was
none honest thought. A sir Gouernar quod Hector I am sure ye be so sage in
science yt ye will do no folly, wisdom is great if the ca^ never touched myl^e,
as much to say as wha^ love toucheth^ wisdom is than oftentimes ou^rcome.
well as for all that quod gouernar it makes no matter, bu^ yet I say as I said
yt it should not have been well done of a gentylma^ to have done as ye say for
it were rather treason so ^o do wherwt Hector began to be sore chafed and
said, what Gouernar say thou that I am a traitor, thou lie falsely I was
neu^r none and drew nere to gouernou^ and laid his hand on his swe^de, than
said Gouernar stryke me not. I say not that ye be a traytoure nor ye be not so
great a man that your nobleness for thinks me for I would ye were greater
than ye are, yet for all yt I say that this deed according to your wysshe had been treason, remembryng y^ trust and confidence that the good lord had in us,
and in the color thereof to have taken his wife to his dishonor, surely I
say it is no thought of a noble man with the which words Hector was so chafed
and drew his sword and stroke Gouernar on the helm so rudely that he was
therwyth sore a stonyed* where with arthur was sore dyspleased and blamed
greatli Hector therefore. And tha^ Gouernar said sir stryke me no more for by
the faith that I owe to our lord if ye do I will not pardon you, for ye shall
have as good as ye bring how be it as for that ye have done I will suffer it
for the honor here of my lord arthur and for the great lygnage that ye be of,
why good sir quod Hector what would ye do else any great hu^te that shall be
soon seen, and so stroke Gouernar again on the helm a great blow, ^her with
Gouernar drew his sword and rudelye stroke Hector on the helm for he was a
good knight, and so there began a great and a sore ba^ayle between these two
knights. And arthur did his pain with fayrenesse to depart them, but they
were so sore dyspleased and chafed each with other that Arthur coud in no wise
cause them to leave: And wha^ arthur saw that he drew his sword and stroke
Hector so rudely that he made him to stoop down to ye neck of his horse, and
with an other stroke he stroke Gouernar so sore that he was sore aston^ed
therewith and ^^e had fallen fro his horse, and than Arthur would have
recovered on him a another stroke, but Gouernar went from him. Than arthur came
to Hector and would have stryken at him again, but than Hector said cosyn what
will ye do, a^e ye dyspleased with me ye verily said Arthur right sore for
gouernar showed to you your folly, and ye therefore have stryken him here in my
presence, whereof I am not content. Sir said Hector I repent me but he
dyspleased me sore yt I could not refrain my self as at that time, well quod
Arthur now than fro hensforth be in peace, or by the faith that I owe to my
lord my father the first of you that begins shall lose my company And also
my good will for ever, therefore come on Gouernar and make ame^des unto my cosyn
Hector in y^ ye have stryken him sir said Gouernar with a right good will.
Than he put of his helm and desired Hectors good will, now cosyn Hector quod
Arthur make ye him amends, sir said Hector right gladly, for it forthinketh me
g^ea^ly the displeasu^e yt has been between us and so he did also of his helm.
And there each of the^ kyssed e^her and ^o entered forth into there Journey, and
rode forth so long till the were passed the forest. And than they suddenly
encountered the knight sir Delalaunde and the messenger that they had met with
the day before, and there each of them did salute other. Than sir Delalaunde
demanded of Arthur into what parties he would draw him unto. Certainly said
Arthur it has been showed me that at holy rode tide next coming there
should be at vienne a great assemble of noble men and good knights. Therefore
I am ridynge thytherwarde to se that nobleness. And to be acqueynted with some
of the good knights that will be there, truly said sir Delalaund it is of
troth that there shall be a great assemble of noble knights, for there shall
be a great tornay. I pray you sir said Arthur, for whom and for what cause was
it first taken, sir if I should show quod sir Delalaunde, ye should than know
some thing sounding to my velany, nevertheless it seems yt ye be a noble man
and the chyef of your company. Therefore I shall show you as I know.

How that sir Delalaunde showed to Arthur the occasion why yt this tornay was
first taken by the lord Beauiew. Cap. xxvii.
Sir it is of troth my lord yt earl of Beauiew has always loved me sith the
beginning of my youth and so it fortuned when I was young and lusty. I thought
to go play me out of mine own country acompanied alonely with my squyre,
hoping to vaynquysshe all the valor of the world. And so at the last I came
into the land of myrpois and fell therein acquaintance with two noble lords of
great lygnage, who did me great honor. And one of them had a right fair lady
to his wife named the fair lady of Rossylo^, for whom this tornay was first
taken. And she had such favor in me and love that within a little while I was
made chyefe ruler and senesshall of all her country, and was of her strayte
counsel. And nothing done without it had be done by me. For she trusted more
in me than in any other person of the world. And in like case I was with the
good lord her husband And so I continued in this love and favor well the
space of six years and more and it fortuned one year yt for my sake they kept
a christmas with open court: whereto came many knights of the country. And
when the first day of this began this lady of Rossilon wife to my said lord,
she was as than fresh lie appa^ayled as it apertayned to the feast and to her
estate. At which time to me she seemed so fair so gentil, and so proper that I
thought I had never seen her half so fair before. And as than her beauty
stroke so inwardely to my heart that I lost thereby both meat and drink yt
every day I began to wax so lent of body that every man had marvel what I
eyled. And demanded often times of me what was the cause that I so enpayred,
but ever I did as privily as I could but at the end it auayled me nothing.
For at the last love constrained me to show unto my love and lady all the
dolor and pain of mine inward heart. And on a day as it happened I tose very
erly For the thoughts of the night killed me. And right as than I found this
lady leaning in a window. And so boldly I lened me down by her and than she
gave me good morrow, and desired that g^d should send me health, well madame
quod I. Than the king that all has formed give you a better day tha^ I have
had a night. And also better health, for my h^lth is very far of, the which
^ight sore troubles me. Than this lady comed her to ward me and said, sir
how is it that your health is so far fro you might it not be brought nerer to
you for goldenor for silver. Madame quod I peradventure if I showed you ye would
put thereto no pain nor counsel, how be it ye might right well do it, so than
it were bette^ that I kept it still secret than to show it, and than to be
neu^r the nere. Sir said she I require you I will with all my heart be glad to
put my pain to bring you to ease and health wherefore it is a great shame for
you, for when ye may have counsel and remedy and will not seek for it, but
thus to suffer pain and vnhertes ease, the which I ensure you greueth ^ight
sore both my lord and me. Therefore good friend by the faith that ye owe unto
me show me your g^efe. And there with she came nerer to me and enbraced me in
her arms and showed me great sign of love an^ sweetness as these women be
acustomed to do when they will draw ou^ of a man's mouth that is enclosed in
the he^te. And when ^ saw her gentylnesse and sw^te behavior, my he^te was
rauesshed and brought into ye case that of a great season I could speak no
world for weeping. But sir quod this k^ight to Arthur though I show this unto
you my nysenes I pray you think no folly in it, but take it in gree, for in
deed sir yongth does many things. By my faith sir no more I will. And therefore
proceed forth in your tale. Sir than I said unto this lady. Madame what so ever
fortune fall thereof I will show you all my desire. Madame it is of troth I
have set my heart and al my thought on you more than on all the remenaunt of
the world with so faithful profounde love in mine heart as it well appereth' and
shall do by me, for another person I love nor can love, but alonlye you. And
therwi^h my heart failed me yt I could speak no word more, th^rwith I sat me
down and she by me. Than she answered and said, what sir Guy delalaunde it is
tha^ thus a ye say ye mada^ said I without fail, will sir quod she say ye
these words other to a^^ay me or else for very love. I require you tell me ye
troth by my soul madame quod I this that I have said is for the great myschit
that I am in without your help. Therefore lady for gods sake have pity on me
And th^rwith I joined together my hands with great vn^ase of heart. Than she
beheld me well and said, sir ye be a ^^ght wise and sage knight, therefore
behold well if you^ desire ^e not pre^udicial to any person, madame quod I for
troth I se and know well that I desire aga^st my lord treason and fa^senesse
who loves and hono^reth me so much above all other, how be it madame I se and
know well that yongth and love brings me to this, so that mesure and reason
fails in me* Therefore I had rather to dye than to live. ^han this lady w^o
was right wise and sage said, sir be in ^este and let joy increase in your
heart for w^ will speak more of this matter at a better leaser, ^his she said
to give me comfort, and not to the entente that she would in any manner wise
t^espace agaynst^ her husband, so this in thus manner I drove of the time a
great season, but as love as I could get her at a good leaser and convenient
place I was ever resoning with her of this matter, and lay importunatly daily
requyring her to have pity of my mortal distres, and so it fortuned on a day
that we were togeder leuynge in a window loking out toward a fair forest. Than
I spoke to her so fair and in so rufull manner that she could no longer drive
of my request. And said sir your suite is so importune that it behooves me to
assente to fulfill your desire and will, how be it sir se ye not yonder great
oak standinge in the forest yes madame said I right well, well quod she I am
content to fulfill your mind on this condition, look that this same day
twelve month and this same propre hour that ye fail not to be under yonder
oak and without fail thither to you will I come ready apparayled to aco^plish
your entente, and before that day look never for to have it. A mine own dear
lady humblye I thank you of your good will sith I cannot have it no sooner, at
the least I shall pass the time more (...) in h^ping of that fortunate day.
whe^fore I will take my leave now of you, for ye shall not se me again till ye
time be come, for if I should abide in your daily presence, your beau^eful
eyes should lea me to abide so long, for that thing that I desire. And so
than I took leave praying her to keep couenaunte with me. And so she ensured me
she would. Than I took license of my lord her husband, showing hi how I would
depart into mine own country for a season, and he was loathe to give me leave,
but wha^ he saw that I would needs depart he offered me to have forsaken his
own country, and to have gone with me, he loved me so entyerly. And so at the
last with much sorrow I gat leave and departed privily on a night and dysgysed
my self and went wandering about the country till the year was past. And tha^
this same day and hour that mine apoyntement was I came to the said oak in the
forest before the castle wyndowe, and incontinent I perceived where this lady
stood talking with my lord her husband in the same window where as she and I
made our apoyntement together. And than I made so many tokens and signs that
at the last she perceived me, and than she began to smyle, and when her lord
saw her laughe he demanded the cause why. And she answered and said, sir for
nothing, for nothing quod the lord I am sure ye will not laughe for naught
therefore show me the cause, for surely I will know it therefore I command you
to show it, sir quod she sith it pleases you I am content to show you, but
first sir I require you tell me wha^ that ye saw or hard of sir Guy
delalaunde. In good faith madame not of a great season whereof I am (...) sorry,
for y^ I had known that he would have ta^ied so^ long a space I would have
sough^ him out or this time, well sir quod this lady he is not now se^ hence,
sir it is of troth he has before this time desired me of love, and in a manner
his suite was impor^unate. And the love that he bare me was so fervent that he
was right sore dyseased thereby, the which was right well seen by him while he
was here with us, and so there this lady told the lord her husband all the
matter that was ^etwene her and me into that same present day. And than she
showed him and said sir this is the same day that I promised him to have
fulfilled his desire, to the entente I thought yt by this day he would have
forgotten this matter, ^ut so sir ye may se him under yonder great oak where
as he is al a^naced because he finds me not there as I promised him. And sir
ye may se by him how yt these folysshe lovers are overcome with love And this
is ye cause that he departed f^o you, for he might not endure no longer the
great tourment yt he was in. Ye madame quod the lord is it thus, than I
comm^unde you on ye love that ye bear unto me that ye god and apparayle you in
the fresshest manner that ye can do and than come again hither to me. Than the
lady did his commandment and came again to him. And than he said. Madame I
will and also desire you as derely as ye think to keep my love that ye go to
yonder knight under the oak and suffer him to do what so ever he will with you,
and reco^maunde me heartily to him A sir said the lady for nothing will I do
thus, for if I had ever thought to have ful^ylled his folysshe desire, ye should
never have known it by my will. And sir if I would now do it, it were to me
great vylany, both tofore god and all the world. Madame said the Lord* I
will take all the sin on me, and I swear to you faithfully on my troth that I
will love you and keep you more derely ever after, therefore I will that ye do
thus in contynent* Well sir said the lady it behooves me thus to do sith it is
your pleasure, if honor come thereby take it to you, and if shame come
thereby ye must take it of worth. And so than this lady came in to the forest
(...), and us soon as I saw her I was never so joyful before. For I thought
I would quy^e all the World for her, than I came to her and enbraced her in mine
arm right swetely and said. My right dear lady my hearts desire ye be to
me right har^^^y welco^e. Sir delalau^de quod she, God put in to your heart
that ye do no wrong nor tresp^ce against any person. Sir my lord my hus^onde
hartly recommau^deth him unto you as to his own good feed H^w so madame quod
I, where is my lord Certainly said she he is here by in his castelle. But
madame said I how is it, does he know that ye be come hyder to me. Ye sir
said she as God help me, for he ha^he caused me to be apparayled in the
fresshest manner to the intent I should please you the better, and so he has
sent me hither to you to the intent to fu^fyll all your will and desire, and
therefore behold me here all ready for to accomplish your will, as for hurt
or ill shall none come to you, thereby neither by my lord, nor yet by none other
for him, and so my lord does faithfully assure you, and sends you word by
me that he loves you in a manner better than he does him self. And when I
hard the great courtesy of my lord, and how that he loved me as well as him
self, and how that he sent me the thing that he loved best in all the world to
fulfill my desire therewith, and how that he would suffer that vylany for my
sake, therwyth fell away clean all my folly and unreasonable desire. For than I
thought it was better to leave my sensual appetyte than to have done that I
had enterprysed in my heart, for I thought than it should have been to great
shame for me to do vilany to so noble a gentle lords heart Than I kneled
down before the lady requyryng her of pardon of the great outrage and folly
that I thought a^yenst her, desiring her for Gods sake to help to make my
peace again with the good lord her husbonde. Than she took me by the hand and
brought me into the castle before the presence of her lord. And as soon as
he saw me enbraced and kyssed me. Than I kneled down before him and cried him
mercy, and there the peace was made between us, and ever sith he has loved me
as Well as ever he did before or better. Now fair sir I have showed you al mine
adventure, the which is right Well known of many folks, and so it fortuned
yt but now of late my lord Beamen was at a feast with the earl of Forest, and
there my said lord took this lady Rossylon by the hand to dance, and the
marshal of mirpois was there present, who is right ^^uious. And when he saw
this my lord and lady dance together, he said how that my lord of Beamen
should be the second. Than the lord of Beamen wist well enough What he mente
and said. Sir marshall as for sir Guy de la launde is a right good knight
both wise and true. The marshall answered and sa^d, his bounte apered well
wha^ he took his own lords wife. Sir said the earl of (...), though he
desired her love, yet I dare well say that he never trespaced ney^her against
his lord nor yet against her, for he did not dysguyse him self like a rybaude
for to come unto the wife of his foster as some has done yt I know right well
wherwyth the marshall was sor^ chafed, for it touched his own delyng and
said. Sir ye be but a ^ole to say these words to me. And thus they mul^iplyed
in language so fe^ that the earl of Forest and the earl of Neuers had much ado
to appease them, and so for this intent was the iournay taken o^ both parties
Which shall be this Wednesdaye next coming, and there will be many great lords
of the marshalles party, as the earl of Foys, the earl of mou^belyall, and the
dolphyn of vy^nes, and many other knights, and also Al^xander the young king
of m^logre. And of my lords party will be sir I^kes earl of Forest, and the
earl of Neuers, and diverse other, therefore sir I doubt me gretely of my lord
the earl o^ Beamen, for I would be right sorry if he had not the honor therefore
I pray you and al your company to be at this tournay on my lords party, for
When ye se him ye will say it were pite but he ^hold have the vyctory. Sir
thus I have showed you all the troth of the matter. Ueryly sir said Arthur with
a good will I shall be with your lord. But sir I pray you shall this lady of
Rossylon be at this tournay. Sir as god help me she shall be there and many
other great ladies and damoyselles, and also it is ordained by common accord
that he that does best shall be made l^ke a king over al other earls, barons,
and knights, that shall be there assembled, and shall be crowned with gold as
a king, and al they with all ye power that they can make shall be content to go
with him in battle Whether so ever he Will have them, and so fro thens forth he
shall be called king of the company, and this marshal entendeth to have this
honor if he may* for surely he is a good knight of his hands, and much
goodness is in him if his tongue Were not, but that little more shameth all the
remenau^t, as it does to all them that god has given an ill tongue unto.

How that Arthur had the honor in the tournay that was made at vyen between
the Marshal of myrpoys and the earl of Beamen, where as was diverse great
kings, earls, barons, and many other good knights right valyaunte, whereby
Arthur gate him great thank and praise and was greatly honored of all ladies
and damoyselles there assembled. Capitulo. xxviii


ANd after that sir Guy de lalau^de had showed all this process to Arthur and
to his company they rode forth togider and so came to lion surle rone and so
passed over the bridge and rode through the town, and in a fair medowe under
ye towns side they espied where tents and pauilyons were rychely pyghte at
whytch time there were assembled many great and noble kings, earls, barons,
and other knights, as well of the one party as of the other. And than sir Guy
de la launde send a messenger to the earl of Beamen certyf^eng him how he had
brought in valyau^t knights with him and that in any wise he should retain
them to be of his company. And when the earl of Beamen and the earl of forest
and the Earl of Neuers hard these tidings they came out of their tents, and
saw where sir Guy de la launde and Arthur and his company came riding. And so
when they came nere they lyghted and salewed these earls, who did behold
Arthur, and perceived well how that he was a meruaylous fair knight great
and bygge and well furnysshed, and seemed well to be of great fyersnes and of
great estate, and also they saw Hector a bygge knight and a well made both of
body arms and legs, and also they beheld gouernar who was a great and a
big man and well made thereto, and that these earls praised much these
knights in their hearts. Than the earl of Beamen took Arthur by the hand and
said Sir ye be right heartily welcome into the country of vyenues, prayenge you
heartily to take your lodging with me and with these other two earls here
present. Than Arthur said, sir with a right good will, and so they led him
into their tents, and there Arthur, Hector, and Gouernar were unarmed. And
when they were out of their harneys every man beheld Arthur for he was
meruaylous fair, so that tydinges came into ye ladies ^en^es how that sir Guy
de la lau^de was come and had brought with him three goodly knights, and
specially one of them who was the fairest and goodlyest that ever was seen, so
that there was no bruyte nor talking throughout all the host but of these three
knights. Some said of whence be they, who knows them, thus was the commoning
of them in every place. Tha^ Arthur and his company issued out of the tents
and beheld the fresshe baners and standards and stremers waueryng in the
wind, pyght before every tente and pauilyon, and hard also the trompettes
tabouryns, horns so wnynge in every corner of the field, and great coursers
braynge and knights renning assayenge of horses, casting of speres, shynynge
of sheldes against the son and glysteryng of helmes and knights by great
company talking togider also they espied the great tente of the ladies, in the
heyght thereof pyght a great shinynge apple all of burned gold, and ladies and
damoyselles there in singing and dauncynge. Than Arthurs heart began to smyle
and said to Hector. Cosyn how say ye, is it not better to be here and to se
all this nobleness than to crepe in to our moders lappes. Yes verily said
Hector, for here now shall appear who be noble men. Ye say troth said
Arthur, and therewith returned in to the earl of Beamens tente and went to
souper, and first sat down the earl of Neuers and Arthur next him and than
the earl of Forest and Hector and the earl of Beamens and Gouernar, and there
they were rychely served. And after souper they played and sported the^ till it
was time to goo to their testes, and so than went to their lodging till the
next morning, at which time they rose and hard mass, and than walked and
talked together without their tents, and therwyth there came to them a knight
fro the marshall of myrpoys, and said to the earl of Beamens. Sir when so ^uer
ye will begin this tournay my lord the marshall is al ready. Now as god help me
said the earl of Neuers let us go to it incontinent. But sir knight I pray you
tell me what company does your lord tournay with all. Sir said ye knight he
has in his company well to the nombre of.ix. C. ready apparayled to tournay In
the name of god said the earl of Forest that is an ill party, for I think our
company passes not.v. C. well sir said Arthur what than, care not for the
nombre of people, therefore let us shortly goo and se these noble men and I
trust god will help us. well sir said the earl of Beamen as god will so be
it. But sir will ye than help us and be of our party. With a right good will
sir said Arthur, Hector and Gouernar also. And than this knight of ye
marshalles praised much Arthur in his heart, and so returned to his master,
who as than was in the company of the young king of malogre, and with them the
earl of mountbelyal, and the earl of Foys, and the dolphyn who was a little
dyseased, and therefore he would not as that day tournay. Than the knight said
to the Marshall. Sir the earl of Beame^ demands of you the tournay
incontinent. But sir one thing I tell you, sith ye were borne ye saw never
three so goodly knights as sir de la lau^de has brought with him, but I can
not know of whens they be, but one of them surmounteth the other two both in
beauty and goodlynes Ihesu said the king of malogre what knights be they. In
good faith sir said the knight there can no man tell. will they tournay this
day said the king. Ye sir verily said the knight, for right now when ye earl
of Beamen fered that he had not company sufficient to answer your power I hard
y^ chief of these.iii. knights say unto him. Sir ear not for y^ for god shall
help us, let us shortly go se them. Than it seems said the king that he has
a good heart. Ye sir said the Marshall he believes yt there is not in all the
world his pere in deeds of chyualry, therefore let us go shortly se what he can
do, he said trulyer than he was ware of. For Arthur could right well give
great strokes, as was right well proved after by his noble deeds. Than was it
commanded that trompettes, and horns should be blown, and than knights in
every part went to their harneys, than the Marshal and the earl of mountbelial
and the earl of Foys and well to the nombre of.ix. hundred knights were anon
ready armed, and the young king of malogres was ^ounted on a great courser and
the dolphyn with him to the intent to se this tournay, for they would not
turnay as yt day. And incontinent as the ladies and damoyselles hard (...)
sownynge of the trompettes and horns, they issued out of their pauylyons, and
there was together in company the counte^^e of Neuers, and the countess of
Forest, and the countess of moun^bely^ll, and the lady of Rossylon, and a lady
who was the Marshals sister named dame blaunche. And than the countess of
Neuers said, let us now take good head of this knight that is come with sir Guy
de la launde and se what he can do. In the name of god said ye lady of
Rossylon, there be three as I understand, but I wo^^ not what they be, and all
this season Arthur was in company with ye earl of Forest, and with the earl of
Neuers, and the earl of Beamen, and when they we^e ^edy armed they mounted on
their horses and the earl of Neuers and Arthu^ rode first together, and after
them the earl of Forest and Hector, and the earl of Beamen and Gouernar, and
after them all the other of theer company, and in ryght^ good ordinance they
rode forth to the tournay. And than the lady of Rossylon said to the other
ladies that were in her company, behold yonder is one of the strange knights
that comes riding with the earl of Neuers, and an other with the earl of
Forest. In the name of God said the Marshalles sister the third comes with
the earl of Beamen, it seme^h that the earls makes much of these.iii.
strange knights, but they know not as yet the force of the Marshal my
brother, but when they mete here in the tournay than shall they have of him
such acqu^intaunce that they will wyshe that they had not come here this day.
No fair lady said the lady of Rossylon. I pray you than show them some
courtesye, send some word to them that they flee away before they se the
Marshall your brother, for I am sure if they se him they are but lost for ever.
At which words all the other ladies did laughe and had great sport. So thus
the earl of Neuers and Arthur rode forth till it was time to begin the
^ourney. And than the earl of Ne^ers saw the marshall on the other part ready
apparayled to Just, and showed him to Arthur. Tha^ Arthur said Sir he comes
very haftely, wherefore I require you let me encounter him first. Go your way
in gods name said the earl. Than Arthur rusht forth so rudelye as thonder
had fallen fro heaven, and all the other knights of the turnay beheld h^^ well,
and praised him much in their hearts. Than the lady of Rossylon said to ye
Marshalles sister. Fair lady I trow yonder knight has espied your brother
for ye may se how fast he flies. And at that course the marshall hytte
Arthur in the mids of his shyelde and brake his spear, and Arthur struck him
so rudely on the helm that he sheuered his spear all to peers, with the which
stroke he sent both knight and horse to the earth, and at an other course
Arthur struck an other knight so sore that he brake a great piece of his helm
and shield and ouerthrewe him flat to the earth in a great trance sore
wounded. And when the young king of malogres saw that he said to the dolphin.
Saint mary who is yonder knight he seems too be the best knight of the
world. Verelye sir said the dolphyn I never saw such strokes given of any
knight here before. Than said the lady of Rossylon to the marshalles sister.
Madame behold how yonder strange knight flies, but your brother the marshal
holds again, I had wend he durst have gone no ferder for fear of your
brother. It which time Hector also for his part struck a knight with so great
force that he ouerthrewe him plain too the earth, and Gouernar struck an other
down^ horse and man, and put him self in the thyckest of the prese and did
maruayles in arms, so that all that beheld him praised him greatly. Than
the lady of Rossylon said, fair lady blaunche how say ye are not these
strange knights right valyaunte, therefore madame for gods sake cause the
marshal your brother to absente him self out of their syghtes, and in your so
doing I think verily you shall do a great alms deed. Than Arthur rusht into
the gretest prease, and struck on the right hand and on the left so great
strokes and so heavy that it was maruayle, for there was none that ever abode
him but he avoided the arson of his sadel and fell to the earth. At the last
Arthur espied where there was a squy^^ holdyng in his hand a spoke or a great
piece of an old broken charyot, the which he pulled out of his hand with
such a might that he cast down the squire flat too the earth, where at
the ladies and damoyselles did laughe. And than Arthur put up his sword to
the entente yt he should mayme or hurt no man, but with that piece of the
charyot he thrust in to the prese and gave therewith so great and heavy strokes
that all that he touched went flat to the earth. For he was of that
condycyon that the more he had to do, the more grew his strength* and
virtue, he vnbarred helmes and claue a soun^der sheldes, and maruaylously bet
down knights, for whom someuer he touched were so astonyed that either he
avoided the sadell, or else his horse bare him in a trance all about the
fyelde. And alsoo Hector and Gouernar did as well for their parts as any
knights ought or might do. So it fortuned as Arthur went searchynge the
renkthes and preses he encountered the earl of Foys, who had nygh vnhor^ed one
of the knights o^ the earl of Beau^eus party, than Arthur prycked forth his
horse and brake the earl ^oo rudely that he thr^st down both horse and man
flat to the the e^ch than Arthur turn^d ^gayne to him, and whether he would
or not he caused him to be yeld^^ pry^oner to the earl of Bea^^eu who was
lord of that tournay on his party. Than the knights of his turnay assembled
them together by plu^pes here.x and there.xv. and yonder.xx. and so fought
egerly together, so that when one was fallen another did (...) him. Some
laughed and some playned, but A^thur was ever in the most thyckest of the
prese, and fared so among them as the wolf does among sheep and laid on with
so great and heavy strokes that he frusshed down all that ever he touched.
Than the earl of Beauieu say, and so did all other knights how that they
never saw knight of so great virtue, nor in valu^e in deeds of a^mes. The
ladies and damoyselles also greatly maruayled at him, and said that better than
he is was the^e never none. And they concluded among them that he was lykely
too attain to win the crown of that tournaye, if he continued his prowes
according too his beginning. So than it fortuned that a great part of the
Marshals company ran al at ones on the earl of N^uers and on his company, who
were far ouermarched when for ^he was sore be stadde and lost many horses and
many of his knights sore beten, and him self overthrown down from his horse
and was lykely to have be raken and yielded to ^he M^rshall But than an hera^de
of arms b^gan to cry and said. Ha Arthur of B^ytayne where art thou now the
earl of Neuers is beten and nere taken prisoner. And Arthur when he heard
that, who as than had by the help of Hector and Gouernar dyscomfyted a great
route of knights And when he espied the earl of Neuers on the ground, he
sported forth his hor^e and ^anne into the thyckest of the prease and struck so
the first that he encountered that he fell down to the earth both horse and man
than he struck on the right side and on the left with so mighty strokes and
heavy that he bet down all that was before him, so that none durst abide him.
And also Hector and Gouernar laid on so on all sides that all that were before
them trembled for fear. And so by clean force in the spite of al his enemies
he horsed again the earl of Neuers, and when he was thus remounted Arthur
than lepte again intoo the prese and did maruayles with his hands, for he
claue asonder sheldes and vnbarred helmes, and bette down knygh^es by great
heaps. Thus was Arthur regarded of al people who said each to other. Ihesu
what a wonders good k^ighte is yonder, god defend and keep him And the young
king of Malogres had his eyes ever upon him, and said to the dolphyn. I think
yonder knight be none earthly man I wenche be some spyryte of the air, for he
all confounds. Than the lady of Rossylon said to the marshals sister. Madame
ye have done right well, for I believe surely ye have prayed your brother that
he should do no^ hurt to these strange knights, and all the other ladies had
^^ght great sport at the merry gestyng of these two ladies And thus always
Arthur was fighting and at last there were.iii. knights an al at ones on the
earl of Forest and bet him down to the earth and would have taken him prisoner.
But w^an Arthur saw the earl at that myschefe he spored his horse thy derward,
and the first that he encountered he brave down flat to the earth, and the
second he took in his arms and rasshed him out of the sadell and cast him
down on him that he had before overthrown, the which grieved him right sort,
for the knight was great and heavy because of the harneys that was on him, than
he that lay underneath said. A sir ye be but ill welcome to me nor he that
sends you hither, I pray god he may^ have some ill aduen^u^e, for ye have
all too bruised me with your falling. Than Arthur took the knights horse and
caused the earl of Forest to mount thereon. And Arthur put him self again
into the thyckest prese and began again to fight as fresshely as though he had
done nothing before of all that day, so that he was dradde in every place,
for there was none durst abide him but al fled fro him, so at the last he
came where as the chief standarde was* where as he found the Marshall, who did
his pain to beat down all that was before him, at which time he had stryken
fro Gouernar his shyelde And therwyth Arthur struck him on the helm so rudely
that he drove him down too the earth all astonyed, and Arthur took his horse
and gave it to Hector for his horse failed him he was so sore wounded, and than
Hector mounted on him. And this stroke was seen of the king and of the
dolphyn, and of all the ladies and damoysels, and they all said that the
Marshal had been the best knight of all the world, but now he has met his
master, for certaynely yonder fair knight surmounteth in prowess all other
knights of the world. Than the lady of Rossylon said unto the Marshalles
sister. Madame your brother is not so ill and myscheuous as ye spoke of here
before* so ye may behold these strange knights how they are before hym^ and
yet he does no^hynge too them, I think he slepeth, for ye may se yonder
how still he lies on the ground, for all that season he lay still on the
earth sore astonyed in a great trance. And when all the knights of his
party saw him lie so still upon the ground they feared least he had been
dead, and said that one unto that other. Yonder is the devil, I think he
will confound us all, therefore let us depart out of this fyelde, and therwyth
they al went their ways. ^ so there remained still Arthur, Hector, and
Gouernar. And when that the young king and the Dolphyn and many other saw
Arthur alone in the field they came to him and ^alewed him and said. Sir god
keep you the best knight of the world, and increase your noble honor and
valor. My lord said Ar^hur, god that al thing has fourmed of naught may
increase you^ bounte and be your^ sauegarde, and sir saving your grace I am
none such knight worthy for to have such praise as ye give me. well sir said
the king we have ^^ne ryght^ well how it is, therefore mine own sw^te friend I
require you that ye will b^ one of my house, and ye shall be my companyon. Sir
said Arthur I am right well yours where so ever I be, how be it I have a
lord already, who has nourysshed me like his own child. Sir in good troth
said the earl of Forest, it is good right than that ye love him. And as they
were thus talking togythe^ the Marshal rose from the ground, and when he saw
that the tourney was done and fynysshed and that he had done nothing to him
that had beaten him down, he was right sore dyspleased, and than he sent a
knight to the earl of Beamen desiring him for to have the tournay to begin
again the next day and how that he would encountre yet again with Arthur.
This knight found the Earl of Beamen in the company of the young king and of
Arthur. And than h^ said. Sir my lord the marshal saleweth you, and desires
you again too have a tournay to morrow. By the good lord quod the young king
your master ought for to suffyse and be concen^e of that which has been
done here this day^, wherefore it is reason that he now rests him self, for
the king full well thought that the Marshal would not be in ease till that he
were revenged of Arthur A sir said Arthur the Marshal is not yet weary, and he
would think my lord of Beamen for recreaunt if be should refuse his request,
therefore sir ^or gods sake grant him. Sir said ^he earl with a right good
will sithe it pleases you, but sir I require you than to help our party.
Uere^y sir said Arthur with all my heart to the best of my little power. So
than there was graun^ed too be an other tournay on the next day. Than sir Guy
de la lounde came unto Arthur and led him to be unarmed. So than Arthur took
his leave of the king, who would right gladly have had him in his company.
And than all the people ran to behold Arthur and said with a common voice,
behold him that all has vanquysshed. Than when Arthur was unarmed ye earl of
Beamen kept him company, and also Hector and Gouernar were unarmed. Than the
indyes and damoyselles retourn^d intoo their pauylyons always speaking of
Arthur, and than they assembled them together by plumpes, here ten and there
twelve, and all the countesses were together in one part, and with them the
Marshalles sister dame blaunche and the lady Rossylon speaking ever of Arthur.
Ue^ely said the countes of Forest sith I was first borne I never saw so good
a knight nor so valyaunce, nor so well doing in arms as he is. It is of a
troth said che lady Neuers, ^aw y^ not how that he brake the great
companyes of knights and turned and once threw all that ever he touched. By
my soul said the countes of Foys, I saw him when he enbraced a knight in his
arms al armed and cast him down upon an other knight and bruised him right
sore there with, and also saw y^ not how yt he struck the Marshal down to
the ground, to say the truth he is the b^st knight of the world and the
most hardyest. And more over all the beauty of the world that ca^ be
comprysed in a man is in him. Also he is ^eplete with all grace and virtue, for
he is free, meek, and gentyl as a lamb. By the faith that I owe unto god
said the lady Rossylon, my lady the countes of Forest I would he were your
knight I believe you well said the lady blaunche for than I think verelye ye
would speak with him oftentimes when other ladies were abedde fast on sleep
wythas few a company as ye might with out making of any noise but shame
have she that will forfayte with an other that is not her own. Certaynely
answered the lady Rossylon I think there b^ but few in this world borne tha^
lives clean both in thought and in deed, how be it I am not she yt closes
privily knights in her chaumbre by night times without the license of my
lord, nor keep none under my couerture, how say you fair lady know you any
otherwise by me, if ye do spare not but speak it here openly, if ye be of
that condycions or have done so, ye ought than the rather too be the more
secret, if ye know that malady to be in an other when you know your own
estate leave the enquyryng of any farther than needs of any other, for I am in
certain that ye be sometime in the shadow oftener than I am in the son, with
company oftener than I am alone. Than all the ladies and damoyselles began to
laugh, and turned all the matter intoo Iapes and sportes And all this while
Arthur was in the earl of Beamens tent, and there was with him sir Guy de la
launde, and there he was well served and much honored of every man. And
after souper they passed forth the time in great joy and much mirth till it
was conuenyent time to go to their restes.

How that Arthur the second day had the honor of the ^ourney, and ^oo with
him abode the price of the field. Capitulo.xxix.
THe next day betymes Arthur arose and all the other earls, barons and
knights, to hear mass and after they armed them all of both parties, and
so than came intoo the ^yelde there as they should turney, and as soon as
Arthur and the Marshall saw each other they apparayled them to run together,
and dasshed too their horses and encountered so rudely that they all to br^ke
their speres the which were great and bygge as though they had been but
redes, and so passed forth without hurtynge of each other, and when that
Arthur had performed his course he encountered an other knight, and struck
him so with the ^ronchon of his spear^ that he was therewith sore wounded and
fell down to the earth. Than Hector and Gouernar began to strive and to beat
down knights vygoryousely, and did enforce them to do noble deeds of arms.
Than Arthur fought so among them with such virtue that he caused all the
tankethes and please of knights to avoid and give hi^ place, every thing fell
too him as he would wysshe it, for he felled sheldes and bette down knights,
and wanne horses and enforced prisoners to yield them at his pleasure, so that
al fled before him, for none durst encountre his mighty strokes. Than the
lady of Rosselyn who was as than nere to the countes of Forest, said to the
marshalles sister. Madame yet I said truly yesterday when, that I said how
that this knight was merely too be retayn^d with a great lady, wherefore I would
h^ were partaining with my lady the countes of Forest here present, for he is
no knight to be common to all ladies, such as wheleth about the chymney, as I
think some such ye know right well for there be many that choseth not by the
will one all only, but are glad to take such as they may get, for else
paraduenture they might tarry very long or they found such a knight as this
is* Than the countess of Neuers said to the countess of Forest. Marye madame
this lady pays without any gage sellyng. Truly said the countes of Forest
they that speaks fair, fair shall here again, but this marshals sister
spoke yesterday vylanye to my lady Rossylon, and therefore now she remembers
her thereof. And so it fortuned that in this season the lord of the castle
Yssembart, and Reynold of piereyle and well.xv. other knights of their route
took their counsel to run al at ones against Arthur too thentent to bring
him to the ground. And when they saw that Arthur had been well trauayled and
that they thought he had been weary, than they al togider ran at him and struck
him on all sides, and charged him with so many strokes that his horse enfou^dred
under him, how be it as his horse fell he took sir Issenbar^ that was before
him in his arms and cast him down to the ^arth in the spyte of his heart. And
when they were booth at the ground, than Arthur slepte upon his fete and laid
hands on sir Issenbartes horse* and mounted thereon against the will of al his
enemies. And when Reynolde of pyetrele saw that he went with such good aid
as he had and enbraced Arthur with both his hands, and so each of them held
other right fore, and therewith other knights came so fyercelye on them that
they were driven down to the earth both ho^s and man Than Arthur lep^e on his
feere again, and as he that was right sore dyspleased ran to the earl of ^oys
and took him in his arms with a gre^ force and pulled him so rudely that the
gyrth^s and paytrell and harneys all too braste and so the earl overthrew with
the sadel between his legs, than Arthur lepte on the horse bare backed and
took from a squier a mace of stele that he b^te in his hand and laid on with
both his hands and struck the first that he encountered so rudelye that he
turned his legs upward, and than he went to another knight and struck him
^oo soore, that he was so astonyed therwyth that his horse bare him half a
mile or that he wist where he was. And so in this ragy here A^thur drove down
x. knights or ever he rest^d, and laid on ever both on the right side and
on the left with so great ire that he confounded all that ever he towched, he
was in su^h^ a furour that he wist not well whether h^ was on horseback or on
foute, with sadell or without sadell, and fomed loo at the mouth that al those
that than ^awe him said that he was out o^ his wit, so that all fled
before him and gave him way where so ever that he went. And did so much
that he escaped ^lene from all the knights which were in the thought for to
have put him to rebuke and shame, so that the place where as he stood was clean
avoided. Than came there to him Hector and Goue^nar, when they saw him without
a ^adel the^ were greatelye maruayled ther^of, and so there with Hector rode
toward ^ knight so fyercely that he bate him down to the ground, and Gouernar
took his horse and brought him unto Arthur And when Arthur appe^^^yued that he
had no sadell under him he maruayled gretely, for he was so sore trauayled
before that he took no head thereof. Than heared of Hector and of Gouernar how
he had lost his sadell, and wheder he had any fall or not* and than they
showed him all how it was, whereat they did la^gh. And when that Arthu^ was
mounted intoo the sadell be saw before him where as there stood all the
countesses and diverse other ladies and damoyselles without their ten^es for
to behold the tourney ^han he spurred his horse, and came to the^ and alighted
down to the earth, and humbly salewed them and said. Fair ladies god that al
fourmed g^ue joy and honor to al your noble company the which is ^yght
fair and gentle. Sir said they, all ye be hither right welcome. well fair
ladies said Arthur for gods sake be not dysp^esed that I am so bold too
come too you, for it should have been great vylanye to me seeing that I was so
nere your presence if I had not done my duty in salewyng of your nobleness.
And in the mean time as they thus talked together the earl of Foys and his
tou^ ran on the earl of forest and his company and held him so hard and
short that he brake all the route of his company, and nigh had taken prisoner
the earl of Forest for he was beten down to the earth. And when the countes
his wife saw her lord so nigh overcome, she said unto A^thur. Sir knight, of
what company be ye of in this tourney. Fair lady said Arthur I am of the
company pertaynyng to the earl of forest. Certeniy sir said the lady I believe
not that, for if ye were of his company ye would not suffer him too be delte
with as he is now but I think ye love better ease and rest than to tournay and
in so your dayng ye do well and wisely, for it is better to be in the shadow
tha^ in the son light. when Arthur he^rde her say so, he was greatly
abassh^d, and to^rued his vysage toward the turney and s^w where the earl of
forest was beten fro his horse and stood defendyng of him se^son foot. And than
he said ^o the countess of forest, Madame for gods sake I as^e you mercy
for I thoughteful little that my Lord your husbo^de had been in this case, but
by the gra^e of god I shall sone help and socoute him. Ye said the lady I
^rowy^ be very fe^t^ ye se him now almost at a great myschefe and yet ye stand
here still preaching to us. And when Arthur herd that he was sore dysplesed and
so mounted on his horse and without any longer delay he ^^she into the thy^kest
of the route so rudelye that his horse went like the thunder, and all the ladies
beheld him right well, and said god keep and def^nde the fro myscheue or
shame. And Arthur ^u^hte into the prese and struck the first so rudelye yt he
overthrew both horse and man, than the ladies began to laugh, than A^thur took
an other with his hands by the sholders and cast him rudely to the earth, tha^
he took his mase of stele hanging at his sadel how, and struck so fiersly
^herwy^h round about^ him in every place that he brake the prese and bet down
knights, so that there were none that durst approach unto him, but they all
^ledd^ before ^ym as these small ^owles does before the fawcon. Than Arthur came
to the earl of forest and brought him a new horse an^ he^ped him to mount
thereon. Than Ar^hur rode to the earl of Foys, and the earl gave him a great
stroke on the helm, but Arthur moved no more for all the ^^roke t^an though he
had stryken a g^eate ^oure, but Arthur struck him agay^e so ^yer^^ly that he
caused him to avoid the a^son of his sadel, and ^aket Arthu^s squire took the
horse, than Arthu^ said to him. ^aket I will thou go with that horse and
presenteit f^o me too my lady the coun^es of forest, who right now blamed me
^u^ sore. Sir quod Faket with a right good will, and so wenceforth with the
horse. And Arthur al this season held under him the earl of Foys in such wise
till at the last the earl of Forest came to them, and so there to him the earl
of Foys was feign to yield him self. Than Arthur put him self again into the
prease, and struck so on all parts, that finally every man fled from him,
and left him in the place all alone. Than Arthur cried openly and said, if
there be any knight that dare come, let him appear, but he might have tarried
there long enough or any that was there would have comen to him. Than sir Guide
la launde came to him and said. Sir I have promised you that I should show unto
you the lady of Rossylon, pleases it you now therefore to come with me, and
ye shall se her by the faith that I owe to God, I will go with you gladly. And
tha^ their two, and Hector and Gouernar rode forth to the ladies tente, and by
the way they encou^rted Iaket, who had done his message. And he showed to
Arthur how that the countes of Forest right hartly did thank him. And when
they were before the tente they lyghted. And than generallye all the ladies and
damoyselles came to them ward with great feeste and joy. And when Arthur was
within the tente with the ladies, who affectually beheld him. Than the
countess of Neuers, and the count^s of Forest right heartily did welcome him.
And he answered and said Fair ladies, great w^lth and honors god may send
unto you all. Than the countess of Foys did salewe him, and said. Sir yet I
ought not thus to salewe you, sith ye have so ill entreted my lord my husband
this day. A my right dear lady said Arthur, ye ought not therefore to blame
me. For it was but the fortune of that play. Truly sir said she, ye say
nothing but truth, nor I bear not to you therefore any evil will. Than the
countess of Forest said who had spoken to him before right rudely. Sir I
humbly require of you pardon, and I will make you amends in yt I have so
rudely spoken to you before this time, wherefore noble and gentle knight take
no regard to the vain words of a woman, whoo lightly opens her mouth to
speak, but behold your great bounte and noblenes, where with ye be greatly
endued, but sir that I said was because I saw my lord at a great mischefe.
Than came to them sir Guy de la launde holding the lady of Rossylon by the
hand, and said to Arthur Sir I have before this time promised you that I
should show you my lady of Rossylon, sir behold her for here she is now
present before you. And when Arthur saw her, he made great joy of her and
promised her faithfully to be always her own knight. And she again right
highely thanked him, and all other ladies and damoyselles affectuously beheld
him, and required him that he would take the pain to unarm him among them,
for they said that they would feign se him unarmed, and somewhat for curtesye,
he with said their desire. But finally they desired him so affectuously, that
needs he was feign to agree to their request, and when he was unarmed he was of
body^ right marvel us fair and gentyl to behold. For he was bygge, long,
and straight. Than these ladies beheld him maruaylousli and said each to other
how that she should be right happy yt might have such a knight to her lover.
And all these countesses, and great ladies wysshed each of them that he might
have been partayninge to their lords. Than a lady brought to him warm water
in a basin of silver to wasshe his neck and visage because of the sweting in
his harneys. And the lady of Rossylon put a mantell of scarlet about him the
which was pertaining to the countess of Neuers to thentent he should take no
cold after his labor, and so he remained a good space amonge^ them and
finally took his ieue. Tha^ the ladies desired him that he would be their
knight, and that he would suffer his harneis to remain still among them till he
had need thereof, and that he would vouchesaue to were the mantell of scarlet
still on him. And Arthur did grant them their desire, and so mounted on his
horse and all his company, and rode forth till at the last he met with all
the hole assemble o^ both parties, and there was the young king of Malogres
and all the other four earls, and the dolphyn, and five hundred other
knights. Than the young king said to Arthur. Sir ye be right heartily
welcome, as he that is the flower of all chyualry, and the best knight of all
the world, and there he desired him greatly to abide with him, and that they
might be companions togider ever after, and friends. But arthur excused him as
well as he might. And all this season he had on the fresshe mantell of scarlet,
wherein he seemed bygge and long and meruaylously straight and fair, and
generally all ye knygtes beheld him and said how that he was hyely reward of
god for he was fair and hardy, and of his chiualry surmou^ted all other, for
they all said that the valor of al other knights were as nothing to the
regard of his noblesse.

How that the Marshall of myrpoys for enui that he had because that Arthur had
the honor of the tournay, and by he had beten him down, for he had we^de
himself to have been the best knight of the world, therefore he defied Arthur
and challenged him to Just. And how that Arthur vanquysshed him, and brake one
of his arms, and two rybbes in his side. Capitulo.xxx
THan the Marshall who had his heart enflambed with great ire because that Arthur
had put him to the worse, and also because he herd so much good and honor
spoken of him, whereof he had so great envy in his heart, and so great despyte,
that he could not hold him self in rest, for he bileued him self to be the
best knight of the world, than openly he spoke so high and loud that every
knight might here him, and Arthur also, saying in this manner of wise Certainly
this s^raunge knight can not swoune, when he is led by the hand with fair
ladies and damoyselles: and clothed with their mantelles, he lacks no thing
but a soft pilowe to play thereon with some of these damoyselles And when
Arthur herd him he answered and said. Sir if their ladies take me by the hand
I thank them thereof for it is by their courtesye and not by my deseruynge
therefore I love them the better and will be the gladder for to serve them and
to be a faithful knight to them al in general. For as god help me so much
is a knight worth as he can deserve praise of ladies and damoyselles. And the
Marshall full of ire answered. In faith as for you ye be but little worth and
that seems well when ye are fa^ne to take the reuersion of these ladies old
clothing. well sir said Arthur as for all that look what so ever they do to me
I am right well content therewith I think I have no thing of yours if I have
take it fro me if ye dare. Certainly said the Marshal if ye had any thing of
mine so would I do think not the contrary for I would not spare neither for
you nor for none other to take it grudge thereat who would. Than Arthur all
smyli^ge said. Well sir than I am right happy that I have no thing of youres
for if I had me thinks I should not keep it long by your will. And wha^ the
Marshall saw him smyle he thought he did it for despyt^ of him and said. Sir
Will ye do so much for all these ladies sakes that ye and I may play together
with tWo fair speres. Sir said Arthur ye be so valiant a man that ye ought
not to be refused nor denied for so litell a request T^an the Marshal Was
b^amed of the ki^ge and of all the other knights and they would full feign
have let these Iustes because they thought that Arthur was weary of the
labor which he had in the iournay before. But the Marshall said he has
promised it me, and therefore if it please him, I trust he will not fail me, if
he do I will say that he is recreaunte. Nay said Art^u^ by the faith that I
owe unto God I will not fail you. And so every man prayed god that the shame
might fall upon the Mar^hall, because of his proud disdainefull mind. Than
Arthur demanded incontinent for his ha^neis. Tha^ sir Guy de la launde went
unto the ladies tente, and showed the^m how that the Marshall had challenged
Arthur to Just with him again. (...) the ladies to him all his harneys, and
prayed god for to give unto Arthur the honor of those Justices. For they said
how that the marshal was a fool, and of an outrageous wil^ull mind, wherefore
they prayed unto god that he should speed the worse. Than dame blaunche said to
the lady of Rossylo^. Madame I bileue now that your straung^ knight shall have
yet or it be night great need of some soft bed to lie in your chamber, by
that time thy brother ^athe brewed a caudel for his heed, for I ensure you he
neue^ as yet encountered so dear a physycien. well madame said the lady of
Rossylon. Fair and easily, at the end shall be seen who shall win the
wager, as yet ye can make no boost for ye have won nothing. Tha^ Arthur and
the Marshall both did arm them and when they were both in the field there was
brought to them great speres and than they spurred their horses with so great
randowne that the blood dashed out of their sides, for they were both good and
redoubted knights, but ^he Marshal was not to be compared unto Arthur for since
Arthur was first made knight he fered no man living, wherefore the Marshall
did folly to enterprise any thing against him, but pride does oftentimes
many harms to his master, the Marshall at the first course struck Arthur and
brake his spear to his fyste, but Arthur for all that moved no more than though
there had been but a read broken upon him. But he struck the Marshall so
^udelye that he bare down horse and man to the earth Than began to laugh all the
ladies and damoyselles, knights, and squyers. Than the lady of Rossylon said
to dame blaunche. Madame your brother is not so fell and so outrageous as I had
wend that he had been, for he takes no more of the earth but his own length,
I think he slepeth, behold how pryuely he lies still. And han the Marshall
awoke out of his trance he was sore ashamed in that he was so overthrown and
demanded if he had overthrown Arthur, than it was showed him nay, wherewith
he was right sore displeased Yet than again he prayed Arthur on his knyghthode
that he would Just with him an other course. But all that ever herd him
thought he played the proud fool and counseyled him the countrary, but all
that auayled not, for he said he would needs yet Just ones again. And when
yt Arthur herd him of that mind, he had great dysdayne thereat and wexed
angry in his heart to considre his folysh presumptuous mind, and said well if
he will needs abide the second I think he will gladlye let the third pass.
So than they took much greater spears than they had before, and in great ire
ran together so egerly that it seemed the earth enfoundred under them, and
the Marshall stroke Arthur right rudely, for he was a good knight, and
sheuered his spear all to pieces, But Arthur hit him with his spear the which
was great and bygge, so that the sadell paytrell, girthes and all brast, and
horse and man went to the ground so rudely that with the fall that the Marshal
had one of his arms broken, and also two of his rybbes, and his body sore
bruised so that he lay still a great season with out mouynge, and than all the
knights that saw the stroke were gretely abashed and said each to other how
that the Marshall was beten down to the earth both horse and man, and in great
ieopardy of his life.

How that Arthur was crowned to be king of all the knights of the tournay.
And they promised him faith and troth to serve hi^ in deeds of arms always
and in every place where as it seemed him best, and the young king of ma^^gres
did crown hi^. Capit. xxxi.
THan wha^ the Marshal was thus overthrown the ladies did laughe, and said.
Blesse^ be god pride always overthrows his master. Than the lady of
Rosst^on said unto the lady blaunche. Madame now it seems that your brother
has l^ste the wager it had been better for him that he had been in your
chaumbre, he speaks no ^o word^s he has little care now for the flies behold
how that he ^aketh h^s legs Than all the other cou^cesses and ladies that were
there present^ did laughe, an^ said the pride of him is now well abated god keep
and defend such a knight that can give such valyaunte strokes As god help
me said the lady Rossi^on the Marshall is now in good rest. I trow he has
little lust to remount again let him be well apayed, for now he has that he
sought for. And so each of them spoke their verdyte. Than the young king and
the other Earls came to the Marshall and demanded of him how he did. And he
answered and said right ill, for I have two of my rybbes broken and one o^ my
arms. I pray you how does Arthur. In good troth said the earl of Beauieu,
he is yet in the fyelde, where as he entendeth if ye will goo to him and break
the third spear. Alas said the Marshall, I believed this day in the morning
that I had been the best knight of ye world, for I thought that there was none
that had any power in comparison unto me, but now I have found my mayst^r.
therefore I require you cause him to come to me. Than the earl of Beauieu took
Arthur by the hand and said. Sir the Marshall would feign speak with you. In
the name of god said Arthur let us goo to him. By that time the Marshall was
laid on a little couche that was brought to him. And when he saw Arthur he
said that all might here him Sir ye be to me right hertely welcome as he
that is the ch^fe flower of all chyualrye, and sir I cry you mercy of the
great pride that I was in, the ^hyche moved me to Just with such a knight as
ye be, verily I was envious and sorrowful of the noblenes that I heart spoken
of you, and therefore I took on me to Just with you, to the intent to abate
your praise and renown, but such there be that thinks to grieve other and
the hurt and gryefe tourneth unto them self, god has done to me right
according to my thought, for he has brought me in to the same case that I
had thought for to have you in, therefore gentle knight, I require you to
pardon my folly that I have thought agenst you. And when Arthur herd him speak
so louyngly, he had great pity of his hurt and said. A sir I ought to cry
you mercy because that I have hurt you so rore, wherefore it forthynketh me,
wherefore sir I pray you to pa^don me. Certainly sir said the Marshall, with
all my heart, and I give you my voice of the crownyng of this tournay as unto
him that is the best knight of all the world. Than the king said sir Marshall
than ye be accorded that h^ shall be crowned as the best knight of this
tournay. Sir said the Marshal as god help me with all my heart. and the king
said by the faith that I owe unto god, he shall have my voice and good will.
and all the other Earls said that they were all agreed thereto, for he was
worthy and none other. Than came to them all the Ladies and damoysels, and they
were all of the accord that he should be crowned as the best knight of all
other And than ye crown was brought forth and the young knyge of malogres
did set it on Arthurs head bye the common accord of all the hole assemble,
and they were al content that he should be king of all those knights that
were there assembled, and they all profred him succor and aid in all places
and agenst al people and as often as he would command them. Thus they
remained in great feast and Joy well the space of fyftene days, with all manner
of pastaunce sownynge to noblenes.

How that Arthur after his crownacyon took leave of the young king and of all
the other lords and knights ladies and damoyselles, who conuayed him on his
Iournay ward, and had great sorrow to leave his company. Capit. xxxii.
AT the end of the.xv. days arthur took leave of the king and of all the cries
and ladies who were not w^l content of his departing. And the king said, right
dear sir and friend I require you as hartelye as I can that ye will go with me
into my cou^^re, and I promise you faithfully as a king yt ye and I sha^be in
in all things as co^panyons and friends, and I shall love you right derely,
and will give you land so great and good that ye shall be right well content
therewith, mine own sweet friend I require you grant me my desire, and
therwyth he enbraced and kysse^ him. And when Arthur heard him he smyled and
said, mine own dear Lord I thank you, and would to god most puyssaunt that
I might do as ye desire me, for it were great Joy to me to abide in your noble
company, if it were nor for one thing that I have enterprysed and as yet I
wot not well what it is, nor where to find it, but as mine adventure
happenneth. I have tarried here very long, therefore now it is time that I
depart. And when they herd that he would needs go, they were right sorrowful,
and the king and all other offered him to go in his company to help and aid
him to attain his enqueste, but Arthur would not consent thereto, and said
that he would have no company but such as came within him. Yes sir said the
king ye shall have with you Bawdewyn my squire, and I will deliver him to you
for good and true, for I will undertake he would rather dye than his master
should take any hurt or damage in his defaute, and also he knows the virtues
of all herbs, for he is a sovereign surgyon. In the name of god said Arthur, I
am content to take him of you, and for his conning I will love him better tha^
two thousand pound of yearly land. Than Arthur, Hector Gouernar, Bawdewyn and
Iaket, took of every man ^oungy and leave, and departed and entered in to their
Iournay, and Bawdewyn and Iaket rode before. Hector and Gouernar rode togider,
and Arthur between them. And as they rode they comoned of the great valor of
the young king of malogres, and of the other earls and knights ladies and
damoyselles, and of the gre^e honor that they had among them. In this manner
they rode every day the space of three wekes without finding of any adventure
whereof any mencyon is made.

How Arthur and his company aryued in the erledome of Brewle, marchynge agenst
the land of Sorolois and entered into the cite of Brewle, the which was
besyeg^d by the duke of orgoule named Malaqu^s because ye earl would not let him
have his daughter in marriage, wherefore by false treson he slew the earl. Cap.
xxx^ii.
AT the end of the.iii. wekes Arthur and his company entered into the Erldome
of Brewle agenst the land of Soroloys, and of this erledome there was an Earl
a noble of hauoyre and of friends, and reputed right wise, and had to wife a
noble Lady and a virtuous, who had to name the gentle Isabell, and had
between them two a fair and a gracyous daughter named Alyce. Ioynynge to this
Erledome there marched a duchy wherein there was a Duke which was named
Malaquys, a cruel man and an enuyons. And this Duchy was called Orgoule, and
this duke had often and many times demanded of this earl, his daughter dame
Alyce to have in marriage, but the earl nor the good lady his wife would in no
manner of wise grant thereto, because of the evil condycyons that were within
this Duke. And when that the Duke saw that he could not get this fair lady
Alyce he bare than in his heart great heat and envy to the earl her father, in
so much that at the last, this duke had knowledge upon a day how that the
Earl was gone to chase in the forest. And thereby his prepenced malice caused
this Earl shamefully for to be slain and murdered. And when that the Earl was
thus myscheuously slain, he was brought home to his wife which was right
sorrowful for his death, and made him to be honorably buried. But this sorrowful
la^y in no wise could ve^yly tell how that he was slain, but she had great
suspecte to the duke. And so within half a year after the duke came unto this
counte^^e and demanded of her Dame Alyce her daughter, but the countes^e
because ^^e had him in suspecte of the ^^the of the er^e her husbonde would in
no manner of wise grant thereto, nor also this fair maiden Alyce would in no
wise have him to dye therefore. And when the duke perceived that he might not
have her at his pleasure he had g^^te ^esp^te thereof, and so defied the
coun^esse and assembled a great host and be ^yeg^^ the cite of Brewle, and
wasted all the country round about a great ci^cuy^e, and made his auowe that
he would not depart thens till that he had won her by force. And i^ this
mean season Arthur and his company arrived in that country, and the Duke had
layen at the syege as than the space of a year before the Cite accompanied
with four hundred knights besides other servants And thus ^rthur and his
company rode thro^ghe this Country the which he found all exyled and put to
wast, and met with much people ^leyng out of the land, whereof he was greatly
ameruayled, and demanded of two vytaylers that he met, ledynge of vytayle to
the host what was the cause of the exile and wasting of that count^e. And they
answered him how that the duke of orgoule had wasted it in such wise. Ye
fre^des said Arthur, and I pray you for what cause. Sir said they that will not
we tell you, for we have need to sell our vytayle to win thereby our sustenau^ce
and therefore it behooves us not to say ill nor to accuse any per^one, but if
ye will know ye may we^e of this people that ye se fleing out of the
country. Than Arthur demanded of them the cause, and they showed him how
that the duke of orgoule demanded in marriage the earls daughter, and how that
he caused the earl to be slain by treason because he would not agree to his
desire, and as now has besyeged the countess in her cite of brewle and has
wastee all the country. And when Arthur herd all this he said. Syrs god speed
and help you all* And when he was riden far from them he said to Hector his
cosyn. Cosyn how say you what is best that we shall do, Sir said Hector in
the name of god let us enter into this war. I allow it well said Arthur but we
will not aid this duke who is in the wrong and has the better hand. Nay
said Hector that is not mine intent let us aid them that be within the cite,
who be in great Ieopardye, and nigh put under wherefore they are in right great
fere, and this in my mind is best for us to do, for they ben in the right,
wherefore god will help and socour us. By the good lord said Arthur it is well
said, and so will we do. But how shall we enter in (...) the cite sith that this
duke ^ath besyeged it round about. well quod Gouerner we must enter by one
way or other. And thus they rode forth till at the last they espied the Cite
of Brewle the which was right hye and strong with high walls and mighty
toures, and round about the cite they saw tents and pauylyons pyght and
glysterige of standards, and streme^s wauerynge with the wind and much
people well atayed for the war. Than said Arthur. Friends this duke besemynge
has much people, I will gooe and speak with him or I enter in to the cite. Ye
say right well said Hector, to thentente that ye may him the better another
time if it fortune you to encounter with him in the field. So they rode forth
straight unto the great tent of the dukes, and there they found him standing
without the said tente, commau^dynge to his Senesshall that the next day
betymes he should make assaute to the Cite with three hundred halbardes. And
with those words Arthur and his company lyghted of their horses, and salewed
the duke full goodly. And when the Duke saw them, he praised them greatly in
his h^rte, and courteysly did salewe them again. Sir said Arthur we are
departed from our country, for we herd speaking of this war that ye have
moved. And we three knights of France would gladly serve some noble man, and
be retained to him for his wages. In the name of god said the duke, ye be
hyder right hertely welcome, and though it be so that I have people
suffycyente, yet will I be right glad to retain you all to be of my house,
and to have wages mete and drink, horse and harneys, and all that ye can
conquer of your enemies shall be your own. Sir said Arthur I thank you, of
this matter I shall speak with my company and know their minds. But sir I
require you against whom shall we have to do. As god be my help said the
Duke against the cite, wherein there is a lady who has refused to give me her
daughter in marriage, wherefore I will win her by force. A sir said Arthur, how
long has it been that ye have assyeged this cite. Uerely said y^ duke it is
now more than a year, but I will abide here this seven year but I will win
it. well sir said Arthur herd ye any thing of late from this lady wheder she
will agree to your desire or not. Nay in good troth said the duke I herd not
from them a great season. w^ll sir said Arthur peradventure this lady repents
her that she has not fulfilled your will, for now at the end she knows
better her own folly than she did in the beginning and ever the longer the
better shall she know how that her loud is wasted, and she may well se how that
she is enclosed within the cite and wastes her goods and her people also by
all lykelyhod are gretely noyed with so long being in a manner in prison, so
all these things ought to move her to fulfill your desire Sir said the duke
it is of a troth al yt ye say, how be it I think there is none of her
counsel that shows her so much reason, or else they will not show it her.
For sir sith ye have said so much as ye have done I will desire and pray you
to do so much as to show her as much as ye have done to me, for ye be as
yet indifferent for ye are of neither party, therefore ye may speak to her the
more boldlyer, and if that she will not agree, let her ^e incertayne I will
take her by force and brenne her in my syghte. Sir ye have right so to do
said Arthur, and sith it pleases you that I shall goo in this message I am
right well content so to do. Than Arthur and his felawshyp mounted upon their
horses and rode toward the city Than Hector said* sir where is your scutch^n
of arms on your breast, for ye be a good purseuaunt think to fornish well your
message. Ye sir said Gouernar this duke has a rich messenger he ought to give
him good wages sothus they rode forth talking and sportyng them till they came
to one of the gates of the city and knocked thereat so long till at the last
the porter opened a lyt^e wyndowe, and there he saw three knights all armed and
well horsed, and he maunded of them what they sought. Arthur answered and said,
we be messengers, sent from the duke for to spek with the lady governor of
this City. Sir said the porter suffer a little space and I will go and speak
with her, than the porter went to the lady, who was as than among her barons
and knights and Alyce her fair daughter in her company. Than the porter said.
Madame pleases it you to know how that there is at the gate three goodly
knyhgtes armed the fairest that ever I saw and they say that they ben
messengers come to speak with you from the duke, therefore look what it shall
please you to command me to answer them. Than sir Oaths who was cosyn
germayn to the lady said. Madame me thinks (...) were well done to let them
come in sith they be messengers. In the name of god said the lady, open the
gates to them and let them enter. Than the porter turned again to the gate
and suffered the^ to enter. Than wha^ Arthur was ^ithin the cite he saw great
plen^e of sheldes and spe^es horse and harnays, kni^htes and squy^rs, and great
and mighty strange houses full of great richesse, than in his heart he
praised much this cite. And all the knights of the cite be held these three
knights as they rode, and said each to other, what knights be these, or fro
whens come they, and some answered and said how that they coud not tell, and
some said they were messengers sent from the duke, but what ^oo ever they be
they are meruaylous fair knights. And thus they rode forth to the palace,
and there ^yghted fro their horses and went up in to the hall, and there they
found the countess and her barony about her. Than the countess and her
daughter Alyce, and all her barons arose against Arthur, and welcomed him and
caused him to sit down by her^ and the fair lady Alyce and Hector, and sir
Ot^es and Gouernar. Than Arthur said. Madame we be comen hither from the duke
of orgoule, who demaun^eth of you that ye should give to him in ma^iage my lady
Alyce your d^ughter, and madame me thinks that diverse reasons ought for to
move you thu^ to do. First ye ought to consider how ye shall let he^ in a
right hye and honorable place. Al^o ye se well ye great number of people, and
the strength which he has, and how that your land is destro^ed and wasted,
and all the people t^erof put to exyle. Also ye ought for to consider how that
ye be lock^d and enclosed here in this cite, and al your noble knights and
gentylmen are in great peril of their lives, and leseth their tym^ and
substance, the which is right gr^te ^omage unto them, so madame all th^se
things, and many other wisely consider^d, ought for to move you to accomply^^e
this his desire, sith this desire is but for your honor, and no shame,
therefore madame may it please you to give an answer what is your will in this
behalf. Sir said the lady I w^l g^ue to you an answer shortly without taking
of any other counseyle R^ther than I would give my daughter to a false
murthe^er and specially to him that by false treason has slain her fader, as
god help me I would rather suffer to be brent to powder. For gladder would I
be to give her to the poorest grome or page in all my house than to him. But
sir I require you tell me wheder ye be any of the knights retaining with the
duke or not. Madame said Arthur I am not retainyng as yet with him, nor with
none other, ^or I and my company are knights erraun^es, who have forsaken our
own countrees to seek adventures, and by fortune we are aryued into this dukes
host, who would gladly have us retained in this his war against you. Sir said
the count^sse I wo^e not what ye be nor of what lynage or coun^re ye be of, but
it seems to me that ye be ex^raught out of some noble house and lignage.
Therefore sir if it would please you to help to deliver us out o^ this
thraldom, and def^de us from our enemies. I will give you my daughter ^or to do
with her what it shall please you, saving her honor. Ye mada^e said Arthur,
and is that your mind will ye put her into my hands to (...) wheresomeuer it
shall please me, and to put all your ^rust into me in that behalf. Ye sir
truly with all my he^te said the countess. And how say ye rait^ lady Alyce
will ye agree to this. Than Alyce beheld Arthur* and perc^iued right well how he
was fair and gracious and said. Sir I w^l accomplysshe the will of my mother.
well madame quod Arthur, than will it please you to know of all your noble
barons and knights whether they will accord that I shall have your noble
daughter in marriage, or ell^s for t^ mary her where so me^er it shall please
me. Sir Oaths said the lady, ye be nere of her lynage, cal^ together al my
barons and my knights and speak with them of this matter to know their mi^des.
Than they all entered in to a great hall and there they comoned of this matter
and diverse opyntons there were among them, but finally they were all agreed
and put their saying on sir Oaths* the which saying they all promised to
keep ferme and stable. Than they ^ll came before the lady and Arthur. And there
sir Oaths said Madame we perceive it is your will to give my lady Alice your
daughter to this knight, ey^her for himself, or else to give her where soever
as it shall please him best. Madame we be all accorded unto your mind that he
shall have her himself, if it pleases him in marriage or ^lles to give her
unto an other where as he thinks best, so that she be not thereby abbated
of her nobleness, and estate. Uerely sir said Arthur I shall be stow her in
as great a place and lignage or greter than she is of her self. Than they all
answered and said. We desire nothing else. Well madame said Arthur are ye
than agreed and my lady your daughter also. And they answered both that they
were both well cont^nte. In the name of God said Arthur, how say you all my
lords are ye agreed thereto also. And they all answered with one voice and
said. Sir we be right well content, and promise you faythfullye, that ye
shall have help and aid of us, and of ours to the uttermost of our powers.
well syrs said Arthur I thank you as hertely as I can for your good will, and
as God help me, I shall bestow her in such a place, where as she shall be more
better content than with the duke of orgoule, who would full gladly have her,
therefore fair lady Alyce come hyder to me. Than the maiden rose and came to
him. And he right lovingly took her in his arms and said unto her. Fair lady
Alyce from hence forth ye shall be my daughter, my cosyn, and my love. Cosyn
H^ctor arise and come hyder to me. Then Hector came to him. And Arthur said to
him, mine own good cosyn Hector, I put you in possession of this fair maiden.
And with great honor and joy, I freely give her to you, to have in marriage,
and all such richesse as we may get of the duke of orgoule, if it be our
fortune for to dyscomfyte him as I trust to god we shall, and I give it freely
unto you. And as unto you fair lady Alyce, sith he has slain your fader by
false treason I promise to you, therefore his head for a recompense. Sir said
the damoysell, humbly I thank you of that gift, for I had rather have that
than to be made a Queen. But sir I requyer you tell me what is this gentle
man, to which ye have given me unto Madame said Arthur as god help me he is
of nigh lygnage, and of great blood. For I ensure you he is sone and heir unto
the earl of Bloys, who is a great Lord and a much redoubted. And when that
the countess and her daughter, and all her lords herd that they were right
glad and said how that God had vy^yted them Than Hector right heartily
thanked Arthur of his gyftt of the fair lady dame Alyce. And in the same hour
they were fyaunced together. And than begau th^re a great feast and great joy
was made thrughout all the cite. Than the tables were set to goo to diner. And
when they were set they were right rychely served. And after dinner they
sported them togider till it was time to goo to their r^stes. In the next
morning Arthur rose betymes and herd mass, and than went up to the palace.
where he found all the barons ready apparayled, and there was Hector and
Gouernar and sir Oaths. Than Arthur said, fair lords I promised yesterdaye
too the duke when I departed fro him that I should have returned to him
again the same night to show him the will and intent of my lady the countes,
therefore I will go now to him al alone, and show him his answer. For all ye
shall abide here still till I come again, therefore get me my harneys and so
anon it was brought to him, and there he armed him. Than Hector said plainly
he would go with him But Arthur bad him never speak thereof if he would have his
love and favor.

How that Arthur went^ alone to the duke of Orgoule and gave him his answer
and bade him abide no longer for the fair Alyce. For he showed him how yt he
had given her to Hector his cosyn. And how that he had promised to her his head
because he slew her fader by treason, with the which answer the duke was
sore dyspleased, so much that there was bitwene them a great battle. Cap.
xxxiiii.


THan when Arthur was mounted on his horse, he issued out of the City all
alone. Than Hector said to Gouernar and sir Oaths. Fre^des let us take our
harneys, for I fere me leest Arthur thur shall have somewhat to do or he com
again. Ye have right well said quod Gouernar, and they armed them, and so
did all the men of war yt were in the cite. And wha^ they were all armed
they went to the batylmentes of the walls to behold the demenour of Arthur.
Who as than had rode so far that he descended sro his horse at the dukes
tent. And there he said to the duke. Sir verily I answer you how ye need not to
tarry here any longer for yt fair lady Alyce, for certaynely I ensure you I
have given her to my cosyn Hector, and all the lo^d that belongs to her both
by fader and mother, therefore sir in fair means I require you to depart
hastily out of this country, and if ye will not I have promised to ye fair
damoysel Alyce to render to her your heed in re^ompence because ye slew her
fader by false treason Than the duke was so sorrowful and replete with
displeasure yt of a great space he could speak no word. Than the duke had by
him a cosyn germayne, who said to Arthur. Sir knight ye do great outrage to
demand the head of my lord the duke, but by the faith that I ow unto him in
the first place that ever I mete you in I shall make him a present of your
heed. Ye sir said Arthur, and why will ye abide so long sith ye may do it now
if ye can, wherefore behold me I am here present, mount up shortly on your
horse and ye shall soon mete with me. Ye say right well said the knight Get me
my harneys, and so armed him. And Arthur than mounted on his horse and he espied
well where there stood before the dukes tent a great spear the which he took in
his hand, and withdrew him from the tente to abide the knight And so when the
knight was armed he lepte on his horse, and saw where Arthur was abiding for
him. And Hecto^ as he was upon the wall of the cite said to Gouernar. Sir it
seems my cosyn Arthur shall not come again without Iustes. Than the knight
ran to Arthur and he to him, and they met so rudely that the knight brake
his spear but Ar^thur hit him so impetously yt the spear heed entered into his
heart, wherewith he fell down dead to the earth. And when the dukes knights
being in their tents saw him fall down dead they were sore displeased. And
also this knight had. v, knights to his brethren in the dukes host, and they
armed them all at ones to run at Arthur.

How Hector and Gouernar and sir Oaths rode out of the cite well accompanied to
rescowe Arthur, who al alone assailed the duke of Orgoule and all his army.
Capi. xxxv.
ANd when hector saw them of the dukes hooste ran to their harneys he said
unto Gouernar, friend let us issue out shortly, And sir Oaths delivered the
chief standarde of the cite to sir Lyonet his neuewe, and so issued out of the
city in good order and well renged in battle. And when Arthur saw the
foresaid five knights cominge to him ward, he dashed his spurs into his horse
and encountered so with the first that he thrust his spear through his body and
so he fell down dead. Than he s^t his hand to his swerd and struck therewith
so the second that he claue his head nigh to his chynne. And fro the third he
berafte his sholder with the arm, for all together flew into the field. And
when sir Oaths saw such meruaylous strokes as he gave, he said. Saint marye
what knight is this, he is the best of all the world^ god defend him from onye
vylany, verily his strokes are greatly to be doubted, for they are right heavy.
And when ye duke saw his knights so slain all only by one man, he was ^ighte
sore dyspleased and cried fast to his knights Syrs to har^eys. Than the most
part of the host ^hor^ly mounted upon their horses and ran all upon Arthur
by plumpes* here.x. and* there.xx. And when Hector saw that he pricked forth
his horse as rudely as though ye tho^der had driven him. And when sir Oaths saw
yt he ran so hastily he said. By my faith it seems he will not recule back
again sithe he seeks for his enemies so hastily. And Hector encountered the
first so virtuously yt he ran him thrughout with his spear and so he fell down
dead, and than he drew his sword and struck of the head of an other, and laid
about him in the thickest of the prese and gave such strokes that he slew
knights and drove down horses that it was marvel to behold. And when Arthur
saw him he smiled and said. A good cosyn ye follow right well after your
lygnage. And Gouernar at his ^omi^ge bet down all about him what so ever he
at* ay^ed to, that it was wonder to behold. And wh^ arthur saw them, he said
I ought never to fail these knights s^th they ^ake such pain to rescow me
v^r^ly by the grace of god, I shall he^pe and aid them. And by that time th^re
were aga^ns^e them many of the dukes knights, and Arthur struck among them
that the first that he encountered he ^laue his vysage down to his neck, and
laid on so round about him that he made to f^ye into the fyelde hands,
arms, and heads and ^^euered sheldes, and vn^at^ed helmes, and maimed many
^nyghtes and bette them down on every side so that he made all to tremble
that were before him, for there was non that abode his stroke without death or
grievous wounds. Than sir Oaths had great maruayle of the nobleness of these
knights, and specially of the chyualry of Arthur* and said to his neuew sir
Lyonet. As god help me these knights* are able to discomfyte the duke and all
his host without any more help, and all this season the countess and the fair
lady Alyce her daughter were mounted on the wa^les of the cite to behold the
noble deeds of these.iii. knights. Tha^ the lady said to her daughter Alyce,
behold your lord and his companyons, I trow there be no moore such in all
the world, behold how they drive asonder the great preses* and how the knights
f^ye before them for fear, but specially behold Arthur, who I think be chief
flou^e of all chyualry, God of his grace has well provided for us when he
sent them into this country. Right dear lady and mother said Alyce* me
thinks hector is well armed and demeneth himself right goodly. well daughter
said the lady does he please you. Ye ver^ly madame said she. Ye have a good
cause dougheer so to be, for among our enemies he is a good bocher of his
hands. And by that time the duke hyms^lfe was come to that scarmysshe
accompanied with.v. hundred men of war. and than sir Oaths and all the host
of the cite assembled together and fought with the duke, there began a great
mortal b^tayle betw^ne both parties but the dukes company of the ryte and
therefore they suffr^d much pain in so much that sir Oaths was overthrown
and taken prisoner. And when that sir Lionet his neuewe saw that, he let fall
the chief baner which he bare. And when Arthur espied that, he was never so
sorry And came to sir Lyonet and demaund^ded of him why he did let fall the
baner. And he answered and said. Sir because mine uncle sir Oaths was taken
prisoner. Saint mary said arthur defend that, but where is he. As God help
me sir he is led forth in yonder great prese that ye se yonder. well said
arthur lift up again the baner, for by the grace of god he shall be shortly
rescowed. Than Arthur dressed him thyderward, and met with Hector and
Gouernar, and said. Syrs let us go rescowe sir Oaths who is taken prisoner.
Than rusht they all in to the prease, and arthur met so with the first that
he cast him down to the earth stark dead, and laid so on every side that
they made him a large way where so ever he went. And Hector and Gouernar did
greatly to be redoubted for they made great plenty of sadels to be avoided,
so that all that saw Arthur and his company said, these be no men they be
f^endes of hell, let us flee from them, for shame have he y^ first brought
them into this country. And when the duke saw these three knights do such
wonders meruayles in arms and slew so great plente of his knights, he was so
sore dyspleased that he was nigh therwyth fro him self, and therwyth dashte to
Hector and struck him so rudely that he per^ed both his shield and his helm
And when arthur felt that rude stroke he was not well content and lift up his
sword and struck the Duke so fyerslye therewith that the sword sanke thrughout
hauberte, shield, and helm, and entered deep into the flesh. In the mean
time Arthur came to them, and there he saw the duke and Hector fyersly
fighting together. Than Arthur struck the duke so sore that the arson of his
sadell could not keep him but that he went to the ground. Than Gouernar took
the dukes horse and delivered it to Hector, for his own was sore wounded and
very faint for bledynge and so H^^tor forsook his own and mounted thero^
hastily. Than the Dukes company came to rescowe him, and so there began a sore
and a terryble battle for there was many slain and sore wounded, but finally
ye duke with much pain was rescowed and ^ight sore hurt, borne he was into
his tent. Than the night drew on so that both parties withdrewe ech^ fro
other, the duke and his company went into their tents, and Arthur and his
fellowship repaired toward the Cite. And as they went they saw between the
wood and the cite the dukes Senesshall goinge to make assaute to the cite
with.iii. hundred men in harneys. And when sir Oaths perceived, the Senesshal,
he showed him to arthur and said Sir se yonder where as is sir Clarembaulte
Seneshal to the duke going to assaylethe. Verelye said Arthur me thinks it
is very late, yet I will ride to him. A ^entil knight said sir Oaths dele not to
hardly with him, for he is a good knight and as gentel as any lives therefore
it were great hurt if he were slain, and sir your strokes are very he^uy, for
there is none that can endure the^ ther^ore sir for Gods sake let sir Hector
first encounter him. with a right good will said Hector, and so he sputred
his horse and escryed the Senesshall. And when he herd him like a good knight
he raune at Hector and met so rudely that Hector ouerthrewe him horse and man
at the first course. Than his seruytoure ran to have rescowed him, but than
Arthur and Gouernar were there present and delte among them such alms that
it was wonder to behold, and with clean force Arthur took sir Cla^e^bault
prisoner, and did incontynente send him to the cite unto the countess who was
right glad of such a prisoner, and caused him to be unarmed in all haste and
made him to mount upon the wall with her for to behold how her knights did
demean them self among there enemies, and there sir Clarembault saw how
Arthur did meruayles for he claue aso^der sheldes, and drove down knights and
cut of arms, hands and heads Also Hector and Gouernar for their parts did
meruaylously well so that nothing endured before them. Sayncte marye said
Clarembaulte to the countess. Madame where get you these knights, for as god
help me they are the best of all the world, for if ye had but these three
knights they were able to chase out of your country the duke and all his
host. Sir said the lady god has puruayed me of them. And finally Arthur,
Hector, Gouernar, and sir Oaths did such meruayles of arms that all the
dukes company that were with sir Clarembaulte were clean dyscomfyted, and there
Arthur took.xl. prisoners and did send them into the cite, and other xl.
fled and ran to the duke and all the men anaunt of.iiii. hundred were
slain. And when they were before the duke and many of them sore hurt said.
A sir it gooth ill with you and us, for sir Clarembault your senessall is
taken prisoner, and.xl. other knights with him, and all the remenaunt slain,
saving who be right ill delte wythall as ye may se. And the duke demanded of
them who it was that had done that deed. As God help us sir it was three
knights that was in y^ company with sir Oaths, but we trow they be fendes and
none erthely men. And when the duke herd this he waxed nigh mad for anger, and
there swear how that he would never depart thens fro syege till he had hanged
those three knights, and burnt the countess and her daughter. Than
incontinent he sent messengers out to his baylyues prouostes, and sent for his
brother peter the cornu, who shortly came to him ward and brought with
him.iiii. hundred men of war, and the Dukes great courser named as^ille, and
this horse was such that there was none like him in all the world for he was
named felawlyke to bucyfal the horse of Alexander the great, there was none
that could mount on this horse but al only the duke and the varl^^ that kept
him, and both day and night h^ was ever tied with four great chains of yren.

How Arthur, Hector, Gouerner, and sir Oaths discomfyted Peter ye cornu, brother
to the duke who was comen to him with.iiii. C. knights, and there this cornu
was slain, and all his people slain and taken prisoners. And how Arthur took
the dukes horse named assyle, ye best horse as than of the world. Capit. xxxvi.
When that Arthur had taken sir Clare^bault the Dukes senesshall and
dyscomfyted all his people than he entered into the cite, where as the people
ran to welcome him and said. God keep the in thy s^rength and virtue, and
blessed be the hour that ever thou were borne. So thus he camme to the palace
where as the countess and her daughter me^te him and demanded of him how he
did. And he said right well thanked be good and Alyce took Hector her lord
and unarmed him. Than Arthur caused all such as were hurt of the prisoners to
be brought into the palace, and caused surgyens to search their wounds, and
every day he would vysyte them three or four times, whereby he gat him such
love of every creature that they promised never to fail him as long as they
lived. Than when arthur was unarmed, there was in his company Hector, Gouernar
and sir Oaths. Than arthur took sir Clarembault by the hand, and said. Sir
make good chere, for ye shall have here no hurt if I may keep you therfro, and
verily ye shall have here but a good prison. No sir said the countess he
shall have no hurt here since it please you the contrary, whereof he thanked
them greatly, and all that ^uer herd arthurs words praised him much, and
loved him therefore the better. Than they went to mete and Arthur and sir
Clarembault sat both togider Thus arthur and the hole army toiourned still
without doing of any thing the space of a month, and by that time such as
were hurt were recovered to health. And the duke and all his host in like wise
lay still, for he abode for more company. So it fortuned that on a wednesday
Arthur was risen betymes and had herd mass, and stood leaning in a wyndowe
and looked into the dukes host for to se the demenynge of his enemies, and in
his company was Hector Gouernar, and sir Oaths and Clarembault. At the last
Arthur beheld over the foreste and espied where there came much people in
harneys down from a great mountain, he saw shyeldes and helmes shine against
the son and saw a great baner waueryng with the wind, and Arthur than
s^ewed this to his company. And at the last sir Clarembault knew the baner and
said. Sir these people that yonder comes, are not for your profit, for it is
Peter the Cornu, the dukes brother who is come to help him. well said Arthur
he is welcome it may fortune he comes to soon, therefore Hector freende, if we
abide and suffer him to assemble his company with the dukes host, we shall
have than much to do, therefore by my counsel let us go mete with them
before in this forest and let us show them what manner of people we be. Sir as
God help me said sir Oaths ye have right well deny^ed, therefore let us go arm
us shortly. Sir said Arthur cause all your people to arm them as pryuely as
they can to thentent that they without may know nothing thereof, and let us
enter as privily as we can in to this forest that we be no^ espied of them that
be coming, and so shall we be in hand with them or they be wa^e, and as he
had d^uysed so it was ordained and done, and so rode forth right pryuely in to
this forest and there departed their companyes in busshementes till at the
last their enemies were among them. Than espied sir Oaths the dukes horse
assyle, who was led in hand with his keeper* and showed him to Arthur and
said. Sir behold yonder is ^he best horse of all the world. For he was never
as yet werye for no labor, for who so ever sytt^th on him can take no hurt,
he is so mighty and strong in the name of god said Arthur, the duke has done
right well to keep him so well for me so long as he has done for by the
faith that I owe to god I will go seek him incontinent Than Arthur dressed him
toward the varier that led the horse and or he took any head Arthur took him
by the sholdres and cast him f^atte to the ground, than he took the hors^ by
the brydell and lyghily did lepe on him, than Arthur assayed him in the field
and found him right strong and light, whereof he was wondersly glad, and
would not forge him for much gold and silver, and as Arthur thus proved his
horse Peter the cornu the dukes brother espied him and ^anne and struck him
behind upon his ba^ke or that he was ware. And when Hector saw that he
pricked forth toward him* and so each of them ran at other and met s^o
rudely that Peter the cornu brake his spear, but Hector marked him so well that
he put his sp^re thrughout the body and so fell down deed^ in the same place.
And when that P^ter yt cornues men saw that they assail^d Hector on all sides
and enclosed him among them and wounded so his horse that he fell down under
Him, but he anon lepte upon his fete and nobly defended him so that none
durst approach nere him, but than they did cast at him knyues and swerdes and
other wepens and so wounded him in diverse places. At the last Gouernar espied
him and said to Arthur. Sir for gods sake go and socour Hector your cosyn who
is nigh at a g^ete mysch^f^. And when Arthur herd that he spurred his noble
horse assyle and lepte fu^th.xv. fo^e of plain ground, and so rusht in
among them that were in hand with Hector, and, encountered so ^he first that
he claue him now^e to the chy^ne, and ^an other he carved his heed to his
tethe, and made head arms, and hands fly into the fyelde^ and therewith all
the hole company da^te together, whereas there was than a teryble battle. At
the last Gouernar gate a good horse and brought him straight to Hector who
mounted shor^ly thereon and dashte in to the prese and there did meruayles of
arms, for he confounded all that ever he attained unto. And Arthur and
Gouernar did marueyles for their part, and sir Oaths and ^is company were not
behind, but they did full nobly and so finally Arthur and his company bate
them so well that all their enemies were dyscomfyted, and ^here were taken
prisoners beyond.iii. score the which were led in to the Cite of ^r^wle,
and many fled away sore wounded and a great nombre of them were slain. And
than Arthur and his fellowship returned to the cite, and there the countess
received them right conrteysly with great Joy and tryumphe. And when ^e knew
how the dukes brother was slain, and assyle the good horse won, she had
great Joy ^^erof, and said to Arthur. A sweet friend ye overcome mine enemies
one after another. Than sir Clar^bault was right sorrowful when he knew of the
death of sir Peter the cornu, and said a duke ye have had but an ill
acquayntau^ce with this won but lyt^e thereby, and I sere me ye are like to lose
more. A good Peter the cornu god have mercy on thy soul. And thus he^ dem^aned
grea^e sorrow* and Arthur did as much as he could for to comfort him. And
such as were escaped from the battle fled to the duke and showed him how
that his brother Peter the cornu was slain, and his men slain and taken, and
his good horse assyle taken and led into the cite of B^ewle. wherwyth the
duke was so sorrowful that he could not sustain him self but fe^ down in a
trance, and when he reuyued he said. A swetee brother dear, have ye bought the
seeking of this Countess sith ye have lost your life for her, than he
commanded that the body of his brother should be fette and carried to the cite
of orgoule, and so it was done, and there he was solempny buryed^ and the duke
bewepte the death of his brother the space of.viii. days contynually.

How that Arthur and his company utterly dyscomfited the duke and struck of
his head, and did send it by Gouernar to the fair lady Alyce and to her
mother as he had promised before. Cap. l.xxxvii.


AT the end of.viii. days the duke co^mannded that all his people should be
armed and ready apparayled to fygher to thentente to make assaute to the cite
whereat he said he would be him self. And when Art^ur he^de all that noise
without in the dukes host, and saw every man in barneys, he kn^we rygh^ well
thereby how they intended to auale the cite. Than he called to hi^ (...)
Gouernar and sir Oaths ^ said. Friends let us arm us and al out (...) and let
us go for to encounter the Luke who is coming to assail this cite. A my lord
Arthur said sir Oaths for gods sake be well aduys^d what ye do, for they be a
great multytud of people, and a great part of our men be sore wounded and as
ye^ not through ho^e, therefore sir by mine advise we shall not issue out but let
us defend this cite wit^in. A sir said Arthur yt god pl^a^ed, we will have
none such^ ^^proche therefore let us issue (...), and go into this grea^e wood
Ioynynge to the or ^hes or out town ty^l our enemies be come to the wal^es,
than let us assemble and fight with them. And when we shall se our time we
may if need be w^draw us a^ayne into this eyee in the spite of them all. Sir
said Hector relay right well, so let it be done. Than there was souned a
great horn and by the noise thereof every man in the cite ran to th^yr
hernayes such as was able, and so they all issued out, and all they passed
not the nombre of two hondre haubd. And when they were issued ^ut they went
between the foreste and the dyches so that they were not espied of none of the
Du^es host. And anon Arthur appert^y^ed where they came four hundred
haub^^des well arrayed for the war and.xxiiii crosbowes, and also he sa^e a
meruaylous great baner wauerynge with the wind, and did show it to sir
Oaths. And when he saw it he knew it right well and said. Now gentyl
knights be merry, for this baner is pertaining to sir G^ce brother To my lady
the countess, who is come out of the land of neorlande for to sucour my lady.
well good friend said Arthur, ride on before and know the truth whether it be
he or not. And than sir Oaths rode for the agreate pace and approached nere unto
sir G^ce, and made a token of peace. And when they saw each other, they put of
their helmes and made To each other great feast and Joy. Than sir Gace
demanded how it went with the war of his sister and of the duke, and who as
than had the b^^ter. As god help me said sir Oaths as yet we have the better
and the over hand, thank^d be god, and that is by the reason and aid of three
knights that god I trow has sent unto us, for above al other knights they
are full strong and mighty, and yonder knight that ye may se sytting on assyle
which was the dukes good horse is the chief sovereign knight of all the
world, for his chyualry surmounteth all other, ^or this is he that one day did
dyscomfyte the duke, and also he has taken sir Claremb^u^t prisoner and
dyscomfyted all his route and also has won the dukes horse assyle as ye may
se, for he is mounted on his back, and that other knight that is by him is his
cosyn, and he slew on a day Peter the cornu the dukes brother. Also this knight
that lytteth on assyle the good horse has promised to my lady your sister and
to her daughter the head of the duke because he slew by false treason my lord
her husbonde. God y^ all thing formed said sir Gace give him power to
accomplish his pronesse let us tide to them. So than they rode forth and all
his route. And when Arthur saw them he d^dde of his helm and spured forth
assyle his horse and came to sir Gace, and each of other made great joy and
feast. Than sir Gace thauned Arthur tyght hersely of the pain yt he has taken
in his systers wars. Sir said Arthur, I trust this day we shall perform
all the matter, for I know well the duke is gone to assail the cite. therefore
me thinks it were good that he were nobly withstonde, therefore after my mind
let us depart our company in twain, therefore sir if it please you ye shall
have in your company my cousin Hector, Gouernar, and sir Oaths, and ye shall goo
along upon these dyches and so encounter out enemies face to face, and I and my
company shall come in behind thyr tents, so that when ye be in hand with
them I will be at their backs, whereby ye shall se them so abashed that thereby
they shall lose the best half of their hardines. Sir ye have right well devised
the matter said sir Gace, and so they departed each fro other, and sir Gace
Hector gouernar and sir Oaths rode forth tog^der so covertly yt the duke nor
none of his kn^we nothing thereof. And so the duke wh^^ he came to the fortunes
of the cite he apparayled him self and all his men to begin the assaute and
therewith sir Gace and his company fell on them fyersly Than Hector sput^ed his
horse and encou^tred the goster, who was a great offycer of the dukes and struck
him so rudely that he perced his heart, and so he fell down dead to the
earth before the duke than Hector set his hand to his sweede and gave the duke
such a stroke that he was feign for to stoop down unto ye neeke of his
horse. Than the dukes men fell on Arthur on all sides, but he defended him like
a noble man. Than Gouernar for his part bette down knights on all sides. And
when sir Gace saw him do so well he praised him greatly in his heart, than he
and all his company freshly ran upon the dukes hooste, how be it the dukes
company were fer above his, wherefore he endured much pain. And when Hector
saw that he was right sorrowful, and spurred his horse and habandoned himself
among his enemies, and Gouernar in like wise, who gave such strokes that he
co^fo unded all that ever he attained unto till at the last his horse failed
underneath him and fell to the ground, and than his enemies fell upon him on
all sides but he fought so fyersly that none durst approach to him, for he
confounded all that ever he attained unto, and sir Gace followed him as nere as
ever he could, but for all that Gouernar was so ouermatched that he was taken
prisoner, and x. other knights pertaining to the company of sir Gace, and so
they were led toward the dukes tent, and at that time Arthur was among the
tents cuttynge of ropes, betynge down of pauylyons, and at the last, he
espied Gouernar where as he was led forth like a prisoner, wherwyth Arthur
was right sore dyspleased, and rushte in among them, and the first that he
encountered with* he departed life and body asonder and he smote the heed from
an other, and so than by the help of sir Gace they brought to death al those
that led forth sir gouernar, and so remounted him again upon another horse.
Than Arthur struck so in the prese that he drove asonder sheldes, and frushed
to death all that ever he touched, so that all fled before him, for there
was none which durst abide him without that he would receive his death, and
that sir gace saw right well and said. A good lord what knight is this, I
think there is not his pere in all the world. Than sir Oaths and Gouernar and
their company laid on with so great and so heny strokes that they might well
be hard a great space and the dukes people were fore afraid when they
perceived how they were assailed on al parts both before and behind and
Hector by fortune encountered the duke and struck him so sore that he struck
away a great piece of his harneys and caused him to recule nigh to his horse
crope, and when the duke felt that stroke, he struck again Hector so fyersly
that he claue his shield and perced through his harne^s but as his fortune was
it did not enter into the flesh, and so there was a great battle between
them, but the great prese of both parties did depart them, and as Arthur
went serchinge the great and thycke preses he found where sir Gace was on foot
defending him self right valyauntlye, and Goue^nar was there doing his pain
to rescowe him, but the prese was so great that they endured much pain, but
Arthur struck in the thyckest among them so fyers^^ that he ouerthrewe
knights by hepas, and did such nobleness in arms that it was wonder to
consider and so he remounted again sir Gace in the spyte of all his enemies.
Than the dukes company began to wexe feeble, and when the duke perceived yt he
was right sorrowful, and so it fortuned him to encounter with sir hector, who
had bete^ down in his sight two of his knights, and there with he struck
hector so fyersly that ni^ with the same stroke he was sore astonyed, but
Hector struck him again so virtuously on the helm yt he struck in to it.iiii.
fyngers deep and right sore wounded him on the head where with he was brought
in to a trance, and his horse bare him all about he wist not where. And at
last he came before the sight of arthur and as soon as he saw him he wist well
it was the duke, and struck him so rudely between the neck and the head, that
his headfell on his horse neck, and Gouernar took and received it. Than Arthur
said. Gouernar I will ye go bear this dukes head to the countess, and to her
daughter Alyce, and show them how I do send it to them in accomplyshyng of my
promise made to them. Sir said Gouernar with a right good will, and so
departed fro the host and entered into the cite. And anon the tidings ran
all about the cite how that Gouernar had brought the dukes head to the
countess fro arthur, and so all the people ran to se the dukes head, and
range all the belles in the cite for joy of ye vyctory that god had sent
them. And when Gouernar had made his present to the countess, she received
it with great joy and said to gouernar. Sir I thank heartily this knight for
his present, and you for your labor, and for this message I give you dorge my
castle for ever. Madame quod Gouernar, and god will I shall not take house nor
land of no creature without the consent of my lord Arthur. And when sir
Clarembaulte saw the head of the duke his master, he made right great
sorrow, and so entered into his chamber, and there he demened right great
doloure. Than gouernar returned again to arthur, and thanked him much from
the countess and from her daughter. And by that time Arthur had done so much
that all the Dukes company were clean by scomfyred as such people that had no
sovereign, wherefore they fled on all sides, and Hector and Gouernar did chase
them, and so brought many of them to their death.

How Arthur and his company went to the cite of orgoule for to take it by
force, but the Bourgeyses thereof brought unto him the keys, and did unto
him homage and so did all the nobles of that country as unto their chief
sovereign lord. Capit. xxxviii.


ANd when the battle was ended Arthur came unto sir Gace and said. Sir let as
goo to the tents of the duke and cause all that we find there to be brought
into the City and therewith we may pay all our people for I am sure we shall
find there right great richesse. In the name of god said sir gace so let us
do. And so than every thing that was found thece, was brought into the cite.
And than they all entered in to the town with all their pray. Than all the
dwellers in the cite ran to A^thur and said with one voice, welcome be ye the
best knighte of all the world, who has delivered us from our enemies, therefore
god that all thing has fourmed increases you both honor and valor. Than
the gates of the cite were set open every man to go and come who would. And
when Arthur was come in to the palace the countess encountered and enbraced him
and kyssed him and said. Sir ye have delivered this cite and erledome fro their
enemies, and have right well revenged the does of my lord, therefore blessed be
y^ hour that ever ye were ^grne. Than she made great chere to sir Gace her
brother. And the fair maiden Alyce made much of her lord Hector. Than Arthur
demanded for sir Clarembault Sir said the countess he is in his chamber,
whereas he makes the gretest sorrow of all the world for the death of the duke
his lord. As god help me said Arthur he does therein like a noble wise man. I
love him ^herfore the better. Than he took sir Gace by the hand and said. Sir
let us goose and and comfort him. So they went and found him weping and
making great sorrow. Than arthur said to hi^. A gentyl knight wherefore do ye
thus sle your self for yt duke who was but a falls tratoure and a shameful
murderer, therefore gentle friend app^se your mind I require you, for as God
help me ye shall have an other Lord good and true who shall love you and set
you in great honor. Than he called to him Hector and said. Good cosyn, keep
co^p^ny here with sir C^^rembault and comfort him and here after think on him,
when yt shall ly^ in your power so to do. Than Arthur and all the other went
and unarmed them, and than they all went in to the Halle, and there Arthur
beheld sir Gace whom he lyked right well, for he was a meruaylous fair
knight. Than Hector came thither and brought with him sir Clarembault. And when
Arthur saw him he cleped and kyssed him and made to him right great there Than
Arthur took the countess aparte and sir Clarembault, and sir Oaths, and sir
Gace, Hector, and Gouernar, and said to sir Gace. ye be brother here to my lady
and uncle to the fair Alyce her daughter, therefore I will ye know certainly
that by the free will of my lady the countess here present, and also by the
assent of her Daughter, and of all her Barons this fair lady Alyce is freely
given to my cosyn Hector, how be yt I will that ye know that he is a Gentell
man, and sone and air unto a right mighty and puyssau^t lord the earl of
bloys, therefore I show you this to know your mind wheder ye will agree to
this marriage ^r no^. In the name of god said sir Gace, if there were no more in
h^ but all only his noble chyualry he is worthy to have a much better than
she is, and therefore I accord thereto with me heart well sir said Arthur sith
that y^ be agreed the matter is ye better. Sir it is so now this duke has his
reward for his trespace and ye have here much people, and also my lady has
great plente of men of war now here in this cite, and in the country about,
and sowd yours will come to us daily if we n^de, therefore by mine aduyce we
shall go in to the dukes country for I will conquer all that land, for I hau^
promised it to Hector my cosyn^ and sir if we need of any socour or aid, I
promise you I shall cause to come to us a king and.iii. great earls with all
their myghtes, so that it will be hard to nombre them. Than sir Gace said,
noble Arthur behold me here I will be the first and all that I can make is and
shall be at your commandment, and I shall follow you withal my heart. And
all that I can make said the countess shall be ready to attend on my right
dear sone in law noble Hector your cosyn, and he shall have all my power to
follow your commandment Madame said Arthur I thank you. Than they left
their counseyle and went to m^te, where as they were rychely served And after
mete Arthur did vysyte all them that were hurt. Than Arthur and the countess
and all other barons and knygh^es went in to the halle, and there Arthur
departed all such tresour that was won at the battle agenst the duke, and
gave to every body so largely yt every man was right well content. Than the
countess sent out her commandment to all her subgectes such as might bear
harneys, eythrr on hors^acke or on foot to come to her in all the haste
poss^ble. And sir Gace did in likewise on his pa^te, and so thither came so wd
yours on every side, and there they all assembled together the mondaye before in
m^wdel^yne tide under the cite of Brewle. And by that time such as were hurt
were recovered to health, and al thing necessary was ready to remeue And a
month after that the duke was slain Arthur and Hector took leave of the
countess and of Alice her daughter and commanded that all the boost would
take the next way to the cite of orgoule And than Arthur mustred his people,
and found how there were two. M. horsme^n and.viii. hundred on foot, so they
rode forth toward ye country of orgoule. But when the gentillmen of that
country understood how that Arthur came on them with baners displayed, and
saw well how they had no captain, sithe the Duke and his brethren and
cosyns were all slain at the syege of Brewle, and they knew well how Arthur
had done all this. Tha^ they assembled them together in the cite of orgoule and
there took counseyle what they might best do At the last they concludid and
said how that they were weary and hurt and lost all that ever they had in the
last bata^^l of Brewle, both their goods, their ^aders, their sons, their
neuewes, their friends, and all their lygnage, and therefore they said they
had lost enough, wherefore they were of purpose to Ieoparde no ferder, and
finally concluded not to defend their country fro Arthur but utterly to yield
all unto hi^ for they said they knew well though they would they were not of
that power to resyst agenst his noble chiualry. And of this accord was all the
bourgeyses of the cite and so by common accord they sent certain messengers
unto Arthur desiringe him if it were his will that he should do no hurt to
their country for they were in mind to yield all to him, and to receive him as
their chief lord. And when Arthur herd that he was right Joyful and
commanded incoytinent thrughout al his host yt no man upon pain of death be
so hardy to hurt any creature of that country. And so long they rode till at
the last they arrived at the cite of Orgoule. And all the gentle men of that
cite burgeyses and other wha^ they perceived that he was nere to the cite they
all issued out unarmed and received him with great Joy, and yielded to him the
keys of the cite, and gave him full possession of all the country. Than all
the host lodged without, Arthur and a certain with him entered into the cite,
and so remained there three days.

How Arthur made his cosyn Hector duke of Orgoule by the assente of all the
lords of that country. Cap. xxxix.
THan arthur called before him all the Lords and Barons of that realm and
said. Syrs ye have rendered here to me this cite and all the hole country,
therefore it is right and necessite that ye have a lord and governor over you
there ore I will give you one I ensure you right puyssaunt both of hauoyre and
of friends, who is Hector here my dear cosyn, therefore make him Duke of all
this country, and I will ye do him homage, and sir Clarembault I will that ye
begin first, and here I release you of your prysonynge. Uerely sir said he I
am right well content so to do sith my lord is dead and having none eyres to
whom his land should succeed, and so he rose and did homage to Hector, and
after him so did all other, and took him for their duke and sovereign lord.
Than Arthur sent to Brewle for the countess and Alyce her daughter ^o thentent
that Hector and she should be married togeder within the cite of Orgoule, and
when she was come the marriage was made between them with great triumph and
joy the which endured.xv. days, and at the end of the.xv. days all the
hooste departed every man in to his own country. And than Arthur called ^o him
Hector, sir Gace, sir Clarembault, sir oaths and Goue^nar and said. Sir Gace
behold here dkue Hector my cosyn, who has wedded your nece, therefore ought
ye to love him fro hensforth. And ye sir Oaths she is your cosyn, therefore I
beseech you love Hector, and bear to him faithful truth, and if so be his
people happen to rebel against him socou^ and help him for now fro hens
forward^ ye are bou^^e thereto. And cosyn Hector if any war fall unto you
send for me into the country of S^roloys wheder I am purposed to goo, and I
shall incontynent^ come to you. And sir Clarembaulte I put my cosyn Hector into
your hand^s, therefore I desire you k^pe to him your faith and troth as ye
have promised* and you shall love you and put his chief trust always in your
wisdom. Sir I shall said sir Clarembaulte bear to him faithful alyaunce and
love as to my sovereign lord and so he did ever after, for he was a true
knight. Than Arthur said to Hector, cosyn dele wisely among your lords and
subjects, and than wall ye do right well, and now to god I commend you And
wha^ Hector herd that he said sir God not dyspleased there is neither land
nor wise shall hold me but I will go with you* ye shall not do so said Arthur,
therefore keep well your land, and acquaynt you with your barons and wha^ I
return again I will come by you And so arthur t^ke leave of the countess and
of Alyce her daughter duch^ss^ of orgoule, and of al other knights who offered
to goo with him, but in no wise h^ would none, and so took with him but all
only Gouernar. Iaket and Bawdwyn, and duke Hector and sir Gace and many other
conuayed him.ii. days on his Iournay, than Arthur took leave of them and they
re^ourned right sorrowful for his departing and went to orgoule whereof Hector
was than duke, and earl of Breule by his wife, and he demened him self so
nobly that he gate the love of all his lords, and kept his land in great
peace and tranquylyte, and great love there was between him and the fair lady
Alyce his wife. Now let us leave to speak of Hector til another season, and let
us speak of Arthur.

How that Arthur and Gouernar departed asonder, and of the terryble aduentur^s
that each of them found or they met again. Cap. xl.
When Arthur was thus departed fro H^ctor his cosyn, who was as than duke o^
Orgoule, he and his company rode so long till they had passed many strong
countries right wild and s^uag^, and among other they past the land of
constantinoble, and of armice. And at last entered in among the great
mountains the which were between the empire of ynde the more and the realm
of So^oloys, there they aryued in to a much savage and wild place where as
there were many great wild beasts of diverse kinds, and the last they issued
out of that for^st and entered into a fair grene medowe, where as they saw
standing a great toure^ and thither they went and found a young squire who was
lord of that place: who received them that night and made them ^yght good
chere and after souper they stood in a wyndowe than the squire demanded of
Arthur wheder he was going. I will go ever forward said A^thur till I se my
time to return again. Sir said the squier I demanded it of you for none
ill, sir behold yonder before you where as there lies a forked way, the pathe
that lies on the right hand is mortal, for there is none that enters into
that way but shortly he received death, and yt I know well, for as yer there
was never none yt ever went that way yt returned again, and sir as for the
other way that lies on the lift hand is good enough, and without
Ieopardye, for that is the ready passage in to the country of ynde the more.
Than arthur demanded of him what was the cause that the other way was so
mortal and Ieopardous. Sir said the squire I can not tell you the troth, but
as it is said it is the way to a castle ^he which is so strong and
aduenturous, that none scapeth there without death, how be it, it is said that a
knight shall at the last acheue it and fordoo all the adventures of that place,
the which are right great and meruaylous, but it is thought that knight is not
yet borne, sir I wot not what I should sa^, but I know well that all such as
has gone thither never came again, wherefore I know well that they be all dead,
and this said strong castle is named the norte noyre. We^l good friend said
Arthur, is there none other passage to this castle but by this Ieopardous
way. Yes sir said yt squier for this great way that ye se on the lift hand,
the which goes to ynde the more* and when ye come ^hyder than there is
another way the which will bring you straight to the castle of blaun^he
flower, and from thens ye shall have a ready passage to the cite of argence, and
than when ye be there every man can show you the nex^ way to the castle of
the por^^ noyre, ^u^ sir which way som^uer a man g^^a thither he never comes
again well said arthur all must be as god will have it. and therwyth he
called gouernar and said. Friend it is conue^ie^t now that we depart asoder^
for ye shall go the way through ynde the more, and so repair the next way
that ye can to the port noyre, and I will go by the way that lies on the
righ^ hand all only saving I will have with me Bawdewin an^ ye shall have with
you Iaket, than Gouernar and said. Sir and god will ye shall not go to your
dethward, but and ye nigh I will in like wise suffer death with you. A sir said
the squire for Gods sake go ye not that way, nor think it not for it is a
great folly, for I ensure you ye shall dye or ye c^ obtain to pass through that
passage, for there is as it is said a fell gryffon gretely to be redouted that
keeps short an egle of gold. And wha^ arthur herd spekyng of the egle of
gold and of the gryffon he remembered his vysion that he had or he went out of
his own cou^trye, wherefore there was none that could turn his purpose, yet
Gouernar did as m^che as he could for to change his mind but finally he said
friend Gouernar if ye love me speak no more of the matter, for as I have
devised so shall it be without fail. And wha^ Gouernar herd that he was in his
mind right sore displeased and said. Sir I have nourysshed and served you
sithe the beg^ny^ge of your tender youth, and wy^l ye than deseuer me now
from your company, also I have for your sake lost mine own country, and all my
friends, sir in good troth ye dele with me right hardly and ye do as ye say*
how shall I return again to my lord your fader if ye dye in this adventure,
certainly nay for I will never return home again for all y^ gold of the
world, but I shall slay my se^fe if I may know any oth^rwyse of you than good.
well (...) arthur speak no more th^rof, ^or ^ will yt i^ shall be thus. And
wha^ Goue^n^r perceived yt his mind was so (...) fyxed he durs^e mo^^ him no
more of ^he matter for fere of his dyspleasure and (...) as for yt night they
went to their res^^^ and in the morning erly lepte on the^^ horses and so
departed, and yt squire brough^ them part of their way, and then ^e quethed
them to god, and so retourn^d again: and than at this said for^ed way ^rthur
and Bawdewyn departed fro Gouernar and Iaket and took the way on the right
hand, and Gouer^ar and Iaket rode forth the way on the lift hand. Now as
for a ^eason let us leave arthur ridynge forth on his good horse assyle and
Badewyn with him, and let us a while speak of Gouernar and Iaket.

How gouernar after that he was departed fro Arthur found in a great ^orest
two knights armed who had (...) and wounded an other knight and would have
rau^shed his sister, and now be r^scowed her and did vanquys^^^ all her
enemies. Capi. xli
Gouernar after he was departed fro arth^r rode.ii. day^s without fynding o^
any adventure and on the third day he entered into a great forest by the (...)
that he had ryden two leges he found a knight lyeng on the erath, and one of
his hands stryken of, and sore wounded in the back and gr^nynge right
pyteously. And when Gouernar saw him he demaunhed what he ayled and who had so
hurt him. A sir said he thus has arrayed me two armed knights who are
brethe^ne and it is now but a year paste sith they s^ewe my fader and my brother
by false treson because of a sister of mine yt they would have had by force, and
as now I was conueyeng her ^ro her uncles place where as she has been ever
sithe the death of her father, and I had thought now to have brought her to my
place, but sir these.ii. knights unhappily had knowledge thereof, and so lay in
wait for me and for her, and so thus as ye se they have arrayed me, for they
were armed, and I was without harneys, and also they have led away my sister
to then^ente to defoule her dyrgynit^, whereof I am more sorofull than of mine
own hurt therefore gentle knight I require you if ye may keep her from
vilany do it for gods sake. which way are they gone said Gouernar and how
far by lykelyhode are they past. Sir said the knight they are ry^en yonder
way and are not as yet past the mountenaunce of a lege. Iaket good friend said
Gouernar stop the wounds of this knight and tarry here still with him till I come
again to you, and so rode forth as fast as he could till at the last he espied
them in a fair valey, and herd well the damoysell how she cried for help and
made great lamentacyon, for one of the knights held her to the encene to have
had his pleasure of her, and when Gouernar herd the cry so he said. A fa^se
knight I charge the touch her not, for I will defend her in the ^^ede of her
brother, than one of these knights lepte on his horse, and without speking of
any word can fye^sly at Goue^nar and brake his spear, but Gouernar hit him so
egerly y^ he dashed his spear in to his body more than a foot, and so he fell
down dead* and wha^ the other knight yt held the damoysell saw his brother
slain and perceived well that Gouernar was cominge toward him with his sword
drawn in his hand, he had than so g^ete fere yt he kneled down to the earth and
cried him mercy. Certainly said gouarnar thou ge^t^st no mercy, but as this
damoysell will command so shall it be tha^ sir said the damosel he shall lose
his head, for he slew my fader, and as they thus talked togider there came to
them the wounded knight and Iaket with him, than this knight said unto
gouernar. A gentle knight I require ^ou give me this false knight traitor and
murderer who has slain my fader and my brother and has maimed me. Take him
to you said Gouernar, for it ple^eth me right well. Than the wounded knight
said to his servants, who as than were come to him fro his own house I charge
you take this traitor and led him to my toure, and the^e I shall do rightful
judgment on him. Than Gou^rnar took leave of them and commanded them to god.
And the wounded knight would feign have had him to have tarried all that night
with him in his house, but in no wise he coud make him to abide, but so they
departed each from other* and the wounded knight went to his own place, and
there did rightful judgment on his prisoner according to his deseruynge.

How that Gouernar came to a strong castle called the brosse, and vanquyshed
the knight that kept it. And how that afterward he was kept in that castle
agenst his will in great danger of death till at the last Arthur delivered him
as ye shall here hereafter. Ca. xlii.
THus when Gouernar was departed from the wounded knight and fro the damoysell
he rode forth the same day so long till it was full none than he issued out
of the wild forest and found a fair mddowe and saw before him a merueylous
fair castle, round about y^ which he well pe^ceyued how that there were
pyght fresh tents and goodly pauylyons and also he saw many bright helmes
shynyng against the son, also he well beheld how yt there was pyght en the
mids of the field a great person whereon there was hanginge a rich and a
goodly shield than Gouernar rested himself a good space to regard al these
forsayde things. And wha^ the knights that were within the tents and
pauylyons saw him so standing in a muse, a, xii. of them well armed mounted
on their horses and went to him where as he stood and right goodly did salute
him and said. Sir it behooves you to render your truage the which is due and
accostomed to be had in this place. why syrs said Gouerner and what is that.
Sir said they there is no knight that passes by this place but or that he
depart he must strike at this fair shield and also must Just against him that
is owner thereof and sir the manner is such of this place that if the knight
within overcome him without, than he that is so ouercomen shall lose his horse
and his harneys, and shall be led on foot to the judge lymyted for this case,
who shall cause to be openly proclaimed and to be said, behold the knight that
is vaynquished, and if the knight stranger overcome him that is within than it
shall be done by him as we have devised to you here before, and than the knight
stranger that so has overcome him shall be lord of this castle, and of the
fair lady that is within it and than all we shall be his servants to love
and to keep him as our chief lord. In the name of god said Gouernar this said
Justice I will not refuse, but as for the signorye of this castle and the
abidynge therein I re^ese freely if god send me the vyctory. Than all those that
were in the pauylions mounted on their horses all armed, who were well to the
nombre of two hundred, and al they came about Gouernar and said Sir ye must
Just at this sh^lde. Than Gouernar spurred his horse and gave the sh^lde such
a stroke that it might well be herd a great dystaunce of, and therewith the
knight within the castle issued out al armed* and wha^ Gouernar saw him come
they ran each at other, and the knight gave Gouernar a great stroke and brake
his spear, but Gouernar struck him so rudely that he ba^e him to the earth over
his horse tail and bruised sore with the fall his lift arm, so that he could
not remounte again on his horse without help, and when all the other knights
saw that they took and unarmed him, and led him forth on foot to a cite
there by, and there he was rendered to the Justice, and incontinent it was
proclaimed thrughout all the streets in the town, behold here the knight that
is vanquysshed. And so than they took Gouernar and brouhht him with great joy
into the castle, and than there encountered him a fair Damoysell, who was lady
of the castle, who said. Sir ye be welcome to this place, and I require you be
nothing dysmayed, for sir here shall you be served and be byloued as these
lord of all this place and sir one thing I ensure you ye shall be in as good
surety of your body as ever I shall be or mine own body, but sir ye mu^t abide
still with me here the space of two years, wyt^oute so be that an other
knight overcome you, as ye have done hy^ which was lord here last. A fair
lady said Gouernar if godwyl I shall not abide here the space of five days.
well sir said the lady it will be none otherwise, ther^ore be content
therwyth. well madame said Gouernar my trust is better. But for all that it was
not according to his will, for as soon as he was entered into the castle, the
brydges were drawn up and kept with.xl. knights, to thentent that he should
not escape, but always he was served rychely with many goodly squyers, who did
nothing else but pleasauntely served him always, but for all that they could
do, in no wise they could please him, sith he might not goo seek for his
lord Arthur, how be it he would not for sh^me suffer any other knight to
vaynquysh him, yet many knights came thither, but ever he overcame them all.
Thus Gouernar abode there a long space, till a^ the last Arthur delivered him
Now let us leave to speak of Gouernar, and ^etourne again to Arthur.

How that Arthur conquered the castle of the port noyre by his prowes and
slew all them that kept it, and how after that he entered into the halles of
the palace, where he was assailed of two great and horr^ble Lions and of a great
grant, and how he overcame them all with great pain, and ac^eu^d all the
merua^llous adventures of the castle* the which are right wondrous to rehearse.
Cap. xliii.
When that Arthur was departed fro Gouernar he took the way on the erghte
hand, and so rode forth.iii. days without findinge of any adventure or any
manner of house or place how be it by the counseyle of his host he took with him
sustenaunce for him self and for his horse for the space of three or four
days, and thus he passed by many valeys and mo^ntaynes, so that he had his
horse were right weary, and on ye fourth day he found an hydeous river deep
and perfound, the banks were so hye fro the water yt he could not se it ren,
yt which water rored and brayed and r^n so swyf^ely that none might pass
wtoute drowning, and in certain places it was full of great and mighty rocks,
the which were of such heyght, that fro the valey bynethe the top of them
might uneaths be seen, the which rocks were so full of vermyn, that all the
river thereby stanke abhomynably. At the last Arthur found a little way alonge
by the ryue^s side on the lift hand, in the which he rode so long till it was
hye none, and than he espied a little straight way b^twene two mountains the
wh^che were of a meruaylous heyght, than he found ^ little narowe bridge over
this river the which with much pain he passed over, than he entered in to a
straight causy made of stone wherein he rode forth, and on every hand of him
all was but great ma^esses and foul stynkynge waters, the which way brought
him straight unto the port noyre, the which was the strong^st castle of all
the world, and so when he came to the bridge and gate thereof, there he
found.xii. knights all armed on ho^ back.vi at the one end of the bridge,
and.v^. at the other end and At the gate there were.xii. other knights on
foot holdyng hatches and mases of st^le in their hands to the^ment ^o keep
that none sho^de enter in to the castle and above o^ the ^a^by^n^s and
bowleweckes there stood men of war with cros^ow^s and other w^pens to defend
the place. And all this season in the mount peryllous was master Steven clerk
to the fay^e Florence daughter unto the mighty king of Soroloys emendus who
had lien there nigh the space of a year to abide the coming of that knight that
should acheue all the adventures of that castle and in his company was the
c^stable y^ kept the palayses and halles without the castle of the port noyre,
and than master Steven knew by his bo^es and conning of astronomy that ye
knight should come the same day, therefore he and his company mounted on the
walls of the palace to se how the knygh^e should do that was as tha^ come to
gate y^ of the castle of the port noyre. And when the fyest vi. knights saw
Arth^r they took their sheldes and speces. Than Arthur said to Bawdewyn friend
I have need now to take good head therefore tari you h^re without, and le^ me
alone with them, Than these.vi knights ran all at ones ^n Arthur on the bridge
and struck him with speres and swerdes, but for all that he felt no hurt, but
he encountered so with the first that his spear did glyde through his body, and
so he fell ^owne dead and the spear break, and with the ^ronch^n thereof he
struck the second so curteisly that he oue^threwe both horse and man and fell
b^s^de the bridge into the water, and when he had thought to have releu^d him
se^fe ag^yne out of the water than Baw^wyn cast him down again into the
river, so there he was drow^ed, tha^ Bawdewy^ took his spear and brought to
Arthur, wherewith he st^ake an other knight so rudely that the head of ^he
spear perced his heart and so f^ll down head, and when the.vi. ^ther k^^ghtes
saw yt their.iii. fellows were ^^ay^e they ^^edde back again over the bry^ge
and went to their fel^wes at the bri^ge fo^e, and Arthur followed them and his
sw^^de in his hand, and struck one of them that he claue him to the sholdres,
than all the remena^^ ran at ones at him, but he defended him self valyaun^ly^
as he that no thing fered, f^r such was his manner, the more he had to do,
the g^^ater g^ewe his strength and courage, ^ so he put him self between them
and the gate, because of them that were on the ^alles^ for they did him much
^rouble and assailed him on all sides, and ever r^ght noblye he defended him
self and gave such strokes that he made to fly into the f^l^e heads arms
and hands, and who so ever he felled to the earth, never rose again, for
Bawdwyn took them by the legs and did cast them over the bridge down into
the river whe^in they were drowned, than Arthur begane ^o chafe and wax angry^
and laid on so fast round about him that finally he slew them all save
two, who fled in at the gate and thought so for to have es^aped But Arthur
hasted him so fast^ after them, that he str^ke of one of their heads, and as
^he other s^^uped to have entered in at the gate Arthur struck him so fyerslye
on the back that he c^aue him nigh asonder, than they that were on the
bowle^erk^^s and on the wailes did cast at him many great stones and other we
pens, but they could do him n^ne hu^te because that he was so nere to the gate
Than w^a^ the other.xii. knights whic^e were ^n fo^e within the gate saw the
dyscomfyture of their.xii. fellows that were on horsbacke done al only by one
man, they were right sorrowful and so ran out all at ones at him with great
hatches in their hands and when arthur saw them he fered greatly ass^le his
good horse, therefore he alygh^ed and delivered him to Bawdewyn and badde him
go tie him without the brige fore, than arthur encou^tred so with the first
that he made his head to fly in to the fyeld, and the second he gave such a
stroke that he claue his head nigh to the teth^. And when master Steu^ who was
on the walls of the p^lays saw the noble prowes of Arthur and the great
strok^s that he gave said to his company, verily behold yon^der is the noblest
knight of the world, it is he that shall acheue the adventures of this place^
it is the same knight that we have tarried he^e for so long, and ever A^thur
fyersly fought among this people and bette them down one after an other, and
among them there was one so gre^e and byg as though he had been a g^a^nt, who
ran at Arthur, and or he was war^ t^ke him by the legs and pulled him so
fy^^^ly that they fell down both togyd^r to the earth but Arthur fell underneath
the great churl, and than one of ye other knights wha^ he saw Arthur lie on
the earth he lift up his axe and thought to have stricken Arthur on the head but
in th^^^ hurt ^ing togider the stroke light on the great devil, so that his
hugged and soul heed flewe to the earth. Than Arthur lepte on his fete and
said. Sir I thank thee^ for thou haste delivered me from much pain and
Ieopardye, and sith thou have delivered me of this great foul dwe^^e I shall
pay the anon the mages, and th^rwith lift up h^s sword and gave him such
a stroke that he claue his head asonder, than Arthur abandoned him self among
the remenaunt so fyersly that he made great plente of ^edes and arms to fall to
the ground and to make short process he did so much that none of the.xii.
were left on live but al were slain and christened in the wa^er by Bawdewyn,
for he was to they^ a good go^ fader. Than Arthur stepte in at the w^^ket of
the gate than al those that were on the walls did shot^ and cast at him, and
ever he bare of with his shield as well as he might till at the la^te he came to
them, and the first that he met with lost his life, and there did such
meruayles that it was wounder to think ther^of, for some he threw over the
walls, and some lept into the water so that ^ynally they were slain and
drowned, and none left on love in all the castle that he could find or here,
and Bawdewin was right sore trauayled with casting of them in to the water
that were slain Than Arthur said to, Bawdwyn, friend I will go enter into the
great palace of adventures, the which he saw before him in the castle,
therefore Bawdewyn I will y^ ye abide me h^re in this court, and keep well my
horse assyle till I come again to you. Sir said Bawdewyn for gods sake put
not your self no more in any place where as ye think is any grea^e peril.
well said Arthur, care not for y^, but I pray you do as I say, and look in no
wise ye come to me without I call you, tha^ Arthur mounted up certane greces to
enter into the hall of the palace yt which was y^ way to ye mount peryllous and
there he found the most fair house that ever was seen, set^e all about with
images of f^ne go^de, and the wyddowes were all of fine ^mbre, with many his
clear wyndowes, and out of this hall he entered in to a chamber the most
rychest that ever was seen* forsyth god first made mankind there was no manner
of history nor bataile but in that chamber it was po^trayed with gold and
asure, and other f^esshe colors so quyckely aourned that it was wonder to
behold, there was portrayed how god did create the son and the moon, and in
the rofe were all the.vii. planettes wrought with fine gold and silver, and all
the sytuacyons of the heuens wherein were pyght many carbuncles and other
precious stones, the which did cast great clerenes both by day and by
night, to say the truth it was the most rychest chamber and the
wonderfullest that ever was seen in all the world. Proserpyne queen of the
fayry caused it thus to be made. Also there were diverse beds wonderful
rich, but specially one the which stood in the mids of the chamber
surmounted in beauty all other, for y^ vtterbrasses thereof were of grene Jasper
with great bars of gold set full of precious stones and the cra^pons were of
fine silver enbordered with gold, the posts of yuery with pomelles of coral,
and the staves closed in bokeram covered with crymesyn satyn and shetes of
sylke with a rich covering of e^myns, and other clothes of cloth of gold,
and four square pyllowes wrought among the sarasyns, ^he curtaynes were of
grene s^ndall vyroned with gold and asure, and round about this bed there
lay on the four carpettes of sylke poynted and enbrowdred with images of
gold, and all the four corners of this bed there were four condytes
meruaylously wrought by subtle entayle, out of the which there issued so swet
an odor and so delectable yt al other sweetness of the world were as nothing
to the regard thereof, and at the head of thy^ bed there stood an image of
gold and had in his lift hand a bow of yuery and in his right hand an
arowe of fine silver, in the mids of his breast there were lettres that said
thus. when this image shoreth than all this palais shall turn like a whele,
and than who so ever lies in this bed shall dye, without it be that knight
to whom this bed is destenyed unto. And when Arthur saw the nobleness of
this chamber, and specially of this bed he had great pleasure to behold it and
said to him self how that at all adventures he would lie down on the bed,
and not to far for any dread of death, and as he was lyeng down on this
bed he espied in every corner of the chamber a great image of fine gold
standing each of them holding in their hands a great horn of silver, and
by their countenance ready to blow. Than Arthur herd a great voice which was
so loud and horrible that master Steue^ who was in the plays without the
castle might right well here it, the which voice said, behold now the end.
Than master Steven said to his company. I am sure ye knight is entered into ye
palace with in the castle god defend him from all ill enco^braunce, than all the
palace began to tremble and shake wondersly so much that at the last one of
the.^iii. images began to blow his horn so loud that it might well be herd the
space of a mile, than the palace trembled so sore y^ all should have fallen ^o
pieces, the doors and windows ofte^tymes did open and close again by their
own accord, than Arthur heard about him great noise of people as though there
had been a thousandemen together, but he could se no creature, at the last he
perceived great light of torches, and ever he herd still the noise of people
Coming and going about ye bed, and also herd the brayenge of an hydeous
river so yt it (...) to him that it had been the ^oringe o^ the wild see, there
with he felt such a terryble wind that he had much pain to sustain him on
his fete. Than Arthur assayed again to have layne down on the bed, than the
voice began to cry again and said, behold now the end than the second
image began to blow than came there in to the chamber such noise and tourment
that Arthur was nigh defe with ye terryble dynne, and the palace than began
sorer to tremble than it did before, so that Arthur thought surely yt all ye
palace should have fallen, than Arthur drew him toward the bed and as he
would have layne him down he saw on his right hand a great lion fyers and
fell comy^ge to hymwarde ga^i^ge and ramp^^ge to devour him, and so assailed
hy^ ^^ght rudely, and with his paws took (...)^ so by the sholder that his
harneys could not keep him, but yt his sharp claws entered in to his flesh,
and as the lion would have taken hi^ by ye heed he (...) ^helde before him, and
the lion d^sht it with his paws all to pieces and nigh had overthrown him to ye
earth, but than Arthur took his strength to him and as the lion was rampi^ge
before him he put his sword clean through his body, and so the lion fell down
deed to the er^he, and Arthur was ^yght fore hurt in the sholder and bledde
fast, than he approached aga^ne to the bed to have laid him down, than ye
third image fyersly did blow h^s hor^e and out of the end thereof by semy^ge
to Arthur there issued out an other lion greter and stronger than the other
was. when Arthur saw him he cried to god and to our blessed lady to help and
socour him from ill death and soul encombrau^ce, and so the lion dressed him
toward Arthur, and struck at him with his broad paws, and Arthur held before
him the remenau^t that was left of his shield, but the lion shortly brake it
all to pieces as though it had been but glass, and with one of his fete he took
Arthur by ye lift side and rased fro him a gre^ part of his harneys and his
doublet and shert, and a great piece of his flesh to the bare rybbes, and if god
had not there helped hi^ he had tendered his mortal life, than arthur with his
sword struck of the lions foot that was under his ^yde, and therewith the lion
fell to the e^th and or he ^ose again Arthur recovered another st^oke and
st^ake of his head by the shuldres, than Arthur took a fair cloth of sendall
that lay on the bed, and therwyth wrapped his wou^des and staunched them
from bi^tdynge, than he approached again to the bed to lie down to test him
and than suddenly the fourth image began terrybly to blow his horn, therewith
a^thu^ looked behind hi^ and espied a great g^aune com^ng to hi^ ward, who
was.xv. foot of l^ngth, betynge togeder his tethe as though they had been
hamers stri^inge on a stythy who had in his hand a great axe, whereof the blade
was well th^e foot lon^, the which was so long and sharp that it would cut
clean a sonder every thing that it touched. And when this gyaunt saw these
lions deed he was ^o sore dyspleased that he was all in arage and so rolled up
his eyes and dashte together his tethe, and ran fyerselye at Arthur thinking to
have stryken of his head, but Arthur feared much ^he stroke and lepte aside,
whereby y^ stroke went beside him and dashed in to panement ^o ^udely yt the
blade of the weapen entered therein Just to the head, and than Arthur struck
him with his swe^de but the stroke mounted up again and would in no wise enter,
for he was harneysed with the skin of a serpent, the which was so hard that
no wepen coud empoyre it And when Arthur saw yt he was right sore displeased
and lift up his swaerde again and struck the giaunt on the head more rudely
than he did before, but all that aualed not, for it seemed to him that he
stra^e on a stethy of stele. Than Arthur fered him self gretely, than the
giant struck many strokes at arthur, but always he watched so the strokes that
he did let them pass by him without any hurt or damage, for he perceived
right well that if the gyaunte did light on him wi^h a full stroke there was
none other way with him but death. Thus this giant ever pursued Arthur to have
stricken him, but always arthur watched the strokes and voyded them wisely and
oftentimes struck the gyaunt again but he could do him no hurt, thus they
fought a great space not far fro the rich bed in the mids of the chamber
than the giaunt with great ire lift up his fauchon to have stryken Ar^hur upon
the head and the stroke came brayeng and dashed into the earth like thonder for
Arthur avoided craftily the stroke, the which entered and cut asonder a great
brase of a be^ch^ that stood before the bed of white yuery* and so the stroke
descended down into the ^rth thrughout all the pauemen^, for the gyaunt was so
sore dyspleased that his weapen en^red through both wode and stone and into the
^r^h ^o the hard head and therewith the b^ade of his fauchon brast clean asonder
in the mids, and when the giannt saw that he fared like a fend of hell, and
so took the handlynge thereof and cast it at Arthur, but wisely he did avoid
it and so it lyghted on the wall of the chamber wherein the stroke entered well a
foot and an half than the gyaunte lepte to thee brase of the benche that he
had cut asonder before, and would have rasshed it out of the benche, but it was
so sore bound with cramp^ns of stele to ye benche that he could not remeue it,
and as he stouped to pull thereat Arthur espied him and how the serpents skin
was but short behind his back, and so under the skin he dashed his sword
in to his belly to the cross, than the gyaunt fell down and made a terryble
braynge the which might well be herd a great way of, than Arthur recovered
on him an other stroke and so dashed his sword in to his heart, than he made a
greter ^rye than he did before and there with his soul passed away to the
devil of hell, than ye noise was heard again tha^ said, behold the end, than
was Arthur so we^y and so sore trauayled and his wou^des bledde so fast yt he
had much pain to sustain himself on his fete, how be it as well as he might
he repaired down the rich bed and always his sword in his hand and therewith
laid him down on the bed, than the image of gold at the beds head with his
bow and arowe did shote and hy^te one of the wyndowes so sore yt it flewe wide
open with the stroke, out of which window there issued such a smoke and fume
so black yt it made a^ the house so dark that arthur could se nothing, the
which fume stake so abominably that arthur the^by was nigh dead, than there rose
such a wynd^ so great and fervent that it brast the glass windows and
latesses so that the tyles and stones flew all about the house like hayle, and
it tho^dred so terrybly that all the earth shoke* and the pal^ys trembled like to
have gone all to pieces, and at the last he perceived a brenynge spear al of
fire the which was coming to him ward therewith he l^pte fro the bed and
fiedde fro the stroke, and saw where yt w^nte in at an other little chamber by
and fell on a knight as he lay a bed and so burnt him clean through, and The
fire descended thrughout bed and chamber and al and sanke deep in to the
earth, than suddenly brast asonder two pyllets which susteyne^ the covering
over the Bed, and than all the hole palace began to turn about like a
whele, than Arthur ran to the image of gold that stood at ^he beds heed
and enbraced it in his arms for the image removed no thing, and this
tourneng of the palace endured a great space. And Bawdewyn Arthurs squire who
was without in the court pyteously wept and demened tyght great sorrow for ye
fete that he had of his master for he thought verily how that he was but deed,
and sayd^ a my lord arthur the best kni^ht the most noble and ha^^y the most
sage and curteyse crea^ture that ever was fourmed by nature, a^as why did ye
enter in to this unhappy castle, for I think surely ye are but de^^. and ^o
than at ye last yt tournynge of this palace began to sece, and the derkenes
began to avoid and to wax fair and cl^re and the air peasyble thau arthur
sat him down upon the rich beds side right feeble and faint because of the
gret^ t^oble that he had endured and for the ferefull hor^yblenes yt he had
^een and herd han when it was thus wa^ed fay^e and clear, than the voice said
again twyse, it is ended it is ended, and wha^ may^ter Steven herd that voice
he said unto his compani. verily the adventures of the palace in ye castle of
the port noyr^ are acheued, therefore I am sure it can be none otherwise but
that ye knight that is there, either he is dead or else right sore wounded and
than he went and gadred herbs such as he knew were right precious for all
manner of wou^des and made of them to give unto Arthur if i^ were his fortune
to find him alive, and Baudewyn who al^o had herd the voice thought verily
than that Arthur had been dead, and said to him self that neither for ye
dyspleasure of his lord, nor ye^ for fear of any other thing he would abide
no longer but yt he wo^d mount up into the palace to se if he could know how
his lor^e did, and so (...) up ye stayres with his swearde in his hand and
passed through the hall and entered in to the chamber where as arthur was
sittynge on the beds side, then was Bawdewyn glad when he saw his master
alive and demanded him how^ he did And arthur answered and said how that he
was right weary and sore wounded. Than Badewyn was right sorrowful at his heart,
for he fered greatly lest that he had some mortal wound, and said Sir may it
please you to show me your wou^des. It pleases me right well said Ar^hur. Than
Bawdewyn unarmed hi^ and serched all his wounds, for he was a right good
surgyen, and washed and staunched his wounds, and softly did anoint them, the
which did him right^ great ease. Than Ar^hur armed him again and said that he
would go se^che ferder over all the palace to know if there were any mo
aduent^r^s and therewith there entered i^ to ye chamber a young varlet, who
acc^stomab^y before apparayled the mete and dri^ke that s^rued for the knights
that were dead at the gate of the castle, and when he came before Arthur he
kneled down and said. A gentle knight I cry you mercy, for gods sake save
my life, for I am a pore verlet that served for my living the knights that ye
have slain. Thou shalt have no hurt said Arthur on the condycyon that thou
wylt^ tell me the truth whether there be in this castle any moo men or
women. Sir said the verlet here in this place there be no moo creatures but
all only two prisoners who were delivered to my masters whom ye have slayue
to be kept hire in prison to the entente that it should never be known where
as they were become and they were sent hither by the co^maundemen of the duke
of vygor. well good friend said arthur bring me to them, than the varlet
conuayed him straight to the prison where as they were closed in, and the
varlet did unlock all the doors which were meruaylously wrought, and at the
last they came to a great cofer all of yren which was surely made fast to the
wall with great bonds and bars of stele, than Arthur didd so much by his
strength that he brast open the cofer and took out the prisoners with much
pain, for they were sore charged with boltes of yren, so that they could stere
no manner of way, and wha^ they were loused one of them said A dear lord, I
wot not what ye be, nor whether ye have taken us out of prison for our welthe
or for our hurt, but for gods sake rather than ye should put us again into
this cofer first strike of our hedes. Certainly said Arthur we have non intent
to do you any manner of hurt therefore tell me of whens ye be and where ye were
borne. A sir said they, we are so nigh overcome for lack of mete, and so sore
bruised withal yt we can scant speak any word, therefore sir for gods sake
give us some mete. Fre^des said Arthur I can not tell whether there be any mete
and drink in this house or no. Yes sir said the varlet here in this house there
is suffycyent and it were to receive the mighty Emendus king of soroloys. Well
said Arthur than go fetch them some part thereof, than the varlet set up the
tables, and did set on them bread and wine and other mete sufficient, and than
they all did eat and drink as much as did please them, and when they had
done, the varlet demanded of the prisoners if they would be shaven, and they
answered. Yes with a right good will. Than the varlet apparayled all thing
ready, for he was a good ^arbour, and when they were shaven than the varlet
brought the^ gowns of the knights that were slain and wha^ they were
apparayled, they seemed well to be extraught of a noble lygnage, and so thee were
in deed as ye shall here after.

How Arthur after yt he had acheued ye adue^tures of the palace and delivered
the prisoners, and after how yt he acheued the adventure yt was in the galary
going in to the gardin of the mount perilous, and by his might with a great
bar bet down ii. massyue images of coper each of them holding a flayle yt
was of such wight y^ x. men might scant lift one of them fro the e^th.
wherewith they were ever beting with great strokes made by enchauntment, to
thentent that none should pass in to the gardyns of the mount peryllous and so
than failed and ended all the enchauntementes of that place. Cap. xliiii.
AFter that Arthur had delivered these prisoners and acheued the foresaid
adventures, than the varlet came to him and said. Sir it is of troth that ye
have fordone and overcome all the adventures of this place saving one, and
that is in ye galery going in to ye gardyn and sir if that were for done than
every body might goo and come in to this castle as surely as in to any other
place. well good friend quod Arthur I pray you bring me thither. Sir with a
right good will said ye varlet, but sir we must have first some fire with us,
for ye galery is so derke that we can se no thing there, and so than they
lyghted torches and went forth so far that at the last in a little strayte
way Arthur found two images of coper one on the one side and an other on ye
other side, and they had each of them a great flayle in their hands, wherewith
they contynually beat down right, ye which was made by enchauntement, so that
no creature could pass by them without death, and when Arthur saw them he took
his sword in his hand and laid on with all his might on these macomettes, in
such wise that his strokes might well be herd of a great way but for all that
he could not enpayre them, tha^ he perceived well that his sword could do him
but little help wherefore he took in his hand agree bar of a door that he found
there, and there with he laid on so fast that finally he bet down both these
macomettes, than all the encha^tme^t began to fail: for than he might
seclerely al about him, and with strayning of him self in this bataile his
wounds braste out again on bledyng wherefore he was feign to vna^me hi^ in the
same place, and than Bawdewin did stau^ch al his wounds again and dressed
them newly wi^h sweet and soft oyntementes than he would have armed him again
but than the varlet said. Sir your harneys shall but hurt your wou^des,
hardely leave it here still and arm you no more, for surely sir ye be now in
as good sauegarde as though ye were by your fader that engendered you. Friend
said Arthur look that here be no treson Sir I warau^t you on pain of my he^d,
sir boldly now ye may enter into the gardyn, and there ye shall find a noble
clerk who is son to a king who is pertaining to a right hye and mighty
pryncesse the noble Florence daughter and cyre to the puyssant king Eme^dus,
who has been there more than this half year to abide for your cominge. For me
said Arthur thou wotest not what thou say, for how should he have any
knowledge of me. Sir said ye varlet I can not tell you, but surely it is as I
say, therefore let us go thither. So they went forth and entered in the gardyn
wherein was all the pleasure that coud be thought, and as they went forth therein
playenge there came to Arthur a fair yoange varlet and goodly did salute him
and said. Sir ye be right hertelye welcome into the land of Soroloys as the
most desired knygh that ever was gyrde with sword. why good friend said Arthur
where is that place that I am so sore desired in Sir said he in all the lord
of Argence. Fair friend said he and why I am so sore there desired. Sir yt ca^
the prisoners that ye have delivered show you full well. Why quod Arthur how
know they what I am. Sir as god help me ye are better known here tha^ ye are
ware of^ for here is in this gardyn a noble clerk son to a king who has
tarried here a great season, who knows you well, and all the demenour that has been between you and the fair damoysel Iehannet or ye departed out of your own
country, and also he knows right well how that ye did at vyen in the
tournay, and also wat ye did at Brewle, and how ye made your cosyn Hector duke
of orgoule. In the name of god said Arthur I have great marvel how ye can
tell me all this. And as they were thus talking there came to them a great
flock of knights, than ye varlet said, sir yonder is my said lord who is
coming to you. Nay said Arthur I shall go unto him, at which time this said
master Ste^uen was apparyaled in a ma^tell of vyolet chamlet, and in a sircote
of grene satyn furred with ermyns, and as soon as he saw Arthur he auayled
his bonet and did salute him. Than Arthur said, a gentle master it is to me a
great rebuke that so noble a man as ye be should do to me so great reverence,
than the master did smyle and took him by the hand and said. Sir we have
^olnge trusted for the wealth and honor that is now come to you therefore now
ye be welcome as the chief sovereign knight of all the wide world, sir now I
think to go se this palace in to the which never man entered before save only
you, for ye are the first that ever entered thereto, and that is by your noble
valor, sir I know well ye be sore wounded, therefore I have made for you a little
drink, and than he sent for it incontinent, and when it was come he said, sir
drink thereof hardelye, fear for nothing in the name of God, for I desire more
your health and honor, tha^ of any other creature living. Than Arthur took it
and drank well thereof, and as soon as it was spredde abroad in his veins, he
was thereby suddenly all hole and more lustyer than ever he was before, for
than he thought yt his strength was do^bled, and truly in a manner so it was,
for by the virtue of these herbs he had ye grace yt ^ro thens forth there was
never man yt could draw out of his body any blood but only the foul monster
of the brosse with whom he fought at great Ieopardye, as ye shall here
afterward.

How master Steven went with Arthur in the palace wtin the castle to ye
intent to see the wonderful adventures that Arthur had there acheued. Cap. xlv.
When that Arthur had received the said drink and recovered there by his
health, than master Steven took him by the hand and said. Sir I have great
desire to go se this palace I pray you let us go thither, and so they.^^. went
forth together, before and all other followed them who would, and at the last
they came into the same na^owe enter where as Arthur had bete^ down these.ii.
^mages of coper with their great flayles, and there a great season they stood
and beheld them, and every man assayed to remeu^ one of their flayles, but it
would not be they were so heuye, than every man had great marvel how yt there
might be so much might in one knight as to beat down so mighty and heavy a
thing, and tha^ they entered in to the palace ^he which was the most fairest
and rychest that ever was seen with man's eye, and at the last they entered
into the rich chamber where as the goodly bed was, than master Steven had
great marvel of ye inestymable richesse of that chamber and bed, Than came
to them the.ii prisoners, and did salute master Steuen^ and when the master
saw them he knew one right well and made to hi^ good chere and sayd^ what sir
marks have ye been here pryner. Ye sir said he truly, and for yt neuew of the
duke of bygor, wha^ he had slain my lord and murdered my brethren by false
treason, than he took me and this either knight and did send us into this
place as pryuely as he could, and did deliver us to the knyght^s that keep this
place who be now al dead by the prowes of this knight, who has delivered us
out of prison and thraldom, and thanked be god and his nobleness now we be
escaped f^o all danger. In the name of god said the master, it was g^ete
need yt he should com in to this country, and than he said to Arthur. Sir it
draws fast to night ward, wherefore it is hye time to go to souper and sir I
will soupe with you here in this chamber. Sir I thank you said Arthur, but I can
not tell wheder there be any thing co^ueni^nte to receive such a pe^s^n as ye
be. Sir said the master by the faith that I owe to you I am pertayn^ng to so
hye and p^yssant and rych lady who has sufficient both for you and for us all,
than ye master commanded ^o make ready the souper, than anon the tables were
laid, and the masters servants ran to h^s tent on the mount peryllous, and
a^one they brought all manner of thing nec^ssary, vessel and plate of gold and
silver great plente, than the clothes were laid and wa^er brought forth, than
Arthur refused to w^sshe with ye master because he was son unto a king. well
sir said the master I pray you fulfill my desire for truly I k^ow better
your estate and honor ^ha^ ye wene I do, than Arthur did as he was required,
than the master sat ^^wne and Arthur by him, and the marks before them, and
all other sat down at other side tables, where as they were as rych^ly s^rued
as though they had been in the house of the noble Flore^s, but though she were not
there, yet she paid for all th^yr expenses. Thus Arthur sat at soupe^, who
seamed to all them that se him ^o be right fair and gracyous above all other
that ever they saw, and so they praised him much in their hertes, and wha^
they had souped at good leisure and the tables taken away, than they set them
down on cosshyns of sylke, and ye master said to Arthur. Sir behold here my
lord the marks, who is and shall be your knight, for ye have delivered him
out of prison That is troth said the marks, and therefore I thank him. well
sir said Arthur, I herd you say as I remember how that the neuew of the duke
of bigor caused you to be put here in prison, and also how he slew your
brethern by treason, wherefore if it may please you I require you show me how
it did fortune. And wha^ master St^uen herd him inquire for the matter, he had
great Joy, for than h^ knew well that Arthur wo^de remedy that case, than the
marquis answered and said. Sir the matter is very long to rehearse, th^rfore I
fear me the report thereof shall anoy you. Sir truly said Arthur it shall be
no pa^ne to me to here it. Than the marks said, sir it is of tro^th how that
the lord of Arg^nt^n was my brother, who was in his time a right good knight. I
say it not because he was my brother, but of very troth he was so greatly
allowed that the renown of him was spredde a broad all the lond^ of Soroloys,
for there he was reputed to be the most sovereign knight of al ye world, and
so it fortuned yt the duke of bygor who is a mighty lord in his country made
on a day a ^ournaye ^o be holden at his cite of bygor because of a neuewe of
his who was married the same day unto a right hye lygnage, and this dukes
neuewe was and yet is right fyers and orgyllous, and is a right greatly
redoubted knight of his hands, and in every place he was reputed next to my
brother to be the best knight of the world and at this foresaid turnay was my
brother, and this dukes neuew had great envy at him because of the great
nobleness that he herd repu^ed of him and so ^oke counsel with some of his
affinite and det^rmined to Just against my lord m^ brother, to the^tent to
abate his renown, and so he took to his company.x other knights, and wha^ the
tournay was begone, he and his company ran at ones at my brother, who as than was
not ware of their malicious purpose, nor had no mo in his company but me and
his squier, wherefore we suffered much pain, but finally my brother delivered us
all fro them and bette down the dukes neuew to the e^th, but than my brother
by his gentylnesse did that I would not have done, for when he saw him at the
earth he lighted and brought him an other good horse, and helped him to mount
thereon, and than my brother lept again on his horse and went to the tourney
and there did such meruayles of arms yt all that beheld him meruayled
thereat, and generally they all said how that in all the world there was none
like him And when the ^ukes neuewe herd all that praise be given to my
brother, his heart swelled for anger and envy, and for despite he would no more
lust ye day. And wha^ all was ended, the price was given to my brod^r by the
co^se^t of both parties and so than all the company went to the court to the
duke, and there they began greatly to praise my brother. And wha^ his neuew
herd that he was right sore dyspleased because he was beten down by him the
same day, ^herfoe openly before the duke for pure malice he appeled my brother
of treason, and said how that he had beten him down in the tournay by craft
and false t^eso^ Than my brother could no longer endure his words, bu^ said.
In faith sir ye say untruly, for I never thought treson in all my life, neither
to you nor to non other creature, and therewith in the quarrel he did cast
down his glove at the foot of the duke. And when this dukes neuew saw that he
had cast his glove, he was nie en^aged for anger and d^spite and stepped on his
fete and took a great mace of stele from a varlet that stood beside, and
the^with he struck my brother on ye head so that the blood fell to the earth, and
when I saw my brother so stricken I took my sw^rde in my hand and thought to
have slain him, but than other knights kept us ^sonder, so than my brothers
company began to draw together, and his company in likewise, whereby it was
likely there to have been a great fray, but wisely the duke appesed both
parties and was right sore dyspleased with the outrage of his neuew. Tha^ my
brother said to the duke, sir your neuewe has appeled me of treason, and
therefore behold here lies my glove to defend my self in the qua^el, that by
treason without any defiaunce, and or I was ware he has stricken me like a ^alse
traitor as he is and that will I prove my body against his, and therefore sir
duke let me have right according to the law of arms. Tha^ was this dukes
neuew greatli blamed of every knight^ who said generally yt if he had ^ight he
should be for this deed right sore punisshed^ Tha^ the duke was right sorrowful,
and did much labor to appese my brother, but in no wise ^ e would be content
of a great season, how be it fynalli the duke required hi^ so much, and so did
all other knights that my brother who had a gentle heart did forgive all y^
matter, and there the pras was ma^e and each o^ them bound to other in two. M.
pound to keep and observe such direceions as the duke would take in yt matter,
wherwt they said they were well content. Than the duke said, syrs first each of
you shall pardon other of al evil wills that has been between you. And ther^o
they answe^ed and said yt they were pleased so to do^ and in knowledge thereof
they enbraced each other and kissed together. Than the duke determined ferder,
how that his ne^ew should deliver to my brother.CC. pound of yearly land to have
to him and his airs for evermore the which direccion his neuew there
confermed and there my brother was put in full possessyon thereof both by the
duke and also by his neuew, who showed fayret semblaunt outward to my brother
tha^ he thought inward in his heart. Than my brother took leave of the duke and
his neuew under the false color of love co^^ayed my brother part of the way,
but fall^ and like a traitor he had laid a ^^^^hement in a little wode of three
score me^ in harne^s and so there or we were w^^e they o^^he in behind us, and
there sh^^ fully slew my brother and two of his sons of the age of.xii.
or.xiii years And so there they slew a.xl. knights y^ were in our company and
there he took me and ney f^low prisoners out of the which ye have delivered
us. And sir it is so my bother has no mo children left on live saving a
daughter, who is enheritour to all the land of Argenton, and the dukes neuew
has taken fro her all the ^heritaunce that she is borne unto and has he in
keeping, and is purposed to mary her to a boy who is his barbo^t, who by reason
ought to be married to a great earl or else a lord both for her nobleness,
richesse, and friends: but as now she is in y^ case that there is none y^ will
mayntaine her right for many of her friends ben dead and I have been here in
prison sith the death of my lord my brother her fader and also her men and
subjects dare do nothing for lack of a capicayne, and this duke is g^etly
redoubted for he is mighty both of hauoyre and of friends, and therefore my
nece is lykely to be lost, for she shall be given at this next mawdelayne tide to
a lewd boy and she is likely to be disher^^ed for ever. For she has no help
nor co^sayle, and there with this marks pyteously began to w^pe for the great
sorrow that he had al his heart Than master S^euen said sir I ensure you it is
of a troth al y^ this marks has showed you. Certayn^y said arthur if god will
send me the grace y^ I may here of a knight of min that should come hither to
me, tha^ will I faithfully ensure you to do my pain to help and socour this
noble damoysel. Sir quod master Steue^ I will know to morrow how your knight
does bu^ now it is to late, and sir ye sh^al ly alnight i^ his pal^s which is
pertaining to my la^^^ ^ores, for it was given her wha^ she was (...) ii. days
old, bowl it she was never here, nor yet none other but you all only,
therefore sir keep it for my la^ye till the season that ye may (...)ble grace
for ye have made it (...) manner of enchau^teme^tes, ano^^er (...) go this night
into my tente whereas I have layne all this season, and tomorowe betymes I will
come to you again and bring all my stuff into t^is p^ace but sir look that ye
ly all this night in th^s ryall bed, and there Arthur promis^^ (...) so to do.
Tha^ the master and his and (...) departed, fro him as for that (...).

How Proserpyne queen of the fayrye about mydnyght appeared to Arthur with great
light of ^orches, and how that she showed him that within the mount peryllous
there was the white shyeld and theg good sword enchaunted called clarence, and
how that he should have them with much honor if his her^e durst serve him. And
how the next day master Steven led Arthur into the herber where as the
white shield was, the which coud never be remeued fro the tree whereon it
hanged, and how that Arthur took it at his case and clarence the swerd also,
the which could never before that time be drawn out of the sheth, nor it would
help no body but all only Arthur who drew it out lightly, and after that it
did hi^ much help as ye shall here after. Ca. x^vi
When the master Steven was departed, than Arthur laid him down in the ryal
tyche bed and slepte well all his first sleep till it was about mydnygh, than
he awoke and saw great clerenes of torche light before him, and perceived
stonding before his bed a queen crowned with gold, who was the most fair
creature yt ever was seen, and he thought she spoke to him and said Arthur
friend here is in this place the wh^te shield and clarence the good sword of
the fayry, therefore thou shall have much honor if thy heart be good. And
therewith she vanisshed away, whereof Arthur had great marvel, both of her
beauty and also of there sudden departing, thus remaned Arthur till it was
clear day than he rose, and master steven came to him and they went and herd
mass, and after mass Arthur said to the master, sir I ca^ not tell what
queen it was yt this night was with me in the chamber where as I lay but it
was the goodlyest figure of a woman that ever I saw and she said ^o me how y^
there was in this place the why^e sheld and the good sword cla^ence. And when
master Steven herd that he smyled and said. Sir I see well it is you to whom
the sword and sheld is desteni^^ unto, diverse knights has assayed to take
them, but they could never remeue them fro the place where ^s they be,
therefore now I think they have (...) master sir ^et us go thither and see
what will fortune. Than they issued out of y^ palace and went into the garbyn
where as was the rich pauylyon pertaining to the noble Florence, the which
(...) lest of the rychest work of the world of grene satyn and crimse^,
bordred with gold and asure, and the post that bare it was of fine yuery, and
the cords of grene sylke, and in the top thereof stood an egle of borned
gold, and at the two corners there stood two great gryffons shining agenst the
son Than Arthur remembered his vysion that he had or he departed out of his
own country, and so he beheld the egle a great ceason, and at the last he
come ^o the pauylion, than Arthur saw before him in the front thereof the
pe^sonage of a queen crowned wi^h gold, the which crown had.vi. branches,
the which signified.vi. realms, and in eueri bra^^^ the there were written
letters, and in ye first was written Emendus the mighty king of Soroloys, and
this branch has chief and highest of all other, and in ye second was written
Florence queen of the realm of blau^che toure, and in the third was given the
king of orqueny, and in the fourth was written Piuernous king of vale found
father to master Steven And in the.v. king of mormall, and in the vi.
Ismaelite the great. This crown was set fall of precius stones, and this image
was fair and gentil to behold, with her forehead plain and white, and her
here like the color of gold, her brows small and propre, somewhat drawing to
the brown color, and her b^sage pla^n neyt^er to long nor to round, color
lyk* as ros^s and lilies togider had been meddled, her nose long and straight,
and her ruddy mouth somewhat smiling, her eyes ^owly, and al her body and other
me^bres made without any reprehencion by the ordinance of nature who had set
in her all beat, and she was vestured with a s^m^te of grene streyte gyrde to
her with a face of gold, so that somewhat her little round and lyly white breasts
might be se^e the which became her wonderslye well, and over all this she had on
a sircote of crymsen lined with vyolet sendall, and her wide sleues were of grene
enbordred with flowers of gold and with rich pearls And this image held
between her hands a chaple^ of sylke wrought subtylly full of fresh flowers,
and about the border thereof were letters wrought of precious stones that said.
He shall keep me for his own that shall have this chaplet And when Arthur had
red well at length these let^ers, and saw the fresh beauty of this image, than
his heart opened for great love, and with great and fervent desire he loved the
presentacyon of that image, and therewith stood before it in a great study. Than
master Steue^ said sir I ensure you my lady is such as this image
represents. Sir said Arthur than in her is all the beauty of the world. Ye
sir said the master there be two persons yt rese^bleth this image. First the
queen y^ ye saw this last night appear to you who is called proserpyne queen of
y^ fayry, who did give to my lady Flore^s, this castle and this pauilion, and
destenyed on her how y^ she should never be married but to the best knight of
the world, and to him this image should give her chaplet yt she holds in her
hands, and sir I trust it be you. Secondly also my lady Flore^s in a^l things
resembles to this image And so the queen Proserpyne and my lady Florence and
this image are in all points so like yt ye can not know the one fro the other,
and the hye brau^che yt is in the crown of this image betokens yt might ^
king Emendus fader to my lady Florens, and the second sygnifieth my ladies
realm, and the other.iiii. represente.iiii. other kings who are subjects to
my lady Flore^s and to her fader, therefore sir and it please you let us enter
into this pauylyon and se wheder ye may have the sheld and swerd that all other
have failed of, and so they entered into the pauilion, and in the mids thereof
Arthur saw where there hanged on a perch the shield and the swerd. Than
Arthur went thereto boldly, and took it as easily as though it had been his
own before, than he set his hand to the sword and so drew it out of the
sherhe, and the blade thereof was so clear that it did cast meruayllously great
clerenese. and therefore it was called cla^e^ce and before that time it was
never drawn out of the shethe nor seen with man's eye, and Arthur delte as
easily therewith ash did with his hwne. And when master Steven law this he had
great Joy and said. Sir I se well ye are the same knight that it was delivered
unto therefore now I have great Joy and I trust that god shall cause you to
attain to much honor and nobleness. Than Arthur said, sir ye promised to
tell me some tidinges of my knight that should come hither, sir I require you
to tell me if ye know any think of him. Sir said the master I know well how ye
promised to come (...) seek this adventure which ye have ac^eued, (...) no wise
ye would suffer him to come with you, and therefore ye sent him by the great hie
way through out ynde the more to thentent he should not se your death nor that
he should die with you, and so sir he is not as yet come for in deed he cannot, for
he is in the castle called the brosse, and sir it is by all likelyhode impossyble
yt ever he shall depart the^s without death though he were made of yre^ and stele,
fo^al the remedy of the world ca^ not keep him fro death, therefore Arthur
comfort your self, and of a thing that is lost without recover never think
there on more. Truly sir said Arthur but if I have my knight I shall never have
c^forte therefore speak to me never thereof, but sir I require you how he is so
lost or in such ieoperdy as ye speak of. with a right good will said the master
but I fere me it will anoy you for it is a long process to rehearse. well said
Arthur as for y^ I care not, tell on I require you

How master Steue^ showed Arthur how yt Gouernar his knight was in the castle
of brosse, and how yt the custom of that castle was first begone. Ca. xlvii.
THa^ the master said, sir it is of a troth yt the castle of the brosse is a
right strong and a noble place, and is ye chief head of al ye country, for there
is wela v.C. gentylmen yt hold their lo^d thereby and they are all subjects to
him that is lord of yt place sir it passes not two year ago that there was a
lord of this castle, who was called sir Neuelo^ le roux, a full good and a
gentle knight who was right sage reputed and gretli rich, and right fore
bedrad, and well beloved of all people and sir it is of a trou^he that joining
to this castle within ii. leges thereof there is a forest in the which there is
a maruaylous great deep pit and the enter thereof is.iiii, square, and it is
well.iiii. spear length broad, and it so black and stinking yt no creature can
abide nere it and into this abominable pit there does repair a marvelous and
a right horrible mo^ster, the foulest figure y^ ever ^as (...) or herd of, for
he is well.xxx. foot long and his head three times more larger tha is the heed
of an ox, and his eyes bigger than a man's fyst, and some of his ^e^h standing
out his mouth more than before and an half, wherewith he w^^or^^e both yren and
stele, and his arms by^ and long without any mesure, his nails or clowes
longer then a foot, so hard and sharp yt there is nothing but that he will
perce it, and all his body as black as any cole, and as hard as stele, for
there i^ nothing yt can perce or enpayre him and also he is of that strength
that he is able to carry away at ones.iii. knights armed And he eteth never
other mete but saw flesh of mankind* and also he is to lig^e and swyft that
an horse cannot ten t^o him, and oftentimes he has been assoyed with great hosts
of men, but al th^^ cold never do him any manner of hur^e ^eyther with sword,
spear, nor crosdowe, nor any other wepen and thus he does great trouble to all the hol^ country. And ^o sir it fortuned yt a two year past ab^ute s. Laurence
tide, yt this said lord sir Neuelon was comi^g out of ynde the more fro the
emperor who loved him right well, and so he had thought to have gone home to
his own castle of the brosse, and a twenty of his servants in his ^^pant and
he passed by this forest were as this great pit is and so unware to him he and
his squier did rest the^ not far fro the pit and suffered his other company to
ride forth on before, and so it fortuned that this foul monster was the same
morning issued out of his p^t, and so as soon as he espied this lord Neuelon
he ran on him and so strangled and bare him into his great pyt and so there he
was utterly lost, and wha^ this was known there was made for hi^ right great
sorrow, and sir this lord has and daughter who is named blau^che flower, who
was then of the age of.xv. year and when she herd the tidi^ges of the death of
the lord her father she made full great sorrow and so she entered into a little
chapel and there she abode.xv days contynually demening wonderful sorrow for
her father, and ever she praid to god that she might have some vengeance of
this foul monster, so long thus she prayde that at last on a night she herd
a voice that said to her how yt the knight yt over comes the lord of this
castle at the end of two years shall fight against this monster, how be it the
voice showed not whether he should overcome the monster or else be ouercomen
himself, than the yo^ge damoysel reported all this that she herd the voice say
to her brethern and to her uncle, and so than they ordained among them that
her uncle should abide in the castle and Just with all knights yt passed by yt
way, unto the time yt he were over comen with a strong knight, and so it was
ordained that if the knight of the castle overcome the knight without than he
should lose his horse and harneys, and also be led to the justice, that it
should be cryde throughout all the country behold the knight yt is vaynquished,
and if the strange knight without overcome him of the caste^, than the knight
stran^ger should go to the castle and there be received as thef^ lord thereof
and be served honorable, and tha^ he should keep the castle and that usage til
he were overcome with an other knight Sir it fortuned your knight Gouernar to
pass by this castle and there did just against the lord thereof, and so ouerca
him and mani mo since that time that he was feign to keep the said usage, and so
sir he is in this castle, and it passes not now to come.vii. wekes of the full
seaso of ^wo year since the usage began, and sir I think verily there shall come
no knight thider between this and that by whom he should be overcome, and as soon as the two year be full co^plet than shall he be led to fight with this
terryble monster, and I am sure as soon as he comes to him he is but dead and
it were a.C. such as he is, and sir the^e is mo than.CC. knigh^es co^tynualli
lodged about this castle to then tent yt he should not strie away therefore I
repute him but a dead man, for there is no succor ca^ help him. well master
said Arthur since it is thus as ye say as god help me there is nothing shall
hold me but I will go thither and put my body in ieoperdy for his, for it were
a great shame for me thus to leese my knight, therefore Bawdewyn f^e^de make
^edy al my gere for I will remeue to morrow betymes, for certainly I will abide
no longer for all the would, and wha^ the master herd him he knew well yt there
was none might let him of his enterprise, how be it he said. Sir ye ought not
to be reputed neither for sage nor wise that will take on him such a thing that
he cannot acheue and to go there as peril is without remedi it is no hardines
thus to do* but a full great folly, therefore sir for gods sake abide. Master
quod Arthur speak no more to me thereof, for sure^^ ^ir I will go thither and look
ones on that foul monster though he be the devil of hell well sir said the
master as god will so be it, but sir sith ye be he to whom it is destenyed to
acheue all the adue^tures of this counter of Sorolois, whereof this adventure
is one of the gretest, the wh^che I pray to god that ye may s^bdowe it
therefore sir take with you this white shield for there is nothing that can
enpayre it, and this sword cla^^nce for there was never yet a better, and thus
sir sith ye will needs go I trust ye may go yt more surelyer and I pray god to
send you good fortune and speed, and saufe to come again and so for y^ night
they went to their restes.

How that Arthur when he was departed fro the port noyre for to go the deliver
Gouernar out of the castle of the brosse, and also for to fight with the
monster, he found in a fair medowe the neuew of the duke of bygor accompanied
with.xiii. other knights, who assailed him right fyersly, but defended him
self so valiauntly that he slew.ii. of them and wounded so the dukes neuew
that he was feign to be carried away in an horse lytter. Ca. xlviii.


IN the morninge betymes Arthu^ rose and take leave of the master, who said to
him. Sir for gods sake return again as shortly as ye may, for I have many
things to speak with you of, and sit I^ this marks shall keep this pala^si^
the mean season, and Arthur promised so to do* and so departed he and Bawdewyn
and rode forth.ii. days without ^yndig of any adventure till at last on a friday
about none they entered into a fair forest and tode a long season and found
no creature, at last hey came in to a fair meadow lusty and grene, and arthur
was in a great thought remembrynge on his shield yt could not be enpayred, and
also of clarence his sword the which would cut euerything, and he had great
desire to se them proved, to thentent yt he might know wheder they were of yt
virtue or not, also he was mounted on his good horse assyle, and as he rode
thus thinking, he met suddenly with xiiii. knights all armed, and.iiii. of
them were on horsbacke, and the other.x. were lyghted on foot and were sitting
under an oak because of the shadow thereof, for y^ weder was than very hot,
and wha^ these iiii. knights on horsbacke saw Arthur one of them dystranged
him self and without speaking of any word he ran at Arthur and struck him on
the shelde^ great stroke and passed forth without breakinge of his spear, and
therewith Arthu^ looked about him and at the last the knight that had stri^ken
him was ready apparayled to have returned again, than Arthur ran at him,
and the knyht brake his spear* but Arthur gave him such a stroke that he
frusshed down both Horse and manne all on an hepe, so rudely that with the
fall he brake one of his legs and his horse fell on him, than Arthur said to him.
Sir ye ben traitor thus to stryke me without distau^ce, but I think ye have now
great need of a carpenter to make you some styltes and croches, for I wene ye
can not life without a lenyng stock. Than an other of these knights came on
Arthur and he went shortly to the earth and his heles upward, and when his
other two fellows saw that they can both at ones on Arthur and hit with both
their spe^es at ones in the mids of his sheld but they remeued him no more
than if they had stryken agenst a great toure, and so they passed forth by, and
than re^our^ed again with their swerdes in their hands and assailed fyersly
Arthur on al sides than Arthur waxed angry and took in his hand his good sword
clarence and struck therewith so the first that he claue his head down to the
sholdres, and when his fel^w saw that he fled to his ^elawes yt were ^n
foot. And than sir Iseharte neuewe to the duke of bigor who was fye^se and
fell, and captain of al y^ company when he saw one of his knights slain who
was his cosyn germayn he s^uffed in the nose and bette together his teth, and
bended his brows as though he had been wode, and called for his helm and for
his horse, and would suffer none of his company to go with him, for he said he
would alone revenge the death of his cosyn therewith he mounted on his horse and
took a great spear and a mighty, than Arthur espied where a spear stod^ leuing
against a tree, and took it in his hand and rode against the knight that came
rennynge at him* and they met so ^udely that they al to sheueted their speres
and so passed forth without any hurt at yt course. And when sir Isembarte saw
that he had not beten down his felawe, he went to Arthur and struck him on
the shield with his sword, but the stroke is bounded again, and when the
knight saw that he was right sorrowful and sore displeased, and than again
with all his might he struck Arthur in ye mids of his shield so rudely that
his sword brake asonder in the mids. And when Arthur saw that he said, sir
knight ye have made of one two, for ye have made^ short sword of a long, now
ye shall se how I can work than Arthur struck hi^ with clare^ce his good
sword on his helm so rudely that the stroke did glent^ down on his at me
and did cut asonde^ all his harneys and entered in to the fless he so that the
stroke bare away agrete piece of y^ brawne of his arm, the which stroke was so
heavy that it descended down to the crope of the horse and cut asonder the
arson of the sadel and gave the horse and great wound, and therewith do the
horse (...) man fell down to the earth. Than ye knights servants ran to
help him, but he lay and great while in a trance, and when he reuyued he
said to Arthur, sir knight ye have so wounded me and slain my cosyn germayne,
but sir I promise you faithfully that as soon as I shall be hole again I shall
render to you this bounte, for I will stryke of your hed^i the sholdres where
so ever I mete you, either in church or in any other place, armed or unarmed,
well sir said Arthur than ye have given me respite till ye be hole again, and
than by the grace of god ye will not do so much hurt as ye speak of than the
other knights would have fought with Arthur, but their master defended them
the contrary, because he said he would sle him his own hands Than Arthur
departed fro them, and ye knights put their lord in a horse lytter and so
carried him to a castle of his own, where as he ^emayned till he had recovered
his health And Arthur after that he was departed fro them rode so long til he
issued out of the forest, and rode up to a great hye hill, and at the
desce^ding there of he saw where a knight alarmed came right rudely to him ward,
and a great spear in his hand, and when he came to him he said. Sir are ye
of the company of the.xiiii* knights yt went this way but late. Nay certainly
said Arthur for they did their pain to have trobled me, but I thank god they
mist of their purpose, but sir I pray you wherefore do you axe the question. As
god help me sir because if ye were any of them I would ^le you mine own hands
or ever ye past any ferder if I could, and also their master for he is the
most shamefullest knight y^ lives, and falsest traytu^ that ever was, for he
and his company had nigh slain a brother of mine this morni^g by this rivers
side because he would not give him a fawcon that he bate on his fist, therefore
he ran at him with his sword in his hand and has wounded him in.xv. places
of his bodi, as he that was unarmed, and the traitor and all his company be in
varne^s, and therefore I am come after him to slay him and I might how be it I
think it could not lie in my power, for he is a knight greatly redouted,
nevertheless I had rather to be dead than my brother should be unrevenged. Sir
said Arthur take no thought for ye matter, nor follow him no ferther this day,
for surely he is in no good point as now to fight with you nor yet with none
other, for he is right sore wounded a sir said the knight blessed be god who
keep and preserve him that has done ye deed. Tha^ the knight returned again
with Arthur talking of that matter. At the last Arthur demanded of him what
manner knights they were and of whe^s. Sir as god help me it was sir I
sembarte neuew to the duke of Bygor, the most falsest traitor in all the
world, for he has murdered by ^reason the lord of argenton fally without any
cause. ye sir quod Arthur since it is he than his trouble pleases me so much
the be^t^r, a by the grace of god he shall have mo^^ ancyaunce within short
space. So than they approached to y^ place where as this k^^ghtes brother say
sore wounded. Than Arthur called to him Bawdewyn who was a good surgeon, and
commanded that he should do his diligence as shortly as might be to hele that
knight. And so arthur say there al ye night, and the ^night demanded of him
whether he was ^y^i^g and he answered and said to the castle of the brosse. well
sir said y^ a night and ye will believe me ye shall not come there, for the
goinge thyde^ is much peryllous. As for all that I ente not said Arthur, for I
will go thider and Just with the knight that is within. well sir said the knight
in the name of god so be it, and sith ye will needs go I shall bring you thither,
for I am one of the knights of the same compani that are lodged with out to
thentent that the knight that is within the castle should not s^ele away Sir
quod arthur know you well the knight that is within the castle or what ^s his
name. Ueryly sir he is a knight stranger and his name is sir Gouernar a big
knight and a strong and a brown o^ color, and there is no knight that Iust^^h
with him but he goth to the ground, and therefore who so ever will Just with him
has need to be of great virtue and strength well said arthur I will assay him,
and so they wte^ ^o rest, and in the morning arose. and the said knight who
was named Iosseran the almayne, and they rode forth the next way to the castle
of the brosse, and arthur left Bawdewyn behind him at the castle to take heed
to the wounded knight. Thus arthur and Iosseran the almayne rode forth so long
togeder yt on a wednesday about none they entered into a fair meadow before the
castle of the brosse. And when the knights yt were without keeping the tents
saw Iosseran their fellow and arthur, with him, than they went to their
harneys and came unto them and made right great thereto Iosseran their
companion, and they said to A^thur, sir knight ye must furnishe that is
belonging to you to do and yt is surely ye must strike this shield and than ye
must just with the knight that ye shall se issue out of this castle. well said
Arthur in the name of god all this shall I do with a right good will And these
knights beheld him well and perceived that he was a goodly knight and praised
him much in their hertes. Therwt arthur spurred forth his good horse and ran
at the shield with his spear and gave it such a stroke yt he claue it asonder
in the mids. Than Iosseran said to his fellows, certainly if he give such
strokes to his enemies there may none endure him. Tha^ Gouernar in the castle
was sone armed, and issued out. And than the damoysel was mounted on the wales
to behold the battle And when Gouernar saw Arthur he knew him not because of
his white sheld but Arthur knew him right well, and beheld the countenance of
Gouernar how he stretched himself in his sadell, and plunged his shield, and
dressed his spear and made him ready, wherefore Arthur loved him much the better,
and so they ^an each at other, and meet so rudely yt Gouernar brake his spear,
but Arthur struck him so fiersly that Gouernars horse enfo^dred and fell under
him, and so horse and man all went to the earth, and than Arthur turned and
laid his hand on his sword and was coming again to gouernar, and all that
beheld his valiantness praised him much, and Gouernar did nothing but was
feign to get him on his fete. Than all the knights went to him and would have
unarmed him and led him to the Justice. And when Arthur saw that, he could not
suffer that he should have so much shame and said. Syrs it is no right nor
reason that ye should led him forth to the Justice, for his horse fell under
him, and therefore though he fell it was the fault of the horse and not of ye
knight* for he has done right well his deuoyre, and also he is my man, for I
am his lord, wherefore he is bound not to withstand his master, so than he
is not to blame sith he has done well his devour. And when Gouernar herd his
lord speak he knew him right well by his speech, than he did of his helm and
ran to him, than Arthur lyghted of his horse and so they clipped and kissed
and made great Joy each to other and when Iaket saw his old master arthur
he kneeled down and did him great reverence. and when all the other knights
saw ye great honor that Gouernar and Iacket made to arthur, and how that he
was their lord and master they thought tha^ well that he was some noble man and
of some great lygnage, and therefore they would not displease him, but let
Gouernar alone in peace, and so they brought both Arthur and Gouernar in to
the castle to the lady, and the damoysell received them with great Joy. There
Arthur remained in great Joy till it came to.iii. days space before the
season prefyxed that he should go fight with the terryble monster. Than all
the knights that were without came to arthur to speak with him, and when they
were in his presence and seeing him so fair and gentyl, wherefore they loved
him with all their hertes, and said among themself, it is great damage to
send to his death so gentle and so noble a personage. And Arthur herd them
well, but he fared as though he had not herd. So finally these knights said
to him. Sir it is so ye have been here a season, and ye be the last that has
ouercomen ye knight of this castle, and now the term is come that ye must
goo and fight with the monster, who passes not fro this castle the dystaunce
of two leges, and therefore it behooves you to remeue this next day betymes,
and we shall bring you unto another castle perta^nynge to the lady of this
place, the which is nigh to the den where as the monster holds his abydyng
therefore sir make you ready and all your harneyes, for we fere gretely ye shall
find it a Ieopardous adventure to bring to a good end. Well sir said Arthur
I am content to remeue when so ever ye will have me. And when they herd him
say so, they had of him great pity, so that d^uerse of th^ym pryuely wept
for his sake. Syrs said Arthur I am here alone, therefore I pray you keep
company with me here this night and let us make good chere and to mo^owe
betymes we will remeue when it shall please you. And so they granted him and
tarried there all night till it was time in the morning to rise.

How that Arthur fought with the monster, the most foulest and horrible figure
that ever was seen with man's eyes and so vaynquyshed him by his valiant
prowess and strak of his head and did send it to the fair Florence* Cap.
xlix.


IN the morning Arthur arose and herd mass, and all the other knights with
him, and after mass the mete was made redi and when they had ea^en at their
leyser, than the knights went to th^yr tents and armed them, and so did
Arthur and Gouernar. Than y^ lady brought to Arthur a fair sword, the which
was her faders, and so he took and gyrte it to about him by his other sword
c^arence than they called him the knight with the two swerdes. So he took his
leave of the lady, and she commanded him to god. And when he was departed she
said all weeping. A gentyl knight it is great damage to send such a person
as ye be to your death. And when arthur was out of the castle, than there were
in his company.v. hundred to conduyte him to the other castle, and so long
they rode that at last they aryued thereat, and the same day the monster had
taken a bocher and devoured him in the presence of them all without the castle
gate, but when the porter of this castle saw al these knights coming, he
knew well they were the knights of the brosse that brought with them the
knight that should fight with the monster, therefore he opened the gates, and
than all the people of the castle ran to behold Arthur, who was clean
covered with his white shield, and holding his hand on the pomel of his sword
having a right goodlye chere and a hardy s^mblau^t, than every person that
beheld him said each unto other. Alas what damage is it to send such a
person to his death. A gentle knight god have mercy on thy soul, for thy
bodi can not long endure, and this was the common voice* and so they conuayed
him on the degrees in to the hall, and that night there they rested them, and
in the morning they all arose and he^d mass. And arthur received the holy
sacrament of the blessed body of our lord Jesus christ in form of bread, and
after mass they all assembled them in the hall, and there talked together of
diverse matters, and as they were thu^ comonyng they herd the monster rore and
braye out for lack of mete, and was issued out of his den, and made greatter
noise than.x. bulls had brayed all together, than all they of the town and
castle had great fere, wherefore they close^ them self in their houses, and
shytte fast their doors and windows, for they knew^ stell that the monster
rather than he would dye for honger would come to that castle and devour them
all* And as soon as Arthur herd him he demanded for his harneys, and
Gouernar did bring it to him with much great pain and fere And all the other
knights were ryght^ delent for his sake, for they doubted gretely of him lest
he should be slain. And when he was armed all the people of the castle
followed him. Than the processions went throughout all the town and castle,
and all prayed to our lord to keep and defend their champyon. Than was
Arthur mounted on his good horse and a great spear well headed with stele in his
hand, and the white shyelde about his neck, and clarence his good swe^de
about him, and also the sword that the lady of the brosse had given him, and
so he issued out of the castle, than they shet fast the gates afterhym, and so
they all mounted up to the batylmentes of the walls to behold the adventure
of Arthur, and so Arthur rode forth till he came to the enter of this pytie,
and the mon^^er the same ^yme was sitting on the brynk^ thereof, and when he
espied Arthur he rose up on his fete, and bette so together his tethe that it
was herd a great way of, and came to Arthur with his arms abroad to
thenten^e that he w^l^^ have borne him to his pytte, but wisely Arthur set his
spear before him y^ which was great and bygge and well headed with fine stele,
and ^he monster who fered nothing ran so rudely agenst the spear point, that
^he spear sheuered all to pieces, but it did no manner of hurt to the monster
and so he approached to Arthur, and thought to have enbraced him in his arms,
but than Arthur put before him his white shield, and the mo^ster dashed with his
nails thereat thinkinge to have pe^ced it through, but in no wise he could
enpraire the shield, for the property thereof was such yt nothing should enter
nor enpayre it. And when the monster saw yt he had done no hurt to the shield
he began to enrage and fare like a fend of hell, and than he took Arthur by the
helm with his longeteth, the which were as sharp as stele. And wha^ Arthur saw
his mouth so wide open, he took y^ sword that the lady of the ^rosse gave him
and dashed it into his mouth. And when the monster felt the sword in his
mouth, he let go his hold of y^ helm and took the swerd bitwene his teth and
al to brake it, as though it had been but glass. And when Arthur saw that he
knew well that if clarence his good sword did not help him his lif was but
lost, and so took the good sword in his hand. And than the monster took him by
the helm with one of his hands, and by the sheld with the other hand, and al
his nails perced his helm as lightly as though he had felt nothing, and
dashed arthur so sore with the other hand on the shield that nigh he had fallen
with the stroke but he could not perce the shield. Than arthur lift up
clarence his good sword and struck the monster therewith on the head so rudely
that the sword entered therein more tha^ an handefull. And when the monster
felt him self wounded, for anger, he bette his teth together, and rouled his
eyes the which glemed like brondes of fy^e, and bette togider his fistes and
made a terrible noise.

How that the king Emendus sent a knight named Brysebar acompanied with a
thousand men of war to thentent that he and his company should go fight with the
monster. And how the said knight arrived at the monsters pit the same season
while that arthur and the monster were fightyng togider, and there he and all
his company did se how that arthur slew the monster without help. Cap. l.
SO it was about the season that arthur should thus fight with the monster,
the mighty king Eme^dus held open court in his city of Sabar, and weth him
there was the emperor of inde ye more, for this city was right nere adjoining
to his empire, and also he was glad to be with king Emendus because of his
daughter Florence, who^ he would gladly have had to his wife and thereon he
trusted when the year were ones expyred. And at this feast were all the other
four kings, and the xii. peers of the realm of Sorolois and many other earls
and barons, knights and squyers queen's, ladies and damoyselles. Than there
came to the king many great complayntes for the hurt that the monster of
the brosse had done in all the country, than the king took counseyle for
this matter, and so he was advised and concluded thereon to send a.M. knights
armed to go fight with the monster. Than there was chosen a right valyaunte
knight to be their captain, who who called sir randell Brysebar, who was one
of the knights pertaynyng to Florence, and he took with him such knights and
men of war as he would chose, and so took his leave of the fair Flor^nce, and
she desired him that if he could bring it about he should go to her castle of
the portenoyre, and commanded her to her clerk master Steven, and inquire of
him whether he have herd any tidings of that matter yt he went ^hyder for and
commanded him yt he should show unto her clerk that the emperor would have
her to his wife by force against her will. And so sir Brisebar promised to
accomplysshe her commandment if it were to him possible, than he went fro
her, and took his leave of the king and of the emperor and of all the hole
route, and so departed and had well in his company a thousand armed knights
and they rode forth so long till at the last they aryued nere to the place
where as the monster was the same propre day and hour that Arthur was fighting
with him, than Brysebar and al his company did light down on foot, and the
monster who as than felt himself hurt on the head with the stroke that arthur
had given him as it has been showed before wherefore he brayed and rored so
long that he might be herd a great space of And when Brysebar ^awe a far of
a knight alone fyghting with this monster in right great peril, whereof he had
great (...), and so had thought to have set on the monster with all his hole
host for to have helped Arthur, howbeit he thought he would se somewhat more of
the deling of the knight, than the monster ran to a tree that stood by the
pyt and took it so rudely in his hands yt he care it up ro^e and rind, and
therwt struck at Arthur, who for fere of the stroke cast before him his white
sheeld, and the stroke did light thereon so rudely that it range all the place
over the which stroke was so heavy that Arthur was feign to knele down on one
of his knees, and therewith the ^^e brake a sonder in the mids Tha^ the mo^ster
for anger was nie out of his mind, and did cast at Arthur the tronchon of the
tree so rudely yt it brake in the air as it went, but Arthur douted the
stroke and slepte aside, and let the stroke glent by, and therewith he was nie
to the monster, and therewith the monster lift up his arms to have enbraced him
but therwt Arthur struck him under the own arm with his sword clarence so
that his arm flew clean into ye field, than the monster lept forth and with
great ire took arthur by the head with his long teth, and with his other hand
he took him by the ^holdre and tare away all his harneys to the bare flesh,
and thought to have tussed hi^ on his back and have borne him to his pyt but
than Arthur put his swerd clarence into his belly up to the hard cross, and
truly it was great need that Arthur has as tha^ that good sword, for there was
none other in all the world should have helped him. And than when Arthur had
thus put his sword into his body, he therewith rusht to the monster so
vertuousli that he tombled him to the earth, and with his fall he pulled of
Arthurs helm fro his head with his long teth that were so fastened therein
that the helm could not be gotten out of his mouth, for wha^ he felt his
death, he Joined his teach throughout the helm fast together, th^^ Arthur
stroke at him again with his sword, wherwt his foul horrible head flew into
the field, than Arthur sat him down for he was right sore labored. Than sir
Brysebar and all his company lept on their horses, and praised much Arthur for
sleinge of the monster, whereof they said he was ye best knight of the world,
and when Brysebar came nigh to Arthur than he lyghted. And wha^ Arthur saw him
coming he put his shield before him and took his sword in his hand to defend
him if need required, and yet he had as than no helm, for it was still in the
mouth of the monster But than Brysebar did of his helm and right curteysly
did salute him and said Sir god that all thing fourmed keep and save you sir
gentle knight as the chief flower of all chyualry, for ye alone have acheued
that enterprise yt we thousand knights were sent to do. Ha sir said Arthur
saving your pleasure it is no such deed as that ye and such company as ye
speak of should need to enterprise, nor I have done noothynge that ought so
greatly to be praised, for you or any other knight might as well have done it
better or shortelyer than I have done, therefore this deed need little to be
spoken of, for it is to small of reputacion to be recounted for any nobleness.
well sir said Brysebar we know and se right well what it is sir ye have
delivered fro great peril of death the best part of all this my company,
wherefore I require you that beside this bounte that ye have showed us as in
s^eynge of this monster that it would please you to show to me yet another
bou^te. Sir said Arthur demand of me what it please you, and if I can or may
do it I shall not fail you well sir than ye shall here what ye have granted
me, sir it is of troth that I am pertaining to the most honorable queen that
now lives, and that is the fair Florence daughter to the mighty king Emendus,
king of the noble land of Soroloys: and as for me I am the most in
sufficyent knight that he has of a.M in his house (...) ^e it sir his noble
grace did send me accompanied with these other thousand knights to thentent
that we should do to this monster as ye have done alone god be thanked, for ye
by your prowess have achyeued that thing that all other have failed of, sir
this is the end of my desire that it would please you to go with us to the
court of the noble king Emendus, and so ^e shall be our companyon and knight
to he noble Florence, and sir I ensure you it shall be your true and faithful
companyon for I shall never have any manner of thing but your part shall be
therein. And when Arthur herd his request he smyled a little and said. Sir I
heartily thank you, but as now it will not be, for it behooves me to go to the
port noyre to master Steven, for I have promised him so to do, therefore sir I
pray you be not mysco^tent though I can not at this time acccomplysh your will
and when Brisebar herd him speak of the port noyre he said. Sir have ye ben at
the castle of the port noyre. Ye truly said Arthur And sir I require you how
did ye enter into the castle. Sir I did there so much thst thankee be god
there I entered. And sir were ye on hye in the palace or did ye lie in the
rich bed. Ye truly sir sald Arthur there I was and lay in ye rych bed, and
tarried there.ii. days and.ii. nyghtes. Well sir said Brysebar, I se well that
ye have acheued all the adue^tures of that place, wherefore ye be the chief
sovereign knygh of all the world, sir I will rydr with you to the port noyre if it
please you for it behooves me to speak with master Steven my ladies clerk* for
I have to hi^ a message fro her noble grace, and sir I will send home all this
people with a neuew of mine, who shall ^erwith him this mo^sters heed with your
helm in his mouth, and he shall present it fro you to my lady Florence. I sir
said Arthur y^ lady is right excell^nt and noble as I have herd say, and I am
to simple a person to send onye thing to her grace, nor also I never saw her,
^or she knows not who I am and al so this present is of to small a reputacio^
therefore me thinks it were folly to me to send it to her grace, therefore sir
I require you let it alone. Certainly quod Brysebar yt will I not do, for the
present is such yt I am sure it shall be received with gladder chere than
though ye had won a great cite. well sir said Arthur do as it shall please you
best, how be it I had rather yt ye would let it alone. Than Brisebar called to
him his neuewe, and said. Fair neuew ye shall return unto the court and
humbly command me to the kings grace, and also ye shall bear with you this
monsters head and present it to my lady Florence fro a knight of hers, whom
she never saw, nor he her, the which knight ye may show unto her grace
has aquyted the port noyre, and acheued all alone the adventures of that
place and also show her how yt I am gone with the said knight to ye port
noyre, to speak with her clerk master Steven, for the matter y^ she commanded
me at my departing. Sir said his neuewe all this shall be done, and so took
the head and commanded them all to god, and so departed, and all the other
knights each of them went home to their own houses. Than all the people of
the castle set open the gates and issued out and came before Arthur both
Gouernar and Iosseran the almayne and all other* and Iosseran made great chere
to B^ysebar, and so all the people of the country came thither to se the monster
and Arthur their champyon, and saydf Sir knight blessed be the time that
e^erye were borne, and the mother that bare you For ye have delivered all this
country fro death. Than all the processions of the country came thither and
received Arthur with great tryumphe, and brought him in to the church within
the castle, and there Brysebar, Iosseran, Gouernar, and Iaket did unarm hi^,
Than the lady blau^che flower came thither fro her castle of the brosse and
descended down fro her chair, and so mounted up the stayres into the palace
and there sho found Arthur unarmed, and Brysebar with him who did behold
Arthur meruayllously, for they were all a bashed of the great beauty and grace
that they saw in him. And when they saw this lady coming, they al arose and
met her, and Arthur Brisebar and she sat down al togider, and so talked of
diverse things till their mete was ready, and than they went thereto and were
rychely served, and the next day the lady went again to her castle of the
brosse, and in this castle Arthur soiorned three days, and than departed and
Brisebar with him, and took leave of all the knights of that country, and so
they came to the castle of the brosse, where as the lady blau^che flour
received them with great honor and she made right great chere to Gouernar
because he was with her all the season yt Arthur fought with the monster and so
Arthur soiourned in this castle.iiii. days and than he and Brysebar with him
departed, and this lady blau^che flower conveyed them a great space and than
she took her leave and returned again to her castle of the brosse and than
Arthur Brysebar Gouernar and Iosseran rode forth till they arrived at the castle
where Iosserans brother lay wounded* and Bawdewyn had hi^ in heling, and as soon as Bawdewyn knew that his lord was come, he was never so Joyful before,
and ran and encoun^ed arthur and enbraced him for joy and y^ night they were
there w^ll served. Now let us leave to speak of arthur for a season, and let us
speak of sir Isem^arte neuew to the duke of bygor who was borne, to the castle
of the ^oche sore wounded by arthur as ye have herd here before.

How sir Isembartes cosyn enbusshed him in a great forest with a great
multitude of men of war to thent to ^^e arthur by treason, and there arthur
did with his hands such deeds yt in a manner it was incredible. And how that
gouernar and Brysebar were taken prisoners and led forth to a toure, and there
Arthur slew of his enemies.v. hundred and mounted into the toure, and so
rescowed the prisoners in the spite of all the town and there wanne the palace,
Cap. li.
IT is of a troth how that arthur sore wounded sir Isemba^te the duke of
bygors neuew under the castle of the ^oche, and thider his servants brought
him, and there he lay a great season at leche craft and so the tidinges ^an
all over the country how that the duke of Bygors neuew ^ay sore wounded, and
how that this was done by a strange knight and at last these words came to
the heri^g of a knight of great power* who was called sir Firmont tr^sou^er to
the duke of bygor, and he had one of his sholdres hier than the other, and this
sir Fyrmont was a right good knight and grea^lye redoubted, and he was cosyn
ge^mayn to sir ^sembarte, and brother to the knight yt was slain by arthur and
when he herd the death of his brother, and how that his cosyn was sore wounded,
and lieng at the castle of the roche, he was therewith sore dyspleased and lept
on horsbacke aco^panied with.x. other knights, and so went to the castle of y^
roche to se his co^i^, w^o as tha^ could not stere out of his bed, there they
did salute each other, than sir F^^mont demanded him how he did. And he
answered and said y^ he was right sore hu^^ well cosyn I pray you who ha^h
done this deed to you and also slain my b^oder. Sir I cannot tell you, for it
was a knight stranger, who is gone toward the castle of the brosse as it has been showed me, and also it is said yt he purposes to return again with
Iosse^a the almaine y^ same wall yt he came, therefore I am ^ight sore dyspleased
that I am not as yet hole for if I were cer^ayn^y I would mete with him again.
well sir said Fyrmo^^ ^ake ye no thought, for if he come that way again he
shall be right well encountered for sith he had done me one displeasure I shall
quite hi^ again with two. A good cosyn quod sir Isembarte for gods sake abide
till I be hole, for verylye he is a knight of great value, it is I as yet that
bears the hurt, therefore I pray you let me beat the quital th^rof, for ^
(...) me leest he will do you more domag^ than he has done to me. ^e say well
quod sir Firmont I will do as you say, and that he said to apese his cosyn but
(...) after as so^^ as he might privily seem a var^et to epsy which way that
arthur returned fro the castle of the brosse, and thus arthur and Brysebar was
with ^osse^an in his broders castle, and there they determined y^ they would not
^^meue th^^s till the wednesdai next a^t^r tha^ ^h^ varlet returned again to sir
Fyrm^n^^ ^^e wed him wh^re as Arthur was and how yt he would depart thens ^he
wedn^^daye n^xt after, and said. Sir now if ye will ye may be revenged of the
I^iu^y ^^at has been done to your brother, and al^o to your cousin, for the
knight that has don it, on wednesd^y next betime w^l pas by the same place
where as your cosyn was hurt and your brother slain. And when sir Fyrmont
herd that he had great Joy. Than he sent menssengers to all the men of war
that belonged to the town and castle of the roche and all the country about,
commaundinge them al to be in harneys ready the wednesday next ensewyng in the
forest at a certain place as covertly as they might without any noise. And also
he commanded that none should be so hardy that matter to show ^o sir Isembart
his cosyn. And arthur all this season was in the castle with Iosserans brother,
and there he had right great chere and Brysebar also, and there they weee
richely served and honored, and the wounded knight was as than through hole
and was among them. And the next day betymes they herd mass and tha^ arthur
went to his horse and with him Brysebar, Iosseran and his brode^* and Gouernar,
Bawdewyn, and Iaket and.viii. other knights so that they were in all to the
nombre of xiiii. persons, and so they rode forth til they came to the same
mountain where as Arthur met with Iosseran* who than said. Sir in this place
ye made me to re^ourne again when I pursued afte^ sir ^sembar^. That is troth
said Arthur well sir said Iosseran I had wend it had been you vereli but than
ye showed me how that ye had wounded him, but sir I know well he had rather ^ie
than he would be vnreue^ged his heart is so fell, and sir I know well that there
is not a more tray^our in all the would, for he does all his deeds by false
treason, therefore sir I doubt greatly of him least that he have falsely ^aide
some wait on your return and so think to be revenged on you, therefore after
mine opynio^ we shall take our harneys what so ever fortune. In the name of god
said Arthur I agree well thereto, tha^ they al took their harneys and rode forth
fair and softly til they came to the same place where as the busshem^nte of
their enemies where. And there was sir Fyrmont and xl. other knights with him
on horsback and.xxiiii on foot, and when they saw arthur and his company they
mounted on their horses and sowned a great horn and therewith all they came
forth in to the plain. And when arthur saw them he demanded of Iessera^ what
people they were, and whether he knew them or not. And he answered and said.
Sir it is sir Fermont and all his power who is cosyn germayne unto the duke of
bygors neuew, and brother to the knight that ye slew, the^fore he comes on you
for your ill, therefore there is no nothing to do now but let each of us do our
deuoyre to defend our lives. well said Brysebar and I shall do my part. And
by my fathers soul said Gouernar and I shall not be behind, and therwithall
the busshement brake out of the wood, and ran all at ones on ar^hurs
company, and Brysebar encountered so rudely with the ^i^st yt he put his spear
clean through his body, and so he fell down dead in the place, than he drew
out his sword and struck so an other that his head flew into the field. Than
Gouernar st^ake one so with his spear that he overthrew both horse and man, to
the earth, and than with his sword he struck so an other that he claue his head
to the tethe, and so dashed into the prese and laid on with such strokes that
he slew and ba^e down all that he attained unto, than came Iosseran and at
this first meting he ouerthrewe two down to the earth. And when Arthur saw his
company do so valayuntly he had great joy. And at last he espied sir Fyrmount
where as he had beten down to the earth sir Brysebar, than he dashed his horse
with his spurs and couched his spear, and struck sir Fyrmont so rudely that he
sent both knight and horse flat to the earth right sore astonyed, and so lay
a great space, and at the last his people remounted him again. Than Arthur
thruste into the prese with his good sword clare^ce in his hand, and the
first that he encounterd he struck him with such virtue that he claue him to
the sholdres, and fro an other he took of the head, and laid on among his
enemies on every side with such strokes that he confounded all that ever he
touched, for he cut of arms, legs, hands and heads, and did meruaylouslye
with his hand, for he made as great way before him as though his enemies had been unarmed, for their armure could not withstand the weight of his strokes,
how be it he and his company were but.xiiii. in nombre, and his enemies were
well to the nombre of.ccc. and also ever they encrea^ed in the number, for sir
Fyrmont had sent his commandment to the castle of the roche, and to the
marches there about. And so it fortuned that w^a^ sir Fyrmont was remou^ted he
was much sorrowful because of his people that he saw so sore ouerladen, and
therwyth he dashed to his horse and struck Iosseran so rudely that he overthrew
him clean fro his horse and by clean force took him prisoner. And wha^ Gouernar
saw that he lyfted up his sword and struck sir Firmo^t so rudely on the helm
yt he cut of clean a large hand bread thereof, and the stroke descended down
on his she^de and (...) i^ asonder in ye mids, and fro the^s y^ stroke did
light on the horse ne^^e and st^ake of the horse heed clean for the body, and
therewith sir Fyrmont fell down to ^^e earth, and than tho that held fast
Iosseran did let him goo at large, because they went to help their master,
who as tha^ was sore handeled by Gouernar, and than Brysebar brought to
Iosseran an other horse yt he had won fro a knyg^t, and so quykly Iosseran
lepte up th^ron, and dashed again in to ye prese, and than sir Firmont was
remou^ted again on his horse, than he caused a great horn to be so^^ed, and
than his people rayled them together and xl. of them in a flock together ^an
all at ones on Brisebar and on Gouerner and on Iosseran and so closed them
about and struck them on every side. And wha^ Arthur saw that he ^usht in the
thy^k^st of that pr^se and brake down and over turned all that ever was
before him, and bette down knights merueylou^ly of that al fled before him
as lambs does fro the wolf. But than there fell, on Arthur.vii. score at
ones, who came fro the castle, wherefore Arthur was fayn to draw back and coud
not as than so cour his knights that were nere taken. And so than sir
Fyrmontes company killed Gouernars horse under him. Than Gouernar laid on with
his sword on all sides and maimed and slew many knights, and Brysebar and
Iosseran did help him full manly with all their power. And at the last
Gouernar aduysed well a knight who all the day before had done him much
trouble, and struck him so rudely with his sword that he dashed it clean
thrughe his body, and so he took his horse and mounted thereon in the spyte of
all his enemies, than he rusht again into the prese and laid on with mighty
st^okes round about him. And at the last these people on f^te slew both
Brisebar and Iosserans horses underneath them, and like valiant knights they
^ept on their sete, and by great virtue def^nd^d them self, but the ^^ese was
so th^cke and so great and they were ouercharched with the people on foot y^ by
clean force they were taken prisoners, and tha^ they al^a^ on goue^nar and
kyl^ed again his horse under him, and there he valyauntely did defend
hyms^lfe meruayllo^slye with his hands. And when he saw himself at that
myscheue and his felawship taken prisoners he said. A gentle Arthur God be thy
help and keep the fro death, for we are down and overcome. And when Arthur
h^rde that and saw how they were taken tha^ he abandone^ his heart and body to
rescowe his knights, and so dashte into the prese, and fyersly said on round
about him on every s^de, and dressed himself toward Gouernar, but it auayled
him nothing for Gouernar Bri^ebar and Iossera^ were taken and led forth toward
the castle, and when Arthur saw them so led forth he was right sorrowful,
and therewith he did so much that it was great marvel to behold him, for he
brake asonder the great prec^s, and all y^ ever he attained unto went to death,
so that the hardyes^ y^ was there was in great fere to encounter him, but the
prese was great that did follow after him and did c^st at him every thing that
they could get^e, thinkyng either to ^lee him or ell^s his horse, and they that
led his knights to the castle ward were as than entered into a narowe causy
the why^he brought them to a gr^te ryu^r the which they must pass over by
ship, for there was no bridge and so they entered into the ^hyp, and ha^ted
them very fast to enter into the castle with their prisoners. And wha^ Arthur
saw how that he had lost his.iii. knights, he did and adventured him self
so far that there was never knight that ever did such an enterprise before,
but he had never no manner of fear, ne never doubted creature, than he lyghted
of his horse, and as by fortune there was another ship departing fro the land
side, and therewith he joined together his fe^e and lept of the land into the
ship among all his enem^es, and his good swerd drawn in his hand, and the
first that he encountered, he claue his head to the thyn and alway^s the s^yppe
sailed toward the castle, and he dealt such strokes among them that for fear
many of them lep^e into the water, and so were drowned and the r^menau^t
slain. And at the last ye ship drew so nere to the castle wall that they
that were wtin the castle did cast down great hokes of yren, and therewith
drew the ship to the shore, and than they ran to their harneys, and took their
crosbo^^^ and other w^^ens of war^^. Than Arthur lepte out of the ship and took
one of the ^rappers of yren and did fasten it surely to a tynge in the castle
wall to ^hen^ent that the ship should not depart thens And they of the castle
did s^ote and cast great ston^^ and bars of yren at him, bu^ a^wayes he
covered him self with his white shield se yt he c^ulde not be hurt for such
was the virtue of the sh^ld that it, could never be enp^^red. And the mayst^r
of the castle caused the great bell to be sowned where with all the people of
y^ castle were moved and issued out in to the field, and flocked round
about Arthur, and there was than so great noise yt it was wonder to here, and
Arthur hel^e (...) his hand clarence his good sword, so that there was none
that approached nere him, but shortly he rendered his life. And all this season
there was a great sort that kept Arthurs knights, and shamefully de^te with
them that it was great pity to se, for some pulled them by their here is, and
some by their berdes* and some bette them with great staves, and some cried down
with them, ^le them out of hand. And if sir Fyrmont had not commaunbout the
contrary, they had been al slain to they had had a.M. lives, for they were his
^er chafed against them than wild boares be when they be hunted. And than
no^han sir Fyrmont had taken the remenoaunt of sir Brisebars knights, than kye
returned to the castle and all his peaple ^^he which were well to the nombre
of.ii falo^dred, and always his people increased it ^ore and more, for they
repaired to him of F^l the towns and countrees adjoining A^^out him. And so
they passed over the sayuer, than he commanded yt the knygh^^es that were
taken prisoners should be ^^edde forth into the great dongeon of the ^astell,
and there to be unarmed, and as (...) commanded so it was done. And so Arthur
saw how they were led in to the castle, but the prese ware so great that he
(...) not come at them. Than came sir ^yrmont and threscore with him on
horsbacke, and all they set at ones on Arthur and dashed at him with speres, and
did sh^te at him great quare^les, and cast many a great stone at his head.
And when Arthur saw yt he was so sore handled among them, and perceived well
it was hard for him to escape the great danger that he was in, thought
inwardly to himself that he would (...) his life dear or he l^st it, and
therewith he lau^ced hymself^ and lepte into the mids of the prease with his
good sword in his hand, and laid on round about hi^ as freshely as though
he had not fought of all the day before, and so made a wide way ever before
him, and did so valyauntly that some of the knights that were enemies had of
him gret^ pity, and so somewhat withdrew them self, what for pity, and what
for fere, fro doing of him any hurt, and said each to other. Saint marye
what manner of knight is this, it were gr^te damage he ^holde thus lose his
life. And when sir Fyrmont saw yt these knights forbear Arthur, he was
therewith so sorrowful yt he was nygh enraged thereby out of his mind, and so
his knights desired him for gods sake that he would have pity on Arthur
seeing that he did so nobly that day in deeds of arms, and also
considering yt there was so many agenste him, but he said he would in no
wise spare him, but swore freshly yt he should dye or he departed, and therewith
he dasht^ his horse with the spurs and thought^ to have stryken Arthur
behind him, but Arthur, saw him coming and watched wisely his stroke and let
him pass by, and ash passed by Arthur aduysed him well and struck at him with
clare^ce his good sword, and the stroke did light between the helm and the
neck so that the head flewe clean in to the fyelde, and than the body fell
down to the ground. Tha^ his knights and people came and wondered al above
him. And when Arthur saw how they all took head to ye deed body, as fast as
he might he went up to the castle that same way yt he saw his knights led
forth. And at the last he came to a greatdore of yren the which as than he
found open, and so he entered into the tour and there he found them that were
vnarmynge of Brysebar and his felawes, and than he shytte fast the door after
him that none should neither enter nor issue out, and like a wild lion he ran
on them and with his swerd cut them in pieces as the sithe does the grass, and
when Gouernar saw Arthur his master his heart began to reuyue, for he wend
verily y^ he had been slain and his hands were fast tied togeder and with his
tethe and with his clean strength he brast asonder the bindyng wherwyth he was
bound, than he ran to one of them that bound him and rashed out of his hands
his wepen, and therewyth he gave him such a stroke that he desceuered life and
body asonder, and than he ran to the door to keep that none should escape that
way, for they that came to ye door went no more to their felawes, and when
they saw how they were delte with all, and how that their felawes were slain,
some of them for fere lepte out of the wyndowes into the water and so some
swam and some were drowned. Thus Arthur delivered the tour of them all, for
there was not one that abode there but he was slain, and when he was thus
delivered of his enemies, than he came to his knights that were bound fast
like prisoners and so lowsed them, and when Arthur saw Brysebar so fast
bound and wrapped with cords he said, a dear f^e^d ye were not wont thus to
be nourysshed, ill hape come to that nouryse yt has caused you thus to be
swatched, and so he vnloused him and also Bawdewin and Iaket and such other yt
had been taken prisoners, and than he closed fast all the doors of the toure to
thentent yt none should enter into them, and this toure was right strong, for it
was able well to keep and sustain.iii. months x. M. men of war, so that
they were well furnyshed with vytayle, but these noble knights had not as than
within all the tour of vytayle the mou^tenau^ce of a peniworth neither of mete
nor drink, wherefore god be their aid and comfort for this present time. Let
us leave to speak of the^, and let us speak of the duke of bygors neuewe, who
was sore hurt lyeng at his castle of the roche as have herd (...)

How Arthur and his company we (...) sieged in the palais by the duke of (...)
but thanked be God they escaped (...) subtle art of master Steven cler^
(...) the fair florence of Soroloys. (...)


When the mayre of the roche had caused the great ^omyn bell of the town to
be ronge, the Dukes ne^ewe as he lay in his bed sick herd it and demanded
of a seruau^te hf his what it might mean, and his varlet thinking to hyde the
counsel fro him said, sir it is for nothing. Tell not me that tale said he,
for that bell is not ronge but it is for some great cause, therefore I charge the
to tell me the troth. well sir quod the varlet sith ye will needs know it I
shall show you, sir it is so sir Fyrmonte your cosyn caused the knight yt
wounded you to be watched in so much yt as now he has found him, and
therefore he had somoned all the people of this town and country about to
come to him to thentent either to take or to ^lee this said knight and al his
company. Why said sir Isemba^te are they than fighting together. and is he not
yet taken. Sir said the varlet I can not tell you. And as they were thus
talking together there came to them into ye chamber a knight sore wounded
bledi^ge fast and said to the dukes neuewe. Sir it is now worse than ever it
was for sir Fyrmont is slain and his heed stryken of And when sir Isembarte
herd that, he sat him up in his bed and demanded of the hurt knight who
had done ye deed. Sir said he the same knight that slew his brother, and
wounded you. well good friend and is not the same knight slain No no sir
said the knight I think verily he be no man but rather a fend of hell, for
he doubts no manner of thing for he confounds all that ever he attaineth
unto, for this day he has sustained so much by his body that he has
shed the blood of.v. hundred persons and confounded and slain moo than can
well be spoken of or nombred with the good help of this company who are right
valyant and vygorrus. A sir said Isembart I am right unhappy if they thus
escape me, but I require you to tell me where they be. In good fatyh sir quod the
knight, they are in yondre great toure, where as were all the prisoners that
were taken, but sir when these deuylles came thither there were but few yt
escaped death, and so they have loused all the prisoners and have fast shette
them self within the tour so that none can come at them. well tha^ I charge
the goo make a cry and reyse up all my men of war and let them besiege the
tour round about and pytche up my pauylyons and tents, for surely I will
ramysh them or they get thens. Than anon the cry was made thrughout all the
town and the dukes neuew^s tent was p^ght up, and himself borne into it, and
than he sent all about the country, and commanded every man that was able
to bear harneys to come to him in all haste possible And there resorted to him
well to ye nombre of.v. hundred or above, and so lodged themself round about
the toure. And than sir Isembarte commanded straytly that none should be so
hardy to assayl the toure till such, season as he were clean hole of his
wou^des, and till the duke of bygor his uncle were comen to him, for he swear
great oaths, he would sle Arthur and his company al quycke his own hands, and
than dry them in the son, thus sir Isembarte rayled on these noble knights,
who were as then lokynge out of the wyndowes of the toure, and than they saw
right well how that people came and lodged round about them in the toure And
Bawdewyn and Iaket were loking out at another wyndowe into the townwarde, and
there they espied ioyninge to ye same toure a right fair manner beseminge as
strong a house as could ^e devised, closed about with strong hye walls, and
great gates bound with great bars of yren, with draw brydges and p^r^e
colyces, and well bolwarked and fa^^brayed, and a great and a deep water beting
on the ^^lles, to say the troth this place was ^ight strong, and within this
house they ^^we a chymney right sore smokyng, and also they smelled the kechyn,
and felt well the savor of roste and fried mete, and so there was in deed, for
there was ordained all the mete yt the dukes neuewe and his company should have
had for it was the dongeon yt belonged to the duke of bygor. A good lord quod
Bawd^wyn I would I were in ^onder kechyn with yonder good mete, for than I would
ete before my master for I have great honger. And I also quod Iaket, and it was
tha^ past noon, and these noble knights had eten no mete of all ye day
before. Than Iosseran said I thank god I had a good physicien, for I am now
a^ hole, but I would now feign ete some mete. By my faders soul and I also quod
Gouernar^ well quod Bawdewyn sir Gouernar ^ ye will come hyderye may drink of
this smoke as I do, whereby your hongre may be well aswaged. And than Arthur and
his company went thither to behold fro whens the smoke came, and when Arthur
beheld the fair place so strong and so rich builded, and herd betynge in the
morters w^thin the kechyn, and might here how the cokes called for wine and
spice, he said to Brysebar. Fr^nde me thinks th^se cokes in ^onder kechyn
have somewhat to do, for they be very besy in faith I will go and he^pe than And
wha^ Gouernar herd him say s^, he s^^^ that gladly he would turn the bro^he.
A good lord said Brysebar what a lad of the kechyn would ye be, in good faith I
think veryle ye would soon beat down your mays^^r, than they all began to
laugh. Well quod Ar^hur there is no mo^^ say, but let us (...) well our pa^e^^
for surely if it be poss^ble ^^yder will I g^ and put some salt into the grewel,
Ye sir ye be a very good coke quod Bawdewyn, ye may well sell trypes in the
market. And thus they sported them each with other. Than Arthur aduysed well the
flore of the chamber wherein he was, and espied well how yt there were stages
underneath the flore, than he said to his company, let us break up the pauement
of this flore, and th^n we may se well what thing is underneath, ^o than they
took their hawbert^s and bylles and such other wepens as was brought thider by
them yt conuayed the prisoners into that chamber* the which were than all
slain and cast out at the wyndowes, and so they dashed these wepe^s ^^o the
pauemente of square stones, and with great labor brake them up, and there they
made so great an hole yt they might well se all thing that was underneath the
chamber but the vaw^te was very dar^ke, and than the called to know whether
any body was there or not, but there was none that answered the^. At the last
Arthur espied where there was a chain of yren fast rebat in to the wall, and
the one end attained to the flore of the chaumbre, and the other end was fast
tied to a great chest of the wall. than Arthur took the chain in his hands
and sl^pped down thereby till he came to the crest of the wall, and there was a
little wyndowe, whereby there entered a little light, so that he might well se
the bottom of the vawte, and than he espied well that he might break the wall
whereon he stood and might than soon come to the earth, than he caused all
their harneys to be brought down to the said creste, and all his company
than they brake down the stones of the wall and did cast them down, and ever
raised the stones deper and deper under their fe^e, ever they stood lowe^ and
lower till at the last they came down to ye earth without onye hurt or damage,
than they found a little door of yren the which was sherte without with.iiii.
great bars of yren, the which door op^ned agenste the said strong place
where as the mete was a rostynge, than these knights thought to arm them and
than to break up the door and so they did, and when they were armed, than they
took great pieces of timber that lay in the vaute, and Arthur ran at the od^^
with such randon yt it made a right great noise, and the same time the dukes
treasourer was gone to se the dead corpse of sir Firmo^t the which was laid on a
bear to be borne to the church to ^e buried, and with him were gone al ye
people of the town saving tho yt were lodged about the toure, so yt there
was not left in the said place no creature but all only the cokes yt were in
the kechyn dressynge of their mete, nor there was none yt was ware how that
Arthur was brekinge up the door of the toure within, and th^re Arthur and his
company did so much that they brake up the door and so entered into a gardyn,
tha^ Arthur said to his company. Syrs go quycklye to the gate and draw up the
bridge, and I will go in the mean season in to the kechyn to the cokes. Ha ha
said Bawdwin I am sure my m^yster has felt the savor of the smoke the which
he thinks right good, whereby he has get him a good appetyte. well said
Arthur do as I have showed you and than ye shall do right well, and so they went
all together to the gates and did shytte the^ fast and lift up the brydges,
and than they were so sure tha^ they doubted no man, And in the mean^ season.
Arthur entered into the kech^n, and began to cry out auaunt out of ^his house ye
foul rybaude knaves, for ye shall all dye. And when the cokes saw Arthur,
they knew well it was he that vaynquyshed sir Fyrmont where with they were so
sore abashed yt they fled away and cri^d out, and said how the devil of
h^ll had brought him in to that house, but Iosseran and Brysebar were at the
door and received and gave them such dyscyplyne that it ought not to be
co^trowled. And Gouernar and Ba^^ewyn k^pt so the gate and turned them again
that there abode not one on live. Than Brisebar and Gouernar took the dead
bodies and did cast them out at the wyndowes and batylmentes of the hye wall.
And sir Fyrmont was lyenge on a bear an carried on me^nes shold^rs, and passed
there by the wall of the same house where as Arthur and his company were, and
as he passed under ye wall Arthur and his company did cast down the deed
bodies on the bear. And when sir Isembartes se^uaun^es saw yt they knew right
well that the dukes fortres was tak^n^ and so they w^nt^ and showed it to
their master where withal he was gretely enraged, and commanded in all the
haste to assail the place where ^s A^thur and his company were on the wall^s
and defended th^mselfe valya^tly that their enemies did l^tell pr^uayle against
them, and Arthur was oftentimes in will to have issued out to have fought with
his enemy^s, but Brisebar would not suffer him, and v^rely and it had not been
more for fear of his company than for him self he wold^ have set open the
gates. And when they without saw that they could not prevail, they seized
their assaute, and wythdrewe t^emselfe. And Arthur and his company w^nte and
unarmed them and Baw^wyn and Iaket covered the tables and served ^^thur and his
felawshyp right r^c^ely, For there was in that house both wine and vytayle
suffycyent for an hole year. And thus right well at their ease they
remained.xv. days without fere of their enemies, and without any great hurt
Thus will we leave to speak of Arthur and his company, and show somewhat of
master Steven.

How master Steven by the virtue of his art of ^ygromancy delivered Arthur
and his company fro peril and danger of the duke of bygor and his neuewe. Ca.
liii
DVryng the time that arthur and his knights were thus besyeged in the duke of
bygors fortress master Steven clerk to the noble lady Florence of Soroloys,
and the noble marks were all this reason at the port noyre loking out the
windows of the palayes talking together of Arthur thinking long for him, for
it was more than.viii. days sithe the promise that he made of his retour,
wherefore they were in great sorrow and in great fere least he were slain by
the fo^ule monster of the brosse. well said master Steven sir marks abide me
here till I return to you again, and than I shall show you how the case
stands, than the master entered in to his chamber and took his books and
looked so long on them till he knew well all the estate of Arthur and of his
company. Than he went again to the marks and recounted to him all the state
of Arthur and of his felawshyp, how that they we^e besyeged in the castle, and
how that the duke of bigor was with.xl. thou sand man come to the castle of
the roche for to help his neuew, wher^ore he said there is now nothing to do
but to study for their delyueraunce, the which he said was hard to do without
his counseyle and advise. A gentle master said the marks, when need comes
than is the friend knowen^ fyr gods sake make have for their delyueraunce.
Sir said the master ye shall keep this castle, and I will go to them and put
to my pain to deliver them. And so he departed fro the marks and entered in
to his chaumbre and took his books, and did ^o much that at the last he had
al thing that he demanded, and than by his connyng he caused him self to be
borne in to the same hall where Arthur and his company were lenyng and lokynge
out at the wyndowes beholdynge the dukes host who was as than come and had
lodged him self and all his company about the palace, and by that time sir
Isembart was all hole, and was able to ride where as he would all armed, and
so he came to the duke his uncle and recounted to him al his adventure. Well
fair neuewe said the duke take no thought therefore, for by the faith that I
owe unto you it shall be dear bought. And in the same mean season master
Steven was come in to the palace and stood behind Arthur or that he was ware
thereof and laid his hand on his sholdre, and therwyth Arthur turned him
about, and when he saw master Steven he cleped him in his arms, and so
did Brysebar Iosseran and Gouernar and all other, and made him right great
there, and demanded of him how he was entered in to that peace, well said the
master how soever ye have kept the place yet I have done so much that I am
now entered. Mary that is troth said Gouernar or else be we sore abused, thus
they made greet feast and Joy all that night, and the ne^te morning they
rose betymes and looked out at the wyndowes and beheld the du^es host, and than
Arthur said how that he would issue out and g^ fight wi^h his enemies, but
Brisebar would not su^fre him at which time they had wend that master Steven
had be still abed on sleep, for he was not as than come out of his chaumbre, how
be it he was about to study for their delyueraunce, for as soon as he was out
of his bed, he took his books and made his coniuracions whereby he caused such a
tempest of wind and rain to rise and fall in the dukes host without, that it
brast down tents and overthrew pau^lions and rusht down standerdes and tare
down lodgings and haled asonder ropes, and ^asht down al to the earth, and
with the wind there was blowe^ up in to the air stremers, towels, and other
clothes so hie that the sight of the^ was clean lost. And arthur and his
compani when they perceived all this with out in the host ^hey had great
marvel for it was a fair and a clear morning before. And when this storm
was somewhat seized, than ^here rose out of the ground such a derke mist and
so stynkyng that scant one man could se an other, and this mist hanged over all
the dukes host and over all his castle and town, except the fortress where
as arthur and his company where in wherefore they did close a^ the wyndowes, and
did light up candels, but this mist endured so long that al they of the dukes
host and also within his castle and town were fulfilled with the favor
the^of. And at the last it seized and the wether began to w^xe clear and
fair, and so than it fortuned that all such as had felt the savor of the
foul* mist their hertes began to fail them and to be so full of cowardyse and
fere as though they had been chased with an hundred thousand men of arms, and
oftentimes be held toward the fortress where as arthur and his company were,
a way feryng lest they would have issued out on them. And as they looked
toward the mountains, to their heryng they he^de x. thousand horns and
trompettes wenyng verily that it had been true, and than to their syghtes they
saw so much people descending down fro the mountains that all the earth was
coue^ed with harnysed men, than they were in great fere than they were before,
and at the last they thought they saw descend down fro an hye hill the chief
standarde and baner of the migh^ye king Eme^dus, w^erin was portrayed a
flambyng dragon of gold. And on another side they perceived were came the king
of orquen^y, and with him a great multitude of men of war, and so throughout
all the host there rose a great rumor and a saying how yt the mighty king
Eme^dus with all his chyual^y was comen on them to rescow his knight sir
Brisebar, whom they had besyeged with Arthu^ in ye dongeon, and so thereby ^he^
(...) so dyscomfyted within their own fantasyes and ymaginacio^s y^ wha^ on
horse back and on foot they fled all aw^ye as fast as they might, and he tha^
could get his sadel did set it on his horse, and some for have lept on their
horsbacke without any sadell or br^d^ll, and fled away all dysmayed, some in
the wodes and some in the rivers and into the great ma^eyses they wist not
whider. And Arthur and his company when they saw all this, they had great
marvel. In the name of god said Gouernar I trow they will fysshe for eles,
behold how some of them vain themself in the maris. And at the last tidinges
came to the duke how that his men fled away and anon he lept on his horse, for
his heart was as sore afraid as any other, and so he fled away also as fast as
he could to save himself. And his servants that were within his caste^l ^an
all abou^e the house to seek a place ^o hide them in, and so did c^ose the^ self
fast within the ground in a lo vaute of the ca^tel and some hid them under
empty pyp^s and other vessels for fere of sp^ing And sir Isembarte fled into
^he gr^ate abbey church and mounted up (...) ^h^ h^e v^wtes for to hyde him
t^ere. and the monk^s nonnes and prest^s and clerks and chanons ran to the
chyrc^es of the town and kneled down and confes^ed themself each to other
knocking them self on their breasts with great rep^ntaunce of their misdeeds
thinking v^rily never to die other death. Tha^ master Steven issued out of
his chamber and went into ^he hall where as ^r^hur was. And Ioseran said
mais^e^ for gods sake come hyder and behold how the du^e and his men do fly
away I think they be afraid. In the name of god said the master I think they
be not a^ ^his time well assured of themself therefore shorte^y take your
harneys and let ^s ^o me^e ^he migh^y ^ing Emendus who is co^ing to rescowe
his knygh^ he^^ sir ^risebar. And wha^ arthur ^erd that, he and all his company
armed them and so opened the gates and went to ^he dukes ^entes. where as they
found good and mighty hors^s, and ther^ each of t^em took a good horse such as
lyked the^ b^st, for there were none to withstand them f^r they were al clean
fled a way and not one left ^eh^nde. So than they all mounted on their horses
and issued out of the tents and took their way up toward the mountains where
as arthur and his company thought that they saw by semyng all the world of men
coming toward them, and heryng horns and trompes sownyng, and braying of
horses, glistering of helmes, shining of sheldes, waueryng of stremers and
penselles, and at the last they espied the flambing dragon of gold in the
great baner of soroloys, and also as to their sight they saw all the four
kings with al their power coming, so that by semyng all the earth was covered
with people. And Arthur greatly meruayled of the great nobleness of the king
Eme^dus that brought so great a multitude of people. Sir as god help me said
master Steven, yet here is no^ all his strength, for here is nothing of the
power of my ladi Florence his daughter, nor none of the country of a^genton.
Ue^ily sir said Brisebar to say the trou^h he is the might^est king yt now
reygneth in all the world. And so they rode tor^h thus talkyng til at the last
they met wi^h the formest company of the ky^ges hooste, the why^he made great
chere and fe^st to master Steu^n to Brysebar, and to Iosseran such as knew
them. And so they rode f^rth ^yll they m^tte with the kings baner and flambyng
dragon, the which was born by the senesshal of ^he lady Flor^^ce who made great
chere to brisebar and thus arthur rode ^uer forth wenyng ve^elye that all this
that he saw and herd had been of troth, f^r he wendful little tha^ all this had been wrought by master S^euens work and craft, and thus eue^ arthur ^ode
forth the space of.ii. leges, and ever still encoun^^ed much people, and at the
last they met with the noble king Emendus, who made right great chere and
feast to master Steven, and to Brysebar and demanded of them how they had
done, and how they came into the prison. Sir and it like your grace said sir
Brysebar thanked be god we do right well, for we were delivered out of danger
by the only prowess of this noble knight that ye se here in our company who
has done so much in deeds of chyualry that it cannot be devised, and thus as
they talked together master Steue^ forded his enchauntement, and than the king
and al his great host assembled were clean vanished away, so that there was in
sight no mo creatures but all only Arthur and his company, wherwt they were al
sore abashed, and each of them beheld other and spoke never a word thinking
how they had dremed. In the name of god said arthur I have grea^e marvel.
Mary sir quod Brisebar I ^pak right now with the king my sovereign lord, and
now I wot not where he is become. well sir quod master Steven let us ride on
forth. For now ye may se well how that we be out of the danger of our enemies.
Than Arthur perceived well that all this was done by ye craft of master Steue^
by^ause of their deliuerau^ce so thus they rode forth til it was none of the
day ever talkyng of their aduen^ures, and at last against night they desce^d^d
down of a great mountain, and the va^ley beneth was very obscure and derke so
that they could se but a little way into it, and when they were nie to it th^i
app^^ceued were as there issued out thereof.iiii. varlettes on feeble horses each
of them having a brenninge torche in their hands, and in their company an
abbot who was a white monk, and.iiii. other monks with him* and they were very
lene and pale, and but febly horsed. And when arthur saw them he rested and
salewed them. And the abbot did of his hode and salewed Arthur and all his
company* and because he saw Arthur of so fair a sta^ure, he thought verylye yt
he was the chief of his company^ and than he said to arthur. Sir I herd
reported but late how yt a knight has acheued the hard adue^tures of the
port noyre. Sir if it be so he is o^ great valor, and therefore I am in
purpose to ride ^hider and to coplayne to hi^ of the g^et wrongs that has been
done to me, for sir as pore as I seem now, yet I was wont to be most honored
abbot in all the country of Argenton and now I am lest set by for my coue^t is
clean destroyed for it is now well.v. year since one of gods service was said
in my church nor there was no light neither of son nor moan that entered into
i^ of all that season, and all our lands and rentes are clean lost, wherefore
many of my coue^t be dead, what for sorrow and what for necessite* and all this
is done unto us by the duke of bygors brother that I pray ^o god and ever shall
that he may dye a shameful death. And sir how that all this is fortuned I shall
show you and it please you to her^ me, sir I have plained me to every noble man
that I mete, to the^^e^t to have some succor of them t^ get me my right
again, but I can mete with none that will help or aid me^ therefore I will
goo and complain me to the gentle knight yt has done so much prowess at ye
por^e noyre if it be my ^ortune to find him, sir I know not what you be,
howbe^t I complain me to you as I have done to many other. By the mother of
god quod Arthur I would ^e ^ight glad to help you to your right, and (...) I
shall be glad ^o put my good wyl^ whereof the abbot thanked him and so aid all the other monks. Than master St^uen desired them to go in company with them
to the port noyre, and promised if they would so do that they w^ld speak with
the same knight that they seek for. And tha^ at last the abbot knew well master
Steven, and cleped and kyssed him and made right great Joy and said. A gentle
master is the knight yt I seek for in your company or not. As god help quod
the master it is the same knight that ye have all this season spoken unto, and
he by his prowess has losed out of prison the noble marks your own brother
And than the abbot held up his hands toward the heaven and said. Hie and
mighty ^ing of paradise celestical increase in that noble knight honor and
bou^te. Tha^ the abbot aduysed well Brisebar and Iosseran and knew them right
well and made wi^h them great Joy and feast. And thus they rode forth so long
till at the last they arrived at port noyre and (...) descended fro their horses
and mounted up ^o the palace. And when the noble marks saw Arthur he made to
him right great chere, and when he saw the abbot who was his own brother he
began to weep for pity when he remembered the death of the lord of Argenton
his brother. And so each of them enbraced other with great weeping for joy and
than the abbot said. I pray to god yt he may die an evil death that has slain
out brother the gentyl lord of Argenton, whereby great hurt and damage is come
to my church. And I pray the same said ye markes^ for thereby is our nece the
lady of Arge^^on dysherited wrongfully and with our cause, and therewith ^hey wept
each ^o other right piteously, whereof Arthur and his company had great pity,
and tha^ Arthur said to them. Lords be of good comfort, for I promise you I
will be at her marriage if I may* and if the lady have than any need of help I
shall be ready to aid her to the best of my power. And the two brethern thanked
him much, and so they unarmed them and where therein great Joy and sport. Now
let us leave to speak of them, and we will trete of the messenger that bare the
head of ye monster to the count of king Emendus and to the fair Florence.

How the neuew of Brysebar arrived at the court of ye mighty king Emendus with
the head of the monster, and did salute the king and also the emperor of ynde
who was still in the court atte^ding that the king should give him in marriage
his daughter the fair Florence and to her the head of the monster was
presented from Arthur, and showed her how that all only by his noble prowess
he had slain the terrible monster of the brosse. Cap. liiii.
SO it was that when Brysebars neuew was departed fro thens as the monster was
slain, he rode so long till he aryued at a City named Phesale where as the
king was and the emperor in his company, who would in no wise depart till
that the king had given him the fair Florence to be his wife. And also
there was in the court at the same time the king of orqueney cosyn germayne
unto the fair Florence. The court was as than great and sumptuous, and the
king had as than heard mass, and was returned into his palace and the
emperor with him, and also there was Florence accompanied with many ladies and
damoysels, and the king of orqueney was there accompanied with many other
great lords and knights talking together of atorney that should be made at
droseme. And in this mean season Cristel^ne neuew to Brisebar mounted up to
the steyres, and two great lubbers brought after him the heed of the monster
in a great basket covered over with towels, and so entered up into the palais,
and there every bodi made him right great chere and feast, and therwt he came
before the king, and when the king saw hi^ coming he had right great Joy, and
demanded how Brisedar did, and whether that he had slain the monster or not.
As god help me quod sir Crystelyne mine uncle does right well, but as to the
sleyng of the monster he is nothing gylty nor none of all his company, for all
only one noble knight has slain the mo^ster the which knight by his
prowess has acheued all the ferefull adue^tures of the port noyre, he is the
most fair knight and the most gracious that ever I saw with min eyes. And when
he saw the f^yre Florence sitting by the king her father he kneeled down to
the earth and said Ri^ht dear lady this said noble knight send^th to your noble
grace for a present the he^d of the said monster, as to the most hye and
puissau^t lady of the world now living, and to you he offreth him self to do
all that he may for so noble lady as ye be, and truly madame it shall be a great
tresour to have and to retain so noble and so ^aliau^t a knight as he is for he
the flower of all the world, and in bounte surmounting all other, than the
head was dyscouered and showed to the king and to the emperor, and thider ran
every body that was in the court to behold it, than they took knives and
swerdes and struck at it, but none ^oude enpayre it, for it was so exceeding
hard Than every man praised much the knight that had slain the monster, and
said how yt in all the world there was not his pere, and some said also yt
this knight is he that has acheued the adventures of the port noyre, and the
king did much praise him, and determined to send to seek for him. Send to
seek for him said the king of orqueney, it were little enough to send a king
for him, for it were not metely for a simple knight to go seek for such a
knight of ^o hie prowess as he is of. well sir said Crystelyne, Brysebar is
abyden with him and are gone together to the port noyre and if he can he will
bring him unto your court. Tha^ all the kings and princes counseyled the king
that he should not send for him but abide the cominge of Brisebar. Than
Florence rose and said to the king her father, sir and it like your grace to
give me leave to depar^e in to my chamber, for this foul head troubles me sore
to look thero^, and so she took her leave of the king and of the emperor, and
when she was in her secret chamber she called to her the king of orqueney, in
whom she faithfully trusted and so they sat them down togeder, and than she
said. Sir of great valor is the knight that has slain the monster and done
so many valyau^t deeds, therefore I pray you can you tell me what he is. By the
faith that I owe unto you madame I cannot tell you, but let us send for
Cristelyne to know if he can tell us any thing of his estate. Than
incontinent he was s^nte for in all the haste, and than Florence caused the
chaumbre for to be clean avoided, saving of the king of orqueney and of the
queen his wife. And when Cristeline was come to them, than Florence demanded
of him what manner of knight it was that offered his seruy^e in such wise to her.
Madame said he as god help me I can not show your grace, but more fayrer, more
gracious, nor more gentiller heart of a knight cannot be found again in all the
wide worlde^ nor a goodlier man of arms, nor of hier prowess cannot be
lightly ymagined. well friend said florence and what message has he sent to me
by you. Madame he showed me how that he is your knight and ready to do you
seruy^e at all times. Mine said Florence and therewith ^he sighed and than there
entered into her heart a great and a fervent love, in ^o much that al other were
clean put out of her mind, and therwt she stood in a stoudy without speakinge
of any word* And than the queen of orqueney demanded of him what arms the
knight did bear. Madame said he a chekered arms and a white shield. well said
Florence is this of troth. Ye truly madame said the knight, and also he has a
sword that can help no man but himself, but he does therewith what him list
Madame I say unto you that about al other he is the best of all the world, and
so he is reputed in every place. Tha^ was Florence overcome wi^h love more tha^
she was before, and thought well yt it was he yt master Steven her clerk abode
so long for at ye port noyre. Tha^ she gave Cristelyne.CC.li^ of land for
the tidi^ges that he brought her fro the said knight.

How that arthur and master Steven went to the gardein pe^tayning to the
palace of the port noyre, and entered in to the rich pauilio^ where as the
image was holding in her hands the chaplet the which she did set on Arthurs
head in signifieng how that he should have the fair Florence to whom the
image was resemblable, for there was none yt should have Florence in marriage
with out he should die an evil death, without it were he that the image did give
unto the said chaplet. Cap. lv.
IN the mean time that Cristeline Brysebars neuew was at ye ^ourt with the
king Emendus as ye have herd before Arthur and his company were at the port
noyre in great Joy and mirth. And tha^ the abbot had song masse^ and so they
were all together in the palace, and entered into the gardyn, and so went
talking together till at last master Steven took Arthur by the hand and said
how that he would speak with him in counsel, than they departed together fro
the other company, and went talkyng together till they came to the rich
pauilion and entered into it, and stood before image that held the chaplet in
her hands. Than the master said, sir this image is right fair, how be it the
figure yt it does represent is.x. times fayrer, the which is the fair
Florence daughter to the mighty king Emendus, and sir when yt she was first
borne she was brought up into the mount of adue^tures, and there was given her
this rich pauylyon by the queen of the fayry, and there they destenied on her
that no creature should have her in marriage but all only he that this image
should give unto the chaplet that she holds in her hands as ye may se, and I
hope verily it shall be you, because of the great prowess that is in you, and I
pray to god it may be so, and sir now here is none but you and I, therefore I
pray you go to the image, and than we shall know the troth. A master said
Arthur for gods sake I ask mercy, so hye a thing as is the love of ye noble
lady Florence is not apertenaunte to so simple a person as I am, therefore it
were folly to me to goo to the image, presumynge to attayn to so hye a
felici^ye. By my head said the master ye shall go, and therefore I pray you so
to do, for my heart gives me good comfort that ye shall speed. well said
Arthur sith ye will needs have me to go, I am content: but first ye shall go
before me. with a good will said yt master, so that ye will promise to follow
me if so be that I mysse. As god help me said Arthur so will I do. Than the
master went and kneled down before the image, but though he had kneled
there.x. year together he ^huld nothing have spedde, yet he was right fair
and a good clerk and right gracious, and also son to a king: but for all that
the image did nothing to him. And when the master saw that he rose, and
caused than Arthur to do as he did, the which he was right loath ^o do: but at
the last with much pain he kneled down before the image, and in contynente the
image turned toward him, and to his seming it blusshed as red as sendall, and
fair and ^asely the image did set the chaplet on his head. And the same
season that this image did set the chaplet on his head, the noble Lady Florence
was in her chamber talking with Cristelyne, who told her how ye knight that
slew the monster had a white shield and a sword that could not be enpayred. At
the which time she felt in her heart the virtue of the property of the same
image in the rich pauilion, the which represented her similitude, wherebye
there entered into her heart such alone, that she lost al her countenance, and
blus^^ed t^ise as much as the image did before Arthur, and thereby in a manner
she fell in a trance and lost the use of her speech. And when the queen of
orqueney saw her in that point, she cried right hiely and said Our blessed lady
saint Mary save my ^a day Florence fro death or ^eoperdy and than Cristelyne
took her in his arms. Than other ladies came into the chamber, and when they
saw her in that point, they took and laid her on her bed and anon it was
spredde al about the court how yt the noble Florence was sore sick, wherewith
the court was sore troubled, and the king and themperoure were right sorry when
they herd thereof. And when that Florence was well come again to her self,
than the qu^ne of orqueney demanded of her what she ayled to be in ye case so
suddenly. And she answered and said yt it was because that she remembered the
foul horriblenes of the head of the dead monster, whe^b^ her heart failed her.
Than incontinent the king commanded that the head shul^ be brent to thentent
that it should no more be seen, and so i^ was done in all haste. And as for
Arthur was all this season before the image with the chaplet on his head. And he
was than so taken with love that there was none in all the world that pleased
him^ but al only the figure of her yt owed ^he chaplet, and therewith he ro^e
on his fete, and the chaplet on his head. And when the master saw that, he
had never so great joy before and said. Sir god encrea^e in you bounte and
nobleness for as for honor ye are there with as now gretelye endue^ sir now I
se and know well that ye shall be my lord, therefore I owe to you faith and
trou^h, and fro hence forth I will to you make homage, and hold my land of
you. A master said Arthur suffer not your self so to say, for the son of a
king ough^ not to hold his land of so simple a knight as I am, howbeit the
master did so much that at the last Arthur received him for his man, and when
he had so received him, the master said. My lord I owe unto you faith and
troth and truly that shall I keep* and from hens forth hardely do somewhat after
my counsel, for I shall help you to accomply in this enterprise more than any
other man living. Master said Arthur, and I shall believe your counsayl and
put my self all only into your hands, for as god help me the love that is in
my heart greueth me sore, and yet I wot not who it is that I love. S^r said
the master take y^ chaplet fro you^ head and give it again to the image to
keep till ye ask it again an other season. Master said Arthur with a good
will, and so took the chapl^t and delivered it again to the image. And than the
image dressed her up and stood still as she did before. Than ye master said,
sir Brisebar will desire you ^o go to the court with him, but ye must deny him
as for this season, for after my mind ye shall first go to acheue the aduenturs
of the tenebrons or dark tower, and take with you no company but only Bawdwyn
your squire, and ye shall depart tomorow betymes* and I will go to the court
wi^h Bris^bar and shall think right well of every thing that is behouable for the
contentacion of your mind. In the name of god said Arthur so let it be. And as
they were thus talking together there came to them y^ abbot and the Ma^kes his
brother Gouernar, and Iosseran, and as for Bawdwyn and Iaket apparayled for the
diner in the palais. And than the abbot said to Arthur, sir I have be^ here a
gee^^ season, whereof I thank you, and also I am ever bound unto you because ye
have delivered out of prison my brother the marks, sir now it is time yt I
retorn^ again unto my dolorous abbey, yt which was wont to be the flower of
beauty of all that country, and now it is the prison of al unhappiness and
mysfortune. and he that has caused all this I pray to god that he may die an
enyl death, who is sir Isembart the false neue we of the duke of Bygor, for by
his means a false enchaunter has taken a way clean ye ^igh^ of the heaven fro
our abbey, so that we live ever in darkness, and also he has taken away all
our rentes and lon^es, wherewith ^ye we are thereby famis^hed for hungre, and
also he has falsely by treason slain my brother the ^oo^e lord of A^genton,
and has dyshe^^ted my nece his daughter, and has given her to a lewd boy,
who is his barboure, and now at this next Mawdelyne ^yde he purposes that
they shall be married together, the which shall be great pi^ie that ever so good
and beautiful a lady as she is, should be cast a way upon so vile a person, for
if she were not my nece I would say she were worthy to have a ryght^ good
prince, wherefore I complayn me to god and to al gentylnes, and specially sir
humblye I require you to help to take vengeance of him, and of such as takes
his part. By the faith yt I owe unto the duke of Britayne said Arthur I shall
put to my pain if I can, and will be the^e at this Mawdealyn tide, and than I
shall help to aid the damos^ll to the best of my power. Sir said master
Steven, than shall ye do well, for ye speak as a gentilman should say Than
said Brysebar sweet sir let us.ii. go together to the court, and there y^ shall
se the noble king of Soroloys and al his barony the which is right great and
hie and also ye shall se my lady the gentyl Florence, who shall retain you for
one of her knights, and ye shall have than in your comp^ny an hundredth
knights of great valor, whereof I am the symplest and most insuffycyent of
them all, and so by you shall the company be enforced and ye renown of them
doubled through out all the world, and I shall promise you above al other to
keep you true and faithful company. And when Arthur herd him say all this,
he smyled a little and said. Dear friend Brisebar I thank you heartely for your
noble profer, and certainly such as my pore body ca^ do is, and ever shall be
ready to do my lady Florence service. for where so ever I be come her servant
shall I be: but as at this time to the count may I not go^, for first I must
fynysshe an ente^pryse that I have taken on me ^ god will give me the grace ^o
accomplysshe it. And than Iosseran demanded of him what en^erpryse it was. As
god help me said Arthur it is to atche^e the adue^tures of the toure tenebrous.
And when Brysebar herd that, he said, sir for gods sake let that enterprise
alone, for certaynlye all the power that my lord the king of Soroloys has is
not sufficient to attain to acheue that adventure, therefore sir in my mind it
were a great folly for you to take such a thing in hand as no man can
acheue. Than master Steven said, Sir Brysebar let him alone, for he has a
great hert^ though it be a grea^e enterprise, yet I trust god shall help him,
for sithe he has taken it in hand I am sure the^e is none that can let him of
his mind. well said Brisebar sith he will not be turned I will go wi^h him. And
so will I also said Iosseran* well syrs said Arthur I thank you but surely I will
have none with me: but al only Bawdewin my squire. In the name of god said the
master so b^ it, and ye sir Brysebar and I will go together to the court and
ye sir Marks and Iosseran Gouernar and Iaket, al ye shall abide here still and
keep still this castle till y^ have other word. Ye say well said Arthur. And
therewyth they went al together to the pa^ays to dinner, and were richely
served, and all that day they made great feast and joy* and at night went to
their restes, and the next morning betymes they arose and herd mass the
which the abbot did sing, and afte^ mass Arthur mounted on his horse, and so
did the abbot and master Steven and Brysebar, and so took their leave of
Gouerna^ and other, and so issued out of the castle, and rode together the
space of four leges and at the last they came to an entering i^to a forest,
where as was a forked way and there the master and Brysebar took their leave
and rode forth their way on the right hand, the which was the next hye way
to the city of Cornite where as king Emendus was the same season. And y^ abbot
went his nex^e way to his dolorous abbey. And Arthur took his way on the lift
hand^ and so rode forth all the day till it was nere hand night, and so aryued
at a ge^tyl squyers place, called the manner of ye plas^hes, the which s^uyer
doubted him self g^^atlye, for he had such enemies that had mortally defied
him, therefore he said to Arthur, sir yet thither righ^ heartely w^lcome: but I
beseech you in all the haste to depart hence shortly for the saving of
youreselfe, for I can no^ warrant you in my house, for mine enemies are right
mighty, and I look each hour when they shall assail me. Than said Arthur, sir
care ye not for that but and it may please you I pray you let me have lodgyng
here with you this night and sir I ensure you if they come while I am here I
trust I shall make a good peace between you and the^, either with fayrenesse or
otherwise. Sir said the squire I am content and god give you grace to do that
ye have said.

How that Arthur slew and discomfyted.xv. knights right mighty and puyssant,
who were come to assail his ho^st, who was called the squire of the plasshes.
Capitulo.lvi.


THus was Arthur received of the sauyer, who made him right good chere to his
power* and the same time the squyers enemies had there a spy, who returned and
showed to the how that there was come to the squyers house a strange knight
by semynge right mighty and puissaunt, and how that he had promised to the
squier to help him if he had any need that night. Than they al answered and
said how that knight might be sure he should se that same night, for they said
they would not let their enterprise for one knight, for they were to the nombre
of.xv. And when it was night they all apparailed them self on horsbacke and
came to the squyers house al armed, and right rudely assaulted his house, and
the squier and such servants as he had defended them self as well as they
could with crosbowes and such other wepons as they had within. And when
Arthur knew well this he armed him and took his white shield, the which did
cast a great clerenesse by night, and took his good sword clarence in his
hand and when he was thus armed tha^ he looked out of a wyndowe, and demanded
of them without what they sought there, and what they would. And they
answered how yt they sought for to have his head My head said Arthur loo take
it here for here ye may se it, and I shall bring i^ o^te wort^ye unto you
than he desired them within to leave their shotynge and to set open the gate,
and to let down the bridge, and according too his desire it was ^one and
Arthur issued out all alone* and ran at them, and they all at once ran at him,
and Arthur drew out clarence his good sword, the which for his goodness was
also called trau^chfer, that is for to say, cutter of iron, and str^ke the
first so therwyth that he claue his head ^o the eyes, and he made the head
fly from the second, and from the third he struck of his arm and sholdre
clean from the body, and than the remenaunt said all at ones on him, but all
they nothing did enpayre him. And than Arthur dashed forth with his horse and
encountered so one of them, that he ouerthrewe both horse and man into a great
dyche the which was about the place, and there he was drowned. And when a great
mighty knight who was master of them all and he that first began this war
saw his people so hardly delte withal with one knight he was right sorrowful,
and therwyth dash^ at Arthur and gave him a great stroke on the shield with a
great mace of yren full of great pryckes of stele, the which he laid on with
both his hands, the which stroke rebounded again upward, for it could not
enpayre his shield nothing, and than Arthur lift up his sword and struck him
on the head, and the stroke was herd a great way of, but the stroke did glyde
down to his lift arm, so that arm and sholdre and all ^lewe clean into the
field, and the swerd dashed intoo the arson of his faddell and claue it clean
asonder, and did cut asonder the croper of the horse, and therewith horse and
knight and al dashed down to the ground, than Arthur laid on among the other
both on the lift side and on the right side, and made heads, arms, hands,
legs, and fete fly clean into the fyelde, than the remnaun^e began to fly,
but than it was to late, for there was none but either he had lost an arm or
a leg, and wha^ the squier understood how that his gest was thus issued out
al alone and fyghtyng with his enemies, than he armed him self and ran out
into the field, but there he found nothing to do, for by that time Arthur
as than had made an end of them all, and so was retournynge home ward. And
than the squire saw that Arthur had ouercomen al his enemies, he thought
verily that he was of hye prowess, and so he thanked him much and said. Sir
ye told me ^^outhe when ye said y^ ye would make the peace between mine
adversaries and me, for now I am among them, and yet they say nothing to
me^. And so Arthur and the squire entered into the place and closed fast the
gates after them and drew up the bridge, and so went to their restes, and in
the morning the squier went out to se which of his enemies were slain, and
among the other he found^ his principal enemy slain, whereof he had great
joy, and offered him self therefore to become Arthurs man, and would have gone
with him, but Arthur would not suffer him, but so he departed from the squire,
and anon the words were spre^de abroad in all the country, how that a knight
with a white shield had slain and overcome.xv. knights, the which words
came to the hearing of master Steven and Brysebar. Uerely said master
Steven that same is Arthur, who has right gerat valor in him. As god help
me said Brysebar it is he, I se well that he is a right valiant knight, for
he is the best in all the world. Thus Arthur rode forth till it was three of
the clock, and there he found between two mountains, a great vylayne huge and
mighty, black and hery out of all measure, and he bare on his sholdre a great
crooked lever. And when he saw Arthur he ran to him and to^ke his horse by
the brydel rain, and demanded of him, saying thus. Fair sir what manner of
man be ye? Friend said Arthur I am a knight stranger. Ye sir said the vylayne
be ye a knight, and what se^e ye he^e in these pastures that and have in my
keeping. Good fellow said Arthur I go on mine adventure w^e^^ as g^^ will bring
me unto: why sir said the vylaine go ye than to seek for adventures, if ye be
so well hearted that ye da^e follow after me, I shall bring you unto a
strange adventure, but I think ye dare not follow me, for I think ye be one
of the knights that will menace and threten when ye stand by the chymney
warmyng of you aft^^ souper, and in the morning all is forgoten. And when that
Bawdwyn herd the vyla^nt say so to his master, he began to laughe greatly at
him, and said. well good re^owe, lead him whether so ever than wylt, and I
warrant him he wyl^ follow the. Sir said the vyllayne I speak not to you, as
for you I se well y^oughe ye be not of that force and might that ye can draw
the wine and drink it, and pay not for your shot or ye go, I speak to your
master, therefore let him answer me if that he da^e Friend said Arthur as for
Bawde^in my squier is but a f^le, take ye no head whatsoever he says, but
hardely bring me w^ether so ever ye will, and truly I shall follow you as
long as my life will last. Ye but sir said the vylayne, if ye follow me, when
it comes to the need than I fere me least ye will leave me and run away like a
cowarde. Nay said Arthur I promise you faithfully I will not forsake you as
long as I may. well said the vylayne, than come on your way forth, and I
promise you if there were ten such as ye be, I shall bring you thycher where
as none of you all should escape from the death, in like wise as I have caused
mani a o^^ to do Than the vylayne went forth and Arthur followed him. And at
the last they entered into a great valley between two great mountains, where
as they found a ly^el lodge where as meat and drynk was s^^er to t^aualling
men. Than the vylayne said to Arthur, sir knight it is now good season that
ye give your horse some repast, for after this ye shall find no mo h^uses till
it be night, at why the time I shall bring you unto such a longyng the
which shall not be good for you, for there shall ye lose your life. Than there
Arthur alyghted and gave his horse meat, and did eat and drink him self.
Than the vilayn said Sir knight, eat and drink with great Joy always, but ^
ensure you this shall be the last that ever ye shall take. And when Bawdewyn
he^de that this vylayn thus always manaced his master, it grieved him right
sort, and said. A thou ^oule thurle hold thy tongue fro thretenynge thus of my
master, what we ^est thou to make him abashed with thy words nay I wa^ra^^e
the, he takes little he^e thereto for do the worst thou can he be (...) thy
malice. Than the (...) began to ^oule his eyes, and to bend his brows and
took his leu^r in do. ^his hands, and would have steyken Bawdewyn, but Arthur
held him and said. Friend take no head what my sq^yer says, for I tell you
he is but a fool, therefore speak to me what ye will and let him alone. And when
the good wife of the lodge herd him speak so swetely to the vylayne, and was
so loath to dysplease him, and when he was unarmed ^he saw that he was so goodly
a creature that she loved him in her heart and praised him much, and demanded
of him wheder he went. Arthur answered and said good love I follow this good
felawe. Certainly sir said the wife he is no good felawe but he is the most
foul^st and (...) traytoure living therefore gentle knight I have great pi^^
of you and ye are v^terly lost and deed if ye go with him any ferder for this
foul vylayne ^othe nothing but watch such knights as passes through this
country to ^hentent to bring the^ thither where as he is in full purpose to
bring you unto, for fro thence there was never none that ever returned again
without death therefore gentle knight return again for it were great loss of
such a knight as ye seem to be thus destroyed. Than Bawdewyn said, sir how
feel ye your heart, will ye recule back again or else will ye goo forth. Friend
said Arthur how should ever any lady or damoysell enploye their love on me if
it should be said that I have fled away for the menacynge of a foul
churlys^he vylayne, nay as god help me I had rather suffer death. well sir said
Bawdewyn than ye think on love I se well, but and it touched me as it d^oth you
I would think on no lady nor on love in this point, for I would love mine own
life better tha^ to trust on their praise or reward. And with these words the
vylayne came to them and said, syrs what noise is this of cowardy se that I
here, sir knight I se well your heart fails you, for ye are about to make
couenaunte to return again, therefore I think well ye will leave me when need
is. Friend said Arthur truly I shall not forsake you. well said the vylayne
than arm you shortly and let us goo hense* for your last days draws fast
onwarde truly, therefore make haste.

How the great vylayne brought Arthur where as he fought with ^ great and a
terryble Lion, but finally Arthur slew him. And how after he fought with a
great gyauntesse and an horrible gyaunt, and by his prowess he conq^ered
them both, and after that fought with a great gryffon, and this was the
beginning of the adventures of the tower Tenebrous, wherein ye shall here
many t^tryble and maruaylous things, the which were acheued by the only
prowess of the valyaunte Arthur. Capi. lvii.
When that Arthur had well repasted him self and his horse, than he armed him
and mounted on his horse, and followed the said vyllayne till at the last they
came intoo a great valey dark and deep. Than say^^ the vylayne to Arthur, sir
knighte now tide ye on before and ye dare, and I shall follow you. So than
Arthur rode before, and as they rode on their ryght^ hand there were hewers of
wood, and as soon as they saw Arthur and the vylaine, than they knew well
that he was brought thither by the soul churl, tha^ they cried alowde and
said. A gentle knight for gods sake return again, for and ye goo any
ferther ye are but deed. A thou foul vylayne we pray to god that thou may
dye an evil death, for many a noble man have thou caused to dye. And when
Bawdewyn herd these words, he said to his master. Lo ^y^ now ye may
remember your love, ye may hear what these people says, certaynlye I would
not think on the fairest creature of all the world in this point. And when
Arthur herd Bawdewyn say so he laughed at him saying thus. Friend by the
faith that I owe unto my lord my fader I can not tell whether I goo nor what
peril there is therein but what peril so ever I shall find I would it were
double as mouche on the condition that I were in certain that she that I saw
never loved me as well as I love her. And when the foul vylayne herd him say
so in his heart he praised him much and knew well thereby that he had a
valiant heart. And thus they rode forth so long till at the last the foul
churl cried out and said. Sir knight how it will appear what ye can do for
now ye shall have need to defend your self. And with that word Arthur looked
on his lift hand and saw where there was coming to hymwarde a great and a
mighty lion. Than Arthur ^ered his horse lest that the lion should have slain
him therefore he lyghted down to the ground and delivered his horse unto
Bawdewyn and dressed him toward the lion. And when the lion perceived him he
lepte and struck at him with his pa^es thinkinge to confound him but Arthur
put his shel^e before him and the lions stroke dash^e thereon so sore that
Arthur was all astonyed with the stroke. Than Arthur struck at him with
clarence his good sword as he passed by him and struck of clean his tail and
when the lion felt himself so hurt he habandoned with all his power his body
against Arthur and with his sharp tethe he took Arthur by the helm and they
entered into the bokles of his harneys but as god would they touched not his
flesh and with his foot he struck Arthur such a stroke upon shield that and
it had not ben the better shield it had been cloven all to petes, and with
his other foot he took Arthur by the right sholdre, but Arthur swarued from
him, or else he had been torn asonder, for in the swaruynge away he lost a
great quarter of his harneis, and therewith Arthur lift up his good swer^ and
dashed it up to the hard cross in at the throat of the Lion, and therewyth the
Lion did cast out a great cry and a hydeous, and so fell down to the ground
stark dead, and therewith incontinent he espied again where as there was
coming to him ward a great gyauntesse with a great faw^hon in her hand, so
well steled that there was nothing but it would cut asonder, and therewith she
came unto Arthur and struck at him right egerly, and when Arthur saw the
stroke coming on him, he quickly cast his shield before him. And this
gyauntesse was terribly angry for the death of her Lion, wherefore she gave
Arthur such a stro^e upon the sholdre yt he was right sore astonyed
therewithal, but as god would the fawchon brake asondre in two years, and his
shield was therewith nothing enpayred. And when the gyauan^esse saw that her
fawchon was broken, she lift up a great spear that she had standing by her, and
thought to have stryken Arthur therewith upon the head: but Arthur stepte under
the stroke, and closed with her, and than she took Arthur by the head, and so
arasshed clean of his helm so rudely that she braste asonder all the buckelles
where withal it was tied and with the pull that she made she stepte back ward
with the helm and than Arthur with his good sword struck her clean thrughout
the belly and therewith she fell backwarde for she was so hasty to revenge her
Lion, that she came to Arthur all unarmed where in she was but a sole for a man
may be anon to hasty to come to his enemy and when she fell she gave such a
cry that all the valey range of the noise so that a great gyaunt who was her
make herd it well and than he ran to a great lever and took it in his hand
and came rennynge so rudely as though a great multitude of men had come to
gyder he made so g^ete a noise and by that time Arthur had stryken of the heed
of the giauntesse and rouled it in the mids of the way and did set again
his he^me upon his heed. And when the gyaunte saw that his wife was deed and
his lion also, he fared like a fend of hell and took his lever and dashed at
Arthur thinking to have stryken him down to the ground but Arthur stepte
aside ^yg^ly and the stroke light on a gr^te rock so rudely, that his hands
tynger so sore therewith that the lever fell from him to the ground and than he
stouped down for to have taken it up* again and while that he was stoupynge
down Arthur took clarence his goo sword and gave unto him such a stroke that
one of his boystous arms flewe clean in to the field. Than the gyaunte lepte
forth and took Arthur in his other arm and if that his why^e ^helde had not
ben he had been frus^^ed asonder for he gave Arthur a great stroke with the
stubbe of his hurt ar^e. And than Arthur aduysed him well and under his arm
he das^t clarence his good sword up to the hard cross and so he fell down
stark dead. Than there came a great gryffon and stryuyned Arthurs horse
clean throughout all the body and thought to have borne him away. And when
that Arthur saw his horse hurt, in his heart he was right sorrowful, and
struck at the gryffon with his sword, and struck asonder both his legs, and
therewith the gryffon flewe away with great pain, and both his legs remained
still upon the horse, and the horse bledde so ^ast that he fell down dead in the
place, wherewith Arthur was right sore displeased. Than the vylayne came to him
and said in this manner of wise. Sir knight in a thing the which can not be
remedyed must needs be suffered in the best wise that a man may, your horse is
slain, take ye no care for him, for there be horses enough, ye have slain the
gyaunt and the g^auntes and a^^o their Lion, and the gryffon, burfor all that I
promise you that your end draws fast on ward, and as for this night let us
go her borowe us in the gyauntes house hereby, the which is a strong place,
and there we shall find great plen^ye o^ good wynes and meats, and there ye
shall se many fair and bryghte harneyses, and also there ye shall se heads,
arms, legs and fete of much people, the which the gyaunte has taken and
brought to that place alive, for the gyauntesse would never by her will eat
none other meat but man's fles^he, and so they entered into the place, and
the same day the gyaunt had taken a knight and brought him dead into the
place upon his own horse, and as than the horse was yet on live. And when the
vylayne saw the horse, he took him by the brydell and brought him to Arthur
and said. Sir knight your own horse is dead therefore I give you this
horse, I thank you hertely good fellow said Arthur. Than Bawdewyn did shytte
fast the gate, and there they did rest them all that night, and on the
next^ morning ensuyng, betymes Arthur rose and armed him and mounted on his
horse that the vylayne had given him. Than the vylayne came forth and said sir
knight follow me for now I will go forth. Go on than before said Arthur and so
Arthur rode forth after him all the long day till it was nere night and than
at the last they came to a myghtie strong toure the which pertained to a
knight named sir Roger the scot. Than the vilayne said to Arthur, sir knight it
is now good time to lodge us here now in this castle al this night let us goo
enter into this place but one thing I ensure you the knight that owes this
place is the most shamefullest traytoure that now is living for there is none
that enters into this place, but shamefully he does murdre them while they be
in their beds, he is also cosyn germayne to the duke of bygor, and nouewe to
sir Fyrmount, who was but now of late slain at the castle of ye roch by a
knight stranger, therefore now let se what ye will do, whether ye will go
lodge in this place or not. well said Arthur I se well and I lie without I
shall be shrewdly lodged, and sithe this knight is of that lignage that ye
speak of he is my mortal enemy, how be it as yet I can not complain on him,
for he did me never no trespass, therefore certainly I will go thither to take
my lodging. And when the vylayne herd him say so he thought well how that he
was of great courage, and loved him therefore much in his heart, how be it he
said unto him, sir in gods name so be it, let us go thither, and if any
ill come to you thereby I am not to blame* I may not too wythall, for I have
given you warning thereof. Than they entered in to the court of that place.
And as soon as sir Roger saw Arthur he knew him right well, and was in
certain how that it was he that had done so much prowess at the castle of
the roche, and had slain sir Fyrmont, and had sor^ wounded sir I sembarte
his cosyn, and neuewe to the duke of bygor, and than his heart began to tremble
for great anger, notwithstanding he made ^o them great ^here outward, and
cleped and kis^ed Arthur and said. Sir ye be right hertely welcome into my
house, as God help me I have more joy of your coming than of any other manne
living but to himself inwardly he said, yet or it be mydnight I will have
that head of yours clean from your sholders. Than the vylayne came unto them
and cried as loud as ever he could, god kep^ the lord of this place,
according to his hertes desire, and these words he said three times. Than
Arthur said, if his heart be good w^ll have he, and if it be otherwise than
good, god amend it. Than Arthur was brought up into his chaumbre, and there he
did warm him And in the mean time this knight sir Roger came to his squire
and demanded of him how and in what manner he might slay Arthur, for if we
make any^ assault on him he will slay us both, for there is none like him in
all the wide world, nor none so soore to be doubted. For he did meruaylous
deeds of arms at the castle of the roche. Sir said his squire I know
certaynlye that we can not endure against him: but I shall tell you what we
shall do, we shall make his bed this night above in your toure and set it
over the trappe door of the dongeon, and we will take away all the bordes in
the bottom of the bed, and in the stead of the bordes set small staves to
sustain up the clothes and so when he shall lie down in the bed he and the
clothes and all shall tomble down into the dongeon and than we shall soon
cast down his squire after him and than slay this foul vylayn and when they
be in the pytte we will take speres and so slay them or else let us here three
or four cawdrons with hot scaldynge-water and cast it down upon their hedes
and so shall we slay them. and wha^ this sir Roger herd his squire say so he
was right well content with him and cleped and kyssed him and said this matter
is right well devised for as ye have said so shall it be done therewith the
vylayne issued out of the chaumbre from Arthur with his great lever on hes
neck and as soon as he saw sir Roger counseliynge with his squire and other
standing togyd^r rownynge in corners Than he began to escrye to them and said
what manner of people be ye, for what matter be ye thus counseyllynge together
what is it for some marriage be ware yt there be no treason among you for if
there be I shall frusshe you down with my lever. Than Arthur issued out of his
chaumbre. And when sir Roger saw him he took him by the hand and said. Sir it
is time that we wasshe our hands for your souper is all ready. Sir as it
pleases you said Arthur than they washed and sat them down at the table
and were right well served, and the vylayne was set down at an other table
behind Arthur, and so they gave him part of al their meats and drynkes that
they had and he did ete and drink excedyngly much for they could not
satysfye his apetyde. And after souper Bawdewyn Arthurs squire took head to his
horses. And than Arthurs bed was made in the same place where as it was
devised before, and the vyllayne laid him down on four quysshens by the fire
in the hall as he that had well eaten and dronken, and so fell fast on sleep
and snorted right sore, wherefore sir Roger that was knighte of the place would
have wakened him, but Arthur would not suffer him, but caused him to be covered
with a grene couerlet and so let him lie, and wha^ it was time for him to go to
his bed, than the torches were lyghted up, and the knight co^uayed Arthur to
his chaumbre, and at his taking leave of Arthur he offered with his mouth him
self and all his householde to be ready at his commandment, but in his heart
inwardly he thought to be ready to cause him to lose his life. And when he was
departed Arthur went to his bed, and as he laid him down he and the bed and
all fell into the great pytte, and the knight and his servants were ready
watchyng at the door, and when they heard the russhe, they entered into the
chaumbre, and took Bawdewyn and did cast him down too his master, and Arthur
received him in his arms because he should not be hurt in the falling down.
Than there ^ose a great cry and noise throughoute all the place, and some
bare speres and bars of iron to cast down at Arthur to slay him in the pyt,
and ever Arthur watched well their strokes and did avoid them as well as he
might. And at the last by the reason of the great noise the vylayne arose
out of his sleep. And so when that he heard that great brute he wist well
that Arthur was betrayed. Than he mounted up into the chaumbre with his great
lever in his hands, and there he saw well that they were about to enforce them
self to slay Arthur. Than he took his lever and struck so the knight sir Roger
in ye neck that he caused his tongue to hang out of his mouth nigh half a foot,
and therewith he fell down into the pyt to Arthur, And the vylayne than said to
Arthur, sir knight gnawe well on that morsel, ye shall have more anon. Than
he lift up his lever again and st^ake sir Rogers Squire such a stroke on ye
head, yt his head was frusshed hard to his shulders, and he fell also down into
the pyt after his master. Than the vylayne said to Bawdewyn, good sq^ter cut
his throat and make him su^e In the name of god said Arthur it shall not need,
for he has enough already Than the vylayn dressed him at the ^e^naunt tha^
held torches in their hands to give light, and dashed them down one after
another, and some fled away and he followed after and slew them all. Than he
entered into the kechyn and there he found the coke boylyng of a great caudron
full of water, the which should have been cast down on Arthur, tha^ he took the
coke in his arms, and did cast him into the cawdron all boylynge, and did
hold him down with his lever, and said. Thou shall sethe without salt till
thou be enough, and if thy flesh be hard so den I shall broyle the on the
coals, than he ran to a ladder and bare it to Arthur in the pyt. Tha^ Arthur
and Bawdwin issued out, and as soon as Arthur was without he ran to his sword
and demaundyd if there were any more to do in that place. As god help me sir
said the vylayne I trow not. Than they light up torches and descended down,
and found an old house full of dead men's bones such as the traitors of that
place had slain. In the name of god said Arthur to the vylayne ye have helped
me now^ like a friend for all your vn^urteis words here before: well said the
vylayne I will that if ye can escape to morrow from that aduentur whether as I
shall bring you, the which I think you can not do, that than ye shall promise
me to do for me a thing such as I shall desire you. Friend said Arthur and I
promise you that to the uttermost of my power I shall do any thing that ye
desire me if a knight may do it without reproach of vylany. well said the
vylayne I believe that all this promise shall not need. for though ye were in a
manner made of yro^ yet I think ye should not escape fro death but as for this
night I shall keep you fro any danger. And so he made Arthur a fair bed,
and lay all night in the flore by him, and so ^e was that night his
chamberlain, and so he was ever after all his life, for afterward Arthur did
much good to him. So thus they went to bed and took their rest till the
next^ morning that Arthur rose.

How on the next morning the vylaine brought Arthur to another adventure nigh
to the toure tenebrous, where as he was first assailed with terrible monstrous
birds, and great griffons without nombre, and after yt he was assailed
with.xxiiii. knights. and how he b^ his prowes slew them all. And also he
bet^e down the great ma^homet of brass out of the which there issued out a
wynd that it turned about great myllstones like powder, and also how that he
entered into the castle tenebrous, and quenched the fire which was the cause of
the great darkness the which contained the circuit of.v. leges compass as ye
shall here afterward. Capto. lviii.
IN ye next morning betimes Arthur rose and armed him and mounted on his horse
and took his wateuer following y^ vilayn, and so he rode forth till it was about
three of the clock, and than they entered into a great valey, and ever they rode
lowe^ and lower, it was than a fair season, for the son shone clear, and by
that time they had ryden two leges and a half, they were in much darkness that
they had clean lost the sight both of the son, and also of the day, for it
was there as dark as though it had be^ about midnyght. Than the vilayne said
to Arthur, sir knight can ye tell fro whens al this darkness comes, if ye can
for do it and make it clear, than shall ye get thereby a perpetual honor, and
know you for certain that as yet there was never none that ever entered any
ferder that ever returned again therefore if your heart fail you enter no
ferder for if ye do, ye shall dye as other have done here before Friend said
Arthur, how is it that all this darkness is here in this place. I will tell you
no more said the vylayne, but I read you be sage and wise, for it stands you
well in hand. And therewith Arthur departed fro them and entered into the
derkenes, and the vylayn and Bawdewyn abode still at the beginning of the
derkenes, and so they lost the sight of Arthur, but they might se the shynynge
of his sheld as far of as one might shote an arowe. Thus he rode forth well
the space of half a lege, and at the last he found a river great and deep, and
black as pitch, and the banks were so hye, that uneath the water might be
seen runnynge underneath, and it was so full of serpents and lydardes, that
none could enter among them without he were slain and above his head flewe
monstrous bl^des and diverse griffons who were able to bear away an armed knight
horse and al, and that they were in as great a multitude as though they had been
sta^lings And Arthur did cover his head with his sheld, and the griffons
dashed thereat with their talentes, and anoyed both Arthur and his horse right
sore, an^ ever Arthur florysshed about him with his good sword clarence, and
what so ever he touched did him no more hurt after. Also there were flies that
were as great as nu^tes and as black as pytche, and they stange both him and
his horse right sore, so that the blood issued out af^er^ but and it had not
been for the clerenes of his shield, he had been slain there and he had had
a.M. men's lives, but by the bright shynyng thereof he might well s^ round
about him, and perceive well when any of these things came to him ward,
whereby he made as good de^ence as was for him possible, and thus he rode a
long season by the ^yuer side, and at the last he found a little strayte way
the which he must needs pass without he would have turned again, and at the
last Arthur dashed into the strayte way, and anon the vermin that was there ran
to his horse, so that shortly he was full of them as though they had been flies,
and they souked so much blood of the horse that he began to wax very feeble and
wha^ Arthur saw that his horse would fayl^ him, he hasted as fast as he might
to get out of that strayte way, and so with much pain ^egal^ his horse out
thereof and incontinent the horse fell d^wn dead tha^ arthur set his fete to ye
earth as well as he might, and tha^ there came a knight at Arthur or he was
ware, and hit him on his sheld^ the which he held not fast in his hand,
therefore the stroke did g^ent and the spear held and brake not, and as the
knight passed forth Arthur took him by the rain of the brydell and caught him
by the arm and pulled him so rudely that he made him avoid his horse, and so
he fell down into the water and there was drowned and devoured with the foul
vermyn that was therein* than Arthur lepte on the same knights horse and took
his spear. Than an other knight cried and said, sir knight beware of me, than
Arthur turned and encou^tred him, and the knight brake his spear, but Arthur
struck him so rudely yt his spear went clean thrughout his body, and so he fell
down deed, than there ran at him.x. other knights al at ones, and they struck
him on al sides with great and mighty strokes, tha^ he took his good sword and
struck one of them so rudely that he claue him clean to the sholdres, and an
other he claue from the sholders down to the back bone, and delte among them
such strokes that he confounded a^l that he attained unto, and by that time he
had great need of such herbs as master steven gave him, and also his white
shield and good sword did him there good service, for such knights as he
had slain were chosen m^ and right puyssau^t but Arthurs chyualrye
surmounted all other, for there he did so much with his hands that he slew
all yt ever were against him. Than he rusht forth with his horse and wist not
whether, til at the last he heard the gryndynge together of two milstones one
upon another as they do in a myll, whereby all the earth about Arthur did shake,
and the cause why that these stones went thus about was for there stood by
them a great fat of brass wherein there was a great machomet sitting upon a
bar of yren made by enchauntement, who blewe from him so great a wind that
these stones turned thereby so swyftly that no creature could pass by them
without death. Than Arthur approached to these mylstones, but than he felt so
terryble a wind that he was feign to alyght down of his horse and went on
foot as well as he might, but he saw well that he could not come nere these
stones without he should dye, therefore he went round about them to se what
ways he might come to them, and at last he found a little bridge, which was
so narowe yt one man could not pass by another, and under this bridge there
was so great a pyt that the botom thereof could not be perceived, and there were
also.xii. knights that kept this bridge.vi. at the one end and.vi. at the
other all armed with ^^os^owes and hatches and ma^es of stele in their hands.
And wha^ the.vi. first knights saw Arthur they ran at him all at ones, and
gave him many great strokes on his shield, but never they could enpayre it,
than he took his good swerd and struck so the first yt he claue his heed
asonder, and fro the second he stroke of his arm clean with the sholdre, and
fro the third he beraue his head. and when ye other three saw^ how their
fellows was slain, and how that nothing could endure against him they fledd^
toward the bridge, but Arthur ouertoke so the hyndermest that his brain ^lewe
clean into the field, and the second for haste lepte into the pyt, and there
brake h^s neck, and the third he ouertoke on the bridge and took him in his
arms and did cast him over the bridge down in to the pyt and there he dyed
myserablye. therwyth he hasted him over the bridge and than the other.vi. ran
all at ones at him and thought to have dashed him down into the pyt, but Arthur
like a valiant knight lept in among them and laid on with his sword round
about him in such wise that within a short space he departed life and death
asonder of.v. of them, and than the syxt kneled down before arthur and
besought him of mercy, and prayed him for gods sake that he would not sle
him. Take no fere said Arthur for thy life is saved, so yt thou wylt tell me
fro whence this great wind comes. Sir said he it comes out of yonder great
vessel of brass that ye may se yonder, for therein is a macho met made all of
lether, syttyng on a great bar of iron made by the craft of enchauntmente,
but who so could over turn this machomet, the wynd should than cease. well
said Arthur abide me here still and I will go se what I can do.

How Arthur bette down the great machomet sitting in the vessel of brass,
and therebye the wind was ceased. Capitulo.lix.
THan Arthur wence forth and thought to have gone boldly to this vessel of
brass, but ye wynd was so byg that he was fayn to lie on ye earth all alonge,
and so to crepe on hands and fe^e till he came to the vessel, and drew after
him his shield, his swerd, and a long spear, and dashed therewith the machomet
so rudely with so many strokes, that at ye last this foul machomet overthrew
up so down in the vessel, and incontinent the enchauntment ceased and the
stones stood all still, for than there was no manner of wynd. Than Arthur stood
up on his fete and came again to the knight and demanded of him what tower it
was yt he saw stand before him in the derke, for all this season he had no
light but by the reason a^ the shyning of his sheld Tha^ the knight answered
and said, sir the duke of bygor has a neuew who is named sir Isembart, he is
lord of this place, and he has such envy to all people that he caused this
tour to be made by a subtle enchaunter, and all this great darkness which ye
have been in, the which endures.v. leges in circuit, in the which compass
there was no land ayred nor sowed the space of six years paste, and so all
such people as were wont to dwell therein are fled away and famisshed for
ho^g^e, and this enchaunte^ by his craft also made this river yt ye have
passed, the which never man did before this time without death, for ever this
darkness has contynua^ly endured saving one day in the year, and that is on new
year* day* the which day the.vi. knights that ye have slain, the which were
of the ^est knights that could be found in all th^s land, how be it now
they have found their master, the which knights did provide for us ye said
day for all th^nges as was needful for us to have, and I and al my company who
were in all the number of.xii. persons, w^ kept always this passage between these
mylstones the which turned ever with out rest, saving on saint martyns da^e
and than we might pass out to the fore said.vi. knights, and fetch in all
such things as was provided for us all the hole year, and so this toure was
beset round about, what with knights and with these milstones and with wynd,
and with darkness, so that it were in a manner impossible to enter into this toure
wtoute death. well said Arthur show unto me what is the cause, and from
whence comes all this darkness. Sir said he it comes out of a great pi^ce
that is in this toure, and there be great gryffons that descends down into
this pyt, and in the bottom thereof there is a great hideous fire, made so by
craft that no man can tell how, out of the which the^e ryseth so black and so
thick a fume and smoke the which ryseth out of this p^t by certain doors and
wyndowes, whereby the light of the son and of the brighte sky is so quenched
that it is ever contynually dark, the which derknes contains the circuit
of.v. leges compass as I have showed you before, wherefore all this country is
clean wasted and destroyed and all the people fled out thereof. And why said
Arthur did he all this cruelte Certainly said the knight I shall show to you,
it is of troth that here by there is an abbey of white monks who were wont to
be reputed right noble and of great possessions, and most commonly kings or
princes when they paste by that place they would there rest and herbour them,
and there they should be well served, and it was named the abbey of the grace
dieu, and the abbot is a right wise man and a noble, for he is brother unto the
lord of Argenton who was falslye slain by treason by this dukes neuew the
which fortuned to come to the said abbey upon an Ester day in the fore none in
the same season that the abbot and al his hole covent were in solemn
processyon, and because that the covent did not at his first coming leave the
service of god that they were in, to have laid the tables, and to have brought
him meat and drink to have filled his paunche, therefore he was so displesed
that incontinent he lepte on his horse, and so was departing and his false
enchau^ter with him, And when the abbot knew that, as soon as he might he
came to him and desired him to ^atye, but in no wise he could make him to
change his purpose: but in the most shamefullest wise that he could he rebuked
them, and called them foul rotten chur^es, promising to do them as great
dyspleasure as could lie in his power to do, so he has done as ye may se, for
he has caused them ever lyth to live in great darkness, and also he has taken
from them all their rentes and possessions which they held under him or in
his rule in all the land of Argenton, for in all that cyrcuyte laborers could
not labor for their living for lack of light, wherefore many of them be
famisshed for hunger, and to say the troth in this said abbey the service of
god has not be minys^red this five year. well said Arthur that is great
damage: but I pray the tell me how may this darkness be fordone. Sir said the
knight the enchaunter when he made this fire was right sore dysplesed because
that there sprang out of the earth even by this terryble fire a fair
fountain, whereby he right well knew that this fire should be quenched if any
knight might attain to come thereto, and to cast the water thereof into the
fire, and so than all the darkness should cease for evermore after.

How that Arthur entered into the toure tenebrous, and how he there quenched the
fire, whereby all the terryble enchauntemente ceased. Cap^o. lx.
THan Arthur said, friend bring me to this said toure than he went on before
and Arthur followed him, and so went fast by the great wyndowes and doors o^
the tou^re the which were of.xv^. speres length square out of the which there
issued so great haboundaunce of fume that his bright shield lost clean his
shynyng, wherefore he was sore troubled for than he could se no manner of thing
how be it they did so much by gropyng that at the last they came Just to the
toure, and there they found the walls pyght full of sharp bars of yren set
as thick as the pricks of an vrchins skyn of the length of half a spear to
thentent that no creature should approach nere to the walls, so there was none
enter but at a little wycket, and with much pain the knight did open it, and
when that it was opened there issued out so great haboundaunce of smoke that
the derkenes thereby was doubled throughout all the countre^, so that neither
candell nor torche could brenne in no place, nevertheless Arthur entered in at
the wycket and left the knight without, the smoke and hete was right grievous to
him, for if there had not ben more valor in him than in any other he had been
there clean overcome, and always he went downewarde on the stayres and saw
nothing, but he felt so many great strokes that oftentimes thereby he was
constrained to knele on his knees, but he could not tell from whens they came,
or who did give them to him, and ever he flourysshed about with his swerd
but it auayled him nothing, for he struck he wist not whereat, and so finally
he was feign to cover his head with his shield, for or else he had been
^^^sshed though he had been of yren, and always thus he went ever downwarde
on the stayres till at the last he came down to the botom, and there he
found a fair great fawte, and there he felt so great hete that he swette so
thereby that he was nigh overcome, and as he felt about him he perceived that
he was nigh the fire, and as he went ferder he found out the fountain by the
reason of the cold air yt he felt, whereof he was right glad, and so than
he took his shield and plunged it into the water, and bare as much water
therein as he could and did cast it into the fire, and ever he fetched more
water and contynually did cast it into the fire, and ever as the fire
quenched the darkness began to mynysshe, and the more water he did cast into
the fire, the clerer the light began to wax, and at the conclusion he did
cast so much water that the fire was clean quenched, than might he se
clearly all about him, than he perceived on both the sides of the stayres how
there stood great images of brass holding in their hands great maces of
stele the which had done him much trouble as he went downewarde, but than
their power was ended, for when the fire was quenched the enchauntement was
fynysshed, than Arthur wha^ he saw that all was done he returned up again
the stayres, and was right weary of his travail, what for he^e and swetynge
and the great strokes that he had received, and so came again to the little
wycket where as the knight was still abiding, and when he saw Arthur hole
and sound and on live he kneled down before him and said. Sir ye be welcome
as he that is chief flower of all chyualry of the world. Than Arthur set him
down upon the grene grass to take his brethe, and did of his helm and
shield. So thus all the country was clean delivered fro darkness, so that
every body might se clearly about them, whereof the abbot and all his covent
had great Joy, and so they went all and rendered thanks to almighty god in
their church. And than the abbot said to all his brethren, syrs let us go and
se him that has thus delivered us fro all thralldome if god will give us the
grace to find him, for verily I think it be the gentyl knight yt was at the
port noyre Than the abbot and al his covent issued out of the abbey wy^h common
processyon and so came to this said toure the which was not far thens, and
there they found Arthur sitting on the ground and the knight by him. And
when Arthur saw them he took to him his shield and helm and his spear in his
hand And when the covent with the processyo^ came before him he kneled down
before the Cross, and all the couente kneled down before him, nor they would
not arise till he was upon his fete. And than there came to them Bawdewyn, and
with him the foul great vylayne who had brought Arthur to all these
foresaid aduen^ures. And when Bawdewyn saw the procession and al those monks,
than he thought verily that Arthur had been dead, than he began to cry and to
braye and to make all the sorrow of the world and said. Nas unhappy creature as
I am that thus have lost my lord and master the flower of all the world in all
noble thyualry, alas death why do thou not take me, and thus as he made this
great sorrow at the last he espied Arthur whereas he stood, than his heart came
to him again. And the abbot came to Arthur and said. Right noble and virtuous
knight ye be right hertely welcome as he that has delivered us and all th^s
country out of such tou^mente and prison as we were in a long space, and by
the pleasure of god by your means the service of god from hens forth shall be
mynystred in our church, sir I and all my hole covent heartily des^re you to
come and take your rest within our abbey now after your great travail. And
Arthur with a right good will did grant them, for he was very weary. Than
Bawdewyn took his shield and the great vylayn took his spear and helm, and
often times said unto him, gentle knight god give the Joy and encreace thyn
honor and bounte, for thou haste acheued that never man could do before this
time, therefore now by the pleasure o^ god and by the hye prowess the fair
damoysell of Argenton shall be delivered out of trouble and ^a^e, and out of
the hands of the duke of Bygors neuewe, for thou haste promised me to goo
where s^ ever that I shall bring the, therefore I now desire the for to keep
thy promise. well said Arthur I ensure you faithfully that I will not break
my promise Sir said the abbot god give you the grace to bring this lady out of
thraldom, for I know well ye have prowess suffycyent to acheue that
enterprise, though it were a greater matter. That is of troth said the
vylayne, for it has been tight well proved, for I have brought him by all the
places where as any hard adventure has been to prove thereby his chyualry and
noble virtue, how be it the dukes neuewe is greatly to be redoubted, but for
all that I doubt not but that he shall be well chastysed, and so therwyth
they went all to the abbey, where as the abbot made them right great honor
and there, and therefore all the belles in the church were ronge continually
three days and three nights for great joy, and so for a little space Arthur
and Bawdwyn and the gr^a^ vylaine sported them there in the great feast of joy.
Now for a time let us leave Arthur in this abbey and let us speak of the mighty
king Emendus, and of the fair Florence his daughter.

How after that Brisebar and master Steven were departed fro Arthur fro ye
port noyre they aryued at Cornite where as king Emendus was, and in his
company the emperor of ynde, and his other four knights, holding the same
time a great sumptuous open court and there master Steven and Brysebar
recounted to them al in open audyence the noble chyualry of Arthur, and this
same mean season there came into the cour^e a knight all armed and brought
tidings to the king how all the adventures of the toure tenebrous were
acheued by the only prowes of one noble knight. Capitulo. lxi.


When that the mighty king Emendus had holden a great solemn court at afest
of ester in a great city of his called sabary, the.xv. day of ester the
emperor would have departed, but the king would not suffer him, but entreted
him so fair that he was con^^nt to abide, and so they were determined to keep
their whytsontyde at Cornyte and so they did, at which time the king kept the
most sumptuous and open Court that he kept sith he was kyng^. So thus the
emperour^ abode st^^ with the king till to the time it was whytsontyde, against
the which time the king had sent for all the nobles of his realm to be at
the said feast at his city of Cornite. And so when the day approached, the
king with all h^s noble company rode to Cornite, and ^here met with him his
noble daughter the gentle Florence, accompanied with ye archebys^hop of
Cornite her uncle, and brother unto the king her father, and so this City was
than r^ally replentished with kings and knights. And when the king was entered
he alighted down at the peryo^, and so m^unted up into the palace, and the
next day the emperou^e came thither, and the king and Florence his daughter
and all his hole bar^ay did encountre and convey him to his lodging, the which
was in the abbey of saint Quintine, and than the king and F^orence returned
again unto their palace. And the third day before the feast there came to
the cour^e the king of orqueney, and the noble king of mormall, and the king
of valefou^de and the king of sabary, also thither came the lord Neuelon,
sene^shal unto the fair Floren^e, and sir ^ncean his neuewe, and the lord
Poole, sir Steven, and sir Miles of valef^unde lord of d^mas, and sir Artaude
lord of Arsate, and sir Morau^t lord of fenisse, and sir Olyuer lord of
sabary, and also there was sir Ultier lord of amaso^, and sir Mo^li^ the scot,
and sir Sanxton of Oste^in And all these were of the retinue of the noble
Florence, and there were so many other that a great part of them were feign
to be lodged without the city. Than the court was so full and so ple^teous
that there was never seen none such before. Than the king caused to be cried
that whosoever would take on him the noble order of knyghthode that he should
be dubbed knighte with his own hands. The next day the which was the first
day of the feast, than there began in the court so much feast and Joy, that
there was never seen no such in all the court before, and on whytsondaye after
mass the king made in his palace fyfty new knights, unto whom he did
give arms and horse and harneys. And Florence did give them gowns of skarlet,
and mantelles of grene furred with ermynes, and so all these new knights were
standing before the king, who did gyrde about them their swerdes, and right
swetely laughyng did give them the neck stroke of knyghthode, and Florence
did lace their mantelles about their necks. And the emperor did make in his
lodging.xl. knights. And the other four^ kings each of them made.x^x.
knights And so than the emperor and the other kings did mount^ on
horseback, and all these new knights wy^h them, and so came to the palace,
and than began horns and bussynnes to blow, and ta^oures and ^ebeckes and
other instruments to sown and to make the most melody of the world, and than
there assemble^ together all the Iuglers and tomblers and al resorted to the
palace. And when they were all assembled at the court there were to the number
of two hundred and x new knights. And so the king and the emperor sat
down and the fair Florence between them, and all the oth^^ kings were set
each of them after their d^g^e. And the iuglers and mynstrelles began to make
Joy and feast. Ladies and damoyselles began to dance. Lords and knights did
Just and ^ournay, trompe^tes and clario^s and other instruments of musyke
began to sown And all the cite was hanged with cloth of gold and rich arays.
And as they were in this great mirth and Joy there alyghted at the peryon sir
Brysebar, and master Steven was remaining at the castle ^eynarte but two
leges thens, and there he made the peace between the burg^yses of the town and
the mean people, for they had been before long at discord, and when sir
Brisebar was mounted upon the palace, all the barons and knights ran and
welcomed him, and made for his coming great Joy and feast, and specially sir
Neuelon the senesshall, and sir Ancell, and sir Miles of valifounde, and all
other made him such chere yt for prese he had great pain to come to the
king, and as soon as the king saw him he made great Joy, and took him by the
hand and caused him to sit down before him. Than was all the court right
Joyful of his coming, for before there were none lacking of al Florence
knights but he and Arthur. Than the king said, sir Brisebar ye sent hither to
me the heed of the foul great mo^ster the which is slain thanked by god but
I pray you tell me how he was conquered. Sir said Brysebar your grace sent me
thither with a great company, how be it we did nothing there, for we found
there fyghtyng with the monster the most gentyl knight yt now lives, and
most freest of heart, most curteyse sweet and amyable, and the most valyau^t
and redoubted knight that ever was gyrt with swerd, for he a^l only stroke of
the monsters heed in my syghte, and did there such prowess of arms that no man can do like him. In the name of god quod the king, it is great valor in
one man to bring to death such a foul be. Sir said Br^sebar ye can not know
the valor and hye prowess which is in this knight, for it is he that all
only has acheued the strange adventures of the port noyre, and it is he
that with his body did maruayles at the Roche, where as sir Fyrmont with.v.
hundred mo did lay in a wait for him, and there he lepte into a ship full
of his enemies when he perceived that I and other of my company were taken
prisoners and so led forth to the castle, and there he sustained all only
the medlynge among all his enemies the which was all ye comynalte of the
town of the roche and of the country all about, and there he slew sir
Fyrmont and more than thre^ hundred of his company, and rescowed us out of
prison, and also he rescowed the knight of the plashes of all his enemies, what
will ye that I shall say, he is the flower of all chyualry, there is not his
pere in all the world. And he had scant vttred these words but that there
came into the palace a knight all armed and dressed him to the knyge and said
Right hye and mighty puyssau^t king I have brought unto you good and true
tidings, that is how that the strange adventures of the tenebrous toure are
acheued, and all the enchauntementes clean fordon^, and the great darkness is
now turned to light and bryghtnes, and all the knights that kept the toure
are all slain, and the great lion and gyaunt and gyauntesse are slain, and
the country delivered fro all the hard adventures that they had long endured.
Fair ^rend said the king and who has done all this deed. Sir that has done
a knight al only who wereth a white shield, and for a certain I saw him
unarmed in the abbey of grace di^^, but never sith god was borne has there
been seen so fair a creature so gentle nor so gracyous. And when Florence
herd spekyng of the white shield, ^he thought than verily yt it was her shield
the which was in her pauylyon at the port noyre, and thought verily that it
was her friend and lover Arthur that bare it of whom she herd so much good
reported, and thus with her own thought her heart tre^bled and suddenly thereby
she blusshed, how be it she made no semblau^t and to her se^fe she said. A
sweet friend noble and true heart when shall I se you, so that I may speak with
you at good leyser. Than the king said in the name of god this knight is right
valyau^t, what is the cause sir Brisebar that ye brought him not to ye court
with you, to thentent that we might be acquaynted with him, so that he might be
ou^ f^ende and we his. As god help me said the king of orqueney it were a
great richesse to have such a shield as he is nere us, and verily as for my
part I had rather have the company of him than of the rychest person now
living and sir B^ysebar ye did right ill your d^uoyre when ye did not your
pain to bring him to this court. Sir said Brysebar by the faith that I owe
v^t omy lord the king I did the best of my power to have brought him hither,
but he answered me yt he must needs go first to the toure tenebrous, and said
if god did give him the grace thereto escape that adventure he would be at this
mawdela^ntyde at Argence to make battle against sir Isembarte ye duke of
bygors neuew for the fair maiden of Argentons sake For he showed me how yt he
had promised to her uncle the marks and to master Steven that he would do the
best of his power to get again the fair ladies heritage, and how that he
would show unto the dukes neuewe that falsely and untruly he had dysheryted
her, and by f^lse treason slain the lord of Argenton her father. It is of
troth said the knight that brought thither the tidings fro the t^n^brous
toure, I waraunt him he shall right well help that lady in her right, But by
the faith yt I owe unto god said the king of orqueney if such a battle shall
be there if god will it shall not b^ without me, for verily I will be thereat
the same time. Sir said Phylyp of orqueney fair uncle suffer me to go with
you, for truly so will I do. And I also quod sir Nephelo^. And I will not be
behynd said Brisebar if god be pleased for there we shall se maruayles of this
knight and tha^ in ye court there began to be a great parlyament among the
knights, and a faithful auowynge to go to the said journey, and so they were
of one accord well to the no^bre of.v.C. knights, and they al promised
faithfully in open audience to be at the said battle and help and to aid ye
said damoysell. Than Florence said to the king of orqueney, fair cousin we shall
do right well to go thither to help this lady, and also to acquaynt you with this
gentle knight, and for gods sake bring him hither, and I promise you to love
him right derely, and to give him such gifts and land that he shall be right
rich and puyssaunt. well fair nece said the king I shall do the best of my
power.

How the emperor was aferde lee^t Florence should cast her love on A^thur,
wherefore he demanded of the king her father to have her in marriage without any
longer delay, ^herwyth the kyng^ was content, but Florence wold^ not agree
thereto, wherwyth the king her father was with her right sore dyspl^ased, as ye
shall here afterward. Cap^o. lxii.
When that the emperor had herd the great praise and laud ye generally was
given to Arthur, and perceived well how yt he had the love of al ye court, and
herd well the good words yt Florence spoke of h^^ whereby there struck into his
heart a Ialousy and a tere lest yt she should cast her love o^ him, therefore he
took king Emendus by the hand and said. Sir I would ^ayne speak with you in
counsayl, but I pray you sir let your daughter be present. So than they both
ro^e and Florence with them, and softely she smyled unto the king of orq^eney
and said to him in counsel. God give grace that of this counsel good may
come thereby but I fe^^ me the contrary. So tha^ they three entered into a
chaumbre, and leaned them down in a ^ayre wyndowe, than the emperor began to
speak to the king and said. Sir it is of a ^routh that i^ is a great season
past sith ye gave to me your good will that I should have in marriage ye fair
lady Florence your daughter here present, but she has ever excused her self
because of the late departing out of this world of the queen her mother, for
^h^ thought it was not pertaining to her to have been married so soon after her
decese, it is now so great a season sith that there can no blame be reputed to
her now to be married, therefore sir now I require you that ye will incontinent
deliver her to me according to your promise made to me before this time. In the
name of God said the king, it is but reason and right that I should so do,
and so I will do, wherefore fair and sweet daughter Florence ye were borne in a
good hou^e, when so noble and so hye a person as the emperor is will have you
in marriage, whe^by great honor and well shall come to us all and to all our
countries let us incontinent send for my brother the archbysshop to thentent
to ensure you together. Right dear father said Florence it is ye^ right over
soon to mary me, and for certain I am not in purpose as yet to be married to
him, nor yet to non other, I think first to se.ii. years more passed at ye
least. How so said the king, damsel will ye than do agenst my will as in the
refusing of the emperor to be your lord in the way of marriage. Sir said she I
have no care for no lord: but only for god and for you, for surely I will not
consent to no marriage. Ye shall said the king, or else ye shall right sore
displese me. Sir qoud she your displesure should grieve me above al other
things: but by the faith yt I owe to you, I will not as yet be married. No ^ayd
the king* than I se well yt ye will be nothing as I command you, therefore
ye shall do it whether ye will or not, and to take her by the hand to thentent
to have delivered her to the emperor. And when she saw that, she was not conten^
and pulled her hand to her again too thentent that the emperor should not
touch it. And when the king ^aw that he was right sore displeased and said.
Damoysel ye have set you against min^ accord and assent, and therefore I
promise you that fro henceforth of my help and counsel ye shall fail,
therefore fro henceforth do as, well as ye can and I straiely charge you avoid
and come no more in my light nor presence, nor where soever that I be. And when
Florence saw her father so sore dyspleased, she said. Righ^ dear father if ye
be thus dysplesed with me ye do not well therein, but sith it is you^ pleasure
that I should take themperous or else to lose your counsel and help, and
also not to come in your syghte the which is a right sore saying of the
fader to his child but sith it is so I humbly require your g^ase of respyte
the space of a month till such time that I may speak with my counseyle in
that behalf La^y said the emperor it is to long a respyte for I will depart
hense right shortly for I trow it be hye time for I have been here a long
season and all that has your love caused wherefore I would feign or I ^epart
know how or in what wise my love shall be rewarded I say not nay but it is
good for you to take auysement and I am content that ye so do a day or two.
well s^yd the king I am content that she shall have respyte till to morrow at
this same hour and no longer. well said Florence this counseyle is against my
heart and will that I should take a man against my heart seeing yt I am a queen
and daughter to the most puyssau^t king of all ye world certainly this
greueth me right sore there with she began right piteously to weep and to make
right great sorrow. And when the king saw her weep he said to her. Avoid out
of my sight and let me not se you till to morow^ again at this same present
hour and than answer me wheder ye will take him and my good will therewith or
else leave him and lose mi good will and favor for ever more. Than Florence
issued out of the chaumbre all weeping. Than the.iiii. kings st^pte to her
when they saw her weeping and left all the ^eest and mynstrelles, and Iesters
left than al their sport and play and the king of orqueney took her by the
hand and demanded of her why she wept so sore. Dear cosyn said she my lord
me fader is right sore dyspleased with me and has com^mau^ded that I should
avoid out of his presence. Than she saw her uncle the archebysshop and said to
him, fair uncle let me go with you to your lodging with a right good will said
he, and shame have he yt thus causes you to weep. So thus all the kings
conuayed her to her vncle^ lodging, and so did the most part of all the
barons of the court, and also all the new knights, and they al abode still at
Florence court. And when she was thus in her lodgyng the kings returned
again to the king Emendus court but the king of orque^ey and Philip his neuew
ab^de still with Florence, and (...) king of orqueney demanded of her why that
she wept. Cosyn said she, my lord my father would mary me and give me to the
emperour^, and would have ensured us together without any counsayl taking either
of you, or of any other of my friends, and as god help me I had rather dy^
than to have themperoure, for I hate nothing so much in all the world as I
do him, for as long as I live I will not have him, therefore it is but a great
folly to enforce me thereto. Fair lady and cosyn said the king, as god help me
or he have you against your will, there shall be persed a thousand helmes. Ye
said Philyp the duke of sabary or that day com^ there shall be burnt a
hundredth towns thereof be ye sure, therefore fair lady be yt in peace and set
your heart at rest. well said the Archebysshop let us go to the court and speak
with this emperor, so thus they rose and went forth and left Florence in
peace. And thus they mounted up into the palace, and found the king Emendus
and the emperor together, who were as than issued out of the chamber. Than
the archebysshop said to ye king Fair brother I marvel gretely what
counsel ye have had to cause thus to come to your court so many noblemen and
other fro so far countries to thentent to trouble and displease them by the
only words of this man the emperor here present, who would have my lady
Florence your daughter in marriage against her will, but sir I ensure you as long
as I live agenst her will he gets her not. As god help me said Philyp ye
duke of sabary he had need to have brought ^omen hither than he has done yt be
thinks to have her away to her dyspleasure. why said thempe^our, and who is
he that will say me nay? is it you, I would there were none to depart ye matter
but ye and I to se who should led her a wai Uerely said the king of orquiney,
it is none egale match a duke agenst an emperor, how be it as god help me
if ye had ^^r against her will, and none other to meddle in the ma^ter but al
only you, I think ye should not rejoice her so easily as y^ think of, and be
ye in certain that in that quarrel he will and shall defend her against you, and
therein do the best ye can with all your power, and begin when ye will, for he
doubts you nothing, nor shall do. And when the king Emendus heard them
say^ these words, he was right sore displesed and said. what is this syrs, are
we taken prisoners? lay ye thus in a wayt to m^nace thus in my presence my
lord and f^ende the emperor, truly if ye continue in this purpose ye shall
know that I am right sore dysples^d with you all. Than the archbys^hop answered
him again right sharplye, and so there began much hurlynge and burlynge in
the court, and much a do was there likely to have be^ done, but as fortune
was in the m^ane season master Steven was aryued at the palais and entered into
the hall and.xl. knights with him, and when he herd this noise and stry^e, he
spoke aloude and cried peace for goods sake and did so much that he apeased
somewhat ye noise. And as soon as the king of valefound saw master Steven his
son, he ran and enbraced and kyssed him, and ^emaunded how he did And he
answered and said, sit right well thanked be god. And than all other kings did
welcome him and so did king Emundus and al^o the emperor, and demanded of
him how he had done since his departing out of the court. And he answered and
said right well, than he perceived right well how that the king and the
archebisshop were right sore displesed together, wherefore he said to ye king.
Sir what chere is with you, this day is a right hye and solemn day, why is
your barons and court thus troubled, this day should be of sport and play,
Master Steven said the king, I can not be merry, for your lady my daughter
Florence has dysplesed me, for she will not do that thing that I would have
her to do, wh^twith I am nothing content, wherefore I pray you assaye and ye
can reduce her to my mind. Sir sayd^ master Steven, I ^rust I shall do so
much that of reason ye shall be content, so of this matter they talked a great
space.

How Florence when she knew that master Steven was come to the court she was
right glad, and how yt he with his policy gate her longer respyt, yt was till
bartylmewe tide next after. Ca. lxiii.
ALL this s^ason was ye noble lady Florence in her chamber making ^ight great
sorrow sore weeping, and saying to her s^l^e. A noble Arthur sweet friend fre
and gentle of heart I never saw you and yet I love you with all my heart. I
had thought to have been unmarried till the season of your coming to this
co^rte, but now I se well that I must needs take him that I hate most I love
you but I can no^t have you, a fortune how art thou turned against me, I hate
him yt I must have, I love him that I must lose, certainly dear love Arthur if
ye lose me thus ye shall have great damage, for ye shall lose her y^ loves you
truly. A master steven why have I not you here now in my great need, if ye
knew of my sorrow I am sure nothing could let you but y^ ye would turn up
so down this marriage. And as she thus complained pi^eously tidinges came to
her lodging that master Steven was comen to the court. And as soon as she
herd that her heart began to come again to her, for than she thought verily
that she neded to care for nothing than she right hastily sent for him. And as
soon as ^he master knew ^herof he said to the king. Sir my lady has sent
for me to come to her grace. Go your way said the king. So thus the master
departed and the archebys^hop with him, and the king of orqueney and his
neuewe sir Phylyp duke of sab^ry, and so they all aryued together where as
Florence was And the other kings abode with the king and the emperor. And the
noble barons of the court and all the new knights were at florence lodging
right sore displeased because of her dyspleasure, but they were all glad when
the king of orqueney and master Steven were comen Than the master entered
into Florence chamber: and goodly did salute her, but as than she could speak
no word, but took him by the hand and caused him to sit down by her side,
and wha^ her heart came to her she said how yt he was right welcome, as he whom
she desired to hau^ at that time above all the creatures of ye world. Than the
master said to hyr^ madame is this a fair array that ye makethus for your
estate thus to bring your self in sorrow, and thus to bring all your people
and these gentle knights in great trouble for your sorrow who are thus come
to your court to do you honor, for they have left the king your father to
come to your lodgyng in this hye solemn day, therefore leave ye this sorrow and
make ^uche chere as pertayneth to an hie Joyful pryncesse rejoice your court
and your people. Than Florence answered and said A master sweet friend I can
not be m^ry, for I am greatly grieved at the heart, for my lord my father has
defended me to come in his presence for a stranger whom^ he would that I
should take in marriage, but god shall rather give me does than I will take him,
for I hate him with all my heart, and it behooves me to answer whether I will
^aue him or not between this and to morrow this time, and I have great despite
that I should thus be dealt with all with a stranger. Madame said the master now
be ye in rest and peace, for sith y^ have a day respyte I shall get you ny^ a
hole ^ere longer delay, and I trust such^ fortune may fall that or the year be
ron y^ shall not have him. A dear master said she I hertely thank you and
promise you that though this emperor be never so^ rich or puyssaunt or full
of noblenes and power yet I have no heart of all his richesse: for I thank god
I am now one of the puyssau^test ladies yt is living, therefore I care not for
him nor for all his power. Madame said the master now tha^ I se well yt your
heart is set on no couetyse, but as me seems your heart is set all on
gentylnes, and believe verily that love in your heart is free and sweet where as
it ought to be to all people except to the emperor for there I think your heart
is fell and hateful, but madame here be two things contrary to be in one heart
both love and hate, how may it agree together, to love and to hate, to be meke
and fell, I can not se how this may be. A master said she have no maruayle of
this though I say that my heart is both meke and tell, certayn^y my (...) is
fell where as it hates why (...) quod the master do ye tha^ have. (...) quod
she ye and ye right sore and yt is thempe our who would have me against my will,
by the holy martyr saint Steven of corinte he shall not have me by my good will,
and if he take me by force I trust he shall well know that he did never so
great a folly. Madam^ laid the master, marriage yt is made by force is gr^atly
to be dou^^ed, but when it is made mekely and swetely by the agreement of both
parties than lightly lou^ contynueth ever after between them, and when it is
contrary ofte^tymes both parties endures many ill days and nyghtes, but
madame now yt I know well to whon your heart is hat^ful, but I pray you let me
know against whom your heart is meke and amyable, tha^ she beh^ld the master
and syghed right sore. And wha^ the master herd her sygh, a little he smyled.
And wha^ she saw him laughe she was a little ashamed and blusshed therwyth, and
al smylyng said. A master ye know well enough all this as well as I do my
self, for I never saw him as yet that has showed me amyte and love, I se right
well daily my hertes enemy, but mine own dear love I never saw, but I se daily
him that I hate, but I can not se him that I love, master ye know what he is
better than I do, therefore I pray you show me what ye know of him, for ye have
gyu^n away my white shield and good sword clarence, and I wot not to what
knight, nor whether they be well enployed or not. Madame quod the master I shall
show you, I will that ye know that I have given them to the most fair and
gracyous knight that now lives, and freest of heart in all gentylnes that can
be found in all the world, for he is the chief flower of bounte in all manner
of chyualry, also he is the best knight that ever was gyrte with sword, sith
the time of Gawane and Lancelot, and the best approved knight that ever has been herd of, who has set his faithful heart without either fraud or fa^^hode
on your love, and to him in my presence your image has given and set on his
heed your chaplet. Than Florence heart began to tremble and said. Gentil
master I doubt me greatly that ye give him a greter praise than he is worthy
for ye have praised him right greatly. Madame truly said he all that I have
said is of troth, for he is worthy to have more praise than I have given him.
well master said she is all this or troth Ye tru^o madame said he. By the
faith that I owe unto god said Florence than I se well he is worthy to have
much honor, and I promise you he shall not fail thereof if god send me life,
and he shall not lose his love, for sith he loves me as god help me I shall
love him again, for reason requires to love him that loves me. Than said the
master I se well next the king your father ye love the emperor because he
loves you. Than Florence smyled and with her hand struck him on the sholdre
and said, master ther^ as I am pleased there I love, but I care not for him
that is against my heart, one of these two pleases me, and the other I hate, I
pray god that he may come yt I love, and I would he were gone y^ anoyeth me,
he that has my chaplet my shield and swerd has my love more tha^ any other of
the world, and the Emperor has my hate more than onye other living
creature, I love him that I never saw and hate him whom I se daily, master
now I have showed you all my counsel, as to him in whom I trust most ye be
my clerk and my man, ye know now as much of my couns^yle as god does,
therefore I require you keep it secret, and put to your pain that I may have
him on whom my heart and love is laid, for now ye know on whom it is set.
Than the master said, madame as god help me ye have right well set your
h^rt on the best and fairest knight of all the world, that is the gentle
Arthu^. And as they thus talked there came to them the king of orqueney and
Phylyp his neuewe, and the archebysshop and Bryseba^, her senesshall and sir
Auns^l, Than Florence rose against them and also ^he master, and so they had
all great Joy of Florence wha^ they saw her make better chere than she did
before. At the last the master said, lords I se well how y^ the noble court
of m^ghty king E^endus is all in a trance in a manner half a sleep, for there
is neither play nor Joy whereof the king is greatly to be blamed, for it is
great shame because ^o many noble men b^here at this feast therefore in my
mind it were good to take some counseyle to se how the court might be
reioysed again, let us send word to the king how that my lady Florence is
redye to give her answer now the which she should give to morrow, and I
promise you that I shall so answer for her that she shall have longer respyte
an hole year, and I trust so to appease both the king and the emperor that of
reason they shall be well content. Than the king of orqueney said, master I se
well how that ye have not as yet forgoten all your old co^nynge, I wene ye will
bring them al a sleep with waggynge of your hand. Than the archebysshop did
laugh, and so they were al of his accord. Than they sent to the kyng^ duke
Phylyp and sir Brysebar, and the king had right great Joy when he herd their
message and said. Truly master Steven I se right well has given her good
counsel he is a right noble clerk, I pray to god send him right good
adventure. And so these messengers retour^ed again and showed how that the
kyngge was right well content and was right Joyful to here her answer. Than
Florence apparayled her to go to the court So the king of orqueney did convey
her, and the king of mo^uall did mete them by the way, and the archebysshop
and master S^euen went before, than all the knights assembled them together
and were well to the nombre of.CCLLL and all they followed after Florence, and in
their hearts they cursed him that was causer of this pletinge and varyaunce,
and prayed to god y^ the emperor might want of his will. Thus Florence entered
into the palace, and themperoure did salute her, and so did all other ^xcepte
the king her father, than the emperor sat^ down and Florence by him, and the
king Emendus and the king of orqueney before him, and so all other eu^ry man
in his room and when every man was in peace than master Steven said to the
king Sir and it like your grace behold here your daughter and lover.
Certaynlye said the king my daughter I believe well that she (...), but as for
any love or amitye that she beteth to me yt I can neither know nor se, for she
has displeased me, for behold he^e my lord and dear friend the empe^our of
ynde, who has done us so great honor that he would have her by the way of
marriage, who is come to desire to have her in his own propre person without
any other mean messenger, and yet she is so dangerous that she demands
counsel in this case the which touch^th her honor and profit and will not
believe me that am her own father, wherwyth I am right sore dysplesed, and bear
her right sore in my heart. Than the master rose up on his fete and his hat
ha^ging on his sholdre in a robe of skarlet lyned with g^^ne sar^ener, holdyng
his gloves folded in his hand and s^med right fair and gracyous, neither to
much nor to little of stature, ^is face somewhatfull and round, and his heir
fair and yelowe, he was a sayre clerk, and son to a king and a queen, and
so in open audyence than he said. Right excellent hye and mighty prince my
^adyes grace here presence the noble and gentil Florence is yet in great
trou^l^ and sorrow of heart of the great ha^denes that ye have showed her this
day, and because it seems that ye have a manner of dysplesure to her word,
wherefore she is not, nor can not be in joy nor ^est as long as ye have that
will toward her, sir now she is here comen to you as she that for thynke^h of
your dysplesure for she does not, nor will not do nothing that shall be
contrary to your pleasure and will, but she is, and eue^ shall be ready to
accomplysh your noble commandment according to her he^^e, the which is good
and true both agenst you and all other persons where as it ought so to be,
and sir sith it is so that my lord the noble emperor here present will do her
so much honor as to desire to have her in marriage, whereof humbly she thanketh
him, ^ut it is well the custom according to the state of every person to d^e
dyscretelye and wyselye in such a case, therefore sir it is conuenyent to dele
prudently in this ma^ter, for ye empe^our and you are two of the greatest, and
puissan^est persons both of hauour and of ^r^ndes that is now living, and my
lady Florence is the most ^ye and puissaunt pryncesse of all the world, and
as touching so hye and solemn a matter as of the marriage of ^hemperour of
ynde, and of the daughter of the hye and mighty king Emendas, this hye and
great solempniti^ ought not to be done privily in chaumbres in rest and peace,
but it ought to be done in the open presence of all the ba^ons of both lands
and realms, to thentent y^ if god send any issue between them that their
marriage may be known openly to al people of both realms, whe^by shall be
eschewed all grudge and murmura^yon, for ^han such issue shall be well known
for ryght^ul heir throughout bo^he the regyons, nor also it is not convenient
that this solemn feast that is this day of the holy ghost and this solemn
feast of this noble matrymonye should be made al but at one feast, this day is
so hye and prin^ypally a feast, ^ha^ every christen man ought to do nothing
else but ^aude and serve god, and sir at the day of this noble marriage let
there be he^e kings dukes, barons and other noble knights, ladies and
damois^ll^s, and let all these do such service as aperteineth for them to do
and than let these ladies and damoyselles dau^ce and sing, and give to these
new knights chaplettes and stremers, and set on their spear points, and let
these young lusty knights frusshe together their speres, and dasshe together
with their swerdes, and let than be ordained round tables to assemble together
such company as shall be brought thither both by you my lord the king, and also
by the emperor than shall we se what knight is of valor and praise, at the
which time shall be brought hither the rich pauylion of my lady Florence
wherein is the image of the fayry holding the rich chaplet, so yt when the
tournay ^hal be done than my lord the emperor shall go to the image to have the
chaplet as he yt is right rich bo^^ of hauour and of friends, and the most
nobl^ parsone yt there shall be assembled, and to him the image will give the
chaplet as to him that is most wor^hy, and when he has it than he shall be sure
and certain that he shall have my lady Florence with good will and entyre
love, and that maryag^ yt is made with go^d love and heart is good, and that
that is contrary against the her: is right ill and I^op^rdous For a body without
heart is as me^e without salt, or as a body without soul, and thus may my lord
the emperor have my lady Florence with great love Joy and feast. And when the
emperor had well herd the master and saw how yt he spoke no more his heart
laughed in his body and said. By the faith that I owe unto god the master
has right well said, and ve^yly with a great good hert^ I me acco^de to his
devise, let this Io^full day be set and let there be c^yed a great Iustes and
a tournay against y^ time, and let there be ordained round tables to m^ke feast
and Io^e, and sir king the same day I will take the tournay against you all in
love and favor. As god help me said the king I am right well agreed, and mine
advise is to let all this be here in this cite of Cornyce. But what day shall
all this be on. Sir said the master and it please you I shall show you mine
advise, let it be at Bartylm^we tide next coming, for than ^hal all corns be
avoided out of y^ feldes, and by that time al thing necessary may be
honorably provided for. I am content said the king, but how say you my lord
the emperor. Sir sai^ he I am right well content. Than anon these poyntementes
ran over all the palace in every man's mouth, and every man prayed y^ god
might send to the master right good adventure for his well and goodly
speaking. Than began again ^ight great feast and Joy, tha^ came forth Iuglers
with ^heyr falls castes and tomblers with they soubersawtes, and damoyselles with
their gambawdes, and made greater sport and tryumphe than was before. Than the
king and the emperor laughed and made great Joy together till it was time to
set the tables, than water was b^ought forth and Florence took license of the
king her father and said, sir I beseech ^our grace be not dyspleased though
these new knights go with me to my lodgyng and though I ^etayne them with me
all this day. Well said the king I am right well content go your way hardely,
and make them as good chere as ye can^ than Florence departed and went to her
chaumbre, and the king abode still in the palace, and the king of orqueney,
Phylyp of sabary, and the Archebysshop, and Brysebar, and well to the nombre
of.v.C. barons and knights went with Florence to her lodging. And than the
master said to her, madame how say ye now, we have respyte long enough, for
many things may fail between this and that. Mai^ter ye say ^yght well, but I
pray you ^el^e will not our knight be here between this and that ^erm^. Madame
said he I se well ye have not as yet forgoten him, it seems he is yet in your
remembrance. By the good lord said Florence I would right gla^ly^e him, and if
god be pleased yt be come to this said ^urney I shall do him honor, and that I
pray you ^et him know it. Madam quod ye master, ^hal go to him and show him all this ma^ter and how yt ye desire him to be there at yt time, and that for you^
love there to show part of his ^hyualry. Well master said she ye say right
well, and I pray you let me be her^e^^ commended unto him. Thus they de^ised
that the master should go to the port noyre till the time of this tournay. and
^han he should bring with him Florence pauilion with the egle of gold and the
image with the ^hapler, and that it should be pyght in ye fair meadow under the
walls of the cite of Corny^e. Than there was water brought forth, and so they
were served full rychely with great sport ^ t^iumphe Thus the king kept open
court.^v. days, and every day ones Fl^rence went to her fathers court. At
the end of xv. days ye king did give many ^yche gifts ^o these knights, b^th
robes horse and harneys, and Florence in like wise gave them so largelye yt it
was marvel ^o consider, and the^ sayd^ (...) with one voice yt there was never
before such a heart of a woman, n^yther so lar^e so gentle, nor so cur^eyse.
Thus al ^hese kings ^^ke their l^ue ^ depa^ted every man to his own country to
puruay him of good knights agenst the said day. Than master Steven was before
Florence and said, madam now it is time yt I depart, for now will I go streyghte
to Argence where I am sure yt I shall find Arthur ready to fight agenst the
neuew of the duke of bigor. A fair master said Florence I have great doubt of
Arthur, for the dukes neuewe is right fierce and fell, and a good knigh^,
th^rfore I am in great fear of him. Madam quod he have ye no dout, for if
there were such.iiii. as he is before Arthur ^he^ could not endure his puyssant
strokes. Tha^ he is right valyant quod Florence. Than ye master took his love
and departed and took with him Brysebar and sir Neuelo^ Florence mar^shal and so
took their way to arge^ce. Now let us leave to speak of them, and let us
return again to Arthur.

How that Arthur was received o^ the i^yre Lady Margarete into the city of
Argence. Cap. lxi^ii.


THus as ye have herd before Arthur so iourn^d a good space at the abbey of
the grace of ^i^n and Mawdelayne tide began fast to approach, and so on and
day the foul vylayne came unto him and said. We be but swyne for we do
nothing but eat and drink, I ^rowe ye be wedded to this abbey, or else I
think ye will become a monk, ye have promised me to fulfill my request, if
that ye will do so go ^hortely and arm you, and let us go^ ^o Argence to help
there the fayrelady Margarete of Argenton* and to get her again her right,
for it is now almoost hye time. When Arthur heard him he smyled and said, with
a right good will, and so he armed him and took leave of the abbot and of ^he
covent, and mounted on his horse and followed the vylayne, and so Arthur rode
forth day by day till at the last he descended down from a great mountain
and entered into the fairest medowe that ever he saw in all his life, and by
the side of this said medowe there ran a fair river, wherein were many
ships, some under sail, and some redye crossed, and some lienge at the
anger, the which river ran thrughout part of the fair Cite of Argence. And
than he encountered a varlet who came straight fro the Cite, and A^thur did
salute him and demanded from whence he came, And he answe^ed and said how
that he came from the Cite of A^gence, the wofullest Cite of the world at this
time, and is in most tourmente and sorrow, for I am sure there was never ^owne
so sore troubled as it is at this hour. And wherefore goo^ friend said Arthur.
Sir as god help me there is good cause why for the duke of bygor and his
n^uewe be com^nge to the Cite, and they have made a cry throughout all the cite
and all about the country that all the noble men and al other such as holds
their londs of the heir of Argent on should be at Mawdelayue tide next
coming before them in ^he cite of Argence to do their homage to sir Isembarte
the dukes neuewe, wherefore I pray to god he may dye an evil death, and it is
but.xv. days to the said day, at which time he is purposed to wedde the
fair lady margarete to a lewd harbor of his, and so she shall be dysheryted
fro her enherytaunce, and all the noble men and bourgeyses of the Cite and of
the country about are right sore dysmayed for they wot not what counseyle to
take in the ^ase for lack of a Capytayne, and ^he lady has no friend but an
uncle of hers, who is put in prison by the dukes neuewe, and there is none can
tell where he is become. And also this sir Isembart has slain and murthred
falsely by treason her father, and sir this is the sorrow that is in the noble
cite of Argence* well good friend said Arthur god conduyte you, god is yet
puyssaunt enough to send h^lpe to this lady, but fr^nde I pray you is this
duke and his neuewe come as yet to the Cite. Sir as god help me he is come al
ready, and with him much people, for his people is no^bred to a.M. persons at
the leest. That is a great company said Arthur, and so they departed, and
Arthur rode forth. Than the vylayne began to cry he is come that shall give
light And ever as he rode he beheld on every side about him great co^panyes of
knights coming and going toward the cite of Argence, and Arthur saw well how
that the land of Arge^ton was the most good lie country that ever he saw,
for he perceived well how that it was full of riches and worldly wealth, he saw
many noble towns and ^oures right hye, and mighty castelles, and many fair
woods and medowes^ and pleasant ryuers, and about ^he towns fair vynes, and
goodly pastures, and fields with corn and fruit and there he saw many ladies
and damoyselles sporting them by the ryuers side with fawcons and gerfawcons on
their hands and so he perceived well that because of ye good comod^ties of the
country ye dukes neuew would disheryte the fair lady Margaret, and he rode so
long til at the last he saw the fair city of Argence shining agenst the
son, enuoyred with great and deep dythes full of water: ye walls strongly
enbatayled, and mo than.v.C. toures made of lyme and stone, and sciment about
it and also he saw many fair churches coue^ed with led full of typpes and
pomelles of gold shynyng against the son, and also he saw the burgeses
lodging closed with hye and strong walls barred with great chains of iron
attaining fro one house^ ^an other, than Arthur in his he^ praised much the
nobleness and riches of the country and of the city, and said to him self
that it might well be called Argence, for it seemed well to be of argent that is
to say, silver. Thus Arthur entered into the city and the vylain went ever
before him with his lever on his neck bare legged, and his hat hanging at his
back and ever he went forth a great pace loking downward to the earth, and
took head of no body that he met, but always cried out aloude he is come that
shall give light, and the burgeses beheld him well and said how that he was a
fool, women and children ran to the wyndowes to behold him. And when one body
spoke to him, he would answer no thing but always said, he is come that
shall give light. Thus Arthur rode forth into the city and saw there
nothing to do, nor no manner of craft or occupacion there used no more than
and ^t had been upon an hye f^astfull day, for all the shoppes and every craft
was she^ and closed, whereof Arthur had great marvel, and he beheld in every
street great companyes of knights walkyng a^ soberly together, lurkyng under
their hattes, beseming as though they had not be well pleased, and some sytting
before their own doors, croslegged leaning on their elbowes, making no manner
of Joyful semblaunt but soberly musinge and some of them beheld the vylayne,
who never ceased crying, he is come that shall give light. And so in this manner
Arthur rode ever still forth till he came into y^ mids o^ the City, and
there he saw a great company of knights and burgeyses about the number
of.xxxv. ca^kynge together in counsayl but it seemed by their chere that they
had no great joy in the^^ hearts. Than the vylayn enforced him self to cry
louder than he did before he is come that shall give light. Than these
knights beheld the vylayne well and saw how that Arthur followed him whereof
they had great maruayle. And at the last a knight of that company called sir
Emery, came to Arthur and curteysly did salute him and said. Sir it is mine
office in this city to receive and to lodge al gentilmen strangers yt
resorteth nyther, and sir here is mine house, therefore I desire you to alyght
of your horse and to enter into it. Sir I thank you said Arthur, how be it I
se well yt I must needs go ferder ^o seek mi lodging Sir said the knight*
saving your dysplesure, ye shall not pass by my house to seek an other lodgyng
therefore by the faith yt I owe unto god ye shall abide with me. Ye but sir said
the vylayn, I trow ye will not abide, for ye have promised to follow me
whether so ever I go, therefore come on your way, for I will go before, and so
was going forth* and ever cried he is come that shall give light. Than Arthur
desired the vylayue to tarry, and at the last he agreed thereto, and Arthur rode
forth to sir Eme^ys door, and there a lighted than the other knights left
their counseyle, and did salute Arthur, and he them ^gayne right courteously,
and they beheld Arthur well and praised him much in their hearts, for he was
right tayre and gracious. Than sy^ Eme^y took Arthur by the hand and led him
into a fair chamber to unarm him, And in the mean time that he was
vnarmynge, master Steven, sir Brysebat and sir Neuelon the sensshal were come
to the same sir Emeris house to take their lodgyng there and so ^oke their
chaumbre, and when the mayste^ had changed his get he went down in to the
ha^l, and the other two knights with him, and the valiau^t knew them right
well and sa^led them by the^e names. And therwithal Bawd^win came out of the
chaumbre fro Arthur, and as soo^e as he saw the master and Brisebar he ^anne
and courteously bid salute them with a joyful heart. Than ye master demanded
of him where as Arthur his ma^ster was. Sir said he^ in this ch^mbre here^y.
And than ^^ey all entered into the ^^aumbre. And as soon as Arth^r saw them,
he ran and enbrased the mayst^^, and after Brysebar and said. Mine own good
companions of ye roche, hither ye be right her^ely welcome. Also he did salute
sir Neuelon the senes^hall^ who in his heart praised him gr^tely. And when sir
Emery saw how the master made so great chere to Arthur, than he thought
verelye that he should be some great man, for he knew well that the master was
a kings son, Than they sat them down on a beds side. Than the master
recounted at the work that had ben^ in king Emendus coutte, and how that
the emperor desired to have had Florence in marriage at the same time, and showed
him how by his means he did let it at that time and ga^e longer respyte till
Bartylm^w ^yde, at which time there is cried a great Iustes and tournaye, and
there he showed him in his ear the salutation that Florence did send him, and
how that she desired him to be there at that time and to show there part of
his prowes for her sake. Than Arthur smyled and en^raced the master many
times. And when they had thus talked a good space than the master called to
him sir Emery their host, and caused him to sytt^ down by them. Than Arthur
demanded of him wherefore the knights and cytezyns of that city were so sad.
And he an^wered and said, sir for it will be no better, and we have all good
cause so to do, and than he began to show him how that in the same house there
was a da^osel who was daughter to the lord of that same city, and of all the
land of Argenton, and how that she was the ryght^ul h^yre of all that
country, and how that the duke of B^gores neuewe d^^ ^alselye mu^^re by
treason the lord her ^ath^r and so showed him all the hole matter as ye have
herade before, and also he showed him how that the dukes neuew would mary her
to a lewd ^adde his harbor, and how that he had dys^eryted her of forty
thousand pound of land by yearly rent, and now he has sommoned all the
gentylmen of all the country round about, and will that they shall do homage
unto him, and so it behooves them to have a false murderer to their lord,
and to reny their rightful heir, and therefore sir all the noble men of this
country and city have been in cou^sa^l for this matter: but y^ conclusion of
their cou^sayl was thus* how that they would make no manner of resistance agenst
ye dukes neuew, but rather suffer their lady to be disherited and banisshed
from her own land, howbeit right gladly they would move war against him, but
they lack a captain, for they think verily that a woman to be chief head in
war should cause it at length to be of little effect. Than Arthur said, sir I
have somewhat herd or this of this matter, but I pray you fair host is this
said lady here in your house. Ye sir truly said he here benethe in a fair
parloure, for she has been ever here in my house sith the death of her father,
for I have promised never to fail her. Than master Steven said good host I
require you know this ladies pleasure whether she will be content that we might
speak with her. Sir said he with a right good will than he went into the
par^our where as she was the same time beginning of our ladies even song, and
was at these words (Deus in adiutorium meu^ int^de) that is to say good lord
entend to mine aid and succour^ And therewith she espied sir Emery and said,
sir ye be welcome. And he did salve her and said, madame here is above in a
chamber a knight the most fairest creature of the world, and master Steven
the king of Soroloys, clerk, and sone unto the noble king of valefound does
honor to this knight, the which knight would feign speak with you, and as god
help me as I perceive by him he is in will to help and succor you in your
need, shall I cause him to come to speak with you, To come to me fair friend quod
the lady, nay god forbydde, for they that have need ought to seek for help,
and not to tarry ^yl it be brought to them for and they do, it may fortune to
come to late, and as for me I have great need of him y^ he would help me, as
for him he has no need of me, therefore it is reason that I go unto him. Than
she apparayled her and went forth and en^red in to the chamber where as they
were, and as soon as they saw her they rose and did salute her and couse^ her
to sit down^ and she seemed to them right fair, gentle and gracyous, and did
salute them one after another right swetelye. Than Arthur said, ^ayre lady,
why hau^ ye travailed your self so sore to come hither to us, for we would
gladly have come to you. She answered and ^ayde, ^yr it is reason that I should
so do for I am a poor disherite^ lady, and therefore it is reason that I go
sewe for help and sucou^ Tha^ master Steven demanded of her estate and she
recounted to him every de^^ as ye have herd here before, and right sor^ weping
said. Alas I pore desolate creature that was wont to be kept in great honor
with my lord and father, who falsely was slain by this dukes neuew and has
put mine uncle in prison, I can not tell whe^der he be alive ^r dead. Certainly
fair lady said master Steven, for gods sake be ye of good there, for your
uncle is in good health and out of prison, by the same token that he is called
the marks, and also he has an old hurt on his browe. And as soon as she
herd that her heart began to rejoice and she demanded for gods sake to know
who had delivered him out of prison. Certaynely fair lady said he, the sam^
knight that sytteth here by you, who has conquered the strange castle of
the port noyre. And when she herd that she fell down on her knees before
Arthur and humbly thanked him. Than Arthur took her up and said, alas fair
lady why do you thus, for gods sake set your heart in peace and rest, for
truly I offer my service to you and the best of my power to help and defend
your right if it be to morrow next I shall be redye to sustain the battle as
long as my life will last. Than the lady would have kneled down and right
humbly thanked him and said. Sir I give to you all my right and enherytaunce
when ye have won it, and mine uncle shall be your servant Alas I can say no
more, I have lost my father, wherefore it is great damage that I live, for I am
weary of my life, than ^he began to weep and said. Sir I had rather that you had
my right than my mortal enemy. My sweet lady said Arthur if god be pleased I
shall deliver it unto your own profit, for truly I will not have thereof the
mountenaunce of a penny And sir Emery when he herd that this knight had
delivered out of prison the marke^, and how that he had acheued the adventures
of the por^e noyre, than he thought verily in his heart that it was he that had
acheued the adue^^ures of the ten^brous toure, than he s^ept forth and kneled
down before Arthur and said. Gentle and noble knight in whom all b^u^te
flour^ssheth, for gods sake bring us out of de^ke trybulacyon that we be in,
and make light all the hearts of the hole barony of Argenton, take this
enterprise on you, and all we shall largely help and aid you, I undertake ye
s^al have.xl. thousand persons in harneys to give attendaunce on you the which
are all subjects to my lady here present. And sir know ye for certain that I
have all ready, and shall provide for horses and harneys and gold and silver
suffycyent to sustain your host longer space than a year the which I will all
habandon into your hands for the helping of my lady And I am here ready the
first that will put my body and life in Ieoperdy. Madame said Arthur if all
your other knights be such ye have much good people and kind. Than he said
to sir Emery, sir and I promise you faithfully to help this lady to the best
of my power. Than sir Emery departed fro them and went and assembled together
all the other knights of the cite yt were pertaynyng to the lady and said.
Lords and masters I t^ynke verily that god has vysyted us, for I show unto
you how that there is a knight in my house who has delivered out of prison the
noble marks uncle to my lady, and also he has acheued all the adventures of
the port noyre, as master Steven has showed unto my lady, and according to
the troth I think it be he that did great prowess in the valey of valefounde
and at the tour tenebrous, and also he has habandoned himself to be ready at
my ladies commandment, and to defend her right against the dukes neuewe
though he be never so fell. Certainly friend said all those knights we believe
verily yt all his travail is in wast For this dukes neuewe is right fyerse and
doubts no creature, for there is not such a knight in all the world,
without it be the knight yt has acheued the said adue^tures that ye speak of.
Verily said sir Emery I believe the same knight is he, and at the leest I am in
certain it is he that has conquered the port noyre. Tha^ anon these tidings
were spread abroad throughout all the cite, than there came knights and
bourgeyses by great companyes into sir Emeris house to se this strange knight,
and so they e^tred into a great hall, and when they were gathered together ^hey
were to the number of.v. C. persons, and than they desy^ed sir Eme^y to go and
^hewe unto this knight stranger yt many of the knights of Argence were come
thither too speak with him. And when ^^^hur herd this he was very joyful and
rose, and he and the master went fort^ into the hall and brought with the^ the
^ayre lady ma^garete, and when Arthur was among them he was byg and mighty and
hye to b^holde, with byg arms and long well furnisshed, and he had on a robe
of skarlet, and his own color was fair and ruddy, and he was of hyer stature
by the head than any man yt was there. And when these knights and barons saw
him they had right great Joy, and thanked god that he had sent him thither
at that hour, and they al said unto him. Sir ye be right hertely welcome into
this city of Argence. And Arthur rendered salvation again to them right
sweetly. Than a knight called sir Robert Ardur, who was most hye and puyssaunt
both of riches and of hauour of all tho knights that were there pertaynyng to
the lady stepped forth and said. Sir it is given us to knowledge how y^ ye are in
mind and will to help and aid my lady that is here present ther^ore sir we
would feign know your mind in this case how ye are purposed for to do. Sir
quod Arthur verel^ ^ am in full purpose to Ieopard my body ^ life agenst this
dukes neuew* and to prove how ye traitorously he has slain this ladies father
and falsely disherited her. Than sir Robert said, sir god give you grace and
power thus to do, for sir this dukes neuew is right fierce and fell, how be it
he is in the wrong, and we in the right, therefore if god be ple^sed he shall be
confounded, and ^yr we say unto you we be all gentylmen and burgeyses
pertaining here to my lady, and we faithfully promise you both aid and our
persons, and also of our goods though we lose our heads in the quarrel, and
sir of this mind both we and al our men be of, and we lack^ nothing but a
capytayne therefore sir doubt nothing, for if the dukes neuewe m^ue any
st^yte, ye shall have moo than xxx. thou^ande fyghtyng men. Fair lady said the
master ye shall have much noble people. Truly sir said she that is troth,
for they loved right well their lord that is dead. And as they thus talked
there passed by them a great rout of horsemen, and so they went to the wyndowes
and beheld well knights and other in the street on horseback to the numbr^
of.v. hundredth persons, and in ^he first front there was the duke of bygor,
and sir Isembart his neuew, who were ridyng to go mete the king of orqueney,
who as tha^ was coming to the city, but his coming was for Arthurs sake and
not for the dukes, but the duke knew not that and the duke had puruayed the
kings lodgyng at the by^shops place, and had puruayed for Philyp duke of
sabary in the abbey of saint Germayne. And so when he had met the king who
welcomed him into ye city and so rode forth together and pa^^ed for by sir
Em^ryes lodgyng. Than sir Bris^bar as he stood lokynge out of the wyndowe
espied where there rode by the king of orqueney, sir Artaude, sir Morant, sir
Olyu^r, and sir Uiceer. Than Brysebar as loud as he could, cried Arthur,
Arthur wherewith the king and all that rode by looked up toward the wyndowe, and
there they saw sir Brisebar and sir Neuelon the senesshal and master Steven
and Arthur who seemed to them to be a man of great valor, and anon the king did
cast in his heart how y^ it was Arthur. Than he called to him ye duke of bigor
and said sir I pray you go to your lodging, for I will take my lodging at this
house. Tha^ the duke would have descended with him but the king in no wise would
suffer him So than the duke and his neuew departed as they yt wist full little
why the king and al tho knights were come to that c^^^e. Than the king took
with him Philip his neuew and the archbishop and sir Ancean and entered into sir
Emerys house, and caused the gates to be closed after them, and sent al his
household to the bisshops place, and sir Philip sent his to ^he a^bey of saint
Germaynes. Than sir ^rysebar and the master and other o^ their company ran to
^he king and enbraced him and al his fellowship. And than Arthur come before the
king and did p^t of his bone^ and did ^a^ute him, and ye king took him by the
hand and Bry^ebar told the king in his eat how that it was Arthur. Than the
king said, mine own right dear friend Arthur ye right hertely well me^^e here
in the land of Argenton as the knighte that I have most desired to se and know,
for certain lie I had not come hither at this time, but all only to speak
with you. A sir said Arthur ye have done your pleasure to travail your self
right sore to come hither to se so simple a person as I am. Than the king
entered into a little chau^bre and there did change him, and wha^ he was ready he
came again into the hal and there found all the barons and knygh^es together,
and Philip duke of sabary was talking with Arthur. Than the king laid his
hand on Arthurs sholdre and said, good friend I pray you that fro hens forth
ye will be of my household and that ye will take of my gift robes horse and
harneys, and I promise you faithfully that I will be to you a good friend, and
so you and I shall be good companyons and friends. Sir said Arthur I thank you,
for truly I am yours in all p^aces and at your commandment when so ever I am
but sir and it please you I have o^^red already to my lady Florence my service,
daughter to the mighty king Emendus* at the request of sir Brisebar and as he
has reported to me her g^a^^ has excepted my service, and so sir than I have
al ready a maistres, and loath I were to displease her grace. In ye name of god
say^ the king ye say right well, for I repu^e her company and myn^ as all on^
thing* and good friend behold there sir Phylyp my neuew duke ^f Sabary,
v^relye ^ love him intierly, therefore I require you let him and you be
companyons and friends, and ^che of you to love other* Sir said Philyp as god
help me I promise him fro hens for^h fay^hfull love and amity nor I have
nothing but he shall be lord thereof in all places and against all persons
except you mine uncle I shall be redye to aid and succour^ him. Right dear
friend quod Arthur god that all thing fourmed reward you, and sir I am and
shall be your knyght^ agenst all the world except my ladies grace, who has
retained me. All this is but right said the king, and this pleases me
right well than the king took Philyp by the hand and said to Arthur dear
friend here I put intoo your^ hand and keeping duke Philyp my neuewe ^oo sir
here take him to you, and also n^uewe I put into your hand this knight in
likewise take him to you, than these two knights enbraced together and
promised each other faithful company. And sir Emery was glad because that he
had lodged in his house such a company of noble men that his heart laughed for
Joy and all the other barons of the cite beheld meruayllously Arthur and
praised him much in their hertes. And than the vylayne who was in the company
with the lady cried as loud as he could, he is come that shall give light. And
the king and al other did laugh at him right hertely. Tha^ the tables were set
up and water was brought forth, than the king sat down and Arthur by him,
and than the bishop and duke Phylyp, and so they were served right rychely,
for sir Emery made them chere with all his heart, and wha^ dinner was done than
they all entered into a fair gardyn, and there were together ye king and Arthur
the lady Margarete and the archebysshop and other to the nombre of.vi.
persons, and all the other company were without with sir Emery, and they talked
all of Arthur and said how yt he had of god a right great gift, for he was both
fair and of noble manners, and had acheued such adventures as were gretely to
be doubted* how be it they said he had enterprysed a great thing to move any
war against the duke of bygor and his neuewe. Syrs said Brysebar doubt
nothing of him, for I know well he has acheued often.x. times a greter
enterprise than this is, and as tha^ the king held the lady by the hand and
said, fa^re lady behold here your knight who I think shall do you good service
tomorow. Sir said the lady I pray to god send him good grace and fortune, so
they were thus long talking together till it was time to go to their restes,
than every man departed, and the king, Arthur, Phylyp and master Steue^
lodged al together in one chamber, and the lady departed into her chaumbre
right Joyous of her good adventure that god had sent her, and all that night
she slept but little for Joy but was always in her prayers thankyng god and
besechyng him to be aid and socour to her champyon, and in likewise did sir
Emery and al other of the cite.

How that the next d^y the master answered for the lady, and Arthur took her
quarrel in hand aeynst the dukes neuew^ sir Isembarcte. Capitulo.lxv.
IN the morning the king and Arthur rose and all other barons and knights of
the cite and went and herd mass, and after mass^ they range the common bell of
the town, and thereby assembled all the comynte of the Cite together before sir
Emeryes house to thentent to keep this knight Arthur that the duke nor none of
his should do him any hurt or treason, and the same day there came to sir
Emeryes house all the kings power, and al sir Phylyppes strength, and all other
knights pertaynyng to king Emendus, who were com thither to se the battle
between A^thur and the dukes neuew. Tha^ the king entered into the hall, and
there was Arthur and master Steven, sir Phylyp of sabary, sir Brisebar, sir
Artaude, sir Olyuer, and sir ^ycect, and also the ladi margarete, and ther^
they devised how they should be demened in yt Journey. Tha^ the duke of bygor
se^e to sir Emeryes house co^mau^dynge him that he should incontine^t bring the
lady Margarete with him to his court, and also the duke caused to be cried
thrughout all the cite yt on pain of de^h all the nobles of the cite should come
to the court to make their homage to his neuewe sir Isembarte. And when the
dukes messengers had showed the lady how that she should come to the court to
thentent to be married, tha^ the master answered and said. Syrs show unto the
duke your lord how that ^hortly she shall come to the court and there do every
thing as she ought for to do of reason. Than departed the messengers and went
to the duke and his neuewe and showed them how yt the lady was not vnpuruayed
of good counseyle, for all the knights of the cite were in her company and moo
than.v. C. other, and all the most part of all the comyns of the cite, and al
so they showed how there was a knight with her who would maintain her quarrel.
And when the dukes neuewe herd that his heart mounted in pride and said, what
knight is that, for cer^aynly if he medell any thing with ye matter I shall
hang him by the neck, and therefore he is but ill come to be of her counseyle,
how be it there is an old prove that says, of ten times he wants of his
will that folysshely thinks, and so fared it by this dukes neuewe, for or it
was night he was in a greater balaunce of Ieopardy than this knight was, for
he left his life to pledge. Than the king and Phylyp went into the palace, and
the duke and his neuewe did encountre them and so brought them into his
court, and there in the open hall they sat them down. Than anon after came
the lady and Arthur on her one side and the master on the other side, and all
the other noblesse and burgeyses and comyns of the cite did enuyron them, and
so thus they were a great company and entered into the palace And when the
king saw her he rose, and so did the duke, but his neuewe of proud heart
^ar^ still and would not ris^ whereof he was much blamed of every parsone that
saw him. And when the people were all silence than master Steven said to the
duke. Sir ye have commanded here our lady Margarete that she should come to
your court, sir behold here she is to know what is your pleasure and will.
Than the dukes neuewe as he that was fell and full of pride rose on his fete and
said, sir clarke we have no thing to do with you, therefore be ye in peace and
let us alone. Sir said the master for a poor clerk I am reputed with the^
that knows me, and as for that I have said is for this lady, and I think she
will auowe my saying, how say ye madame be ye pleased that I shall speak for
you or not. Certainly said the lady I will hold ferme and stable all that ever
ye hau^ said or shall say, and as to you sir duke I require you do me right
this day, and if ye will not here in open audyence I put ^othe me and all my
goods and lands into the hands of the king of orqueney and of sir Phylyp
his neuew^ duke of Sabery, who are both here present. Certainly fair
damoysell said duke Phylyp doubt ye nothing that any body shall do you
wrong, where as I am present. well madame said the king and I receive you
with a right good will into my hands sith it is your pleasure so to put your
self. Than the duke of Bygor said, damoysell I shall do you right, therefore
master speak ye on and show what ye will in this ladies behalf. Sir said the
master I say how that ye and your neuewe have sent for my lady Margarete who
is now here present, therefore if it please you show us what is the cause.
Than the dukes neuewe sir Isembart said, sir clerk I shall show you ye cause,
it is so I am fully purposed to give her in marriage to a barbou^e of mine. An^
also here openly I straightly command all the noble men and burgeyses of this
city and of all the land of Argenton on pain of lesynge of their lands that
in continen^ this same day they come and do their homage to me as to their
chief lord and governor, and they that will not do thus, I forbid them their
heritages that they hold, and not to be so hardy as to enter into it any more.
Than the master said, sir than we perceive well what good right ye would do to
this lady if there were no knight yt would answer you, how be it I will not
spare to speak according to right sir duke it is of troth that all the comentie
of all the ^ond of Argenton, as well all the noble men and burgeyses as the
comen people have herd and seen and are well assured that sir Uicter sometime
lord of all the land of Argenton was rightful heir, and this noble lady
Ma^ga^ete h^re present was lawfully desc^nded of him as she yt is rightful
heir of all the heritage and goods pertaynyng to her said father, and
therf^re sir as well all the hye ba^ons of this cite and land of Argenton and
knights and burgeses as well o^^er mean people as we^ as such as be here
present as they that been ^bsent, repureth, takes, and holds her for their
natural lady, as she yt is the ryghtfull heir of all the land of Argenton,
furthermore s^r I say that sir Isembarte your neuew here present is in mind
wrongfully without cause to d^sherite this lady of he^ propre heritage, and
has al ready put o^t al her of fy^ers, and has set in their stead servants
of his own therefore sir we des^re you that all this ladies lands may be
delivered again to her, and that she may be recompensed for such wrongs as she
has had or ^^les let him show a lawful cause why that she should loose he^
l^ndes. Sir ele^^e said sir Isembarte, I will show you no caus^ why, but I
will keep it whether she will or not. Sir than said the master here lacks
right, but sir duke as ye be a ryghtfull Judge, let us have right here this
day. Tha^ the duke said, what fair neuewe ye must^ needs tell the cause why ye
would hold^ her heritage, well sir said he sy^h it pleases you I will show him
the cause, sir ^le^k I say it is so yt the father of this la^dy for yt great
love that he had to me afte^ that we were ones accorded together before the
duke here my uncle, than at the last it fortuned so yt a grievous malady^ took
him y^ which sickness cost him his life, and or he died because of the good
company that I kept him, and for the entye^ love that he had to me, he gave me
gen^^ally all his lo^des without res^ruyng of any thing to him self or to any
of his and ^o gau^ me his g^oue in record of full possession thereof, and know
well this lady is his dough^er, how be it her own father did ^eshe^^e her, and
not I how be it her father desired me that I should make he^ a nonne, and to
give her.xxx. pound of yearly rent to find her with all: but because that her
father loved m^ so well, and because it is an hard thing for to make a young
lustye damoy^el a nonne, for often times such are aft^rwarde dysmayed, for it
is hard to resyst agenst nature, therefore in eschewyng of such
inconu^niences, I purpose to mary her* and assign to her.C.C. pound of yearly
rent, wherefore I will yt she shall make her homage to me as to her chief lord.
Than the master said unto ye duke^ sir I shall make sufficyent answer in thy
s^ate, but first we will have assurance of him, yt for whatsoever be said he,
shall move at this time no strife therefore, and my lady here for her part in
likewise shall make you assurance. Why said sir Isemberte who is that here
that will be pledge or meddle for the lady. Than sir Philyp duke of sabary
stepte forth and said. I am here present who will be pledge for this lady, and
in like wise said mo^ than.v.C. other barons, well said y^ duke of bygor, and I
will be pledge for my neuewe. That is sufficient enough said the master, sir
truly than I shall answer you, and say that where as your neuew says that
this ladies father had a great sickness, whereto sir I answer and say yt your
neuewe here sir Isemb^^te did murder and slay him and all his falsely by
treason, lyinge in a wait for him by the way by a prepensed malice without
any defiaunce cause or occ^sio^ given on his part, and forthermore where as he
says that he is in possessyon of all the lands of Argenton, she which is of
truth but that is by ^^au^e, for he keeps it falsely w^ut ^eason ^ran^ cause
Sir if he will knowledge him ^elf of the mu^ther of this ladies rather, and how
that wrongfully he hol^eth her land, sir in this ladies name I require you and
so do we al, that we may have ^ight judgment of him, and that it may be done
to him as it ought to be done to a traitor, murderer, comen ^hefe or robber.
And sir if he deny all this, suffer this lady to prove all this to be of trothe
by her knight who is here present by her, and redi to maintain her quarrel
body to body agenst you^ neuew sir ^sembarte. And when the remnau^t of the
ladies barons herd the master speak so boldly, each of them did point on
other and said, this master doubts little the pride of sir Isembart, who
when he herd him self called to his own face murderer and thief robber, he
was so full of felony yt he blusshed for dispite, and closed his fyst and stepped
forth and thought to have stryken ^he master with a knife yt he had in his
hand, but the people departed them. And wha^ Arthur saw that he laid his hand
on his sw^rde he said, sir fair and easily I would counsayl you, for be ye in
certain that if ^e lay any hand on him, all the world shall not save your
ly^e. Than the great^ vylayn began to cry.iii. times, he is come that shall
give light. Than the king or orqueney laughed at the vylayn. And when Philyp
of sabary saw Arthur moved, he stepped forth and mo than.v.C. with him o^
knights, and enuyroned the lady and Arthur, about to aid and to defend them
if need were. Than tidings ^an abroad in the cite how that Arthur was likely
to be slain in ye palace, wherefore thither came running all the hole coment^ of
the citte, and brast open the palais gates and thought to have slain both the
duke and his neuew, but the king of orqueney with much pain apeased y^
people, til at the last a servant of the dukes came to him and said, sir do ye
right to these folks, or else ye are but dead and al yours for all the comente
of this cite are here with out in your palace, and has broken open your
gates, therefore dele wisely I read you. And when the duke herd y^ he doubted
him self greatly, and would feign that he had been at home in his own
country. Than Arthur said to him, sir it is of ^routh al yt the master has
said of your neuew, how yt he is a murderer, traitor, thief and robber, here
is my gage to prove it true my body against his in mortal batayl for this
ladies sake. Tha^ the vylay^e began to cry as he bid before as though he had
been wode, therwt Arthur cast down before the duke his glove. And tha^ the
duke answered and said sir knight ye speak right largely I wot not what moves
you thus to do, but I pray you refrain your words, if so be yt my neuewe
has done any trespass against this lady. I am puyssau^t enough to make her
such a^endes that she shall hold her well content, and I pray you fair
damoysell put all this matter in to my hands and I promise you I shall so do
yt ye shall be well content. Sir said the master ye are a right wise and a sage
prince and are well worthy to give counsel in many great matters, sir ye may
give good counseyle in this matter if it please you to do as I shall show
you, your neuewe did stryke of by treason this ladies fathers heed, and if ye
will therefore stryke of your neuewes heed and give it to this damoysell in
recompense of her fathers heed, than she shall be content or else she shall be
defended by her knight And when sir Isembarte herd all yt he was so sore
chaued with ire yt he said yt there should never be made none accord in that
matter but al only by the sword And when yt I have vanquysshed this knight I
shall hang him by the neck, and shall brenne this clerk and damoysell in a
fair fire. Than he did cast down his gage and thereto he was well cou^seyled
by his knights, for they believed verily that there was not in all the world
so good a knight as he was. Than the vylayne cried out, he is come that shall
give light. Than ^he master said to the duke, sir do as right requires,
receive these gages. An^ so with great pain at the last the duke took them up,
and than the battle was Iudg^d ^o be incontinent the same day. Than sir
Isembarte went to arm him, and the lady led Arthur to sir Emeryes house and
there his knights did arm him, and the master said to him sir Arthur bear
this day in this mortal battle your white shield And he answered and said if
god be pleased I will not bear it for fere of one knight, nor yet for two such
as he is. Than it was known thrughout all the cite how their lady was armyng of
her cha^pyon at sir Emeryes house, and how yt the battle was Judged to be the
same day, than al ye belles in every church began to ring, and all ye people
of cite and of ye country besought god to help and socour Arthur, and all the
processyons of the cite assembled them together with their relyke and crosses
and holy water, and chanons, priests, and clerks in copes of gold and sylke,
and all barefoted praying to god for their ladies champyon, and all these
processyo^s came and met Arthur in the street, who as than was mounted on his
horse, and Phylyp duke of sabery with him and more than.v.C. other knights in
his company. And when Arthur saw these processyons, and the bishop mytred and
all barefoted, his heart lermed and wept for pity, and did light of his horse
and kneled down, and there the bysshopp^ did sense him and blyssed him with
the cross^, and Arthur did k^sse it and anclyned his heed down, and the
bishop did give him his blessing and said, that lord that was nailed on the
cross be your aid and socoure this day and ever. And all the knights and
other answered and said Amen. Than the processyons returned again to their
churches, and Arthur and all his company mounted again on their horses, and
so thus he was brought in to the field. The hole clergy of all the cite were
on their knees making their prayers to god that he should that day be help
and socoure to their lady and to her champyon. Than the king of orqueney came
to the field and commanded his neuewe sir Phylyp duke of Sabary to keep the
field so that there should no wrong nor treason be wrought there that day.
Than sir Phylyp armed him self, and took in his company sir Brisebar, sir
Neuelon, sir Ancean, sir Artaude, and well to the nombre of.v.C. knights of the
court^ of king Emendus. Tha^ the lady came to the feld with mo tha^ a.M. of
her men with her. Than sir Isembart was armed, and as he passed for by the
people every man said Go thy way we pray to god that thou mai^t dye an evil
death, and when he was in the field where as Arthur abode for him. Than the
master said to thy duke sir a mortal battle ought not to be done without an
oath. Than the duke caused to be brought forth a relike one of the bones of
saint Uyncent, and an arm of saint G^orge. Than Arthur took his oath and said,
by these glorious saints relykes ^h^t be here present, and by all the other
saints of heaven sir Isembart the duke o^ bygors neuewe who is here present
murthred or caused to be murthred falsely and without cause the lord of
Argenton father to my lady Margarete here present, and wrongfully he would
dysheryte her, and therewith he kyssed the saints and books, and so lepte up
on his horse as lightly as though he had been but in a Iacket, and so set him
self aparte and stretched him on his horse, and all that regard^d him said,
behold the hy^ countenance of yonder knight se how he dresseth himself on
his horse and plung^th down his shield, and the king and other also did
well behold him, and praised him in their hertes above all other knights that
ever they saw. Than sir Isembart took his oth^ and said that as god and the
holy saints might help him he never slew the lord of Argenton, nor never
thought it and than he would have kyssed the saints, but he might not, and in
his rysynge he had such a pain in the heed that almoost thereby he had lost
his sight, wherefore all the people that saw him said this knight has but an
evil countenance, it sem^th he is in the wrong, than he lepte upon his horse
right heuyly, and Arthur was ready on the other part of the field. Than the
duke of bygor prayed sir Isembarte his neuewe that he would leave the battle
and said how that he would make the peace and accord, but in no wise he
would do so, but swear that he would never make no peace till that he had the
heed of his enemy and the lady burnt, but many folks think to do many
things the which the hurt thereof lyghteth on their own necks, and so it
did on him. And when that the duke saw that he could make no peace he
commanded that they should do their best, than both the knights let their
horses re^^e with great ran don, and struck each other with great and mighty
speres, and both knights were of great force, and they encountered so rudely
that both their speres all to sheuered to their fystes, and they russhed so
together with their bodies and helmes that they fell down both to the earth But
Arthur who was the more lustyer knight quyckely lept^ upon his fete and drew
out traunchefer his good sword And all that season sir Isembarte lay still on
the earth his fete upward and his head downewa^de. And when Arthur saw that
he lay so vnease^y he stepte to him and lift him up, and laid his shield
under his head, and withdrewe him self a little from him, wherefore he was
greatly praised of the king and of all the other people. And the king said to
his neuewe, sir Philip it seems well this knight has a right noble and a
gentyl heart. Uerely said the duke Philyp it can be none otherwise but that he
must needs be extraught of a noble blood for there is in him no touch of shame
or vylanye. And when sir Isembarte was revived out of his trance he start upon
his fete and took his shield to him and drew his sword and came unto Arthur
and gave him a great stroke on the shield, and struck away a great piece of his
hawberke, and the stroke did glyde down to the earth. Than he said to Arthur,
ye made me right now to fall in a sleep, but or it be night I shall make you to
sleep in such a wise that ye shall never wake. Than Arthur answered him and
said, sir ye promise very much but I can not tell you whether ye shall be able
to pay it, and there with Arthur struck him on the helm with such force that
he bare away a great piece thereof so that one of his ears might well be seen,
than he cast his shield before him, and Arther gave him such an other stroke
that he claue his shield asunder in the mids, and the stroke did glent by
his arm so that the blood followed, and with the same stroke the swearde entered
into the earth nigh a foot, and all the people that saw that stroke, said:
saint Marye, what knight is yonder, who may sustayn his strokes, there is no
knight like him, and truly ^o he was as than the best knight of all the
world, for he was of that condycyon that the more he had to do, the more
hardynes was in him and strength. And when sir Isembarte felt him self wounded
he struck Arthur on the helm, so that it entered til it came to the coyfe of
stele, and than the stroke did glence down to ward to the lift side, and
struck away as much of the hawberk as it touched, but it came not nere his
flesh, for in certain if tha^ sir Isembart had been a true and a faithful
man, he had been a right good knight for he never found his match before that
time, but as than he had to do with him that abated his pride, than Arthur
struck him on the helm and claue asonder both helm and coyfe, and so as the
sword turned, it carved away one of his ^res from his head, and a great piece
of the brawne of his sholdre, and part of his harneys ^uste unto the bare
rybbes, And all tho that saw it said, Jesus how may any such strokes be given
of any knight living. And when sir Isembarte felt him self so wounded, he
was enraged for ire and said. Uassayle me thinks ye have found me, but by
all the saints of paradise I shall revenge me, than he lift up his swerd and
struck Arthur on the shield so that he bare away a great piece of his
harneys. And when Arthur felt the stroke so heavy and puissant, he stepte aside
as he that was both st^onge and light, and well and warely he put the stroke
by, the which was ued^full, for if the stroke had light upon him full, by
lykelyhood he had be^ right sore wounded. And than Arthur began for ^o wax
angry, and took his sword in his hand with great ire, and dressed him toward
sir Isembarte and s^rake him so rudely that he struck away arm and shouldre,
and all the flesh of his side unto the bare rybbes and did cut his leg
nigh clean asonder in the thycke of the thygh, and yet for all that the sword
entered into the earth half a foot, than sir Isembart f^l down to the earth, and
Arthur stepped over him and poynted his sword toward his vysage and said, false
recreant knight without thou wylt make open knowledge of thy defaute, I shall
put my sweard into thy head. Than he cried Arthur mercy and said, ^ree knight
slay me not, but send for mine uncle and for the lady Margarete and for all
the other barons, and than shall I show you all the case. And when they were
all come than he said. Damoysell certainly I slew falsely by treason your
father, and wrongfully without a cause have dish^ryted you, wherefore I render
again to you your land, and cry you mercy in that I have trespassed to you.
Than answered the damoyselles and said sir god do judgment to you for his part
for as for me now have I but right, that ye be in this case that ye be in.
And when the duke herd that he desired the damsel for gods sake to pardon
him and to save his life, for he has lost an arm and a leg, and I require
you let that suffyse at this time. Fair Lady said Arthur how say you have I
done enough at this time, or else shall I do any more, and ever sir Isembarte
lay still and ever cried for mercy and said, I yield me an recreaunte and
vanquysshed like a traitor and murderer. Than the duke kneled down before
the lady and held up his hands and required her that he might have his neuewe
in the same plyte as he was in. And wha^ the common people of the country saw
the duke desire the lady to pardon his neuewe, they were in great fear
least that she would have granted his request, wherefore a great company of
them rushe into the prese till they came there as sir Isembarte lay still, and
they all at ones laid on him in such wise that they left no joint together
with other. And wha^ the duke of Bygor saw that he was afraid of him self,
and so took his horse and fled his way homewarde into his own country as fast
as he might. Tha^ the king of Orqueney said. Madame god and this knight has
this day done you great honor. And than sir Philyp demanded of Arthur how
that he did Sir said be right well I thank god. Than al these lords and
knights mounted on their horses, but the lady and much^ other people went
barefoote unto the great cathedral church of the city, and ^here she
rendered thankynges unto our lord Jesus Christ, and within a little while after
Arthur and sir Philyp and all other lords and knights came thy there on
pylgrimage and than the bishop and all the hole clergy received Arthur with
solemn processyon, and so for great joy all the belles of the city were
ronge three days together, and all the burgeses throughout every street where
as Arthur should pass did hang out of their wyndowes and on their walls
cloth of gold and of sylke, and rych carpettes and cusshyns and coueringes of
grene, and rich aparayle of emerines lay abroad in every wyndowe, and fair
ladies and damoselles beholding Arthur their champyon. And when ye lady had
done her prayers, she issued out of the mynst^r. Than began iuglers and
tomblers, and mynstrelles to make great ioy^ and sport. And the king led this
lady on the one side, and duke Philyp on the other side, and so led herforth to
the p^lays, and all the other barons brought forth Arthur, and as he passed
throughout every street burgeyses and ladies and damoyselles for Joy did cast
at him flowers of pleasure and said, god encreace in you bou^te and honor. And
the great vylayne ran ever dauncyng before for Joy, and cried ever now darkness
is turned to light. And when the king had brought the lady to the palace he
said, now fair lady ye be welcome home to your own ryghtfull heritage. Sir
said she god grant you y^ hye Joy, of heaven, and keep and preserve my good
knight yt has delivered me fro mine enemies and saved my land. Tha^ anon
after Arthur entered into the palace and the master and al other lords and
knights with him. Tha^ the ladi said to Arthur gentyl knight ye have delivered
to me my land the which was lost as to my use, for I had nothing thereof, and
now I have it again by your noble prowess, wherefore I hold yt I have of god
and of you, wherefore I will to you make faithful homage, and take you for my
lord the which knowledge I will make here openly before all the nobles yt be
here present. A madame said Arthur for gods sake say ye never so to me, for
that shall ye not do. Sir said she ye have given it to me, and of you I hold
it, I am but a woman alone, and am in purpose never to be married, seeing yt my
lord and father is de^d the which I thank mine enemies, but now they have
such rewards as they have deserved, and I know well as soon as ye depart out
of this country the duke of bygor will assail me again in the revenging of his
neuewes death, and if he can take away from me yt he have given me. Fair lady
said Arthur I promise you I shall help you to keep your right to the best of
my power, and wha^ so ever and as often as ye send to me I ^hal leave al things
and come to you where so ever I shall be. Sir said the lady god give you a.C.M.
thankynges, but sir I swear to you by the faith that I have borne to my lord
and father yt I will keep no fo^e of land of y^ ye have given me without I make
to you homage therefore. And wha^ the king herd that he said to Arthur, sir take
her homage sith ^he will needs do it, and in like wise counseyled him duke
Philip and master steu^ and many other, and at last with much pain Arthur took
homage of the ^ady and of diverse other barons o^ y^ land. Tha^ began there to
be made great feast and joy, and sir Emery, B^isebar and A^taude were
governors of the feast and triumph. And when the mete was ready tha^ water was
brought forth and so there washed the king and the bishop and the lady
Margarete together, and tha^ Arthur and duke Philip and master Steue^, and so
al other, and every man after his degree and so they were all in as great mirthe
and Joy as could be devised, the which Joy endured but a little season, for
all their Joy was soon turned into great trouble, for all the court was in
great displeasure as ye shall here after, who lysteth to read or here thereof.

How the same season while the king of orqueney and all these other noble
people were at dinner in great Joy and mirthe there came in a messe^ger fro the
wounded knight to Arthur des^ringe him to come and help him or else he wol^e
wy^e him of his death, wherwt all the court was sore troubled, and ceased all
their Joy for the love of Arthur, for incontinent he departed fro y^ court and
went forth with the messenger, and how yt all the court fered greatly Arthur for
that enterprise, for there was never non that ever returned again alive fro
that adventure. Caplo. lxvi.


AS this noble court was in this forsaid great Joy and while y^ they were at
dinner there entered in to the palace on horse back a squire his sword gyrte
about him with his heart in his hand, and when he approached nere to the table
where as the king sat he began to cry as loud as he could, where is the
knight that is called Arthur of brytayne, if he be in this court let him
answer me, and with those words all the court was in peace, so that every
man might well here him. And when Arthur herd how that he demanded so for him
he answered and said. Friend if ye demand for Arthur of Brytayne there be
many folks reputeth me to be the same therefore behold I am here redye, for I
am the same man that ye demand for say what ye will. Sir said the squire I
am sent to you, therefore ye shall here what I shall say, sir it is of troth
how that my master sir Octhebon of hurtebise has heard tidings of you and
of your adventures, and so has he done of many other that could do him no
good, sir this knight is very seek in his body, for I think verily he is nere
to his death, therefore he sends to you by me that in co^tinent with out any
longer delay that ye come to him and give him health, accompanied al only but
with your squire, and if ye do not thus incontinent through your defaute he
shall dye, of the which death I here in his name appele you before the king
and all this noble court. And than Arthur answered him and said, friend how
is it so that I should give him health, I am but an ill physycyon to help him
that is so seek as ye speak of. Sir come on your way and he shall show you all
the manner of his sekenes. well said Arthur thinks he than that I can give him
any good counsel. Ye sir said the squire if ye be of that hardines and valor
as it is of you reported well friend said Arthur suffer than till to morrow,
and I shall this day take my leave of all these barons and so follow you. Sir
said the squire are we now in Brytayne, if ye will go come on your way
streyght^ for I will depart, how be it I will that ye know that my said mayst^r
appeleth you of his death. In the name of god said the king of orqueney of an
ill death I pray to god that he may dye, for he has caused the death of many a
noble knight, and so he will do now of this knight, and so shall we left his
company. Truly quod Brysebar would to god I had here his head. Tha^ the squire
answered the king and said, sir if I might answer a king I would say that ye
should not curse my master before me, and as to you sir knight that would have
my masters head, ye would not go and seek to have it for your weight of fine
gold, ye would fain have it so it might cost you nothing but ye were never so
hardy to go seek for it, the cause is ye du^st not, and as to you sir knight
Arthur ye cause ^e to tarry here over long, either come on your way or else
abide ^ere still, and so the squire was going his way. Than Arthur stepte fro
the table and demau^^ed for his harneys, and said that all the world should not
cause him to tarry any longer, than Arthur went and armed him and came again
into the hall, and said, I will depart, and so took his leave of the king and
of all the hole barony, who were right sorrowful of his departing. Than sir
Philyp and moo than.v.C. other knights would have gone with him, but the squier
messenger would not suffer any creature to depart with him but al only Bawdwyn
his squire. Than master Steven came to Arthur and said, sir ye go in a great
aduentur of death, for your return is right Ieoperdous, but if god give you
that grace to return, leave ye for nothing but that ye come ^o the tourney
before ^ornyte at bartylmew tide next coming, for there shall I be and my
ladies pauylion with me, I will now return to the port noyre. and I shall
send Gouernar after you. ^er^ainly master said Arthur, if god will that I shall
escape this adventure I shall be at y^ said tournay, wherefore as now to god I
command you, and so mounted on his h^rse and took with him his while shield,
and clarence his good sw^rde, the which were right nedeful to him in that
Journey, and so he rode forth and Bawdwyn his squi^r with him. Tha^ was all the
court sore troubled for his departing. Than the king commanded to take up
the tables and to ^russe all his stuff, for he said he would depar^
incontinente. Thau the lady Margaret had thought to have cau^ed him to carry,
but she could not in no wise and so in the ^ame hour he departed, and al
other ^ords and knights, so yt there abode with the lady Margarete no moo but
her own knights. The master also ^ayd that he would go to y^ port noyre And
when all the cour^e was departe^ the master came to the la^y and said. Madame
will ye comaunde me any service unto the marks your uncle who is at y^ port
noyre. And the lady de^ired him to tarry two or three days till such t^me as she
had set all her land in some good order, and than she promised ^o go with him
to the port noyre to se her vnc^e, y^ which request the master did grant
her with all his heart, for he loved her entierly. and had set al his heart and
love on her how be it ^he knew it not as than, than the lady ordained her
balliue^s and prouostes and other officers, and kepers of her lands, by the advice and good cou^^all of the master, and received homage of al her people,
and there she made ^yr Emery principal governor above all other. And when she
had ordained all this, tha^ she took her horse and.xii. o^ her knygh^es with
her, and so rode for^h wi^h ^he master to se her uncle, and as they rode
together y^ master dyscouere^ to h^^ all his courage how that he loved her
with perfect and faithful honest ^oue, with the which words her heart was so
fy^ed yt fro that time for ward she loved him entyrely^ and did nothing but
after his counsel, and promised to owe him her good will and favor, and so at
^he last they a^yued on a saturday at the port noyre. And when they were come
thither there mettet hem Gouernar and Iaket, and so the master and Gouernar
took down the lady than Gouernar and Iaker demanded how that Arthur did. And
the master answered and said now that he was in good health and merry, and how
yt he was as tha^ newly departed to the castle of hu^^^yse in ye country of ye
lost isle, and showed him how that he des^ed that he should come after him
whereof Gouernar had great joy, and departed the next day. And when the lady
saw Goue^nar so byg and so goodly a kn^ght, she demanded of ye master what
knygh^ he was. And he answered her and said how yt he pertayned to Arthur. In
the name of god said she I think it right well, for he s^meth to be of hye
prowess Uerely madam said he and so he is. Than Gouernar took the lady and led
her into the palace, than the marks came forth the same time and met them who
knew nothing before of her coming, and as so^e as she saw her uncle, her heart
^rembled when she remembered the death of her father, and so she ran and enbraced
him weeping, both ^or joy and for sorrow, for joy that she saw her uncle, and
for sorrow of the remembrance of her father. And when the marks saw her and
knew well yt she was his nece, incontinente he remembered the death of her father
his brother, with the which remembrance his heart clo^ed in such wise* that
of a great space he could speak no word, and so sat them d^wne on a benche.
And when the lady could speak, she said, fair uncle and dear friend I neue^
saw my dear father sy^he he departed with you, I pray you tell me whether yo
have seen him or not I pray you answer to me a pore orphelyue both of father
and mother. And when her uncle herd her say so, him thought his heart did
break for sorrow, and said. A mine own nece and dear lou^ both ye and I have
lost him, and ye are disherited therefore we ought well to complain on our
domages. And sir Isemba^e I pray to god thou may dye an ill death yt have
thus brought us into this dolorous chance. Sir said the lady of an ill death he
is dead, and so was about to tell him all the ma^ter, but she could not for
weeping. Then the master came to the^ and showed the marks that Arthur had
conquered sir Isembarte in plain batayl, and had rendered to ye lady again her
loudes, and how that she had made homage unto Arthur. Tha^ the marks said,
certainly fair nece ye have done right well to make him homage, for he has
delivered us out of poverty, and has made us ^y^he, and he has well aduenged
you of your mortal enemy, and he has delivered me out of the dolorous
prison that I was in, wherefore if ever I may se him again I will become his
man. Thus they talked together so long that at the ^^ste the master made them
to forget their sorrow, and to be joyous and me^y, and so they went to dinner
and were served right richely and so al yt day they were together, and thus this
lady abode a great space at the por^e noyre, and every day sported with her
uncle, and so they made right great joy and feast together.

How ye Gouernar in serchyng of Arthur had the honor of a tourney yt was made
by ye earl of the isle perdue, and there Gouernar was amorous of the cou^tes And
how ye the ^rle charged the cou^tes yt she should not speak to Gouernar, whereof
evil came to him, for the next day Gouernar did bette him well in the
tournay, and lay all night after with the countess his wife. Cap. lxvii.


IN the morning betymes Gouernar took his leave of the lady and of the master,
and of the noble Marks and rode forth on his way and Iacket his squire with
him, and he was right rychely beseen, and mounted on a good and puyssaunte
horse, and so rode forth.viii. days and never could here any tidings of
that he sought for, till at the last he tryued in the lands of ynde the more
between the realm of soroloys and the empire, and there he saw a great river,
and at a cross way he encountered a messenger, who bare a scochyn on his
breast, and also a bode full of letters, and rode a great pace, and this was
aboun^e saint Laurence tide. Than Gouernar did salute the va^l^t and demanded
of him what tidings and of whence he was. And he answered and said, sir I am
pertaining to the earl of ^he isle perdue, and am riding to the strong
castle to a knight named sir Iakes to thentent yt he should come to him to go
with him to a tournay, for the emperor of ynde has somoned my master yt said
earl to wait on him to Corynte at this Bartylmewe tide n^xte coming, because
of a turnay that is taken there between him and the mighty Eme^dus king of
Soroloys, and because my lord thinks not to be vnpuruayed of good knights,
he has made to be cried a tournay on mondaye next coming to thentent to those
of ye b^st knights yt comes thider to have them with him to the said great
^ournay a^ Cornyte, therefore I must go to the said sir Iakes to cause him to be
with my said lor^e on monday next coming. well good friend said Gouernar go
on your way god send you good adventure. So than the varlet departed, than
Gouernar said to Iacket, I am in purpose to goo to this said turnay, for it may
hap right well that we may there here some tidinges of mo lord Arthur, and so
they rode so long till at the last they aryued at the isle perdue, where as
^hey ^ounde many knights yt were ready come^ so yt all the ^o^gyng^s were taken
up, wherefore he had much pain to get him any lo^g^ng^, but at the last he
met with a good ^urg^^se who received him friendly into his house. And when
Gouernar was changed he called to him his host and demanded him all the
manner of the earl and what manner of man he was, who answered and said sir he is
a ^^gh^ valiant man and a hardy kn^ght, for there are but few that may
compare with him in deeds of arms, and he has to his wife the most fair
lady that is in all the world exc^pt the king of Soroloys daughter, and for
her b^au^e hither resorteth many strange knights both dukes, earls, and many
other good knights, and because he does tournay tomorow he knows well yt
many knights will be at his house for to se his wife therefore he has caused
the gates of his castle to be fast shette, and has defended that what so ever
he be shall not enter, the gates were not open sith none yesterday No said
Gouernar in the name of god I shall assay to enter and if I can to se ^he fair
lady, than he called to him Iacket and commanded him to bring for^h his
horse, for he said he would go and assay his horse against the next day that
he s^olde tournay, and so Iacket brought him his horse and mounted thereon, and
so rode forth throughout ye streets of the town till he came to the castle gate
the which he found fast shet^e, and than he bad the porter to open the gate,
for he said he would enter into the castle, and than the porter demanded of
him what he had to do there. Friend said Gouernar I would speak with the good
lady of this place. ^eryly sir said the port^r ye may not enter in at this
place, for my lord has def^^ded the contrary, for he has commanded yt what
so ever he be yt co^eth hither that none should enter, wherefore I dare not
let you in. Yes I pray you said Gouernar, and I will give you what so ever
ye will demand of m^. Than the porter opened a little wyndowe^ and there he
saw yt Gouernar was a right goodly knight and brown of vysage, and saw how
yt he rode on a maruayllous fair horse, than thought he well yt he was some
noble man and said to him, sir if ye will give me the horse that ye ride on I
will open you the gate Open the gate than at ones and I give him to you. Sir
said the porter will ye promise me as ye be a true knight that I shall have
him. ^eryly I promise you that ye shall have him as I am a true knight. Sir
said the porter I pray you ^ary a little while, and I shall go in and speak with
my lord. well said Gouernar I pray you ^ye you again as fast as ye may.
Than the porter went to the earl and said, sir there is at your gate a
maruaylous fair knight, who has so great desire to se my lady yt he will give
me his horse that he rydeth on, the which is well worth by lykelyhode a.C.
pound on the condycyon that I would open the gate and let him in, therefore sir
pleases it you to ^hewe me your mind in this case. How so sai^ the earl my
mind was that none should enter into this place^ how be it I will not that
thou ^hould^ it lose thy gift tha^ he would give the, therefore goo thy way and
open the gate and take thy horse, and tha^ he said to the countess his wife,
madame yonder is a knight that has given a rich gift to se and to speak with
you, wherefore I charge you as dear as ye hold my love that wha^ he is come ye
make to him no manner of semblaunt, nor speak no word to him what so ever he
say to you, if ye do otherwise ye shall right ^ore dysplease me. A sir said
the lady for gods sake I axe mercy, sir we know not what kynght he is nor of
what valor and if he have given a rich gift to speak with me he shall have
but a small reward for his curtesy if I should keep my speech from him,
against love no man can be, and I am a gentylwoman of great power, therefore I
should greatly trespace and I should not speak ^o ^im if he speak to me. By
the faith that I own unto god said the earl if ye trespace agenst my
commandment I shall dysplease you at the heart ro^e. we^ sir said the lady,
for your love I am content, but if any vylany grow thereby I pray to g^d it
may fai on you. Than the porter opened the gate to Gou^rnar, and there the
porter took his hor^e and Gouernar went forth into the palace a fore, and the
earl and ^uch other knights as were wi^h him meet Gouernar and did s^lute him
^ b^helde him maruaylouslye and so ^e pa^^ed f^rth^ till he came where as the
cou^te^^e was t^an he went to her and sayd^ Ma^^me g^d that all t^y^ge fou^^^
^o g^ue you ^hys day health joy and peace, and blessed be the ^enowne yt
ru^n^th of your valuce^ bou^te, and fresh beau^ye, for now I se well it is of
troth and more tha^ is or ^an be reported. And when the cou^te^^e herd him she
answered no ma^er of word, the which grieved her right sore in her heart and
therewith she cast down her look toward the earth* and Gouernar made
countenance to salute the other ladies, and so ^^te down among them. And at
the l^st he said to the countess, fair lady I am a knight that passes
thrughout this country, and it was showed me how that ye were in this castle,
wherefore I thought I would not pass by without seeing of you therefore I am
come to you to offer my self to be your knighte, and to do that I may do for
your sake, wherefore madame I r^quyre you to show me what is your pleasure,
for I am sore desiring to know it and the countess spoke no word again, but
cast down her look to the ground, wherewith she was right sore grieved at the
heart. And when Gouernar saw that she spoke no word he was right sorrowful
and sayde^ Madame will ye not speak to me, I have he^d renowned of you that ye
were fie a gentle of heart and of such courtese that ye could bear none ire
nor no malice in your heart, nor do any vylany to any manner of person,
wherefore fair lady answer me some manner of word, how be it for all that she
spoke no word again And there with water was brought forth and all they
washed and sat down to dinner, and the era^e caused Gouernar to sit next to
the lady to thentente to do him the more anoyau^ce and shame, and there
Gouernar carved to the lady right goodly with his knyfe, and oftentimes spoke
to her, but she would ueuer give ans^e^e again, where with Gouernar was so
sore dyspleased that he neither did eat nor drink bu^ a ^ytel for he saw
well ho^ the lady spoke to all other but in no wy^e she would speak to him And
a^^o the coutesse was ^ight sore d^spleased in her heart because she du^ste
not speak to him. And thus they we^e in this case till they were taken up fro
ye diner, and than Gouernar took her boldly by the hand and said, madam I would
fay^e speak a little with you, and so he lad her unto a fair wyndowe, than
he said, sweet lady it is for none ill or despite or for any trespace that I
have made to you or to any of yours that ye do to me such hardness yt ye will
not speak to me, ye have the name to be the most free and gentyllest of heart
of any lady now lynynge, for all bounte and courtesy is said to be in you,
therefore sweet lady show somewhat of your courtesy to me as in speaking but
one woorde^ and fair and gentyl lady do me so much honor as now to speak to
me for as god help me I am ashamed if ye do not for ever, for it shall be said
to morrow of me how that I am but a folysshe knight and outragyous, for by mine
outrage it shall be said that I have lost the herynge of the speech of the
most fair lady of the world, madame I require you put fro me this reproach,
open to me a little your sweet mouth wherein is all curtesy, and speak to me
some word, for madame as god help me my heart dies in my body for I am in
fere leest that ye be dyspleased with me for some trespace that I have done,
but for all yt she spoke no word again to him, and yet she was as sore grieved
in her heart as he. Gouernar stood and talked so long to this lady till at the
last two of her gentylwom^n came for her that she should go into her chamber
and take her rest. Than Gouernar at her departing laid his arm about her
and said, madame I se well I must needs depart from you at this time, I will
go to my lodging right so^owful and ye shall go and rest you and sleep and
take little care for my great grefe, how be it madame I say unto you that I
will never depart fro this town till ye have spoken to me. And so thus
talking he brought her to her chamber door, and he saw well where there was
a way out of the chaumbre in to a fair orcheya^de Than he said, madame ye
will not speak to me, ^ut I promise you I will come this same night so yonder
orcheyarde and so to your chaumbre to speak with you though I dye therefore,
sith I have taken that enterprise in my mind either I will dye or else ye shall
speak to me And therwyth the countess entered into her chaumbre without
speaking of any word to him. And than Gouernar returned to his lodging into
the town right sore dyspleased in his heart. And when Iacket saw him come on
foot he demanded of him where was his horse. And he answered and said, in
faith frend^ it gooth not well with me. Ha ha said Iaket I trow ye have played
away your horse because ye would not tournay to morrow with the knights of
this country, well shameful knight to morrow when I se other gentyl knights
tournay I shall show them how that ye lie a sleep in your chaumbre. Than
Gouernar laid him down on a bed all replete with ire till it was night. And
than the said earl commanded all his knights that they should depart and goo
to their restes because they should be trauayled on the next day, and also he
said to the countess his wife, madame go this night into your chaumbre and
take your rest, for I will this night ly alone for I am sure I shall be right
sore trauayled to morrow. And when it was derke night and the countess taken
her leave and entered into her chamber. Than rose Gouernar and badde Iacket his
squire to give him his swer^e. And Iacket demanded of him what he would do. I
will go out and play me said Gouernar. By the faith that I owe to god said
Iaket I trow ye will go lie in a wait by the hye way for to rob some
merchant to by you a new horse with all. Gouernar answered no word again
but departed fro him, and as than every body was in their lodgings, for it
was than somewhat late, and the moon shone very bright, and the watchemen were
on the walls of the castle and so went often about, and at the last
Gouernar came to the high walls of the orcheyarde the which Joined on the one
side to ward a fair forest, and there Gouernar saw well on the other side the
wyndowes of the chaumbre where as he saw the lady enter when he departed fro
her, than he clam upon a grene oak, and did so much that at the last he gate
upon the wall and there he stood still pryuely a good space because of the
watchemen that went about, for as than they were in that quarter, and when they
were passed he gate him down by an other tree, and so stood still by the
walls under the shadow of the tr^es, for the moon did him great anoyaunce
because she shone so clear. And at the last he gate him into the mids of the
garden under a fair pyne tree where as there was a right fair fou^tayne, and
there he stood a great space and durst not stere for ^eare of spying, for h^
knew well that if he styr^ed the watchmen who as then were not a sleep, should
se him, and he knew well that and he ^ere espied and taken he should notte
lightly escape without does, therefore he kept him self as pryuely as he
could, and al this season the countess was in her chamber in her kyrtel bare
foted and bare legged, and on a carpet of sylk and her damoyselles about her,
and there they began to speak of the knight who had given his horse to speak
with her and one o^ the damoselles who was named Powcet said how that he was
of right great valu^e and ^ounteful of heart By the mother of god said Eglentyn
an other of her damoyselles ye say right truly, and where as he is gentyl of
^ert in like wise he is passing fair and more gracious of words than my
lord is. Truly said Powcet I meruayl me greatly how that my lady could have
so hard a heart as when he spoke so swetely to her that she would give him no
manner of answer. Truly said Eglentyne as I remember I heard him say at his
departinge that he would come this same night into this garden. By the good
lord said the other I remember well I heard him say so. well said the
countess I care not whether he ^ome or not, if he do let him kept fast
that he shall win, let us go to our beds, and that she said to cover her
courage and to break their words, and so she sent away from her all her
gentle women, saving Powcet and Eglentyne, for they two were of her preuy
counsel, then she said to them. A ^ere lady the mother of god, what shall we
do if this knight comes into the garden this night, y^ he be espied of the
watch^men it shall be thought that I have caused him to come hy^her, so shall
I be shamed and he destroyed, the which should be a great damage, for he is a
^ight fay^re knight. By the good lord said Egle^tyne madame ye say right
truly, ^her^fore Powcet fellow let us ^waine go s^ whether he be come or not,
than Pow^et took a grene mantell and did cast it on her and ^o went forth
together, playeng to the entente the watchmen should know that it we^e they,
and at the last^ Powcet looked under the pyne t^ee and there she saw where he
stood, than she said sister Egl^ntyne there is no more but now let us do for
the best, for yonder I se him, and incontynente they approached too the
fountayn^, and made semblaunt to wasshe their fete and hands and Powcet took
her mantell and did cast it on the knight, and took a fine keuerchefe and did
knytte it on his head and so took him by the arm and did lead him forth into
the countess chaumbre, as though he had been one of her fellows And as soon as
Gouernar saw ye lady he cast of his keuerchefe and his mantell and kneled
down and sayde^ Madame I pray god give you good life and good night and she
answered and said, sir knight in an ill night and time ye be entered in to my
chamber without my license, wherefore ye be not welcome unto me, but for your
labor I shall cause you to be hanged by the neck, and these words she spoke
fair and easily because she would not be heard, and forthermore she said sir
knight how durst ye be so bold to break my walls and enter into my
chamber, by the mother of god ye shall dye therefore. Than Gouernar answered and
said, ryg^t here and swear lady blame me nothing therefore, for as god help me
my heart dyed in my body when so hye a lady as ye be would not speak to me,
for as it is said that a^l goodness and gentylnesse is co^prysed in your
person, wherefore fair lady now do with me what it shall please you, sith ye
have spoken to me stryke of my head and ye will, ^oo here it is al ready, and so
he laid forth his heed to the countess to have had her ^tryken it of if she
list, and when the countess saw him humble himself so mekely, her heart began
to melte, and so took of him some pity. A madame said Powcet this knight has
evil enployed his curtesye that he ha^h done to your porter as to give him his
good horse for your love, and now ye to speak so rudely, he has done more
bounte and cu^tesy sith he came hither than ever did onye that ever came unto
this place to s^ you, though they were never so noble or great, it is reason
that he may feel that he has not ill enployed his gift that he has given for
your sake, and also he has Ieoperded his life in this behalf, it came of a
great gentilnes of heart to give away his horse, and of a great valor of
courage to put this his life in adventure for your sake, full little durst thus
have done any knight of this country, who be afraid of every folly, they lack
in their hertes such bou^te and valor, I say not all this all only for his
sake, for I never saw him before this day, but as help me god I se by reason
yt love has caused him thus to do, for if he had not loved you he would have
done nothing of this yt is done, therefore madame for gods sake make him
amends of the ill cruelte yt ye did to him this day and speak to him more
curteysly. Powcet said the lady I can not I am so full of ire, for he has
dyspleased me with his cominge hider, for it is no thank to him though I were
shamed for this deed. Madame said Powcet if ye put him out of your chaumbre at
this time of night he shall be espied of the watchemen, and so taken and slain
and you shamed, for every man that shall know thereof will say that ye caused
him to come, and the more that knows thereof the worse it is, for when a
thing is done it is conuenyent to let it pass as easily as may be, and to
keep it secret for all is little enough, sir knight knele ye down and cry my
lady mercy in that ye be come hither without her license. Than Gouernar kneled
down and said, madame for gods sake forgive me this trespace. And she beheld
him meruaylouslye, for he was fair and gracyous and he was bare heded, and
Powcet struck dowe his hear with her hand, for it was somewhat ruffled with
the wind, and said. I madame behold and se what manner of knight this is, and
who is so hard herted that will not forgive him that puts him self in
such adventure all only to se a fair noble lady, certainly I pardon him in
your name, for I am sure madame ye will be content therewt. Than the countess
did smyle and said, always ye will play the fool, but so she took Goue^nar by
the hand and caused him to arise upon his fete, than Powcet bad him sit down
by her lady, but for courtesye he would not at the first biddyng, Than Powcet
said, sir knight now ye need not to take any care for any of the knights of
this castle for your coming hither, and without ye have fere of a woman, sit
down by my lady and make your own peace therwt Gouernar sat ^own and enbraced
and desired the lady yt she would pardon him, and so she did, and than Gouernar
all smylyng cast forth many pretty and goodly words, and ever he found the lady
gentyl and sweet of her answers Than Powcet said, sister Eglentine my lady me
thinks is me^y now, I ^^ow she care not for us, let us go watch in ye next
chaumbre, for I think she would feign be a bed, and so they went their way,
and the lady called them again, but that was very softely, for it was with a
dead voice. And than anon powcet h^rd the curteyns drawn about the bed, and
she knew well there were no mo creatures but the lady and the knight together
Than Gonernar began a little so speak fair, as these lovers do^he when they
would have their desires, and at the last he did ^o much that they were agreed
to lie together, and so to bed they went, and there they took such pastaun^e
together as these lovers are wont to do wha^ they be in like case. And than
Gouernar demanded of the lady why she had done him so much vylany as in that
she would not speak to him in her palace In the name of god said the lady the
cause was for my lord comau^ded me so to do, and I durst not dysplease him, how
be it that grieved me right ^ore so to do. Well madame* it is often s^ene that
too much restrainyng is not good, but as in this case he yt has the damage let
him weep hardely, and so he enbraced and kissed the lady, and thus they were
together til i^ was nere hand day. Tha^ the lady said sir knight I require you
render unto my lord the vilany that he has done to us, in such wise yt ye
^ust to morrow agenst him, and let him feel and know how that ye be dyspleased.
By the mother of god said Gouernar so shall I do, I warant ye shall se him fly
to the earth. Tha^ the lady began to laughe. Than Powcet came to the beds side
and sayde^ madame is all the ill will any thing mynysshed, is all this warte
now failed, I believe that the peace be made, I trow ye have made amends this
night to the knight. By the good lord said the lady Powcet ye play always the
fool, Up sy^ knight said Powcet, for it is time for you to rise. Than Gouernar
rose and app^^ayled him. Than the countess said, ^ie y^sterday ye did give a
way your horse for my sake, wherefore I will give you again as good a gift,
Powcet bring me hither yonder little casket that ^ieth o^ my press, and when
she had it she said hold sir knight I give this casket to you and all that
is therein. Madame said Gouernar by the leave of God I will not take it, for I
thank god I am rich enough, ^ have so valiant a master that he will give me
goods su^fi^yent. By the faith yt I owe to god said the lady though ye were a
king yet I give it unto you, and without that ye take i^ I ensure you I will
never speak to you more while I live. I give it to you freely but for a
remembrance for ^he love that I have in you, and to ^ie you therewith a ^ewe
horse, aad I require you to morrow (...) with my lord as ye have promised me
Madame by the faith that I owe unto you said he I ensure you I shall make him
reuerse from his horse. Than ye lady and Powcet did smyle, and so than
departed Gouernar fro them, and took the casket with him, the which was full of
coined gold, and as than all the watchmen were a sleep, for than it was at the
point of day.

How that Gouernar did beat down at the tourney the earl of the isle perdue.
Cap. lxviii
THus wha^ Gouernar was departed fro the con^tesse he came to his own lodginge
and there he found Iacket his squire slepynge on a form before the fyre^ and
so he awoke him. And when ^acket saw him his her^e trembled because of his
soda^n^ wakyng and said. This is a fair tarying. I ^^owe for a wyseman to come
now to his lodg^ng, and th^n he did lygh^ up a torche and there in the chamber
Gouerna^ did open his casket, wher^in there was of gold and Iewelles beyond
two thousand pound. And when Iacket saw it his heart was afraid and sayd^
Sir I think ye houe to b^^ed some abb^ye. beware ye b^ not hanged to morrow. A
^aket friend said Gouernar hold thy peace hold here.C.C pound and ^oke that I
have to morrow a good horse^ and give all the remnaunt of the money to poor
people. Ye said Iacket ye be very liberal of other men's g^ddes, for I trow
all this cost you nothynge^ ye be a large g^uer of alms. I think it were
better that ye caused the abbeye to be covered with led fro whence ye stale
this money, but so than as son^ as it was fair day Iacket went into the
market place and there he found his own masters horse to be soulde, and
there he boughte him for an hundredth pound, and so brought him to Gouernar
who was ^yghte glad of him, and after that none of that day was paste,
harowdes did cry in eue^y street, knights lepe upon your horses, and get y^u
shortly to the fi^lde. Than horns, bussynes, tabourynes, trompettes and
claryons began to sown maruaylouslye. Than knights q^ickelye did arm them,
and than the gates of the castle were set open, and the earl did issue out
with a great company of knights with him, and came into the place where as the
turney should be and by that time Gouernar was armed and mounted upon his horse,
and he was greatly beho^^en that journey of every body for h^ was a right
fair knighte in harneys. Than the countess and oth^^ la^yes and damoiselles
were mounted on the castle wailes to behold the t^urn^y the which was in a
fair grene right under the castle wall, than Powce^ and Eglenti^e saw where
as Gouernar came riding toward the tourney in a narow^ lane. Madame quod Powcet
behold yonder knyg^te, by semynge he should b^ some noble man. Truly said the
la^y he is the most semelyest knighte in all ye tow^e. Madame said Powcet I
t^inke ye would his honor and profyt By the good lord said the lady I would he
^er^ a king. Than anon in the field the parts were disseuered, and Gouern^r
wa^ ag^nst ye earl, than herawd^s cried knights do your best. Than b^gan the
the tour^ey right hand and sharp. and Gouerne^ aduysed well the earl and ran at
him right ^udely, and the e^le st^ake him so sor^ that he made him somewhat
bow on his horse, but Gouernar struck him and met him with his body so
rudely yt he made him avoid his horse and the legs upward. Than Iacket took
the earls horse and brought him to the countess for a present. And when the
ladies saw where the earl did fall, than Eglentyne said, a yonder is one with
his fete upward. That is true said P^wcet that is my lord the earl, behold
how he shakes his legs. well said the countess me thinks yonder knight
holds my lord very short. Madame said Powcet he acquyreth him of his
promise. Thus Gouernar held the earl so short yt he was feign to yield him
whether he would or not. Than all the earls company came al at ones on
Gouernar, but he was strong and light, and gave so great strokes and heavy
that he confounded all that ever he att^yned unto, and at the bronte he
unhorsed moo than.viii. knights. And when Iacket had made his present unto the
countess who thanked him much, than he returned again unto his master, and
so he had enough to do ever to carry the horses of them that his master had
overthrown to the bu^geyse who was his masters host. Than Gouernar aduysed
well where there was together a great flock of knights than Gouernar dashed
among them so rudely that at his first co^ynge he ouerthrewe two knights
together, and so within a short space he departed the knights asonder and
gave such strokes all about him yt every man ^ledde before him, and a^l the
ladies saw him do meruayles with his hands, and they maruayled how that ever
he could endure such pain with his body, and than as he returned fro that
company he m^tte again the earl who as than was remounted, than Gouer dashed
into the prese^yll that he came straight where as the earl was, who as than
handled right sharply a knight of the part that Gouernar was of, than
Gou^rnar dressed him to the earl and enbraced ^ym by the shouldres and dashed
his horse with his spurs, and ouerthrewe both the earl to the ground and
also the knight that the earl ^ought wythall, and there he made the earl to
yield him again. And when the countess saw that she smyled right swetely and
said. Powcet friend yonder knight has beten down two at ones, blessed be his
virtue, he is now well avenged of the earl my hu^bonde, who would not suffreme
to speak with him. Than the earls company set on Gouernar, but he defended him
self right maruaylously, but they oppressed him so sore that his horse
enfoundred under him, and than Gouernar vygorously lepte on his fete, and there
he aduysed the earls senesshall, who had at that time ^yght sore anoyed him*
and he was well mounted upon a good black morell horse, than Gouernar lepte up
to him and took him about the neck with his hands and pulled him ^o sore
that he made him to avoid the saddell whether he would or not, and so fell
to the ground, than Gouernar took his horse and quyckely lepte up into the
saddell, and in a great ire das^t into the prese, and gave so mighty strokes
that he made all to flee before him, and by that time the earl was remounted
again, and the third time he came behind Gouernar and enbraced him with both
his hands to the intent to have lyfted him out of his saddell, but he could
no more remeue him than though he had lyfted at a great toure. Than Gouernar
turned him to the earl and took him by the head and pulled him down to his
horse mane and gave him so many strokes that he all to bruised him, wherwyth he
fell down to the earth in such plyte that he could not remeue for all the
good of the world than there fell on him all the earls company, and by that
time the earls senesshall was remounted, and so he came to Gouernar, and wha^
he same him do such deeds of hye prowess he praised him much in his heart,
and thought to tournay no more that day against him but said, sir knight be ye
in certain yt as many horses as fail you this day I shall puruey you ever of
an other. Than Gouernar dashed into the prese, and round about him he laid on
their heads and vysages that he made them to blede like beestes, and at the
last his horse failed him and than the earls senesshall brought to him an
other horse. And when he was remou^ted he struck in as fresshely among them as
though he had done no thing of all that day before. and than he did so much
by his prowess that every man gave him place and departed and left him in the
field all alone. Tha^ the earl was borne into the castle in a horse ^ytter,
for he was sore bruised, and his senesshall came to Gouer^ar and desired him
much to go to the castle, but Gouernar would not, but said what should I do
th^re, I know not what manner of people ye be, for among you ye dayne not to
speak to any strange knight. Tha^ the senesshall wist well that h^ said that
by the countess, wherefore he blamed much the earl in his heart, in that he
had commanded her so to do. So th^n G^uernar returned to the burgeyse his
host who made him right great chere and feast, and the knights and burgeyses
of the to^ne came thither to se him, and said one to an other, behold here
the valyau^t knight. Gouernar had won that day.xv good horses, than h^
vnarm^d him, for he was somewhat weary of his travail. And wha^ the earl was in
his castle he commanded that the gates should be set open, and that every man
should come in who so ever would, and than he was unarmed and the countess
his wife came to him and demanded how^ he did. And he answered and said how
that he was sore bruised. A sir sa^d she and who has done that, I am right sorry
therefore. Truly said he thus has arrayed me the same knight that gave yesterday
his horse to my porter to thentent to se you Sir said she I believe it well, for
I think he was dyspleased with you because that ye forba^e me that I should not
speak to him, I think he remembered yt to day, wherefore it is good to be well
ware to whom a man does a dyspleasure. Than the earl came into the hall where
as all the other knights were, and there they were talkyng and enquiring each
of other what knight had done best that day, and so they all did give the
praise to Gouernar. In ye name of god said the earl he has bet^n me down^ three
times this same day, th^r^fore I r^quyre you get^ him hyth^^ to me, for I
shall acqueynt me with him, for I will give him the one hal^e of all my lands
on the condycyon that he will abide and dwell with me C^rtaynly sir said his
se^esshall and on that condycyon I will give him yearly a thousand pound for
according to the troth he is a right good knight. Than the ^rle commanded his
sen^sshall to go for him, and so he did, and found him at his hosts house, who
made him right great ^here and honor. And than the senesshall said, sir the
earl hertely desires you to come and speak with him in the castle, and sir
for gods sake abide and dwell with him, and he will give you the one half of
his lands, and I shall give you a thousand pound yerelye, and keep you true
and fayth^ull company, and thus talkyng they went, forth together toward the
castle, and as soon as the earl saw him he rose up on his ^ete and so did all
the other knights, and did him much honor, and the earl caused Gouernar
so sit down by him. Than these tidings ran anon into the countess chamber
how that the good knight was come, than the ladies had great delight to se him.
Than Powcet said, madame I thynk this knight pleseth you right well, therefore
let us go se him. Certainly said the countess with a right goo^ will, so than
they went into the hall, than the earl and Gouernar did rise and right
courteysly did salute the lady. Tha^ the countess said to Gouernar sir ye
should not salute me, for I have done you more vylanye than ever did lady to
any knight without trespass. Madame said he it is no trespass for so hye a lady
as ye are to take her pleasure of so simple a knight as I am. Than ye earl
said, sir ye have this day beten me fro my horse, the which never as yet
knight did before, wherefore I owe unto you a great ransom. Sir said
Gouernar saving your grace I am not of such virtue nor of such valor as to
do so hie a chyualry as y^ speak of. well sir said the earl I know well how it
is, but sir I require you be of my house, and ye shall be chief co^maunder
thereof, for I will ye what so ever ye command shall be done* Sir said Gouernar
I humbly thank you, how be it I can not accomplysshe your desire, and the
more the earl desired him, the more he said nay. Than ye earl said to the
countess, madame I pray you desire him, and so she did right swetely, how
be it she was not greatly bound to do so much at her husbands desire, but
Gouernar wisely excused him and said. Fair lady it can not be, for I have a
lord already who must needs be served of me and of other far better knights
then I am. Certainly sir said the senesshal if there be more prowess in him
than is in you, he surmounteth than all the knights of ye world. C^rtainly
si^ said Gouernar he is able to cast such vi. as I am into the river. Truly
said the earl, tha^ do ye well to serve him faithfully, wherefore I will
require you no ferder, how be it that forthynketh me. Than ye countess was
right sore displesed because he would not abide. Than ye souper was ready and
water was bro^ght forth, and so they sat down and were well served. After
souper Gouernar took ly^ence of the earl and of the counetsse, and of all other
knights, and than torches were lyghted up, and the senes^hal conuayed him to
his hosts house, and the earl commanded that his host should take nothing of
him for his dispense, than Gouernar took his leave, and the next morning
betimes departed, and commanded his host to god, and gave him all the horses
that he had won in the tourney, and the burgei^es thanked him hertely and
said In all places where as Alexand^r ye great did conque^e ye may go without
ieoperdy and do as much as ever he did. And so Gouernar entered into his way,
and rode to seek his lord Arthur. Now let us leave spekyng of Gouernar, and let
us return to Arthur and to the king of orqueney.

How that after Arthur was departed fro Argenton to go to the castle of
hurtbyse to the wounded knight who had sent for him, in his way at the last he
found at the entryng of a fair forest three ladies of right excellent beauty,
of whom the chief was called Proserpin queen of the fayry who greatly desired
Arthur of his love, but in no wise he would agree there to, and there he lost his
varlet that was his guide, wherefore it behooved him to tarry there all that
night, for it was dark and wist not whyther to go. Cap. lxix.
SO it was that when the king of orqueneye was (...) f^o argenton he rode
straight into his own country for to make redi his people to go at
Bartylmewtide to the turney at Cornite, and duke Philip went to sabary to
apparaile his people and sir Neuelon, sir An^ean, sir Artaude and all the other
knights of king Emendus returned to the kings court, and there recounted
the hye prowess of Arthur, and how he had spe^ at Argenton with the duke of
bygors neuew, and how that ye wounded knight of the castle of hurtbise had sent
for him, and how that he was gone thither. Than the king was sorry in his heart,
for he had great fere of him lest that he should never return again for he
knew well that many good knights were perished there. And in especyall Florence
was right sorrowful, for there was none yt could reco^fort her. And Arthur ever
rode forth after the squier, and so rode.iii. days together without finding of
any adventure, and the.iiii. day he rode till it was none, and than they aryued
at a knights place who was uncle to the squire that was Arthurs guide, and
there they were well received, and so sat down to dinner and were well served. And
when they had dined than they mounted on their horses again, and so rode
forth till it was night, and than they entered into a little narow way between a
fair forest and a grene meadow, and so they rode forth well ye space of half a
mile, and ye moan began to shine fair and bright, and at the last they came to
a way yt they must needs enter into the thick of the forest, and at last
Arthur espied under a fair oak a delectable place, where as he saw.iii, fair
ladies maruelously white and of gre^ beauty, but she yt was in ye mids was
sovereign most fair, for she al only had more beauty than both the other.ii.
and yet they were as fair as could be devised. And when Arthur had espied
them, he set his fete to ye earth and lighted fro his horse, and she that was
in the mids rose when the other two were up, and there Arthur saluted the^
right curteisly, and they him again, and the squier that brought Arthur
thither, took one of the ladies in counsel, and wha^ they had talked together
a good space they went into ye thick of the wood, they.ii. together alone, and
were not seen again o^ all the night, and the other that was in mids had to
name Proserpin, and she took Arthur and set him down by her and held him by
the hand, and beheld him faithfully in the vysage, and said* sir ye be right
hertely welcome. And he answered and said, madame I pray god keep you fro all
ill. Sir said Proserpyne I have great desire to se and speak with you, if ye
be he that has conquered the battle agenst the duke of bygors neuewe. Madame
as god help me said Arthur I would full feign yt there were such valor in me
as that I might acheue such a deed. well said Proserpyne, I know right well
how it is, and also of other of your deeds, and sir ye be in certain that
right great renown renneth on you how that ye be free, sweet, fair, and
gracyous, and to be a good knight above all other, and as for beauty I se well
how it is. well madame said Arthur I pray god amend in me that lacks of
that ye speak of. That is well said quod ye lady than she laid her hand on his
head and demanded of him what was his name Ma^ame quod he I am called Arthur.
Arthur said she, now and by the faith yt ye owe to her that ye love bent, and
to saint George have ye any lover yet, I am sure my demand is but a folly f^r
so fair a knight, so young, and so va^iant in arms as ye can not be without
a lover, wherefore I am in certain ye have one but I pray you show me what she
is by the faith yt ye owe unto her, and I promise you never to accu^e you, and
therewith she beheld him and smyled a little and said, I pray you speak and show
me ye playnes by the troth that ye owe to father and mother if ye have any
alive. Madam said Arthur, ye co^iure me right sore, therefore as god help me I
shall ^^ew you ye troth Madam it is so I can not tell whether yt I have a lover
or not, but of one thing be ye sure I am a lover, for I love with all mine
entyer heir. And what is she quod the lady I pray you by the faith yt ye owe
unto her. As god help me said he I cannot tell you, for I n^uer saw the person
yt I loue^ what said the lady^ tha^ ye love and wot not who, who has set you
on this folly, wherefore love ye thus. Mada^ quod he I love because of the great
goodness and valor yt is in her, for she is a sweet gra^ious and a gentil lady
of heart. why sir knight how know ye y^. Madam it has beshewed me yt she is of
such condycions. well quod the lady, what and there have beshewed you more tha^
troth in yt behalf, who than shall do you right, I demand of you think you yt
all that is said of me and other to be of t^^t^. Certainli mada^ nay some list
parauentur at sometime to speak more than they know* well friend Arthur quod she
tha^ ye be but a fool, by my counsel leave such folly, and lose no le^g^r your
time without reason, ye be now in your youth, and in you^ beuti wherefore ye should
have daily your love in you^ arms, and led a lovers life in mirth and in
solace and wha^ it is time to stryke for her sake b^th with ^pe^es and swords,
and cast d^une these knights to the earth by.ii. at ones: and leave serving thus
of the muse or else ye shall be called no more Arthur, but ye shall be called ye
knight that museth, therefore leave this love, but behold here and se in your
c^pany if there be any thing that pleseth you, chose which ye will, the squier
that brought you hither museth not, for he is with his love, and has her all this
night in his arms behold here the copany of me who is right fair and young.
gentyl and puissant, holding in mi hand great heritage* and I am daughter to a
king^ and both my father and mother dead an^ now I am entered into my land to
keep my relme which is great and noble I am also right young about the age of
xvi. years, and would love right well some g^ntil knigh^ that would help me to
keep my land and relme, and to c^unsayle me for my well in all my business such
one would I love and keep entirely. Arthur (...) need not to be deceived by
your love loving of the muse and take me here in deed. And when Arthur herd
her, he b^held her well, and with a great p^rfound sygh said. A dear lady as god
help m^ my heart is set on her that I showed you ^f with a^ ^y faithful love
and thought in such wise that I am not master of my self, nor my heart is
not mine own for it has forsaken me for this said ladi so yt I ^m nothing lord
of min own heart nor with al, the power yt I have I cannot withdraw it fro her,
for I think verily yt she has put my heart into her heart therefore I ^aue good
hope yt the^ shall be good companyons and faithful together seyng^ yt it will not
come again to me and love his sweet companyo^, therefore fair lady blame me
not though ye love me that I do not acco^plysshe your desire, for as god help
me I can not, for my heart is not mine own, therefore madame blame me not sith
my heart has forsaken me for an other, but as I be saved ye be full ge^til and
noble, and right happy shall he be that shall attain to your gra^e, for your
beauty is such yt every person y^ sees you will put to their pain to seek the
ways to attain to your hye love, for by the faith yt I owe to my lord and
father I had rather have your love of it might be than to be king of all
France, but by my soul madame ye may behold he^e my body without heart, vine
without savor, a fair body wt^u^ love avails nothing. well friend Arthur
quod Proserpyn many there be that fyndeth fautes and will s^ke for no remedy you
lay the blame on your heart, such folks as will not do as they be required ca^
find fables enough to find occasion of excuses, ye have long mused, and yet
ye purpose to muse l^^ger, hardely love enough and love th^re yt your dreme
and fantasy shows you^ and thereby ye shall have very much Joy by lyk^lehode,
for your musyng will do you much honor, by the faith that I owe to you I love
my lover faithfully, and I say it by yo^, behold here Arthur who dr^meth and
museth, behold here the shadow without the son light, behold here the body
without heart, this is he that loves and woteth not who^, therefore he is feeted
of none, therefore friend Arthur take to you the best counsel yt ye ca^ and god
be with you. Than she rose fro him and departed into the wood and her company
with her. Tha^ Arthur abode there alone but with Bawdwyn his squire, for the
squire yt brought him thither was departed, therefore he wiste not whether to
goo. Than Bawdewyn said, sir as god help me ye ouzt to be blamed. And why so
good friend said Arthur. Sir because this gentle noble queen that was right
now with you who is so fair so sweet and so gracyous and she would feign have
had your company and love, and thus ye to let her depart and would not enbrace
and kiss swetely her pleasant little mouth, wherefore in my mind ye are
greatly to be blamed for as help me god I would not hau done so though I had
lost my head in the pain. A good friend said Arthur, and what there tha^ should
the sweet Florence have, and what ^^ul^e she set by me if I should do as much
to another as I should do to her if it pl^ased her, what would ye have me to
make of my mouth a train for every body, if she keep her mouth^ close for the
love of me, and I than to habandon me to all the world, what honor than were
it to me to be common to all the world, what should it than be said on me, he is
but a rybaude. well sir said Bawdewyn, for all that I could not have done so.
Thus they m^unted on their horses and entered into the wode, and rode they wist
not whither so long till at the last they lost their ware, that they rode they
wist not whyther, and at conclusyon they came a^ayne to the same oak from whens
as they went^ before, and th^re they tarried all that night and lay on the
cold earth in the thycke busshe, and tied their horses to a tree.

How Arthur conquered the ca^^el of hur^^yse the most strong place of the
worl^ ne^t to the port noyre, where as was ^he damosel by whom the wounded
knight was hurt, and ther^ Arthur did so mu^he by ^ys prowess that the said
knyg^t rec^uered health. Cap. lxx.
IN ye morning b^times Arthur and Bawdwin ro^e and shoke their ^ares to put
away the feathers fro their heir and so mounted on horses and found a little
way the which brought the^ clean out of the forest. Tha^ A^thur was right sore
disple^ed in his mind because he had lost the squi^^ yt was his guid^ in ye
man^r, for he knew not where to fy^d him the hurt knight, and so they rode
forth so long till they e^tred into a fair meadow, and than they saw ^n a fair
his mou^tain standing a goodly castle ye which was closed with double walls
and gates, and at the first gate the^e was one that watched the passage for all
comers, and as soon as he saw A^thur, he took a horn and blew therein so
fiersly that all the valey ronge therewt and therewith there issued out of ye
c^stel a knight all armed and well mounted, and h^ made toke^ to A^thur tha^ he
should beware of him. Than Arthur took his shield and fl^risshed with his spear
and met so rudely together that the knighte brake his spear* and Arthur st^ake
him so that his sp^re w^nt through ou^ his body more tha^ a foot, and so pulled
out his spear again and dressed him self agenst an other knigh^ that came
rudely at him and he struck Arthur in such wite that his spear brake in the
mids, but Arthur st^ake him so fiercely that he overthrew both horse and man
to ^he ^rth stark dead. Than there issued out of the castle v. knights, and
they all ran ^n Arthur at ones, and Arthur tha^ took his sword and struck so
the first that he claue his head clean asonder, and the other dy^d^ kyl his
horse under him, but than (...) his hand on the horse of him that he had slay^^
before and so lept into the sadd^l, and the just tha^ he encountered lost his
head. And when the other saw that they f^ed away as fast as they might, and
Arthur followed th^ym, and in his pu^su^ he slew two of them, and as the ^^^t
wol^ have entered in at the castle gate, A^thur struck of his head clean from
the sholders Than h^ entered into the castel^ and there he saw before him an
other st^ong wall and it was ^o hye that it was me^uayl and it was ^nuyroned al
about with and great deep wa^er that yssu^d ^ute of loudrye fountaynes, and
as he beheld how that he might ^uere into the place there came to ^ym the
some squire that caused him to come fro Argence, and he did salute him. And
when Arthur saw him he knew him right well and demanded of him the cause
why that he left him in the for^st. As god help me sir my lady led me forth and
I ^u^st not displese her. well said Arthur, and where is the knight that ye sa^
has sent for me Sir quod the squire he is in a chamber in this cas^el, where
as I think he shall never se to morrow this ^yme, for sir ye tarry fro him over
long which is g^^at sin. Friend said Arthur I pray you bring me: where as he
is yt I might sp^ke with him. Than the squire br^ughte him to the knight and
Arthur did salute him And the knight ^igh^ piteously and w^^h a ^oft voice
said, sir ye be hertely wel^om Sir said Arthur ye have sent for me, behold
^owe here I am, therefore show me your will. Than the knight enforced him
self to speak and said, sir for gods sake be ye not dyspleased though ye be
come hither for my sake, for sir the seek creature seeks ever for health and to
ye intent that ye shall be in certain of my sekenes if ye be not dyspleased I
shall show you all my grefe. Than the knight unarmed himself and laid his
body all naked Tha^ Arthur saw on his back.v. great wou^des made with a knyfe
yt was enuenymed, and the^ began at his sholdres and enduted down to his
thyghes, and the wou^des were sore ra^kled and of such largenes that he might
well have laid in every wound all his arm. And wha^ Arthur saw that his
heart trembled for pity and demanded who had g^ue^ hi^ ntho strokes. Certainly
sir said the knight I shall show you it is of a trouhe I loved right hertely
a fair damoysell who is right noble and gentyl, and she me in like case, and
when I might I did resort unto her, and she is in a chamber above in this
castle, and at the last this love that was between us was known by her
friends, wherwyth they were right sore dyspleased and so lay in a wait on me
at a season yt I was with her, and as I would have departed they took me and have
arrayed me as ye se with enuenymed knives so that I can have no hel^h and the
damoysell is fast kept^ in prison in a chamber here above to thentent that she
should not come to me to give me health for she can do me more good than all
the creatures of the world, and if I might have any creature that might find
the means to speak with her she would send me such oyntementes that should
make me both hole and sound. And sir the.vii. knights that ye have delivered
me of did keep the gates to the intent that no surgyen should come hither to
hele me, sir I have been four year in this sore tourment that ye se me in, and
there is no^n in all this place that would bring me such things as my lady
and love would send me, and they will suffrenone to speak with her fro me, and
therefore I must needs dye well sir said Arthur and how should onye body enter
into the castle sith the gates be shytte. Sir said the knight there is none
that can enter at the gares for they be over strong, but sir in the castle
diche there is a little ship by the which the knights that ye have slain
were wo^t to enter into the castle, and by the ship there is a little false
gate, whereby ye may entr^ into the castle if it please you, and so ye may
bring fro my lady the oyntme^t that shall help me. Sir said Arthur I shall do
my power, and tha^ he said to the squye^ Friend bring me to the ship and I
will enter into the castle. Than the squire brought him to the ship, and
Arthur entered into it, and tha^ the ship went forth without any manner of
touching, and A^thur was not gone far from the bank but there came flyenge
about him moo than.iii. M. quarelles shot out of crosbowes, and Arthur sat
in the ship and covered him with his white shield, and the quarelles did light
as thycke thereon as thought it had rayned, in such wise that all the ship
was rased with quarelles, and in this manner he approached to the posterne, and
when he came to the enter he found styckynge round about the gate great
long sharp speres with heedes of fine stele, than he took his good sword in
his hand and laid on these speres as fast as he could, and so did cut them
clean asonder in the mids, and there he did so much that by clean fore he
entered in at the posterne, and when he was within there rose such a wind that
Arthur had much pain to hold him on his fete, and than there fell so great
haboundaunce of rain that he stood to the mydde leg in wa^er, the which
water ran so fast that he was feign to stay him by his spe^e, for what for
the wynd and swyf^eues of the water, he had m^che pain to stand vpryghte, and
at the last and with grettrauayl he did so much that he issued out of the
straymes of the posterue, and than he herd a thing make a great noise in the
castle, and therwt there came on him at ones mo than.v. hundred persons re^y
to fight against him, and so they assailed him rudely on al parts and they did
cast at him speres stones, darts and staves ^ight great plenty, and he gave
again ^yght great ^trokes and frusshed down all that ever he attained unto,
how be it ye prese was so gre^ that they caused him to knele down on his knees,
and there quickery he stepte up again and dashed in among them, and was right
sore chafed, and his str^ngth than began to increase, and the more he had to ^o
the more grew his strength, and so he cut asonder all that ever he attained
unto, and so by clean force he drew his back back to a wall and there rested
him. Tha^ his enemies ran to crosdowes and to spears, and so charged him with
many great strokes. And when he felt hymse^fe so sore oppressed he was sore
chafed therwt and so habandoned himself among the^ and gane great strokes, for
whom so ever he touched, he claue him to the sholders, and than they began to
fly before him, and he followed them, but he was ^ight sore wety, for they
behynd him did him much pain and travail, in thy^ case thus fightyng he was
fro three of y^ c^^^k till it was none, and three ^^mes he was driven down on his
knees, and yet for all that ever he rose again to the spyte of them all. And as
he was thus fighting at the last he herd the sown of a gr^^ horn above in
the castle, and as soon as all tho that fought against Arthur herd the blaste
of the horn, they all suddenly departed without any word speaking, and so
there remained but a lonely Arthur whereof he had great maruayle, than Arthur
dressed him toward the castle, and entered into it, and so at y^ last he entered
into the fair halles, and there found neither man nor woman, and than be
setched al about the place, but he could find no^ creature. At the last he
entered into a fair tyche chaumbre, and there he saw the most fair and rychest
bed that ever was seen, and it was al redymade to lie down therein, than he
approached the ^roand sat down on the side thereof and his sword in his hand,
and than he herd well mo the people coming and going in y^ same chamber, and
her^ doors and windows open and shette but he could se nothing whereof he had
great maruayle. And when he had sytten a good space on the ^edde and well
rested him, at the last he saw where there came into the chamber a great
company of ladies and damsels and knights and squiers, and in y^ myd^es
among them he saw where there was a young fair queen crowned with gold in a
syrcore of crmynes, and a man (...) of vyolet sylke, and she was of right great
beauty, and f^ure knights led her and she was enuytoned all about^ with
other fair ladies. And as soon as he saw her he knew well that she was
Proserpyn the queen whom y^ he found in the forest the night before, and than
he rose upon his fete than y^ queen came runnynge too him and enbraced him
a^oute the neck and said. Sir ye are rygh^e hertely welcome into my house.
Fair lady quod Arthur I pray to god give you both health and much Joy.
Arthur said the queen now are ye past al Ieopardies, for now that ye be i^ my
company ye be in a sur^te, therefore put of your harneys for ye shall be in as
good surete as mine own propre body. Madame quod Arthur I thank you, how be it
I have not as yet acheued that thing as I came hither for, for here is bynethe
in this castle a seek knight who has se^^ me hither to a damoysel that should
give him health, and I have promys^d to bring him that she would deliver me
for his health, therefore madame I require you if she ^e here in your company
cause me to speak with her if it please ^ou, ^ thereby I shall acco^plysshe my
cou^nau^t to the knight. Friend quod the ladi be ye no more ^ismayed of the
knight, for I promise you he shall have h^lth for your sake, and that right
shortly. Than the queen called to her a lady, who was called Argent, and tha^
she said to Arthur, sir behold here y^ same lady y^ ^he knight was hurt for
and it is she that can give hi^ health therefore A^ge^ce I will that ye go to your
knight, and think on his health as a lover ought to do to another. Madame quod
Arge^ce with a right good will, and as to you sir knight I thank you a
ho^dred.M. times sith that I have leave to go^ to my lover for you^e sake, and
sir ye have wo^ne thereby of him to be to you a true and a fayhfull knight, and
of me ye shall have a true servant, therewith she departed, and Proserp^ne
commanded y^ Arthur should be unarmed, than ther^ r^n ab^ute Arthur knights
and ladies, and one took away his sh^lde, an other his sw^rde, an other his
^elme, and so each of them laid to their ha^^es to he^pe him, and w^a^ he was
unarmed he stood in his doublet, and tha^ the ladies brought him wa^me water to
wasshe his neck and his vysage and ha^ddes, and tha^ the fair ladies did wype
his vysage with fair white ketchefes. Than Bawdewyn came and brought him his
gown to put on but y^ queen would not suffer y^ for she made him to put on a
grene kyr^ell and a syrcote of scarlet than the queen took her own mantel fro
he^ neck the which was of purple s^lke and put it on Arthur, tha^ he was so
fair and gentill that one could not be satysfyed with beholdynge of him, for
all the ladies than said how that the knight was a gracyous person great joy
should y^ lady have that might have such a lou^r as he was. Than the queen
took him by the hand the which was a right goodly sight to behold, for they
were both fair and young, and thus hand in hand they w^nte throughout the
chamber, talkyng of many things, and when they had thus talked together a
great space the queen commanded every body to depart, and to leave them
alone togyth^r, and so they did. And than the queen took him by the hand and
said. Arthur let us goo sit down on yonder beds side, and so they did, and
by that time the chamber was cl^aue avoided saving all only of Bawdewin who
said unto his master, sir I think it best y^ I go and see your harnes and
amend it, for it is ill bruised, and it is hard to tell wheth^r ye shall have
any thing to do shortly or not. And when Arthur heard him he wist full well what
he meant and therefore he smyled, and so Bawdewyn departed. T^a^ the queen said
to Arthur, min own sweet and true love I am now well pacyfied in my heart now
y^ I have you in my house as of him in all the woorlde that I most desire to
se and speak withall^ and therewith she ^ayde one of her arms about her
neck, and with the other hand she did stryke down his here and said, Arthur
ye be come to y^ plae where as ye be much loved with a faithful heart wherefore ye
shall be lord and go^e manner of al y^ land yt I have in goue^nauce whe^fore I
will make you my knight and souerain lover by y^ way of marriage, and first I
present my se^fe to you and all the power yt I am lady over, and ^ ensure there
was never man as yet there as you ^e now, therefore refuse not the honor and
prof^te that I offer you the she took a ryng fro he finger and said by this
gift I put you in rul possession of me and al mine, therefore genti^ knighte I
require you rec^iue it. And when Arthur herd her thus speak and saw the ring,
tha^ he beheld well the lady and saw the gentilnes and faitenes y^ was in her,
and fe^te her sweet breath and saw her smyling counte^nau^ce, at the last his
heart came to him and remebred Florence, the^ he ^^ld not keep him fr^ weping,
and cast out many a per^ound and deep sigh, and beheld well proserpin and said.
A gentil and noble lady your amorous words perseth my heart so yt I feel my
self at the g^etest mischief that ever did any c^ea^^^e for if I were ye most
hie and noble king that ^uer was sith Alexander the great, and if I had learned
in love all the days of my life and at the end might attain to that case that
I am in now. I should well think my pain and labor right we^l enployed and
hyely rewarded, for if all the kings of ye world were al in one person and al
their goods and honors and al parts there^f were gathered together into one
person, and if it plesed you to take him to your seruic^ he should well think him
self ^ight hi^ly and derely governed but madame I am but a simple person to be
compa^ed to your hie estate, therefore ye shol^e abate greatly your renown if ye
should take such a strange knight as I am, wherefore ye should be blamed much
of your people, wherefore madam for gods sake advise you better, and let this
pass over, and take such a noble person as is mete for your estate and honor.
Sir abque; the lady I quite all the world for you, for I will no^ other but al
lonely you, therefore receive me for I will it shall be so and none otherwy^e, and
if ye will defend your opinion by her that ye told me of this last night in the
forest, ye can not do so by reason, for ye never saw her, nor she you, nor
never spoke with her, therefore there is no couenaunte made between you and her
but that lawfully ye may leave her and ye list, therefore ye can not excuse you
to do this my de^yre. without it be for cowardi^e that ye have to enterprise the
governance of a realm And when Arthur had well understand her, he answered and
said, mada^ as god help me I told you the troth as it is, and I would be glad
to do that thing that should plese you, how be it of one thing be y^ in
certain that I have set my heart there as I have showed you, se^ that I can
never call it again, ye may behold he^e my body, taken and it please you, but
my he^t remains in an other place with her who has it in keeping. Than the^e
was a lady came to the queen and showed her that her dinner was ready. And than
she said, sir knight thynk well ^n this matter, I give you respyce till to
morrow, end so she took Arthur by the hand and led him into the hall, and there
he saw so many bordes cou^red, and so g^eate plenty ^f ladies and damoselles
and knights and squyer^, that he had great maruayl to behold the noblenes that
he saw there. Than the queen said alowd that every body might here her, sir
lords and ladies behold this knight who shall be lord and captain of al my
seygnory. And wha^ they herd that they cried all with one voke he is welcome god
keep him, blessed be the hour yt ever he came hither, and they all beheld him
maruaylously, and praised much his fresshe beauty and goodly bemenour. Than
there began great feast and Joy with much honorable tryumphe, and so we^e set
to dinner and served right honorably, and after dinner they sported them a
long season, and at last the queen called to her two of her ladies the fairest
of all the company and commanded them yt they should led Arthur a playenge and
that they should show to him such chere to cause him to love one of them if
they could bring it about. And they answered they would do the best yt lay in
their power, so they.ii. led forth Arthur in to fair chambres and gardyns of
pleasure, and they did as much to draw him to love one of them, as ever did
woman to draw onye man to love, for their delynge with him was ^uche that it
would have ^e^ hard for any other creature to have wtstand their occasyo^s for
if a woman be minded to cast for he her hokes and lines to take any man the^wt
it is very hard to escape ^ut of their dau^ger^ for in such a deed a woman is
more subtle than the devil, for he causes a woman of such dy^posycyon to do
that thing yt he can not do him self, in like wise this queen commanded
these ladies to do y^ she could not do her self, but Arthur for all their
pleasant occasyons would never bend for all yt they did or said was very
no^ous to him for alway^e he had in his heart the remembrance of the fa^re
Florence, and so in this case he was between them till it was time to go to rest
Than he was conuayed to his chamber with.xi. knights, and a great multitude or
torches against his coming, the queen also was ready in his chamber, and than with
in a little while after the ^pyces and wine had b^n eten and dronken, than the
qu^ne and al other took their l^ue of Arthur ^ departed out of his chamber, and
than he went to his bed, and there was drennynge al night before his beds
fere.iiii. mortes of wax and wha^ every body was a bed there came to Arthurs
bed side a fair damoys^ll s^nt to him fro the queen, and she was in a syrcote
of ermynes, and over y^ a rich mantell of sylke, and so she lened down on the
bed to Arthur, and with her hand stryked down his head right swetely, and
there she made him such lowly cou^tenau^ce y^ he might perceive well how she
would hau^ had him to have taken her into his bed. And at last Arthur said,
fair lady I am in fere leest ye will take cold with your taryenge so long
here, therefore either come to bed to me or else go your way hens. Sir quod
she I will ly with you with great Joy, but first ye shall assure me to take me
for your love, and never to have other. A fair lady quod he yt can I not do,
for I love an other, and so tha^ should I be false of my pr^myse. Well sir said
she than I will go my way. Ye say well quod Arthur I pray god send you good
adventure, and so therewith she departed, and Arthur slept as long as it
pleased him til it was fair day in the morning. Than Bawdewyn opened the
wyndowes, for Arthur would arise. Than the queen ^ntred in to his chamber, and
Arthur sat in his bed doing on of his doublet. And as soon as Bawdewyn
saw the queen he said unto Ar^hur, sir behold who comes h^therto you, by mine
aduy^e let not her escape at this time. Tha^ the queen sa^e down by Arthur
on the beds side. And she badde Bawdewyn go play him for a season. Madame
quod he with a right good will, I shall not long anoy you here. Tha^ the queen
demanded of Arthur how he had taken his rest that night, and ^adde him as
than good morrow. And Arthur answered and said, madame god y^ all thing has
formed send you his dear love. Friend said she I gave you yesterdaye respyte
till this day, therefore as ye be now auysed either to take or refuse y^ I have
offered you, show me now your mind in yt behalf shortly. Madame said he I
can show no more nor give you no more than I have done, ye may take my body
the which is here present, but as for my heart I can not take it away from
whence as it is, I have enforced my self to have it again but y^ more I
think on her yt has it the faster she holds it, therefore madame I can do no
more as help^ me god ye have here my body without the heart. Tha^ the queen
beheld Arthur well and enbraced him about the neck, and al smiling said, well
good friend Arthur fro hens forth now be ye in peace, for truly I have right
well assayed your troth, but now I se well your steadfast faythfulnes for ye
be true to your love, for I se by it ye love her faithfully, and certayn^ly ye
have good cause so to do, for in like wise she loves you, for she has
refused the emperor of Yndes love for your sake, for her heart is on no creature
of the world but al only on you: and I am she yt anon after her natyuyte did
desteny her to you when she was brought up to us into the mount peryllous, and
as for the other.ii. ladies yt were with you yesterday the which so sore did
tempte you to have won your love the which they did but only to assaye
you, one of them destenyed yt the image in the pauylyon who holds the chaplet
should never give it but to you, and so ye to have both the lady and the
chaplet, and y^ other lady destenyed yt ye should have the white shield and the
good sword enchaunted the which ye be in possessyon of, and the third that
came to your bed last she destenyed that if any other person would presume to
take the fair Florence y^ he should die an ill death, and I have caused you to
come into this country, for I made you to have the vision of the egle of gold
yt ye thought ye saw in your sleep, and there ye saw a dragon the which
would have taken her fro you, the dragon is sygnyfyed by the Emperor of Ynde,
for as much as he may he will let you to have her, how be it she shall be yours
at length, but first ye shall suffer much pain and trouble, but I shall show
you what ye shall do, keep well the love of the king of or qu^ney and of the
archebysshop of Cornyte, for they shall be to you both true and steadfast, and
specially above all other love well master Steven, for by his means ye shall
have her after your war be done, and in your war I shall help you
with.xi.M. haw bertes, it is I that sent for you in the name of the hurt
knight yt ye should come to him to thentent that I might assaye you, and to
know of what faythfulnes ye were of, but now Florence may be in a surete yt
she is beloved of the best knight of the world, and of the most fair and
steadfast knight y^ now lives, therefore now sir knight arise, for it is hye
tym^ Tha^ the queen departed and Arthur apparayled him and went into the hall
where as he found the said queen nobly acco^panyed and all they rose against
Arthur, and he right swetely did salute them, than the queen caused him to sit
down by her and he said Madame and it like your grace it is now hye time that
I take forth my Journey and go thither as I am in mind to do. Certainly s^r
said the queen I am right well content yt ye so do, but first ye shall dyne. So
than Arthur dyned there with the queen, and after dinner he took his leave of the
queen and of all the court, and there was much sorrow when he departed, for
all the court had trusted yt he should have been their lord. Than Arthur
mounted on his horse and so departed out of the castle, and so came to the
hurt knight and demanded of him how he did, and whether yt he had well quytte
his couenauntes or not. Sir as god help me quod the knight I do right well, and
ye have right truly and nobly quytte you to me, therefore the lord yt all
thing fourmed reward you, and truley I am and shall be your own knight. And
so Arthur commanded him to god, and the lady also that was his love, and so
rode forth his way toward Cornyte.

How that Arthur when he was departed fro the queen proserpane it fortuned him
to take his lodging with the neuew of sir Isembarte, who took Arthur and locked
him fast in a toure to thentent to have slain him by night, but there Arthur
did so valyauntly that he brake out of the toure and slew the knight and all
his people. Capitulo.lxxi.
SO it was that when Arthur was departed fro Proserpyne he rode so long till
at the last he entered in to the land of the duke of bygors neuewe and so by
adventure he took his lodging with a knight who was neuewe to sir Isembarte,
and he received Arthur with great Joy, than he was unarmed, and when he was
redye went into the hall where as this knight was. Tha^ the knight demanded
of Arthur what was his name. And he yt doubts nothing answered and said, sir
I am called Arthur, and my squire is named Bawdewyn. Than the knight knew well
yt it was he yt had ^layne his uncle sir Isembarte, wherefore his heart rose sore
against him, but he made no semblau^t thereof, for he knew well that Arthur was
a knight right sore to be redoubted, for he wy^te well he was not able to
resyst against him, therefore he thought to slay him in his bed a sleep, and in
the mean time ^o close him fast^ in a toure, and than to send for the duke of
Bygor and al his company, and there to fle him by night time. And than he made
fair semblaunt to Arthur and said, sir I am bound to love you well because
ye have slain sir Isembart, for of all men living I hated him most, for he
dydd^ me many dyspleasures, and thus with fair words he drove of the season with
Arthur till it was souper time, and than he was right well served, and after
souper they sported them till it was time to goo to their restes. Than the
knight caused Arthurs bed to be made in a strong tour but it was so well
hanged with clothes of sylke and arres that Arthur could not perceive the
walls nor strength thereof And when Arthur and Bawdewyn were entered into the
toure incontinent the knight did shytte fast the door, which was all of yren,
and did bar it fast with four great bar^e and escryed on Arthur and said*
sir make as merry as ye can for or ye depart out of your chamber ye shall lose
your head, for ye may say ye be unhappy to come hither to your mortal enemy.
And wha^ Arthur herd yt he was in his heart right sore dyspleased, and so ran
to the door thinkinge to have opened it but he could not: for it was barred
without with four great bars of stele. Tha^ the knight armed him and al his
company, so that they were well to the no^bre of.xviii. persons, and the moon
shone fair and bryghte in at a little wyndowe behind one of the tapperts. Than
Bawdewyn ta^e down the hangynges, and than they might ^e^^e^ely all about
them, for the light of the mou^ came in at the window where as the prisoners
were wont to be served. Than A^thur armed him and took his sword in his hand
and beheld well the wyndowe the which was very strong barred with yren, and
by adventure he found in the chamber a great lever of yren and so ^e took it
in both his hands as he that was right sore displeased and did lift up the
lever as lightly as though it had been but a stick, and laid at the bars of
yren with such strength that he all to braste the bars and stones and made
such an hole that an ox might well have issued out thereat. Than the knight
and his company without when they saw that they did cast at him right
rudely darts and quarelles shot out of the crosbowes. Tha^ Arthur took his
white shield and went to the wyndowe and there received all their shotynge, but
they could in no wise hurt him. Than Arthur lepte out at the wyndowe and so
descended down and covered him with his shield. Than they all ran at ones at
him, but Arthur gave such strokes that he dashed down all that ever he attained
unto. And Bawdew^n took a bar of yren and did help his master to the best
of his power. And at the last Arthur ^ncountred the knight of the place, and
gave him such a stroke that he claue him to the sholdres and so fell down
dead to the earth. And than anon after he disco^fited all the remenau^t, for
he delte such dyscyplyne among them that he cut of arms, hands, legs, and
hedes, and all that ever he attain unto Than Bawdewyn ran and did lift up the
draw bridge, and did shytte fast the gates to thentent that non should escape
and so they serched all about but they could neither find man nor woman,
and than they went to their restes til the next day, and so went forth on their
Journey toward Cornyte.

How that Gouernar in searching of A^thur by adventure he passed forby the
same castle where as Arthur had slain the lord thereof, and there he was
assailed of the friends of the said knight, and thece dy^ so valyauntly that
he slew the most part of them, Capitulo, lxxii.
ANd when that Arthur hadd well ryden four leges, than was it known how that
the knight was slain and all that ever were in the place, and thither came all the knights friends and found him dead, wherefore they were right sorrowful,
and as they made this sorrow it fortuned that Gouernar passed forby the same
castle, and as soon as they that were within saw him they thought yt it had been he that had slain their knight and friend. Than they begone to cry all at
ones, let us issue out for yonder is he that has slain our knight, add so
they ran all at ones at him with great axes and maces of stele and did him
much anoyaunce Than Gouernar delyu^red his spear to Iacket his squire, and set
hand to his swerd and gave many great strokes round about him, and cut of
hands and legs and made arms and heads to fly into the field, and at the
last he did so much that he delivered him self from them all saving of.iii.
knights, and they came with a great randon to him, and the first that Gouernar
encou^tred he struck him so rudely that he fell to the earth, and in his
falllynge braste his neck. Than he dressed him to the second and gave him
such a stroke with his sword that be made both helm and head to fly to the
earth. Than the third stood still without any moving, and demanded Gouernar of
whens he was, and he answered how y^ he was a strange knight. And sir said
y^ other knight where lay you this night passed. I lay said Gouernar.vii.
leges hens with y^ lady of quar^orde. well sir said he knight than ye be not
he that ^ay this night in this castle. As god help me said Gouernar it is
not I, for I never saw this castle before this time well sir said the knight
than I require you to come on with me a litel way and I promise you I shall
bring you again into this same place wytho^te hurt or any manner of damage to
you or to any of yours, and al this he did because he would bring him before
the dead bodies for to se whether any o^ them would bled^ again fresshely or
not for thereby he thought surely y^ he should know whether it were he or not
that had slain all those people. And Gou^rnar acco^ded to his desire, and so
they entered intoo the castle and there saw the dead bodies wytho^t any more
of bledynge. And when the knighte saw that he said, sir this people did run
agenst you wrongful^y and so it appears by them, for they that had thought
most for to have won, I think has now most lost, wherefore sir ye may
depart when ye will, for ye shall not be let for me, and I pray to god send you
right good adventure. Than Gouernar departed and so followed after Arthur.

How that Arthur found.xl. knights who had taken a damoysell the which they
found in a forest, and they would have rauysshed her, and there Arthur rescowed
her and slew all the.xl. knights whoo would have pylled and robbed the ladies
castle, and have slain all that had been within. Capitulo.lxxiii.
ARthur rode forth so long till at the last he came to a great forest, and as he
would have entered into it, there encountered him a fair young damsel right
sore weeping, and her fair yelowe heir hanging about her sholders, and she
was right sore hurt in the vysage and bledde fast and as soon as she saw
Arthur armed her f^re began to be dowble, and than she knele^ down and held
up her hands and cried him mercy and said, gentyl knight save my life and the
honor of my body, and take all that ever I have, and she was but in her smock
and a thynne syrcute, And when Arthur saw her, he knew well that she was
afraid, and said: fair love have no dre^^ for I will do nothing to you but
good. And when she herade that she was in a surete ^he sat her down on the
ground, for she was in that case for fere that her legs would not bear her,
nor could not speak of a great season. Than Arthur alyghted fro his hoar and
right swetely took he in his arms and said, my own sweet damoysell be ye now
well assured and of good heart and show me what case ye stand in, and I that aid
you with all my power, than he ^aw how y^ maidens heir was all tuffled by the
reason of the wynd and thick busshes yt she had run through, and Arthur ^yke
a gentil knight did stryke down her heir for they were right fair and
goodly. And when she might spoke she said, sir your great swetenes and gentyl
heart has taken fro me part of my fere, how be it all that season she wept
right pyteouslye and said, sir I shall show you all the case how it stands
with me sith it pleases you to know it, sir it is of troth I have dwelled
here in this foreste with an aunt of mine a wydowe a good old lady in a fa^re
great manoyre of hers, and now there is come into this forest.ii^i. knights
who a^e banysshed out of their own country, and they do nothing but rob and
pyll, and they have in their company.xx^. horse men and ^en footmen, and so
they rob over all the country, so that they leave no house vnrobbed, and this
other day they sent to mine aunt that she should send them two hundred pound
of money, but mine aunt would not for she wyste not why she should so do, and
so now they become and have laid syege round about mine auntes place, and
there have co^tynued these.^v. days and have made their and we that they will
never goo hens till they have won the place and brent it down to the earth,
and slain mine aunt and so I issued out at a little gate to go to a brother of
mine to desire him to g^te ^ogyther our lygnage to come to h^lpe and deliver us
fro these thieves and robbers, and as I was going here by there met me ten
foot men of their comp^^^^ who lies in a wait to keep the hye ways. And
thus they have arrayed me as ye se, and have ^ yspoyled me and taken away my
pal^^^y, and so would have ^^ysshed me, but as grace was they f^lle at a
varyaunce among themself who should have been the first that should have
defouled me, and so they fell together and gave each other great strokes, and
in the mean time I fled away in great fere of my life. Than Arthur said
fair damoysel^ go we^ woe together where as these rybawdes be, and I shall do
so much to them either by fayr^nes or foulnes that they shall r^ndre to you
again your gown and your palfrey. A sir said the lady they are very y^^
people and a great company. Fair lady care not therefore said Arthur god shall
help you in your need. Tha^ the damoysel mounted upon Arthurs horse behind
him and so rode forth till at the ^a^^ they aryued where as these thieves were
who were seeking for the damoysell among the busshes. And they saw her on
horse back riding behind Arthur, they ran all about him to have slain him,
but than Arthur took his swer^e and laid ^oo on these rybawdes that within a
short space he had slain them all. Than the damoy^ell had right great Joy
and so took again her hor^e and her clothing and apparayled her and said to
Arthur, sir I pray god keep you from all evil encombraunce. And Arthur said,
my love now let us go to your aunt and let us help her as much as we can. A
sir said she ye can never have vyctory over them, for they be at ierst.xxx. on
horse back well armed and there be of them many good knights, therefore ano^^
they will slay you the which should be a great damage therefore let us go to my
broth^r and gather together my fre^^es the whyc^e shall be in nombre at the
leest of.xl. persons on horse back and so than shall y^ ^^^e them. Than Arthur
said fair damoysell take ye no thought therefore for I waraunt you or I depart
I ^^all make them to be to us such friends y^ fro he^s forth to you nor to
none other they shall do no great hurt. well sir said the lady god give you
grace thus to do for they be right ill people. So thus they code forth together
into y^ foreste, and the same tym* Go^ernar ^ Iacket were ^ntred into y^ same
foreste to seek Arthur for they had herd tidings y^ he was riden in^o that
forest before them, and they (...) so long till at the last they found wh^re
(...) these.x. thieves lay dead* and than they t^oug^^ well how that Arthur had
d^^^ that deed. Than Gouernar said to Iacke^, friend I know well my lord
A^thur has been here, I se well he is a (...) carpenter, for he has made here
a fair sight of chyppes. Sir truly said I^cket ^here is in him great dyspence
for he gy^eth mo^e than is of him demanded, for he has given more to this
company than they would have had, and all this season Arthur rode forth ^^yl with
y^ damaysel, and al last they aryued at y^ damoysell^s auntes p^ace, and the
said thieves as than had lef^ their si^ge and were gone after a great company of
merchants to ^h^^tent to ^obbe and to flee them, and in the me^ne season
Arthur and the damoysel came to the gate, and she called y^ porter. And as
soon as he saw her he knew he^ right well, and so ser open the gate, ^^d
than Arthur and the damosel entered into the place. Than Arthur said to the
porter, ^^^nde let the gate stand still open, for your enemies are all gone,
for they all that were h^re were my cosyns therefore I war^ant you be not aferde
of them, therefore let down the bridge and so the porter did, for he believed
him. Than the lady led her knight into the hall. Than her aunte came to them
and made them ^yghte great feast and so unarmed Arthur and made ready the me^e,
and than they sa^e down to souper and as they sat there entered into the hall
one of the knight^s of the said sheues, and so he came straight to the table
whereas they did eat with a great staff in his hand, and without speaking
of any word he lift up his stuff and struck the lady a great stroke between
the sholders, so that he made her to lene down flat on the table and
therewyth she made a great cry* and therewyth the these took a great cup of
silver full of wine and did cast all the wine at Arthur where as he sat, and
took the cup with him, and therwithall returned back again without speaking
of any word, and as he issued out of the hall he met Bawdewyn and struck him
so rudely that he wist not well where he was. Than Arthur said to the lady
madame thus to be beten and to lose your good is a right great outrage. Than
the knight answered Arthur and said, sir if thou will amend it come to the
cross way beside yonder wood and there shall ye find me Than Arthur stepte
upon his fete, and called for his harneys and anon Bawdewyn ar^^d him. Than
the lady said gentyl^ knight in the honor of the hye god of heaven go not
thither, for they are xxx. on horse back well armed, wherefore ye can not endure
against them all. Madame said Arthur speak to me no more, for I will go look on
them, and so mounted on his horse and followed the knight to the cross way
where as he was ready aby^ynge for Arthur, and as soon as he saw Arthur coming
he cast down the cup and took his sp^re, and they met together so rudely
that the knight brake his sp^re but Arthur s^rake him so that his sper^ ran
through out his body more than a foot, and so fell down dead. Than Bawdwyn
said, right now thou strak^st me and now y^ art stryken again, for thy great
pride thou have now an ill reward but of such deserte* such payment, and so
Bawdewyn drew out the knights own sword and struck of therwyth the knights
hand wherwyth he had stryken the lady at the table, and so did put the hand
into the cup. And there menaunt of the thieves as they were departing of
their pray that they had won of the merchants, they espied how one of
their fellows was slay^e and therefore in contynent they took their ha^^eys and
^^nne at Arthur on all ^ydes and so gave him many great strokes, but ever
Arthur cast his shield before him, and thereon received al their strokes, so
that they could in no wise pair his shield in any manner of point, whe^of they
had ^yght great maruayle. Than Arthur st^ake one of them so rudelye that his
head flewe clean into the field, and he claue another to the shouldres, and
the third he claue from the sholdre ^owne to the waste, and so gave among
them many wondrous strokes: but they were very many, and so some of the^m
ran to crosbowes, and to ^artes, and therewyth did him much anoyaunce but
always ^yghte valyauntlye he detended him self, and so at the first bronte
he slew upon a.ii. o^ them. Than as they w^r^ thus fighting togeth^r it
fortuned Gouernar to aryue on them ^^ the reason of the bront and noise that he
had heard, and the^e he saw w^ll how all that company were on one knight whom
he saw defend him self right valiauntly, and so long he beheld him till at
the last he knew well it was hy^ master A^thur by the reason of his why^e
^held, than he dashed to his hor^e and came in among them as the wo^fe doothe
among sheep, and struck so the first that he encountered that he ran him
clean throughout the body, and he set his hand on his sword and struck so an
other that his head. fell on Arthurs horse neck. And when Arthur saw that he
knew well it was his old knight Gouernar whereof he had great joy, and so
rested him self too be hold Gouernar how that he fought with his sw^rd, and
there he saw how Gouernar ^yd cleue one down to the gyrdell. Than did Arthur
smyle and said, this master chastises right sore his scolers for he te^^heth
them a hard lesson, by the says that I owe unto god I shall help^ him Sir
said Bawdwyn when ned^ is, than a friend is proved, goo give you grace well to
do, and so Arthur rusht into the prese and confounded all that ever he attained
unto. Tha^ one of these thieves y^ was on foot, for he had lost his horse
before, ran at Arthurs horse with a sper^ and struck him cleue throughout the
belly and so the horse fell down dead. Than Arthur lepte on his fete and his
sw^^d^ in his hand and dressed him to the the^e that had slain his horse, and
gave him such a stroke that he claue him too the sholders. And when Gouernar
saw Arthur on his fete he was right sorow^ul and so dashed into the prese and
encount^ed a knight so rudely that neither his helm nor coyse of stele could
sa^e him but he was ^ouen to the hand te^he and so he fell down dead. Than
Bawdwyn took his horse and brought it to Arthur, and quickly he lepte up
thereon, and h^ band^ned him self among his enemies and so between him and
Gauernar of the xxx. they lef^e but four alive and so were taken, and in their
taking two of them were slain and the other two were bound fast, and Bawdewyn
and Iacket did keep them, Than there came to them the lady and her nece, and
when they saw their enemies lie dead on the ground, and saw the noble valute
that was in those two knights, these ladies praised them much in their
^eattes, and the^e they saw how that Arthur and Gouernar were together making
good chere e^he to other and doing of their h^^mes. Than the lady said to
Arthur, sir from whence comes this knight, is he p^traynyng to you. Ye truly
madam said Arthur he is a friend who has right well ho^pen me this day. we
saw not to^ether (...) great season. And the lady saw we^ how that he was fair
and maruelously byg and said. Sir ye were happy to come hither at this point,
and to you sir knight ye have acheued this ente^pryse of these thieves, I
require you let t^^se other two other be slain or else hanged for of ^ll ill
cote spryngeth an ill ^re, for they will never do good if they escape. And when
the thieves herd that they were in great fear and said to ^r^^ur, gentill
knight save our lives and we shall show you where is in the forest ^yghte
great treasoure. where is that said A^thur. Sir we will bring you thy there
so that we dye not. And Arthur answe^ed and said syrs, as for your life and
death lies in these ladies hands to do what it pleases them, but shortly
bring us to this great tresoure. Than these two thieves went on before, and
Bawdwyn took the cup wy^h the knights hand therein and did present it to
the lady from Arthur, who thanked him much and so would have given the cup
to Bawdwyn but he would not take it for he said he had enough to do with the
carriage of his horse and harnes. So Arthur rode so long after these thieves in
the forest till at the last they came into a wyld savage place in a great
valley, and there they found bows and cross bows, hawbertes, helmes, and
gowns, couerynges and other cloth the which these theu^s had robbed al about
the country, and also there they found hid in the ground gold and silver
great plentye, and cups and chalyces and other vessel of silver, the which
mounted to a great value. Than Arthur said to the lady, madame cause all this
riches to be borne to your place, and render ye again such things as has been stolen fro churches and other people of the country, as for me nor none of
my company shall take the worth of one p^uy thereof. And the lady did as Arthur
commanded her, but she desired Arthur that the two thieves might be slain,
and so they were incontinent, than they re^urned to the ladies place, and went
to souper and were rychly served. Than Arthur demanded of Gouernar how
master Steu^n did and the marks. And he answered and said how that they
did right well and were in good hel^h, and how that they did ^^maunde them unto
him, and in like wise does the fair lady Margarete of Argenton, for she is
come to the port noyre to se her uncle the marks, whereof Arthur had great
joy. And when the lady of that place herd y^ she knew than well that Arthur
was y^ same knight that had delivered the marks out of prison, and also had
rescowed the lady margarete from the hands of the duke of Bygors neuewe. Than
she kneled down before Arthur and said, sir I thank you as much as I can
or may do for the aid and socour that ye have done for the lady of Argenton,
for I am her cosyn Germayn. And when Arthur saw her knele he took her up and
so made great joy togeth^r till it was time to go to their restes, and in the
morning Arthur rose and took his leave of the lady and so rode forth on his
way to goo to Cornyte, for it was as tha^ but.xv. days to saint Bartylmewe
tide when as the great ^ournay should be bitwene the king Soroloys and
themperoure of Ynde Now will we leave to speak of Arthur and of Gouernar and
speak now of master Steven.

How that master Steven departed fro the port noyre to go to the tournay at
Cornyte and took with him the noble Florence rich pauylyon. wherein was the
image with the chaple^ who resembled in all thing unto the lady Florence the
most fay^e creature that was as tha^ in all the world. Capitulo.lxxiiii.
THus as Arthur rode forth on his way toward Cornyte, master Steven was at
the port noyre with the marks and with the gentyl lady Margarete of Argenton,
and there she did sport and play her as a gentle damoysell ought for to
do, and every day she made chaplettes of roses and other flowers the which
she gave ^o master Steven, and she made him also with the nedell work a
gyrdell and a purse of gold and sylke, she loved him right well in her heart.
Than master Steven aduysed well how that the great ^ournay at Cornyte
approached nere, therefore he thought it was time for him to depart thither
ward, than he said to the Marks. Sir I desire you to keep well this castle
of the port noyre, and to you fair lady I r^quyre you keep ye still company
here with the marks your uncle till ye here fro Arthur, for and I can he shall
be here bitwene this and saint Remyges day. And right swetely ^he did graunt^
him there to abide. Than he took his leave of them and so took al his books, and
the egle of gold and the pauilion with the image holding the chaplet, and so
departed and rode so long till he aryued at Cornyte Than he mounted up the
stayres into the palace, at the which time the fair Florence was entered into
her own chaumbre, and the king at that time was not in the palace, but
Florence knights were playenge at the chesse and at the tables and other
dysportes, and the master came in among them suddenly, and as soon as they
saw him they ran to him on al sides, and made to him right great feast and
chere. And at the last it came to the knowledge of Florence how that he was
come and incontynente she came to him, and as soon as he saw her he did of
his bonet and saluted her, and she said sir ye be right hertely welcome now,
for I was in fere leest that ye would not have come to this tournay, therefore
it is now time that my pauylyon be pyght up, and so^ she led the master into
her chaumbr^ and took him aparte, and than she demau^nded of him how that he
had done sith he departed from her and how that Arthur did. Madame said he I
saw not Arthur sith he did the battle at Argenc^ For as soon as the battle
was ended and that the king of orqu^ney and duke Phylyp and all the hole
company were in great Joy and mirth there came a messenger to Arthur from the
wounded knight to thentent that he should goo to him for to give him health, and
so the same propr^ hour he departed, whereof every man was so sore troubled
that they all departed the same day. A master said Florence than I fere me
greatly of his death. Madame said the master be ye in a sure^e take no care for
him, for he fereth not all the world, for there is not such an other kn^ghte
in all the world again. Mad^m^ I showed him how that ye did command you
unto him, and how that ye desire him as derely as he loves you y^ he should
not fail for any thing but to be at this next great ^ournay at cornyte and he
did grant me for certain that he would not ^ayle thereof. A master said she
did ye not requy^e him faithfully so to be. Madame as god help me I warau^t
you he will not fail. Well master said ^he I require you ^ause me to se him
and ^o sp^ke with him as shortly as it may be. M^dame said he with a right good
will. Well master than I pray you se that my pauylyo^ be pigh^ up in the
field incontinent, for paraduenture if he come now any thing before the day
and se no ^yg^e or token in the field y^ any tournay should be the^e, than it
might fortune he would depart again. Madame ye say right well quod the
master for in deed it is h^e time. Than she sent for sir Neuelon her
marysshall and commanded him y^ her chief pauilion should be pight up in the
fel^e^ and from thens forth that all her knights sh^l^e lodge eu^ry night
about her pauilyon. And as she co^^aunded so it was done. And also the master
caused the pauylyon with the image to be pyght up, and many other tents and
pauylyons but the image y^ held the chaplet in the pauylyon was so goodly and
delectable to behold that no man could be satysfyed with lokynge on her, how
be it the fres^he beauty o^ Florence was incomparable thereto, and so there were
pyght up.x. tents and xiiii. pauylyons all peratyning to the noble Florence*
beside all other yt were perta^nynge to her noble lords and knights for she
had there at that time out of her own realm to the no^bre of.xv. C* knights.
Also sir Neuelon caused his tent to be pight up who was senesshall to the
ge^tyll Florence, and chief of her co^seyle next master Steven, ^ she trusted
much in him, for he was a wise man and a good knight, and no ill sayer, and
his pauylyon was set next to the forest and ferthest fro the ladi^s pau^lyon,
and next to the ladies tent was sir Ancelles pauylyon neuew to the senesshall
who was a right hardy and a valiant knight, the third pauylyon was
partaynynge to the archebysshop of Cornyte who was uncle to Florence, and
brother to the king of Soroloys father to Florence, the fourth was sir Miles of
va^efounde, the fyft was sir Peter brysebar a redoubted knygh. Also than
thither was come s^r Rowland of bygor who was one of Florence knights, but he
was right enu^ous, and he was cousin germayne ^o the ^u^e of ^ygor, and he
caused his pauylyon also to be pyght up the which was right goodly and fresshe
to behold, he was not in the country when the battle was between Arthur and
the duke of bygors neuewe, and when he knew the dyscomfyture of his cosyn he
was so sorrowful that he did neither eat nor drink but little of three days
after yt he knew thereof and when he had somewhat passed his so^owe, than he made
auowe and promise that if he might se or know the knight that had slain his
cosyn sir Isembart y^ he would be avenged of him if ever it lay in ^is power,
and he might well be descended of the lygnage of the duke of bygor, for he was
fell and spytefull and proud, and the chief cause was he came to the tournay
was to thentent to encountre Arthur if he came thither. So these.vi. pyghte up
their tents round^ about Florence pauylyon. Than upon a day Florence issued
out o^ Cornyte and all her chyualry with her, and so went into her own
pauylyon, and all other lords and knights ladies and damoyselles went each of
them into their own tents and pauylyons, the which were to the nombre of two
thousand, and Florence commanded that every body should make as great feast
and Joy as they could do, so than there began great feast and Io^e. Than
kn^ght^s began to Just and tournay to assaye them self, also the ladies and
damoyselles did send them chaplettes and streame^s to set on their helmes
and speres, and some company of knights sported them in the forest, and some
went to the fair ryu^r with sparhawkes and gerfowcons on th^yr hands, and
some ^e^elde the hye tournes and ^ournynges of the sakers and gerfawcons,
squyers and variettes were furbusshynge and scou^ynge of their masters harneys
and ^okelyng of sheldes and helmes, and knocking on hedes and burres on
mighty speres, ladies and damoyse^les did ca^^ ^le^ sing and dance w^t^ lusty
knights, and clerks sange balades, and knights and ladies talked of love,
some enbraced, and some kyssed and showed sing of love, and such as were
s^cke or hurt were shortly made hole. Than Florence beheld these lusty
damoyselles playnge and laughing with these fr^sshe young lusty knights
clappynge them on the backs with their white hands, and shewyng^ them great
sign of love, and geuynge each to other laces, gyrdels gloves, k^uercheu^^,
^ynges ^^aplettes and garlondes of fresshe flour^s. Than Florence cast out a
great sygh and said to master Steven, sir se ye not how these ladies and
damoyse^les laughe and play each of their lover. A master and what have I
deserved that I cannon have my lover to sport me with him as well as they do
with theyrs, for I love with all my hole heart and yet I wo^e nor what he is,
for my heart lies on him that I never saw, so thus I am in the son without
having of any light, I am in love without Joy. A dear master what have I
deserved more than onye other. Than the m^yster said, a dear lady he ye of
good comfort for a time shall come that shall give you light, the cloud that
as yet covers the ^yght in good season shall be made bright. A master said
Florence did ye not hertely command in unto him when ye went to Argence. By
the faith that I owe to god said the master I did it madame in the best wise
y^ I could ymagyn. Thus the fair Florence and the master every day from the
wednesdaye till saterdaye talked together of the coming of Arthur the which
saterdaye the archebysshop sange mass before Florence, and he and all the hole
barony that day dyned wy^h the noble Florence, for she had desired them all so
to do*

How sir Rowlande of Bygor apeched Arthur of treason because that he had slain
his cosyn at Argence, and so defied him at the vt^eraunce but Arthur at the
first stroke drove him down horse and all to the eart^, and brake one of his
a^mes and two rybbes, whereof Florence was right Joyous and specially when she
saw her loved Arthur whom she never saw before. And how after sir Rowlandes
servants assailed Arthur to have slain him, but he valyauntlye defended him
self and slew many of them. Capitulo.lxxv.


ANd after dinner the archbysshop and master Steven and sir Rowland and the
other barons went talkyng and playing togeder out of the medowe and entered into
the forest, and at the last they came to a fair grene oak the which did cast
a fair shadow a great cyrcuyte about it, and the grass was fair and soft
and thyck underneath so there they sat them d^wne and talked together of many
thyng^s till at the last the master demanded o^ sir Rowlande how that he lyked
by that country about Cornyte and whether it were fa^rer than the country of
bygor. Than sir Rowland answered that it was not to him that he would give any
answer in that case. why said the master and as for me I am as little bound to
you, as you to me. well said sir Rowland that makes no matter for though ye be
son to a king yet will I not answer you in that matter nor in non other, take
it as ye list why sir said the master have I trespaced any thing agenst you.
Yea yt ye have said sir Rowland and that tyght greuousely for ye were at
Argente wha^ my cos^n sir Isembart was slain, and ye kept company and were
chief cou^seller with the knight that slew him, therefore I bear grudge in mine
heart against you, and I promise to god that if I may encountre him that did
that deed, I shall do as much to hi^ as he has done to my cosyn. Sir said ye
master when ye mete him ye may do as ye will, but often ^imes it fortuned that
a man can not attain to do so much as he would do, nor paraduenture he can
not nor dare not, butte as for that deed ye ought not to be dyspleased though
right was done, for godlightly will suffer no wrong, but always he fordereth
and aideth the ^ight cause how so eu^r it falls. well said sir Rowlande than
ye say how that my cosyn was in the wrong but there is none yt says so but
he says otherwise than truth is, and that will I prove before every man
ag^nst you and ye will mount on your horse for I say the mat^r was not truly
nor ega^y del^ withal. Sir said the manster ye lay unto me great outrage and
vylany, where as ye say that I did in that matter otherwise than well and
t^uely, whereof I say plainly ye lie fal^ely in your head and ce^tenly I shall
never be in rest till that I have ^^^te a knight agenst you to prove it, and
if I can it shall be the same knight which did the battle agenst your cosyn,
who shall cause you to call again these words that ye have spoken. Than the
master rose right g^eatly^ dyspleased and would have departed and ^^r^ that
company, but the archebysshop held him again and prayed him that he would
suffer all that for that time, and at his request he said he would so do. Than
sir Neuelon the senesshall said to sir Rowlande, sir be content with the words
of the master for he is a man of greter dygnyte than ye be of, for though he
had stryken of your head, ye have not so hye a friend yt durst revenge your
cause, the noble king of Orqueney was at yt battle, and where as ye say that
the matter was not truly deite wythall, ye speak than vylany against the king
and against Phylyp duke of Sabary his neuewe, and against all su^he as were
there, the which seeing needs not there to be rehearsed, for it is a shame to
you to suffer such words to pass out of your mouth. Than ^ore dyspleased
Brysebar slepte forth and said, sir Rowlande ye say that the master did not
truly in ye matter when your cosyn was slain, wherein I say that ye say not
truly, and if ye will maintain the contrary take your hatneys and I shall take
mine and let it be seen who is in the troth, and therewith sir Brysebar was
rysynge to have departed, but the bishop held him again and said, look who
so ever speaks any word more of this matter let him be sure I shall not be
his friend, and so they left there speaking of yt matter for that time, for the
bishop brought them in an other talking, and as they were deuysynge and
talking of one matter and other Arthur and Gouernar issued out of the forest
and so entered in to the medowe. And than Arthur beheld the goodly tents and
pauilyons that were pyght all about the field, and also he saw the sheldes
and helmes and harneys shynynge against the son, and h^^de the great coursers
braye and cry and stamp with their fete, the which fight and noise quyckened
his heart and courage. At the last Gouernar espied Florence pauily^^ wherein was
the image with the chaplet and showed it to Arthur. And when he saw it his
heart inwardly reioysed, for he knew well it was his ladies pauylyon. And by
y^ time the master and al other were entered again into the fair medowe, and
Arthur sat on his horse in a great study and mused of his adventure. And at
the last sir Miles of balefou^de espied him and knew well how yt it was Arthur
for he had seen him before at Argence. Than he said to the other knights that
were about him, lords behold yonder is a knight al armed who is right fair
to behold, is there onye here y^ knows him, for he would not name him
because of sir Rowland. And wha^ master Steven saw him he said I know him
right well, wherefore I trust yt the great wind that was lately blown will now
sone be laid, and of his coming he had great Joy in his heart so much that
he forgate in a manner al his displeasure. Certainly sir said the senesshal he
is right fair and gracyens to behold, wherefore I believe he is of a great
blood, but me thinks by his semblaunt he is in a great study whe^fore so
ever it be. By my hode quod Brysebar I know full well wherefore he studyeth.
Than the master and the senesshall and Brysebar rose and fair and easily
went to him ward and said each to other how yt they would not name him as at
y^ time because of sir Rowlande, and so^ they came before Arthur who was still
in his study. And Gouernar as soon as he saw the master he alyghted fro his
horse and enbraced him, and all the other barons each after other. And
therwythal Arthur left his musing, and as soon as ever he saw master
Steven and the other knights he did alyght from his horse, and did salute them
all one after an other, and so among them there was made right great feast and
joy, And than sir Rowlande meruayled much what knight he might be, because he
saw so much chere and joy made to him* and that they knew him and he not.
Than the senesshal said to Arthur, sir I will ye take my rent and pau^^^n as
your own, and so ye and I to kep^ company together in thi^ t^rney. Sir I am well
content quod Arthur, and to incontinent he was unarmed, and al his harnes and
horse was sent to the senesshals tent. And wha^ Arthur was aparayled than the
master said to him, sir let us go and salute ye the archbysshop, who is
brother to king Emendus, and uncle to the fair lady Florence And when A^thur
herd speak of Florence his heart trembled for joy, and so he wen^ t^warde the
bishop. And when the bishop saw him he rose and did salute him, so did sir
M^es and also sir Rowland of bygor how be it they knew him not, and so the
bis^hop behe^d him affectuously, for he seemed to him to be ye most fair
knight of the world. Than Arthur did of his bonet and did salute the bishop
and al other and in likewise they him again. Than the bishop demanded of him
what he was. Sir said Arthu^ I am a knight stranger. And as soon as sir
Rowlande herd him say so, it ran into his he^t that it was the same knight
that slew his cosyn, and than he demanded of him what was his name. Sir said
he my right name is Arthur. And how call ye your squire quod sir Rowland. Sir
said Arthur he is named Bawdwyn, Than sir Rowlande knew well that it was he that
slew his cousin, and so demanded of him fro whens he came. Sir quod Arthur I
come straight fro Arg^nce. well sir quod Rowland saw you the batayl that was
done the^^ between a strange knight, and the duke of bygors neuewe. And when ye
master herd tho demau^^es he was right joyous for than he wist well that the
words yt had be spoken before should be ^el reue^ged. Than Arthur answered sir
Rowlande and said, sir when ye bata^^e was done I passed forby. I think said
sir Rowland that it was your self tha did that bat^yle with sir ^sembart. Sir
quod Arthur I would he right glad^e to be of such valor as too conquer in
batayl such a knight as he was. Certenli quod Rowland I know well it was you,
and therefore I say that falsely and ^nt^uly ye did it, and that I will make
g^od incontyneut my body agenst yours. And when the archbysshop herd that he
blamed much sir Rowland for his words and desired him yt all the matter might
be in rest and peace. But he proudly answered and said how that he would not but
yt he would arm him incontinent. Than the master said to the bishop, nay sir
let him alone for he is in the right. therefore he has good cause to be
revenged if he can for wha^ he has his enemy present before him, what shal^e
need to go seek for him any fe^der and all that he said because he thought
long till they were together for he wist we^ how yt Arthur should revenge right
well such words as he had said to him before. Thou Gouernar right sore
dysplesed slepte forth and said, sir Rowlande ye be to much outragyous to
appele thus this knight of falsenes whom ye know not nor never saw him before,
nor wist no^ what he ^s therefore I say plainly ye lie falsely in your head* he
is not false nor never was to you nor yet to an^ otther, and in that quarrel
here is my guage to fight with you my body agenst yours. Tha^ Arthur blamed
Gouernar for his words and commanded him to be in peace, and so he did follow
his pleasure. Than Arthur said, sir Rowland if ye lay any thing agenst me, I am
here ready to defend me agenst you, well sir said Rowland of falsnes I appele
you in y^ quarrel, mount shortly on your horse and d^fend it and ye dare well
sir said Arthur ye say well, go on your way and I shall not be long fro you.
Sir said the master to sir Rowlande ye have the heart of a noble baron
therefore ye do right well to defend your right, for your right and truth shall
sure lie help you, all this he said but in a mockery. Than sir Rowlande went
to arm him, and the senesshall and the archebysshop and master Steven kept
still company with Arthur, who incontyne^te was armed. Than the master went
straight to the noble Florence, and found her in her rich tente standing on
a cusshyn of sylke, and as soon as the saw the master she began to smyle and
called him to her. Than he said madame and it like your grace Arthur is come,
and at his first coming sir Rowland of bygor has appeched him of falsnes for
sleyng of his cosyn at Argence, and so they be both about to arm them for the
battle between them shall be incontinent. And when ye lady herd him speak of
Arthur her blood trembled and therewith she b^usshed as ^uddy as a rose and was
in her heart right joyous of his coming, and right sore dysplesed that sir
Rowland should fight with him so sone at his first coming than she said
master I doubt me least that any up lany should come to Arthur by fighting
with sir Rowlande. Madame said the master ye know not as yet ye noble valor
of Arthur, for I answer you be sets nothing though he had to do all at ones
with such.vi. as sir Rowland is therefore madame issue out of your pauilyon and
look on your lover and behold whether he be fair or not, the archebysshop
your uncle is with him, and your senesshal, and sir Ancean, and also sir Miles
of valefounde, and sir Brysebar, all these are right sore dyspleased of the
felony that sir Rowland has done to Arthur your knight. A master said
Florende would to god he were mine* let us go and I pray you show him unto me
for I desire much to se him. Than Florence issued out noblye accompanied with
ladies and damoyselles to the number of.C. C. and by that time the tidings was
spredde all about the field in every man's tent how yt sir Rowlande was
armyng of him to fight with a strange knight. And when ye archebisshop and the
other barons saw Florence they went and encountered her, and Arthur was in
their company, and there they saw each other, wherewith they were both so sore
stryken with the darte of love, that they lost their countenance, how be it
Florence as goodly as she might, maintained her countenance, and than she laid
her hand on the b^sshoppes sholdre and demanded of him what knight Arthur
was, who above al other seemed to be the most gracyous and g^n^yll, and he had
his helm of his head and beheld ever Florence, and also her fair eyes went
never fro him, for she could not keep her self fro beholding of him. Than
Brysebar said, madam this same is the knight that ^rought in my syghte the
foul monster of the brosse to v^^^aunce, and ever sith he has offered his
service to be your knight if it please you so to except him In the name of god
said Florence he is ^yghche^^ely welcome, and with a ^ight good will I retain
him as my knight Right dece lady said Arthur I humbly thank you of the hie
honor that ye do ^o me as to retain me to be of the company and number of so
many and noble wise men as your knights be. And with the^e words there came a
messenger to Florence, and showed her how that the king of orqueney and duke
Philyp were coming with.v.C. knights in their company and how that he was within
a mile and a half. They are right ^ertely welcome said Florence. And by that
time s^r Rowland was armed and al^o Arthur. Than the ha^aw^e began to cry go
together, bail, bail. Than Gouerner set on Arthurs he^me on his head, and
Bawdewyn brought him his horse, and he mounted thereon as lightly as though he
had been unarmed, than he took his white shield and did cast it about his
^eck^. And as soon as Florence saw the sheld she k^ew it right well, and said
in he h^rt^. I ^e^e ^o ^er that shield becomes you right well, I pray to god
it may^ be well enployed upon you. Than he took a great and a mighty spear, and
when he was ready at al^ points than he turned his eyes to ward Florence, and
her eyes went never fro him, but beheld him with fervent love and desire
wherewith Arthur took such hardynes that he feared not all the world at that
hour. So than he turned and dasshed his horse to wa^de sir Rowlande, and he in
like wise to him, and they went together as though thun^er had fal^e^ fro
heaven, and all that be ^elde them said one to another, a good ^orde what a
goodly knight is yonder ^^aunge knight. And sir Rowland hit Arthur so rudely
that he brake his spear all to sheuers, but Arthur struck him with his spear the
which was so long and byg so immeasurably yt he lent both knight and horse, and
al to ye earth in a hepe, wherewith ^yr Rowla^des arm brake a^onder in y^
mids, and ye horse and sadel fell so sore on him yt it brake two ribs in his
side, and so he lay a great space in a trau^ce whereof Florence had more ^oy
tha^ ever she had of any thing, and specially when she saw her love do so hye
deeds of prowes. Than sir Rowland had brought thither.xiiii. knights, and when
they saw their master sir Rowland a^ that myschyef they all took their harnes
and al at ones ^an and assayl^d Arthur. Tha^ Arthur drew his good sword and
struck so the first that he encountered with that h^ ^aue him to the chinne, and
fro y^ second he made his head to fly into ye field, and the third he made to
fly over his horse c^ope and his legs upward. Tha^ every m^n beheld the hye
prowess of Arthur and said each to other, the strokes of this knight are
gr^a^ly to be doub^ed. Than Gouernar took a great pyece of a broken charyot and
dashed into y^ prese and drove down knigh^es both hor^e and man to ye crath.
Than every man said unto other this knight^s not without company, their alms is
right hard to endure, I would have none of their p^^aunce, they are great
dyspenders* for they give more than is of the demanded. And wha^ Florence saw
the outrage of those knights she was right sorrowful, for she had great fe^e of
Arthur. Than she commanded her seneshal yt he should go and depart y^ batail
and that those knights should be al taken, and their hands bou^^ fast
together in a punysshemente of their deeds, than her senesshal incontinent
mounted on a great courser, and in a rich corset of grene gyrt with a white silke^
lace, and his hat at his back with a white warderer in his hand. Than he sported
forth his horse and caused knights to come out of every ^ent and so they took
the knights yt were fightinge with Arthur and Gouernar, but first of the.xiiii.
there was.vi. slain, and diverse other sore hurt. Tha^ Florence and the
archebysshop came to sir Rowland where as he lay still at yt time in a trance
half a sleep, and when he was revived and saw ye bishop and Florence standing
before hi^ he de^ired that the knight that had iusted with him might come and
speak with him and so Brisebar went for him, and when Arthur was come, sir
Rowland said to hi^ Sir ye be welcome and for gods sake pardon me of the
outrage yt I have done agenst you, as to enterprise to Just agenst you, whereof
now I sore repent me and fro hens forth I will be your knight and good friend.
Sir said Arthur if y^ have any thing trespassed agenst me I pardon you with
good heart. Than there were brought forth the knights of sir Rowland who were
fast besid because they fought agenst Arthur without any defyaunce before. Tha^
said Florence in the name of god they shall make a large ame^des. Certainly
madame said sir Rowlande I am content yt they make amends to ye knight as he
will him self. So be it said Florence. Madam said Arthur I thank your grace
sith they shall make me ame^des at mine own saying therefore than they shall go
quite and fr^, for I pardon the for they did but like knights to help and aid
their lord and master. And wha^ the bishop and al other herd him say so they
said, a this is a free and a gentle knight. And tha^ the gentil Florence said
in her heart, a mine own love ye have a g^til heart and a fre, and mine heart is
with yours and ever shall be, and than she said to Arthur. Sir knight ye shall go
and vnar^^ you with my senesshal who shall hold you company. Madame said Arthur
as it shall plese you I am content. Than Florence went into her tent and took
her master by the hand and said Master ye told me ^routh of Arthur, for he is
fair and gracyous, and ye best knight of his hand ^s yt is in all the world.
Certainly m^dam all that is troth, for all noblenes is in him. well master
said Florence I love you entyrely and also my lord my father loves you right
well, and ye and I have been norisshed up together, so ye be (...) man and
clerk sworn of my straight counsayl therefore ye ought to owe me your faith
and troth without any ^r^son or falsenes, and ye ought to help and to aid me in all my business. Certainly madam quod the master al y^ ye say is of troth, and
so shall I do as long as I live, for I shall keep so crete your counsel as
long as I live Certainly master said she I have great affyaunce in you,
therefore it is so I will yt ye shall know the secrets of my heart, therefore I
require you keep it close. It is so I love Arthur with al my heart, and I will love
him above all other creatures of ye world, for here I swear faithfully too
you that as long as I live I will never have lord nor spouse but al only him*
And when the master ^e^de her say so he had right great joy, and said. Mada^
surely ye have good cause th^^ to do, for he is the flower of all the world,
and I shall help you to have him more than any other person of the world. But
master quod Florence there is one thing that I would feign know of what
lig^age he is of. Certainly madame he is son unto a mighty duke, for Bawdwyn
his squire has showed me so. That is suffycyent said Florence, and so they
left their comunycacyon at that time and departed. Than was sir Rowland borne
into his tent and unarmed. And the senesshall and Brysebar, sir Ancell, and sir
Miles led Arthur to the senesshalles ^ent, and there was he unarmed, and when
he had was^ed his hands and vysage, than brought Bawdewyn him a syrcote of
scarlet furred with armynes the which became him right well he was bygge and hye
above all other and colored like the read rose had be^ set on the white lyly.
Than he said he would go and se sir Rowlande, wherefore every man praised him
much, and all the other barons went thither with him, and there he was till it
was past none, than he took his leave of sir Rowland and issued out into the
field, and than there was assembled all the nobles of the field to behold him,
and they all said how yt he was the most fair creature of the wor^lde, we
think he be son to a king, would to god the fair Florence were his lady and
spouse. And therewith he entered into the senesshalles tent, and he and sir Miles
played together at the chesse, and by that time the king of orqueney and duke
Phylyp his neuewe were come and were lyghted in the mids of the mids of the
medowe ne^e to Florence tent And so he and Phylyp and well a.xiiii. other
knights went straight to Florence tent and there they found her playenge
with master Steven, and when Florence saw the king her cousin and duke Phylyp
she did salute them and enbraced and kyssed them, and said how they were
welcome, and so they made each other great feast and Joy and sat down on
fair new grene russhes, and talked together of many things. And at last the
king demanded of the master tidings of Arthur. Sir said the master he is
not far hens, he is in the senesshalles tent. A madame said the king did ye
not se him nor speak with him as yet. Yes sir said Florence I saw him when he
did Just against sir Rowlande, who had appeled him of falsenes because of his
cosyn the duke of bygors neuewe. And I pray you madame said Phylyp how went
the Iustes between them. Sir there is two ribs broken in sir Rowlandes side,
and one of his arms broken asonder, for his horse fell on him In the name of
god said ye king he knew not as than Arthur, but now I trow he knows some of
his strokes, therefore madame speed for ye knight and be aqueynted with him, for
there is no prince in all the world but y^ would be right glad to have the noble
company of him, and as I understand he has offered him self to be your
knight, therefore receive him and retain him in such wise that he escape not
fro you, for ye can not tell what need parauenture ye shall have of him here
after. Cosyn said Florence ye say right well, the master shall go for him, and
so he did. Than the king said to duke Phylyp his neuew, a sir where is become
the good and faithful company that ye promised to this knight now that ye be
here and know that he is so nere and yet ye make none other semblaunt,
therewith sir Phylyppe sle^te forth after the master for to go to Arthur, and
as they issued out of their tente there entered the archebysshop. Than the king
and Florence rose and did set down the bishop between them.

How that duke Phylyp and the master went to fetch Arthur to the king of
Orqueney and to the fair Florence. Capitulo.lxxvi.
DUke Philyp and the master entered into the senesshals tent, and there they
found Arthur playing with sir Miles. And when Arthur saw duke Philip he went
and enbraced him and said sir ye be right her ^el^ welcome. Sir quod duke Philip
and ye be also here well found Sir said Arthur where is* the king of orqueney.
Certainly sir he is with my lady Florence in her tent, and he desires you ^o
come to him. In the name of god said Arthur, I pray to god send him right
good adventure go we thither and so duke Phylyp and he went hand in hand
talkyng together, and the master the senesshal, sir Miles, sir Ancean, and
Brysebar went after them till they came to Florence tent. And wha^ Florence
saw Arthur her heart began to tremble and suddenly blusshed, but there was none
that took head thereto, for every man took regard to Arthur. And than the king
and the archbisshop rose and went and enbraced him, and made him right great
Joy, and set him down by them. And than the king demanded of him how he had
done sith the time he saw him last. And he answered and said right well I
thank god and you. Than the king said to Florence, madame behold here this
knight, for as god help me I would it had cost me every year.xii. thousand
pound on the condycyon that he were partaynynge to my house, and to be my
companyon, and of this I heartely did require him at Argence, but he than
answered me that he had offered his service to you to be your knight, therefore I
say there is nothing that can be but ladies wins al, madame ye have him
whereof I am right joyous, and it pleseth me right well, for if I had him he
should be yours at your comau^dement, ye be a ^ye^ and a puyssant lady,
therefore do him some good and that shall be your honor. I promise him said
Florence I shall make him a great lord and a ^uissant, and she thought in her
heart that she would make him as great a lord as she was a lady. Mada^ quod
Arthur I thank your grace, and therewith he stood upon his fete, and he had a
gentle body both fair and byg* and so well proporcioned in all his members
yt the more ye Florence beheld him the more he pleased her, there was no lady
there but that they wysshed that he had been partaininge to their lords and
husbands, and as th^^ were talkyng thus together there came to Florence a
messe^ger fro her father the king Emendus, and he showed her how y^ he did
hertely command him to her, and desired her to go bastely to dinner, for he was
coming, and will lodge the same night nere to her tente. Than Florence made
semblaunt as though she had ben^ glad of his coming, how be it she was not
content in her heart with his hasty coming, for she had thought to have spoken
with Arthur after diner* and tha^ she repented her yt she had not spoken with him
at good leyser sith he came. Than went she to dinner, and the king of orqueney
and the bishop sat down together, and Florence in ye mids of the table, and
duke Philip and Arthur sat down together and so al other barons, and they were
right rychely served, and by that time ye tents and pauilion of king Emendus
were come and pyght up not far fro Florence tent, tha^ these came squiers and
officers by great companyes* and every man in his own office did their pain to
make all thing ready agenst the kings coming for the king was coming right
nere. And when the king of orqueney had dyne^ he mounted on his horse, and duke
Philyp and the bishop and Arthur and all other barons and knights, and all
they did as much honor to Arthur as they could do. And thus they rode forth
till at the last they encou^tred king Emendus who had in his company two.M.
horses Than the king of orqueney and the archebysshop did salute the king,
and so rode nere him, and the king between them both. Than Phylip and Arthur
came together, and Philyp did salute the king right swetely, and so than duke
Philyp and Arthur rode forth before the king and duke Philip held his hand
ever on Arthurs sholdre, and Florence s^nesshall, and sir Miles and sir
Brysebar and sir Ansell rode ever about him and made to him r^ght great joy.
And at the last king E^endus perceived Arthur and saw how all yt joy was
made because of him, and he saw well how that he was a right goo^ly knight.
Than the king demanded of the a^chebysshop his brother and of ^he king of
Orqueney what knight he might be that duke Phylyp held so much company
withal. By my faith sir said the bishop he is a right gracious knight and a
chyualrous of his deeds, and there showed the king how that he had Iusted with
sir Rowlande, and how that he ouerthrewe him horse and all to the earth. Th^n
the king of orqueney said, sir it is the same knight yt ye have herd so much
honor and hye prowess reputed of. Saint mary said the king I am ashamed yt I
have made him no better semblau^t than I have done therefore for gods sake
cause him to come to me. Th^n sir Moraus who was senesshall unto the king
v^nte for him Than Arthur returned and went to the king and did of his
bonet, and than the king^ of orqueney put Arthur between him and king Emendus.
Than the king said to him, sir ye be right hertely welcome into this my
country, and sir for gods sake be not myscontent though I have made none
other semblau^t to you or this time. Sir and it like your grace said Arthur
there is none such cause but I am always at your commandment to the
uttermost of my small power, well Arthur said the king I think that is your
name I require you be of our company, and be on our party at this tournay
against the emperor of ^nde. Sir said the king of Orqueney he is all ready on
your side sith he is retained with my lady Floreuce your daughter who has
promised to do much for him. well said the king that she accomplissheth not I
shall fulfill. Thus they were talking together till they came to the kings tent,
and there he aiyghted fro his horse and entered into his pauylyon, the king of
Orqueney: the bishop, Phyl^p, and Arthur followed after the king. Than the
king commanded that there should be a rich pauylyon pyghte up ioyninge to
his, for Arthur to lodge in, for he would have him nere to his person as long
as the turnay endured. And therewith came Florence to se the king her fader.
Than the king rose and enbraced her and set her down between him and the
king of orqueney. And her fader demanded of her how she did. And she
answered and said sir right well I thank your grace, than ^he saw where as the
bishop held Arthur by the hand whereof she was right joyous in her heart. And
by that time the king of Mormal, and the king of valefounde, and the king of
Ismaelyte, and sir Olyuer and all the other twelve pe^es were come in to the
field, for they were all partaynyng to the king Emendus, and so they came
where as he was, than there was great joy and feast made, for than the court
was noble and great. Than the master made great joy of the king of valefou^d
for he was his father, and he in like case was glad to se his son. And all
these kings had well in their company at the least ^ thousand knights and they
were (...) lo^ged about the medowe, the whythe lodging endured well the space
of two leges. Thus the king and Florence and all other made together right
great joy and myrthe in the kings pauillou, and the king of orqueney held
Forence in h^s a^mes and ^ayd. Fair lady my nece here shall be seen novle
chiualrye done with in th^se three days for your sake. Truly cosyn said Florence
here shall be some y^ I had rather were hens. Certainly madame said the king, so
goes the world some to pleasure, and some to an^yau^ce Than he said to king
Emendus, sir behold here in mine arms a rich tresure, he that shall have her
ought to keep and cherysshe her tyght derelye. As god help me said the king
a rich man and a noble and a puyssaunt shall have her who is the emperor of
ynde y^ more. And ^han Arthur herd that he was so sore dysplesed in his heart
that he could speak no word of a great season for all the gold of the world,
nor though his life had layne in ieopardy thereof. Sir said Florence parauentur
the emperor loves an other better than me, than he will let me go. Than master
Steven rose up among them all and said to the king, sir noble and puyssant
king above al other I require your grace of a little audience here before your
grace and all the.xii. peers of Soroloys, and before al other yt be here
present, for I trust that my saying shall turn you both to profit and to
great honor. Than said the king I am content that ye speak. Sir said the
master it is of troth yt there is no creature yt ought to love any thing so
well as his own propre fle^he and blood, the which every man should love, and
hold right derely according to the profyt of the soul and sauegard of the
body and honor of the person. For he that loves not his own, loves folyshly
for I say these words because of my lady Florence here present who is of
your flesh and blood, for she is your own proper daughter, it is of troth
ye are desirous to assure and to mari her to y^ honor of your person, and to
the honor and profit of al your noble r^lme, wherein ye do right nobly for it
is hy^ time I say not agenst it, how be it right his and mighty prince in
doing of this ye ought to regard and considre these.iii. things that I have
showed your grace here before, that is to say, to the profyt of the soul, to
the sauegard of the bodi, and to the honor of her and of you, and of al your
relme. First as to the profyt of the soul ye ought to regard to whom yt ye
will give her in marriage, and to se that it be not agenst her heart, so that she
shall have none occasion to hate him yt she shall have: but that it be to the
pleasure of her her^ and contentacio^ of her mind, for if it be agenst her heart
than shall she hate him, and so shall there never be rest nor peace, nor good
love between the^, the which shall turned to deadly syn because of the hate
and great rumor yt shall be between the^ and so this should be ill for her soul,
and secondly sir ye ought to regard ye sauegarde of her body, for ye know well
how yt my lady your daughter is both young and tender and has be^ ever swetely
brought up, wherefore it is no need to send her into a strange savage country,
where as the air and regyon is contrary to her nature and sauegarde of her
body, she is a hye and a mighty lady in her own country, what need is it than
to send her any ferther, and if ye give her such a husband as will led her
into a far strange country, and parauenture she loves him not, but inwardly
does hate him, what is a worse malady to the body than hate and dyspleasure
and can not re^edy it, so sir than if the country be again* her nature, and also
that she hate him that she must abide with, I repute than my lady in a manner as
deed, and thyrdly sir ye ought to regard the honor of her and also of your
self and of all your country in considering how ye marriage made against
heart and good accord oftentimes has an ill end, for if my lady your
daughter who is right noble and puyssaunt and rich of hauoyre and of lands,
and also she has friends right hye and doub^able, if she should be
encompanyed by marriage to any person that should be against her heart and will
her heart that is so gentyl the which can suffer nothing against her wyll^ I
fere me that she shall do some thing against him or against his the which shall
not sown to her honor nor yet to yours therefore sir it is co^uenyent that ye
regard and consider all this, and sir I say because ye have said that both
noble and rich shall have her who^s the emperor of Yude the more, sir I know
well that my lady does hate him so much that by her will she would never se him
more, nor never to here speaking of him, how be it ye will needs that she shall
have him, she dare not dysplease your grace, wherefore I fere me that if she
have him that all these said things shall fortune, and perauenture worse the
which should be great pity, and also sir ye know well that it is a long
season agone that there was writing made and sealed by you and by all the.xii.
peers of your realm y^ she should never have none other creature in marriage
but all only him that the image should give unto the chaplet, and as yet there
was never none that assayed it, and now sir here is come all your chyualry,
therefore hold on forth your tournay and let se to whom the pryse shall be
given, and than sir let the emperor and all ye other kings and noble knights
come to the pauylion where as the image is, and to whom so ever that she give
the chaplet let him enjoy it with much honor. Than the king of Mormall
rose who was right ancient and a wise prince and most preuyest of the kings
counseyle and said, sir it is troth I am your man and hold all my realm of
you, therefore I owe unto you faith and troth, and also unto my lady your
daughter, and sir for troth I will bear witness and the master has said to
you well and truly for sir if it be so that ye have put to your seal and were
of that accord, and also all these other kings that be here present, and also
all the.xii. peers of your realm, sir I say that ye and also all they ought
to abide fremely by your seals and accord as good kings ought to do And when
that the king Eme^dus had well understand all these sayenges he knew well
how that they said t^outh, and so he answered and said, syrs I knew well how
that ye have said right well and nobly, but it is so that I have promised so
faithfully to this emperor that I doubt me if that I break promise with him
that he will appele me of falsenes and so make mortal war against me. Than
the king of Orqueney said, sir if that the emperor will move any war agenst
you by my head he shall be answered right sharply and soon, for sir comaund
ye your men of war to be ready on your part, and we shall do one deuoyres on
our behalues, and so I trust we shall show him such a sight that he shall be
sore encombred with lokyng or numbryng of them, and if he will have battle one
knight against an other in ye quarrel I am he^^ ready and will be to accomplish
that ba^ayl for my lady your doug^ters sake. Tha^ Arthur thu^ rose up and said
aloude, so yt every man might well here him. Noble and gentyl king it is no
reason that ye should adventure your bodi agenst a knight and ye a king, but if
my lady should have need ye shall not lack of a knight, for behold me here,
who is and ever shall be ready to do any thing that she shall command me. And
so every man there be held him, for he was maruaylous fair and he had on his
syrco^e of s^arlet, yt why the became him wondersly well y^ which plesed much
king Emendus and al other. Than king Emendus said, sir I se well how ye be
worth a knight, and therefore sir if any batail be in this case I give you
grant that ye shall accomplysh it, Therewith Arthur kneled down and right
humbly thanked him. Tha^ the king of Orqueney took Arthur by the hand and
caused him to sit down between him and Florence, wherewyth somewhat she
abashed, and as than tho two lovers du^st make no great semblaunt together
one to another.

How a great and a puyssant knight defied Arthur because he sat by Florence
and did pull down a corner of her keue^ thief the which the wind had blown
up, and so Arthur did Just with him and did cast him to the earth so rudelye
that he was not able to lepe on horsback five months after. Cap. lxxvii.


SO it was y^ as ye king of orqueny and Florence and Arthur sat together as ye
have herd before, there entered into the pauylyon a great knight black of
vysage, and he was gyrt with a greet sw^rd and a long, and bare a great faw^hon
in his hand, and so he came before the king and salu^ed him and al other, as he
yt was come fro the emperor who as than had pigh^ up his tents at y^ one end of
the meadow who said, sir king Emendus I tell you the emperor of ynde will be here
to morrow betymes for gladly he would speak with you as with him yt he entyrely
loves. Tha^ the king said, sir he shall be welcome and to morrow I will go to him,
but sir quod ye king I pray you what people has he. Sir said y^ knight he is
well to y^ nu^bre of.vi. M. knights and squyers right hardy and valiau^t. In
the name of god said y^ king that is a fair company. Than this knight beheld
the king of orqueney and Arthur, who were talki^g with Florence, and he saw how
Arthur dressed down one of the corners of her keuerchefe about her neck the
which had been blown up a little with the wind wherewith ye knight was sore
displeased and said to Arthur, sir knight fair ladies are much bound to you,
for ye can apparayle and array ladies right well, they have of you a good varlet
to be in their chambres, for ye ca^ brus^he their gowns and beat their furs
right well. well sir said Arthur ye may say your pleasure, it pleases me
right well and not al only for your sake, but because I have great joy if I
might do any thing that might be to their pleasures. what sir quod the knight I
believe your fader was a priest, for ye can right well preche, certainly it is
for no good yt ye draw so nigh to ye lady. why f^e^^^ quod Arthur and ye thike
any ill in the maier speak it and remedy it and ye can. Sir quod the knight I
think yt ye have forfeyte with your neighbor. Than master S^euen said sir
knight ye be not wise thus here to report vylany of my lady, for ye say yt
she has forfeyte with this knight, for he can not forfeyte with her but yt she
must be accorded with him, therefore herein ye report vilany of them both. Than
Arthur stepped up in great displeasure and said to the knight, sir if ye grudge
with any thing in your heart show it wortly. Sir said y^ knight with a right
good will wi^h a spear or two with you here without in this fair medowe.
Hasarde might he have that refuses you said Arthur. Than the knight desired of
the king to have armure, and said sir I will stryke of the heed of this
knight or it be night. Mary said the king of orqueney than shall ye be ill
welcome hither. So these.ii. knights armed them and went forth into the
field Than the king Emendus went out of his tent, and so did al other to se
ye Iustes between them, and the archebysshop held Florence by the hand. Than
one delivered a great spear to Arthur but it plesed him not and demanded a
bygger, and so than there was brought to him such a spear that should have
greatly enco^bred an other knight to have borne it all only, and that Arthur
did because he was displeased with the knight, and also because he wist well yt
all the hole noble company of kings and knights should se whether he had
honor or shame, and specially because the noble Florence should behold him, and
so their with these knights ran together rudely and the knight struck Arthur so
virtuously that his spear sheuered all to pe^es, and Arthur struck him so
^udely in the mids of his shield yt he claue it asonder in two peers,
wherewith he made him to turn his he^^s upward, and brast asonder yt are son
of his sadel and payt^elles and gyrthes went clean asonder, and knight and all
went to the earth in such wise yt with the fall yt knight was bruised, so yt he
was not able to lepe on horseback of.vi. months, after, and so lay a great
season in a swoune yt every man had w^nde he had been deed, and when Florence
saw yt she was never so joyful before, and said to her self this knight ought
right well to be in the love of a right hit and a puissau^t damoysell. Than the
king Emendus had great me^^alle fro whence yt such strokes should come and
said, sir knight what so ever ye be god increase your honor, for as for
bou^te and valyauntnes ye have sufficient all ready. Than all the other kings
praised him much, and each of the^ wisshed that he were pertayninge to their
household. Tha^ the king of orqueney ran straight to Arthur and enbraced him
and said. A dear friend ye have rendered to this knight of such service such
gouerdon, and so took and led him into his tent, and there he was unarmed.
Than king Emendus caused the knight wha^ he was received to be borne into sir
Rowlandes tent to bear him company. And when sir Rowland knew all this how yt
he had Iusted with Arthur and how he had speed he had so great Joy that
nere hand he was thereby all hole of his hurtes, and said to the knight, sir ye
be hertely welcome, for ye have found my phisicyon, sir the ^etuary yt he has
given you to drink is full strong, I trow there be therein more bitterness
than swetenes, therefore friend come on to me and keep well your clothes as I do
mine. Than the knight said, sir how is it with you for as for me I ensure you I
am sore dyseased, at which words al^ yt were there did laugh, yt which
saying was told to king Eme^dus, whereat he had great sport, so Arthur went
to the pauilion yt the king had made to be ordained for him, and Florence and
the bishop and mayste^ Steven went to her tent, than she took ye master apart
and said master how say ye by Arthur is he not a virtuous knight and a
valyau^t above all other, think ye yt he has any love toward me. Ye truly
madame I know well more than to any creature living. A than gentle master
quod Florence find some means yt he and I might speak together, for I would
feign know somewhat of his heart by his own report. Madame quod the master I
will do what I can and yt shall be to morrow after souper, and so as for ye night
they departed, and every body went to rest till the next morning that the
king and all other were up.

How Florence and Arthur spoke together at good leyser at the end of the
forest, and there promised each to love other, and there the queen Proserpyne
appeared to them and showed to Florence how that Arthur loved her truly, and how
that they should have each other by the way of marriage, but first they should
endure great pain and trouble. Capitulo. lxxvi^i.


IN the next morning the king arose and apparayled him self ^o go and mete
the Emperor but Florence wol^e not go nor suffer none of her company to goo,
saving all only master Steven, and that was to the intent to speak with.
Arthur. So thus rode forth king Eme^dus and all his company, and Arthur rode
talking with the king of orqueney, and so than the master came and did
salute them and they him, than the master said to Arthur in counsel, sir my
lady Florence does salute you by me as she yt would to you both honor and
profit. A master said Arthur I pray to god send her as much honor and
wealth as I would to mine own propre person, for truly she is a lady of great
honor, and I am greatly dyspleased in my heart yt the king has made me to
ride with him, for now I may not se her grace the which greueth me right sore.
why said the master would ye than gladly se her. Ye sir quod Arthur gladlier
than either father or mother, and yet I am sure they would be glad to se me.
Than I believe said the master that when ye se her yet would ye be gladder to
speak with her. Sir truly master I had never so great Joy as I should have if I
might come to speak with her grace but I se well that will not be. well Arthur
friend said the master love ye well than to speak with her. A master ye have
made covenant with me or this y^ I should speak with her, but I se well ye have
forgoten it, but and ye would do it I would be your knight. well sir and I
cause you to speak with her in pryu^te or it be night will ye than give me a
gift that I shall demand of you. Give you master said Arthur ye truly, and
what so ever ye demand of me and it be the heed of this emperor that is
here coming, for and ye will I shall go stryke it of incontinent. Certainly sir
said the master it shall not cost you so much for my demand is no more than
if I find the means that ye shall have in marriage the noble Florence will ye
than again find the ways yt I may have the fair lady margarete of Argenton
by the way of marriage who is at the port noyre, for I love her with all mine
entyer heart. And when Arthur herd yt he was never so Joyful before, and
enbraced him with all his heart and demanded of him whether he had onye
comfort of her or not. And he answered that he trusted right well to speed,
and the rather by his means. well master said Arthur if she be ones agreed to
you fear no man living that should take her fro you as long as I am able to
ride or goo but that he shall lose his heed in the quarrel. Sir said the
master I hertely thank you, and sir I shall tell you what ye shall do this
night after souper, keep your self in your tent close and goo not to the
court, and than I shall come to you and bring with me the lady Florence, and
there ye shall speak with her at good leyser, but than be ye no thing abashed
but humbly desire her love and favor in all goodly manner, and habandon your
self in all points to be her knight, but though that she make it strange and
deny you at the first, yet be not ashamed therewith and she shall love you the
better, whereby ye shall the rather deserve her grace, for than she shall know
that of great hardynes and valor of heart it is come on you to take in hand
so hye an enterprise Gentle master said Arthur think on this and I shall be
your knight. well sir said the master I will depart fro you as now because
none should mistrust our talkyng. Than the maysterrode forth in to the company
of the king of valefou^d his father, and Arthur rode into the company of duke
Phylyp. And king Emendus rode forth so long till at the last he encountered
themperoure, and there they made great chere each to other, and so rode
together check by cheke till they came to their tents. And than the prestes
were ready to go to mass, and so they herd mass all together. Than after mass
the emperor being in his tent with king Eme^dus and all other nobles that were
there assembled at that time. Tha^ king Eme^dus said to him, sir it has been
or this time agreed and accorded with all these four kings, and all
these.xii. peers of my realm, as well by oath and assurance as by sealynge of
certain charters made and affermed of the same couenau^tes that no creature
should have my daughter Florence in marriage but al only that person that the
image who is in Florence pauylyon should give unto the chaplet that she holds
in her hands, for so it is destenyed, wherefore and it please you when the
tournay is done ye shall go to the image and I believe she will give it you, and
yet our oaths and assurance kept and uphold Verily sir said the emperor I am
well concent, thinking surely to have had the chaplet. well sir said the king
ye have brought hither much people, and also we have a great company with us,
wherefore I fere that if we should tournay togider all at ones that there should
be done much hurt, whereby here after should ensue great hatred and envy,
wherefore me thinks best that one of your barons take in hand the tournay as
to morrow with a thousand knights in his company, and I shall set one of my
knights against him with as many in his company, and so let us do all four
days one after an other, and I think this is a better way than all to fight
at ones. Certainly sir said the emperor ye say right well, and all this
pleases me. Tha^ stepte forth the earl of the isle perdue, whereas Gouernar had been with the countess all night, and he desired of the emperor that he might
have the tournay the first day, the which the emperor did grant him with a
good heart. Than came forth the king of Orqueney and he desired of king
Emendus to answer the earl the same day, and he had grant of his request.
And the king of orqueney took Arthur and Gouernar by their hands and said,
syrs I retain you against to morrow to be on my party And when therle of the
isle perdue saw Gouernar he made to him right great chere. Than king Emendus
took leave of the emperor, and so every man departed in to their own tents.
Than the king of orqueney went about and did chose out such knights as
he would have till it was time to go to their dinner. Than was water brought
forth, and so than every ^an went to the court who yt would Than the king
Emendus and the other four kings were set at the great table and duke Phylyp
and Arthur were set next them, and there they were richely served and made
great feast and joy. And when all the clothes were taken up, than king
Emendus and the other four kings sat them down together on a clothe of sylke
And the king of orqueney took Arthur by the hand, to whom he made right
great joy and bare to him much honor And as they thus talked together, there
came to them the archebysshop. Than master Steven stood before the king and
said, sir my lady Florence your daughter has se^te me to you, for she has
herd say how that the king of Orqueney has taken on him the tournay as to
morrow against the Earl of the isle perdue, and sir because she knows well how
tha^ the emperor has many good knights therefore sir if it please you she would
lepe on her palfrey as to morrow and come and se the tournay and play of these
good knights. In the name of God said the king of valefou^de my lady shall do
right well in her so doing, and I am suit the king will give her license. Sir
truly with a right good will said the king sith it pleases, you, but I doubt
me much that the hete shall anoy her, and also the great prese of horses and
knights shall trouble her. Well sir said the master of that she shall be taken
good head of, and sir my lady des^reth also that Arthur her new retained
knight might tournay to morrow against them without, for she will se him
tournay, and she will send to be of his route her senesshall, sir Brysebar,
sir Ansell and sir Miles of valefoude, and so she will know to morrow what all
these knights will do. It pleases me right Well said the king. And when
Arthur herd that he had great joy and said I am all at the commandment of
my lady* and I thank her grace that it has pleased her to retain m^ for one
of her knights, for in deed so I am and will be evermore. well said the
master sithe it is so that Arthur shall be ^omorowe in my ladies route it
shall be good that he go and sport him with them to be acquented with them,
and to sp^ke and common together, for by keeping of company togyd^r much love is
attained. In the nam^ o^ God said the king of orqueney all this is but well
said, go your way with him and acqueynt ye him with these other noble
knights, and he thought in himself yt Florence would gladly se him* and that
he perceived well sith ye time yt he caused him to sit down by her, for than he
perceived somewhat her lowly countenance to hymwarde, and also king Emendus
was content yt he should go, howbeit the master made no great haste because yt
none should mystrust him. Than the king of orqueney said to Arthur, sir take
your leave of the king and of other, and so he did Than the master went
strayte to the senesshalles tent, who made him right great there, and wha^ that
al other knights knew that he was there they made to him great sign of love,
and desired him yt he would not depart out of their company and so he promised
them to do. Tha^ the master went to the fair Florence and said, madame
Arthur is come to your senesshalles tent, the king has sent him thither to
sport him, than her heart lept for joy and said. A master and when shall I
than se him. Madame said the master he is as now in the company of your noble
barons who does gretely feast him, and as yet to cause him to come fro the^ in
my mind it were not well done, but madame goo to your souper this night somewhat
betymes, and then send for your barons and commau^de them to make the^ ready
against the morning to tournay in the company of Arthur, and than when they be
departed fro you in the mean season that they be about their besynes ye shall
go play^ you in the enter of this forest among the fair gr^ne oaks, and
thither shall I bring him to you. Ye say right well said Florence, so be it,
than she commanded to haste her souper, and so went thereto betymes. And
Arthur all than season was with the seneshall, and all the other knights for
the love of him made great Joy and feast till souper was past. Than master
Steven said to Florence, madame I will goo to your knights and cause the^ to
come to you, and than shortly look that ye deliver them, and than go^ ye thider
as I have showed you, and in ye mean time I shall kep^ company with Arthur. Go
your way dear friend said Florence and cause them to come to me, for I
think very long till I have delivered them. Than the master departed fro her
and went to the senesshals tente, and there he found as than all the barons
was^hynge of their hands talkyng of wives, and laughing at sir Brysebar
because he said he loved better to be stryken, than to stryke an other, for he
said it greatly anoyed him the dyshonoure or myschye^e of an other, for he was
of the opinion yt he could not be stryken without his wife were ill, for he
said that if y^nes were ones mounted up intoo the heart of a woman, it were
hard to with draw her fro her enterprise, and if his wife did ill, the shame
thereof is to her and to her lygnage, and not to him, for he should be angry and
displeased with her ill deeds or vylany. And when they saw the master they
ran too him on all parties, and played with him right swetely. Than the
senesshal demanded of him what tidings. And he answered and said, lords my
lady Florence would feign speak with you incontinent therefore go your ways
shortly to her, but for goods sake tarry not long with her, for she is a
little dyseased in her head go your ways and I shall keep company with Arthur in
the mean season, he and I will go walk together. Than al these lords and
knights apparayled them and went^ to Florence. And than she commanded them
that they should make all thing redye against the next day for the tournay,
and that they should keep company with Arthur as their chief capytayne that
day. Than her senesshal said, madame than it is needful for us to return to
our lodgings to make all things ready. In gods name said Florence go on
your ways, and so they departed, and in the mean season master Steven led
Arthur into the wood. And when Florence had delivered all her knights, she
called to her the queen of Orqueney, in whom she trusted about al other, and
two other damoyselles and said to them. Fair ladies let us goo a little into
yonder wood to sport us, for I have a little pain in my head. Madame let us go
said the queen of orqueney. And so they two went toward the forest ta^kyng
together, and the other two damoyselles came after, and at the last ^he^ came
under the shadow of the fair grene oaks, and there they sat them down And the
master and Arthur were in the forest not far fro them. And at the la^^
Florence and the queen perceived them. Than the queen said, madame I se yo^der
the master and an other knighte with him, but I wore not who it is. And
Florence answered and said, madame that is trou^h, I am glad that I se them,
for I have a little to speak with the master, therefore madame rest you here
a little while and I will go and speak with him Madame said the queen by your
lycenc^ I must also depart and go speak with the countess of the isle perdue
who is come to this tourney, therefore I will go to her and than the master may
come to you. In gods name said Florence so be it. Than the queen departed
and the master and Arthur came to Florence and so set them down together. Than
the master said, madame behold here your knight and true lover. Master said
Florence he is right hertely welcome, for his coming pleases me right well.
Madame said Arthur god give you as much honor and joy as I would to the person
that I love best of all the world. Madam quod the master as god help me I am
in certain yt he would you more honor than any person living, for ye have
his heart and faithful love more than any creature of the world, and madame to
prove that this is true inquire of him the troth, and he is so gentle and
make that he can not hy^e his mind fro you, and madame I pray you be not
dyspleased, for I must needs goo speak with my lady the queen of orqueney, and
so he rose and went his way and left Florence and Arthur together. Than
Florence demanded of Arthur of whens he was. And he answered and said, madame
and it like your grace I am of the realm of france. And of what lygnage be ye
come said Florence I require you tell me the truth. Madame said he ye be so
hye a person that I ought not to hyde any thing fro your grace, madame know ye
for trou^h that I am the all only son of the duke of britayne. That is noble
enough said Florence, but by ye faith that ye owe to me who is the person of
the world that ye love best, and would have her love and acqu^yntaunce, is she
in your count^e or else where show me the troth and hyde nothing fro me I
require ^ou, and what she is that ye would be most ^oyous to have he^ love,
name her to me by the faith that ye owe to all the sacraments of holy church.
Madame said Arthur I r^quyre your grace to pardon me, for she may be such a
person that if I should name her ye would p^rauenture think in me great folly,
for she may be such one that she will not set her heart in so low a place, nor
yet I think scant will here me, therefore it is better to me to be still than
to speak ^oly. Truly said Florence that is had in the heart is bad in the mouth
and speech, therefore show me wherder ye love any lady or damoysell ^n all the
world or not. Madame truly I love one as faithfully as heart of man can
think. Ye said Florence but do^th she know that ye love her. As god help^ me
madame nay. why spoke ye never to her often ye matter. No truly madame said
Arthur. And how is it that ye love her and n^uer showed her thereof, in that it
should seem to me that ye loved her no^, for it is much pain for the mouth to
retain and keep close the fervent will of the heart, for lightly the desire of
the heart puts outward the word of the mouth, as the wind puts away the
smoke, and how should we know that ye love her and it be not showed her, and
if she love you with out speking each of you to other what joy shall there be
between you, of your hertes know not the wills each of other as much auay^eth
two shouelles in a ^^che and ^o man to work with them, as two persons to love
togider and none of them to speak to other, therefore Arthur show me surely if
she yt ye love would^ give you audy^nce should it any thing touch you on the
quycke or not. Madame I shall tell you the troth as God help me sp^kynge with
her that I love should gretely ^^comforte me, for the salutacion that ye sent
me this last day by the master was more ioyefull to me than to have had all
the worlds ^resour^. why do ye set ^o much by that m^ssage or why do ye
love it so much. Madame for the love of you that did send it to me. Arthur
than me thinks ye have love to me. Madame as god help me yt is troth more
than to any other person of the world. well Arthur by the faith that ye owe
unto your baptim is there no love in you that surmounteth this love that ye have
to me, show me the very troth. No Madame by the faith that I owe unto God
neither to fader nor mother nor to any other person^e of the world And would ye
said Florence be glad and I loved you again. A dear lady I have never had nor
can not have so great joy well said Florence it is but folly that ye have set
your heart on me, for if I loved you again ye should be shortly ^layne if it
were known, for ye may se here this emperor who does greatly enforce him to
have me, and he is a great man both of hauyour and of friends, and also my
lord and father and al these other four kings will al run on you to sle
you, therefore Arthur advise you well, for when one begynn^eh a matter, it is
great wisdom to regard and behold what end it will come unto, and the end
of this enterprise is but your death. Madame said Arthur for all that if I knew
it should please your grace I would care for nothing else, for I would
neither dout emperor nor king if I had your noble accord, for if there were
any that would make any busynes in that case I should show him or this yer^
went out more than an hundredth thousand bright sheldes out of France, nor
they should not have so strong a castle or City but that I would bring it
down to the hard earth. Why said Florence for to have me would ye or durst ye
tha^ begin war agenst so many noble and hye rich and mighty persons as be
here, have ye so good a heart or hardynesse. Madame ye truly by the faith that
I owe unto you and it were agenst all the world. Arthur friend said Florence I
can not se the manner how ye might have me, but your thought in this matter
may be to your damage, or parauenture death may happily come to you shortly,
therefore good friend wythdrawe your love, and than do ye wisely, and because
such a man as ye be has thought to love so hye a person as I am, I will make
to you amends for your good will, therefore I give to you the port noyre the
which ye have acheued, with.xx. thousand pound of yearly land, and leave ye
this folly as in loving of me, for ye shall find enough ^esy^e. Why madam will
ye than give me land and goods to thentente that I should leave loving of your
grace, certainly madame I will none of your lands, I love you with al my
heart, and will never take it from you, I care not for your richesse where as I
should lose your love, for I thank god I am rich enough, for as god help me
if I might have your love I would desire no more wealth in all this world. Well
Arthur said Florence is this than surely your mind. Ye truly madame without
any faynynge. Well good friend Arthur said Florence than be of a good heart,
for by the faith that I owe unto you, ye be in the way to have that ye desire
for, if ye be of a good and faithful heart to me ward, I promise you to be in
like case with you, what so ever fall thereof, therefore be ye hardy and
couragyous, and show your se^^ee so to morrow in this tourney that every man
may have cause to doubt you. Madame said Arthur, that lord that fou^med all
the world send your haboundant grace both bounte and valor, for now that I
have your love I am rich enough, for I desire no more of god, and I shall be
true to you while my life endures. well mine own true lover said Florence I
shall tell you what ye shall do, I will that ye shall be too morrow in the ^ourney
in the company of the king of Orqueney who is my cosyn Germayne, and I will
that fro hens forth he be your companion and that ye love him, and I shall
desire him ever to increase your honor, in as much as he may, and I shall
send unto you to give you attendaunce my senesshal and other of my knights,
and they shall be of your route, and there I desire you do such deeds of arms
that it may sound to your honor, and to the rest and peace of my heart, for my
heart shall be repasted and nourysshed with the good renown of your hye
prowess, I may not long* talk with you at this time, nor so often as my
heart would, but always send me your will and mind by master Steven, and I
shall send mine again unto you, keep secret this matter how so eu^r ye do,
for else much harm or evil might perauenture happen to fall to us by false
envy, be ye always true and faithful and I shall do my pain to bring you to
honor. And as they were thus talking together there issued out of the forest
Proserpyne queen of the fayry, and of the castle of hurtebyse, where as Arthur
had been with the wounded knight And she did sit down by Arthur, and both the
lovers knew nothing thereof till she was set, and as soon as Arthur saw her
he knew her right well, and did salute her, and she him again and Florence
also, and she said to Arthur Friend now have ye that your heart has long
desired for, therefore now be in peace and joy, and love your lover with true
and faithful heart. Fair, daughter Florence I saw not you sith I was in your
bed, and there I made knowledge to you of this man, behold here Arthur your
true lover who faithfully and with good heart loves you, therefore fair
daughter love him again, for I did desteny him to you in your natiuyte in the
mount of adventures and at the same time I destenyed also that ye should in all
thing resemble unto me. Than Arthur beheld them both one after another, and
so perceived well that they were like in all things, for there was no
creature though he were never so crafty that if he beheld well at length them
both could not dyscryue the one fro the other they resembled so nere together.
Tha^ she said to Florence behold here your lover, and I will be^e witness yt
he is at this time the most true lover that lives, for I have right well
proved him, and than she recounted to Florence how that she had desired his
love in the forest, and al^o caused him to come unto the castle of hurtebyse
and there did as much as she could to entyse his mind to cause him to love
her and also how she made other to tempte him, and how all that would not
avail, for always he was in one ferme point, whereat Florence right swetely
did smyle. Than Proserpyne said to Arthur, friend ye shall have her in
marriage, but first ye must suffer great pain And fair Florence because that
the emperor and the king your fader be great together* therefore your fader
will be right sore dysplesed with you, in such wise that if he might have you
at that time he would put you both to death but for all that be not abashed,
for I shall make the peace between you right well, there is no great love
bitwene him and the emperor, but I promise you or all be done I shall cause as
great hate to be between them, in so much that each of the^ shall defy other
to the death, wherefore live ye in rest and peace and love each other faithfully,
and I shall think right well on every thing that shall be behouable for you in
this ma^er, and so thus I bequethe you both to God for this time. So than the
queen Proserpyne rose and went her way so sodeinly that none of them wist
where that she was become whereof they had great maruayle. Than Florence made a
token to master Steven that he should come to them, and when he was come she
said. Master behold Arthur here I deliver him to you and look that ye take
good head to him, and show to my cosyn the king of Orqueney that I send him
to him, and say that I desire him to think to do him as much honor to morrow
as he can do for my sake, and good sweet lover Arthur thynk ye to morrow how
that ye are a lover to a fair gentyl damoysell, and to a right noble lady and
a rich give ye gifts largely to these noble knights both harneys and horse
the which shall make you to be beloved of every body, for I bileue the time will
come that we shall have need of friends, there is no sweter thing than largely
to give, for thereby oftentimes all ill will is appeased, and master I charge
you to deliver to him what so ever he will have, Arthur now go on your way and
lodge in the tente yt the king my father has ordained for you and look ye be
fre and large and give with good heart and so as for this time adieu mine own
dear lover and so for a remembrance kyssed him and than she departed and went
to the queen of orqueney. And Arthur and the master went to the senesshals
tente, and there they encountered Gouernar and Bawdewyn. Than within a while
Arthur took leave of the senesshal and of al other that were there and so
departed and went to the kings tent, and by the way he met the king of
Orqueney, who issued out of the king of valefou^des tente, who was father unto
master Steven, and when he saw Arthur and mayst^r Steven together he did
salute them and made to them right great chere and ^oye, and so they went^
talking together till they came to his tent. Than the master took him aparte
and said, sir my lady Florence t^usteth much in you, and loves you right
entyerly* wherefore sir she has lent you here Arthur her own knight and
puts him into your hands, and she desires you that all the honor and
aid that ye can do, that ye will show it to him to morrow in the tourneye for
her sake. And when the king h^rde that he had right great joy, and said to
Arthur, sir by the faith that I owe unto the king, I promise you that I will
bear to him fay^hful company and true love, for the love of my lady and of you,
so thus they were so long together till it was t^me to go so their restes and
^o than every man returned in^o th^yr own tents and ^odgynges. And the
master delivered to Go^ernar.xi. horses for Arthur, to then tent that he
should give them away the next day.

How that Arthur had the honors o^ the tou^ney the first day, the which was
made for the fair Florence between the king Emendus and the E^perour who
would have had Florence to his wife, on the which day Arthur gate him self
great praise among all the barony, in so much that every knight was glad to
be in his company, whereof the fair Florence was ^ight joyous, for she loved
him above all other. Cap. lxxix.
IN the next morning all the kings and other ^ose and herd mas^e, ^ such as
would took a sop in wine, and than eueri man Armed him. Tha^ Gouernar and
Bawdewyn by the commandment of Arthur did give and depart man^ horses and
much harneys to sundry knights where as they saw mister and need, the which
knights thanked Arthur right hertely and promised to give him their help and
socoure at all times, and against every man, whereby it appears that there is
nothing but by large gifts it is made soft and meke. Than the tidings of
Arthurs courtesye was spredde abroad in every tente, and there it was said how
that there was not in all the world so free a knight as Arthur was. And these
words came to the au^yence of the fair Florence, whereat her heart did laughe,
and there withal she mounted on a palfrey, and the queen of orqueney, and the
archeby^shop in her company, who showed her how that Arthur had a great
renown, and counseiled her to love him well. And thus was king Emendus mounted
on his horse, and al his barony to behold the iournay, and Arthur was ready
armed in ye place whereas the tournay should be, and so than there came to him
the king of orqueney with his baner dysplayed, and moo than.ii.C. in his
company. And when he came to Arthur he said in open audyence, sir your noble
valor and hye prowess is right well known, and I bileue verily that in all
this tournay there shall be no knight like unto you, therefore sir I offer to
you my body and all my company to be this day under your governance. And when
Florence herd that she smyled for joy, and than there came to him all such
knights as he had given to before both horse and harneys, and they all
thanked him right swetely and said, sir we will be of your route this day,
for we make of you our capytayne in this tournay, and as they looked down into
ye valey they saw where there came Florence senesshall with his baner
dysplayed, and with him sir Brysebar, sir Insell, and sir Miles of valefou^de
and with the^.iii. C. knights who were all pertaining to the fair Florence,
and they all came to Arthur, and took him for their chief capytayne. And wha^
Arthur saw the great honor that was done to him he had so great joy that his
hardines encreaced thereby more than the one half, and so dashe to his horse
and rode forth and did salute the king Em^dus who held his one hand in the
lap of his daughter Florence, than ^he king did salute him again and said,
sir I r^quyre you help to aid this day our knights if ye may. Ye good Arthur
said Florence and show so forth your self that it may be known how ye be a
knyght^ pertainynge to a gentle damoysell. Madame doubt ye not but I will do
my deuoyre for my will thereto is good. Tha^ Arthur returned and went again to
the king of orqueney, and he was so fair and goodly to behold in harneys
that every man had their eyes upon him and said This knight is the sovereign of
bounte and beauty of all the chyualry of all the world. Than there came to the
field the earl of the isle perdue, and with him a thousand and.v.c. knights
all with baners and stremers dysplaied wavering in the wind with great noise
of trompettes tabours and busynes, and than there was mounted on their horses
to behold the tournay the emperor and king Jonas and the duke of bigor, who
as than was late come out of his own country. Than har^des began to cry
knights do your best go together bail, bail, than began the tournay and
knights went togider by great routes, and laid on each upon other, and Arthur
rusht forth with his horse so rudely as though the earth had trembled, and struck
so the first that he encountered with all in the mids of the breast so rudely
that he ouerthrewe knight and horse al togider on a hepe. Tha^ Florence said to
the king her fader, sir of yonder knight that is fallen I hope we shall have
peace of him all this day. Certainly fair daughter said the king that is true,
for that stroke came from the hands of a good knight. Than Arthur encountered
an other and ^oke him by the sholders and drew him so rudely to him ward that
he cast him down in the mids of the pla^e, than he took his sword the which
Florence had sent him, for he would not draw out clarence his good sword to
thentent yt he would normayme or sle no knight by his will that day, but he
gave with that sword such strokes yt he brought a sleep who so ever he touched
so that they were fayn to tomble to the earth whether they would or no^, and
there he did so much at that bront that he bette down a.^v. knights, than
every man yt saw him said, this knight is none earthlye man, but we think
rather he be a ^ende of hell, whoo thinks he be nothing pertaining to god,
for he confounds all that ever he attayneth unto, so every man was abashed
of his hye prowes and virtue. Than the king of Orqueney always followed Arthur
with his eyes, and by the reason of the noble prowess that he saw in him, ho
took in him greter hardynes than ever he did before, and there with he rusht
into a great flock of knights that were of the emperors party, and laid on
round about him, for he was a right noble knight, than al those knights and
diverse other ran round about him, for they knew well if they might take him
prisoner it should be a great honor unto them and alsoo they thought they
should have a great ransom for him, but always he defended him self ^yght
nobly, but at length it auayled him not for the prese was so gr^t and some took
him by the neck, and some by the sholders, and so would have unhorsed him. And
when sir Neuelon the senesshal, sir Brysebar, sir Ansell, and sir Miles saw
the king of Orquenyy in that case, they dashed al together intoo the prese to
help him and there they did right nobly, how be it the senesshal was be^en
down, for his horse foundred under him, and so there they would have taken
him prisoner. Than Gouerner saw that, and he dressed him ^o that part whereas
the senesshal was taken, and Gouerna^ held in both his hands a great l^uer,
wherewith he laid on among those knights with so mighty and heavy strokes that
he astonyed whom so ever he touched, and ^here he did so much that by very
force he caused the senesshal to remount again on his horse, and in the mean
sea^on the king of Orqueney was holden right short so that his h^rse foundred
and fell under him, how be it after yt he ^efended him self right valyauntly.
And when Arthur who as than had dyscom^yt^d a great company o^ knigh^es s^w
the king in ye dystresse he ^ush^ for^h into the prese and encountered with the
son of therle of the isle perdue, and took him with both his hands about his
sholders and did cast him down on other two knights that were on foot, so
tha^ one of them fell flat to the earth, and than he rose again and be held
the knight that was ^allen on him and said, ma^ye sir ill have he that did
cast you upon me. And when Arthur had overthrown this knight he took his
horse by the rain and brought him to the king and did light of his own
horse to help the king to mount thereon in the spyte of all his enemies, and
than by great force and hardynes did lepe up again on his own horse. And all this saw well Florence and the archebysshop, and all the other kings and
praised gretely that deed He is the best knight of the world said the king
Eme^dus. Sir that is true said the bishop. And when Arthur had remounted the
king of orqueney again he said. Sir put your self no more this day in to
so great a prese of your enemies, but sir and it please you hardilye ^olowe
me. Than Arthur put him self in to the same prese that was before on the
king, and they were as than al ^ested on Gouernar and on sir Brysebar, who as
than had great need of help, and there Arthur laid on round about him by
such force yt he bette down knights and horses to the plain earth, for he
struck none but that he went to the earth, and so there Arthur did so much
that he overcame all that route, and when he was passed ^heym he saw where
three knights had beten down sir Miles of valefounde. Than Arthur dressed him
so to the first that he ouerthrewe to the earth, and took his horse and
delivered it to sir Miles and caused him to mount the^on. Than Arthur struck so
the second knight that his horse bare him all about in a trance, for he
wist not where he was. And Gouernar with his lever struck so that the third he
fell flat to the earth, and when he releued he fled awa^e as fast as he
might, for he durst no longer abide for all the Cite of Paris, and the other
knight yt was borne on his horse all in a straunce came before where as the
king Emendus and Florence was, whereat the king and she did laugh. And when
the knight reuyued he said all on her. The knight is an ill carpenter, for he
makes many chyppes, I trow all the fendes of hell has sent him hyder, shame
have he I wene he is a burgonyon. Than the king laughed at the words and
said, there is non^ can abide him, for his strokes are right valyaunt^ That is
true sir said the bishop. Than Arthur saw where there was a great company of
knights well to ye nombre of.ii. hundred in a route, and among them was the
earl of the isle perdue, and he had taken more than.xl. of Florence knights,
and unhorsed them and was ledinge of them forth as prisoners. And when Arthur
saw that he was right sorrowful, and so by great randon he dashed in among
them, and there did such deeds of arms that all that beheld him wondered at
his valyauntnes, for it seemed that he was but newly come to the tournay, he
claue asonder sheldes and vnba^red helmes and braste asonder gyrthes and bette
down knights together on hepes, and Gouernar with his lever delte strokes right
rudely, wherewith he brought knights a sleep, so that some of them wyste not
which way to turn them. Tha^ came to him the king of orqueney, Brysebar,
^he senesshall, sir Miles, and sir Ansell and many other knights, and so by
that time there was horsed again a.xxv. of the knights that were before taken
prisoners, and there they delte so with their enemies that the earl of the isle
perdue was sore dyspleased, and he and a.xviii. in his company ran all at
ones at Arthur, and there by forse they slew his horse under him, wherewith he
was right sore dyspleased, and than stepte up on his fete and gave so many
great strokes and heavy that he cast every man to the earth who so ever he met
withal, and than he repented him that he had not born with him that day
cla^ence his good sword, how be it he gave such strokes yt none du^st aproche
to him, but every man fled fro him. And when Goue^nar saw Arthur a foot in
that great prese, he aduysed well the earl of the isle perdues neuew who was
right well mounted on a good horse, and so took him with his one hand by the
neck and pulled him down on his horse mane and gave him a right great stroke
with his le^er between his sholders, and as he thus held him Arthur came and
took him by ^he leg and ^u^bled him over his horse out of the sadel and threw
him to ye earth and so took his horse and did mount there on. And when the earl
saw his neuew on the earth, he spurred his horse to come to his rescowe. And
than Arthur enbraced him so at his coming and spurred so his horse that he
drew him clean beside his sadell, and in the spite of al his enemies he took
him prisoner and caused him to be yielded to king Emendus, and so was put into
the keeping of the fair Florence, and tha^ she caused him to be unarmed, for he
was right weary and was very hot and sore chafed. And than Arthur dashed intoo
the prese, and there did what he list him self, for he bet down knights and
wan horses and the emperor saw well how that he al only discomfyted his
knights, the which grieved him right sore, and also the duke of bygor was right
sore dysplesed in his mind because he saw Arthur do all that day so nobly,
and at the last he knew well how that was he that had slain his neuewe at
the City of Argence, wherefore he would feign have runned on him to have slain
him, but he doubted much ^he king of orqueney. Than he said to the emperor,
sir the earl of the isle perdu^ is taken prisoner and all your knights clean
dyscomfyted, the which is ^o you great shame without so be that ye pu^ thereto
some other manner of r^^^dy, and all the shame that is done to us, is done by
yonder knight with the white sheld^ and by the other knight with the great
l^uer, and verily it is he that slew my neuewe sir Isembart at Argence, and
sore wounded my cosyn sir Rowland* and also he has slain sir Fyrmont my
tresourer and so he has done me right great damage, and I know well he is a
right fair knight and a young, and of his hands such as ye may se* and this
I say because of your love Florence whom ye shall have, but his prowes and
goodness parauenture may cause her to love him for the heart of a woman is sone
turned and changed, this knight has done you al ready ^ight great damage, and
is likely to do you more without ye take right good head, and put thereto right
good counsayl Therefore sir I require you let me have the tourney to morrow, and
I shall so handel him that I promise you he shall not be here again on the
third day. well sir said the emperor I grant you your desire. Sir said the
duke I thank you, and so they left their talking as at y^ time. And Arthur all that season laid on round about him as freshely as though he had but newly
begone the tourney, and the king of orqueney beheld him meruaylously and spoke
never a word, and when he had long beholden him, he took at his hye prowess
such hardynes that he habandoned him self intoo the prese, and laid on freely
with his sword. Than the tourney was more greter and more thycker than is was
of all the day before and so there Gouernar brake his lever, tha^ he laid hand
on his sword and did therwyth as much as any good knight ought or might do.
And so at last Arthur and the king of Orqueney did so much that they unhorsed
all the earls company and were set on foot sore beaten, in so much that they had
much pain to stand on their fete. Than Arthur stood in the field with his sword
in his hand saying, lords if there be any moo that will come let them prese
forth, I am ready to answer them, and so at last ye king of orqueney and he
returned fro the field. Than the king Emendus encountered them and enbraced
them all armed as they were, and specially Arthur and thanked hi^ much of the
pain that he had suffered y^ day, for sir all only by your prowess this day
themperours people are dysco^fyted. And as they were thus talking together there
came to them a knight f^o ye duke of bygor who said to ye king Eme^dus, sir the
duke of bygor demau^deth of you the tourney to morrow. Than stepte forth the
king of mormall and ^ayde, sir may i^ plese you to suffer me to have to morrow
the furney agenst the duke of bygor. Sir it pleases me right well said the
king Emendus, therefore I desire you do your part, for we have the honor this
day, therefore do your pain that we may have it also to morrow. Sir said he
doubt not I shall do my true deuoyre, tha^ he took Arthur by the hand and said
Gentle knight flower of all chyualry I desire you as hertely as I can do so
much to morrow as ye may win a king for evermore as yt it would please you to
show part of your hye prowess to morrow in ayding of my quarrel, and in the
defense of the noble honor of my lord ye king here present. Ye sir said the
king Emendus and thereto I will desire you, for by your hye prowess we have the
honor this day, therefore it should grieve us gretely and we should lose it to
morrow. Tha^ Arthur said, sir with a right good will I shall do my deuoyre. And
when Florence herd yt she was not content in her mind, for she thought that
Arthur had been sore weary of that days journey, and thought that it should
greatly anoy him if he turnayed the next day and so she thought she would let
that journey y^ she might, tha^ she commanded the king her father to god as at
that time, than she took with her into her tent the archebyshop and diverse
others of her barons, and king Emendus caused Arthur to be brought into his
tent with all his hole baronye, and all the emperors knights spoke of no thing
but of Arthurs prowess, for they said that there was not again in all the
world so good a knight as he was beholding and considering al his deeds, and
how that he had borne him self in this turney, and the emperor said yt he
would rather resemble to him than to have such an other empire as his own
was: and the bruyte of Arthurs renown sprad so far abroad, till at last it
came to the hearing of sir Rowland, and than he said I thank god that such a
knight has Iusted agenst me, for my honor is the more Tha^ the king Emendus
came into his one tente, and than caused Arthur to come to him, and there were
all the other kings who did much honor to Arthur, and there were diverse that
said to the king of Soroloys, sir behold here this knight full of bounte and
worthy to have great honor, and all that they said by Arthur who as than was
right hor^. Than the king co^maunde^ two squyers to stand with a towell and
blow wynd into his face, and thus Arthur stood before the king and he was
goodly for to behold, for he was straight long and bygge, and above all other
right gracyous of his words, for every man had great disporte at his lowly and
goodly words. Than the king commanded yt there should be brought to Arthur a
mantell to cast on him to thentent he should take no could, and the king of
orqueney did put it about him, yt which became him right well. And than
th^re came to them Gouernar to whom there was made right great feast and joy,
there came thither the earl of ye isle perdue who^ Arthur had taken prisoner in
the tournay, and in his company.xxx. knights to pledge him of his ransom.
And the king made him right good chere. And sir Roulande and themperours
senesshall who had Iusted before with Arthur by that time were heled of their
hurtes, and were come also in to the kings tente to sport them and to here
tidings of the tournay. And wha^ the earl of the isle perdue saw them he had
great joy, and demanded of them how they did. And they answered and said
how that they had been sore hurt, but as than they were well amended. Than the
earl said to the king Sir it is of troth that I was taken in your tournay,
therefore sir I am come to you to be delivered of my ransom, therefore may it
please you to show me your pleasure, and I am ready to accomplis^he your
commau^deme^t. Certainly sir said the king it lies not in me, for that matter
lies in the pleasure of Arthur, who is here present who that took you
prisoner in ye field. Sir said Arthur saving your grace that is not so, for the
tornay is yours, and I am but as one of your knights and of my ladies your
daughter, therefore sir it were no reason that I should say or do any thing
where as your grace is present. In ye name of god said the king we will that ye
shall speak your mind, and it shall please us right well all yt ever ye shall
say or do. Than the king of valefou^de said, sir ye shall do thus, for it is
reason that ye do as my lord the king will have you. well sir said Arthur in
ye name of god, and so stood upon his fete and said to the king, sir and it
like your grace sith it is your pleasure yt I shall speak I say that this earl
here being present shall keep you company this dinner season, and after dinner
to sport and to play him with you as long as it shall please him, and when it
will please him to return to the emperor that he and all his company go
frank and free, and I will desire him to take of my gift this sword, the
which I think be good and sure, the which Gouernar had brought to him before
fro master Steven by the commandment of Florence to thente^t that he should
give it to the earl, and in deed there was not a better sword in all the
emperors host, and there Arthur desired the earl for his love to take it for
a remembrance, and also desired him to take a horse of his gift in recompense
of the horse yt he had taken fro him in the field. And when the king herd
Arthur have these words he had great joy, and loved him withal his heart
because of his gentilnes. Than therle answered and said, sir gentle knight of
heart I have richesse sufficient and am able to be set a right great rau^some
though it were.xx. or.xxx. duckettes, and also I have swe^des and horses
enough, how be it y^ hye prowess that is in you and the great gentylnes of
your heart provoke me to receive all your courtesye, and verily I take all
your offer of you on the condition that ye will fro hens forth take mi aid and
socours in all your busynes agenst al persons except my lord the emperor.
Than Arthur a^l smylyng thanked him much. Than the king enbraced the earl for
the love of Arthur, tha^ was water brought for^h an^ the king washed and the
earl and so dyned together and made good chere and were right richely served,
and after dinner they sported them togeth^r till it was time for the king to go
to his ^est. Than the earl took leave of the king and so commanded him to god.
And Arthur conuayed him a great ^pace, and did give to the earls knights many
good horses and palf^aies, whereof they thanked him right gretely. And at the
last A^thur ^oke his leave of him and so depa^ted, and than the earl went
straight to ye emperors tente where as he found him accompanied with the duke
of bygor and many other noble knights* and there the earl made grea^e praysyng
of Arthur before themperoure and showed how of his gentylnes he had suffered
him to go qu^te, and how that he had given him many gr^te gif^es, and also to
his knights. Uerely said the emperor there is not such a knight in all ye
world* neither of beautye nor of prowess, for he is the sovereign knight of al
other, for I s^ none like him of prowess, I would I had given ye best city
that I have on the condition that h^ were retained as my knight. And when ye
duke of bygor herd the emperor praise so much Arthur, he was in his mind right
sore displesed and said to therle, sir ye make here a great ple^yng of a flying
vacabond* for no man knows what he is, nor fro whens he comes, and ye make
of him here such a noise, that no man takes head of any thing else, I can
not tell you what he has given you, certainly it is no honor for you to take
any gifts of a man fugytyue that is fled or banysshed out of his own
country, but sir I will ye know certaynely yt what so ever gifts he has given
you, to morrow shall I give you his head from his sholders therefore I hold him
wise in that h^ has d^parted of his tresour in his life days to you and to
your company, for I waran^ him he shall do so never again. well sir said therle,
threte him hardely fair and easily that he knew it not, for and he do I fere
me lest that he will fly away, and than ye can not give me his head and sir
where as ye say that no man ^noweth what he is, sir I ensure you he is a right
noble wise knight, and it makes no matter to a noble knight where so ever he
becomes, for his boun^e will show right well his estate and where as ye say
that he is a vacabonde and is fled out of his own country, sir it had been
better to your neuew that he had fled into England or that he met with him
at ^^ge^ce, for there your neuewe lost his life, and there ye fled a way
without by doing of any farewell, he needs not to ^aue any care though ye say
thus of him for an ill tongue enpayreth ^euer the honor of a noble wise man,
and I en^ure you I will show him th^se vylayne words that ye say of him* and
if any ill come to you thereby take it a worth. Than ye duke began to wa^e
ang^y, and so the ma^er would have been worse and the emperor had not been, for he
caused them to be departed and to be in peace. Now let us leave to speak of
them, and return to Florence.

How that Florence feigned her self to be sick, to the intent that Arthur
should not tourney the next day, for she was in fere that Arthur had been
weary because of the travail that he had endured the first day of the
tournay. And how that the emperor when he knew that he went to se her, and
so did her fader king Emendus, and all other kings dukes earls and barons,
and all the hole chyualry. Capitulo. lxxx.
Emendus. Florence.


When that Florence was departed fro the king her fader and entered into her
tent, than she drew her into her secret chamber and called to her master
Steven and said. Fair sweet master I am right sore displeased in my heart
because yt the king my fader has desired my love Arthur to turnay again to
morrow in the company of the king of mormall, for I see well he does not
consider the travail that he has endured this day, for if he were made of
stele he ca^ not endure thus every day to travail, alas if any ill or
dishonor should come to him I should die for sorrow. I se well they yt thus
desire him to go forth again to morrow love but little his health, wherefore I
will find some means to put of the tournay as to morrow to thentente that he
shall be the more fresh the next day after, therefore I will send word to the
king my fader how that I am sick in my bed desyring him that as to morrow the
tournay may be deferred till the next day, but master I desire you let
Arthur have knowledge of the troth, for else I fere me he would be sorrowful
for my disease Madame said the master ye speak wisely and I shall tell you
why, first thereby Arthur shall well rest him, and secondly it is so he is as
now gre^ly praised of his courtesy, and is taken as chief companion with the
king your fader, and with all the other kings and barons, and as I understand
he is gretely in the grace of the emperor and of all his knights, for all
this hole assemble loue^h him, and as soon as the emperor hereth of your
disease he will come and se you accompanied with all the nobles of his company,
and when the king your fader hereth of his co^mi^g to you I doubt not but that
he and all his other.iiii. kings with all the noble men of their company will
in likewise come to se you so than thereby here shall be assembled all the hole
chyualrye, and so than at some hour conuenyent while they be al here it shall
be well done to assaye the virtue of the chaplet, and to se to whom the image
will give it ^o. Alas master I love this knight, and I would not for any
thing that an other should have it, and I fere me leest the image will give
it to some other person. Than the master all smiling said, madame what
perauenture and the image give me the chaplet would ye be content, and as he
spoke he smelled to a fair rose that he held in his hand. Master quod
Florence ye please me right well and I love you faithfully, and also I ^o.
Arthur. Madame said yt master than sith I please you and that ye love me and
Arthur also, than it makes no matter wheder that I or he have the chaplet since
that your love is on us both. Ye but mayst^r said Florence, in my love there is
a dyfference. And what is ye difference I pray you madame show me the troth
Truly master that rose that ye hold in your hand right well does sygnyfy
it. This rose madame said the master and I pray you how. Harken master to me
and I sh^l show you, it is so I se in that rose three manner of things, first
the closoure without the which keeps fro hurting the budde till it be a full
rose spradde abroad, and when it is spradde than the leaves be fair and read,
and in the mids of the rose there little grains resembling to gold, and out
of this rose there may be felt such odor and smell that it perseth
throughout the nose eue^ to the heart for the heart will rejoice with the good
sm^ll thereof. In the name of god said the mayst^r all this that ye say is
true, but madame what does all this sygnifye. Master said Florence I shall
show you the closure without the which keeps ye budde fro hur^ing til it be
sprede abroad sygnyfyeth you, who has kept me till this day without
enpayryng, for it is now time that the rose sprede abroad that is to say to
mary me and to keep my land as it pertains to the daughter of a king, and
these leaves of the rose that be so fair and read, signifies your troth and
faythfulnes, for I have found ever i^ you great troth and bou^te toward me
and also to my fader and to all the hole realm, and master in this rose there
be grains like unto gold, the which is the precoyust metal of all the world,
and that is sygnifyed by the great and excellent clergy that is in you the
which is more precious than gold, for thereby ye have always kept and defended
me in all my needs, and master by these.iii. points I love you But the fourth
thing that is in this rose is the sweet ^auour thereof, the which perseth all the
hole body even to the heart, for in the flagrau^t odor thereof both the body
and the heart is reioysed, and certainly master this.iiii. love that comes
thus of this rose is min own love Arthur who is chief rose, and above all other
most fair, and above all other knights most valiant, as the rose is chief
of all flowers. Madame said the master I se well ye have had a good and a sage
master, and I se well how that ye love me well with out, but ye love Arthur
inwardly, and by my soul ye can not do better, for ye can have none better
than he is, and know ye for certain that none shall have you but all only he.
Gentyl master said Florence help me thereto, for all my trust is in you. Madame
as I understand he is come into the senesshalles tent. well master than go
your way to him and show him that I will that he come and se me, and bring
with him the senesshal and such other company as he will, and than shall I se by
their countenance if they be content though I make Arthur a little good and
lowly semblau^t, for oftentimes the will of the heart shows it self fayrely
outward, for it is hard to know an other man's will without there be made to
him some manner of semblau^t whereby he shall have occasyon to utter somewhat of
his will. Madame said the master I se well it is a subtle thing of a woman's
wit when they li^t them self, than the master rose and went into the
senesshalles tent. At which time Brisebar said, here lacks none now in this
company but the master. And with that word he entered in at the door. And than
sir Miles said, loo syrs when one speaks of the wolf lightly he sees his
tail* and so therwt they welcomed the master, and caused him to sit down by
Arthur. Than the master said to Arthur, sir how have ye done in this tournay,
how seems you by the knights of this country, be they not as valiant as the
knights of france. Certainly master said Arthur they be as valiant and
rather more hardy, for there is none yt I have seen but yt they ought right
well to be received in to the hye order of chyualry. Sir said the master ye
may not depart fro hens now till ye se my lady Florence, for and ye do she will
not be content. Master said Arthur in the name of god I would right glad to se
her, but I know not her pleasure in yt behalf, let us goo and se her all
together, and so they rose and went all together with Arthur, and the master
went in before the Florence and said. Madame behold here is Arthur who is
come to se you. He is right welcome said Florence, and so she rose against him,
and the queen of orqueney took Arthur by the hand and set him down by her and
she demanded of him how that he did sith the tournay. And he answered her
how that he did right well. By the good lord said Florence in the tournay ye
suffered much pain and travail, and right well there ye did, wherefore your
lover if ye have any ought to love you the better and this she said al smyling
and laid her hand upon his heed. Madame as god help me said Arthur I have
not as much love as I would have. In good faith said the queen of Orqueney if
she were right hye and noble she should be right well enployed on you. Ye truly
said Brisebar I would he were beloved as well as I would according to my will,
and when Florence herd yt she smyled and said, sir Brysebar by the faith yt
ye owe unto the hye order of chyualry and to saint George what is your will in
that case. Madame said he I will not show that, for peraue^ture it should
displease you. Nay by my soul said Florence I will not be displeased what so
every say, therefore show me your mind, also I command you so to do.
Madame sith it is your pleasure I shall show you, I would yt ye loved him in
such wise that he were your lord and husbonde, for a more sweter, courteyser,
nor a better knight can ye not have again in all the world, for a more gentle
gracious co^pani coud not be found again as should be of you twain. well
Brisebar said Florence and say ye this with good heart. Ye truly madame by all
the saints of paradyse. well sir senesshall said Florence and what should be
your mind. Madame said he I pray to god I never go out of this place but I
would it were so on the co^dit^o^ that it cost me as much as I am worth. Tha^
she demanded the same of all other, and they al with one voice said ye same. well
syrs said she behold well wheder ye have wysshed your profit in this or not,
for ye al know well how that this emperor demau^deth me of ye king my fader
and would have me to his wife, and therefore if it were so that an other took me
he would have great despyte and move against him war, whereby should ensue that
al ye should be put ^o pain and trouble, and in peril of your ly^es, for ye
be al my men wherefore ye ought to defend me against all mine enemies. Madame
said Brisebar by my soul I care not for that against who so ever it be, and it
be not against my lord your fader, for if Arthur might be ever among us we
need not to care for all the world nor any manner of pain yt I should suffer for
his sake should never grieve me. well than quod Florence I se well yt ye would
suffer pain and peril of your body on the condition yt I would have him to my
husbonde, and than she demanded so of all the other knights if they would in
like wise. And they answered yes all with one voice. And how should I be sure of
this said Florence. Madame said they all we faithfully assure you by the faith
of our bodies and lesynge of our lands and goods. Than Florence said to
Arthur, sir ye have here many good fre^des. Madame said he I thank them and
god reward them, and I shall deserve it to them when I may. By my faith quod
the master I believe you well, for ye have a large and a plenteous heart, and so
therewith Florence brake their words of y^ matter, and fell in communication of
other matters til it was time to depart. Than Arthur took his leave of Florence
and of all other* and master Steven conuaied him forth and said to him in his
ere, sir be not trobled in your mind though as to morrow yt ye here y^ my lady
Florence be somewhat diseased* for she will do it for such causes as ye shall
know right well here after. well quod Arthur I am and ever shall be content with
her noble pleasure, and so than ye master took his leave of Arthur and
returned again to Florence, and Arthur went straight to the king of orqueneys
tent, and than they both went together to the king Emendus te^t who as than was
rysynge fro sleep, and so they three sat down together and talked of many
things till it was time to goo to their souper, where as they were rychely
served, and after souper they sported them together till it was time to goo to
their restes. Than the king departed and al other for that night.

How the tournay the next day was deferred because of Florence disease.
Capitulo. lxxxi.
IN the next morning betymes the master rose and lept on his horse, and so in
great haste rode straight to ye kings te^t, and there he did alight, and so
was brought to the kings beds side. And when the king saw him there so erly
he demanded what tidinges* Certainly sir said the master my lady Florence
has been this night right sore seek, and is as yet right sore holden with the
collyke in her body, therefore sir she desires your grace that ye tournay this
day may be deferred till to morrow by which time she trusts to be well amended
so yt she will come and se the tournay if god will se^de her any ease of her
pain. Saint mary said the king gentyl master has she than such pain, I
should be right sorry if she should fortune to dye as God forbid without any
issue of her body, for I will never have wife, nor I have no mo children but
she, wherefore than the realm of Sorolois should be without heir of the right
stock the which should be a great damage to all this realm, I think verily
she had to great hete yesterday ye beholding of y^ tournay. Sir said ye master
with gods love she shall amend to morrow, but in good faith sir it were time
that she were well married, well master said the king I shall think thereof right
shortly. In the name of god sir quod ye master it is time yt I return to my
ladi, but sir for gods sake defer ye tournay til the next day because of
Florence sekenes Than the emperor sent a knight of his to Florence to know what
malady she had, but Florence had commanded tha^ if any body came fro
the emperor yt he should not be suffered to enter into her tente, so thereby ye
knight could not be suffered to enter and so returned again to the emperor and
showed him how yt no body could enter into her tent to speak with her, and than
the emperor said well I will go se her my self, than all the kings, dukes,
earls* and barons yt were in his company mounted on their horses and rode forth
with the emperor And when the king Eme^dus herd that the emperor was ridynge to go
se Florence his daughter, than he mounted on his horse and al his kings and
knights with him, and when they were al met and assembled together there was so
much people as though all the world had been there, and at last a messenger
came to master Steue^ and said, sir the emperor and the king and al other noble
men yt be in this field are coming to se my lady Florence. Than ye master went
and did show that to her. Tha^ she commanded that there should be made ready a
rich bed before her pauilyo^ right before ye face of the image with ye chaplet,
and the image was properly besene with a kyrtyl of purpel ^atyn and a gown of
grene sarcenet, and upon the bed there was a rich quylt wrought with coten
covered with crimsen sendal stytched with thredes of gold, and shetes of white
sylke, and over al a rych furre of ermynes, this bed was right rich, and
Florence laid her down in her bed in a light kyrtell of chaungeable vyolet
tartorne some what blusshynge on a red color, and she had a keuerchefe of
white sylke on her head all loose untied wherefore there might be seen under the
keuerchefe her fair throat as white as yuery, and her fair golden heir
flying about her neck and her fair face was in a mean neither to long nor to
ro^nde fresshely colored like the rose on the lylly, and on her there was a
cast ma^tell of grene silk and she did cast out her arms thereon, so that her
white hands and her long fyngers were stretched abroad on the mantel and the
queen of orqueney sat by her who said to the master, sir make your self
now as though ye were dyspleased because that my lady is sick. That is well
said quod the master, and so shall I do, therewith he rusht togider his hat and
made semblaunt as though he had been very angry, whereat the queen and Florence
did smy^e right swetly. By y^ time the emperor and all the kings and knights
were come, than the emperor went on the one side of the bed and the king her
father on the other side, and so sat them down on the sides of the bed, and
all the other lords and knights stood round about ye bed. Than there came
also the king of orqueny and Arthur with him, and they len^e them down on the
beds fete. Than the emperor did salute Florence, and she said how yt he was
welcome. Than the king her father d^maunded of her how she did, and laid his
hand on her head. Tha^ she beheld her father and said, sir I have been this
night and al morning right ill at ease, but thanked be god I do now better
than I did. God be thanked said the king. Than the king of orqueney who was
right preuy of her counsel said. Madame think not long, for with gods leave
ye shall soon be hole. And than she beheld him and smyled a little and said,
sir I would be glad thereof* and so thus they talked together of one thing and
other a great space. And Florence said how yt their company did her much
good.

How the image in the pauylyon did set ^er chaplet on Arthurs head in ye
presence of the emperor and of.x. other kings and of all the hole assembly,
wherwyth the emperor was right sorrowful because he thought to have had
Florence in marriage, but he failed of his purpose, for the image took no regard
neither to the emperor nor to none other there, but al only to Arthur to
whom freely she did give her chaplet. Capitu. lxxxii.
ANd when the master saw his time and knew how yt all ye hole barony were
there assembl^d he rose upon his fete and said in open audience. Mine own dear
and redoubted lady Florence our lord god has done you this day great grace
and honor, for I believe verily yt never before this time there were never so
many noble men assembled together as be now here present for to se a lady yt
is dyseased, for madame ye may se here about your bed an emperor.x. kings
dukes and earls mo than.l. and al ye hole barony of thempyre of ynde the more,
and also of.x other kingdoms, wherefore madam ye ought to be right joyous and
more at ease in your heart* for they al love you and are glad you to plese, and
also as I understand my lord the king your father has great will if god be
pleased to puruey for you a right hye and a noble marriage* and I think yt if
it plese him now in his mind may be well satysfyed, for I believe he shall never
se again in one day so many noble man assembled together as he^e be now
present, wherefore now he may fulfill his pleasure, and according to my mind it
were time that ye were married Than Florence sat her up in her bed and a lady
cast a mantel about her neck and said, master it is of troth how that the
king my father here present has had a great season good will to mary me in so
much that he is now well at the point thereof if it be his pleasure, but it is
s^ y^ my lord the king my father by seming takes no head to accomplish
such destenyes as were destenyed of me at my natiuytye, and because that
paraduentur^ all ye my lords yt be here present at this time knows not what
it is yt was destenyed on me, therefore I shall show it here in open ^udyence.
It is of troth that my lady my mother whom god assail when I was borne s^e
sent me by ye king of Orqueney and mine ^ncle tharchbysshop and by the queen
of orqueney who are al here present, to the mount of adventures, and there it
was destenyed on m^ by the queen of the fayry that no creature should have me
to his wife but alonely he to whom the image in my pauilyon should give the
chaplet that she holds in her hands* and if that any other should take me he
should dye an ill death therefore and to this covenant did seal and swear the
king my father and all his other kings and.xii. peers of his relme and so on
that point take me who so will if he list to put him self in the adventure if
he have not the chaplet, therefore let the king my father do as it pleases him,
I pray to god he do so that it may be for ye best. Than tharchbisshop rose and
said to the king, sir it is true all that ever my nece has said, for sir I was
present and both saw and herd al this that she has said, for as god help me
if I were a man of the world, and so yt I might have her to my wife, I would
not presume to have her for all the good of the world, with out so be I had first
the chaplet. Than ye king of valefound rose and said, according to my mind it
were best that all the hol^ chyualry the which ben here ass^mbled go al to the
image, and first let my lord the emperor begin, for he is most worthyest both
of noblenes hauou^ and riches, where it should seem that he is worthyest to have
the chaplet, and if he fail thereof, let than al ^ther assaye every man after
other till it be given to one or to other. In the name of god said the king
of orqueney ye say right and so let it be done. And the emperor said he was well
agreed thereto. Than Florence said, I can not tell who shall have it, but god
give me him in marriage, so that my heart may be in rest peace and joy, and so yt
he may love me, and I him. Tha^ it was agreed on al parts yt who so ever had
the chaplet should have the lady without any repellyng of that covenant, and
thereto Florence contented. And when it was thus agreed on all parts than there
was laid before the fete of the image.iiii. rich cusshyns of silk and gold.
And than it was ordained that the king of orqueny and duke Philyp of sabary
should^ keep the place, and to se that none should have any wrong there that
day, and also it was ordained that Arthur and Gouernar should take heed and
mark well to whom the image would give unto her chaplet Than the emperor said,
fair lady will ye be glad and I have the chaplet. Sir said Florence by the
reason of having thereof ye shall be the more nere my heart who so ever shall
have it, and ye more joy shall I have, and the better shall he plese me. Uerely
said the emperor tha^ will we go and assay, and therwt he rose, and the duke of
bygor, and therie of the isle perdue led him straight to the image, and there he
kneled still on his knees fro the morning till it was nere even song time but
he was as nere as he was at the begi^ning and at the last he rode full of envy
and shame and sore dyspleased in his heart, but he made at that time no
semblaunt. Than after him went thither kings dukes, earls barons and knights
each after other all such as were to mary, but nothing they were obtained, so
than there were no mo to assay but such as kept the place And than duke Philyp
of sabary went^ to the image for he was to mary, but he sped as his f^lowes did
before. Than the king commanded that Arthur and Gouernar should go and assay.
Than Arthur answered and said, a gentle king here has been this day many
noble kings and ^ther princes that has failed, wherefore than should I presume
to assay to attain to that they have all failed, I think it were but a folly
for me to assay well said the king but I will that ye go and assay according
as the covenant is made. Ye truly quod the emperor we will yt ye shall go. Sir
quod the king of orqueney ye must needs fulfill the kings pleasure and
themperours, well sir said Arthur I am content since it is their plesurs and
than he commanded Gouernar to go before, and so he did but no comfort he had
there, than Arthur rose and went to the image, and as soon as he was on his
knees the image beg^n to take color as fresh and as quick as though she had been alive and fair and swetly she turned her self toward Arthur and did set
the chaplet on his head in the sight of al ye assemble, where with the emperor was
right sore displesed. And when the duke of bygor saw yt he was sore troubled in
his mind, for he hated Arthur to the death, in so much yt in a great fury he
stepte to Arthur and took the chaplet fro his head and did set it on his own
head, and all that while Arthur was on his knees. And wha^ Gouernar saw how
that he tok^ away the chaplet fro his master and see it on his own head, his
blood began to tremble for anger, and stepped forth to the duke and laid his
hands on the chaplet in such wise that he rasshed it clean fro his head, and
a great deal of his heir therewith and so delivered the chaplet to Florence,
and she t^ke it and set it on her own head, and so than there was none that
durst touch it. And when the duke of Bygor saw how that Gouernar had taken fro
him the chaplet and p^rte of his heir the^with he lyf^ up his fyst and struck
Gou^rnar a great blow on the cheke and did hurt him righ^e ill and caused him
to blede sore at the mouth and at the nose. And when duke Philyp of sabary saw
Gouernar hurt and bledyng he drew out his swerd and struck the duke of bygor in
the mids of the breast in such wise that the point of ^ys sword appeared a
foot behy^d at his back, and therewith the duke fell down star^e dead to the
earth. And when the emper^ur s^w his duke dead he cried on his knights to arm
them and to take duke Philyp. Than themperours knighte^ assailed him on al
part^s, and he defended him right valia^tly. ^han the king of Orqueney stepte
for^h when he sow his neuewe in that case, and drew his sword and laid on
among them right^ fierslye Than Arthur dash^ into the prese with clarence his
good sword in his hand, and he laid on and gave such strokes that he betre
down knights by great heaps. Than every man ran to their harneys on both
parts. Than Florence said to her senesshal what do you stand and look on and
se Arthur in peril of his life, ye ought to sustain his quarrel. And when her
senesshall herd her say so he stepte out into the field and cried out as
loud as he could to harneys syrs incontinent and help to aid and socour
Arthur. Than stepte forth Brysebar and sir Miles* and well to the nombre
of.v.C. And when the king Emendus saw the matter began to kyndel so sharply he
took his horse and rushte into the prese and with great pain, and what with
fayrenes and foulenes together he departed them and co^ma^nded yt none should
be so hardy to stryke one stroke more as at that time. Than the emperor came to
the king and said, sir king ye have begyled us and slain our duke and many of
our knights, therefore sir be ye in certain that as long as I live war
shall not fail you till the hour yt I have the head of the king of orqueney
and of Philip his neuewe and of this knight Arthur. Sir emperor said A^thur,
oftentimes a man fails of yt he desires nor I know not him yt will stryke of
our heads as long as I have in my company clarence my good swerd. Ye ye sir
emper^ur said the king of orqueney be not half so hastye, for or ye have our
heads first th^re will many lose theyrs, and one thing I assure you yt if it
were not for the dysp^esure of my lord the king I should go se you in your
own country between this and Ester with such a company of people yt it should
^e hard for you to nombre them* for ye shall find them that little doubts
you. Than the king Emendus commanded him to be in peace, and tok^ the emperor
by the hand and said, sir be ye not dysplesed ye and I will go apart and agree
right well together. I am content said the emperor Than they avoided from them
eue^y man Than the king said, sir ye know that it was agreed both by you and
by me and by all other, that who so ever should have the chaplet should have no
wrong, but should enjoy it peasybly, therefore your duke did amysse to take
it fro Arthurs heed. Sir said the emperor though my duke did wrong yet I was
suffycient enough to make ame^des for his trespace though ye Gouernar had not
taken it fro his heed and pulled away his here therwt, and yet worse what need
duke Philip to ^lee him therefore. In the name of god said ye king duke Phylyp
did, but his office, for he was one of the kepers of the field to se yt none
should have wrong, and your duke ^trake Gouernar on the face, where fore he had
his deserte* why sir said the emperor though he struck ye knight yet was it no
reason ye duke Phi^yp should slay him, and the king of orqueney to slay many
other of m^ knights. Sir said the king though the king of orqueney was moved
he could not chose, for he was puissaunt enough to have made ame^des for the
death of your duke that h^s neuewe slew* but your knights ran on him to have
slain him in my presen^e, therefore blame not the king though he rescowed his
neuewe, for a gentle man's heart ought not to fail his knights in time of
need, and specially his own neuewe. In the name of god quod the emperor he
ha^h slain my duke, and he is a duke, therefore I will that he dye for the
cause, and tha^ it is duke for duke. Truly said the king this w^r hard to
do, for if ye begin any noise or trouble I have great fere that it will turn to
your own h^rte for it will be ouermoch for you to acheue to that ye would have,
but sir I se well ye be right sore dyspleased, but sir oftentimes deed men
makes peace, and by marriage many things are appeased, sir I shall put to my
pain how yt ye shall have for all this Florence my daughter to be your wife, on
the condycion that all ill wylles and heart brennynges may be quenched on al
parts and every thing pardoned. And when the emperor herd^ yt he smyled a
little and said, verily sir for ye love of Florence I would forgive and pardon
a right great trespace, Sir said the king I will go speak with my lords and
come again to you incontinent, ^han the king departed fro him and called to
him his.iiii. kings and the arch^bysshop and diverse other knights and said*
lords this emperor is right sore dyspleased, and to say the troth he has
right good cause why, and I can find none other agreement in him but either he
will have duke Philyppes heed, or else he will come on us right shortly with a
great host, or else without he have florence my daughter, this is the amends
that he will have for the death of his duke therefore gentle kings and lords
show me your minds in ye behalf. Sir said the kyng^ of valefou^de it is my
mind and advise yt it is good to eschew al perilles yt may hap to come
both to the body and to the soul and to our ha^oures and friends for a thing
of a little cost ye se well how that the emperor is the most chief cr^sten prince
of all the world and right puyssau^t both of hauour and of friends, therefore sir
be ye not abashed to g^ue him Florence your daughter, ^or the^by shall ye ^inne
many great friends, th^rfore sir it were better for you to give her to him than
to this knight Arthur of whom we know nothing but that he is a knight right
good fair^, and beauteous. And in very deed so he is sir quod ye king of mor^al
this same is mine opinion. And mine also said the king of Ismaelyte. In the
name of god said the king of orqueney, against that I have agreed ones unto and
set th^rto my seal shall I never be contrary, for I will never break mine oath,
nor I will never love the emperor. Nor I also said ye archebisshop by the faith
that I owe unto you I shall never be of that accord yt the emperor should have
Florence. Than the king ^mendus and in the name of the other three kings
answered and said. well syrs I that am king over you all shall agree you in
this matter well enough, ye sh^^l se right well what I shall do in this m^^er.
Than the king of orqueney and the ^^chebisshop departed fro the counseyle not
content in their minds. And when the king Emendus saw that the king of
orqueney and the archebys^hop his ^rother were departed from him, he went
straight to themperoure and his.iii. kings with him and said, sir we will be
your friends and well wyllers, and ye also to ours, and are content to fulfill
our will so that ye will in like wise do to us First sir we will that ye pardon
and forgive the king of orqueney and duke Phylyp his neuewe, and to all other
all manner of ill will that ye have to them for all ^^ner of deeds done by them
or any of the^es, and on this condycyon I and these three kings give you
Florence my daughter in marriage, and I put you in posse^^ion of her by this
glove, and so drew it of ^is hand and gave it to the emperor And he re^^iued it
with great joy and thanked them right hertely and there pardoned all the ill will
that he had to any body and so there they took each other by ye hand and went
talkyng together to their tents.

How that Proserpyne queen of ye fayry who rese^bled to Florence laid her
down in Florence bed in Florence stead, and sent her to the port noyre
with the archebysshop and all her knights. Capi. lxxxiii.
Emen^us. Pro^^rpyne.


When the king of orqueney ^ tharchebyshop were departed fro ye king Emendus
and saw^ how y^ the king had granted Florence his daughter to the emperor,
they went^ straight to Florence where as they found Arthur, duke Phylyp, and
Gouernar and they were all still armed to thentent to defend them if any need
were. Than the king of orqueney caused them to be unarmed and took Arthur by
the hand^ and said, sir as long as I live and have any land I shall not fail
you, but I shall aid you to dye in the quarrel to defend your right. Sir
said Arthur god tha^ all thing fourmed keep you and reward your gentylnes.
Go we quod the king and speak with Florence, and so they went to her, and as
than she was still sitting on her bed all afraid of the bronte and fraye
that was there, and the Queen of orqueney sat weeping for f^re of ye king her
husband. Than there sat down the king, tharchebysshop, Arthur, and Gouernar,
and also there was the master and duke Phylyp. Than the king said to
Florence, madame be ye in peace and rest and doubt ye of nothing, but it is
so my lord the king your fader has given you to the emperor, and has put
him in possession of you by the glove of his hand, and all the other kings are
of his accord, but tharchebysshop your uncle and I are departed fro them
because we will not consent thereto in no wise, therefore madame may it please
you now to show us your mind wheder ye be content to have him to your
husbo^de or not for if it please you it behooves us to be content, and if it
please you not to have him here I offer my self to you that or he have you
against your will I shall rather adventure to lose my heed from the shoulders,
and I shall put in ieopardy to slay the emperor in defending of this gentylman
Arthur in his right if ye be so content. And when Florence herd him say so
she began right sore to weep, and when she might speak she said, a gentyl king
now I se well I have no mo friends but you and such other as be here present,
alas I am of ye estate that I ought of right to have many mo, but when my fader
and mine own men fail me, alas to whom shall I compain me, alas unkind
fader will ye give me him whom that I hate mortally, and take fro me him that
I love faithfully, and therewith her heart was so oppressed with bitter sorrow
that she fell on so sore a weping that it was great pity to behold her, and
when she might somewhat speak she said, certainly I had rather dye than to have
the emperor, and as God help me ye be all my friends and so I will retain you
as long as the world serves me, the which yet somewhat comforts me,
whe^fore I will no longer hyde my heart fro you, and so she turned her self
toward Arthur and said, behold here him who has my chaplet my dest^ny is on
him, wherefore I will have none other but him* for him I love and will do. And
wha^ the king of orqueney herd her say so he had great joy and said,
madame we be all your own men and friends and of your counsel and would
always your honor and profit, and as God help me ye can not do better than
to set your heart on this noble knight Arthur, for better: more wise more
goodlyer ^ha^ he is ca^ not be found, and sith it pleases you as for my part
I am the same accord, and to him I offer now my self here present, now let
all other speak every man for him self. Tha^ the archebysshop said, fair
lady ye are my nece and I am your uncle, in good faith I am agreed to your
pleasure, and I promise him faith and troth, and to aid him against all
persons. And I also promise the same said duke Phylyp. Than the master rose
and said, madame I am your clerk and always I trust I have counsayled you to
your honor and profit, and I allow you in this matter, and am faithfully
agreed thereto, but I counsel you let my lord here tharchebysshop ensure you
both together hand to hand. Than they al answered with one voice, the master
says right well and all we be agreed thereto. Than the bishop took Arthur by
the hand and the ladies hand also, and there did ensure them together with
words of matrymony, whereof each of them had great joy. when that Florence and
Arthur were thus ensured together the king of Orqueney said* syrs now have we
purchased war with the king and with the emperor, for as soon as they know
of this matter they will be right sore dyspleased with us all, therefore now let us
se by what means either by war or for^e or how this matter may be brought to
pass. And as they thus talked together suddenly there sat on the bed by
Florence Proserpine queen of the fairy. And wha^ they beheld her they had
wonder of her sodeyn coming and they could not well know her fro Florence they
resembled so nere together, but tha^ Proserpine said to the king, sir ye dema^de
and study how ye may bring about this matter I shall show you, I am she that did
desteny on Florence yt she should have Arthur therefore I shall show her how he
shall do, therefore Florence fair daughter se^de ye i^concynent Gouernar and
Brysebar to your castle of clear toure, and let al your tents and pauylyons
and such other abylementes of war as ye have there be conuayed in all haste
to the port noyre, and garnyshe that castle richely and surely in such wise
yt ye may be able to sustain the defense of an hole host, for there shall be
made against you right great war, for the king Emendus your fader will be so
ill content with you and with Arthur that if he might have you both in ye fury
he would cause you both to dye a shameful death, for he has now so great love
to the emperor yt they be as al one, but for ye there is not now so great love
between them but I shall cause here after as great war bitwene them so that each
of the^ shall be desirous to ^^e other, wherefore fair daughter Florence rise
out of your bed and apparaile your self and do on the masters gown and his
hat and mount on your horse and take the queen of orqueney with you and also
tharchebysshop your uncle and duke Phylyp and al your other knights and ride
ye straight to the port noyre, and the king of orqueney here present and the
master and Ar^thur shall abide here still with me, for I will lie here still in
your bed i^ ye stead of you, for ye know well there is no creature can know
the one of us fro ye other Go ye your ways and let me alone with the remnau^t
of the matter. Madame said the master for gods sake think well on the honor
of my lady Florence and we shall believe you well. Than Florence departed her
knights asonder and did send them one after another all to Argence and
commanded them there to abide for her, so they al departed and within four
days they aryued at Argence, and there they found the fair lady Margarete of
Argenton who was come the day before from the port noyre and she received
them with joyful chere and there they showed her how they were come thither to
abide on the coming of their lady Florence, and when she heard that she was
right joyful and caused all her house to be apparayled right richely to
thentent to receive Florence right honorably and sent for many of the
gentylmen of her country to give attendau^ce on her. Than Gouernar and Brysebar
departed fro Florence and went to ye clear toure and conuayed al her stuff to
the port noyre both tresour and abylementes of war and vatayle sufficient
to garnysshe the house withal for the space of.vii. year, and they had xxvii.
charyottes continually carieng.vii. wekes together of such stuff as pertayned
to Florence and to the furnysshing of the place, so that it had of every thing
sufficient for the space of.vii. year.

How that the lady Margaret of Argenton with all her hole barony went and
met Florence and received her in to Argence with right great feast and joy.
Ca. lxxxiiii.
ANd the third day after that Florence knights were departed fro her, tha^ she
and the queen of orqueney and tharchebysshop departed and went first to the
cite of pancopone the which pertained to the bishop and there he commanded al
his people to be ready on a day warning in their best apparaile for the war,
and in likewise did Gouernar in the realm of blau^che toure, so than Florence
departed fro pancopone and went straight to Argence. And as soon as the lady
Margarete had knowledge that she was two days journey fro Arge^ce she mounted
on her horse and.v.C. in her company and went and encountered the lady Florence
of Soroloys, and when she met her she did right humbly salute her and said*
Madame ye be right hertely welcome in to this country, and madame behold me
here who is and shall be your humble damoysel ever to be ready at your noble
commandment. Certainly fair lady Magarete said Florence I take you and will
do for my special friend and faithful lover. Than ye lady Margarete went to
the bishop and to duke Phylip and right swetely did salute them, and than she
demanded of Florence how it was with Arthur. And she answered and said: fair
lady Margarete he is abyden in the court with the king of orqueney and with
master Steven. And I pray you madame how does he. Verily said she right well.
Than am I glad said the lady Margarete, for Arthur is my lord and chief fader:
for he has re^dred again to me my land whereof I was dysheryted by the neuew
of the duke of bigor. well said Florence care not for yt for ye be as now well
revenged both of the uncle and of the neuewe. A madame said she blessed be them
that has brought that about, and thus they rode forth on their way and they
encou^tred sir Miles and sir Artaude and diverse other knights pertaining to
Florence, and al other knights of that country drew thither by great flocks,
and wha^ they were nere to the cite of Argens, than there issued out of all the
honest burgeises of the cite riding on good horses, and fair faucons and
sparhawkes on their fistes and they were well to the nombre of fifty well arrayed
al in one suit half scarlet and half grene, with many tabours and trompettes
before th^ym. Than the bishop saw well how that the cite of Argence was right
noble and goodly, for he saw ye bright son glimmering on ye fair chirches
and hye steples covered al with fair led, and also he saw the rich baners
and stremers pyght out of wyndowes of the fair houses, and the batylmentes
were pyght full of sheldes, basenettes, helmes and speres to thentent to show
ye strength of the cite, and the streets were hanged with clothes of gold and
of silk, and with read sendall chaungeable with grene and all the helles of
the town sole^pny did ring so that it was great joy to se and to behold the
noblenes of that cite. In this manner Florence entered in to the cite, having in
her company beyond.xv. hundred knights, and the burgeyses of the cite mounted
up into their windows to behold Florence who was led between the bishop and
duke Phylip, and thus they rode til they came to the palace, and there descended
and so mounted up into yt hal than Florence entered into her chamber and
apparayled her, and by that time her diner was ready and the tables ready
covered, than Florence and the archebisshop and all other sat them down to
dinner and were right tychely served, and so there Florence soiourned the space
of.viii. days. Now let us leave Florence at Argence and return to the emperor
and to king Emendus and to Proserpyne who was ^ayde in Florence bed in the
stead of her.

How that Proserpyne was ensured to the emperor in the stead of Florence, and
how that the king banysshed out of his country the king of orqueney, and also
she king of valefounde and master Steven and Arthur. Capitulo.lxxxv.
SO it was that wha^ Florence was departed fro ye court of king Emendus her
fader and that he had given her to the Emperor, tha^ each of them went into
their own tents to diner, and the king of Orqueney wh^ was abiden still in
Florence tente with Proserpyne queen of the fayry who resembled so nere
Florence that the one could not be known fro the other, and there he and Arthur
dined with her, and after dinner the emperor came to king Eme^dus and said, sir ye
have given me Florence daughter, and sir I know well how that the king or
orqueney and Arthur be still with her in her tent, and they have been always
contrary to me, wherefore I doubt me leest they (...) Florence mind fro
mewarde, therefore sir I pray you let us go and fiau^ce her this night and let
us be married to morrow. Sir said the king I am content, and I promise you yt al
such who so ever they be yt be contrary against your mind shall incontinent
forsake my company, than the emperor and the king and the other three kings went
straight to Florence te^t, and as soon as they were entered the king of orqueney
and the master and Arthur rose and welcomed them, than the king sat him down
on the one side of the bed and the emperor on the other side than the king
said to Proserpyne wenynge to him it had been his daughter Florence, fair
daughter it behooves you to be fiaunced this night to this emperor and to
morrow ye shall be wedded with great joy* well said sir Proserpyne sith it is your
pleasure I am content let it be done inconty^ent, than the king demanded for
tharchebyshop his brother to the^tent to ensure them togider Sir said the
master he is gone to pancopone for abesynes yt he has to do there and duke
Phylyp also. And where is Florence senesshall and al other knights. Sir surely
they been al gone with him. In the name of god sir said the emperor the
archebisshop has been always contrary to me in yt I should have Florence,
therefore sir never trust me but yt he is gone to do some manor of ^reason to
the intent yt I should not have her. Than stepped forth ye master and said, sir
emperor ye say no^ wisely to call the archebysshop traitor or to say yt he
seeks to work any treason against you it is to largely said, for there was
never as yet any noble man of S^roloys that ever did any treason against you or
against any other man living and though that he be not of the accord of this
marriage he does but right, for saving the honor of my lord the king here
present all that be of that accord are forsworn and have broken their promesses
and couenau^tes and does against their own seals, and as for me as long as I
live shall I never accord thereto. No master said the king will ye not than
accord thereto, but hold all other forsworn, by the faith that I owe unto god
if ye were not the son of a king I should make you well to know how ye have
spoken folishely here in my presence, but thus much I say unto you I charge you
incontinent that ye avoid this pauylyon, and I defend you the coming again
to my syghte, and dyscharge you out of Florence counsel. well sir said the
master sith I se than that I must needs leave your court and coming before
you and banysshed fro ye counsel of my lady for this emperor here present,
wherefore let him be in certain yt as long as I live he shall never put ringe
on my lady Florence finger nor wedde her for all the power yt he has or can
have. Than the king was sore dyspleased and rose and had thought to have
stricken the master, but the king of mormal and the king of Ismaelyte did
hold him, and therewith the master went out of the pauylyon. And when the
king of valefounde saw his sone cast out of the court and how the king would
have stryken him he rose up and said to the king, sir for the esche wyng of
all ill and trouble before this time I was agreed that this emperor should
have your daughter, wherein now I confess me yt I was forsworn and did therein
contrary to mine own seal and promise, the which consentement now here I
openly revoke and deny, for as god help me I will be no longer forsworn,
therefore I say to this emperor yt he take her not, for if he do let him be in
certain that there is and shall be in the realm of va^^^ounde a king who is not
his friend, but he is and shall be his mortal enemy. And when king Emendus
herd him speak in ye manner he was right sore dyspleased, for he loved and
bileued him right well before and said, sir king either consent to this
marriage or else forsake the presence of me and shortly avoid this pauylyon.
well sir than I will depart, and I warraunt you I will no more desire to come
in to your sight, I say no more but god give grace ye do well, and therewith he
went out of the pauylyon and went to his son master Steue^. Than the king of
orqueney rose up and said to the king, sir I have great marvel where ye have
taken this counseyle to enstrau^ge your self fro your friends and counseyllers,
verily sir ye be in an ill mind in this case and al for this emperor who
shall never do you so much good, but by the faith yt I owe to my lady Florence
if he were not here in your presence I should take his heed fro his sholdres,
and let him take good head that after that he is married that he carry her not a
mile out of this place but I shall be there ready to encou^tre him and not to his
pleasure what said the king do ye menace and threte him here before me, shortly
I charge you avoid this pauylyon, and beware yt I se you no more in my sight,
and in the despyte of you all the emperor shall have Florence my daughter. well
sir said the king of orqueney sith ye have banysshed me out of your court and
of your presence I assure you I am able right well to withstand your malice,
but sir I counsel you convey this emperor surely when he departs in to his
own country lest yt he be not encou^tred wtall to his dyspleasure, than the
king of orqueney took Arthur by the hand and said, sir come ye on with me and
lene this court, for no noble man ought to abide here. Sir said Arthur* I will
go with you with a right good will, than they departed out of the pauilion, and there
they found the king of valefou^de and master Steven and to them he said, now
syrs we be al banisshed out of ye court king of Emendus god now be our help,
than they trussed up their tents and sent their people every man home to his
own country, and so than they mounted upon their horses and so departed, and
they had not ryden a lege and a half bu^ yt the king of valefounde was in a
sudden study. Than the king of orqueney demanded of him what he ayled to
study. Sir quod he I muse in what manner we may do anoyaunce to this emperor
who would have our lady against her own will and ours, the which sore greueth me.
well sir said the king of orqueney care not for y^ matter, for I ensure you he
shall not wedde her this year. Sir said he it can be none other wise, for
the emperor and the king her fader will now led her to Cornite and there fiau^ce
her against her will. well sir said the king of orqueney fere ye not that, for be
ye in certain that as for Florence she is all ready at the cite of Argence where
as she abides for us. why said the king of valefounde and who is it than that
lies at Florence bed in the stead of her and is so like her. I shall show you
said the king of orqueney, herd ye never speaking of the queen of the ladies
of the fayry that be in the mount peryllous where as florence was co^uayed as
soon as she was borne. Yes mary quod the other king I have h^r^ thereof diverse
times. well sir than sed much I say to you that she that lies in my ladies
bed is Proserpyne queen of the fayry, and she did desteny her at her natiuyte
that she should be like in all things to her, and so she is as ye may se,
wherefore ye shall know full well by to morrow this time that there was never
emperor and king so abused and abashed as they shall be. In the name of god
said the king of valefounde I never herd speaking of this matter before, but
let us haste us and so speak with my lady Florence at Argence, and there let us
advise ferder what shall be done in this matter. Sir ye say right well and so
let us do, for I am sure we shall have great war. Than they sent two squyers
before them to Florence to give her knowledge how that they would be with her
the wednesdaye next after by mass time. And when Florence knew that she had
right great joy, and caused incontinent the places to be apparayled where as
they should lodge, and than the archebysshop and duke Philyp rose and went and
encountered them, and when they were met together they made right great joy
each of other, and duke Philip enbraced Arthur, and the bishop was with ye
kings and so entered in to the city, and all the burgeyses and comynalte of
the cite made great feast of Arthur, for he seemed to the^ so gracious and so
fair yt they all said. A good lord what a noble couple should it be bitwen
our lady Florence and this noble knight Arthur, would to god he had wedded her.
Than they all alyghted at the palace, and there Florence met them and enbraced
every king each after other, and in like wise did the fair lady Margarete Than
Florence came to Arthur and said mine own sweet lover ye be right hertely
welcome. Mine own dear lady god increase in you noble bou^te and honor. And
than the lady Margarete ran to master Steven, and each of the^ right swetely
enbraced other, than they went all to their chambres and apparayled them, and
tha^ they went to dinner and were served right rychely, than al these kings and
Florence and the lady Margarete departed and went to the port noyre and
commanded all their people to draw them thyderwarde as shortly as they
could, and so they rode forth and on a tewesdaye betimes they arrived at the
port noyre, than Florence went up to her palais where as she had never ben
before, and than she thanked Arthur in that he had fordone thenchauntementes
the adventures of ye place, and Gouernar and Brysebar had apara^led that place
in every thing that was behouable, and thus they were in great joy and
tryumphe the space of.viii. days and than these kings and Florence went into
a fair chamber to counsel, and the bishop and Arthur, duke Philyp and the
master were with them, and than they recou^ted to Florence how yt they were
departed out of the court in great displesure, and how that the king Emendus
had banysshed them al out of his presence, and also we know well that as soon as
he has knowledge that ye be here and we with you we shall have sharp and
great war made unto us, wherefore it is convenient that we advise well what shall
be done in this matter. Than ye master rose and said, lords if ye think it to
be done I shall show you mine advise. And they all answered and said, master
say what ye will it shall plese you right well to give you audience Than the
master said, madam ye be the propre and rightful heir of Soroloys, and our
propre lady, and we al your me^, the dyscorde that is between my lord your
father, and us moves propertlye by the reason of you, and not for any
trespass that ever we did him, therefore madame it is reason that ye take upon
you this quarrel and busynes, and drake your heart to you and be not to sort
in this matter, for when my lord the king your father shall be come hither
with all his power to assyege you as I am sure he will do, he shall not have so
hardy a knight in all his company but he shall be aferde to gyrde his sword
about him to come agenst your company, for ye be a great queen and a
puissaunt, therefore send for your people, and let duke Phylyp do in like case
and my lady Margarete also, and when al your people be assembled together, who
so ever than will be so hardy to assail you, let him be sharply answered and
defended, and madame behold here Arthur to whom this matter touches right
nere, who is faithful yours and ye his, therefore me thinks it were reason
that he were chyefe capytayne of this matter and let him maintayn this war
fiersly and virtuously, and the king of Orqueney and the king of valefound my
father, let them return into their own realms, for parauenture the king
Emendus will send for them again, and will repent him in that he has
banisshed them out of his sigh^, and if they fall into accord with him again,
than shall they do much good for us in this matter with the king, for than
they shall show him his folly in that he would mare mi lady Florence his
daughter agenst her will, and how that he does great wrong to make war agenst
Arthur, but sir Arthur according to mine advise be ye of good heart, and if
they will needs make war agenst you do to this emperor as much damage as
ever ye can. Than the king of valefound said, fair son verily ye have well
and wisely said, I am agreed let it be done as ye have said As god help me
said the bishop I am agreed with the same saying, and to the same they were al
agreed. Than the king of valefounde said to Arthur, sir we be all establysshed
that ye shall have the hole conduite of this matter, therefore do your deuoyre,
and here we give you the charge of my lady Florence, and the bishop her uncle
shall abide with you and duke Philyp also, and with him master Steven my son,
and if ye have any need send us word and we shall not fail my lady at no
time, and if we happen to fa^l at any accord with the king, than shall we
blame him for his fo^^y, and as for us and our people we faithfully promise you
that if any sword be drawn agenst you we shall be ever ready to revenge it to
the best of our powers. That shall not be failed said (...) king of orqueney,
Syrs I ^hanke ^ou said Florence, so than they est^^^isshed Arthur chief
capytayne of yt matter, and so the two kings departed out of the counsel and
took leave of Florence and Arthur and of al other and returned in to their own
cou^t^yes. Now let us leave to speak of them and return to the emperor and
king Emendus how that they were amused at ye church door wha^ they had wend
to have married Florence.

How that Proserpyn queen of the fairy was led to the church to have been
wedded to themperoure wenyng that it had been Florence, but when the bishop
had thought to have put the weddyng ring on her finger, suddenly she
vanysshed away, so that none wist whether she became, and so than they stood
all abashed as though the clouds had fallen from heaven. Capi. lxxxvi.
SO it was that when the king of valefound and the king of Orqueney was
departed fro king Emendus to great displesure how be it the king as than when
he saw that they were gone he repented him of his folly, how be it he made no
manner of semblau^t for the love of the emperor, but said to him, sir let us go
to the city of cornyte and there shall ye fyaunce Florence, and to morrow be
married to her. Sir with a right good will said the emperor. Than Proserpin was
apparayled and led forth to Cornyte, where there was ready the bishop of
Pancopone, and as soon as they were come to the city, tha^ incoutinent
the emperor was ensured to Proserpyne in the stead of Florence, and so there was
great feast and joy al y^ night till every man went to their restes, and in the
morning they arose and Proserpyn was apparailed right rychely^ and so the king
of mormal and the king of Ismaelye did led her to church, and as (...) she
came to the church door, there was ready the ^yshop of pancopone reue^^ in his
pontificalibus, and there did axe the banes between the^, and so proceeded
forth in the words of matrymony. And wha^ the bishop thought to have set the
weddyng ring of her fynger^ suddenly she was vanysshed a way, so that none
knew where she was become, wherewt the kings, dukes, earls, barons and all
other were as greatly abashed as though they had tombled out of the clouds,
tha^ the bishop blyssed him self and did cast holy war^^ round about him, and
every man said this is a wondrous case, we trow we be enchaunted, how be it
never the less they herd out the mass with great devotion praying to god to
keep them from the illusions of the find of hell, and when the mass was done
they returned to the palais* and al ye day they were sore troubled in their
hertes, and so three days after they serched continually all about the city
for Florence, and on the.iiii. day there came a knight to the palace, and did
salute king Eme^dus and the emperor and said, sir I se well ye be sore troubled
because of Florence, but I can show you tidings right well where she is,
surely syrs she departed fro Argence the wednesday next after Myghelmas day,
and in her company mo than.xv.C. knights, and sir with her is ye archebisshop
your brother and dke Philip of sabary, and are as now at ^e castle of the port
noyre, and she has cased the place to be fortified with artyllary ad with all
manner of vytayle sufficient ^oynd a siege for the space of vii. year, and
Florence has sent al about for men of ^ar^e, and duke Philip has also sent
into his own country for all his power, and as for all the power of Argenton is
there already with her, and also there is with her Arthur and Gouernar, master
Steven, and sir Brysebar, and all her hole chy^alry. Ye friend said the king is
all this tr^e. Ye sir as god help me, for I have seen all this with mine eyes.
Of the king of Orqueney and of the king of va^e^ound can ye show me any word
said the king. Sir I can show you certain word o^ them, for I encountered the^
but late as they were riding into their own countries. As god help me said
the king I repent me that I spoke to them so folyshly this last day, but I
did it in a great displesure. In ye name of god sir said the emperor if ye have
done the^ any trespass ye may right well make them amends, and in your so
doing ye shall do right well, Uerely sir said the king and so will I do, but
what counsel and remedy shall we make for this knight Arthur who has thus
taken away Florence my daughter, but by my crown if I may take them, they
shall both suffer a shameful death, nor as long as I live I shall never sease
till I have them, and tha^ shall the drabbe my daughter be mu^ed up in a stone
wall, and the false rybaud Arthur hanged by the neck but I understand they
have furnisshed ye por^e noyre for the space of.vii. year, and also they puruay
the^of people as much as they may Sir quod the knight that brought the
tydinges yt is of trouth^ well sir said the emperor I shall show you what we shall
do, ye shall send for all your power, and so shall I do for mine, and so let us
bestege ye castle of the port noyre, and though yt it were made of iron and
stele, yet shall it not endure agenst our strength. As god help me sir said the
king the castle doubts no man, but I allow w^ll let us besiege the castle
round about till we have famisshed them, for otherwise shall we never have the
place, therefore let us send for our people till we have sufficient. Ye sai
right well quod the emperor I will go and return into mine own country, and ye
shall find me and I live at the port noyre wtin.xv. days of Ester next coming.
And there shall ye find me also said the king Than the emperor commanded to
trus^e al his stuff, and so took leave of the king and departed into ynde, and
as soon as the emperor was departed, tha^ ye king said too the king of
mormal, ^yr god ye home into your own country and somo^ up al your men of war
and mete with me at the port noyre the.xv. day of ested and I prai you speak
with the king of valefound and make the peace between hi^ and me, and desire
him to be at Argence the said day wythal his power to go with me to the port
noyre, and show him that I shall make too him a large amends for that I have
done too him in like wise he said to the king of Ismaelyte that he should
speak with the king of Orqueney, and so they promised to do, and depa^ted
and went each of them into their own countries, and than they sent al about
for their people and showed the other two kings their message that they had
fro the king Emendus, and how that the king desired them to be at Argence
the.xv. day after Ester. And they answered how that they would not fail to be
there at yt day and so each of them apparayled them self and all their people
in as hasty wise as they could. And the emperor and the king Emendus also
made them ready in all have to go to the port noyre, and at the emperors
commandment there came with him the king Godyfer and the king Iouas, and the
king Comedos and all their hole power.

How that Arthur sent Gouernar to his cosyn Hector duke of orgoule desiringe
him to come and help to socour him agenst the emperor of ynde, and agenst the
king Emendus, who would besiege him in the castle of ye port noyre, Ca. lxxxvii.
SO it was that when the king of orqueney and the king of valefound were
departed from Arthur out of the port noyre as ye have heard here before, than
wtin a little space after there came to Arthur a spy streyghte fro Cornyte,
and there he recounted to Arthur all the delyng of the emperor and of king
Eme^dus and how that they somon together great people to come to assyege them
at the port noyre. And when Arthur herd that he said to duke Philip, well sir
than there is no more to do but let every man do the best they can, wherefore
it is time that ye send to sabary to your senesshall that he bring hither to
you al your chyualry now at this Ester and ye my lady Florence send forth your
letter to your relame of blau^che toure, and let my lady Margaret send to
Argence, and I shall send to orgoule to my cousin Hector. why than said Florence
have ye than a cousin in these parts. Ye madame by the faith that I owe to your
grace, for if I might have him ones by my side* doubt but little the malice of
this emetoute, than she made her lettes and se^e sir Neuelon to the clear
toure, and so ^parted. And when he was there aryue^non he found sir Perdycas
who was these gouernar of all that realm of clear owre, and to him he
delivered Florence letters, and in contynent on the sight of the letters he
somoned together all the noble men of the city and of all the hole realm, and
when they were assembled together they were to the nombre of.xxx. thousand^ men
of war, and so they put them self straight into ye way to go to their lady
Florence to the port noyre. And also the lady Margarete sent sir Miles unto
Argence to sir Emery, who brought with him will xxx. thousand. And duke Philyp
sent sir Brysebar into sabary to gentle Clemenson his marshal who brought
with him.xx. thousand. And Gouernar went to the city of Orgoule to the noble
duke Hector cosyn to Arthur, and than it was showed him how that the duke was
at Brule with the countess of Brule, who as than was a little deseased, and
Gouernar rode so long that on a sate^day betimes he aryued there, than he
mounted up the stayres and ent^ed intoo the hall and there he found Hector
sitting by the countess his mother in law eating together of a dyshe of
fys^he, and as soon as Hector saw Gouernar he rose and enbraced him and his
heart reioysed for gladness wha^ he saw people of his own country, and than he
demanded tyding^s of his cousin Arthur, and Gouernar answered and said, sir he
hertely commands him to you, and desires you to come to help to socour him
agenst his enemies. And I pray you what be they said Hector that be his
enemies, for as long as I live what so ever they be though they be never so
great of degree of pui^saunt but I shall make them to tremble and quake if they
will abide and look me in the face. Than the countess said, fair son I
would ye should not spare to help to socoure our friend and lover the noble
Arthur. Than the duchess of Orgoule the fair lady A^ice enbraced Gouernar and
demanded of him how yt Arthur did. Fair lady he her^ely commands him to
you. Tha^ he said to Hector, sir haste you for it is need. Tha^ Hector called
too him sir Octebon his senesshal and commanded him that he should send into
all the country of the erledome of Brule that all that might here harneys that in all the have they should come to him too the City of Brule, and in like wise he
sent into all the duchye of Orgoule to sir Clarembalt that he should assemble
al his host, and in all have to come to him to the City of Brule, and when al
his people were assembled together, tha^ Hector took leave of the countess his
mother in law, and of the fair lady Alise his wife, who desired Gouernar to
recommaunde her to the gentle Arthur. So they departed fro Brule, and entered
into their way toward the port noyre, and so long they rode till at the last
they were within two leges of the port noyre, and than they entered into a
great deep valey

How that Hector as he went toward the port noyre to socoure Arthur, he
encountered one of the kings that was coming toward themperoure, and had in
his company well unto the nombre of xviii. thousand men of wa^^e the which
king Hector slew and all his people, so that there was none that ever escaped
saving two, and so they fled away, and there Hector was a great botye and
much treasure and great habou^dau^c^ of vytayle the which was al brought in to
the port noyre. Capi. lxxxviii.


THus as Hector and his people were entered into this great valley they
perceived where as there came to themwarde about the nombre of.xviii.
thousand men of war. Than Hector demanded of Gouernar if that he knew them.
And he answered and said sir nay in good faith, but I doubt me least they be of
our enemies. Than Hector made al his host to be armed, and he him self and
Gouernar armed them, and when they were armed Gouernar presed forth and
demanded one of them fro whence they were. And one of them answered and said,
friend it is king Godyfer who is going toward the emperor to help him to
lay siege to the port noyre to the intent to take it and to slay a knight that
is therein, who has taken away Florence daughter to king Emendus the which lady
should have been wedded to my lord the emperor, wherefore there is none that is in
that castle or takes part with that knight but that the shall dye all a shame
full death, what said Gouernar tha^ thou do threten me and yet thou call
me friend, but I shall quite yt for thy labor therefore defend thy self. than
Gouernar drew his sword and struck so the knight between the sholders and
the neck that he claue him down to the waste, and than Gouernar said I trow
I have assured this knighte to be on our part, for I think he will abide here
still in this place. Tha^ said Hector I se well that between Gouernar and this
knighte there was but little friendship, than Hector be held and saw where king
Godyfer did desryng him self to come on Gouernar as fast as he might, but
Hector met him first and struck the king so rudelye that he overthrew him wide
open in the feld than Hector turned him with his sword in his hand to have
stryken of his head but his people socoured him and ran on Hector on all sides,
but Hector struck so among them that he brake the great prese than Gouernar
dashte into the thyckest of the prese without sparyng of any body, for he cut
of arms legs and hedes great p^enty. Than sir Clatembart entered into the
prese, and sir Oaths in like wise, than there began such a fray that it was
pity to behold, than king Godyfer was remounted again and Hector laid on
round about him, and he went so much forward that he was closed in among his
enemis, how be it he gave among them so great strokes that all yt ever he
attained unto went to the death but his enemis did cast at him knyues and
dagers, so that at the last therbi they slew his horse under him, than he lept
on his fete with his sword in his hand but his enemies oppressed him gretely.
Therewith Gouernar came to him all in a great rage, and he was also at his coming
so beset with his enemies that his horse was slain under him and than Hector
and Gouernar were in that case yt it was hard for them to escape, till at
last sir Clarembalt and al his rou^e came to them and so than there began so
sore a battle that it was wonder to behold, and than Hector and Gouernar did
so valiantly that each of them gate him a new horse and so in the spyte of
all their enemies they were again remounted, and than they dashed into the
prese and gave so mighty strokes that they confounded all that ever they
attained unto, than the king Godyfer came on them with so great a prese that
they drew by clean force Gouernar and sir Oaths out of the prese and closed
them so round about, and gave them so many great strokes yt they slew their
horses under them, and than they defended them self as valiaunte knights
ought to do, and oftentimes they called for Hector to help to rescowe them,
but the prese was so great and thycke yt Hector in no wise could get to them
and yet there he did maruailes with his hands, for he all to frusshed sheldes
and vnbarred helmes and ket down knights but Gouernar and sir oaths were so
over laden that they were both taken prysone^s and led out of the battle.
Than Gouernar said, a dear master Arthur to god I you commend, he that al
thing fourmed keep and save thy noble body. But when Hector knew that they
were taken prisoners he was so sore displeased that nigh he enraged for sorrow,
and so habandoned him self among his enemies and gave so great and heavy
strokes that every man fled before him, for he struck none but that they lost
their lives, or else sore wounded. And in the mean season Gouernar and sir
Oaths were led forth toward the emperor who was coming after, and as they were
thus led forth they met with sir Brysebar and Clemenson senesshal to duke
Phylyp of sabary, and Brysebar knew Gouernar as soon as he saw him, than
Brysebar escryed and said, saint mary save Arthur the good knight, for I se well
that Gouernar is taken, therefore gentle knight help to socoure these two
knights who are pertayninge to the gentle Arthur, than all his company set
fyersly on them, and within a little while they were all slain and hewn in
small pieces, and than Gouernar and sir Oaths were remou^ted again and they said
to sir Brysebar. A sir for gods sake haste you as fast as ye can, for ye shall
find here before in a great valey the noble Hector cousin to Arthur fighting
with king Godifer who has with him a great company, wherefore I fere me
gretely that this noble duke Hector has to much in hand easily to escape.
Saint mary said Clemenson yonder I se them, Brysebar follow me, than they all
together in a front went together as fast as they might, and they were all
well to the nombre of.xx. thousand fyghting m^nne, than Clemenson dashed in to
the prese with his swerd in his hand, than he struck the first that he
encountered in such wise that he made his heed to fly fro his sholdres, and
sir Brisebar met so with an other that he claue his heed to his tethe, and
they did so much at their coming that they two bette down and slew mo
than.xx. knights. And when Hector saw that he said, saint mari what knights
be these or fro whens are they come. Than Gouernar who the same time came into
the prese answered Hector and said, sir I trust that I have ^one so much that
ye shall have noble socour, and when Hector saw Gouernar his heart reioysed
and said, friend help to socour yonder two knights, for they are worthy to
have help. Than by that time all the hole company of.xx. thousand was come in
to the prese, and there they flew knights great plente, so that all king
Godyfers company were nigh dyscomfyted. And when the king saw that he was so
sore dyspleased that nigh he was dead for anger, than he dashed his spor^s to his
horse and gave Hector such a stroke that he struck away of his shield and
harneys a great quarter, but as god would ye stroke did not enter into the
flesh, and Hector struck the king so rudely on the helm that he claue his
heed down to the sholdres, and therewith he fell down to the earth struck deed,
and when his people saw that they turned and fled away, but Clemenson and
Brisebar followed in the chase so that of.xviii. thousand they left on line but
two persons. Than Hector and Gouernar came to Clemenson and Brisebar and each
of them saluted other and Hector thanked them of their good socour. Than they
went all to the chari^ttes and carts that king Godyfer had bro^ght thither,
wherein they found great plente of gold and silver and great plente of
vitayle, the which Hector caused to be co^uaied to the port noyre. Than
Gouernar said to Hector, sir I will goo before to my lord Arthur and show him
of your coming, and come you after fair and easily. w^l said Hector go your
way in the name of god, and so he departed and went to the port noyre and
mounted up in to the palace, and there he found Arthur with Florence and the
bishop and master Steven and duke Phylyp. And when Arthur and duke Philyp
saw Gouernar they saw well by his harneys yt he had been in some bataile. Tha^
Arthur demanded of him what tidinges. Sir said he right good thanked be God,
sir behold yonder comes your cousin Hector and al his host who has
discomfyted and slain the king Godyfer, and of.xviii. thousand that he
brought with him there is left a live but two persons, with the which king we
met in a fair valey, and he was coming toward the emperor to have helped
him to have destroyed you, in the which fraye I was taken prisoner and also
the countess of Brules senesshal sir Oaths, but thanked be god and duke Phylyp
for his senesshall the gentle Clemenson and sir Brysebar did rescowe and
deliver us, so now the king Godyfer is slain and all his company, and Hector
brings with him great plente of gold and silver and vytayle the which he wan
in this batale, I know well it mounteth to the nombre of.ii.C. charyottes and
carts. A good lord said Arthur ye vytayle is more welcome than gold or
silver. Than by ye time Hector, Clemenson, and Brisebar alyghted at the port
noyre, and lodged all their host about in the castle, tha^ Arthur ran and
enbraced Hector al armed as he was and said, cosyn ye be right hertely welcome
to the helping of the noble Florence here present. Truly said Florence blyssed
be ye neighbor yt is ready to help at need, but Arthur how is it yt ye have
had such a kynnesma^ so nere us and would never show it to me. Madame quod
Arthur I did it for none ill intent, so tha^ Hector was led into a chamber to
be unarmed, and duke Philyp received Clemenson and Brysebar and sir Oaths with
great joy, and wha^ Hector was unarmed than he went into the palace, and
Florence beheld him and liked him wondersly, for she saw well that he was bygge
and well made, than she said to Arthur, sir this gentylman seems well to be of
a redoubted lynage. Sir quod the bishop he seems well to be of the valor of a
noble man. Ye sir quod Hector yt I warraunt you if I were at a table fair
covered with mete and drink thereon. As god help me said duke Philip he says
well for it were now time to ete some mete. Tha^ squyers set up tables, and in
ye mean time Florence and Arthur, duke Philip and the archebysshop went and
lent out at a window and at last they saw where there was coming Florence
senesshal and sir Perdicas and.xxx.M. in their company of Florence retinue, and
they al followed ye white baner of the realm of blau^che toure, than Florence
said to Arthur, sir behold yonder comes our folk yt shall help our
neighbors. Madame quod Arthur they be welcome, tha^ also they saw where there
came sir Miles and sir Emery and.xv.M. in their company, than the fair lady
Margarete said, madame behold yonder comes my copany, who are come to help
you at al times Margarete my love I thank you quod Florence of your good aid,
and god give me grace so long to live yt I may deserve it unto you. And wha^
Hector saw so many sta^dardes and stremers coming he said as god help me if
this were the emperor to this comi^g I would tha^ have trust soon to se him and
by ye good lord I shall se him as shortly as I can. So tha^ these knights did
alight and mounted up in to the palace, and Gouernar and Brisebar appointed
every man to his lodging, and these knights were received with great joy, and
they went to diner and were served right rychely with all manner of deyntees.

How that the emperor of ynde and the king Eme^dus accompanied with.viii.
kings, and well to the nombre of.iii.C.M men of war laid syege about the
castle of the port noyre where as Florence and Arthur were, whereof ill turned
to the emperor, for there he lost three of his kings and well an hundred
thousand of his men. Capitulo. lxxxix.


AFter dyuer wha^ all the tables were taken away, than Florence and the bishop
and Arthur went together and lened out at a window, and duke Phylip and the
master and Hector lened out at an other window, tha^ they saw whereas the king
of Mormall and the king of Ismaelyte with al their powers took their lodging and
pight their field about the castle, and the king Eme^dus was at Argence
abiding for the king of valefou^de and the king of orqueney, and wha^ they were
come to him than the king Emendus made his own peace with them, and made them a
large amendus in that he had before banysshed them his court and said how
that he did it but in a haste, and than repented him of his so delynge, and
when they were thus accorded than they all together set forth in their way toward
the port noyre, and the two kings went before, and the king with the great
dragon of Sorolois came in the rerewarde with al his host, so that all the
country was over spradde with people. Now I se well said Arthur that we shall
have war, but by the faith that I owe unto god if I may ones meddle with them
they shall not all return again. By the good lord said Hector they lodge
very nigh us, and yet they be not our fre^des. Than of the^perours company there
came king Jonas, and after him there came king Clamados, and than after came
the emperor him self, and he was right sorrowful when he knew of the death of
king Godifer and of his company, and how that all the tresour and vitaile was
taken into the port noyre, and so the emperor was lodged on the left side of
the castle. Than F^orence said to the bishop, sir how say ye is not yonder
people sufficye^t to take a lady prisoner. Certainly madame quod Arthur it is
of troth they are gretely to be doubted. Sir said Hector let us go to them and
give them their welcome Verily said the master now shall be seen who is a noble
man, verily I am sone to a king therefore ought I by reason to love deeds of
chyualry and to bear harneys, therefore because of this matter I would fayn be
made a knight. and tha^ I would gladly sir Hector go in your company to bydde
yonder galauntes welcome, for I would be loath yt ye should go and I to tarry
behind. And when ye bishop herd the master say yt he would be made a knight
he had thereat great laughter and sport and said, master by the good lord it
is much better to be in a chamber with ladies and damoyselles than to be
yonder without and to abide the breking of sharp speres, and it is hard to
find a clerk to be a good knight. well sir said the master all yt makes no
matter, for I trust to do so well yt I shall bring in one day in to this
place.ii. of those kings prisoners, than they all yt herd him began to laugh
and so al yt day they sported them at ye masters words till it was time to go
to rest and than every man went to bed and took their restes till the next
morning, in the morning all these lords arose betymes and assembled them
together in the mids of the palace, tha^ Hector said to Arthur, cosyn yonder
people without has good lift to sleep, for there is none to wake them, by ye
good lord me thinks we be very slow, let us go to them and se how they do. In
the name of god quod sir Cleme^so^ so let it be for we do not our deuoyrs to
abide so long, therefore let us issu out and dele valiau^tly with the^. In the
name of god quod Arthur every man to harneis and so every man went to arm
the^. Florence was not at ye poyntment, but when she knew thereof she came to
them and said syrs what mean ye to do, this matter must be done wisely, for ye
know not preseisely as yet for what cause this great assembly be come about
this castle, peradventure they be come to do honor to our marriage between
Arthur and me, for I can not bileue that the king my fader be com on me in
harneys, wherefore in my mind it were not best to assail them first, but if
they assail us tha^ let us defend our self in the best wise we can, sir
marks ye are a noble man to goo on my message to the king my fader, wherefore
I pray you go to him and humbly comau^de me to his grace, and say yt I require
him to send me word of his mind, and why that he is come hyder in this manner
of wise at this time, I pray you mark well these words that I have said to you,
a wise man needs no teching, but and ye se that he will needs keep still his
froward mind to me ward, tha^ I will that ye say to his.iiii. kings and to
al his chyualry how that I send them word how that they be al my men and
subjects, wherefore if there be any of them so hardy to draw any sword
against me or against any of mine* tell the^ that by the faith that I owe to my
lady Egle^tyne my ^ere mother on whose soul Ihesu have mercy that I shall
cause them to be hanged by the necks though they be never so noble or
gentil, and after that I will ye inquire why this emperor is come thus in to my
realm, and if ye se that he be come for our ill and that he would have
battle, show him prysysely that he shall have bataile right sharp and strong
to morrow betymes without any longer delay. In the name of God said duke Philyp
I se well we have a good heed of our house, madam ye follow right well the noble
steps of your lygnage. well madame said ye marks I trust I shall so fulfill
your message yt ye shall be content^ and so he took his leave of Florence and of
all the hole barony and rode forth till he came before the king Emendus at which
time he was accompanied with his.iiii. kings, and also there was the emperor
and all his kings and other dukes earls, barons, and knights, there was also
the king Jonas and king Clamados and diverse other noble men pertaining to
the emperor. Than the gentle marks entered in to the same place and did salute
the king and al his company, and said, sir I am come to you fro my lady
Florence your daughter the most noble and gentyl lady living, who right
derely commends her unto your grace as to her own dear fader, and sir she is
gretely abashed of this great company in harneys that ye have brought hyder at
this time, for sir it is a great abasshement to a noble gentyl maiden to se so
many helmes and sheldes shyning against the son wherefore sir she requires you
to know your pleasure and mind. Than the king with a fyerse look said, sir
knight I will not receive her salutacyon, for I love her not at my heart, but I
hope to do her damage both of body and of goods. Sir said ye marks and for
what cause. Certainly said the king for she has done me shame and despyte, for
she has gone away fro me with a strange knight, and she is come to hyde her
self in this castle, and there folyshely she keeps company with this strange
knight the which is a shame to her for evermore, and also she has done me
despyte, for I had given her to this emperor to have been his wife, and she
will not follow my will, and therefore because of the shame that she has done me
and does yet like a false stru^pet I shall put her into a perpetual prison to
thentente that she shall do me never more shame, and I shall hang the ribawde
knight by the neck that caused her thus to do, for the despyte that she has
done to me I shall do her an other, for I will never depart hens till I have
brought this castle down to the hard earth. Tha^ the noble marks answered
and said, sir as touching the shame that ye lay against my lady for cominge into
this castle I shall answer you, sir my lady is of great nobleness and honor
and a queen called by the right of her mode^, wherefore it is right yt some
time she go and se her own country, and to take her pleasure of her own, and
sir in that she departed without your license was for fere and doubt of this
Emperor to whom ye have given her against her will and heart, for she doubted
lest that he would have had her against her will, and therefore the master by
his clergy made you to be abused at the church door, and sir she came not
hider so simply yt she ought to be blamed, for she brought with her duke Phylyp
and tharchebysshop, and well.v. hundred other knights in her company and sir
the bishop is here uncle and your brother, wherefore he would be as loath that she
should do any otherwise than well as your self would be, but that needs not to
be fered, for she is of such wisdom that she ca^ rule her self well enough,
for there is not a wyser lady again in all the world, and sir also duke Phylyp
has been always with her, and therefore such people as be daily with her can
report her deling and so can not you that knows nothing thereof, and yet there
is none that speaks any vylany of her but you y^ which thing sir me thinks
ye ought not to do, and sir in deed yo^der good knight Arthur is with her, and
though it be so that she has retained him to her servant I think therein she
has done wisely, and so have not ye done in letti^g him depart out of your
court, for he is the flower of all the chyualry of the world, and she by her
wisdom has retained him, for when he went out of your court he left not
his felaw behind him, and sir if she have a good knight retained unto her she
is not such a lady but that she is of such habilite that she may right well
guerdon him for his service, sir she is not come to this castle in the despyte
of you, nor yet for the love of him that ye so sore despise, but sir she did it
because y^ ye would give her to such a man as she never loved nor can not love
nor will not love as long as she lives, without it be by force, and sir she
is not so poor a lady but that and ye would give her never so rich a man
against her will yet ye may be sure there should never good life be long between
the^, and because that this emperor would have her and she loves him not,
therefore she is come to that most strong castle that she has where as she
cares neither for him nor yet for any other yt would do her any dyspleasure,
therefore sir take heed what ye do for ye know well yt ye would have her to do
clean contrary to that was destenyed to her in the mount perilous at her
natiuyte, and sir a thing predestynate is hard to be broken, but sir I shall
show you what ye shall do fro hens forth leave medlyng any ferder in this matter,
for of one thing I make a warant that there is in her company and host a great
nombre of the best knights of the world, sir leave this matter and dele like a
true king, and agree to y^ promise that ye were before accorded unto, and y^
was who so ever should have the caplet of the image should in likewise rejoice
my lady Florence your daughter, and to this ye have written your hand and set
to your seal, and in likewise has done al your.iiii. kings here present and
all the.xii. peers of your realm, now sir ye do against your own seal and
covenant that ye made like a king thus to send for your people in harneys to
assemble against a woman, the fader against the daughter it is unnatural and a
great shame it is no deed of a king to do against his own covenant and promise,
sir for gods sake forbere for doi^g of any hurt against your own child for
any singular love yt ye have to this emperor. Certainly said the king I will
not forbere my mind, for all the tresour of the world shall not cause me but
ye knight shall be hanged by the neck, and she put in to perpetual prison. well
sir said the ma^kes than begin when ye will, and do the best ye can peraue^ture
all shall not be as ye would have it, but nevertheless to you.iiii. kings and
to al y^ xii. peers and to al other knights y^ be here present I say unto you
all my lady Florence sends you word by me yt she meruayleth greatly yt ye be
come hyder in harneys to war against her considering that ye be all her
subjects and she is your right lady and mastres, therefore lords take good
head what ye do, for she straightly charge you that ye nor none of yours draw
no sword nor wepe^ against her nor none of hers, for and ye do she promyseth by
the faith y^ she owes to my lady Eglentine her dear mother y^ was, that there
is none of what degree so ever he be of but that she will cause him to be hanged
by the neck like a false traytoure, wherefore syrs by my counsel take heed
what ye do. Than the king of orqueney said to the king Emendus, sir ye cause
us to have great maruayl yt ye have somoned us to come hither in harneys to
make war agenst our natural lady and to do against our promesses writings and
seals, sir it is of troth I am your man and I ought to go with you whether so
eu^r ye will have me in any just quarrel, but reason nor right will not that I
should make war agenst our right lady, whose subjects and men we be and must
be, for she is and shall be our lady by just inheritance, but by y^ faith yt I
owe to god and to my crown of the realm of orqueney, neither I nor none of
mine shall move any war agenst her, and of the same accord were all the.iiii.
kings and.xii. peers, for each of them said that they would never bear
harneys agenst their own lady, nor do against their own promesses made before.
Than the king Emendus said, lords I ^an not tell what ye will do, but I
promise you all that I will never depart out of this place till I have destroyed
this castle and all the knights y^ be therein hanged by the necks. And they al
answered him and said, sir do as it pleseth you, and we shall give you the
lokyng on, but we will not help thereto nor none of ours. Than the marks said
to the emperor, sir my lady would fayn know why ye be thus entered into her realm
with such nu^bre of men of war. Certainly sir said themperoure I am come
hither to seek her as for mine own, for she is given to me by her father and
because that she denies my will therefore I am come hider to have her wheder she
will or no, and I will do worse to her than I would do to a false traitor and I
shall hang by the neck yt rybaude knight that keeps her at his pleasure, and
duke Philyp of saboty also who does sustain her in her folysshe mind. And
when the king of orquen^y herd themperou^ menase and threte and say so of his
n^uewe duke Philyp he said, ye sir emperor fair and easily for or ye can
bring yt about ye shall have no cap nor hat too put on your head, for though yt
she be given to you yet she is not delivered to you, ye man well muse on her
delyu^raunce, but I ensure you ye get her not so lightly as ye wene, and sir as
for the knight whom ye do menase to hang by y^ neck, sir it were a great sin
so to do, for his nourisshing cost him more than so but sir take to morrow
some appointment between him and you to do some deeds of arms togider or else
take part of his men and so shall ye do of his, and than and ye ca^ take him
bind him fast, and than hang him by y^ neck and tha^ shall ye be clean out of
suspection between Florence and him, for tha^ ye may be sure he shall trespass
you no more, sir love has brought you hither, but ye nor al your knights are
nothing worth without ye do some deeds to be praised, sit mount on your horse to
morrow* for love governs you my lady is so fair, and she would gladly se you
give some fa^t stroke with your sword for her love for always good knights
gets grace among fair ladies, therefore sir to morrow wyn her amourous grace
with some deed of chiualry for in good faith ye have it not. well quod
the emperor get me ye knight yt sporteth hi^ so with her. Ye sir quod the mark
she will not so lightly beget, for sir he is within and ye be without in the
rain, and he is in the shadow abiding in the sight of this fair ladi y^
which is a great shame to you therefore put him out of this castle and get your
self in, but sir how say ye, shall this assemble be made to morrow or not. By my
faith said the emperor I shall make him assemble to morrow of.iiii. thousand,
and also of.xviii. M. men of arms. Sir said yt marks will ye promise this
faithfully. Ye truly said the emperor. And I promise faithfully for the other
parti said the marks y^ ye shall be received, and than he spoke as loud as he
could and said, lords and fre^des such as be subjects to my lady Florence y^
on pain of your lives yt ye move not nor make no w^r against my lady Florence
nor agenst (...) o^ hers, and than he said to the emperor sir for gods sake
begin the batail betymes because of the hete. Than the king Clamedos said to ye
marks, is this lady Florence so fair as it is said. A sir said the marks,
think ye nothing on her, for your emperor does enough for you hothe. well
friend said the king, I here say she has with her a sweet little rose white
tender and young, who is called Floret. Sir said the marks in deed there is
such one with my lady, and I ensure you she is right sweet, and she makes
oftentimes for me and such other knights of my company goodly chaplets and
sir as yet to my knowledge she has no love nor paramout and sir me think ye
have a jolly wanton eye, therefore sir come and se her to morrow, for she shall
be on the walls of the castle, and I shall show her unto you if I ca^ mete with
you, and sir when ye have seen her set your fete together and assay if ye can
lepe up to her, take on you to morrow this enterprise for the emperor, with a
good will said he, and said to the emperor, sir I require you let me have the
batail to morrow. well quod the emperor since ye will needs I am content, and so he
took his glove in pledge, and ye king thanked him, and the marks departed, and
went to the castle and recou^ted to Florence and to Arthur word for word as ye
have herd before, than they answered yt they had of him a right good
messenger, and granted him the ba^ail the next dai with xxx. M. agenst the king
Clamados.

How Philip duke of sabary and master Steven son to the king of valefou^d were
made knights, and of the discomfiture yt Arthur made on the emperor. Ca. lxxxx.
ANd when duke Philyp of sabary herd how yt they should have a battle the next
day in the morninge he said to the lady Florence, madame I require you let me
be made a knight, for I may not be in the place where as so many noble men be
without I were a knight By the faith that I owe to god said Florence with a right
good will. Than master Steven stepte forth and said, madame my lord the
archbisshop here present reputeth me but as one more metely to beat furs than
knights, but madam by the faith that I owe to god I would feign be made a
knight, and thereof I require your grace, and than every body began too laugh*
well sir quod he laugh not thereat for I ^ape not, I will be made a knight and I
may, than he went to the lady Margaret of Argenton and said to her in her
ear, mine own dear lady will it not plese you that I be made a knight, I
beseech you give me leave to be one, and she answered him fair and softly in
counsel and said, yes ywys sweet love I would be be glad thereof, than he rose
fro her and said alowde, my lady Margarete of Argento^ how say ye shall I be
made a knight. Certainly friend quod she I would be glad there of, on the
condycyon that ye will take armitre and horse and other abileme^tes of my gyf^.
Madam said he I thank you and I shall be glad to follow your pleasure with the
license of my lady Florence. Certainly quod Florence I am con^ent therwt. And
wha^ al ye other lords and knights saw that the master mened godd faith they
were right glad thereof, and so went as far that night to their restes and in
the morning for duke Philip Florence prepared horse and harneys and al other
abileme^tes, and fair lady Margaret ordained in like wise for master Steven,
tha^ tharchbishop sange y^ mass, and Arthur did gyrde on the masters sword,
and Hector did on duke Philips, than Arthur and Ceme^son led forth the master
between the^, and Hector and sir Perdi^as led forth duke Philip, and so they
offered to the bishop, and he did give them ye neck strokes of knighthode
according to the usage yt was than in y^ country, than Arthur and Hector armed
the^, and tha^ caused a great horn to be blown, and by the sowninge thereof
euery^ knight went to their harnes, and tha^ they took their leaves of Florence,
and than Arthur said to the marks and to sir Cla^e^ bait and to sir oaths,
syrs I pray you go and fortify the gates of this castle with.iiii C. pauess^s,
and so they did, and tha^ they issued out of the castle in good ordinance and
Arthur ordained their bataile right strong and marvelous, in y^ first battle
there was him self sir Brysebar and sir Cleme^son, and in their company.vii. M
hawbertes, and they were commanded to keep their right way under the mou^tayn
than followed after the^ Hector and Gouernar and Florence senesshal with.iiii. M.
with them, and the master and duke Philyp and sir Perdycas went about the
mountain to thentent to close round about themperyens, and they had with
them.viii. M. Than the emperor on his part called him the king Clamados and said
sir go arm you and your me^ and go make assaut to the castle of the port
noyre, and if ye fortune to encou^tre the kinght Arthur look yt ye take him and
bring him alive to moror I will make him be hanged so hie and ^o nere to the
castle y^ Florence may se hi^ every day when she will. Sir quod the king doubt
ye not it shall be done, but it is an old said saw he yt reckeneth without his
host mast reken twice, and so did he ^or he failed of his enterprise* than the
king caused to be blown a great trumpe, and than eueri man ran to his harnes,
and the king Clamados arden^d.iii. batails and therle of thy^e ^^^me did led
y^ first batail, and the duke ^^^alion with him* and they had in their company.x.
M. men, and the second bataile was led by the duke of Galace and he had with
him.x. M. men, and the king Clamados him self led forth the third bataile
and other.x. M. with him and so they went forth with baners dysplayed and took
the right way toward the castle, the which way Arthur was coming toward the
field* and so they went forth so long till at last the duke of Calyon and the
earl of the isle per^ue who led the fy^ste battle encounted Arthur and
Cleme^son and Brisebar and their company, than Cleme^son desired of Arthur to
have the first course with his spear and Arthur did grant him, than he dashe
his sporres to his horse sides and ran at y^ duke of Calyon who came against
him, and they met so rudelye yt Clemenson struck so ye duke yt his spe^e went
clean through out his body and so the duke fell down to the earth. A Jesus said
Arthur what aid is this at the first meting, our enemies has by this deed a
great loss and discomforte. And when therle of the isle perdue saw the duke dead
there arose in his host a great and terrible cry, and they ran al at once on
Clemenso^, but he like a valiant knight defended him self with his sword and
gave right great and puissant strokes among them, than there was none could
hold Brysebar but he rusht into the prese, and the first yt he encountered
wythal he bet down to the earth, and the second never did cry after. Tha^
Arthur and his company came into the prese, and there b^t down and flewe
knights by great hepes, and Arthur with his good sword clare^ce plunged in
among his enemies and be^ down knights and horses in such wise that al fled
before him, and they would have fled fro the death, for there was none that
abode hi^ but that he received death at his hands, and Clemenson stood still and
beheld him and had great wonder at his deeds, and as he stood loki^g on him,
Arthur encountered so a knight that he claue him to the teth, than Clemenson
took of his deeds great hardines on him and dashed into the thickest of the
prese, and sir Brisebar followed him so far that they were enclosed round about
with their enemies, and the prese was so great that their horses were slain
under them, and so by great force they were taken prisoners and led forth out
of the feld toward themperor but as fortune would Hector met them and as soon as
he saw them he sporred his horse with his sporres, and struck so the first that he
claue him to the chyn, and fro the second he took away his sholdre, than
Gauernar took his sword in his hand and did help Hector to discomfyt them
that led away the prisoners, and in the spyte of them all they we^e remou^ted
and so returned again to the host, and Hector turned his horse and struck in
the prese so rudely that with the first that he met he struck of his head, and
or he cealed he slew.x. each after other, and at last Hector, Clemenson,
Brysebar and Goue^nar, met together and between them they did such exiyse among
themperours people that al fled before them, than ther^^o^ galace came into the
field with.x. M. in his company, and than the batayl began to be so terrible that
there was many slain and hurt of both pries, and wha^ Arthur saw so many
emperiens assembled togider against his men he dashed to his horse with clarence in
his hand and struck so ^u^ely in y^ prese yt he cut of hedes, legs, arms,
and hands, and vnbarred helmes, and claue asonder shelds, and co^fonnded and
bet down al yt ever he touched, and at last he encountered ther^eof y^ isle
perdue, but he though^ he would not flee him, but he struck him with the pomel of
his good sword on hie on the helm so rudely yt he was so astonished with the
stroke yt he wist not where he was and so al in a trance he fell on his horse
neck, and in the releuynge he struck at Hector who as than had broken part of
the prese to thentent to follow Arthur, but Hector gave hi^ such a stroke that
he avoided the sadel and fell to the earth, tha^ Brisebar and Gouernar took him,
and so he was sent into the castle to Florence like a prisoner. And when the
duke of galace saw that he had lost him, he was right sorrowful, and in great
rage dashe into the prese and met with sir Ansel, and gave him such a stroke that
his sword went clean throughoute his body, but yet as God would he was not
wounded to the death, but he fell down to the earth in a great trance Than
Gouernar took and ^onuaied hi^ out of the prese and sent him to the castle.
And when Florence saw her knight sir Ansel so sore wounded she was right
sorrowful and caused her surgiens to search his wounds, and when Arthur saw the
stroke that the duke of Galace had given sir Ansel he was right sorrowful for he
wend verily yt he had been dead, therwt he broched to his horse and encou^tred
the duke with great malice and gave him such a stroke yt he claue him to the
sholders. And when his people saw yt he was slain and that they had as than no
capytaine, they were greatly abashed and turned them to fly, but Arthur and
Hector chased the^ til at last they met with the king Clamedos and.x. M. in his
company, and so they all dashed togider, and than there began a terryble
batail, but the kings company was so great that Arthur and his company had
much to do to defend their lives till at last master Steven and duk^ Philip
and sir Perdycas were come round about the mountain so yt they were at y^
backs of their enemies, so yt king Clamedos took no head thereof till they were
on them unware, and as soon as master Steven saw ye kings host he blewe
such a blast that there arose a mist in the kings host that they were so
abashed therewith that they had thought to have fled away, but than duke Philip
and the master rusht into the prese, and each of them bet down him with whom
they encountered, and there the master did maruailes in arms, and at last
Gouernar saw him and said to sir Clemenson by the good lord sir master Steven
by semyng has given up his mind to be a priest, for I wene he will never
sing mass, behold yonder how valiau^tly he fyghteth, for there he saw him
give right great and valiant strokes what shall I say more, so much did Arthur
there and his company that y^ king Clamedos and al his were clean discomfited
and fled away as fast as they might to themperours tent, and recou^ted to him
all the loss that he had in that batail, and showed him how that the duke of
Calion and the duke of galace were both slain and the earl of the isle perdue
taken prisoner and al his company slain and said also sir verily there was
never seen such a knight as Arthur is, and he has in his company of the
most valiant knights of all the world. And when the emperor herd al this he
was so sorrowful and full of dyspleasure that he was nere enraged out of his
wit, than he caused horns and trompettes to be blown to thentent to cause
his people to arm the^ and so the emperor him self armed him and also did king
Jonas and.xv. thou sand in their company. And when Arthur herd that he said to
his people, sirs thanked be god it is right well happed to us in the beginning
of this wa^re, and our people this day has taken great pain* wherefore they
ought to be weary wherefore in my mind it were best that we draw our self again
into our castle and let us se what this emperor will do to us, whereto every man
was agreed and so they withdrew the^ and mounted up into the castle and entered
into the palais. Than Florence demanded of Arthur how that he did. And he
answered and said dear lady thanked be god right well. And in like wise did the
fair lady Margarete to master Steven, than the earl of y^ isle perdue came to
Arthur who received him right swetely and said, sir be of good chere and be not
dismayed, for ye shall have here but a good prison, and the earl thanked him
right swettly,

How that the emperor spoke with queen Proserpine, wenyng to him that it had
been the fair lady Florence, but he was deceived, for she did set a great
dyscorde between hi^ and the king Emendus as ye shall here after. Cap. lxxxxi.
When y^ the emperor and his company were ready aparailed they lept on their
horses and followed after Arthur with.xl. thousand in his company, and when he
came nere to ye castle, he beheld ye satuacion thereof a great season, and at the
last he saw the queen Proserpine and a damosel with her issuing out of the
castle, and he thought verily y^ it had been Florence that had been fled out of
the castle, and with that sight he clean forgate his displeasure and all the
loss yt he had in the battle before, and so he dashed to his horse and a.xxx.
persons with him, and wha^ he had overtaken her and seen her perfytely in the
face, he said to him self verily this same is Florence and so than he forgot
al manner of other things and laid his hands on y^ rain of her horse and said
fair damsel whether are ye going so fast this way. Certainly sir said she it
has be^ showed me that ye and the king my father are right sore dyspleased with
me, but sir it greueth me more your displesure than mi father wherefore sir I
think to go to an abbey here by, and there to be made a nonne for your
dyspleasure all only. Damoysell said the emperor if it please you we two shall
be soon agreed. Sir said she I thank you, but how shall that be, will ye
have me to your wife, and I you to my husbond. Ye truly said the emperor. Sir
said she I am content therewith, but how shall I do for the king my father will
sle me if he may have me under his rule, and sir by the faith yt I owe unto
our lord my body was never defouled with yonder knight Arthur nor yet with any
other. well fair lady said the emperor and if that be of troth I ensure you
your father shall do you no hurt but my part shall be therein. Sir said she
may I trust on this, for it sore forthinketh me yt ever I did any dysplesure to
you. Ye truly said the emperor think not the contrary therefore now be in peace,
and so the emperor took her with him into his tente, and cleped and kissed her
oftentimes yt at the last it came to the heryng of king Emendus how that
the emperor had a great batail with them of the castle, and how that he had lost
al his people that he had sent thider, than he armed him and well to^he nu^bre
of.xxx. thousand and came to the emperors tent to comfort him of his loss,
than it was showed to the emperor how that the king was coming toward him. He
shall be welcome said the emperor. I sir said Proserpine I am now under your
keeping, for gods sake let my fader do me no vilany. Be not afraid for I
warrant you said themperoure Than the king entered into the pauilyon and as
soon as he saw proserpyne he wend verily it had be Florence his daughter and
said, what thou strumpet art you nowhere, where is that rybaud knight Arthur
that has kept the thus long, is he now become thy sauegard, I trow now thou
wenest to make thy peace, but by the faith that I owe unto the crown of
Sorolois thou shall never escape out of prison as long as I live thou shall do
me no more shame now that I have the. Sir said the emperor for gods sake be
not so sore dyspleased for she has done no trespace, and if she have I
forgive it her for ever, and sir so shall ye do for y^ love of me, and Florence
I require you knele down before your father and cry him mercy. Sir said she with
a right good will, than she kneled down before her fader and said, gentyl king
and dear fader have mercy on me and forgive me your ill will, and the king who
was stylful of fervent ire and despyte lift up his foot and struck her
therewith in the mids of the breast and so ouerthrewe her wide open to the
earth. And when the emperor saw that he was right sore dyspleased and said sir
king ye have done me great vilany for I had assured her that she should have
had no hurt neither of you nor of none other, and she is in my pauylion and in
my keeping, and she is mine and yet ye beat her here before my face. well sir
E^perour said the king in an ill hour she is aryued here, for whether ye will
or not she shall be cast in to perpetual prison, than the king took her by
the arm and drew her to him ward, to thentent to have led her forth out
of the tent, but the emperor took her in his arms and said sir king hold you
still or by the faith that I owe to mine empire if ye set hands on her any more
ye and I shall be enemies together for evermore. Than was the king more
dyspleased than he was before, and lift up his hand and gave her a great blow
or two under the cheke as she stood in themperours arms. Than the emperor said
what stryke ye her for all my prayer and between mine arms in my keeping by the
faith that I owe unto god it sore greueth me, and therewith he took his sword
in his hand and gave the king a puissaunt stroke. Than the king drew his
sword and gave again the emperor a great stroke, than the king company
assailed the emperor, and themperyence ran on the king, and so there were well to
the nombre of.xxx. thousand on both parties, than there began among them a
great battle and a fyerse so yt there were many slain and hurt, and among
them there was such a noise that Arthur and his company might well here them as
they were in the castle, and they went ^o the wyndowes and looked out at them
to know what noise that was, and there they saw a fyerse bataile without in the
field among their enemies, and they sent out a spy to know the truth what
it might be, and he went and came again and reported to Florence and to them
all how it was, and for what occasyon the battle was between the king and
the emperor. Never trust me said Florence but y^ Prose^pyne is in themperours
tent, and they wene all how that I were there among them, for I remember well
she said ones to me and to Arthur also how y^ she would cause as much hate and
strife to be among them as ever was love. Verily madame said Arthur ye say very
troth, for I am well remembered so I herd ones say, and ever this bataile
increased more and more, for the people drew to on both parties, the which
had turned to great damage on both parties if the.iiii. kings had not ben,
for they did so much that with great pain and ieopardy, they departed them,
and than suddenly Proserpine was vanysshed away so that none wis^ where she
was become, and as soon as every man was unarmed, the emperor departed and went
his way toward his own country, and his people comforted him to the best of
their power, and the king was in his tent and trembled for ire, and therewith
there came to him one of the emperors dukes and said sir my lord the emperor
quyreth you of the gi^^ of Florence your daughter, for he cares neither for
you nor for her, nor for none of your loves, nor for nothing that ye have or
shall have, and by me he defyeth you, and bids you to be ware of him at this
next cestes, for than he will come and make war against you with an hundred
thousand men of war. Than the king of orqueney said, sir say unto your
Emperor that if he come he shall find that will speak with him not to his
pleasure, and I ensure you if he come not he shall be sought where so ever he be
to thente^t to have his heed brought into this country, therefore show him that
if he will come and bring him self into this realm he shall ease us of much
pain. Than the duke departed, and the king Emendus abode still in great
malencoly Than the king of valefou^de said to him sir here is begone a great
besynes* and many inconuenie^tes are like to follow thereby, therefore sir it shall
be nedeful for you to puruey for people, and for the best knights that ye can
get, for the emperor is a puissaunt prince, and has many friends, gentle
king suffer your self to be cou^seyled both to your profyt and honor, sir
for gods sake leave this abusio^ thus to lay syege to your daughter, and do no
more against your own promise and agreement nor strive no more against your
daughters desteny, for there is no profit can come to you thereby but many ill
inconuenyentes may ensue thereby, and has done all ready as it has appeared by
the duke of bigor for he has received death, and sir ye were in great
displeasure with the king of orqueney and with me, and banished us out of your
court, also sir ye were in great abusyon at cornyte at ye chirch door when ye
we^de to have married Florence to the emperor and now ye be fallen with him at
great mortal war, and sir this emperor has lost a king and.ii. dukes and
all their people slain and all this is done because ye obstinate against
Florence desteny, therefore now sir do yet the best, appease your self and make
peace with your daughter and with the good knight Arthur, and desire him to aid
you against this emperor, for one thing I say yt he has in his company many
of the best knights of all the world, and sir if ye may have them ye need not
to fere the emperor nor yet all the world, sir I counsel you thus to do. Ye
said the king and would ye have me to do thus, how should I than have any honor
or fame in this world sith she shamefully has forsaken me and is gone away with
this strange knight* well sir quod the king of valefou^d your daughter I
ensure you right sagely behaueth her self as she that nothing will do against her
desteny, and because ye would have constrained her to have married against her
will, therefore she is come in to this stro^g^ castle for to withstand this
emperor, sir she has with her your own brother tharchebyshop and her cosyn
duke Philyp of sa^ary. and. v.C. of her knights, and sir there is none of all
these that for all the good in the world they would not suffer any
inco^uenientes bitwene her and this knight Arthur, but sir she fereth yt this
emperor would do her damage, therefore she has retained him and such other as
be of his company because that he is the most best knight of all the world
now living, wherein sir she has done wisely, for ye may se how at all points
they have displeased this emperor and slain of his men, sir your daughter is
your own, and this emperor is now your mortal enemy* but sir your love ought
for to be on your daughter, and bear you fyersly against your enemies and not
against her whom ye should love. Than the king said, sir by the good lord I am
at this present time so overcome with dyspleasure that I can not as now receive
your words in gree, I shall advise me well this night and to morrow I shall
answer you. Sir ye say well said the kings and.xii. peers Than the king was
unarmed and al other in like wise, than the tables were spread and every man
sat down and made good chere, and so passed forth the time with the king till
it was time to go to rest.

How that after the emperor was thus departed in dyspleasure and had defied the
king with mortal war the next night following by the subtle art of
master Steven all the kings host was brought every man fast a sleep, and in
the mean time the master and five other knights with him bare the king
Eme^dus fast a sleep as he lay, bed and all up in to the palace of the
Castle of the port noyre. Capitulo.lxxxxii.
THus as the king Emendus and his lords were in their tents right sore
troubled and abashed of the debate yt was risen between the king and
the emperor for the love of Proserpyne as ye have herd here before all that
season Arthur and his company were in the castle laughing and having good
game of the beginning of the occasyon of the strife between the king and the
emperor, and so all that day they were in great feast and joy till it was time
to go to their restes, and so every man went thereto save the master, and he
was in his doublet because that the weder was somewhat hot, and in his company
there was duke Phylyp, Brysebar, Gouernar, Hector, and Clemenson, and Perdycas,
and they played and sp^rted them togider til it was ver^ late, than Gouernar
said to the master, sir yonder in the heaven ye may se many sterres, but I pray
you how can ye know by them what should fall after. Sir said the master ye
science thereof is right pleasant and goodly. I pray your master said Hector
look now up in to the heaven and behold the planettes and look and ye can
perceive any thing that should auau^tage or else hurteful to us, and so for
their pleasure the master looked up and beheld ye heaven a great space, and at
last he said, lords and friends and ye be held the planettes and could
consider them as well as I do ye should clearly perceive that we be at the end of
our war, for we shall have shortly peace, and as I think verily we shall have
Arthur to our lord and master. Sweet master said duke Phylyp and I pray you
how shall all this come to pass. Verily sir I se well by ye course of the
sterres many meruayles, for ye planet that as now re^neth who has the
governance over the king Emendus is now in that point yt if we might have
the king we should lightly have peace with him, and I know well by the planet
that he is as now laid in his bed in his pauylyon and is fast a sleep and
all his host, and I know such a charm that if I do cast it, neither he nor
none of his shall awake till it be to morrow fair day, therefore let us go out
in to the field and bring hither the king, and than shall we have our peace
sone made. In ye name of god said Brisebar shame have he that fails so to do.
Let us go straight way said Gouernar, than they all aparayled them and went
out of the castle as pryuely as they could, and desire the marks to keep the
gates open till they returned, and when they approached nere to the tents,
than the master blew such a blast that there arose a great storm and a thycke
myste, so that they loost clean the sight of the ^entes, and therewith every man
that was waking in the field fell fast a sleep, than the master and his
company w^nt to the kings tent, and there they found him in his riall bed
fast a sleep, and great lyghtes of wax brenning before him, and so among
them they took the hole bed and the king lyenge in it, and bare it fair and
softely up to the castle, and did set down the bed in the great hall of
the palace, and so set four torches of wax brenning before him, and so they
did let him lie still. Than the master said I will retou^ne again to the
tents and awake the king my fader and show him how that we have the king
within the castle with us And so he went into his faders tent and vndyde his
enchauntement, and so than he was brought unto his faders beds side, and than
he sat him down fair and softely, and abode till the king his fader awoke
by him self, and than the master said, sir be ye a sleep. Nay said the king
who be ye that speaks to me thus erly. Sir I am Steven your sone Saint mary
said the king who has brought you hyder, get you hens for and king Emendus
may take you there is no gold nor silver that shall save you fro ye death. Sir
said the master the king is as now more in my danger than I am in his, for
sir he is in ye castle fast a sleep A sleep in the castle said the king how
can yt be, how is he come thither, or how should he be a sleep among his enemies
Sir truly we have this night borne him to the castle in his bed fast a
sleep, for sir by the subtle ar^e of nygromancy I brought him and all his
host fast a sleep, therefore sir I am com to you for to have your counseyle
what we shall do with him either slay him or save him on live. Slay him said the
king saint mary look that ye touch him not to his hurt, but honor ye him as
much as ye may, abide ye here a little space, and I will arise, and go speak
with the king of Orqueney, and as soon as he was ready they went both together
to the king of Orqueney, who was as than fast a sleep in his tent, than they
awoke him and recou^ted to him all the matter. Than the king of valefou^de said
sir for gods sake help to make ye peace among us. Than the king said syrs I
think it were best to go and wake all the other kings and.xii. peers, and let
them come hyder, and so they were incontine^t sent for, and they came thither
straight ways, and as soon as they were come and herd all the case how it
was. Than the king of valefounde said, syrs let us every man ^et to our hands
to make the peace for as now we are nere at the point let us go all to the
castle and say to the king how that al we were ^orne in like wise as he was up
in to the castle whiles that we were a sleep, and than when he sees and
h^reth that we all be taken prisoners, and that he has none now in all his
host that is able to mayntain his war he will the sooner be converted and
brok^n fro his purpose. And they all answered and said, sir ye have right well
devised the matter, we be al content thus to do, than they all departed pryuely
that none of the host espied them, and went up into the castle, and so there
they went to their beds, and lay still till it was in the morning, than in
the morning betymes the master and Hector went to Arthur and awoke him and
said, sir ye have here in your company the king Emendus and all the other four
kings and the.xii. peers. And where are they said Arthur. Here win this fair
chamber said Hector. I gentle master said Arthur blessed be the hour that
ever ye were borne, for now I trust we shall have peace let us go cause Florence
and the archebysshop to arise, and so they did, and when they were up and ready
and herd these tidings they were right joyful, than tharchebys^hop said let
us go and cause to arise the king of valefounde and the king of Orqueney and
the king of Ismaelyte^ and the king of mormall, and all the.xii. p^res, and than
let us take counsel together and se what shall be done ferder in this matter,
and duke Phylyp went for them, and as soon as they were come they saluted
Arthur and Florence. Than the bishop said, syrs now there is no more to do
but let every man take their harneys, than Arthur, duke Philyp, Hector, and
Gouernar armed them, and two. C. other knights in their company, than the
bishop said, syrs now shall the king Eme^dus doubt wha^ he sees you, and the
sooner he will agree to make peace with you Than the king of valefounde said, fair
lady Florence ye shall go to the king your faders bed and wake him. Alas said
Florence shall I go to him and he hates me deedly, I fere me he will slay me.
Madame quod the king of mormal there is not so hard a herted man but yt a
woman shall molyfy him, for there was never so great wrath but a woman may
appease it, therefore madame go your way to him, for I warau^t you ye shall make
your peace your self. well quod Florence I shall go to him god be my help,
tha^ she departed and went softly into the chamber where as the king her fader
lay, than she opened ye windows and did out the lyghtes of ware, and went
fair and softly to the kings beds side, and when she saw that he slept fast
she sat her down by him on the beds fete.

How that king Emendus wha^ that he awoke forgave all his ill will to Florence
his daughter, and did put all the gouernynge of his realm into her hands.
Capitulo.lxxxxiii.
THus as Florence sat on her faders beds fete a good space, at last the
king felt one sitting on his beds fete therewith he awoke and opened his
eyes, and beheld the great wyndowes open before him fair glased and the sone
shynynge all about the chamber the which was hanged right rychely, than the
king meruayled gretely where he was and was sore afraid and blessed him of
tentymes and said, saint marye where am I, what am I betrayed, that art thou
that syttest on my beds fete. Sir said she I am your daughter Florence, and
when the king perceived that it was she he said, who has brought the in to
this place where as I am sith thou haste shamed thy self with a fugityue
knight. A sir said Florence for gods sake say ye so no more for by the holy
baptim that I received at the fon^e stone and on the dampnacion of my soul my
body was never by him nor by none other enpayred neither in word nor in deed.
Certainly said the king fool as thou art I believe the not, why have thou
else ben so much in his company without doing of any other thing, for look
where as the ^^rt is there is the body habandoned, for the body enclyneth to
the heart. why said Florence it needs not always to accomplysh^ all the
wylles of the heart, but such as are honorable and good. Sir said the king
what honor is this for you thus to hold your self in prison privily hid
with a strange knight, and to leave such a noble marriage as I would have given
to you Sir said she if it please you I ^hal show you as to that I have left you
and come h^der, it is of troth I saw well ye were of the mind to have given me
in marriage to this emperor the which truly was against my mind for I have
him to the death, in so much that I would it had cost me the one half of my
lands so that I had his heed fro his sholdres, so that I should not offend
god, and sir in this great hate read if I should have taken him my heart should
never have b^n in peace til I had caused him peraue^ture to have lost his life,
and thereby should I have been reputed a false murderer and dampened my soul
perpetually, and to you this should have been a great shame and reproach for I am
sure if I should have died in the quarrel I should have said gramercy to him yt
would have brought me his heed, for I am in fere I should have put my soul in
i^opardy to have gone to the devil of hell, and as fynding in some manner of
ways to have shorted his mortal life, and so in this I should have become
cruel, and lost my woman's heart, sir I ensure you this was my will and
entencion, and sir to eschew al these perils and inconuenyentes I am come
hyder, for I know well that if I had tarried with you ye would have caused me to
have had him against my will, therefore I durst not dyscouer my courage unto
you, but I showed my mind to your brother the noble archebisshop who is mine
uncle and fader in god and confessor, he has all this season taken head to me
both coming and going, in chamber and out of chamber, therefore inquire of him
and of duke Philyp of sabary and of all my other barons and knights ladies and
damoyselles wheder than I have dys^on^stly ordered my self or not, and sir as
for the knight that ye speak of I have none otherwise done with him but as my
desteny has given me, and sir thus has been al my deling therefore sir for
gods sake have pity on me your own humble child, ye be my lord and fader,
and I am your daughter, ye are left unto me in the stead of my mother, who I am
sure and she had lived would have endured great trouble rather than I should have been married against my will and desteny, and sir sith ye are left me in the stead
of my mother for gods sake than leave your faderly h^rte and take a moderly
heart unto you, sir accomplysshe my desire and let never this emperor have me,
I love you and doubt you as I ought to do my dear fader, wherefore sir open
your heart and take pity on your child, and therewith she began rufully to weep
so ye great plente of silver drops fell down on her breasts. And when the
king saw her and herd he^ speak to humbly his heart could no longer endure
in ye rygour, but it began to melte and said, well daughter Florence appease
yourself and weep no more I shall speak of this matter with my counseyle, where is
Guyllia^ my cha^berlayne cause him to come to me for I will ^yse. Sir quod she
he is without in ye field in your tent. Saint mary said the king and how am I
tha^ brought into this place. Certainly sir ye we brought hider right softly
for fere of waking of you, and in like wise so be al your.iiii. kings and xii.
peers, for they knew nothing thereof till they awoke this morning. Verily quod
the king this was wondersly well slept^ of us al, give me my doublet and I will
rise, than Florence gave it him and laced his sleues and took a keruerchefe and
did cast it about his sholdres and took a comb and right softly did kembe his
heed the which right well pleased the king, and so she made him ready at al
points, and tha^ he issued out o^ the chamber and led Florence by the hand,
who made somewhat semblau^t to be sorrowful, and when they were entered into this
palace the king saw al his other.^iii kings and xii. peers than he smiled a
little and said^ lords the lady of this place has made better war than any
of us has done, for we are now more in her danger than she is in ours. Tha^
the king of mormal said, sir than it is nedefu^ to us yt we take good head yt
we displese her not. well said the king but were a^l we brought hither without
knowledge of our people in the field, by the faith that I owe to god I have
wonder how it might be. And therewith they heard a great cry and clamor without
in the field among his people, and the king maruayled what it might be. Uerely
sir said he king of orqueney I believe it be for you, and for us because they
know not where we are become. For gods sake said the kyng^ send word out to
them, and show how that I command them to be in peace, and so incontinent
there was a messenger sent to them. Than the king of mormall said unto
Florence, madam I require you depart out of this chamber for a season, for we
will speak with the king in counsel* than she departed Than the king of
mormall said, sir before ye came to us we were speaking of you, and I shall tell
you what it was, sir it is of troth that ye know well the desteny of Florence
your daughter that who so ever take her in marriage, without it be he to whom
that she is destenyed unto ^hal note escape without death as it appears plainly
by this emperor, for I believe verily that if he enforce him self any ferder*
to have her it will cost him his life, and sir ye did se how that the image
did give her chaplet unto this knight Arthur who is above all other most
chyefe in chyualry and sir ye dydd^ seal and swear to keep the appointment
that was made, and in like wise did we al your kings and.xii. peers, therefore
sir it is our mind and counsa^l that ye accomplysshe you promise whereto y^
have set your writing and great seal, and sir do ye so that ye may have the
accord and good will of this knight Arthur the which shall be right nedeful for
you for the sustaynyng of your war, and sir a^ we be of this accord, why syrs
said the king and will ye have me too give my daughter and heir unto a
strange knight, and we know nothing of his gentylnes or parage, for he may be
of such lignage that it should be great vylany to me and to al my relme to give
her unto him, and al ye that counsel me thereto should be greatly blamed. Than
the king of valefound said, sir a man ought not to demand for good wine
where as it grows, nor a wise valiant man fro whence he comes, we se and
know well the hye surmountyng beauty of his body, for sir in all your realm
there is not a goodlyer man at all points, and also we may se his great
gentylnes how that he giuethe all about unto knight^s horses and harnes,
robes, and gold and silver great plentye and he is endued above al other with
this noble virtue of lyberalytye, and sir the swe^tenes and grace that is in
him can not be recounted, and the redoubted chyualrye that is in him is
incomparable, sir if there were no thing else in him it were suffycyente
enough for him to attain thereby unto great excellent honor and noble
dygnytye, how be it sir send for his cousin Hector, who is here within this
place, and also for Gouernar who is a right sage knight, and let us take their
promise to t^l us the troth where that Arthur was born and of what lignage he
is come for paraduenture we shall sooner know it by them than by him self, for I
am sure he will not praise him self, for I never saw so good a knight and so
little auaunture. Than they said all with one voice, sir this king says well
than they sent for Hec^or and Gouernar and when the king Eme^dus saw Hector who
was byg and great and well furnisshed in all his me^bres and holdyng his hand on
the pomell of his sword and ioked fiersly. Than the king said, this knight is
to be redoubted I wot not what he is. Tha^ they answered and s^id, sir
themp^rours people knows right well to whom he belongs, sir surely ^rthur
and he calls each other cosyns Than the king called them to him and said
lords we have sent to speak with you, ye be both fair persons and have right
great semblant to be wise, and so we believe verily yt ye be, yet nevertheless we
will hau^ your promise that ye shall show us the troth of that thing y^ we will
demand of you and that for love or promise loss or winning to you or to any
other that ye have shall show nothing to us but the troth of our demand.
Certaynlye sir we faithfully promise you to show you any thing that we can do,
so yt it turn to no vylany to us nor to any lord and master. well sir said
the king I pray you who is your lord and master. Sir as god help me Arthur is
our lord. And what hold you of him said the king. Ue^ely sir said Hector a
duchy and an erledome, I hold of him. That is a great thing said the king and
ye sir Gouernar what hold you of him. As god help me sir all that ever I have
in this world. Than he is a great man said the king. Ye sir truly said Hector
that he is. And of whom was he borne said the king and of what country and of
what lygnage. As touching that ye shall pardon us, for that will we not show
you without his license, than Arthur was sent for, and as soon as the kyuge
saw him al his dyspleasure passed away, than the king desired him so hertely
that at the last he gave license to Hector and to Gouernar to show the king
what he was. Than Hector said sir by the assurance and promise that I have
made to you I shall show you the troth now that the has given me lycence^ sir
this knight Arthur is the al only son to my lord the noble duke of Brytayne,
and neuewe to the earl of Bloys, and of the lygnage of the Duke of Lancastre in
England. By my promise said Gouernar all that Hector has said is of a troth. In
the name of god said the king than he is of a suffycyente gentyl lygnage, how
say ye my kings and peers. As god help me said the king of mormal, sir al
we will counsel you that ye deliver to him the honor that god has
predestynate for him, that is to say, let him have my lady Florenc^ your
daughter, and unto this sir we al be agreed how say ye my lords do I say well
or not. And they al answered with one voice that they were al of the same
accord. And than the archebysshop was sent for, who was soon agreed to this
purpose. Than the king said, lords and friends ye will that I shall do this
as ye al be accorded unto, wherewyth I am content, and if good happen to come
thereof it shall please me right well, and if it be otherwise the blame shall be
too you, for ye cause me thus to do. And they al answered and said that the
were content to bear the burden thereof. Than the bishop said, sir ^efuse not
^hus to do, for sir he has been assured to her ever since ye time yt the
chaplet was given him at Cornyte. well said the king sith it is so far forth
gone I will than make no longer delay in the matter, than he called Arthur to him
and sent for Florence and said daughter Florence I have been in co^municatio^
before this time with the emperor to have married you to him, who as at this day I
hate of al men living, for as now I would not that I had done so for this
castle full of gold and silver, but now my kings and peers of this relme
does counsel me to give you in marriage to this knight Arthur, and if it
please you I am content therewith, therefore show me your pleasure. Right dear
father said Florence he is nerer to my heart than ever was the emperor sir I
will not refuse him, but am reday to fulfill your pleasure. Than the king took a
ring fro her finger and said to Arthur, s^r here I give you Florence my
daughter and put you in full possessyon of her by this ryng, and of al y^
hononre that partayneth to her to have during my life, on the condition yt I
will be king still as long as I live and you to be king after my deth^ and fro
hence forth I put the keeping of all my realm into your hands, and I will sit
still in peace now in mine old days, and ye shall have the pain and travail if
deed requires, and god be your guide in all your works. Than Arthur kneled
down and took the ryng. Than al ye olher.iiii. kings took him up and did him
honor and reverence as to their lord and sovereign, and Arthur took the fair
lady Florence in his arms and kyssed her right swetely, the which he never did
till the same time, and that he swear on all the saints before y^ king too put
him out of suspecte, whereof the king had great joy, and so was clean out of al
sorrow when thar Arthur was put in possession of the lady Florence. Than there
began great feast and joy, and than they went to diner and were s^rued right
rychely, and than it was published through out ^l the host both within the
castle and without how that Arthur was ensured to the fair lady Florence, and
accorded with the king, than in all the host there was made great feast and
triumph for joy, and every man said to other now have we a noble and a good
lord, now let the emperor do what he list, and blessed be the mother that bare
this noble knight Arthur, and god save al them that ever has given counsayl in
this matter, ^han they al did send unto the king, and requyre^ him that their
new lord mygh^ ^ome into the host to thentent that they might se him, and
when the king herd th^yr request it pleased him right well and commanded that
Arthur should be apparayled in royal vestures, than Arthur was arrayed as it
appertayned to a lord of such a great host, he had on a cote of skarlet, and
a syrcote of grene sarc^ne^ ^u^red with menyuers, and over that a garmente of
sylke rayed with gold and a long mantell of vyolet satyn, and he seemed to be
as fair as an aungel descended from heaven. Than the king stood before him
and held in his hand Florence his daughter who did right swetelye behold
him, and all the four kings and xii. per^s stood and beheld him he was hye
and bygge and surmountynge al other in statu^e. Than the king caused him to
mount on a fair palf^ay. And when the lady Margarete ^aw him she said to
Floeence. Madame behold what a manerly man god has sent you he had done more
honor for you than for any creature in all the world. Than the.iiii. kings
and.xii peers and Hector Gouernar, duke Philip and the master and mo than.v.C
other knights mounted on their horses and conuaied Arthur into the host, and
clarence his good sword was borne al naked before him in signifying that he was
chief champyon of all the realm. Than the king caused to be cried throughout
all the host, how that he had committed to Arthur all the cure and charge of his
realm, and charged every body that they should obey him as their propre king
and sauerayne lord. And as he rode throughout the host and passed for by every
man said welcome our new lord, god increase thyn honor, and so every man made
great joy to behold him. And thus the king soiourned at the port noyre.viii.
days in great feast and joy.

How that Arthur demanded congie and license of king Emendus father to his
lady Florence to depart into Brytayne to se the duke of Britayne his father
and the duches his mother, the which license they gave him with much pain
and Florence was in great sorrow for his departing. Capi. lxxxxiiii
AT the end of.viii. days the king made to be cried yt the host should
depart every man homewarde and commanded them to be ready at a day warning,
and gave them gold and silver great plenty. Than Arthur came to the king and
said, sir it is of troth yt when I departed out of mine own country I promised
to my lord my fader and to my lady mi mother yt if I lived I would be with them
again at the end of.v. years at the ferthest, the which shall be now at this
hal^n tide, and I know well that if I break my promise with them they shall
never have joy, and I am sure they will believe no manner of messe^ger though he
be never so true, therefore sir by your license I will depart and go se them and
return again in as short space as is to me possible. A sir said the king
take good head what your desire is, for one thing I promise you I will never
put on my sportes for any thing of business that may hap to fall to my ^elme and
yours, for the charge thereof is now in your hands, therefore sir do as shall be
for your honor. Sir said Arthur as long as I live there shall need no fere to
be had, and certainly I will ^a^y as litel space as I may, for as god help me I
would I had been there and here again, sir here is the king of orqueny who^ I
shall leave in my stead to do every thing in mine absence yt shall be needful to
the realm, sir I will take with me my cosyn Hector, duke Philyp, master Steven
and sir Brysebar. Sir said the king take with you, whom it shall plese yo^ since
ye will needs go, depart when ye will in the name of god, who be your guide and
sauegard and take your leave at Florence or ye depart, than Arthur went intoo
Florence chamber, whom he found weeping, for it was showed her how yt he would
go into his own country, she was set on her beds side, and the lady
Margaret held before her a keuerchefe to wype wythall her eyes, than Arthur
enbraced her and sayd^ mine own dear lady weep no more for as god help me it
greueth my heart right sore to se you do thus, mine own sweet lady for gods
sake be content. A dear heart said Florence now that ye have me and that I am
given unto you, and now ye will leave me, alas it is but a little ^ason that ye
have hold company with me, wherefore I am right sorrowful A right dear and sw^te
lady said Arthur as god send me joy and sauegarde of you there can not be to
me so great a sorrow as to leave your noble company therefore sweet gentil heart
think not that I will leave or forsake you on whom all my heart and faithful love
is set and fixed, and by whom I have al my welthe and honor, ^or I promise you
as faithfully as ever any lover can promise his lady yt as soon as I can I will
return again to you, for I shall think till ye season become as long or longer
than ye shall do, and madam I do it not but for the love yt I owe unto my lord
my father and mother, for I fere me that they should be in sorrow for my sake,
wherefore mine own good lady and dear heart give me license to depart as for
this time. ^e^tenly dear love quod Florence I can not endure to displease you,
and I se well how ye be minded to go, wherefore in gods name go on when ye will,
and return again as shortly as you can, and I require you bring hither with
you my lord your fader and m^der to then^e^t that he may se me who is and shall
be his daughter. Madam said Arthur with a right good will if I can bring
hithereto, and therewith he cleped and kissed her the which was the second time
that ever he kyssed her, than Arthur required the fair lady Margarete that she
should not depart out of his ladies company. And therwyth tharchbyshop came to
them, and Arthur desired him that he would comfort and cou^sail his lady
Florence in his absence, and so he departed and took leave of the king and of al
other, and so entered into his iourny^ and took with him Hector duke Philyp the
master Gouernar, and Brysebar, and.xl, other knights, than Hector sent before
them a messenger to his city of orgoule whereas Arthur was rychely received of
the countes and of ye fair lady Alyse and of all the barons of that country,
and there Arthur tarried.iiii. days making great joy, and on the.v day
Arthur and his company departed and H^ctor with him, and so entered into their
way making great joy as young people should do for they were glad of their
new lord Arthur, who was sweet young and curreys, and of great power and thus
they rode forth so mer^ly si^gyng and the master was in a cote of ^ar. ever
vyolet, and a mantel of read sent al and his hat in his hand because the
w^ther was very ho^e for it was in the month of August, and the merry morning
was fair and fresshe because of the sweet dew, the lusty birds did merelye
sing, and the weder was fair and clear, and this master was young having a
lusty heart and full of new love, than he began merelye too sing, saying this
swe^e pain of love sleeth mine heart. and al is for you mine own lady. And
when Arthur herd him sing, and considered well the dy^rye of his song, he
than perceived well how^ that his heart was set on love the why^h pleased him
right well and caused him to remember his ladi Florence, and than he said to the
master, sir did ever any love cause y^u to wake one night. By the mother of god
sir said he sith that I first did think on my lady I was never so fast a
sleep but that I thought my spyrit and heart was with her. Sir said Brysebar
than though ye sing I b^ame you not, for I am sure ye thought on her. By the
faith that I owe to god mais^er said duke Philip what was the thing yt gave you
occasyon to love your lady bes^^ for what said the master will ye than confess
me be ye a priest, I se well ye will ple^e with me I must defend my self, I
pray you good master yet show it unto me. well sir said the master I shall
show it you, I love her because she is gracious and gentil of heart, for her
grace and gentyl heart has me retained into her service, in so much that I
quyte all the world^ for her, for as help me god I have found in her grace
gentylnes and swetenes. well master said Philip yet for all this ye know not
whether that she loves you^ or bears to you any faith or trouth^ Yes truly
sir said the master I know well she bears to me both faith and love. well
master I pray you tell me whether had ye leue^ to have the love of her
witho^t trouth^ or else troth without love, for a woman can not well love mi
and you and every bodi, and do for you and for me and for other, for in that
point there lacks troth when ye love rests not on him that attends
therefore, and ^ she rest on him, than her love is not generall^ and either she
loves you without troth, or else she is true without love. what said the
master love without troth is nothing worth, for troth is the vpholder of
love, for faithful love is fourmed of troth, and what profit should it be
for me if she were never so true and l^ued me not, the one can not be without
the other, what should it avail me to go seek for her troth, and she love me
not, for l^u^ is the drawer, and troth is the vpholder, for troth is the very
end of love and therewith he began to sing faith and troth is in my dear lady,
and so they al did laughe at him and made great feast and sport.

How Arthur in the way as he went to Britayne he arrived in a fair meadow that
was joining to the town of Lion surle rone, and there he found the king of
Malogre accompanied with diverse earls and other barons, and they had there
cried a great tournay and there Arthur and his company were frendely received
and had great chere both of the king and of al other lords and knights. ca.
lxxxxv.
IN this manner as ye have herd before Arthur and his co^pani ^ode forth til
they came wtin iiii. miles of Lion, and tha^ they sent Bawdwin before to take
up their lodging, and as he aproched nere to the town of Lion he saw the
fair meadow the which was between Uyen and Lion pyghtfull of tents and
pauylyons, and swarmynge full of knights and horses, and at last Bawd wyd
espied the pauyl^yn of his old lord and master the young king of Malogre,
whoo did put him to Arthur, and there was the earl of Forest and the earl of
Neuers and the earl of Foys and the Marshal of myrpoys and the lord of
Beauieu and the dolphyn of Uyen, and a great nu^bre of other people, for they
had holden a great tournay the day before, and the same day the king had al
these noble men at diner with him in his pauilio^, and in the next day they
should depart, and when yt Bawdewyn saw the pauylyon of his old lord the
young king of malogre, he dressed him self the next way thither and without
the pauil^on door stood the lord de la launde, and with him a.x. other
knights and al they beheld Bawdwyn as he was coming, and each of the^ said to
other. what is he that comes so rudely, or fro whence comes he, I can not tell
said an other but it seems he has a gre^ have, and ever Bawdewyn approached
nerer and nerer. And at last sir dela lou^de said, verily me thinks it would
be Bawdewin my lord the kings squire. Verily said an other and so it is in
deed. Than Bawdewin alyghted fro his horse. And when sir de la lou^de saw
verily how it was he, as fast as he could he ran, and enbraced him and made to
him ^ight great wit and feast, and knights than of al parties of the ^elde
b^gan to assemble there till at last tidings came to Alexander the young king
how yt his old servant and squire Bawdewyn was com, than he commanded that he
should be brought to him and so he was, and when he was before the king he
kneled down and saluted the king. Than the king said friend thou art welcome,
and how have yt done sith thy departing. Certainly sir said he right well, for
a man can not be in the company of such a knight as I have been withal that can
fare amysse. In the name of god said the king and how fares ye noble knight
Arthur. Sir by ye mother of god he does as the best renowned and praised knight
of all the wide world and the most honored and most has done of deeds of
valu^e and of prowess I being present, and there he recounted many of his
deeds, whereat the king and al other had great marvel and more over sir said
Bawdewyn I say that he is at this hour the man of gretest power that I know
now living, for he shall be the noble king of Sor^l^ys, for he has ensured the
fair lady Florence daughter and heir to the mighty king. Emedus king of
Soroloys who has under his rule four mighty kings and vii. peers in his
realm and they be all his men and holds their lands of him. By my soale
said yt king this is a great thing that ye speak of, and friend where is he now
at this present time, or where did ye leave him. Sir behold yonder ye may se
him coming homewarde into his own country. sir I must go before into Lion to
take up his lodging. what be they that come with him quod the king. Sir there
is with him a noble clerk who is called master Steven, and he is son to a
king, and also the duke of sabary named sir Phylyp, and sir Hector duke of
orgoule, sir Brisebar and Gouernar with other.xl. knights of great valor. In
the name of God said the king he shall have in these parties none other
lodging but al only min. Than he commanded all the earls and barons about him
to mount on their horses, and commanded to bring him his own horse for he
said plainly he would go mete. Arthur on the way. Sir said Bawdewin ye say
right well and do nobly to do him that honor, for sir truly he loves you
entyerly, and sir I ensure you he is a man of right great valor. And wha^ the
lord de la lounde herd these tydinges of Arthur he had right great joy and
ran to the lady his wife and to the lady Rossyllon and to all other ladies and
damoyselles, and recounted to them the coming of Arthur and reported of his
d^menynge and honor as he had herd Bawdewyn say before, and also he showed
them how that the king and all the hole assembly were taking of their horses
to ride to mete with him on the way. And when these lad^es herd all this they
were in great joy because of his coming. Than the lady of Rossyllon said, I
se well tha^ that the crownyng that we did to him wha^ we saw him last is well
bestowed and enployed on him, for it is a great honor to us sith he has horn
him so valyauntly ever sith, therefore let us also goo and mete wi^h him and bid
him welcome, and do him all the honor that we ca^ do. In the name of god said
all the other ladies and so let it be done, than they apparailed them with ryal
vestures, and by that time the king and al his earls and other company were
mounted on their horses, and the ladies and damoyselles also, and so rode
forth together in company. Than Bawdewyn spor^ed his horse as fast as he could
to bring these tidings to Arthur. And wha^ Gouernar saw Bawdewin retoune
again so fast he said to Hector, sir Bawdewyn torneth again what it meneth
I wot not. And wha^ he was come again unto Arthur he said, sir behold yonder
comes the young king of mal^gre and the earl of Fois, and the earl of Forest
and the earl of Neuers, the lord of Beauieu and the lord de la lounde, the
marshal of myrpoys, and the dolphyn of vyen and all their ladies with them, and
they are coming to mete with you to welcome you into this country, and mo tha^
a.M. horse in their company, and the king will not suffer ye shall have any other
lodgyng but with him. And wha^ Arthur herd this he had right great joy and
said, a good lord I thank your grace that ye have given me so many honors,
than he said to the master and to duke Phylyp, syrs hold you nere me, and so
they did, and than he said to the^ Certainly syrs ye shall se here people of a
noble behauour and honor and well ordered and so they rode forth fair and
easily till both parties approached nere togyder^ and as soon as Arthur saw
the king and his barony, and specially the fresh ladies and damoyselles he and
al his did alyghte of their horses, and in like wise did the king and all his
company, and there they met and enbraced each other with m^che great joy and
tryumphe, and Hector and Gouernar were much made of because of their old
acqueyntau^ce among them. Than Arthur went to the ladies and would not have
suffered them to have light fro their horses, but the lady Rossillon did wheder
he would or not, and she ran to him and enbraced and kyssed him right swetely,
what shall I say more all the hole assembly were in great joy because of the
coming of Arthur. And when duke Phylyp and the master saw the great feast
and honor that was done to him, both of the king and of all other earls and
barons, knights and squyers, ladies and damoyselles, tha^ in their hertes they
praised Arthur more than they did before. Than Brysebar said, this gentylman
I se well is none orphelyne in his own country, he needs not to care for the
emperor if these people will help and aid him, a Florence I s^ well ye be
well assured, would to God with a wisshe that ye were nowhere present that ye
might se this joy. And this king held still Arthur by the hand and demanded
of him what knights the master and duke Phylyp were. And he answered and
said, sir this is a sovereign clerk a knight and a duke and sone to a king
right noble and puissau^t, and sir this other is duke of Sabary a right noble
and a doubty knight, than the king took them by the hands and said, lords ye
be right hertely welcome into this country, and to you syrs we will make fe^st
and joy, as for Arthur we care not for^ let him make him self there and h^
list. Than they mounted on their horses and rode forth toward the tents in
the field, and the king would have had them to have ryden before him to
thente^t to do them the more honor thereby, but than the master said, sir for
gods sake pardon us, for sir we ^e servants to my lord Arthur here
present, for we hold of him therefore sir by your license we will not ride
before him Syrs quod the king as in that ye shall bear him honoar, therefore by
the faith that I owe unto you ye ^hal ride on before, so than they went
forth before, and the earl of Forest, and the earl of Foys, and the earl of
Neuers were with Arthur, and Hector and Gouernar were with the dolphin of vyen
and the marshall of myrpoys, and in this manner they came to the kings tente,
and they did than wasshe their hands and went to diner, than the king sat
down on the hye benche and commanded Arthur the master, and duke Phylyp to
sit down by him, and all other according to their estates, and there they were
rychely served. Than the ladies sent a present to Arthur of fresh chaplettes
to thentent that he should give them where as it lyked him best, and tha^ Arthur
did give them unto the king and to the master, and to duke Phylyp and to all
other earls and barons, and when they had dyned, than the lord de la lounde
came to Arthur fro the ladies and said, sir all the hole assembly of ladies
and damoyselles sends their reco^mendacions unto you as to him that they ones
crowned king of all knights that were assembled together at that time, and
they al desire you that ye will come in to their tent to sport you with them,
and to bring in your company whom as it shall please you best. So than the
king and he, the master, duke Philip, and all the other earls and great
barons went thider, and there they were received with great joy and feast, than
these ladies began to dance, carowle, and to sing with these lords and
knights And at the last the king said to master Steven a gentle master and
why do ye not play and sport you among these ladies and damoyselles, be they
not metely fair, gentle and noble. king said the master by my soul they
are right gentyl noble and beautiful, but sir with sporting among them I
can little skyll. why master said the king what play than will ye sport you
withal. Verily sir said duke Philyp he can many goodly plays if he would use
them, for there is not in all this world his match. A ge^tyll master said the
king by the faith that ye owe unto Arthur I require you show us some of your
sportes for a pastaunce. Master quod Arthur I pray you do so. Well said the
master sith it pleases you I am content, than wtin a while the master caused
in the mids of the house suddenly a fair fountain to appear, and in the
highest thereof there stood a horse of crystal, and out of diverse places thereof
there issued out stremes of sweet cristal line water, and that horse stood
quaking semyng to be quycke, and round about this fountain there seemed to be
fair grene busshes and fair grene hills covered with vyolettes sweet
smellinge, and roses with other sweet flowers great ple^te, and diverse manner
of birds synginge melodyously, and so all the ladies and damoyselles that were
there left their dauncynge and carowlinge and did wasshe their hands at this
fresshe fountain, and made chaplettes of the fair flowers that they saw there
growing and herkened to the sweet armony of the birds, and they had great
marvel what it might be, or fro whens it might come so suddenly, and all the
lords and knights were gretely abashed with that sight. Than the master caused
to be coming into the hall.ii.C. varlettes vestured all in cotes of scarlet
paled with grene, and.ii.3C. trompettes sowninge all at ones, than the knights
and ladies beheld what it might mean And at last they entered into the hall and
after them by seminge there came a clerk right fair and gracious, and he had on
a robe of scarlet lyned with grene se^dall and his cappe in his hand, and this
clerk had stonding by him a fresh grene hawthorne full of fair blossoms
right sweet smellyng, and in the highest of this tree there was one brau^ch that
surmounted all the other, whereon there sat a nyghtyngale the most fair and
gracyous of all the world and best syngyng, than she lift up her heed and filled
her throat full of wind the more shryller to verse out her sweet voice, her
synging pleased so well all the ladies that each of them wisshed to have had her
in a cage. Than ye king and Arthur rose and went nere to behold this
marvel, than the lady marshal put up her hand to the intent to have taken
the nightyngale, but she could not attain thereto, than the clerk yt kept the
hawthorne said, madame and if ye will have my bird perauenture ye shall have
her and if ye be such as ought to have her, for if it be so that ye or any
other lady here in this company did never trespace in marriage neither by
thought nor deed such one may take her at her own will, but and if they have
done any fault let them not offer to have her, for they shall fail of her And
when the king herd that he laughed a good pace and said, let se who will enter
pryse to have this Ioly bird and than every man was agreed that all the
cou^tesses should assay each after other, than the lady marshal thought to have
departed away pryuely, but than the clerk called her again and said, madame
ye were the first right now that would have taken my bird, and so shall ye be
again now at this time, therefore m^dame come forth and assaye what ye can do,
than the king caused her to assaye w^eder ^he would or not, and than she put up
her hand but she could not attain thereto by two cubits of length. And when
the lady Rossyllon saw yt than she said, madame this bird techeth us to speak
of our old works, now it appears if ye have been always in your prayers or
not, ones ye said words to me the which ye know not, but now I may say to
you such as I se, than the cou^^esse and great ladies went one after an
other, but all they failed of their purpose. And at the end the king caused the
lady Rossyllon to assaye, and as soon as she did put up her hand toward the
bird the gentle nyghtyngale did descend down and sat her on her hand, and
yet this was not to her very great praise, for she had not ben long married
Than the earls did laugh at their wives, but yet some of them were not very
well content. Than the master caused suddenly all this to vanysshe away both
clerk and tree, bird and all, than every man meruayled what this might be,
and they wend that they had dremed all this and the king smyled at this matter,
and went and sat down together the king and Arthur and the master and all
other lords. Than the king said, as god help me I would it had cost me the
half part of my realm, so that this master were always in my company, and
that he loved me as well as he d^^th Arthur. Sir said Arthur he has ryght^ well
showed to me that he loves me, for sir sith I departed fro you I have had
war with.vii. kings and an emperor, and sir this emperor will come again
now at this next eester to make war with the mighty king of Soroloys for
the defyaunce is made between both parties, wherefore I must return again as
shortly as I can. why sir said yt king shall ye than have war the nex^
e^st^r. Ye surely sir, for it is sworn and cried on both parties. And when
shall ye wedde this lady Florence of whom I have herd so much speaking of.
Sir said Arthur if God will give me the honor of this war I shall wedde her
incontinent after. By saint John sir said the king I would I were at yt war,
at the day of your wedding. why sir said the dolphyn and ye would so the^ go
thider why sir said the king if I go will ye go also. Ye sir with all my
heart, and that I faithfully assure you. Well said ye king keep your prom^sse,
and I ensure you yt I will go with.v.C. men of war in my company. And I
promise you said the dolphyn yt I will go and a.C. men of arms with me. And
without me shall ye not go said therle of Forest. Promise yt faithfully quod
the king, and as much said therle of Neuers, and so far went this matter
that ye earl of mo^^t belyall, and the earl of Foys, and the lord Beauieu^ and
the m^rshall of mirpoys promised all together yt each of the^ would go with.ii.C
in their company, and there appointed again to mete in ye same place in the
mids of lent. Than Arthur thanked them and said, syrs I trust at the said
day to be here aga^ne with you, and brige with me my dear fader and mother, and
so than we will d^parte togider And when these ladies herd how yt Arthur would
bring thither the duchess his mother, than they all desired of their husbondes
that they might go with the duchess when she were come, and the king was well
content therewith and desired the earls and barons that it might be so. And so
at the last it was agreed and accorded that they should al go together Thus was
Arthur and his company.iii. days with the king and with these earls in great
feast and joy.

How that Arthur and Hector his cosyn with all their company aryued at Bloys
and how the earl of Bloys fader to Hector, and the countess his mother, and all
the hole barony of the realm met them on the way and received them with great
joy, for they had been before in great fere that Arthur their neuewe and Hector
their sone had been dead. Capi. lxxxxvi.
SO on the fourth day Arthur and his company took leave of the king, and of
the earls and barons, ladies and damoyselles and took his right way toward
the town of estampes, than Arthur sent Iaket his squier before to Blois to
give the earl knowledge how that Arthur his neuew and H^ctor his son would be
with him the sunday next following, than Iaket departed and mounted first to
orliaunce and there he found therle of Bloys who was right sorrowful in his
heart because he could here no manner of tidings of Hector his son, wherefore
he was in great doubt leest that he should have been deed, than Iaket mounted
up in to the hall where as therle was, and as soon as he saw Iaket he ^ose
and enbraced him, and demanded of him how that Arthur and Hector his sone
did. As god help me sir said Iaket they do humbly salute you by me^ and
sends you word how that they will be with you this sunday next coming hole
and in good health thanked be god as great lords and puissaunt knights, for
sir I say unto you how that Hector your son is earl of Brule and duke of
orgoule and is right rich and puyssaunt. Ye Iacket said the earl and who has
given him this honor. Sir by the mother of god my lord Arthur who did
conquer it with his sword as he that is the best knight of all the world. A
good lord said therle humbly I thank your grace sith that my child is so
well puruayed, than the earl did send a messenger to al his friends giving
them knowledge how that his sone was comi^g home ward who was become right
puyssaunt and noble, co^maundinge them for joy to hang the streets of the
town. And as soon as the countess herd of these tidings she mounted up in
to her charyot and came to orlyaunce to the metynge of her sone, and so therle
and all his company did m^te Arthur and Hector and their compa^y at cietry,
and there received them with gr^te chere and joy, than all the noble men of
the coun^re came thither to se Arthur and Hector, and so all together they went
to bloys and there they se^o^^ned viii. days making great feast and joy.

How Arthur aryued in Britayne and how the duke his fader and al his chiualry
met and received Arthur with great honor and tryumphe, and how yt the
duchess his mother swouned for joy when ^^e saw her sone Arthur, and in like
wise did Iehannet his old love, whereof the master and Philip had gre^e fere
leest that Iehannet should draw away Arthurs heart fro Florence because of ye
great love yt they saw between them. Ca. lxxxxvii.
AT the end of.viii. days Arthur called to him Iaket and said, friend ye
must go to my lord and fader and to my lady my mother and to Iehannet and
salute me right humbly unto them, and show them how y^ I will be with them
the.xv. day after saint Martyn, and show also to my lord and fader how that
there comes in my company a sone to a king and a duke right mighty and
puissau^t than say that I desire him to send for part of his friends to keep
them company when they shall be come to him. Sir said Iaket I shall do your
message in the best wise, for he was g^adde to go. Than Gouernar said Iaket I
pray you let me be humbly recommaunded to my lord and to my lady and to
Iehannet. It shall be done sir said Iaket and ^o departed and rode so long till
at last he came to Nauntes on a friday at night, and there he demanded
tidings of the duke, and there it was showed him how that the duke and the
duchess were departed to the castle of the for^st, and fro thens they should
depart to thabbey of Iannebon, and than they shall come to the cite of vennes,
and there to soiourned nere till it be crystmasse, and than to come again to
Nau^tes where as they will keep open court, for he has somoned al his barons to
be there at crystmasse with him. So than Iaket tarried all that night at Nauntes,
and in the morning he departed and went to vennes where as he found the duke
and duchess and they were as than lokinge out at the windows of the palace,
and there they talked together of diverse matters till at last the duchess began
to w^pe, than the duke demanded of her why she so sore wept. why sir said she
alas behold the great noblenes of this country and the fair forestes that be
therein, and the valor and bounte of the lusty country of Brytaine alas sir who
shall keep and obtain this cou^^re after us sith that Arthur our dear sons is
deed, and sir we shall never have mo children together, alas sir when I
rem^mbre al ^hys my heart dies in my body for sorrow. Dea^ madame said the
duke nay and god will, for if that were ^^ue we should have great need of
comfort, but yet I have trust in god that he shall ^ende us joy of our
child, and to hear shortly some good ridinges of him it is not yet fully.v.
year sith his ^epar^yng, and within that ^erme his promise was to come again,
whe^fore mada^e I pray you to weep no more, ^or it g^eaue^h me to se you do
thus and as they were thus talking together Iaket came intoo the palace and
en^^ed into ^he hall, and as ^one as the kn^ghtes and squiers saw Iaket they
enbraced him and demaund^d how that Arthur did. And he answered how that he
did right well and was coming homewarde, than Iaket mounted up into the
chamber, and there he found the duke and the duchess together, and the
duchess aspyed him first and ran to him and said: a my friend how does
Arthur my son. Madam he humbly saluteth you and also my lord here pre^ent and
also Iohannet. what Arthur my son friend said the du^^ and where is he. Sir he
will be here with you by thend of these five days. And how does he said the
duke. Sir as the most honored noble knight and best proved that is now living
in this world, ^or under ^he heaven there is no knight of his valor and h^e
prowess, and sir he has given too Hector his cousin an erledom* and a duchy
right great and noble, he is now two t^mes as rich as the e^le his father is.
Ye Iaket quod the duke where has he go^en this lan^ and who has given it him.
Sir as god help me Arthur did give it him, and he wanne it va^iau^tly wit^ his
sword, but sir this deed is nothing ^o the regard of a thousand deeds that
he has done sith he departed. Than the duke smyled and joined his hands
togider and lift up his eyes to heaven ^ thanked god. And the duches wept for
joy and so did Iehannet also. Than the duke said Iaket and who comes with
my son Arthur Sir there comes with him a clerk of great wisdom, and is
chief counseler with the fair queen Florence and he is son to a king right
mighty and puissant, and al^o there is with him a mighty duke who is called
duke Philip of sabary, and other diverse noble knights to the nombre of.xi.
why friend Iaket said the duke is Arthur than so much honored that a son of a
king and a duke and so noble a company comes with him. Uerely your son is in
this case, that or this year go out he shall be crowned king of a puissant
realm. A good lord said the duchess I render to you grace and than^kynges
sith ye have given to us such a child of whom is reported so much honor w^l
quod the duke madam mount up into your chayrot and let us go to nau^tes and met
him th^re, so than they departed and went fro vennes and came to Nau^tes in an
evening late, and Arthur and his company rode so till at last they ^ame to samur
and entr^d into the abbey of saint Florent, and there he lodged al ye night and
was well receued and honestly, and in the next morning Arthur sent a messenger
to his father, giving him knowledge how that he wol^e be with him at Nauntes on
the sunday next coming. And when the duke herd that he said to the duches
his wife, madam let us go and mete our son and this noble cumpany that comes
with him, for I have great desire to se him, than all the world, and tha^ by
that time all the dukes friends, lovers and subjects were come to him to the
nombre of.v. hundred, than they all togider mounted on their hors^s And
Iohannet was in the chair with the d^ches, and so they rode forth, and wy^hen
th^e leges thence they met with Arthur and al his company, and as soon as
Arthur saw his father he did alyght and did of his bonet and in likewise did
his father to him and there they cleped and kyssed each other oftentimes. Than
the duke said, my sweet f^ende and dear child ye be right hertely welcome home
to me as he that has been more desired with me than all the creatures living. A
dear son how could ye ever have the heart thus to leave your mother who has been so dolo^o^s us for your absence that she has wept ever sith your
departing, and as the duke ended these words his mother came too him and
cleped and kyssed him, but she was so overcome with oye, that she could speak
no word of a great season, but so they sat down togy^her, and when she might
speak she said, my sweet and dear child ye have long holden us in darkness,
nor neu^r sithe ye departed my heart was in any joy, but now sweet heart my
joy is increas^d that I may have you in m^ne arm^s and there with she kyssed
him and wept ^ight pitiousely for joy, so that Arthur could no longer keep
his he^te and eyes fro weeping the which he did never before sith he came out
of his childhoode, nor never after did for no manner of trouble that came to him
And when ye duke Phylyp saw y^ pityfull and joyful metyng^ between the child
and the mother and ye fader, and saw how yt they wept, for all the gold of the
world he could not keep him self but that his eyes were full of drops of
water than came to them Iohannet and cleped kyss^d Arthur right tenderly and
said a my lover Arthur ye be hertely welcome unto me, sir ye left me right
sorrowful when ye departed last out of this country, but my sweet lady your
der^ mother has kept me right tenderly for the love of you, and oftentimes we
have wept together our fill for the love of you, a mine own ^wete love I
understand that god has given you a better and a more gentiller lady than I
am, sir all this agrees me right well, for sir I have right great joy of
your wealth, sir ^ offer me to serve you and to love you with good faithful
heart, for ye are my lord and I am your daughter, and therewith she wept right
tenderly and took Arthur in her arms. And when Arthur saw her so weep he
could not keep his eyes fro dystyllyng of salt tears for her sake, for he
loved ^o the damosel that he was sore tempted to have repented him in y^ he had
fyaunced Florence. And wha^ the master saw the great love of the fader ^ the
mother and their ^hyld, and of Ioha^net, he said to Philyp, sir I doubt me of
these people least they wtdraw away fro Florence Arthurs her^, and I pray you
be^old and se how they love him, saw you ever so much honor done to any
treature liuyn^e Fere no^ quod Philip he has brought me into this country, I
warant you he shall d^part again and return in to ours. Tha^ the duches and
Arthur rose upon their fete than all the noble men of y^ country came about
him and made hi^ as great feast and joy as they could, than the duke went to the
master and to duke Philip and receued them with great honor and so they al
mounted and went to Nau^tes and ther^ ^han all the burgeyses of the city
issued out al in one su^e and lyuerey and met with them. And also the bishop
of the town and all the hole clergy encountered them and made great joy and
generally so did al those of the city Than the duke made great honor unto
duke Philyp and unto the master. And when they w^te alyghted fro their hor^es,
than they mounted up into the pala^s where as they made great feast and joy
the space of.xv. days, and than eue^y man departed. Than Arthur said to the
duke his father, and present there was the master, duke Philip and the duches
sir Oliver of yriac, and diverse other batons there he recounted all his
fortune, and how that he had fyaunced Florence and how that the war is begone
and taken between him and the emperor of ynde and how^ that al this wa^re was
laid on his hand and charge, and the^fore he prayed the duke his father that
he would go with him into the country of Soroloys to thentent to help him.
Than the duke said, son Arthur with a right good will and I shall bring with
me all my strength wy^h baners dysplayed, and tha^ if we may find this
emperor we shall show him what that brytons can do. And when the master herd
that he smyled and becleped the duke and said, sir ye have nobly answered
without any counsel, it seems well ye are the father and he is the son, sir by
the faith that we owe unto god we shall keep you good company. Than ye duke
sent all about for his strength. And in the mean season Arthur led the
master, duke Philyp, sir Brysebar, and all the other knights of Soroloys in all
the towns and cities of his country, and thus they passed the time til it was
nere lent, and than they returned again to Nauntes where as they found al
their host ready apparayled to depart. Than Arthur took of the^.x. M. after his
own choice and all the remenaunt he sent home again to thentent to keep the
country in sauegarde in the dukes absence, and they soiourned.iiii* day at
Nau^tes and so departed and took the hye way to Lion, and sir Oliver, Gouernar,
and Brisebar had ye co^ueiaunce of the host, and ye duke Arthur Hector the
master and Philip took their way straight to Paris to take leave of ye king of
France who received them with right great joy and honor, for he loved the duke
entierly, and the king made great chere to the master and to duke Philip, the
master praised much the noblenes of france, thus they were.iiii. days with the
king and than they departed and the duches with them and took their leave of the
king, tha^ the king said to the duke, sir if ye lack men of war ye shall
have part of my strength, tha^ the duke thanked hi^ and said I trust we have
people sufficient, so they departed and rode so long on their iourny til they
came to Lion on a wednesday in the morning and there they found Gouernar
Brisebar and ^ir Oliver who had made t^ die for their lodgings, and tha^ the
king of malogre and al his earls and barons were assembled togider and were
lodged about vien and when they knew yt Arthur was coming they mounted on
their horses and me^ with him, and they al made great honor too the duke of
britayne and the ladies received the duches right honorably, and so they rode
forth togider, and than y^ young king ran to the master and enbraced hi^ in
his arms for he loved him well because of his marvelous cu^n^ng, than they came
to the pauilions and there alighted, and the dukes pauilion was pight up right
richely, and ^here they soiourned.iiii. days in great joy and the king desired
the master y^ he would show as than some pastau^ce among that company, than
the kings squire were before hi^ ready to do seruyc^ Than the master caused
each of them to thynk either without any head, and each of them beheld other
and were greatly abashed and had great maruayle where their fellows heads
were become, than they looked on the earth whether they were fallen down to the
ground* and there with they sought each others head all about the house, and
^he king and all the hole asse^bly had tyght great sport thereat. Than on the
fourth day they al departed and took their right way to the port noyre.
Gouernar Brisebar and sir Oliver did guide forth the host, and Arthur sent
Bawdewyn his squier before to the port noyre, to apparayl and garnysh the
castle and too draw thither al his garnysons this noble company rode so long
till they came but a days Journey fro the castle of y^ port noyre. Now let us
leave spekyng of them as for this time and return to Florence

How after that Arthur was departed fro king Emendus and Florence to go se his
friends, Florence than departed fro the port noyre and the queen of orqueny
and the lady Ma^garete of Argenton with her and went to sport her in her
own ^ea^me and castle of clear toure, whereas the emperor came and bes^eged
her, for or she was ware thereof he and his company were laid round about the
town^ and they were to the nombre of two.C. thousand, what of emperyens and of
sarasyns. Ca. lxxxxviii


IT is troth yt wha^ Arthur was departed fro ye port noir to go into France
and into bry^aine for to se his fr^nds tha^ Florence and the queen of orqueney
and the lady Margarete were of accord that they would not go with king Emendus
into the realm of Soroloys but they determined to goo to the clear toure, and
there to abide till the retournynge of Arthur where as they might every day
privily talk each unto other of their loves, so than Florence took her leave of
the king her father and so departed and took with her the queen oedrqueney and
the lady Margarete and a.xl. other knights with them, and so they travailed
till they arrived at the clear toure, and there they were in great sport and joy,
but it is oftentimes said, he yt has an ill neighbor has oftentimes an ill
morning for as soon as Florence was come to the clear toure and that it was
known that she would abide there a good space, sir Perdycas provided for all
things that was necessary for the place, than a spy went to the emperor of
ynde and said, sir Florence is now at the clear toure, and sir ye may now and
ye will soon have her, for she is come thider but privily and but with a small
company. And when the^perour^ herd that he sent incontinent for as much
people as he could get between him and babylon, and he assembled there
together so much people yt all the country was over spread with them, and
Florence knew nothing of al this till the time that the emperor had besy^ged
her round about with mo than.ii. C. M. men. And when she saw y^ she was in that
case, she was right sorrowful and wept pytyouslye every d^y more and more, for
she saw well she could not send out for no socoure to any body there was such
watch made al about the place than she bewailed Arthur and said, and Arthur
sweet friend ye are over long fro this business, certainly if ye lose me ye
shall lose your true lover, a dear love I am yours and now ye know nothing in
what mis^hefe I am in, ^or now your lover is in great peril, thus Florence made
the gretest lamentacion of y^ world and her people did comfort her in the
best wise y^ they might. Now let us leave of Florence and return to Arthur.

How y^ Arthur was right sorrowful because that his horse did stomble under him,
and how the master showed him how that Florence was besyeged by the emperor in
her castle of ye clear toure whereof Arthur was in great fear and trouble.
Capi. lx^xxix.
When that Arthur and al his host were within a lege of the port noyre Arthur
and the duke his father and the king and the master rod^ each by other
^alkynge of dyuersr matters, suddenly Arthurs horse foundred under him and fell
grouelynge to the ^arth but Arthur held him still in the saddell till the hor^e
and he rose both again together and fro thence forth Arthur was in so great
a study yt no man could hau^ a word of him but with great pain and in this
manner he endured a great season Than the king began to reason with him but he
could skant have any word of him, than the king and duke Phylyp called to
them the master and sayd^ sir what ayleth Arthur for since his horse stombled he
would never speak no word by his will, we maruayl what he ayleth well said the
master go to him and demand him the qu^stion, tha^ they rode to him, and the
king rode on the one side and duke Phylyp on the other side and the master
before him, than the ma^ster al laughyng began to sing melodyously, and the
king and duke Philip did laugh at him^ and Arthur eu^r rode forth as though he
had ben^ half a sleep, and with the sport that they made he lift up his
eyes, and when he saw them about him making such sport a little he smyled,
Than the master said to him sir what there is with you, what sport make ye to
my lord the king here present who is come hither for your love, sir now ye be
come into your own realm and into your own power, and sir these lords have
for^aken their own countries to come hither with you. Than he answered and
said gentyl master pardon me, for I ^nowe well ye say but truth, but sir I
ensure you ever sith my horse ^el^ under me any heart has been so heavy that I
ca^ in no wise make any good there, I can not tell what it meanethe, I pray to
god all be for the best, I doubt me greatly of my lord the king of Soroloys
or else of my lady Florence lest that this Emperor has done to them any
tribulacyon. Sir said duke Phylyp doubt not that, for if it were so ye may be
sure my lord and uncle would soon^ have sent messe^gers to you, therefore m^ke
good chere and rejoice your barons and such noble men as be come hither for the
love of you and namely this great host who has so far trauayled for your s^ke
A de^e friend duke Phylyppe said Arthur I require you make ye than good chere
and semblant and so than the king and Arthur, the master and duke Philip rode
forth together throughout al ye host and comfor^ed their people as well as they
myght^ than they arrived at the port noyre and mounted up intoo the palace, and
all the host was lodged without in the field, and all the ladies and
damoyseles that came thither with them maruelously beheld the strength and
satuacyon of that place, and reputed in their wyndes great noblenes and valor
in Arthur for the acheuynge and conquerynge of ^ha^ place. Than the master did
deuyse too them all ^haduentures that werein that place. Than the duches mother
to Arthur had right great joy, and than the master led them to the gardyn to se
it, and when they saw the place so fair ^ so d^lect^ble they wysshed never to
depart thenc^ So than these ladies went and rested them at the fountain. And
Arthur and the king Hector, and all the other earls, and the lord Beauien were
al together in company, but Arthur was still in melancoly. Than the master
went into his own chamber to look his books to know wha^ was the cause that
Arthur was so sadd^ for, than anon he perc^yued by his ^okes and cunning what
p^ryl that Florence was in, and how th^mperoure had besyeged her round about,
than incontinent he went to Arthur and said, sir the matter go^th ill to work,
for this emperor has besieged Florence in her castle of clear toure with a
great number of people, so my lady is in great mischef without remedy be soon
found for her, she w^p^th right pitiously and makes the gret^st lamentacyon of
the world, she cries out on fortune and says, alas now have I al lost, I was
borne in an vnhappy^ hour, a gentyl hea^te Arthur, god tha^ al thing fourmed
of naught keep and defend you from al ill encumbraunce and give you honor, for
as for me I am at great myschefe, fortune shame have thou for thou have done me
many troubles, al^s my sweet love is far fro me, and min ^nemy has approached
nere me my love is absent, and him that I hate is to nere my presence, alas
mine own sweet love Arthur if I were in your arms than I would think my self
better assured than to be in this strong castle, for than would I neither fear
king nor emperor. alas where are my men and my good friends that they do
not their dylygence to study for my deliverance, a king of Orqueney ye do a
great trespace against your true and faithful lover Arthur when that ye do not
deliver me out of danger, he loves you above all other, and now ye to be
^hus false to him, certainly he would never have failed you, but he would have
put his body and goods in ieopardy for your sake, and now thus ye to leave me
in this dolor, alas good king come and deliver me, and if ye can render me
unto this gentle knight Arthur who loves you with all his heart. Thus sir
said the master I know well that she does complain every day with such
weeping chere that I must n^des weep when I think on her, and the queen of
Orqueney, and the lady Margarete does comfort her al weping, for it greueth
their hertes to se her so sore weep, and this sir all three of them be in great
sorrow, I can scant tell you who is in ye gretest. Saint mary said Arthur it was
not for naught that my heart was so heavy, now I know well the sygnifycation
thereof, alas master and does not king Emendus know what case that she is in.
Yes sir said the master he assembleth people on al syd^s of his realm of
Soroloys, and also al his iiii. kings with al their powers be com to him, and
they are all ready to draw thider ward, and they will remeue a monday next
coming, but it will be a.xv. days or they come thither, and sir all the kings
co^plameth gretely that ye be out of the country, for they say that if ye had been in the country the emperor had never ben so bold to have come thither, sir I
doubt me gretely of Florence for she has not past a xl. knights with her
wherefore I fere me leest that she can not endure to keep the place till the
king her fader and his host be come thither. And wha^ Arthur herd that he was
sore displeased and said to the young king of Malogre A gentle king I require
you for gods sake let me go thither or else I shall dye for sorrow, and sir I
pray you abide here with all this host till monday, and than let the host
follow after me ^o the clear toure, and let duke Philyp and my senesshall and
the marks have the guydynge of them, and sir my lord my fader shall abide here
still with you, and also my lady my mother and all these ladies and damoyselles
till such season as I seude you word, and sir I will have with me the master
and Hector, Gouernar and sir Brysebar. And when all the barons hard him say
that he would go they counseiled him to take more people with him but he would
not, and so took a soppe in wine and took leave of the king and of all other,
and enbraced his fader and mother and commanded to god all the other ladies and
damoyselles, and so he departed and his company with him, and rode forth as
fast as ever they might, and trauayled so long both by day and by night
till they came nere to themperours host Than Arthur said, lords we approach
nere to our enemies, I think it were best that we did put on our harneys, and
so there they alyghted and did put on their harneys.

How that Arthur and the master, Hector, Gouernar, and sir Brysebar entered
into the clear toure where as Florence was besyeged and they.v. dysco^fyted a
puyssau^t king sarasyn who was called the Sowdan, who was come thither to help
the emperor, and there were all the sarasyns and turks slain. Capitulo.C.
When that Arthur and his.iiii. felawes were armed they mounted on their horses
and rode forth till it was about three of the clock, than they rode to the
botom of a great mountain and there they alighted, and Arthur alone a foot
mounted up to the hiest thereof, and there he saw the castle of the clear toure
whereon there were pynacles of bryghte cristall, and it did shine so against
the son that no man could cl^reli look against it, and he saw themperours great
tent, and besemyng to him all the world was there of people, and he saw well
how that people lay round about the castle, so that none could issue out
nor none enter in^o the place, and he saw well how that on ye same side that he
was on there were lodged a great nombre of sarasyns, and than Arthur complained
pyteously for the mischefe yt he saw his lady Florence in at that time, and as
he thus beheld the castle he saw where as there came toward the mountain
a.lx. sarasins all armed, than Arthur went down to the valey again to his
company and said, lords I think all the world of people is in this country,
how shall we be demened. Sir said Brisebar there is no more to do but let us
mount on our horses and do as knights should do, sir there is none of us but yt
is well worth a knight. well said Arthur now yt shall be seen, for yonder comes
a.lx. or moo of out enemies to awake us if we sleep. Let them com said
Gouernar and he took a great spear and did plunge it in the rest, and
therewith the sarasyns were come who saw well these.v. knights, and one of them
presed forth before his felawes and Gouernar with his spear slew him, and than
the master struck so another with such virtue that the spear went clean
through out his body, than he set his hand upon his sword and lay on so
among his enemies as a wol^e does among lambs. And when Brysebar saw him do
such deeds of arms he said, here is a g^od master he chayseth sharply his
dysciples, than Brisebar struck the first that he encou^tred with so rudely
that his ha^ne^s auailed him not a bo^io^, for he was persed to the heart, than
Gouenar and he bette down sarasyns even as he would him self. And when Hector
saw that he feredle^st all the sarasyns should have been slain or he had done
any thing against them, than he rushte into ye prese and cut of arms hands,
and legs and made hedes fly into the field, and bet down sarasyns and
horses meruaylously. And when Arthur saw all this he smiled and said, lords
leave me my part, what me thinks ye take all, yt is none egal partynge, than
he dashed into the thickest of the prese, and the first he sent to the earth both
sarasyn and horse, and the second he claue down to the chynue, and there he
gave so puyssau^t strokes that he confounded all that ever he attained unto, and
to make short these.v. knights did so valyau^tly that of al these.lx. sarasyns
there escaped not one but they were all slain Than Arthur said lords let us
now deu^se how we may find the means to enter into the castle* it is so
closed on al sides that none can enter into it but he must pass first
throughout.xxx. thousand men of war, I suppose this emperor host endures.v.
leges in bread so I can not se how we should enter every man give his advise
and counsel, for here on this part of the castle that we be on is all over
spradde with fell sarasins Sir said the master suffer a little and I shall give
you my counsel how we shall enter into the castle, I shall cause us all to
look for the season as black as any pytche, so yt it shall not be known but
for sarasins, let us arm us with the armure of these dead sarasyns, and than
let me ride on before, and I shall led you sauely throughout al their host,
for I ca^ well speak the language. Ye say well said Hector, tha^ they al armed
the^ with the harneys of the sarasyns yt they had slain, and tha^ they mounted
on their horses and the master rode on before til they came to the sarasyns
te^t, and the master had on the harneys of the Sowdanes seen shall who was
slain before by Arthur, and the sarasyns that saw him wend verily yt it had been the senesshall, and they demanded of him fro whence he came. And he
answered and said, friends I go to play me all about the field, and I purpose
to go to the castle gates to enter in if I may and to slay al them that be
within the castle, than there were diverse that offered them self to have gone
with him but he said he would have no more company than he had, and said syrs
there is none of you that shall go with me, therefore I charge you on pain of
your lives yt ye stere not till ye here me blow my great horn, and tha^ come
as fast as ye ca^. Tha^ the master and his company rode to the castle gate and
called ye porter and said, my friend open the gate and let us in and god shall
rew^rde you, for we are christian men and are sodyours, and I promise you that if
ye will let us in and the lady of the place receive our service than shall she do
like a wise lady. Syrs said the porter and ye be soudiours ye be welcome, for
my lady has great need of such, than he let down ye bridge and opened the
gate, tha^ these v. knights entered, and the porter lift up again the bridge
and closed the gate again after them. Than it was showed Florence that five
strange soudiours were entered into the castle to help and to aid her, than
she commanded that they should be brought to a chamber and unarmed, and than to
be brought to her presence, and when they were unarmed and looked so black
every man was afraied of them, and some said god give grace that they be not
spies, and so they were brought to Florence, and as soon as she saw them she
t^e^bled for fere, and when she saw that they were al goodly persons and much
like of stature she fered them gretely leest they had been spies, and demanded
them of whens they we^e. And they answered how that they were sarasyns borne,
but as than they had renewed their believe and were crystened in France at
Paris, and the king of France was their godfaders, and than ^he demanded of
them wheder they came straight out of France. And they answered yes. Than the
lady Florence demanded of them and said, friends did ye ever here of a knight
who is named Arthur, and he is sone unto the duke of brytaine. Yes truly madame
said they we he^de well of him. he departed from Paris the same season that we
did depart, and he did haste him gretely to come into this country, and he
brings with him the duke his fader and the duchess his mother, and well to the
nombre of.x. thousand other knights ready apparayled for the war, and madame
as it is said he be wayleth gretely a gentil damoysel of this country, for
whose sake he has oftentimes right pyteously cast forth many a great syghe
and madame oftentimes he speaks and complains to a great man of dygnitye,
who is in his company, and also madame as it is said that there is one with him
that is named master Steven, and an other Gouernar, and the third Hector, and
diverse other that we have forgote^ the names of them. well syrs said Florence I
se well that by such tokens as ye report that ye have seen them, but I pray
you does Arthur think so much on ye lady that ye speak of. Ye madame truly
said the master, than the lady Florence began piteously to weep, and the lady
Margarete held r^dy a keuerchefe to wype her eyes therewith, and when Arthur
saw her weep so he said, right fair lady weep no more, for surely we shall
never fail you till death have made an end of us. And as they were thus
talkyng to Florence, the sarasyns in the field that saw them enter into the
castle in that peasyble manner, than they perceived well how that the leder of
them was no^ the sowdans senesshal, and thought verily that they had a great
mock, wherefore they al ran to their armure and armed the^, and moo than.v.
hundred of them went to the castle, and did knock and beat at the gate. Than
the watchemen of the castle did cry, ^yrs to harneys, for part of your
enemies are at the gate. Tha^ every man of the castle ran^e to the windows to
look what it might be, and wha^ Arthur saw how it was he commanded his
company to arm them, and so they armed them, and so did all that were
within the castle, for sir P^rdicas caused a great horn to be blown, and by
the sownyng thereof all tho of the castle ran to their harneys. Than Florence
said, friends for gods sake issue not out of the castle, for ye be not able
to resyste against their power they be so ma^ny in nombre and ye so few, but I
require yo^ defend this castle as well as ye may. Madame said Arthur be ye in
rest and peace and let us al^n^ hardely, than he mounted on his horse, and so
did his other four companions and to the nombre of.xl. other knights of the
castle, and so he rode to the gate and caused the porter to set it open. Than
Arthur by great randon dashed into ye prese with his white ^helde covered al in
black, and holdyng a great hatche in both his hands and laid on round about
him on those sarasins that he made hedes, arms, and hands to fly into the
field, and bet down horses and sarasyns in such wise that it was maruayle to
behold him, and He^tor and Gouernar on their party bette down sarasyns by
great hepes, and the master, Brys^^ar, and sir Perdycas did as valyauntly, as
onye good knights ought to do, but above all other Arthur did excellently, for
he laid on round about him, and confounded all that ever he attained unto, so
that every man fled fro before him, and said how that he was a devil of hell,
and none erthly creature, For he avoided the streets where as he passed, and
made great hepes of ^ead knights, so that Florence knights had great marvel
of him, and also Florence and the queen of orqueney, and the ladi Marga^ete
blissed them at his deeds, and said how that he lacked but little of the
prowess of Arthur. And at the last Hec^or was beten down, for his horse was
slain under him, and so his enemies had thought to have led him a way as a
prisoner, and th^rwith Arthur came thider, and in that fury he slew moo than
xv. knights, and remounted Hector again on his horse in the spyte of al his
enemies, and than he dashed again into the prese and bette down all that ever
he attained unto, and Brys^bar and the master did right well their parts,
but specially A^^hur made place before him. And when Florence saw these.v
knights do so valiauntly, she said unto such knights as were about her,
syrs for gods sake and ye love me goo and help to rescowe yonder five
knights Than the great common bell was souned and every man than ran to their
harneys, and so they were to the nombre of an hundred and an half on
horseback and.iii. hundred on foot, who were in long Iackes and great
basenettes on their hedes, with good swerdes gi^te about them and long speres
in their hands, to the intent to slay with them their enemies horses, and so
they issued out of the castle and flew many of the sarasyns that within a little
while they were nere all dyscomfyted. And when the Sowdan saw this people so
ouerladen and slain he caused a great gr^sley horn to be blown, than every
man that herd it ran to their harneys, so that they were to the nombre
of.xxx. thousand, and the Sowdan was a young lusty courageous knight, and
mounted on such an horse that there was none like him in all the world in
goodness, for who so ever was mounted on his back neded not to doubt any man
living, for what by force of the horse and of the man there was none by
lykelyhode that might resyst against him Than the Sowda^ dashed unto his horse
with his sharp sporres, and he rushte forth as though he had flowen in ye air
like a bird. And when Arthur saw him co^ing he desired gretely to have that
horse, than he took a great mighty spear and ran at the Sowdan and brake his
spear by the might of that horse for the horse was able to have borne two men
armed without any payne^ and as Arthur passed forth after his course the
sarasyns enclosed him round about, than he drew his good sword clarence and
there he slew of his enemies with out nombre, but they charged him with so many
strokes that they slew his horse under him, than he lepte on his fete and did
put his white shield before him, and with clarence his good sword he did cut
so among his enemies as a carpenter does hew chyppes out of a gre^ tree, and
they did shote at him with their bows of turkey, wherwyth they did him much
trouble, and more had done and his good white shield had not been. Than
Florence said as loud as she could cry, saint mary sw^te virgin save and
defend yonder good kn^ght f^o^ all danger and peril. And when Arthur hard
her voice his hardines increased for such was the manner of the more that he had
to do the more was his strength, and was ever of more courage, and tha^ he
lightly lept in among his enemies and began so to deseuer a sonder the great
flocks of the sarasyns that none approach nere him but yt he received death
for his mede. At the last Hector espied him and saw how that he was on foot
wherewith he was so dyspleased that he was in a great rage, tha^ he couched his
spear and ran at the Sowda^ who was rennynge at Arthur, but Hector struck him
so rudely that he persed him to the heart, and so he fell down dead, than
Hector took his good horse and delivered him unto Arthur, and wha^ Arthur had
him he was more gladder of ^he horse than he would have been of all the tresour
in France, than he mounted up on him and rusht into the thickest of the prese,
and th^r he did meruayles with his hands, for there he cut of arms, hands
and legs, he claue a sonder helmes and made hedes to fly in to ^he field,
and bette down knights and horses all together in hepes* and than there was
none that he encou^tred withal that escaped from the death, than there came unto
him the master, sir Brisebar, and sir Perdycas, and.xl. other knights upon
horseback of Florence company, and a three hundred on foot, than they al laid
on these sarasyns and bet them down like dogs. Than Arthur encountered the
Sowdans brother and gave him such a stroke with his good sword clare^ce that
he claue him down to the sadel And when the sarasyns saw how that the Sowdan
and also his brother were dead and slain, they made such roaring and sorrow
among them that the emperor as he was in his tent might well here the noise,
and demanded what it was. And one showed him how that it was ye Sowdan who was
scarmusshi^g with them of the castle, and therewyth there came to him a knight
who had one of his arms clean stricken of and said, sir Emperor the Sowda^
is deed and his brother Saladyne also slain, for sir there be come.vi. as I
think rather deuylles of hell than erthly creatures, for they have all slain
and confounded, and specially there is one among them that makes way where so
ever that he comes, there is none so hardy that dare abide him a stroke of his
hands but all flees before him, therefore sir emperor call your me^ to
harneis or else we shall be all slain. Than the Emperor was sore dyspleased
and said, what hundred deuylles of hell has brought hider these vi. knights
who thus confounds all my people, than he cried to harneis and caused horns
to be blowe^ in his host Than every man ran to their harneys, so that anon
there were together more than an hundred thousand men, and Arthur, Hector,
Gouernar, ye master, Brisebar, and sir Perdycas were all be sprent^ with the
blood of the sarasyns that they had slain. Than the queen of orqueney who had
all the day well aduysed Arthur and his deeds said unto Florence, madame
certainly I think that yo^der knight is Arthur, for as I deem yonder shield is
your white shield, and I think he that is by him is Hector, the master,
Gouernar, and sir Brysebar. Madame said Florence that can not be, for they are
as black as any ynke. And as they thus talked they saw where as the emperor
was coming, and a hundred thousand following after him. A sweet lady mary said
Florence keep and defend now yonder knights, for I fere me now that they
shall be slain, and the emperor came thiderwarde as fast as he might with
great noise of trompettes tabours and horns. And when that the master hard
that he came to Arthur, and said, sir we have to little nombre of people to
abide yonder emperor at this time, we have done al ready sufficient for one
day, therefore sir let us return again to the castle, for our company are
right sore trauayled. Ye say well said Arthur cause the retraite to be blown,
and so it was done, than Arthur and his people entered into the castle, and
closed the gate after them and drew up the bridge and they had slain in that
battle to the nombre of.xv. thousand sarasyns, than Arthur mounted up into
the palace, and Florence met with him, and she did of his helm and thanked him
greatly and al his company of the pain and labor that they had taken for her
sake that day, than they looked out at the windows and saw where as the emperor
was beholding the dead bodies of the Sowdan and of his brother and of the.xv
thousand other sarasyns.

How truse was taken for a month between the emperor and Arthur. Ca. C.i.
ANd than Arthur out of a wi^dow called down to the emperor and said, sir
emperor ye do your self great shame and vylany, ye have ill counsel thus to
come on a woman by stelth, and under thassurance of truse that was taken
between my lord her fader and you thus to cause so number of people to come on
her sir if there were in you either valor or troth ye would not thus have
done, first ye should have given her warninge, and have made your defyaunce,
and have given her certain day of battle, and than to have taken her if ye
might, this sir should have been your honor, and not thus to awayte her in her
chamber with all this number of people, and she nothing knowing thereof before.
well said the emperor what so ever thou art thy tongue is fair fyled, would to
god I ^ad ye head of thine yt lokest so black. why sir said Arthur and would
ye than so feign have my head. Truly said the emperor on ye condition I would it
had cost me one years rent of al my lands. Ye sir said Arthur than give this
lady a certain day of battle that she may in the mean season send for her
people so yt she may answer you, and sir I promise you that I will be there and
than get my head and ye can. Truly said the emperor I am content, but what
assurance shall I have that ye will be there. Sir said Arthur by the faith yt I
owe unto my special lady. well said the emperor and I give her day for a month,
and truse in the mean season and so than the assurance was made on both
parties, than Arthur said holding Florence by the hand sir emperor behold
what a Jewel this is, sir ought not a man to b^ right jolly to obtain such a
lady so tender so sweet so ^uddy of color. Than ye emperor was sore displesed
and said: what you pratyng fool me thinks thy by sage is covered over with
black cordewan would to god I had the in my keeping, sir said Hector all smylyng
^ake no head of his saying for he is but a fool, than the emperor departed and
went to his tent, than Arthur said to Florence, madame we have now truse with
the emperor* so that we may well provide for men or the trewse breke^ for the
t^rme thereof is a monethe. well sir quod Florence I thank you thereof and of
the pain yt ye and your company has taken this day for my sake, but sir I
shall deserve it when I may. Madame it is al ready deserved, but madame may it
plese you to leave the loving of the knighte yt ye say ye love so well and take
me to your lover and give me your love, and I promise you I shall deliver you
from this emperor for this other knight is now in france in great sport, and
thinks but litell on you, for he has many fair ladies in his country at his
commandment. Sir said Florence his sport and joy is a great pleasure to my
heart, for I am his both with heart thought and body, and never to be falls to
him, for as help me god I had rather suffer my head to be stricken of than I
should do or think any falsenes to him. why madame love ye than him so inwardly
and so truly. Ye or else said she I pray to god I never have joy in this
world. well than said he I se well that my love can not prevail. No be ^e sure
said Florence, therefore be ye in peace and speak no more to me thereof. In like
wise the master prayed the lady Margar^t of her love desyryng her to love him
and to forsake the clerk. And she answered yt to dye in the pain she would
never be false to him. Th^n Arthur said to the master let us leave these
l^dyes for we are come to late for by seminge they a^e ensured to other. Sir
said Florence I know not your name, but I desire you go and ^narme you and
than we will go to dinner, for our mete is ready, than they were led into a
chamber and unarmed. And than Brysebar when he saw his own hands so foul
and black it abhorred him and said, the devil take this blackenes so that we
were rydde thereof, than he said to the master, sir I require you take away
this blackenes fro me and fro al my company. Than the master laughed a great
pace, and so did al his company. well said Arthur I am well agreed that it
should be now taken a way fro us al, for it is time. Than the master took a
box and did anoynte them all, and than they al were in their first color,
than Arthur took on him as chief, and in a goodly sir cote he entered into the
palace where as Florence tarried for them to wash their hands, and as soon as
she saw them she knew well Arthur and them al, than she ran to him and
enbraced and kyssed him swetely before them al and said, mine own lord dear
heart and love ye be right hertely welcome, as he for whom I have wept many a
salt tear, but sir I pray you who made you so black as ye were right now.
Madame by the faith that I owe unto you master Steven, and there recounted to
her al ye cause why, than th^re began great fest and joy throughout al ye
castle, and also throughout all the town when it was known how that Arthur and
Hector were comen in to the castle than they were in their minds better
assured than though the king Emendus and all his power had been there, and lady
Margaret made as gret^ there to the master as was to her possible, and so they
went to dinner and were right rychely served, and after dinner Arthur said to
Gouernat it is nedeful for us now to puruey for every thing that is necessary
to us to thentent that we be not deceived at the day of our battle,
therefore I will that ye go to my Lord the king of Soroloys, and recommaunde
me humbly to his grace, and show him how that I am at the clear toure, and
recounte to him how that we have spedde, and how that we have truse for the
space of a monethe, and than is the day set of battle between the emperor and
us also salute fro me the king of orqueney and say how that I desire him to
somon against the said term all the power of Soroloys both on horseback and
on f^te, so that they may be here about the end of four wekes, and I will in
the mean time go unto my lord my fader and too al his company and bring them
hyder. And when Florence herd that she sayd^ sir have ye brought them into
these parties. Ye madame truly and with my father there is a noble king of that
country. And fair love where be they. Madame I left them at the port noyre.
well said Florence I require you go to them and bring them hyder for I would
gladly be acquaynted with my lord your fader whose daughter I am and trusting
so shall continue, but I pray you tell me how does my lady your mother. Madame
I ensure you she is also at ye port noyre, accompanied with five or six
countesses who have left their own count^yes to come hyder to se you. A dear
heart said Florence, blessed be the hour that ever ye were borne since that
have brought so noble a company with you to se me, for now my fader king
Emendus shall not think that I am ill bestowed on you sir I require you let me
se them as shortly as ye can tha^ Gouernar took his leave and departed toward
Soroloys.

How that the young king of malogre and the duke of ^ritayne with diverse
other earls and barons, and acompanied with a great army of men of war aryued
at the clear toure, to the intent to socour Florence and Arthur who were
besyeged by themperoure, who had nigh enraged out of his wit when he knew
that they were come into that country. Capitulo.C.ii.


IN the morning betimes Arthur departed and took with him Hector and Brisebar and
took with him.v. other kn^ghtes of Florence, and the master abode still with
Florence, thus Arthur ^ode forth a iii. leges, and than he espied the baner of
the duke his fader and of al his host for the young king of Malogre hasted
him as much as he might for the fear that he had of Arthur. And when Arthur
saw the baners and standards wavering with the wynd, and the helmes and
sheldes shynynge against the son, than his heart smiled and said, a gentil
France god increase thine honor and noblenes, and than he approached nere to
his ^ad^r and made him reverence and there was great joy at their metynge, and
the duke demanded of him how that he had spedde. And he recounted to him
and to his company al ye hole m^tter as it was done, and so they rode forth
together ty^l they came into themperours host. And all that seas^n Florence was
lening o^te of ^he batylmentes of the toure for with her eyes she had conuayed
Arthur before as far as she might, and at the last the queen of orqueney had
espied the french host coming, and saw the french baners displayed with
the wind. Saint mary said she fair lady Florence what people be yonder that
I se coming hyder ward, I think it be the emperor. And wha^ Florence saw
them she was in fe^e of Arthur and said, alas I doub^ that ^f they have
encount^ed my love Arthur that ^hey have slain him and therewith she began to
weep, than a knight who came straight from Arthur to thentent to show her how
that he was coming said Madame be well assured for yonder people that ye se
coming are pertaining to my lord Arthur^ than she apeased her self and
first she saw the great baner of the duke of Britain, and saw h^lmes and
sheldes flambe against the son, also she beheld the goodly company of young
knights mounted upon good horses and she herd horses braye and beat with
their fete, than she praised much in her heart the noble country of France
she thought it was a be^ter syghte of them than it was of the men of war of
her own country, for they were more better horsed, and harneysed a great deal
more properly, and than they saw coming after that the great baner royal of the
king of malogre, and her heart reioysed to se the noble company that came with
him than she saw the earl of Neuers baner and the noble burgonyons right
properlye be seen, than therle of Foreste and the dolphin in his company, and
than came th^rle of Foys, and than the earl of mount belyall, than the lord
Beauieu, and last of all came the banner of Myrpoys, and al this company were
to the number of.xv. thousand knights, chosen for the nones. Than Florence
said, a my sweet love Arthur it seems well that ye are not behated in your own
country sith ye bring with you so many noble men of war, and of so great
dygnytye. Certainly madam said Margaret these people will dystroye this
Emperor and all his host, they seem no men but rather aungelles of heaven
behold madame how light and quy^ke they be in their armor, a noble realm
of France blessed be thou sith such people com^th out of the. And when their
people were lodged, than Arthur caused the king and the duke his father and all the other earls and barons to mount up into the castle Than the king said
too Arthur, sir I require you show me the gentle Florence. Ye fair son said
the duke show me my dear daughter that shall be. Sir ye shall se her anon
said Arthur, than he sent before duke Philip too Florence to thentent that
she should make her self fresshe against their coming, and as soon as she saw
Philyp she made to him right great joy and demanded him how that he did,
and how that he liked by the realm of France. Madame said he I like it very
well, for I ensure yon France is a noble gentyl country, madame behold here
comes the noble duke of Britain fader to Arthur, and with him king Alexander
of malogre, and diverse other earls and barons who are coming hither to se you,
and Arthur desires you to aparaile your self with vestures of Joy, than she
went to her chaumbre and apparayled her self according to her estate and as to
receive such noble men as were come to herwarde, and the queen of orqueney and
the fair lady Margaret did help her, than these Lords alyghted at the peron
and so mounted up into the palais than the master ran to Florence and said
madam come on your way and se the duke of britain and the king and other earls
and barons, and she who was the gentyl rose on the lily young and tender,
always having a smylyng countenance, and the most gracyous of all the world
issued out of her castle and two knights led her forth, and two other
knights led the queen of orqueney, and when the young king and the, duke of
Britain and other earls saw her they marueled greatly of the excellent beauty
yt god had given her. Than the king stepped forth and his bonet in his hand and
inclined him self to her and right swetely did salute her, and she answered
him and said, sir ye be right hertely welcome into this country, thee which
is and shall be at your noble commandment* and al other things whereof I have
any power. Than the king did salute all the other ladies each after other.
Than the duke of Britayn came to Florence and said, my right dear lady god
increase your noble honor as unto the most noble lady of all the world.
Than Hector said, madame this is the duke of Britain father to Arthur, where
with she was right glad and enbraced him and said, sir ye be right hertelye
welcome into the land of Florence your daughter as he yt shall be mine own lord
into whose hands and protection fro hens forth I put me and al my realm of
Soroloys. Than he took Florence by the hand and would not let her depart for no
body that came to them than all the other earls and barons did salute her, and
she redred again to them such salutacyon yt every man was well content, and
every man marueled greatly of her beauty, and of the wise and sage words that
she had to every body. So than the king and the duke and Florence sat them
down together, and the lady Margaret took therle of Neuers and therle of
Forest and sat down with them, and therle of mountbelial and ye dolphin and the
lord Beauieu were lokinge out at the wyndowes and beheld the emperors great
host, and at last Arthur and the mast^r came to them. Tha^ the dolphin said,
sir Arthur as god help me I have great desire to know what people these be
that be here with this emperor, and to se how they can couche their speres.
Let us go to them said the lord Beauieu, and let us make them know how french
men become hyder. A great shame take he said therle of mountbelyal that fails
or will abide behind. well syrs said Arthur if it please you we shall not do
thus, for than should we break out truse and not keep our promise made to them
for than they would repute us falls in breking of our couenaunces, and sir
french men have been always reputed true, therefore let us abide till the day
be come, with out so be that they break the truse their self. And si^ said the
lord Beauieu how long shall your truse yet endure. Sir quod Arthur it must
endure yet a.^v. days. ^ sir said the dolphyn if it were not you, shame have
he that set the day so long. what all this long season we shall but lie here
still like swyne and do no good. And as they thus talked they herd great noise
without in themperours host, for there was a great rumor among them because
of the french hoostes coming into the castle* and therewith they saw every man
run to their harnes, and anon they espied themperours seen shall mounted on a
good horse, and a great spe^e in his hand, and his shield about his neck, and
he come str^yght toward the french host who were lodged without the castle
gate to thentent to know what people they were, but the lord de la lounde when
he saw him coming in ye manner he thought he desired too have Iusted whth some
of the french men, than he mounted on his horse and took a great spear and ran
at ye senesshal, And when the dolphin saw that he said to Arthur, sir me
thinks by the lord de la lounde that he thinks but little on your truse*
for if he did he doothe not well thus to do, I pray you behold how fast he
runs. Ye sir said Arthur I se him well, god keep his body from any hurt. And
when the senesshal saw him coming so fast toward him, he plunged him self in
his sadell, and did cast his spear from him and put his shield behynd him, for
he would not Just because of brekyng of the truse. And when the lord de la
lounde saw yt he knew well he was not coming to Just, therefore he discharged
him self and reined his horse than the senesshal saluted him and demanded what
people they were yt were new come to the castle with such an host. Certainly
sir they be people of France, who did here tidings of a great war that this
emperor should have shortly, and th^rfore we be come into this country as
soud^ou^s retaynyng us who so ever will Souldyours quod the seneshal and
therewith he lift up his eyes and beheld the hooste over al and there he saw
the goodly young squyers vncrussing of their summers and cariages and pitching up
of their te^tes and pauilions, and he saw ye goodly knights ten their horses up
and down in the feldes, some lyghtyng and some mountyng and there he saw the
armere^s furbyshe the harneies and the speres and sheldes flaming agenst the
son, the baners standards and stremers wavering with the wynd, than he said
to him self, saint mary what people are these are they mortal men or
aungelles of paradyse, whoo may endu^e against them. A france an honorable
country above al other, blessed be thou that nourisshest up such people Than
he said to the lord de la lound, ge^tyl sir will not these people abide and be
retained with my lord the emperor till his war be done, and he shall give them
such wages and foes, that of reason they shall be content. Sir said the lord
de la lounde if ye will know the certain go and speak with our lords and
masters who are entered into the castle to go speak wi^h a lady I wot not
what she is, but as it is reputed she is right gracious and fair. Saint mary
said the senesshal if I go thither I doubt me of them with in the castle
least they take and keep me still there as prisoner, wherefore I will go first
and sp^ke with my lord the emperor, than he departed and went straight to
themperours tent and said to him gentyl emperor there is come out of the noble
realm of France the most goodlye company of men of war that ever was seen
in all this world, and as I deem they be well to the nombre of.xv. thousand, and
one of the^ showed me how that they were soldiers, and the capitaines are
gone into the castle to speak with Florence, sir I fear me lest that Arthur
has retained them on his party, for he can get much people, therefore sir
after my counsel ye shall send to them in fair manner and desire ye them to
become your men during your war, and if they will do so, than give them
largely both of gold and of silver, and such other things as they need for
sir and ye may get them ye shall be able to conquer all the world if ye list
Than the king Jonas said to the emperor* sir it were but well done to know
what people they were, and wherefore they be come, for I understand that Arthur
has been in France, and sir it might fortune that he has brought them with
him to thente^t to anoy you, and sir if they be come to make war against you,
than begin ye first on them, and rather to day than to morrow, and strike of
al their hendes, and hang up their capytayne, and flee Arthur quycke, and as
for the strompet Florence deliver her among our knaves and boys, for she has
done you full great anoyaunce, and therefore sir send to yonder people of
france, who are new come, wenyng to win all the world and command them to
come to your service, and if they will be with you, than entrete them as ye
should do strangers, and if they will not come to you than command them on
pain of their lives incontinent to depart one of this country, and sir if they
will not do thus^ grant me the enterprise and I shall ensure you to get you
all their heads. Than the senesshal was in his mind dysplesed with the folysh
proud words and said, by god sir king if ye eat no mete till all this be done I
fe^e me lest it will be to late for you to ^^e, but sith it is your mind I
counsayl my lord ye emperor here present to give you leave to acheue this
enterprise either to bring them to my lords service or else they to depart
out of this realm, or else al their hedes. In the name of god said the king
Jonas I pray and require my lord the emperor to give me license to acheue this
enterprise if I can, and I promise faithfully to go speak with them or that I
sleep without any longer delay and I shall know what is their wylles and
minds. Certainly gentle king quod the emperor ye have a noble valiau^t heart,
do as it pleases you for I give you leave, than he took his glove, and the
king took it and thanked him, and so than they went to dinner, and all the
noble company of France and brytaine were in the clear toure where as they
dined in great delight and sport, and were served right richely, and after
diner they sported them till it was about one of the clock.

How that king Jonas al alone came to the castle of the clear toure, and there
did his message from the emperor of ynde the more. Capitulo.C.iii.
THan king Jonas issued out of the emperors host al armed well and fresshely
mounted, and so all alone without any company he came to the clear toure, and
under a fair olyue tree he alyghted and mounted up into the palace, and there
he found Florence and the king of Malogre and the duke of Britayne setting
together, than the king Jonas spoke before Florence in open audience, so yt
every man might well here him and said, the hye sovereign god who all thing
formed of naught defend and keep the puyssaunt emperor of ynde the more and
all his friends where so ever they be here or else where, first to the
Florence there as thou syttest I say fro the mighty emperor yt thou go to him
al only in thy kyrtel on the bare fete with thy here hanging about thy
sholdres, and on thy knees cry him humbly mercy of ye great outrage that thou
have done to him, and I think that he will have mercy on the that thou shall
not dye no cruel death, for if thou wylt do thus I think he will give the
pardon of thy life and ma^y the to one of the gromes of his kechyn, and if thou will not do thus know for certain yt to morrow next coming this castle shall
be rased down to ye hard earth and thy self burnt in a fair fire and the
lurden that is called Arthur hanged up by the neck. Than Florence began to
smyle and said, sir Jonas show unto your emperor that or all this be
perfourmed^ there shall not abide one tothe in his heed but I shall cause them to
be rasshed out each after other, and as for coming into my castle against my
will let him know well I have such people about me that shall defend it
right well against him, for thereof they be desirous. Than the dolphyn stepte for
the as he that was full of ire because of the rude words yt king Jonas had
spoken of Florence and Arthur and said to the king, thou foul old churlysshe
vilaine if thou were not a messenger I would rash out thyn eyes out of thyn
heed with mine own hands what art thou come hyder to speak vylany to so hie a
lady and princess as Florence is, to say that she should be given to a kechin
grome in marriage, thou old fool say unto thine emperor that he com to my lady
Florence crepyng on his hands and knees, and to take of such Judgment of
death as she will assign him to dye of, and if he will not so do let him ^lye
fast out of this country, for as for me nor none of my company have taken no
trewse with him^ therefore I utterly defy him, and first here before thy face
thou abused folysshe dotarde I def^e the and al thy malice. And when king Jonas
saw the great peril and dau^g^r yt he was in he was nigh for anger out of his
wit, and therewith he set his hand on his sword and than Brisebar stepte to
him with a great lever in his hand and said, sir king fair and softely not
so hardy in thy heed yt thou ones stere, for and thou do thou shall never speak
word more with thine emperor, than he held his peace and stood still, for he
saw well yt if he had moved he had been but dead. Than Brisebar said if you have
any more to say speak and avoid fast out of this presence if thou love thine
own life. Than the king I was said to the king of malogre and to the other
lords of france and britayne, syrs it is so the hie and m^ghty puyssaunt
emp^rour has hard spekyng of you how yt ye be come hider with much people in
harneys, for what cause he knows not, wheder it be to be with him or against
him, if it be for him and that ye kyl com and dwell with him he will give you
g^lde and silver, rentes and lands and great possessions, and he will love and
honor you in such wise that of reason ye shall hold you right well content And
if ye be come to be ayenste him he would know it to thentent that he will take
counsel what he shall do against you, and in this behalf show me your minds.
Than the king Alexander of Malogre spoke first and said, sir ye seem to be a
wise m^n, I wot not what I should call you for I know not your name, but this I
say unto you show unto your emperor that he has to little land and is of to
small a power, and hat^ to little store of gold and silver to retain to his
service such people as we be, but if he will dwell with us and serve us truly let
him come to us and we shall do right well for him, and if he have no wife we
shall mary him to one of our damoyselles who has been long one of our
lauenders. And when the king Jonas hard him that he called him a wise man, and
that he would mary his lord the Emperor to a lewd damoysel he was than so
angry for despyte yt he was nigh in a gre^e rage and said to king Alexander, sir
ye have an outrageous heart to call me a wise man and would mary my lord to one of
your damoyselles, and he is the most mighty prince and most honored yt ever
b^^e crown of gold on his head, and more over ye would have him to come and
s^rue you, therefore sir I say unto you on his behalf that he shall be to morrow
assembled against you with.xx.m. speres in his company, therefore beware of him
and of his, for in his name I defy you and all you^s, and sir dolphyn to you I
say beware that ye come not there, for and ye do I promise you to take that
head of youres cl^^e fro your sholdres, than he went to Brisebar and took him
by the chyn so ^udely that he made all the re^h in his head to dashe together,
and said, by the faith yt I owe unto themp^rour of yude I shall never depart out
of this country till I have hanged the by the neck before Arthur and al these
f^eshe men that be here present And when Brysebar felt him self so rudely
handled and so churlishely thretned he strayned his ^ethe together and frounsed
and glared with hie eyes as though he had been wode, and therewith he lift up his
lever and gave king Jonas therewith such a ^troke bitwene the sholdres that he
fell flat to the ear^h, and Brysebar dashed down with his knees on his belly,
and with a short knife he cut of a great part of the here of his berde,
wherewith king Jonas braied and cried out a great pace. And duke Philyp did
laughe thereat and said, syrs behold what a good barbou^ Brisebar is, me
thinks he does live very hard, behold how the here is come out rotes ^ all.
Than Florence rose and said, friend Brysebar arise and let him alone for he is
a messenger, therewith Brisebar departed fro him, than the king arose and went
down the stairs al astonyed, and so mounted on his horse and went to
themperours host, and by that time the son was far drawn into the weste.
And when the emperor saw king Jonas in ye case he demanded of him who had
arrayed him in that wise. And he answered, sir the frensshe men in the blau^che
toure has thus arrayed me, and there he recounted to the emperor how yt they
would mary him to one of their lauenders, and would have him to serve them Ye
said the emperor are they than of that mind, than I command you that to
morrow next ye beat down this castle, and that the harlot Florence be taken
and br^^t and the ribaude Arthur hanged by ye neck and all the remnaunt slain.
Tha^ king Jonas said, sir I undertake on pain of my heed that all this that ye
have devised shall be done to morrow betimes, and so he went to his tent as for
that night. Than the noble knights in the castle went to counseyle to
determine how they should do the next day, for there knew well that there
should be battle made to them, than master Steven said to king A^exander, sir
I know well that this king Jonas that lately departed fro us will make on us a
fyerse assawte to morrow next, therefore there is no more to do but now let it
be seen what frensshe men can do, and if we hold them rudely at this beginning
they shall be the lighther discomfyted here after nor also they will not so
lightly again assemble against us therefore let every knight show forth the
best that they can do, and blessed be he that no with shall do valiauntly, sir me
thinks that it were b^st that ye send for all your people that lies without
in the tents and let them come into the castle as pryuely as they can without
any noise and conuai all their stuff with them, for now all this night
themperou^s people will sleep fast because they think to fight to morrow, and
when our people be come into this castle let us all keep our self in our
harneys as pryu^ly as we can, and than we shall let down the brydges and set
open the gates, and so in the morning our enemies shall think that we be all
fled away this night for fere, and than I think we shall se this king Jonas,
and all his company come and enter into this castle, and as soon as they be
entered tha^ we may stepe to the gate and close it fast, and so tha^ they can
not escape us, nor they that be with out shall not help them, for if we should
go and issue out and fight in the p^aine field with them al we should have over
much to do, and by lyk^lyhode lose many of our people, for they be in nombre
an hundred against one of us, and when we have slain al them that (...) all be
entered with in this castle than let us set open the gates and let the r^menaunt
enter who will, and if they will not come to us we may go wha^ we will and look
on them in their tents, and the moo that be deed the fewer enemies we shall
have. And when Florence herd the masters counsel it pl^ased her right well,
and said how tha^ she would that they should do as had devised Madame said
king Alexander your grate not displeased we shall not do thus ye be daughter
unto a hye and a mighty puissaunt king, and I am also a king and it were shame
for such people as we be to take our enemies closed in a net or cage, for
rather we should go seek them in the open field with b^ners dysplayed Ye sa^
right well said Florence, but sir they have done against me more vylanye and
trespace than this case is in, for they become hyder into my country and has
enclosed me here in my castle without any reasonable cause, wherefore it is no
shame to take advantage of them if we can. In the name of god madame said the
dolphyn ye say but troth, for it is good polyce in war to spy auantage on
our enemies, so that there be no treason in the case, wh^rfore let us do thus
as is devised. I am agreed thereto said the duke of Britayne, for time enough
here after we may issue out on the^, but I promise you I will be the porter and
keep the gate, and I shall give them fre enter as many as will come without any
danger, but at the going out of the tavern it shall behoue them to pay for
their scotte, for such shall enter yt shall not find again their going out,
than every knight did laughe at this new porter, than Florence enbraced him
and said, a mine own dear lord and father it appears right well how that ye be
of the fyernes of Arthur your sone, and so at the last they agreed all to this
counsel. Than Brisebar mounted on his horse and rode forth to the frenshe
host without the castle and came to sir de la lounde who had the guydynge of
them, and they two together did convey that same night al th^yr host as
covertly as they could into the castle, so that none of the emperors people
espied them, and they within the castle did rest them all that night till that
it was nere on the point of the day light, than they hard mass, and after
that they ordered al their people, and the duke of Brytayne and al his company
kept the gate, and entered into the great sellers and vawtes ioynynge thereto,
and kept themself privily and close without any noise, and in the ma^ket place
of the town was the dolphyn, and in another street the earl of Forest and the
earl of mountbelyall, and in an other corner was ye earl of Neuers and the earl
of Foys, and the young king of malogres, master Steven, Arthur, Brysebar, and
sir de la lounde accompanied with five hundred other knights kept the passage
to the palace, and duke Phylyp and duke Hector were in the palace with Florence,
and al these noble men and all their company were ready a^med and all closed in
chambres, sellers and vawtes and so kept themself close with out any noise
making.

How that the emperor and king Jonas accompanied with fyfty^ thousand men of
war came to the clear toure for to have made assaute thereto, and than they
found the gates open and entered both into the town and in to the castle,
for they thought verily that all the frensshe men had been fled, but they were
deceived, for than the frensshe men lepte out from their enbusshementes and
shette fast the gates* and there slew king Jonas and all the fyftye
thousand, so that none escaped alive but one and the Emperor who was taken
prisoner. Capitulo.C.iiii.
IN the morning wha^ king Jonas saw the day begin to spring he lept out of his
bed and made to be cried thrughout al his host ye eueri man should to harne is
to ye e^ntent to make assaut to the clear toure, tha^ king Jonas assembled there
togider to the no^bre of.xv. thousand persons, than there came to him a
knight, and said, sir Florence and all the frenshe men are fled away this same
night privily, for the gates of the castle and town stondeth wide open, and the
frensshe men has left behind them much bagage there as there were lodged with
out the town. And when king Jonas hard yt he had never so great joy before
and said, I knew well that as soon as they knew yt I would come against them
they durst not for their lives abide any longer, I am angry with nothing but
with that Florence should thus escape us tha^ he caused a great horn to be
sowned than there assembled about him on horseback well to the nombre of.xl.
thousand and with great noise of tro^pettes, tabors and horns they rode to
themperours tente who was as then risen out of his bed and stood without his
tente with great plente of people about him, and as soon as king Jonas saw him
he alyghted and said, sir I am right sore displesed for Florence and all the
galau^tes of france are this night privily fled away, I am sure Arthur has
led them into his country, but sir and it please you mount on your horse and go
ride to the castle and take the possession thereof, and so shall ye have the
conquest before king Emendus does come, for when he is come ye shall have a
great auau^tage of him, for than he shall be without and feign to lodge in the
field, and ye shall be at your ease within the town and castle. And wha^ that
the emperor hard how that Florence was escaped fro him he was nigh out of his
mind for dyspleasure, than he demanded for his harneys, and so armed him and
diverse other with him, so what of his company and of king Jonas they were to
the nombre of fyfty thousand, so the emperor rode forth with baners dysplayed
and with great noise of trompettes, horns, and tabours, and came to the first
gate of the castle, than there the emperor saw the foundation of the great
walls the which were right hye and thick and the great and deep dytches full of
water, and the gates rychely build mighty and strong, and the sharp cuttinge
port eullesses of bright stele, also he beheld the hye and mighty toures
pyght full of waueryng fanes, than he praised the castle so much in his heart
that he would not give it again for all the gold of the world, and than he said
to king Jonas verily this castle pleases me right well I shall make it my
chamber, he said trulyer than he was ware of, for there died he in great
myschefe, and was buried in the castle. Sir said king Jonas here ye and I
will take up our lodginges, and thus oftentimes people speaks of a thing that
they know but little what the conclusyon shall be, than by adventure as the
emperor looked in at a window of the chief toure he had a blushe of Florence
for as than he was paste the first gate and ward, than he said to her a
gentil pusel make good chete for verily ye have the emperor to your host. And
wha^ Florence hard him say so her heart trembled for fere and said, a sweet
love Arthur it is nedeful this day yt ye be the chief flower of al other
knights, sweet heart deliver me this day of this emperor, and by yt time
themperou^e with all his.l. thousand were passed the gates and wards and were
come to the chief palace, than ye noble and free duke of britayne rusht out of
his ^n busshe and lift up the bridge and closed fast y^ gates and did put out
his sta^^arde over the wall of the gate into the castle ward and caused to be
blown a grisley horn than knights lept on horses on every side, than Arthur
came down out of the chief dongeo^ well mounted on horseback well armed, and
cried brytayne saint malo than he broched to his horse and with great randon he
dressed him to the emperor and struck him so rudely with his spear that he bare
down emperor horse and all in a hepe, than Arthur had thought to have taken
him but he might not the prese was so thick. And when Arthur saw that he was
hold so short with so great a nombre he took clare^ce his good swee^e in his
hand and did cut down therewith all that ever he attained unto. And wha^ king
Alexander and his company saw the noble prowess of Arthur they took on them
great hardines, than king Alexander ran and encountered king Jonas so rudely
y^ he flewe clean over his horse crope his legs upward, and with his fall he
had almost overthrown the dolphyn who laid on with his sword as a man out of
his wit, and when he saw king Jonas make a forke with his legs upward, he
lift up his sword and struck him bitwene the legs so rudely that his right
leg flewe clean into the field, and said go thy way thou doting fool cover
thine arse shame have thou and there this king Jonas was all to trod^n with
horse fete, and the emperor was so bruised with his fall that nigh the thine of
his back was broken asonder and so was land under a pyne tree on his shield
and could not st^re to help him self. Than all the earls and the lord B^auieu,
sir de la lounde, and Brisebar da^ht into the prese and did there such
valyauntnes in arms that they did in a manner with their enemies as they lift
them self, for they were n^re hand dyscomfyted because of fault of their
capytaynes, and so than they had thought to have turned again to the gate,
but than the noble duke of Brytayne was before them who right sharply received
them for the brytons struck of their heads arms and legs, but specially
Arthur d^lt^ wonders strokes about them, and bett^ down all that ever he
attained unto, so that every man fled before him to make short process these
noble men did so much that all the emperyens were clen^ discomfyted and
slain, how be it they endured much pain and labor first* for they were a
great nombre of people, and by that tune it was about none, than Arthur and
all his company vna^med them and took their dinner, than they r^tourned to the
palace, and as they went they saw lyeng under the pyne tree the emperor who
had his chine sore bruised and almoost broken, than Arthur caused him to be
sayre and easily unarmed, and made him to be borne to the palace and to be
laid in a fair goodly chamber, and appointed.vi. knights to wait and give
attendau^ce on him, and.x. squye^s to serve him, than Arthur caused all the
best surgiens of the country to be brought to him to hele him of his sore
hurtes, and Arthur kept the Emperor as honorably as a man ought to keep such
a person as he was. Than Arthur said to his company lords what shall we do with
yonder great host that is without, for I think that if they ones know that
the emperor be taken and king Jonas slain they will flee away, and so shall they
escape fro us therefore let every man give his advise what is best ferder to be
done. Uerely sir said master Steven my counsel is y^ in the heyght of the
highest toure in this castle that ye set out themperoures banner dysp^ayed to
thentent that they without in the host may se it, and than they will think
verily ye the emperor has won this place, and so than they will abide still
and think him self well assured, and sir as soon as every man of our company
has dyned let us issue out with baners dysplayed and fight with them, for
people without a Governor are half discom^yted, for they shall have no virtue
nor power against us, and let us make king Alexander oua captain and governor
for a king ought to gouernr an host, and than let us do so that king Emendus
when he comes may have but litel to do. Than every man said how that the
master had well aduysed, and agreed also to do, than every man went to dinner,
and when they had dyned every man cried to harnes, and so armed them, and they
with out in the host were right joyful when they saw their lords baner
dyspl^yed in the top of the castle, and than king Alexander and Arthur
ordained y^ the baner of britain should be in the way ward and that Arthur
should be in y^ company of his fader ^he duke of britayne, and next after him
in battle should be the earl of mount belyal, and than the earl of Neu^rs than
therle of Foys, and than therle of Forest, nere after the lord Beauieu, and
th^n the dolphin, and than the lord de la lounde and sir Brisebar, and than
last of all king Alexander their chief capytayne, and master Steven in his
company, and when all these noble men were thus s^t in good ordinance and
their baners dysplayed, than Florence beheld well their noble and hie
countenau^ces and praised them much in her heart and said, a gentyl country of
France right noble art thou, god keep the therein and mayntayn it since thou
have nourysshed up such a noble company of knights as here be now at this
time present, so than there issued first out the baner of Britain with the
thekered arms, and so al other every man in good ordinance. And when the
empetyens saw them come forth than they knew well how that the emperor and
king Jonas were both slain or taken, and than they were so abashed y^ they
had though^ all to have fled a way, than king Florypes brother to themperoure
and king ^randalas and king Clamados cousin germayne to king Florypes mounted
al on their horses, and rode al about their host and did encourage thyr
people, than the king Florypes called to him y^ earl of the isle perdue, and
commanded him to ride against the french host and demand of them what
people they were, and what they would and to show them that if they demand
battle they should have it on the mondaye next following without any fail so
that they will give ^rewse in the mean space, So than the earl rode straight
to the duke of Brytayne who was in the formest bron^ and right nobly did salute
him. And when Arthur saw^ him he made to him right great joy, and than the
earl desired him that he would cause him to speak with their chief capytayne. Than
Ar^hur brought him to the presence of king Alexand^r than the ^rle did his
reverence and saluted him, and demanded of the king for what entencyon he and
al his company did approach so nere to the emperors host. Ce^taynely friend
said the kyng^ it is so that ye and your company be entered into the land
pertaining to the gentyl la^y Florence, and ye have wasted and exyled al her
coutry and subjects wrongfully and without any reasonable cause, and ye have
besiege^ and assalted her here in her castle without any def^au^ce made to her
before, whe^fore we are riding in purpose to areyse your syege and to drive
you out of this cou^t^ey if we can. Sir quod therle cause your host to tarry
and re^urne again to your castle, and king Floripes brother to the emperor
desires of you truse and respit of ^atayle till monday next coming, and than h^
p^omyseth you to deliver you bataile without any fail, for sir al out host
is sore troubled because of our empe^our, for we wo^e not where he is, for sir
we se well yt the castle is not delivered too him sith we se al you h^re ready
to, batalle, and he is abiden behind and al his, we wot not where to seek him.
Cer^aynly sir quod the king your emp^rour is within ^he castle in prison, and
the chine of his back nigh broke asonder, and as for your king Jonas is dead
and al tho that came with the^^ but sir as for the respite yt ye demand I shall
take counsel in y^ behalf, and than give you an answer, than the king sent
for all his lords and showed them ye requests of king Florypes, and desired
them to give him counsel in ye behalf, ^han the duke of Britain desired the
master to give first his advise, than the master said, lords it is of troth yt
this king Floripes is a cruel prince and greatly red^ubted, for throughout al
the^perors land the people will do more for him, than for the emperor him
self, and syrs ye may well se before you all the bylles and great va^^y^s be
full of men of war, so that for one of our compani the^e is an.C of theyrs,
and also though themperoure were dead, yet these people are not with out a
captain as long as they have with them this king Floripes, therefore my
counsel is let us gine them this ^rulety^ monday, sith it comes of their own
desire, for our people are right ^or trauayled of the pain yt they have had
this morning, and their horses be also right weary and sore chafed, and sir
there be many of our knights and people sore wounded so they may well take
their rest the ^pa^^ of these four days and so by monday^ every man and horse
shall be well refresshe^ how be it on the other side I se well that as now their
host is in a manner without any ordenaunce, and in great trouble for the
missing of their emperor, so that if we shol^ go on them at this point I
think that we should dyscomfyt them al, but we should have no honor in that
behalf^, for we should do but dyscom^it^ people that were but as half dead,
therefore let us accomplish their request, and on monday let us assemble against
them and tha^, if god give us the vyc^ory than out praise and honor shall be
the more, grete^ and more laudable, And when the master had thus devised they
were all agreed to his saying. So than the kyng^ Alexander granted the trewse
too the ^rle till the monday following. Than the e^le returned and said to
king Florypes and to such other as were with him syrs it is so the french
men h^th granted to you trewse till monday next, and as for the emperor is in
prison sore wounded and the king Jonas slain and al their company, but of one
thing I ensur^ you all, sithe God first made mankyn^ there was never so goodly
a sort of men of war assembled together as they be, and as god help me if
we were half as many mo people as we be here already we could not endure
against them they order their batayles in so goodly a manner. Hold your peace
sir earl said king Florypes, and if ye be aferd fly away, for as god help me
as soon as mondy is come I shall neither eat nor drink till I have again my
brother the emperor and put them al to death by the sword, tha^ he sent for all the
noble men of y^ host and chief captains, and took their faith and troth to
help him in his quareil. Than king Alexander and al his company retu^ned
again to the castle, and alighted at ye gate And there Florence m^t the^ and
co^uaied them up into the palais, and tha^ she demanded them the cause why
they returned again so soon without battle. Madam said the duke of britain
it is so ye king Florypes has desired of us trewse till monday next coming the
which we have granted him. In the name of god said Florence so be it, so than
every man unarmed the^ throughout all the castle, and after they went and
united the emperor and kept him company how be it he was sore enpaired because
of the hurt yt he had. Now let us leave to sp^ke of the^ and return to Gouernar
yt was going on message into the realm of Soroloys to king Emendus

How Gouernar went into the relme of Soroloys to thentent to give knowledge to
king Emendus how ye themperor had besyeged his daughter Florence in her
castle of clear toure, desiring him too have his host to rescowe her at that
time. Capi. C.v.
When that Gouernar was departed fro blaunche ^ou^e as ye have herd hereafore
he rode so long ^yl at last he arrived at the fair city of palestyne, and
there he herd tydyngs of the mighty king Emendus how yt he had knowledge that
the emperor had besyeged his daughter in her castle of blaunche coute wherefore
he assembled his hosts together as fast as he might, to thentent to rescow
Florence his daughter, and there it was showed him how y^ the chief governor
of his host was the king of orqueney, who was put to the way ^ard with xxx. M.
hawberts, and a^^e^ him y^ king of mormal with other.xxx. M. and than the king
of valefound with other.xxx. M. and than the king of Ismaelyte with other.xxx.
M. And ^ha^ the mighty king Emendus with.C. M. in his company and than there
we^e of duke Ph^^yppes company.xv. M. and of the lady Margaretes of Argentons
company.xv. M. who were brought by sir Emery. And when Gouernar herd these
tidings he was right joyful, and so mounted on his horse and rode so long till
he came within a days journey of the city of Cornyte, than he encou^tred y^
king of orqueneys baner with a right noble company, and so rode forth and passed
by all those great routes, at last he spyed sir Ansell neuewe to sir Neuelon
Florence marshal and each of them enbraced other, and so to them there came sir
Rowla^de of bigor, and sir Uiceer of damason ^ sir Artaude, and sir Morys of
fenice and al ^hese were Florence knights, and al these knew well Gouernar and
made to him gret^ chere and at last ye king of orqneny came to the^ and he
enbraced Gouernar and to hi^ made right great fest and chere, than Gouernar did
alyght, but the king made him to remount again and demanded of him how that
Arthur did. Sir quod Gouernar he is at ye blaunche toure there I left him, and
with him duke Hector, Brisebar and master Steven sir it is so y^ the emperor has
besyeged Florence in the castle, and he has with him people without number,
and he had enclosed the castle round about or we entered, how be it we entered
by the subtyl wit of master Steven, but sir I am sure there is by this time
with Arthur the most noble company of all the world for he has brought with
him out of his country the king of malogres and.iiii. earls and.iiii. barons,
and also ye mihgty duke of Britayne his own fader and they are well to the
number of.xv. ^hou^ande knights of france of great price and valor, wher^ore
I think by this time they have made some manner of scarmysshe with their enemies
for they are hardy knights and courageous for it is great maruayle if they lie
thus long still. Ye said the king is A^thur than of that virtue and strength
yt he has brought with him such people, as help me god I am right Joyful
thereof, now it shall be well known if he be an orphelyn in his own country or
not Sir said Gouernar he hertely does salute you and desires you to haste your
people as fast as ye ca^ toward him for the rescowynge of Florence. with a
right good will said the king, with gods grace we shall be there by wednesday
ne^t coming at night, let us go and speak ^oyth my lord the king of Soroloys,
so they passed f^rby the great hosts, and Gouernar said behold I trow here
be all the world of people than much people demanded tidings of Arthur, and
so did all the kings in their own propre persons so at last they appro^hed the
great host of king Emendus and passed forby all the great rou^es til they came
to king Emen^us an^ as soon as he saw Gouernar his heart reioysed in his bady
and enbraced him and demanded tidinges of Arthur Sir said Gouernar I left him
at the blau^che ^ou^e, and there he recounted to the king how yt they entered
into the castle, and showed him how yt Arthur had brought with him out of his
country the most noble company of all the world, and also his fader ye duke of
britain and there he showed the names of them al, both of the king earls and
barons whereof ^he king had great ioy^, than the king of Orqueney said sir your
daughter is not ill bestowed, I think he will defend her right well against
the emperor. That is true quod the king, but is there any great company with these
noble men. Ye sir truly quod Gouernar, for or I departed fro them they had
discomfyted y^ Son da^ and also his brother and.xxx. M. sarasyns of his company.
That is a gr^t thing quod the king. Sir quod Gouernar Arthur desires your
grace too auaunce your host as hastily as ye ca^, and now sir I will return
again to blaunche toure, for I think long to know thestate of my lord Arthur
and so he took his leu^. Go your way friend quod the king and salute f^o me my
daughter Florence and Arthu^ al such as be come with him, and thank them on my
behalf for coming into this country to the ayding of my daughter. Than
tharchbisshop enbraced Gouernar, and so Gouernar departed, and he and y^ king
of orqueney went togider to his host. And when sir Ansean of valefou^d knew
ye Gouernar would depart again he said to the king of orqueny, sir my lady
Florence is beseged wherefore I will by your license go with Gou^rnar and se my
lord mine uncle who is with Arthur. Tha^ slept forth sir Miles and sir Rowland
of Bygor and sir Ulceer and sir Artaud and sir morante, and they al demanded
license of the king to go with gouernar, and he gave them al license, than they
took their harnes and mounted on their horses and went forth on their way and
passed al y^ hosts

How that Arthur accompanied with the french men dyscomfyt^d king Florypes
brother to the emperor, and slew al them yt were in his company. Ca. C.vi.
SO it was that the next day after that the ^rewse was taken A^t^ur rose up
erly in the morning and en^red unto the palace and there he found the dolphyn
and the lord de la lound, and so each of them did salute other, than the
dolphin said as help me god it anoyeth me greatly thus long to be closed in
mewe, I would gladly go and sport me abroad in the feldes, but first let us go
take our harneys with us because our enemies be so nere us, and so they
al.iii. did arm them and Brisebar also, and mounted on their horses and issued
out at the gates and rode down by a fair valey by the river side til they we^
well the space of of a mile and half fro the castle, tha^ ^he dolphin beheld
well the pleasant ^iuer and the goodly meadows on both sides, and praised much
the country in his mind, than he dashed his sporres to his horse and galoped
down along by the ryu^r side till he came to a thycke wood, and when he had
thought to have returned again, he perceived a knight armed yssuy^g out of the
same wood mounted on a good horse, and came rennyng toward him by great
randon, and when the dolphyn saw him he encountered him with such force yt the
knight brake his spear but the dolphyn struck him so rudely yt he put his spe^e
through his body, and so the knight fell down dead. Than Arthur said to his
company, I se w^ll the dolphyn is a knight of gre^ valu^e, and had scant
fynysshed his words but that he perceived yssuyng out of the wood king
Clamados with.ii. C. in harnes with him coming ay^nst the dolphyn wy^h great
fiercenes, and when the dolphin saw yt he dash to his horse and took his sword
and struck so the first that he c^aue him down to the tethe, than all the
remenant ran on him at al sides, but than Arthur rush^e into the prese, and the
first that he encou^tred he dash his sp^re ^lene through his body so far
that he wounded an other knight that was behynd him nigh to the death, than he
drew out his sword and laid on among them that were in hand with the dolphin,
and gave among them so great strok^s y^ he cut of arms, hedes, and legs, and
b^t down knights and claue asonder sheldes and made great place before him, for
none aproched nere him but that he received death and also ye dolphyn did as
nobly as any knight could do, and Arthur beheld him, and under his helm did
laughe at his noble valor, than Brisebar and sir de la lounde dashed in to the
prese so rudely yt each of them beat down his enemy, than they laid on with
their swords like two wyld lions. And when y^ king Clamados saw his people so
slain with.iiii. persons he was right sorrowful and replet with ire and said if
all the other french men be like these.iiii. all the world can not endure against
them but by the fay^h tha^ I owe unto the emperor I shall ryd one of them out of
this mortal, and therewith he lift up his sword and struck Brysebar so rudely yt
the gentyl knight was ny^ stryken down, for his horse with the stroke fell down
on his knees, than there fell on him so many folks y^ they drew him down to
the ea^^h And when the lord de la lound saw that he began for to cry as fast
as he might help Arthur for Brisebar is else lost, than the dolphyn espied
that and rushte into the thi^kest of y^ prese and he and sir de la lounde did
as much as they could to ^es^owe Brisebar, but it auayled the^ not for there
were to many on him, and so he was taken prisoner and delivered to.xx. men to
keep, and they led him forth out of the host right rudely, and than unarmed him
and did beat him right ill. And when Arthur knew that Brisebar was taken and
led out of the field, he was ^ighte sorrowful and sore displesed, than he dashed
into the prese so rudelye y^ he confounded all that ever he attained unto, and
claue asonder sheldes and vnbarred helmes, and v^nayled hawbertes and cut of
heads, ha^d^s and arms, and threw down kn^ghtes, for none abode him without
does, so that al fled before him, and he and the dolphyn and sir de la lounde
held them self ever togider in a front. And all this season Brysebar was
led forth out of the field till they came to ye foot of a great mountain,
betynge and ill intreatyng of Brysebar their prisoner, but it was not long
after till they were dyspleased and sorrowful, for wyth^n a little while after
they drank of the same cup, for Gouernar, sir Ansel, sir Miles, sir Rowland,
sir Uicier, sir Ar^aude, and sir Mo^ant the same time descended down this same
mountain, for they were coming out of the realm of Sorolois as ye have herd
here before. And when that Gouernar saw those people dele so foul with
Bris^bar, his blood trembled in his body for fere of Arthur, for than he
doubted y^ the blaunche toure had been taken and destroyed and his lord Arthur
dead than he said to Rowlande, saint Marye I doubt me greatly of my lord
Arthur, for yonder is some of our compani that is taken prisoner therefore
gentle knights help to rescowe him who so ever it be, than Gouernar rode
forth with great randon, and when he aproched nere to them he knew right well
how that it was Brisebar yt was taken prisoner, than he set his hand on his
sword and laid on among them like a wolf among a meyny of sheep and did cut
down and slew as bef^^e him, so within a while al tho.xx. kn^ghtes were al
slain, than Gouernar came to Brysebar and said, a friend it seems well this
people did never nourysh you up that thus foul and shamefully have delte with
you, whereof I am rygh^ sorry, and so loused him out of his bands And when
Brysebar saw him h^ had right great joy and said, a friend ever at need a man
shall know his friend, but for gods sake have you to help my lord Arthur who
is at great myschyefe here by this river side, for as help me god I am more
sorry for him than for my self. And when Gouernar herd that he galoped forth
incontinent and al his company after them, and as soon as they came to their
enemies they found the lord de la lounde ou^rthrowen to the earth and tak^
prisoner, and was leding forth, and therwyth Gouernar laid on round about
him, and his company with him, and they bet down knights on every side, than
Gouernar took a horse and delivered it to sir de la lounde, and in the spite of
al his enemies he made him to remou^t, and ^han Gouernar went al about seeking
of Arthur, and sir Rowland with him, and at the last they found him in the
thyckest of the prese, where as he did maruailes in arms, and the dolphin did
help him to the best of his power. And when Gouernar saw him he dashed in among
the^ and frusshed down all that ever he attained unto, for he was a maruailous
good knight and of great virtue, and sir Rowla^de and his.vi. ^elowes did help
them to their powers, and Gouernar went before doing great meruayles. And when
Arthur saw^ him his heart quicken^d and took great pity of the pain and labor
that he saw him take and endure so long, and therewith he laid on more
rudelier than he had done before of all the day, for such was his manner the more
he had to do the more grew ever his strength and hardines Than came in Brysebar
well armed and horsed, for he had been before at a good market where as he had
choice of the best, and he bare down his enemies before him by great hepes.
And when king Clamados saw so his people dyscomfyred he turned him self to
fly and said to a knight that was by him, go and have you to themperours host
and bring with you.iiii. C. howbertes to socour me, and so the knights rode as
fast as he might till he came to king Florypes and to king Brandolyn who were
sekyng all about the host for king Clamados, but they could here nothing of
him, wherwyth they were gretely dyspleased, and at last the knight messenger
came to them and said to king Florypes, gentyl king haste you to socour the
noble king Clamados who is yonder by the river side, and he and his company
are fighting with x. frensshemen^ who I think are out of their minds. I
believe they be not erthly people, but ^ather fendes of hell who are come for to
destroy us all, for I am sure they hau^ flayne by this time nigh.ii. hundred of
ye b^st knights of king Clamados, and sir king Clamados his self is wounded
in.v. places of his body, and without ye haste you the faster he is but either
dead or taken. Saint mary friend said king Florypes, and how is it they have
not slain al these frenshe men since they be but.x. persons. Slain sir said
the knight, nay speak not thereof, but sir pray to god to keep you fro
myschyefe, and that they approach not to nere you when ye shall meddle with them,
for there is none that approaches to them without death sir have you or else ye
will lose your good king Clamados, than king Flor^pes commanded a great
grisley horn to be blown, than all the host armed them hastily and mounted
on their horses and took their speres and sheldes and made so great bruyte and
noise that duke Phylyp as he was in the castle herd the^, and looked out at a
wyndow and saw all the host at mynge them and mou^tyng on their hors^s And
than it was showed him how that Arthur and the dolphyn, sir de la lounde, and
sir Brysebar were issued out of the castle all armed and were riden down by
the river side, and when he saw all the people of the host drawing thyderwarde
he thought well that there was some fray toward, wherefore he fered greatly of
Arthur and his company, than be caused the great watch horn of the castle to
be blown.iii. times so yt it was hard throughout the town and castle, whereby
every man knew well that there was some new tidings, wherefore they armed them
and mounted on their horses, and than all the earls lords and knights did a^me
them and mounted on their horses saving the duke of Brytayne, king Alexander,
and the master who as than were not risen out of their beds, and al these
lords and knights with baners dysplay^d issued out of the castle, and they
were well to the number of.xv. thousand in.iiii. batayles well renged and in
good order, and they rode down alonge by the river side, and duke Phylyp rode
form^st till at last he met with the first company of the emperors host, and
they encou^tred rudely togider, and so both parties ever increased so that there
was between them a great mortal bataile and a fyerse, themperiens were.xl
thousand and the other part were but.xv: thousand, how be it they slew many
of their enemies, and king Brandalyn was chief governor of themperours
hooste, and in this mean season Arthur and his.ix. felawes did so much that
they clean dyscomfyted al king Clamados company, than king Clamados was right
sore displeased and ran at Arthur and struck him on the white shield, for he
thought yt he would set little by all his loss so yt he might overcome him, but
the stroke rebou^ded again without doing of any hurt, for the shield was to
hard for him to enpayre it, and when the king saw yt he was nigh wode for
anger* and therewith gave Arthur an other great stroke, but al auayled him no
thing. than Arthur struck at the king who was aferd of the stroke and thought
to step a little a side but it was late for Arthur light so on him that he claue
his shield clean a sonder in the mids, and the stroke entered into his sholdre
and struck clean of the arm from his body, and as the sword did glent down ^
share also clean away the calfe of his leg, and when the king saw that he
was so sore wounded he turned him and flewe away as fast as he might, and.x.
other with him, for there were no mo left alive of his.ii C. men and yet they
were all maimed and hurt than king Clamados fled til he came to the
remenaunt of themperours host where as he found king Florypes, and there he
fell down before him and said, a gentle king why do ye tarry thus long yt ye
take not vengeance on these frenshe glotons who have thus araied me, wherefore
king have you and socour our people And when king Florypes saw him in that
case he was right sorrowful and swear a great oath and said that he would never
ete till he had the hedes of them that had thus ill arrayed him and broken the
crewse than he commanded horns and t^ompetes to be blown, so that every man
within the host did arm them and mounted on their horses and made great
noise and bruit^ so that the duke of brytaine as he was in his chamber within
the castle herd well the great noise, and tha^ he demanded of his servants
what it might be. Sir as god help us it is our company that are fyghtyng
without in the field with the emperors host, for sir all the lords of this
castle are issue^ out saving you and king Alexander who I think be yet in his
bed. Saint mary said the duke and is not my baner there among them. No sir
t^uely nor none of your men. And quod the duke I lose mine honor this day,
get me my harneys and so hastly he armed him, and tha^ he entered into the
chamber where as king Alexander was and recounted to him all this matter, than
the king was right sorry yt he was not gone forth with the host, so tha^ he
armed him and al his and mounted on their horses, and so in good ordinance
they issued out with baners dysplaied and rushte in to the battle to help
their company, and when Arthur and his.ix. felawes had dyscomfyted clean king
Clamados and his company he went there had been no more to do at that time, and
so than he demanded if any of any his company were hurt or sore wounded. And
they all said that blessed be god there was none of the^ that had any great
hurt and therwyth they hard great noise and dasshyng togider with speres and
swerdes and hard cryenge brytayne. well said Arthur I believe that our company
of the castle be fighting with the host without, wherefore let us go help
them and by that time they had rydden a little way forth they saw whereas the
battle was right fyerse and cruel. Than Brysebar espied where as king Floripes
came toward them with an honored thousand men, and so showed them to Arthur
and said, gentle knight and noble lord and our chief sovereign lord now is
it needful that ye show your noble valor in this journey for sir behold
yonder comes king Florypes with all the world of men after him A noble king
Emendus how is it that ye come not to socoure this noble company. Friend said
Gouernar be ye in certain that ye shall have by him shortly noble help and
socoure, let us leave our talking and goo on our enemies, for as god help me I
shall ones go through them or else I shall lie on the ground in qua^el, for I
doubt no death well syrs said Arthur doubt not for all the world as long as
I live, but syrs hold you ever close nere me, for I promise you ye shall se me
ouerthr^^ (...) many knigh^es yt it shall be pain for you to nombre them, let
be go on them ^o^ we tarry t^ long. Sir said the dolphyn doubt ye not of us,
for as long as we live we shall never fail you, therewith they dashed into the
prese and overthrew knights by great hopes, but specially Arthur did
wonder^ly, for he was tha^ as fresh as though he had done nothing of all the
day before, thus we will leave them fygh^ing and (...) to master Steven in the
castle who knew nothing of all this matter.

How mayste^ Steven by his art and c^ning caused thempereyens^^ g^ a wrong
way from Arthur and so encountered ye king Eme^dus and al his host. Ca. C.vii.
SO it was ye when master Steven had ^aye^ in his ^ed as long as it pleased
him, than he arose and went into the hal, and there he found Florence and the
lady Margarete, and than he had great maruayle that he saw no body else and
demanded of them where as all the noble company were become. And Florence
answered him and said, a gentle master now is such besynes com that we have
great need of your help, for Arthur and al our company are without fightinge
with themperours host, who are an hundred thousand, and our company are
but.xviii. thousand, and also more over king Florypes is coming on them with
an other.C. thousand, wherefore by all lykelyhode our people shall be
destroyed wherefore gentil master as ye be sone to a king help now our noble
chyualry by your clergy. And when the master hard these tidinges he went to
his chamber and took his books, and did so much by his connyng that he raised
a great myste in king Florypes host so yt each of (...) could sca^t s^ other:
whereby they lost their hye way to come on Arthur and his company, and took the
straight way yt the king of orqueney and the great host of ye mighty king
Emendus was coming, and or they wist their horses were nere togider, tha^ the
king of orqueneys hooste spyed and kn^w well by their baners and standards yt
they were of their enemies than they r^^ to their harneys and sadled their
horses and mounted on them, and the good king of orqueney was clean armed and
well mounted on a great migh^ye horse and rode formest of all his ^ompany the
which was well to the nombre of.xxx.M. And next after him come the king of
mormall with other.xxx.M. And when they were n^re to their enemies, than the king
of orqueney ran against king Brandalin who brake his spear al to pieces, but
the noble king of orqueney struck him so rudely yt he fell over his horse
crope his legs upward, so that he lay a great space for dead on the earth, but
at last he was resc^wed by his people, tha^ began the battle right cruel and
fyerse on both parties, and the king of orqueney and the king of mormall did
right valiauntly. Now let us return to master Steue^ who that after he went
out of his chamber and had caused this great mist to be in the^perours host he
armed him and went down i^to the court of the palace and there he found ready a
great and a mighty black horse with read eyes sparkelyng as fire, the which
horse had never eten prouendre and was bare on al.iiii. fet^ for he was never
shode, and tha^ the master incontinent mounted on him, and as son^ as ye
master was on his back he sodeinly vanysshed away so yt Florence nor none
that were with her wist where he was t^ come, and so suddenly he was borne into the
host where as Arthur was fighting with his enemyis, and as soon as the master
was there he blew such a blast that there rose in such a wind and storm in
themperours host yt they lost th^rby half their strength and hardines, than
the master with his swerd in his hand dashed into ye prese and gave many great
strokes, but his horse with his fete both before and behind gave such strokes
that he ouerthrewe wh^soeuer he touched, so yt the^ was none that approached
nere him b^^ yt the horse would ren on him with open mouth and deuour^ him so yt
every man fled ^way before ^he master for fere of his horse, the horse wo^de
join together his fete and lepe into the mids of the prese, and there he would
lay on with his f^te both before and b^^inde ^ by^e with his tethe so that he
claue asonder sheldes and brast aso^der helmes so that none durst abide him and
Arthur and his company when they saw the master and his horse they laughed at
him a great pace, than the.iiii. earls and the brito^s made place before them,
and specially Arthur above all other did meruailes in arms, and at conclusyon
they did so much that their enemies fled before them, and they followed after
them and flewe so many of the^ that they were all clean dyscom^yted, for they
saw well they had no socour, and had great marvel where the king Florypes with
his host was become that he came not to socour them, tha^ Arthur caused a great
horn to be blowe^ and railed togider his people about king Alexander, and so
than took counsel to return again to the blau^che toure, than they saw the
master coming to them fro the hye mountain on his horse brayeng like the
wind, ^ when he was come to them he said, syrs now quyte yourselfe well and
show tha^ y^ be noble men come out of the gentil country of france, for it is
^o y^ ^he noble king of Orquen^y and the king of morma^l are beyond yonder
mountain fyghtinge with king Floripes, and they are but.xl. thousand against
an.C. thousa^de^. wherefore they are sore over marched, for gods sake let us
go and socour them. And when Arthur hard that he was as fye^se of heart as a
raged lion and said to king Alexander gentyl king let us go shortly and h^lp^
these gracious kings, certainly I had rather dye tha^ they should suffer any
h^^t one of the^ is cosyn German to the fair Florence. Certainli friend
Arthur said the king I am content with al my heart, tha^ they rayled their
people together and went forth^ with good ordinance and baners displayed, and
such as were wounded and hurt returned to the blau^che toure, and so they
rode forth such way as the master ^edde them till at last they came to the
bataile, than the master dashed his spor^es to his horse and ru^ht into the
host, than his horse began to fight with his fere, and to byte with his teth,
than Arthur and his company did laughe at him than Arthur, duke Philip, and
Gouernar dashte into the prese, and the first that Arthur encou^tred withal he
struck him so rudely that he claue him to the sholdres. and fro an other he
took his head, and so ^elayd on round about him and confounded all that ever he
attained unto, tha^ ye good king Alexander and the noble duke of britain and
all other lords rusht into the prese, than there began a fyerse battle. And
when the dolphyn saw the noblenes of Arthur and his company, he took on him
thereby great hardines, than he brothed his horse with the sporres and dashed
into ye prese and his enemies assailed him on all parres, but he defended him
like a good knight, but there were so many against him that they slew his horse
under him, than he l^pte on his fete and slew and drove down many knights
with his sword but at last for all that ever he could do he was taken
prisoner, and when Gouernar saw that he dashed into the prese and the first that
he encountered he claue him to the teth, and fro another he struck of the arm
hard by the sholdre, and so laid on round about him, and after him went
sir N^uelon and sir Rowlande of brygor and did right valyauntly, but there were
on them mo than.x^ and they held them so short yt they could not aid the
dolphin And wha^ sir Brisebar saw his company in that case than he went into
the prese and closed him self just to Gouernar, and between them they slew
many of their enemies, for they kept them so close together that no man could
part them, at last master Steven saw them in that case he rusht in with his
horse and did such wonder what with his hands and with his horse that his
enemies fled fro his strokes and said, shame have such Iogeler yt has
taught his horse thus to dance, let us fly fro this feast, shame have he that
gives him any thing, we are but dead and we abide him, therefore let us leave
him, hanged may he be that brought him into this country, therewith they
^eparted and fled away fro ^he dolphyn, than our knights came again to the
dolphin and caused him again to mount on a good horse, and did put them self
again into the battle, than sir Ansell struck so rudely a knight yt he f^ll
down stark dead And when king Brandalyn saw yt he was right sore displesed
and struck sir Ansell so rudely that he put his sword clean throughout his
body more tha^ a spa^, therewith the gentyl knight fell down to the ^eth right
dolorously hurt and wounded And wha^ duke Hector saw that he was right sore
displeased, for he wend he had been dead, than he ran at king Bra^dalyn and
struck him with his swerd so virtuously that he made his head to fly to the
earth and said, a unhappy king thou haste taken fro us a right noble knight,
but now thou have paid for the me^des therefore I claim the as quyte, than the
king of orqueney who had well seen Hector do that deed he said, a gentle knygh^e
blessed be that womb that ba^^ the, for verily ye can well r^uenge your friend,
than there began great sorrow in themperours host for king Brandalyn, than much
people of them drew togider to bear the dead king out of the battle, and
Arthur caused sir Ansell to be borne to the blau^^he toure to Florence, and
there his wo^des to be serched. And when king Florypes hard tidings that
king Brandalin was slain and saw his people so slain and wounded he was for
sorrow and angre^^ye out of his mind, and therewyth he ran at a knight of
the king of mormalles with a great sp^re and pers^d him therewith clean
thrughout the body and so he fell down dead, and with his sword he struck of
the head of an other, and the third he rydde out of his life. And when the
gentyl king of mormal saw his people so slain he ran at king Floripes and
gave him a great stroke on the ^helde, but the stroke did him but little hurt,
but than the king Florypes gave him such a stroke that he claue his sholdre
down to the sadell, and therewith he fell down dead, tha^ began there a great
sorrow among his company, for he was a right noble and genetyll kyng^. And when
Arthur saw that he was never so sorrowful before for any thing that ever came
unto him before, therewith in a great rage he began to florysshe with clarence
his good swerd and gave king Florypes such a stroke ^n hye on the helm that
he claue him clean asonder down to the sadel so that he fell asondre in two
parts, and what his people saw that they were so abashed that they had no
power longer to defend them self but little, so than Arthur and Hector slew
of them even as they list, so thus they were clean dysco^fyted, and so they
fled away and saved them self as well as they might. Than the gentil king of
orqueney came to the place where as the dead body of the noble king of mormall
lay and wept for sorrow and said, certainly my heart is heavy for your death, a
gentyl noble king of Mormall this war was evil begone for you, all t^outh,
bounte, and beauty was in you, certainly he had a hard heart that thus slew
you, therewith he alyghted fro his horse, than king Alexandre can to him and all the other dukes, earls, barons. and noble knights, and they all made right
great sorrow, than they dressed forth the dead body and did send it to the
blau^che toure. And when Florence hard of them great sorrow that they made she
was in great fere of Arthur, and the lady Margarete had great doubt of the
master till at last she was encertayned that it was for the death of king of
Mormall whereof she was right sorrowful and caused the dead body ryally to be
laid on a rich bear in the mids of the quere of the church. Than the king
of orqueney sent to the mighty king Emendus.iiii. knights in message,
certyfyenge him how that they have had a great bataile, wherein the good king
of mormall was slain, and of themperours part how that king Brandalyn king
Clamados and king Floripes be al three slain, and the earl of the isle perdue
taken prisoner and maimed for ever, so than these messengers departed, and than
the king of orqueney caused his tent to be pyght up a little beside where as the
battle was there to abide the coming of king Eme^dus, and kept still in his
company the king Alexander of malogre, and the duke of brytaine and the other
earls and barons returned to the blau^che toure to keep it and to b^re company
with Florence.

How that the emperor dyed in prison for sorrow when that he knew that his
kings and people were al slain and dyscomfyted. Capitulo.C.viii.
SO it was that when the king of mormal^es body was brought in to the church
within the castle, there was made right great sorrow in all the city and castle,
in so much that themperoure as he lay in his bed sore sick, for he enpayred
every day more and more, and as he lay he herd the great sorrow yt was made without
in the castle, than he demanded what it was and wherefore that great bruyte wi^h
out was made, and than it was showed hi^ how that it was because of the death of
ye king of mormal who was slain by king Floripes. Ye said themperor and how
does king Florypes. I charge you tell me the troth. Sir for goods sake
inquire no more of that matter till ye be perfect hole I will not said
the emperor I will know it, but than he said to a subject of his own that was
there with him, I charge the to tell me the plain troth, sir since it plese you I
shall tell you the plain troth, it is so i^ deed al your people are destroyed,
and your brother king Floropes and al your other kings are al slain, and when
the emperor herd that he had so great sororw that he closed his tethe together and
cast his hands abroad, and therewith his heart did ryue asonder and so dyed for
sorrow, and than such as were about him did cast out a great cry, than
Florence and the duke of britain went into the same chaumbre and there they
found the emperor ded, tha^ the duke of britain sent for king Alexander and the
king of orqueney and for all the other lords and barons, and when they were al
together than they aparailed the emperors body, and conuayed it to church, and
laid him by the king of mormal, and also thider was brought the body of king
Florypes and laid by them, than incontinent there went a messenger to king
Emendus, and by that time the first messengers were come to king Eme^dus and
said to him, sir themperor is in prison and al his hosts discom^ited, and al
hi^ kings dead and slaiu tha^ the king demanded whoo had done those noble
deeds, sir said he as god help us yt has done such knights as Arthur has
brought with him for sir in all your life you never saw such knights nor more to
be doubted, there is nothing that can endure against them, but sir all the world
speaks of Arthur and his cosyn Hector, for Arthur a lonely by his noble prowes
has made an end of all his enemies, how be it sir there is one great mischefe
fallen unto your grace. for the good king of mormal is slain by king Florypes,
but incontinent arthur slew hi^ and claue him asonder in.ii. years, and wha^
king Emendus herd of the death of his good king he could speak no word of a
great space, and when he might speak he said, a gentyl knights heart true and
honorable to al people, alas that I have thus lost you, certainly it for
thinks me, a emperor shame have you si^h ye have taken fro me my noble and
true companion cert^nly I shall take vengeance on you as soon as I shall se you
and as he was thus talkyng there came to him the last messenger and said, sir
ye king of orqueni does acertayne you that the emperor is dead. And how is he
dead quod the king, certainly sir quod the knight when he herd of the death of
his brother king Floripes and of his other kings and that his host was clean
discomfyted, he dyed for sorrow as he that was sore sick before because of his
hurt that he had in his back. w^l quod the king than I am revenged on him for
me king how be it I would he were alive again and al his so that I had again my
good king of mormal, go your way again quod the king go to the king of orqueni
and say that I desire him to ordeyne ready to buried the bodies of the emperor
and of my king of mormall, of king Florypes of king Brandalin, and of king
Clamados and show him how that I will be to morrow next coming with him there to
do the obseruaunce of their buryinge than the king said to his brother the
archbis^hop fair brother go to the blaunche toure and aparaile right hyely for
the burying of these kings according to their estates and your self this night
say yt obseruaunce yt belongs to their obsequies, and by gods license I
shall be there to morrow by mass time. Sir said yt bishop I shall fulfill your
commandment with a right good will, and so be departed and went to the
blaunche toure, and than Florence came to hi^ and said, mine own good uncle and
friend ye be right hertely welco^ than the king of orqueney and king Alexander
and al other earls and barons welcomed him, and when he was changed he and al
his gadered together and went to church and there the bishop did all the
obseruau^ce and all the ceremonies, and there was ordained.v. rich beeres,
and.v. rych crowns of gold hanging over them with baners and cote armures beten
with the colors of their arms, and when the bishop had done all the service
over the bodies, than they al returned again to the palace and so rested them
till the next day.

How that king Emendus came to the blaunche toure with all his noble company to
the burying of the emperor and of the other.iiii. kings. Capi. C.ix.
THe next day betimes king Eme^dus and al his host mounted on their horses and
took the way to the blaunche toure, and commanded that all his host should go in
good ordinance as they were wont to do with baners and sta^dardes displaied as
though they should enter into bataile if need were, and than he sent for the
king of orqueny to ye blau^che toure and for all his host, and as soon as the
king of orqueney knew of the king Emendus ple^ure he departed fro ye blau^^h
toure and went to the king, than incontinent the king commanded him yt he
should arm him and al his, for he said he would yt the french men should se the
fiercenes of his power, so than the king of orqueny and his company went into
the f^^^t fro^t and in this manner the king Emendus came toward the blaunche
toure like a mighty puissant king to thentent that he should be the more praised
of the french lords, and th^re was lening at a window of the castle, Florence,
king Alexander, the a^chbyshop and the duke of britain together ever ^oking for
the coming of king Emendus, and at ^heyr windows there ^^oode Arthur, Hector,
duke Phylip and ^he.iiii. earls and.iiii. ba^ons, and the ^olphin and the
marshal of myrpoys and all the other knights of france, and at last they saw
coming down a great hyl the baner of orqueney waueryng with the wynd, veryng
therein a field of gouldes enrayled with azu^e, a bar o^ goulde with a lion
rampau^t gold, and tha^ they heard trompettes horns and taboures blowing
merely, tha^ they saw crosbowes and moryspykes on foot to a great number, and
knights on horsbacke well ^enged and in good ordinance with many sta^dardes and
gysernes wauerynge with the wynd, great horses braying and beting with their
fete, sheldes and helmes shynynge against the son, and than next after came
the host of the good king of mormal weping and making great sorrow without any
baner saving a little gi^^ene of sendal of black color and every knight of ye
company bare their speres and the hedes downward and the small end of their
sheldes upward. And when the archbysshop saw them coming in ye manner he had so
great pity yt he wept for sorrow, and Florence also could not keep her self fro
weeping, and al other had great pity of ye company, for it seemed well to them yt
they were right sorrowful and without a lord. And after these people came the king
of Ismaelites host with his baner displayed, wherein was beten a libard passant
azure crowned with gold barred with flower de lyces silver their people were of a
fierce countenance and made great brute with horns and tabours and they rode
in good ordinance well renged in batayl. After them came the baner of Argento^
be^ing a field of azure, a knight armed gold on a horse silver, and sir Emery
was chief leder of ye company, and as soon as the lady Margaret saw her baner
she said to Florence madam my people have not yet forgoten you. As god help me
fair lady quod Florence they be right goodly to behold and seems well to be
people to give right good aid, and as they looked ferder they saw where sir
Clemenson came ryding with duke Philippes baner bering gold, and grene meddled
togider, poudr^d with roses azure, than duke Philyp said yonder. I se my baner.
Uerely quod king Alexander right great and mighty is that king yt may have such
people at his commandment, than they saw where came the baner of ye king of
valefound fader to master Steven and he ^ate a field ver^ with crowns gold
and chaplettes silver. And last of al there came the rich baner of king
Emendus wherein was a great flambyng dragon, and than there came so much
people yt all the earth was covered with them and there were so many standards and
tokens yt a man might say that all the world was coming, than king Alexander and
his company said, where was all this people found that belongs to this king,
it seems h^ has brought all the world with him. Than Florence said to king
Alexander sir me thinks it were well done yt ye and your company did mount on
your horses and go and mete my lord and fader, sir he will take it for a great
honor and love. As god help me madam quod the king ye have said like a noble
lady ought to say, and so shall we do than mounted the king and al other earls
barons and knights without any harnes, than king Alexander and the duke of
britain rode together and tharchbishop and Arthur, and so al other lords.ii.
and.ii. together, and they were so goodly to behold yt every man had maruayle
of them, and so they passed by all the companyes till they came to king Eme^dus,
who received the^ al right swetely, and thanked them gret^^ of the g^et aid yt
they had done to Florence his daughter, than king Alexander rode on the over
side of king Emendus, and the duke of britain on the other side, and so they
rode forth till they came to the blaunche toure, and there they alighted, than
Florence came to ye king her fader, and each of the^ enbraced other and the
king said* fair daughter ye have a good lord that so gentil a company has
brought with him out of his country, and I fewelye be full well bestowed, ^han king
Eme^dus took ye duke of britain by the hand, and so they.ii. went togider to
church, and there was done the service for the emperor and for the other kings
full solempnly and there they were enter^d with great honor, and after that Arthur
caused a fair church to be edified in the same place where as the good king of
mormall was slain* and there he founded a lodge of xl. chanous and each of
the^ to have.iii. L mark of yearly rent, and when al these foresaid
obseruaunce was done yt king Eme^dus commanded yt al his ^entes and pauylions
should be pight up without the castle, the which was done incontinent, and their
diner was puruaied for in the same place. and the king Emendus and king
Alexander and ye duke of britain sat them do^^e togider at one table, and al
other king^s and princes sat down at an other table every man after his estate
and so there they were served right richly, and Florence remained still in the
castel^ and her uncle the archbishop, duke Philip and the master were with her,
and when king Emendus had dyned he called to him Arthur and said Arthur ye
have won on these emperiens great tresure and riches, wherefore cause the^ to be
gadered togider and depart them among your knights where as it shall plese
you best, and there as ye shall thynk them well enployed. My lord said Arthur with
a right good will, and so than Arthur departed such riches as was m^n in the
field, in such wife yt every man held him self well con^ent, and every man
said noble knight Arthur god encrese your bounte a honor and god give you good
life, for we have a rich and a noble lord of you, than Florence and the bishop
came out of the castle to the kings tent, and as soon as king Alexander saw
her he rose up on his fete and put of his cap and brought her to her fader,
than the king her fader took her by ye hand and set her down by him and said,
fair daughter we have been right sore displesed for the death of your people,
therefore it is now time yt ye rejoice us as in taking of Arthur to your lord ^
hus^ond for we be accorded thereto and I will yt ye shall go to sa^^ry, and there
ye shall be wedded. Sir said Florence al shall be at your pleasure, how be it
sir if it plese your grace I will first go to the port noyre, for there is the
duches of britain mother to Arthur and al these other ladies wives to these
noble lords yt be here come with Arthur, and sit I shall bring them into this
country and do them such honor as I can, as I think they will do to me if I
were in their country. And when the king her father herd that he smiled and
said, ^aire daughter Florence it pleseth me right well go your way to morrow,
and the king of orqueney, duke Philip and Arthur ^^al go with you, and for the
love of them I shall mete with you and them at Argence. And when the lady
Margarete herd that the king wol^ go to argence, she sent hastily sir Emerye to
apparayle her palace, to receive the king and his company right honorably,
and gave license too her host ^o return home, so they were all that day in
great joy and sport, and bare great honor to king Emendus and to al his thus
they passed forth this night.

How after the dyscomfiture of the^p^rour and al his people ye king gave
lyce^ce to al his host ^o depart ^uerye man home, and went him self to
Argence there to^ make the weddyng between Arthur and Florence* and how that
Florence went to the port noyre to make these to the duches of britain and to
the other ladies and to bring them to Argence to her fader king Emendus. Capi.
C.x.
IN the next morning ye king Emendus rose and gave license to al his host to
dept and he pu^ him self forward on his journey toward Argence, and took with him
king Alexander and the duke of britayne and all the other earls and barons, and
broug^t them throughout diverse of his cities and castles and made them right
great chere and fest, and also Florence rose ye same day betymes and ent^ed
into her chariot and took with her the queen of orqueny and the fair lady
Margaret* and after her there were other.iii. charyots full of fair ladies and
damsels, and Gouernar and sir Neuel^ were ch^fe rulers of her household, and
the king of Orqueney, duke Philip, Arthur and the master kept her company, and
so rode forth together till they came to the port noyre Than Arthur, Brisebar
and Clemenson were sent some what before to show the duches of the coming of
the fair lady Florence, daughter to the mighty Emendus king of Soroloys, and
to make purueyaunce for her coming, so they rode forth so far till at the
la^t on a saturday at night they aryued at the port noyre, than they alyghted
and mounted up to the palace, and than they found the duches and all the other
ladies in the chapel hearing of euensonge, each of them praying for their
lord, for they were in great fear of them, for they herd no manner of
tidings of them. And as soon as the duches saw sir Brysebar, than her h^r^e
came to her. And than sir Brisebar kneled down on his kne, but the duches would
not suffer him to knele no season but raised him up, and than she demanded
tidings of the duke her husbonde. Than Iehannet stepped forth to here some
tydinges of Arthur, than Brysebar said madame my lord the duke does right
well, and he does salute you by me, he is with my lord the king Emendus who
does to him right great honor and to al your other lords and knights, and
also madame my lord Arthur your son does humbly recommaund him to you, as he
that is the best knight and most honored of all the world, and to you fair
damoysel Iehannet he recommaundeth him, and know you for ce^tayne that within
these ^yght days as he showed me, he will put you unto great honou^^ therwyth
Iehannet cast down her look to the earth and gave a great sigh. Madame said
Brysebar to the duches, behold yonder the gentle, Florence, daughter to the
noble king Emendus who is coming hyder to you, and brings with her the king
of orqueney her cosyn, and specyal friend to my lord Arthur your son, and
also duke Philyp of Sabary Arthur, Hector, and master Steven is with her, and
all the people are coming to se you, and to bring you to the mighty king Emendus
unto the city of Argence, and there I think shall be the marriage between
Arthur your son and the noble Florence, a good lord said the duches I thank
the sith thou have given me such a child that does me so much honor. Sir
Brysebar said Iehannet is this my lord Arthurs love that is coming hyder. Ye
t^uely fair love ^ayd Brysebar. Certainly said Iehannet I would gladly se
her, and shall serve and love her with a good heart, yet notwythstandyng I had
rather have had Arthur to have been my lover than hers, so they past forth yt
day and night, and in the morning there came messengers before that showed how
that Florence would be there at dinner, than the duches and all the other
countesses ladies and damoiselles dy^ array them right freshly, and mounted on
their palfraies and r^de to encou^tre Florence. And at the last Brysebar said,
madame yonder comes Florence out of the forestes side, and at the same time
the king and I give unto you my freende and lover Than the master kneled
down and thanked Florence, tha^ the noble marks stepped forth who was uncle and
governor of ye lady Magaret and thanked Florence with al his heart, tha^ Florence
called to her duke Philip and said, freende I pray you re^ou^ne again hastily
to the king my fader and show him how yt I have dysposed the realm or mormal,
and the land of argenton and desire him that he will send me his confirmacion
in yt behalf under his great seal. Than duke Philip took his leave and
departed and rode to king Emendus and recou^ted to him al yt Florence had
commanded him. And when the king herd all that he was right joyous for ye
love of arthur, and so was all the court so than the king did confirm al
Florence desire, and did send unto her his letters patentes sealed under his
great seal, and than Florence was mounted into her chariot, and the queen of
orqueney and the duchess and Iehannet with her, and the cou^tesses rode each by
other next to the chariottes Than the countess of Neuers said to the countess
of Foreste, madam this noble lady Florence has done right wisely and nobly to
make these marriages. That is true quod the lady Forest, she has done it to
thentent that arthur should not resort to Iehannet other wise than reason and
honor would. Tha^ the lady Rossillo^ said ye now Flor^nce will suffer their
company in all honor and right, thus these ladies rode forth talkyng til they
came to the port noyre, where as they were.iiii days in great feast and joy,
and there eueri day Gouernar talked of his marriage and passed the time in all
honor with his lady Iehannet, and the master in like wise with his lady Margaret
and said how that it was good to serve such a lord and such ^ lady yt so
hyely rewarded their servants and friends, and by that time duke Phylyp was
returned fro the kings court and brought with him the letters pate^tes of the
kings and there she delivered to gouernar and to the master the said letters,
than duke Phylyp said to Florence* madame the king your fader desires you to
make as great haste as ye can to ye cite of Argence so yt ye may be there on
mondaye next coming, for there the king will be ready against your coming,
than Florence made her ready, and on ye next morning betymes departed, and all
her noble company with her, and did so much by her iourneys yt at last she was
wtin the sight of the hye walls and toures of ye cite of Argence, tha^ the
king Emendus when he knew of their coming he called all his barons to mount
on their horses, and the king Alexander and the king of valefou^de and the
king of Ismaelyte and such knights of the king of mormalles as was a byden
wtin the court till such season as the king had purueyed for them a new
king, and all the people of the cite of Argenton went out to mete Florence
Arthur ^ their lady Margaret, and the people of the land of mormall came to
Gouernar and received him as their lord and king and did to him homage, than
they desired to see their new lady and queen. Who as than was in the charyot
with Florence apparayled in vestures ryall, and when Florence knew their desire
she caused her to be taken out of the chariot and set on a goodli pa^fray to
thentent that every man might se her, and so than they were glad to se her,
for she was a right fair and a goodly lady and so they made to her reverence
and honor as to their ladi and queen, and the people of the land of Argenton
received master Steven for their sovereign lord. and specially sir Emery, and
in this wise they came to the cite of Arge^ce, than there m^t with them the
archbishop and al ye hole clergy of the cy^e, and every man to his power made
great feast and joy, than there alyght to Florence and al her kings and
queen's, dukes and dutchesses, earls and cou^tesses lords and ladies, knights
and damoiselles than the noble king Eme^dus came out of his palais, and
received them right honorably every person after their estate than there began
great feast and joy, and so went up to the palace and there this noble company
were together in great joy and tryumpe.

How Arthur wedded ye fair Florence daughter to the mighty king Emendus with
great honor and triumph, and king Gouernar wedded the fair Iehannet, and
master Steven wedded the fair lady Margarete of A^genton all in one day and
one hour. Capitulo.C.xii.


When that Arthur saw so noble a seygnory and company were assembled together he
went to king Emendus and said, sir and it like your grace there is now in this
cite assembled ^yght hie and noble people, for here is now.vi. kings.vi. dukes
and.x. earls beside other lords and knights, wherefore sir may it please your
grace to keep open court for a certain space, for I believe verily the^ was
never seen in one day so many n^ble men assembled togider. As god help me
sone quod the king I am co^tente and so shall it be, therefore make ye
puruayau^ce therefore as ye shall think it b^st for you^ honor a mine, and I
will yt ye wedde Florence my daughter here in this cite, and Gouernar Iehannet,
and the master the lady Margaret. Sir quod Arthur in ye name of god all this
shall be done according to your commandment, sir king Al^xander shall abide
and be lodged here with ^ou in the palace, and my lord and fader the duke of
brytayne and all ye other kings and princes shall be well l^dg^d in the cite in
noble and fayr^ houses, and than Arthur made the t^mpl^ to be apparayled for
himself to be mary^d in, and the ^bb^y of saynct Ge^mayne for Goue^nar, than
there were I^g^leis, gest^rs, and mynst^elles gadered together to a great
nombre so yt they made great myrthe and joy in every part of the cite, so
that there was never seen none such before in no place, than Hector caused a
fair quintayne to be pyght up in the mids of the cite, and thereat ran these
young knights brekynge and sheueringe of their speres, and some spoke of
making of a tou^nay, than was the dolphyn mounted clean arm^d holding a
great and a mighty spear in his hand, and the same time the king E^endus, the
king Alexander and Florence, the duke of brytaine and Arthur were lokyng out at
the windows of the palais, and al other kings and princes were in likewise
beholding the lusty knights breking of speres in every street of the cite
against ye quyntaynes that there were made and ordained, and therwyth the
dolphyn ran at the chief quintayne, and gave thereon such a stroke yt he claue
the shield yt hanged thereon clean a sonder* and brake his spear all to sheuers
and so passed forth and kept his course, and he was greatly praised of all the
princes and barons, ladies and damoyselles, and they demanded who it was, and
it was showed the^ how it was one of the fresh lords, whereof many of that
country had great despyte, and spak^ thereof in great displeasure, and at last a
knight of ye country of Sorolois who was called sir Bertrand of the toure s^id
to his fellows, lords and felawes I sewe. yt these frenshe men that be now
here in this country be of great pride and of fyerse cou^tenau^ce, and by the
oc^asio^ of them we are reputed of the less valor, for we may here well how
generally they be praised, therefore shame have they yt will suffer it any
le^ger, wherefor^ let us take a to^rnay against the^, and tha^ we shall know
what they ca^ do. In the name of god so let it be said diverse other. So therwt
water was brought into the hal and the tables laid, than to the court there came
kings dukes, earls, barons, and knights fro al parts, so thankyng Emendus,
king Alexander, and the duke of Britain sat togider at one table, and all the
other kings sat one against another, and every man after his estate, and there
they were right ryche^y served, and when dinner was done and the tables taken
away, some went into the chambres and beheld the ladies dau^ce and some went
and looked out at the fair windows. And tha^ sir Bertra^de, sir Angele an
other knight the^.ii. went sporting togider and spoke of the taking of this
^ournay against the frenshe men, and they found sir Cleme^so^ and sir Perdicas
lenyng in a window, and tha^ they demanded of sir Bertrande whereof he and his
felaw did talk. And he answered and said how yt it was of the turnay. And
when sir Clemenson hard their minds he was well of the same accord and said*
let us go to duke Gouber^ of ylaumes and know of him wheder he will be of ye
same mind, so tha^ they went to the duke. And when he saw them he smyled and
said, welcome be ye sir knights, what tidinges is th^^ with you. Verily sir
quod Bertrande we say yt we would feign know what people these fresshemen be
with their swerdes, it is said how that they did bear them self valiauntly at
the blau^che toure against the emperor, how be it we know it not, for we were
not there present, therefore sir we are in mind to make a tournay against them,
and we would know your mind wheder ye will be on our side or not. And wha^ the
duke Gou^erte hard their minds it pleased him right well and said, let us go
to king Eme^dus and desire grant of him for this tournay, and so they al went
togider and entered into the chamber where as king Emendus and king Alexander of
malogre and (...) the other earls of france were, there was also Hector duke of
orgoule and the dolphin of v^en, and the lord Beauieu, the marshal of myrpois,
and the lord d^ la lou^de. Than the duke Goub^rt^ ^^id to king Emendus, sir
behold here this dol^hyn who truly is a gentyl knight, and verily he made
yesterday afayre course at a quintaine whereof he was gretely praised, and not
without a good cause, and he has thereby sir quyckened so the hearts of the
knights of this your country so yt they have a great desire to make a turnay
here in this cite if it please you to give us leave, and si^ we would be right
glad and joyous ^f it would please some of these fre^she lords and knights
to come forth and play them with us in this tournay, sir we would take it for
great love, and pray the^ thereof right hertely. Verily sir quod the king of
malogre we shall not fail them for so little a thing, if it please them let it
be done to morrow next. And so be it quod sir Bertra^de. In the name of god quod
king Emendus we will yt it shall be to morrow, for to morrow we will make the
solempnysacyon of the weddyng of Arthur and of my daughter Florence and of
Gouernar and Iehannet, and of the master and the lady Margarete, but the
fourth day after I am content yt this tournay be done. well quod king Alexander
it shall be as it pleases you Than the duke Goubert, sir Bertra^de and their
company departed fro the king and went down into the palace, and there they
showed to all the other knights of their country how yt they had taken a
tournay against the fren^^e men to beholde^ the fourth day after ye m^riage,
and so there were to the nombre of.v.M. that promised to turnay togider of one
part against the frenshe men, and made their auauntes how yt they would bear down
to the earth all the frenshe men and win al their horses. So this day there was
great feast and joy throughout al ye palace till it was night, so every man
that went to their restes till the next morning. The next morning betimes king
Eme^dus and all other kings and noble lords did rise, tha^ the king caused
Arthur to be apparailed in vestu^es ryal like a kyng^ he had on a kyrtel of
flami^g grene like an emeraude and a mantel of scarlet furred with ermynes and so
he stood before al ye kings with a fresh lively color, and he was byg and hyer
by the head tha^ any other, and there was hold before him by.iii. great lords a
rich crown of gold a septer royal and a naked sword, in sygnifyeng that he
was chief cha^pyo^ of all the realm, and al ye appertains to the crown of
Soroloys, tha^ ye duke his fader beheld hi^ well and ye water dashed into his
eye^ for joy that he had to se his sone in the great honor, tha^
tharchebisshop was ready in his po^tificalibus to do thobseruau^ce, and so with
great noise of minstralsy Arthur was rially brought to church, and than
Florence was apparailed like a great queen as she was, crowned with gold, and
the queen of orqueny went on her one side, and the queen of Asmaelite on her
other side somewhat behind her, and al other queen's dutchesses cou^tesses and
ladies came after her, and the king Alexander and the king of orqueney her cosyn
led her to church, and there arthur married her with great joy, and there was
so great f^est joy and brute made ye none could sca^t here other because of
the noise of the instruments. Also Gouernar was in the abbay of S. Germans
apparailed like a king, and with him was duke Philip* the dolphin and Hector,
and all the barons of mormall and there he wedded Iehannet with much great joy
and pleasure. And also the ge^tyl master was fresshely apparailed like ye sone
of a king, he was always free and sweet of heart with a smylyng countenance and
a gracious clerk above al other, and also right good and a valiau^t hardy
knight and with him there was the king of valefounde his fader who had right
great joy when he saw his son gentle and so gracious, there was also with
him sir Neuelon, sir Brysebar, sir Morant, and sir Rowlande of bigor, tha^ the
master wedded the fair lady Margarete with great joy and triumph, and wha^
his wedding was done he mounted on a great courser, and a mantel of grene
about him, and the king his fader by him, and other knights to the no^bre
of.v.C. and such noise of minstral^^ before him as though all the world should
have riuen asonder, and in that wise he came to the court of king Eme^dus, and
also there came king Gouernar to the court after y^ he was wedded with great
joy and mirth, than there was made the gretest joy and feast yt could be
devised, and ye master kept his feast at sir Emeries, and Gouernar at thabbey
of S. German and Arthur kept the court in ye palace, and this feast endured a
hole month, thus Arthur lay ye night with the gentle Florence, and the same
night engendered on her a fair sone whom the king Alexander did hold over the
font, and was named Alexander after his name, the which child was afterward
emperor of ynde the more and of Constantinoble as ye shall here more plainly
here after.

How the frensshe knights, and those of Soroloys, of Argence, of Orqueney, of
Mormal, of Ismaelyte, of Valefou^de, and of Sabary did tournay together whereof
Arthur and Gouernar had the honor. Capitulo.C.xiii.


THe fourth day after the marriage during the feast, duke Goubert, sir
B^rtrande, sir Clemenson, and sir Perdycas went to king Alexander and desired
him to remember the tournay yt they had enterprysed, and with the words Arthur
came to them, than king Alexander answered and said. Fair lords in gods
name let it be done to morrow, than he did send for all y^ earls barons and
knights of France and showed them of the tournay to be holden the next day
whereof they had great joy, and every man commanded that their harneys should
be made ready against the next morning, and than the tidinges sprad over all the
city how that ye frensshe men should tournay against the knights of that
country who were in ^o^bre.x. against one frensshe man And when Arthur
understood yt he sent for Gouernar, and when he was come to him he drew him
apart and said, friend to morrow shall be the tourney against our men, wherefore
we ought to keep and defend them, wherefore we must advise us how we shall do,
for I se the knights of this country have great envy at th^se french knights,
and they are.x. times as many as our people be, wherefore I doubt me that our
knights should have some vylany, and I had rather dye than su^^re yt therefore
I shall show you what we shall do, when the tourney shall be to morrow begone* I
shall come to your lodging as pryuely as I can, and there ye shall abide me, and
tha^ we will arm us both in strange harnes, to thentent that we should not be
known and tha^ we will go to the turney and help our knights, for I think
they shall have great need of us, and Hector and the dolphin shall be in the
first front and if I can, duke Phylyp, the master and Brysebar shall not turney
against our knights, because they have been in france, and have had there
right good chere and as for all the remenant I care not for. as for them they
be ou^e friends and loathe I were to displese them, keep secret this matter yt
no man know thereof, for I will that we do this as couer^ly as we can. In the
name of god so be it quod Gouernar, and so every man drew to his rest for that
day, and the next morning betimes, every man rose and so went and herd mass,
and after took a so^ in wine Than the knights ran to their harnes on every
side, than horns and trompe^s began to sown in every street of ye city and
than duke Goubert and al his company were ready aparailed and so issued into the
field. Than king Alexander did arm him and al his company. Than Arthur came
to king Emendus and with him was the king of orqueney, than Arthur said, sir
the knights of this your country are.x. times as many as are these french
knights, and sir they are of such condicyons that they will never recu^e back
to die therfo^e, sir I know not the minds of th^se your knights, for if they
thin^ to overcome them and seek therefore it ca^ be none other wise but y^ many
shall dye in the quarrel, sir me thinks ther^ore y^ it were well done yt I
should cause be armed.v. hundred knights and take them with me to keep ye none
ill should be done In the name of god quod king Emendus so be it than departed
Arthur for he had that he desired, than he took with him sir Brysebar and sir
Tercelin his n^uew and did shi^ the chamber door after them, than he said too
sir Brisebar, sir I love you and take you of my pre^y counsel, it is so there
be many knights against our french men, for I se well they are fa^re over
matched, wherefore I will go aid them wherefore I will have sir Terceli^ a^med in
my harneys, for he is nigh of the same bygnes yt I am of, and he shall take with
him v. hundred knights w^l armed and go too the turnay to keep the field that
no hurt shall be done, and no man shall know but yt it were I and ye sir Brisebar
and I will go to Gouernars lodging as privily as we can, and there he and I will
arm us in some strange harneys, to thentent yt no man shall know us, wherefore I
pray you dyscouer me not, so than sir Tercelyn was armed in Arthurs a^mur and
took with hi^ ^^ hundred and issued out of the City with gr^t noise of trompetes
and ^abouts, than duke Goubert said yonder comes Arthur to keep the feld to
thentent that we should do none outerage too these french men. So than in the
first front was duke Hector, the dolphin and the lord de la ^ound than all the
other kings and the duke of britain mounted on their horses to behold hold
the tourney, and also thither came the king of valefound and master Steven his
son with him, and.v. hundred knights in his company. And when the french men
were entered into the fyelde they were not the.x. part so many as the other
were. And when master Steven saw that he said to his fader, sir behold yonder
the knights of great hardynes seeing their countenaunces, for they be nothing
abashed for all that they be so far ouermatched, than Arthur went pryuely
to thabbey of saint Germans to Gouernar, and there they armed them in
strange harnes, and mounted on.ii. great coursers. And when the french men
were a renged, than Hector aduysed well sir Rowland of bygor who was coming
toward him than Hector rusht to his horse and encou^tred sir Rowland so rudely
yt he tombled ^uer his horse tail than king Emendus said to the duke of
brytayne, sir this beginning is on your part, than the dolphyn encountered at
one frusshe sir de la ^ound and sir Morand and ouerthrewe them both to the
earth, than the turney began to be maruailous fires but the french knights
were sore over matched, wherefore they endured much pain and at last Arthur and
Gouernar came toward the prese al disguysed, than Arthur said too Gouernar,
sir when ye se Hector bydde him keep us.ii. company but be well ware that he
know you not, with a good will sir quod Gouernar and so they rode forth fair a
softely, and wha^ duke Philip saw them con^yng he said to the king, sir behold
yonder comith two strange knights, it seems by their coming that they are
afraid of the first strokes, therwt they aproched to the tournay, than Gouernar
showed too Arthur sir Bertrand by whom the turnay was first begone, and also the
duke Gouberte who gave many great strokes with his sword, and there with Arthur and
Gouernar stood still and beheld them, than king Emendus said, I think
yonder.ii. knights doubt greatly these strokes. Ye sir they do wisely quod
duke Philip, therwt Gouernar ran at sir Ber^rand and b^re him cle^e out of his
sadel. Mary said the king I wene we have mocked yon^er knights wrongfully, we
shall se sone what each other knigh^ can do therwt Arthur ran at duke Goubert and
encountered him so rudely yt he sent both horse and knight all to there^ in a
hepe than he took his sword and laid on round about him so that he confounded
al yt ever he attained unto, and Gouernar was not behynd for his pa^^ Saint
mary quod the king who knows yonder knights, they seem to be the best
knights o^ all the world. Sir said the king of orqueney but yt I se Arthur
yonder without the field I would ^aye else plainly that it were he, by that
time Arthur had broken that great prese, than he espied where the do^phin and
Hector and the earl of mountbelial and.xxx. of their company were sore
ouerladen, for there we^e many on them, and by that time the duke Gouberte was
horsed new again, than Arthur ran at him and struck him too ru^ely on the
helm so that he was thereby in a trau^ce and his horse bare him all about the
^yelde, till at the last he came before king Emendus where as he was* and
than he came to him self again and said all the deuyl^es of hell take such a
carpenter, and he that first brought him into this country, than Arthur was
^ore handled in the prease, but than he russhed forth and charged so his sword
on these knights in such wise that he and Gouernar bet down all that ^uer was
before them. And when yt the french knights saw yt these.ii. knights did
help and did the^ so nobly, than they took on them so great hardines that they
confounded all that were before the^, than knights of the other part said let
us fle away for and we abide, de^h will follow thereby, and so than they fled away
on every side fro him, than the king and such as were in his company and al
other yt did behold the tourney had great marvel of the deeds of the.ii.
knights and master Steven perceived we^ the play of Arthur than he knew well
yt it was he and said softely to him self, a gentyl knight y^ cannest not
fail thy friends I ca^ not suffer any longer that ye should endure more
travail, than the master blewe such a blast yt there rose suddenly in the
tourney such a mist yt one could scant se an other, tha^ Arthur and Gouernar
departed as priuelye as they could and went to thabbey o^ S. Germain and so
than every man went to their own lodgi^ges, and as soon as they were unarmed all the french men went to king Alexa^ders lodging, and they went all ^ogider to
the kings court, and the king Emendus did welcome them and made to them ryg^te
great ^est and joy, and was right glad of the great prowes that he had lene in
them that day, than the king took king Alexander by the hand and demanded of
hi^ wha^.ii. knights that they were that so nobly did tourney on their part
that day and where that they were. And he answered and said, sir I can not tell
you what they be, nor where they are become. Tha^ the king inquired of all the
other if they could tell any ^poynges of them, and when the king saw that he
could have no knowledge of them he fell sodeynlye in and great s^udye, and as
he stood so musyng Arthur and Gouernar came to the court, than the king
enbraced them and demanded if they knew any thing of those two knights that
had ^oone so great prowess. And they answered that they knew nothing of
them. So than they washed and went to dinner, and after dinner they sporced
them every man as he lyked best, and as king Emendus saw these knights
spor^ynge of them in the palace, he remembered the two knights and again
demanded if any body knew them. And when the master saw the king in that
ca^e he ^ame to him and said fair and softe^y, sir believe certainly that these
^woo knights that ye desire so sore to known was Arthur and Gouernar. Than the
king had right great joy, and so went ^o them and enbraced with weeping
eye^ for joy, and said in open audyence, ^yth I have given my doughte^ to
Arthur I repent me not, for I could not have bestowed he^ more no^^y than on
him, for I could not have believed to have seen so much noblenes in one
knight as I have seen in him this day, than the king made so great feast and
^oye that it was ma^uayle to behold, thus ^n^u^^d the feast.xv. days. Than
all the ladies would return into france whereof Florence was right sorrowful,
how ^e it she did so much that they al^ abode other ^v. days and so than
they departed. Than king Emendus and Florence and al other lords and ladies
brought Gouernar and I^hannet into their land of mormall, and there they were
received with great joy and honor, and carried there.viii. dais

How after the marriage of Arthur the barons and ladies of france returned
into their own countries except king Alexander whom king Emendus kept still and
made unto him great ^here, and he tarried there so long till that Florence was
delivered o^ a fair son who king Alexander held on the fon^. Ca C.xiiii.
AFter that these.vii. days we refynysshed than the french lords ladies and
knights took their leave of king Emendus, who conuayed them.ii. days journey,
than king Emendus and Florence took their leave of the duke of brytayne and of
all the other lords and knights ladies and damsels, and Florence required
them to return into ye country again as shortly as they might, for she said
she would gladly have gone with the^ saving for keeping of company with the king
her fader, so each of them kyssed other and so departed, and Arthur and
Gouernar did convey them a little way, than the duke of brytayne said to
Arthur his son, good son think always to plese well the noble king Emendus,
and Arthur promised him so to do, and than he took his leave of the duches his
mother and kissed each other with weping ^yen, so than the duke and the duches
took their way homeward and Arthur and Gouernar returned to the king, and found
him and king Alexander together, for king Emendus had so entreted king
Alexander that he promised him to abide in his company for a certain space,
and so he abode there so long in great mirth and pleasure till at last the noble
queen Florence was brought a bed and had a fair son* And on a fair day as
king Alexander Arthur and Gouernar were sporting them by a river side, there
came a messenger riding to them a great pace and said to Arthur sir I have
brought you good tidings sir king Emendus does send you word how yt your noble
quen^ Florence is brought a bed of a fair son, wherefore he desires you to
come as fast as ye can* for ye king will desire king Alexander and king Gouernar
to hold him on the ^o^e, and wha^ Arthur herd yt he was righ^^ joyful and said
to the messe^ger, I give the forthy tidi^ges.C.ii. land where soever ye love
best to have it, tha^ the squier thanked hi^ righ^ humbly so than they rode
forth, and at last came to king Emendus who made right great joy of them, and with
great solemy^^ti^ the child was than brought to church and cristened and had to
his godfathers king Emendus, king Alexander and king gouernar, and was called
Alexander, and at their coming fro the church their was made such feast and
chere and revel y^ it was wonder to behold, for there was nothing yt could have
made king Emendus more joyful than he was, for he has than al his request of
god, for his prays was ever that Florence might have an h^yre ma^^ of her body
borne to sucsede in his realm, and this child was the most fa^^ child toward
of the world and well fou^med byg and mighty and he had on his sholdre a fair
cross as ^uddy as a fresh rose whereof king Emendus said th^^ it was a sign
that he should attain to much honor, for so he did after in de^^ for he was
or he died emperor of y^de the more and of constantynoble, and co^^^^red by his
prowes diverse other realms

How king Alexander returned into his country and led with him Arthur Gouernar*
Hector and master Steven, ^atye^ in britayne so long till Florence sent for
Arthur because y^ her father king Emendus was departed this ^i^e wherefore ^he
made great lamentacion. Capi. C.xv
When that king Alexander had been a long season with king Emendus he took
leave of him and returned into france, and there went with him Arthur,
Gouernar, Hector and master Steven, and within a while after that they were
departed king Emendus, what for the great Joy yt he had of his son and for
such labor as he took before he fell seek and lay in his bed, and as the
story says he lay but.vii. wekes but that he dyed, and King Alexander and
such other as went with him rode so long by their Iourneys till at last they
aryued in the land of brytayn, than a messenger went before to the duke and
showed how yt they would be with him on the monday next coming. And when the
duke herd that he was never so ioyefull before, than the duke sent for all his
lords and ladies of his country yt they should be with him at ye receyuynge of
his son Arthur and of such other as came with him, and so they did, and the
same day Arthur aryued there and was received with great f^est and joy the
which feast endured.viii. days, than all they co^uayed king Alexander in to
his own realm. It needs not to be demanded wh^der that Arthur and his
company had there good chere or not.

How Arthur was sent for because of the death of king Eme^dus, and how yt he was
crowned king of soroloys. Ca. C.xvi.
ARthur and his company were a great season with king Alexander and had right
good chere and on a day as he sat at the table there came in a messe^ger fro
his lady Florence, and he kneled down and arthur did arise and went to him and
received of him a letter sent to him fro Florence the which arthur incontinent
did break up, and therein he found how that the mighty king Emendus was dead,
whereof he and all that company made right great sorrow, than arthur desired king
Alexander yt he would go with him again into the realm of Soroloys, and he
granted him so to do with a right good heart, so tha^ incontine^t they
apparayled for their departing, and so mounted on their horses and did so much
by their Iourneys yt they aryued in ye realm of Sorolois, and there they
found Florence making right great sorrow for the death of the king her fader
but as soon as she saw her lord Arthur her heart revived, in such wise that
she forgot in a manner half her sorrow, than the next day the corpse was borne
to the church, and with great solempnite there he was ryally buried as it
appertayned to such a noble prince, than wtin a while after king Alexander
said that it was time to make purueyau^ce for Arthurs crownacion, than there
was sent for all the kings, dukes earls, barons, knights and squyers and al
their kin and friends and there came thither people without nombre, tha^
arthur was there with great triumph crowned with gold and took homage of
every man, and after his crownacion the feast endured.viii. days every man
making great joy save Florence who was still in great sorrow for the death of
her fader, and after this great feast and joy and that every man had made
homage to arthur for their kingedomes, dukedomes and baronies and for all their
lands, than every man departed into their own countries, and ever after
arthur, Gouernar Hector, and the master loved each other and held so fast
together that none of their enemies di^^^e never approach on none of them, and
so they used their lives in great honor and love, and peace and union was ever
between the^ and their subjects for as long as they lived there was never
none of that ever moved any war against them, thus arthur and Florence
reigned in great prosperity, ^rad and sore doubted of all the world, and did
many fair conquestes, for he conquered or he died.viii. realms and diverse
countries and rich seygnoryes, but he lived not long after

Here is devised how long that arthur lived* and how that he was buburied.
Cap. C.xvii.
THe history recounteth that the noble Arthur lived but.xxxii. year and tha^
he died, and the queen Florence whom he loved so well dyed for sorrow and so
they were both buried with great so^empnite, and laid both in the tomb with
king Emendus, on the which tomb there was wryte^ this epitaphe, here lies
the mighty king Eme^dus Arthur and Florence his wife who led so good life
together that they were never dyspleased either with other, and Gouernar, Hector
and the master made great sorrow for the death of Arthur and the young
Alexnader son to arthur, and to Florence was in the guydyng of king Gouernar,
of Hector, and of the gentle master Steven, who afterward was Emperor of
ynde and of Constantinoble, and thus ends the hystory of the valya^^te knight
Arthur son to the duke of Brytayne, and of the noble lady Florence daughter to
the mighty king Eme^dus king of the realm of Soroloys. And all those that
redeth or hereth this history I pray god send them bliss perdurable. Amen.

Here ends the hystory of Arthur of little Brytayne.
Imprynted at London in Powles church yeard at the sign of the Cock by
Roberte Redborne.


