By the Queen.
Forsmuch as upon the lamentable complaynt made unto the Queens most excellent
Majesty by sundry her loving subjects, the Clothiers of diverse parts of the
Realm, and of a multitude of other people maintained in their handlabours by
them: It appears that partly through the great death of sheep which of late
years has happened in sundry parts of the Realm, and partly through the
great abuse of some which have obtained (upon reasonable consyderations)
license to buy and sell wool within this Realm, who through their insatiable
greedines by abuse thereof, without any regard had to the great mischief that
thereby grows to the common wealth, have not only used in the beginning of
the year, and at other times, to engrosse and buy up great quantities of
wool, contrary to her Majesty's good and gracious meaning, whereupon the said
licenses were gra^nted: but in passing the bonds of their licenses, by buying
yearly greater quantity of wool then they ought to do, so that the
Clothiers can buy little or none, but such as is very course, or else as such
ertessiue prizes, as they can not make their principal thereof again: whereby
her Majesty understands, that without some restraynt of the said licenses
for some reasonable time, there shall follow great want to the Clothiers to
continue their trade, for mayntenaunce as well of themselves, as of great
multitudes of poor people living only under them, to the decay of diverse good
towns, which are cheefely mainteyned by the Clothiers. Therefore by the advice
of her Counsel, her Ma^^^^^^ strayghtly charge and commands, that from and
after the publication of this present Proclamation, no person, (other then such
as by the laws of this Realm are appointed and per^^tted shall upon pain of
her Majesty's displeasure and imprisonment during her pleasure, by him (...)
self, or by any other, either directly, or indirectly, by virtue of any their
special license, buy or ^^rgaine for any wools whatsoever, of the growing of
this Realm, or of Wales, at any time bef^e the feast of all Saints next
ensuing the publication hereof. And that all persons, having at this time any
grant from her Majesty, to license him or them to buy or sell wool, shall
within two months after the publication hereof, exhibit into her Court of
Exchequer the same grant, to be ^^^^lled there, whereby her Majesty may be
enfourmed of the contents thereof, and so as (when came shall be to remit the use
thereof) order may be taken how the same may be hereafter ordered and used.
Without such public damage to the Realm, as already has appeared: And if
the same stall not be presented to be enrolled within the said time, that then
the same shall not hereafter have place to be used. And for the better execution
hereof, her highness by the advice aforesaid, straightly ^^argeth and
commands all and singular Justices of the peace, Majors, Sheriffs, and
Bayliffes, not only to see this Proclamation truly executed, but also if any
person be justly accused before him (...) them for contemning or breaking this
Proclamation, or any part thereof, they shall commit such person to ward,
there to remain without bail or maynepryce, till her Majesty's pleasure be
further known. Moreover her highness, meaning to leave nothing undone that
may tend to the re^^esse of so great a mischief as were otherwise like to
ensue, has taken order that the company of the Merchants Staplers, that they
nor any of them (notwithstanding that by the statutes of this Realm, they be
permitted without limitation of time) shall not buy or bargayne, either
directly, or indirectly, for any wools growing within this Realm, until the
latter end of February next ensuing. And in case the said Company, or any of
them, shall contrary to the said order, presume to buy to bargain for any
wools: then her Majesty, upon notice given unto her privy Counsel, of the
persons that shall so offend, will cause the said parties to receive such
punishment, as shall be due for their contempt in that behalf.

Given at Hampton Court the xxviii. day of November 1576. in the xix. year of
her Majesty's most prosperous reign.
Imprinted at London by Richard Judge, Printer to the Queens Majesty.

Cum primilegio Regiae Maiestatis.


