By the Queen.
WHere it is ordained and provided by a statute made and established in the
Parliament holden at Westminster, the the viii. day of June in the xxviii.
year of the reign of the Queens Majesty's dearly beloved father, of famous
memory king Henry the eight, that the prices of al kind of wines, (that is to
say) of the Tonne, Butte, Pipe, Punchion, Hogshed, Tyerse, Barrel, Rundlet,
when it should be sold in gross, should be limited and declared by the Lord
Chauncelor of England, Lord Treasourer of England, Lord President of ye
said Kings most honorable Counsel, Lord privy Seal, and the two chief
Justices of either Bench, or five, four, or three of them, and that the same
should be sold according to the same prices so by them set and taxed, upon
pain and penalty contained in the said Act. forasmuch as the Lord Chauncelor
of England, Lord Treasourer of England, and the two L.chief Justices for
diverse considerations them moving, and according to the effect and meaning of
the said statute and Act, have in writing by their deliberate aduises upon
conference had with sundry persons thereto requisite, taxed, limited,
assigned, and appointed the prices of Gascoigne and french wines, to be sold
within this her highness Realm for this year following (that is to say)
Every Tonne of the best Gascoigne and french wines to be sold (the seller
bearing all the charges due and payable to her Majesty in her custom house)
after the rate and price of twelve pounds sterling and not above. The buyer
bearing all the said charges, after the price and rate of ix.li.vi.s.viii.d.
sterling the Tonne and not above. And every Pipe, Hogshed, Tyerse, Barrel,
Rundlette, and other vessels of the same several wynes to be sold in gross,
after their quantities according to the same rates and not above. And every
Tonne of Rochell and other small and thynne wynes to be sold (the seller
bearing all the charges due and payable to her Majesty in her custom house)
afer the price and rate of ten pounds sterling the Tonne, and not above. And
the buyer bearing the said charges, at vii.li.s.viii.d. sterling the Tonne, and
not above. And every Pipe, Hogshed Tierse, Barrel, Rundlet, and other vessels
of the same several wynes to be sold in gross after their quantities
according to the same rates (and not above.) The Queens most excellent
Majesty therefore strayghtly charge and commands a^l and singular her
loving Subjects, and others, putting any manner Gascoigne, French, Rochell, or
other small or thin wynes to sale within this her highness Realm, that they
ne any of them, in any manner of wise, by any craft, couen or private agreement,
shall sell any Gascoigne, French, Rochell, or other small or thynne wines,
otherwise then is above limited, upon pain to forfaite and pay such
penalties as be contained and expressed in the said statute, or in any other
statute made or ordained for the same. And moreover her highness pleasure and
commandment is, that all and singular Majors, Sheriffs, Bailiffes,
Constables, and other Officers, to whom it appertains, that they, and every
of them with diligence, cause and see that this her proclamation be put in due
execution, after the tenor of the same, and also according to another Act of
Parliament established in the Parliament above rehearsed, against such as will
refuse to sell their wines at prices taxed as is aforesaid, as they will
answer thereto at their perilles.

Given at our Manor of Grenewich the xxiiii. of November, in the two and
twentieth year of our reign.
Imprinted at London by Christopher Barker, Printer to the Queens Majesty.


