By the Queen. A proclamation to admonish all persons to forbear traffic
in the king of Spaynes countries, with other aduertisementes for aunsweryng of
a general arrest made in the low countries by the Duke of Alua.
THE Queens majesty lately understanding, that by a sudden commaun-dement of
the Duke of Alua, as governor in the low countries belonging to her majesty's
good brother the king of Spain, al manner her marchaunts and other her
subjects inhabytyng in the town of Andwerpe, were arrested and put under
guard of certain companies of soldiers, and their goods and marchaundizes
also seized, about the xxix. of the last month of December, and since that
time the like arrest is made generally in the said low countries: A matter
very strange, and heretofore in no time used betwixt the Crown of England
and the house of Burgondy, without some manner of former conference precedyng,
and intelligence had of the minds and intentions of the Princes them selves on
both sides. Whereupon her majesty has thought good, to give warnyng to all
her subjects that have any cause to traffic in any of the countries of the
said king, that they shall forbear the same, until further knowledge may
appear of the mind of the said king him self how he shall allow hereof:
which being known to her majesty, shall be notified to her said subjects.
And in the mean time, her majesty wylleth and commands all manner her
officers, of all to wnes, burghes, cities, ports, and all other landyng places
within any of her dominions, that they do cause all and every person borne
under any part of the obedience of the said king of Spain, or living in his
countries and professyng obedience to the said king, and their goods,
marchaundizes, stirs, and vessels, to be arrested and stayed, to be forth
coming and aunswerable, as well for the indemnitie of her majesty's subjects
already, without any just cause deteyned, as for other necessary consequencies:
and that also in all towns, havens, and dwelling places, where any merchants
borne or professyng the obedience of the said king, shall found to be
suspected for conuertyng or conueying of their goods, by any manner of fraud
or color of bargayne, from the arrest and seasure thereof: there the principal
officers of that town or place, with assistaunce of others Justices of peace,
shall proceed to the inquisition thereof by all manner good means, and shall
commit to ward as well the parties, of what nation soever they be, that have or
shall be privy or aydyng to any fraudulent coloring, except they shall first
confess the same, as also the others that have so colored the same, and the
goods to be also put in safety. And yet because her majesty has no other
meaning herein, but to have the persons of the said kings subjects and their
goods put in safety by this arrest, for the preservation of her own good
subjects and their goods, and to be respondent for such other disordered
actions as may ensue of these so strange and hasty attemptes: she wylleth and
charge all manner her officers, ministers, and subjects, that no violence be
used to the hurt of the persons of any the said kings subjects by reason of
this arrest, without they shall by manifest wylfull resistaunce provoke the
same, neither that any spoil, waste, or damage be done to their goods and
marchaundizes, but only to cause them to be put in good guard and safety. And
if any of the said kings subjects shall challenge to be exempted out of this
arrest by reason they be denizens, her majesty in deed having no meaning to
impeach them thereof, and yet for the time not knowing how in like cases her
subjects being naturalized in the said kings countries, are or shall be used:
is pleased that the said persons being in deed denizens, shall but find
sufficient suerties to be forth coming, with their goods: and if they so
will not, then they shall be committed to the custody and guard of some other
English merchants, and due inuentories taken of their goods, until
knowledge may be had how her majesty's subjects be or shall be used on the
other part. And considering also her majesty understands that a number of
artificers and other fortes of people, have since the beginning of the late
inward troubles in the low countries, resorted hither into her realm for
auoydyng of the said troubles, as well for their consciences, as for the
dangers that properly follow such civil troubles: her will and pleasure is,
that in all places where such shall be found to be (being of honest and quiet
conversation) and except they shall be participiant to the coloring of other
merchants goods, the same shall not be molested either in their persons or
goods, otherwise then where to the officers of the place it shall so seem
needful, and there they shall give bonds one for another to be worth coming,
and suffer inuentozies to be n^^de of their goods.

Furthermore her majesty hearing by report, that the arrest of her subjects
on the other side the seas, should (...) upon a pretense, for staying of one
ship and three or four small barks, lately come into certain her ports of
^e^ Realm, wherein certain money was: has thought good briefly to notify
the circumstaunce of that pretense, whereby may be seen manifestly, that the
same is gathered without just cause, and the deuisers and promoters of the
(...), whosoever they were, to have proceeded bnorderly and unadvisedly. Her
majesty was first infourmed by her officers in certain her ports in the West
country of this Realm, that three or four small barks, called Zabras, were
come out of Spain into certain ports there, having in them a quantity of
money belonging to sundry merchants of Italy and the low countries, and
that diverse ships of France in warlike manner were upon the came coasts,
attending to surprise the said Spanishe bessels and treasure, if they should
pass to the seas, and that it was also to be feared, that they would enter
into the very ports, and take them away by force. Whereupon her maiesfie did
send strait commandment by special letters, to all the ports in those
West parts, that the merchants and owners of those vessels should have
knowledge thereof, and that they and all other the king of Spaynes subjects,
should be assisted and defended against the attemptes of the French, by all
means possible. After which done, the Spanishe ambassador here now resident,
made like request to have new order for mayntenaunce and assistaunce of the
said vessels and treasure against the said French, which was also granted
to him, and several letters pattentes to that effect were delivered to his
own messengers. And a while after this, he requiring of the Queens majesty,
to understand her pleasure, whether she would be content that the owners and
conducters of the said treasure might be either conducted by sea or by land
to Dover, pretending the money to appertain to the king his master: her
majesty granted to him, that which soever of these two ways he would
desire, should be forthwith directed for him, whereof he thanked her
majesty, saying that he would stay until he might send into the low
countries, and have word from the Duke of Alua, which of those two ways he
would have ^t transported. In the mean time, her majesty was infourmed that
the French had secretly in the night entered into one of her havens in the
West, where the said treasure was, and had attempted the surprise thereof, but
were only repulsed by such force as her majesty's officers had in readiness
for that purpose: a matter notorious to all the parts where the said ships
were assaulted, and well reported also to the ambassador. Whereupon,
considering how doubtful and there with chargeable a matter it was, from time
to time to preserve the same lying abiode in the havens: it was thought best
even for the honor of the Realm, that the said treasure should be taken en
land, and there safely preserved in the sight and presence of them that had
the charge thereof, without touching or withdrawing any part of the same. And
being then certaynely known to belong unto merchants, it was also thought,
after the due preservation thereof from the peril of the seas, not an
unreasonable motion, nor against the honorable usage of princes in their own
dominions, to treat with the owners with their good contentation, and not
otherwise, to borowe it or some part thereof, upon like good assurance and
conditions, as her majesty has oftentimes borrowed of other merchants,
subjects to the said king in his own low countries, and as other princes
have done lately in the very like cases. The like manner was used to wards a
ship lying near Southampten laden with wolles, and wherein also treasure was,
and in apparaunt danger of Frenchmen houering upon that coast, who had made
great offers to the officers there, only to withdraw their defense: for
which purpose, her majesty sent her captain of the Isle of Wight for
security, to have the same likewise preserved from the French, and to be
taken on land: as if it had not ben, the French had taken it within four and
twenty hours after, which also was known to belong unto merchants, and so
is to be notoriously proved. And before the said captain had taken care to
see the same preserved, it is known what sums of money were offered to him,
to have only left the ship wherein the woolles were, after the money taken on
land, remaining to be undefended: which the said captain would not suffer,
but armed certain soldiers to very great charges by sea, which presently yet
do continue to guard the said ship. And during this time, whylest this was in
ordering, the Spanishe ambassador came to her majesty about the.xxix. of
December, bryngyng with him from the Duke of Alua a short letter, only of
credence, and thereupon required, that the vessels and money stayed in the
ports might be put to liberty, as belonging to the uyng his master. To whom
her majesty answered, that she had in her doings (if it were the kings)
showed him great pleasure to save it from the French, she wing him therein some
particularities of the diligence of her officers, but she was infourmed that it
belonged to merchants, and herein within four or five days she should
understand (...) be herein done, that in reason should miscontent (...) ^er
good (...) or sieve days at his next coming. And so be (...), not (...) but to
allow of the a^^^were. And her majesty in the mean time having according to
(...) expectation (...) from the west country, whereupon she intended to have
satisfied the ambassador at his (...) (which she (...) to her appointment) not
only for the delivery of the said ships and trea^^^, for such portion (...)
might appear to belong to the said king: but also to have performed her
first o^^^e to (...) con^^uct for the some by land or by sea. The first
intelligence brought to her majesty (without any (...) of the ambe^^adour)
was, that all her subjects, goods, marchaundizes, and ships, were arrested,
taken, (...) at (...) as (...), the very same present xxix. day that the
ambassador was with her majesty, so (...) salleth out to every man's
understanding, that howesoeuer her majesty had then satisfied the ambassador
(...) same xxix. day, all her subjects and their goods had been nevertheless
arrested, as they were at Indwerpe the (...) day. Whereupon her majesty now
leaves it to the indgement of all the world, to consider not only whether
(...) a pretense was sufficient to cause so sudden, so violent, and so
general arrest to be made with force, in such ma^^^, and at the time it was:
but also in whom any default shall be found, whatsoueuer may follow hereof, her
ma^^^ having had no intention to miscontent the king of Spain, nor to possess
any thing belongyng to di^ ^ub^^^s, otherwise then with their good will, upon
just, reasonable, and usual con^^tions. And thus much^ her (...) has thought
convenient to notify to all persons, for testimony of her sincerity, and for
maintenance of tractions, whatsoever they shall be, whereunto she may by this
means be provoked.

At Hampton Court the vi. of January, the xi. year of her majesty's reign, and
the year of our Lord. 1568.
God save the Queen.
Imprinted at London in Powles Church yard by Richard Jugge and John Cawood,
Printers to the Queens Majesty.

Cum priuilegio Regiae Maiestatis.


