By the Queen.
Where it is ordained and provided by a statute made and established in the
Parliament holden at Westminster the viii. day of June, in the xxviii. year of
the Reign of the Queens Majesty's dearly beloved father of famous memory
Ring Henry the eight, that the prices of all kind of wines, (that is to say) of
the Tun, Butte, Pipe, Punchion, Hogshed, Tyrse, Barrel, Rundset, when it
should be sold in gross, should be limited and declared by the Lord
Chauncelor of England, Lord Treasourer of England, Lord President of the said
Kings most honorable Counsel, Lord priurie Seal, and the two chief Justices
of either Bench, or five, four, or three of them: (...) that the same should
be sold according to the same prices so by them set and taxed upon pain and
pe^^^^^^ contained in the said Act: Forasmuch as the Lord Keeper of the great
Seal of England, the (...) of England, and the two Lord chief Justices for
diverse considerations them moving, (...) according to the effect and meaning
of the said Statute and Act, have in writing by their delibe^^^^ ad^^^ts,
upon conference had with sundry persons thereto requisite, texed, limited,
assigned and ap^^^^ted the prices of Gascoigne and french Wines to be sold
within this her Highness Realm (for this year following:) that is to say,
every Tun of the best Gascoigne and french Mines to be sold (the sell(...)
bearing all the charges due and payable to her Majesty in her Custom house)
after the price and rate (...) ^iii.s.iiii.d sterling and not above: (the buyer
bearing all the said charges) after the price and rate (...) sterling the
Tun, and not above. And every Pipe, Hogshed, Tyerse, Barrel, Rundlet, and
other (...) of the same several Mines to be sold in gross after their
quantities according to the same rates, (...) not above. And every Tun of
Rochel and other small and thin Wines to be sold (the seller bearing all
charges due and payable to her Majesty in her Custom house) after the price
and rate of nine Pounds thirteen shillings four pence sterling the Tun, and
not above: and the buyer bearing the said charges at vii. li. sterling the
Tun, and not above: and every Pipe, Hogshed, Tyerse, Barrel, Rundlet (...)
other vessels of the same several wines, to be sold in gross after their
quantities according to the same (...) and not above. The Queens most
excellent Majesty therefore straightly charge and comman^eth all and
singular her loving Subjects and others, putting any manner Gascoigne, French,
Rochel, or (...) small or thin wines to sale within this her highness Realm,
that they, ne any of them in any manner of wise by any crast, couin, or private
agreement shall sell any Gascoigne, French, Rochel or other small (...) then
wines, otherwise then is above limited upon pain to forfeit and pay such
penalties, as be contained (...) expressed in the said Statute, or in any other
Statute made or ordained for the same. And moreover* ^er Highness pleasure and
commandment is, that all and singular Majors, Sheriffs, Bayliffes, Con^^bles,
and other Officers to whom it apperteineth, that they, and every of them with
diligence, cause and (...) that this her Proclamation be put in due execution
after the tenure of the same: And also according to an other Act of Parliament
established in the Parliament above rehearsed against such as will refuse to
^ell their wines at prices taxed as is aforesaid, as they will answer thereto
at their perils.

Yeuen at our Manor of Richemonte, the xxiiii. day of November, in the xxi.
year of our Reign.
Imprinted at London by Christopher Barker, Printer to the Queens Majesty.


