By the Queen.
THE Queens most excellent Majesty, being credibly enfourmed that many
vagaboundes, roges, idle persons, and maisterlesse men, having nothing to live
on, do daily resort to the Cities of London and Westminster, and the Suburbs
of the same, and also to the Borough of Southwarke, and other Villages and
Towns near adioynyng to the said Cities and Borough, and there are suffered
to live very disorderly: by occasion whereof, many robberies, and fellonies,
and other horrible crimes and offenses be committed and done, to the high
displeasure of almyghtie God, and to the great hurt of her good and loving
Subjects. The chief occasion whereof, seems to be the want of the good
execution of the good Laws and Statutes, made for the punishment of such
maisterlesse men, idle, and v^grant persons wherefore her Majesty, myndyng with
some severity presently to have the said good Laws (...) Statutes already
provided against such persons, to be duly put in execution, has thought good
by this her Proclamation, to notify the same her hyghnes pleasure, to al her
loving Subjects: and therefore does ^^^^^^ly charge and command, al persons
that by the Laws of this Realm may be taken for roges or vagaboundes, and al
idle persons, and maisterlesse men, not having wherewith to live on, nor living
by any lawful labor or occupation, and being her natural borne Subjects,
that they and every of them, do within two days next after the publishyng of
this Proclamation, depart and avoid themselves from the said Cities of
London and Westminster, and Suburbs of the same, and from the Borough of
Southwarke, and all other Towns and Villages within seven miles compass of
the said Cities and Borough, and from thence to repay^ to the countries and
places where they were borne, and there to tarry and abide in some lawful
work and exercise, as they ought to do, upon the pains and penalties limited
and expressed in the Laws and Statutes provided against such offenders. And
her Majesty's further pleasure and express commandment is, that the Mayor,
Aldermen, and Recorder of the said City of London, and all Justices of Peace
within the Counties of Middlesex, Kent, Surrey, and Essex, and specially al
those Justices that be within the limittes aforsayde, that they and every of
them, as they will avoid her highness displeasure, do from time to time, as
occasion shall serve, cause good watch to be set, and search to be made, in all
places where they shall think convenient, for the apprehendyng, arrestyng, and
taking of al such idle vagarant persons, and maisterlesse men, and that they
cause the same with all speed to be imprisoned, and duly punished, according
to the tenor and effect of her Majesty's Laws and Statutes in such cases
provided, without any tolleration or favor whatsoever to be showed unto any of
them. And her Majesty does also specially charge and command the said
Mayor, Aldermen, and Recorder of London, and all Justices of Peace, Bailiffes
of Liberties and Fraunchises within the said Cities, Towns, and limittes, that
they and every of them, within the limittes of their jurisdictions, do from
time to time cause good search to be made, as well in all common tablyng houses,
Innes, Alehouses, and typplyng houses, as also in all bowlyng Alleyes, and other
places where any gamyng or play is used and frequented, and there to apprehende
and take such suspected persons, being maisterlesse men, of evil name and fame,
not having wherwithal to mainteyne their idle life, and the same so apprehended
and taken, to commit to prison, there to remain, until they shall receive such
punishment and correction, as by the Laws and Statutes of this Realm is and
shall be due unto them. And her highness is further pleased and contented, that
the Mayor of the said City of London, shall have power and authority from
time to time, to proclaim and publishe this present Proclamation in all places
within the said City and Suburbs, so often as to him shall seem needeful
and convenient.

Given at her Majesty's honor of Hampton Court, the.xiiii. day of December.
1576. in the.xix. year of her highness reign.
Imprinted at London by Richard Judge, Printer to the Queens Majesty.

Cum priuilegio Regiae Maiestatis.


