The copy of the queens highness commission.
ELIZABETH by the grace of God, Queen of England, France, and Ireland,
defender of the faith. etc.
To our trusty and well-beloved A.B.C.D. and to every of you, greeting.
Whereas in the Parliament holden at Westminster, in the.xxxiii. year of the
reign of our late dear Father of worthy memory king Henry the eight, one
act or statute was then and there made, for the mayntenance of Artillery, and
debarring of unlawful games. By the which good statute, amongst many other
things, it was provided, that the Fathers, Governors, and Masters of the
youth of this our Realm, should in diverse and sundry sorts train and bring
up their youth in shooting in the long bow, and should have for that purpose
several bows and arrows, in number and quantity accordying to their ages and
years, upon such pain and penalty as is expressed in the said statute, as
by the same statute more at large it does and may appear. And being given to
understand, that for lack of due search whether every person and persons have
bow and arrows, according to the tenor of the said act, the commendable
exercise and use of shooting, and the rest of the good devises and provisions
contained in the said statute, is therefore in the most parts of this our
Realm utterly forgotten, and not accomplished. And to thentent that shooting
may be used and exercised within this our Realm as in times past, and unlawful
games suppressed and put out of use, we have thought it convenient for good
consyderations us specially mouyng, to nominate, assign, and appoint you to be
our Commissioners, geuyng unto you and every of you, and to al other officers
aucthorised by the said statute, full power and authority by virtue of these
presents, in our name, not only from time to time as often as need shall
require, to make due and lawful search in every place within our County of S.
as well within liberties as without, as well for such as use unlawful games, as
also for such as keep houses or alleys for unlawful games: but also whether
every person for him self, his servants, and other youth in his or their
several houses, have sufficient furniture and provision of bow and arrows,
and have and do use and occupy the same, according to the true meaning of the
said statute.

And to thend the same may be the better understood and known, our pleasure
and commandment is, that al such bows and arrows that every person ought
to have by the order of the said statute, ye shall cause the parties to bring
to some convenient place or places, within the parish where such parties
dwell, by the discretion of you our said Commissioners, or any of you, there to
be viewed and seen by you our said Commissioners, or any of you. Upon which
search, view, and examination, if you or any of you our said Commissioners,
or any other our officer abouesayde, shall find any person or persons, either
not furnished with bow and arrows, or not vsyng the same, as by the said
statute is limited and appointed, or any person or persons using unlawful
games, or keeping houses or alleyes for unlawful games, contrary to the meaning
of the said statute: that then our pleasure is, that you our said
Commissioners, and every of you, by gentle admonition shall do your good
endeavor to cause a reformation to be had therein, that the exercise of shoting
may be used and continued by as many of our good subjects of every estate, as
can or may use the same. And if you can not by gentle admonition and order,
cause the offenders to refourme them selves in the premises: then our
pleasure is also that you, or any two of you, shall cause the names and dwelling
places of such offenders to be noted and certified unto the Lord
Chauncelour, or Lord keeper of the great seal of England for the time being,
to the intent we may cause such order and direction to be taken and had therein,
as by the laws and statutes of this our Realm is provided in that behalf.
Wherefore we will and command al and singular our officers, ministers, and
subjects of our said County, as well within the liberties, as without, that
they and every of them be aydyng, helpyng, and assistyng you our said
Commissioners, and every of you, in the due execution of this our Commission,
as they and every of them tender our pleasure, and will answer for the contrary
at their perils. In witness whereof. etc.

Witness our self. etc.
God save the Queen.
Imprinted at London in Powles Churchyard, by Richard Judge, printer to the
Queens Majesty.

Cum priuilegio Regiae Maiestatis.


