By the Queen.
A Proclamation declaryng the untruth of certain malicious reports devised
and publisshed in the Realm of Scotland.
THE Queens Majesty of this Realm of England, understanding that there are
publicshed sundry matters lately in Scotland, contrary to all truth and
meaning of the said Queen, as it appears maliciously devised to blemishe
the honor and sincerity of her Majesty, and to bring Therle of Murrey in
hatred with his own friends being native good Scottishe men: has thought it
good to let it be openly notified to all persons, both English and Scottishe
that are disposed to hear the truth, that howsoever it be said or written by
any person of what state soever the same be, that any secret practice has been
made betwixt her Majesty and Therle of Murrey, whereby it should be conuented
and accorded that the Queen of Scotts son should be delivered into her
Majesty's hands, to be nourished in England as she should think good, and
that the Castles of Edinburgh and Stryueling should be in English men's
keeping, and that the Castle of Du^bretton should be besieged and taken, and
rendered to her Majesty's behoof, and that Therle of Murrey should be declared
legittime to succeed to the crown of Scotland after the deceasse of the
young prince or king without barnes, and in that case Therle of Murrey should
acknowledge to hold the Realm of Scotland in fee of her Majesty as Queen of
England: Her Majesty as she is and by Gods grace intends during her life to
be a prince of honor, and a maintayner of truth, does in the word of a
Queen, let all persons to know, that all and every these foresaid things
above specified, are altogether false and untrue, and are devised by persons of
inere malice and rancour, being disposed to nourishe factions and discordes,
and hating the good quietness and concord betwixt the two Realms of England
and Scotland. For this her Majesty likewise assures all persons, that as of
these untruths and falsehoods there was never conuention nor accord betwixt
her Majesty and the said Earl, nor betwixt him and any her ministers to her
Majesty's knowledge: So was there not at all any conuention or pact, either by
word or writing, made betwixt her Majesty and the said Earl, for any thing,
since his last coming into this Realm, although it is true that some motions
have been made, as well by Therle of Lennox and the Lady his wife, being, as it
is known, parents to the late murdered father of the prince, as by others,
that if hereafter it should be scene that the said prince could not continue
in safety in Scotland from thattemptes of the murderers of his father, and
other his mortal enemies, that then he might be nourished in England under
the custody of such as now have the charge of him, and are known to have
most tender care of him. But hereof was there never any manner of conuention or
accord, neither yet was there heard by her Majesty any word of the Earl of
Murrey, or of any in his company, to allow of any removing of the same prince
out of Scotland, or out of the charge of them that now have the custody of
him. And likewise her Majesty assures all manner of persons, that she
esteems all other reports false, that are said also to be made of any league
and intelligence betwixt the Earl of Murrey and the Earl of Hertforde, with
other such like improbable false devises and slanders. All which her Majesty
would have to be of all honest persons both English and Scottishe that love
truth and hate falsehood, to be esteemed for false, and to have been sediciously
and maliciously invented, devised, and publisshed. Finally, this her Majesty
wills all persons to understand, that in this cause between the Queen of
Scotts and her son, there has lacked no good meaning, nor yet does, to have
had the same well ended with quietness for the whole nation of Scotland, and
without any prejudice to the crown of Scotland, or to the dignity thereof:
The let and impediment of which good end, her Majesty would all persons to
understand, not to have come of her or her counsel, as hereafter shall more
manifestly appear.

Given at Hampton Court the xxii. of January. 1568. the xi. year of her
majesty's reign.God save the Queen.
Imprinted at London in Powles Churchyard by Richard Judge and John Cawood,
Printers to the Queens Majesty.

Cum priuilegio Regiae Maiestatis.


