By the Queen.
WHereas the Queens most excellent Majesty by her Highness Proclamation in
November last, did appoint and limit the reading of the Lotterie within her
City of London this x. of January. And by the same did give straight charge
and commandment to all and singular her officers, ministers and subjects
having therein to do, to prepare themselves accordingly, as by the said last
Proclamation may appear. Her Majesty perceives, that of some mistrust or
doubtful interpretation of the proceedings in the said Lotterie, the first
intention (to have the collection and adventures to have amounted to a certains
mass and sum of money, (where with a great number the adventurers might have
been largely benefited, according to a Chart thereof published in August,
1567.) is not, nor can not be accomplished: Whereupon it is thought meet
(without any further expectation or delay) to proceed to the publishing of the
said Lotterie, for so much as is already collected, and to cause every
Aduenturer to be truly, indifierently, and ratably answered, according to the
mass collected, without any indirect dealing toward any person. And to the
intent that every person having any interest herein, may understand what in
reason to expect for his Adventure. It is to be understand to all Adventurers
in the same Lotterie, that the very certain sum of money collected, and
chargeable to the same, is a twelfth part of the whole mass first by the said
Chart appointed, and no more, as by due certificat and good account thereof (by
her Highness Commissioners and Treasurers, being persons of special credit
in that behalf) made, her Majesty is certainly informed. Whereupon all
Adventurers shall be duly answered of their Prises accordingly after the said
rate: That is to say, To him that shall win the best and greatest Lotte, the
sum of four hundredth and sixteen pounds, thirteen shillings and four
pence, which is the just twelfth part of five thousand pounds, before appointed
to have been given, if the whole sum had been collected. And so consequently
every person to be answered of the several Prises contained in the said
Chart, after the said Rate.

Giving also to understand, that for the supplying of the full number first
appointed by the Chart, every person having adventured any one Lotte of the
value of ten shillings, shall be admitted to twelve adventures or hazards,
after which adventures or hazards, the said rate of a twelfth part, shall be
duly answered and paid in ready money. And whosoever has adventured more
then one Lot, after the rate of ten shillings, shall be answered and paid in
like sort: which several adventures, hazardes or Prises growing of the said
Lotterie, shall be duly answered and paid (after the Rate of the said twelfth
part) according to the appointment and promise contained in the said first
Chart.

And for this purpose, all persons having interest herein, shall and may begin
to give their attendance this present tenth day of January, and so to continue.

Yeouen at her Highness honor of Hampton Court, the ninth day of January, 1568.
and in the eleventh year of her Majesty's most prosperous Reign.
God save the Queen.
Imprinted at London by Henry Bynneman, dwelling in Knight rider street, at
the sign of the Marmaide.

Cum gratia Regiae Maiestatis.


