By the Queen.
WHereas the Queens most excellent Majesty, upon information heretofore given
unto the same, of the great and excessive pryces that Wines transported hither
out of France, were grown unto, much to the impoueryshing of this her realm,
did (for the preventing of the inconvenience that was like to increase and
ensue thereof) by her Majesty's Proclamation, bearing date the xv day of July,
in the xvii. year of her reign, notify and publish virto such her Majesty's
subjects, as did and do use the trade of bryngying in those kinds of Wynes,
that they should forbear to bring into any part of this Realm the said
Wynes, unless they might utter and vent them after the rate of ten pounds the
Tun, with all manner of extraordinary charges, upon such pain as in the said
Proclamation is contained. And although her Majesty's good and gracious meaning
therein, by the indirect and covetous practices of some persons that brought in
the said Wines, took not so good effect as her expectation was it should have
done: Yet her Majesty and her privy Counsel, fynding by good experience, that
it is both necessary and profitable to her subjects, to continue the order of
the said former Proclamation, not only for such Wynes as shall be hereafter
brought into this Realm, out of the Country aforesaid, but also honorable to
her Majesty, to cause the same Proclamation to be duly executed for those
that have been brought in since the publishing thereof, and remain yes unsold
by the Merchant. Therefore her Majesty, with the advice of her Counsel,
straytely wylleth, charge, and commands al her subjectes, and others, that
shall bring those Wynes into this Realm, duly to observe the same rate and
price of ten pounds the Tun, with all manner of ordinary and extraordinary
charges, upon pain of imprisonment, and of such further penalty and
punishment, as by any manner of Statute Law, or Prerogative, may be indicted
upon the transgressors and contemners thereof: Wherein her Majesty's
intention is, and so the publishes by these presents, to all her said
subjectes, that no favor, tolleration, or qualification, shall be used unto
them, in respect of the great benefyte that is like to redounde to this
Realm, by the due observation thereof.

And whereas by the said last Proclamation, no order was set down for the
restraynyng of the excessyue prices of Retaylers and Vtterers of the said
Wynes, of late years exacted: Her Majesty now by the advice aforesaid,
straytely commands and charge, that none of the said Retaylers or
Vtterers of the said ^ynes, shall sell any Wynes, alredie by them bought, and
not uttered, or hereafter to be bought and retayled, (...) above xvi. d. the
Gallon: and so ratably and proportionably for other measures under the same,
upon pain of imprisonment and such further penalties as may be any Statute
heretofore in this behalf provided, be imposed or said upon them, and as they
will avoid her highness indignation and displeasure.

Given at her Majesty's Palace of Westminster, the xxvii. day of July. 1576.
In the xviii. year of her highness most prosperous reign.
Imprinted at London by Richard Judge, Printer to the Queens Majesty.

Cum priuilegio Regiae Maiestatis.


