By the Queen.
THE Queens Majesty, hearing credibly by report, that in some parts of her
Realm, her people and subjects are, and of late have been vexed and molested,
by certain lewd persons, under pretense of executing of Commissions for
inquiries to be made, for lands concealed, who do by color thereof, and
without warrant of Commission, contrary to alright, and namely contrary to her
Majesty's meaning and intent intermeddle and challenge (as it is reported)
lands of long time possessed by Church wardens, and such like, upon the
charitable gifts of their predecessors, to the common benefit of the
parish, yea and certain stocks of money, plate, cattayle, or such like: and
let not also to make pretense to the belles, lead, and other such like
things belongyng to parish Churches, or Chapels used for common prayers: and
further to attempt to make titles to the lands, possessions, plate, and
(...)es belonging to Hospitales, and such like houses, used for maintenance of
poor people, with many such o^^^^ unleful attemptes and extortions, to a
pernicious example, if the same should be further used and suffered by color
^^^^of for this purpose, her Majesty meaning speedyly to withstand this
manner of extortions, and unlawful practi(...) and troubles of her subjects,
and doubting that the like is, or may be used in other places of the Realm,
though (...) complaint be not thereof made, has lately commanded, that al
Commissions, which are extant, and not de(...)ed, for inquisition of any
manner of concealementes, should be by supersedeas out of her Court of
Exchequer re(...). And yet because the frauds of offenders in such cases do
so abound, as it may be, that they which have al(...) begun, by color of
commissions to use such extortions and vexations for gain, will them selves
conceal the (...) of their Commissions, being but by process of supersedeas:
Therefore her Majesty (to notisie this her gra(...) disposition more public
to her subjects, and to procure due punishment of the offenders, with
restitution of (...)s wrongfully taken) gives to understand by these
presents, that al manuer of Commissions now extant, that (...) pass from any
her Courts, to enquire of any lands, tenementes, and hereditamentes, or of
any goods, or cha(...) concealed, or supposed to be concealed before the date
hereof, shall cease, and not continue: and that no Commissioner (...) by virtue
of any such Commission, charge any person to enquire further of the contents
of any such Commission* And if any manner of person shall have just cause to
complain of any other, for any manner of extortion, or mis(...) by color of
such Commission, the same shall and may exhibit their complaint to the
Justices of assise, now this (...), or to any other two or three of the
Justices of peace in the shyre, whom her Majesty charge to cause the truth
of the complaint to be examined, and the offenders to be severely and speedyly
punished, and to make due and large restitution. Or if the cases of the
extortion (...) great, or that the offenders can not be found within the
County: then that certificat be made thereof by the said Justices of assise,
or the peace, either to her Majesty's privy Counsel, or to the Lord Keeper of
the great Seal, to be further tried and punished in the Star chamber, for a
further example. And although her Majesty most graciously in this sort means
to relieve her subjects from wrongs and vexati^^^ yet th^rewith her Majesty
gives them al to understand, that she intends not to forbear by sum
better or(...) means, and by persons of known honesty and wisdom, to
enquire of such lands, and other things, as (...) and justly do belong to
her Crown, and are withdrawn and concealed, and to the which by the laws of
her Realm her Majesty is justly entitled: wherein such care shall be had, as
hereafter no commission shall be granted, (...) to suchpersons as shall be reputed
of such trust and honesty, as shall by no means give cause to offend any, but
such as of mere wrong will keep and deteyne things belonging by order of law
to the Crown, to which her Majesty doubeth not, but al good honest subjects
do bear that duty and reave rence, as they will yield their service to the
mayntenaunce thereof, as by the law of God they are bound (besides their
earthly duty) to her Majesty.

And finally, her Majesty would have her Justices of assise to have some
special care, not only to the premises in this their Sessions, but also to the
refourmyng of certain covetous and injurious attemptes, of diverse that have of
late time by other color then for her Majesty's use, taken away the Lead of
Churches and Chapels, yea and the Belles also out o^ Steeples, and other
common goods belongyng to Parishes, an example not to be suffered unpunished,
nor ^nrefourmed. And so her Majesty eftsoon charge her Justices of assise
to provide severe remedy, both for punishment and refourmation thereof.

Yeuen at her highness palace at Westminster, the thirteenth day of February,
in the fourteenth year of her Majesty's reign. God save the Queen.
Imprinted at London in Powles Churchyard, by Richard Judge and John Cawood,
Printers to the Queens Majesty.

Cum priuilegio Regiae Maiestatis.


