The form of the oath made by such as have made their humble submission to
the Queens Majesty's Commissioners, for their offenses in the late rebellion
begun in the North in November. 1569. and the twelfth year of the reign of the
Queens Majesty, Elizabeth by the grace of GOD. etc.
FIrst, ye shall swear that ye be heartyly sorry that ye have offended the
Queens Majesty in your late rebellion. And that you do and shall repute and
take all oaths and promises heretofore made to any person or persons, for and
touching the said rebellion, to be wicked, unlawful, and of none effect: And
also that you have offended God and her highness in taking of any such oath,
or in making any promise for that purpose: And that from henceforth ye shall be
true and faithful subjects unto the Queen our sovereign Lady, Elizabeth by
the grace of God, Queen of England, France, and Irelande, defender of the
faith. etc. And that you shall from henceforth obey and allow all laws,
ordinances, and statutes of this Realm, not being repealed: And all the same
ye shall against all persons maynteyne, and defend to the uttermost of your
power: And shall assist all such Judges, Justices, Commisioners, Officers, and
Ministers, as well ecclesiastical as temporal, as the Queens Majesty shall
appoint for the due execution of any of her Majesty's laws, ordinances,
injunctions, statutes, or proclamations.

Item, ye shall never hereafter during your lives make any unlawful assemblies
or commotions, ne put your selves in any number in forceable array at the
commandment of any person what so ever he be, but only by the commandment
of the Queens Majesty, or of her Lieftenant, or Lieftenantes, officers, or
ministers, having sufficient authority of her Majesty to appoint the same.

Item, you shall not do or commit any treasons, murders, or felonies, ne know
any such to be done by any person what so ever he be, but you shall open and
bewray the same to the Queens Majesty, or to such as have her Majesty's laws
in administration. And in case there shall happen to be any person or persons,
which shall utter and declare unto you or any of you privily or openly, any
seditious matters, or shall write any seditious letters, or move you to any
insurrection, or any unlawful assemblies, or speak any sclaunderous words of
the Queens Majesty, or of any of her counselors: you shall likewise open and
disclose the same, and shall endeavor your selves to apprehende, or cause to be
apprehended all such persons, and so to have them committed to sure prison,
until you shall know her Majesty's pleasure by order of her Counsel, or
other Ministers. And you shall also swear that you do utterly testify and
declare in your consciences, that the Queens highness is the only supreme
governor of this Realm, and of all other her highness dominions and
countries, as well in all spiritual or ecclesiastical things or causes, as
temporal: And that no foreign prince, person, prelate, state, or potentate,
has or ought to have any jurisdiction, power, superiority, preeminence, or
authority ecclesiastical or spiritual within this Realm: And that you do
utterly renounce and forsake al foreign jurisdictions, powers, superiorities,
and aucthorities: And that you will from henceforth bear faith and true
allegiance to the Queens Majesty, her heirs and lawful successors: And to
your powers shall assist and defend al jurisdictions, privileges,
preeminences, and aucthorities granted or belonging to the Queens highness,
her heirs and successors, or united and annexed to the imperial crown of
this Realm, So help you God, and by the contents of this book.

God save the Queen.
Imprinted at London in Powles Churchyard, by Richard Judge and John Cawood,
Printers to the Queens Majesty.

Cum priuilegio Regiae Maiestatis.


