By the Queen.
THe Queens Majesty upon very wayghtie and necessary considerations, tendyng
first to the honor of almyghtie God, and next to the surety of her self and
the whole state of her loving subjects of all degrees: has with very good
deliberation and advise of her counsel resolved to establishe her realms,
dominions, and subjects in strength, as well in civil as in martial policy,
and to the furtheraunce of some part of necessary things belongyng to the
state martial. Her Majesty gives knowledge to all manner her subjects, that
by special persons of good trust, there shall be particular inquisitions made in
all parts of the Realm, in what sort the statutes and laws of the same are
observed, which are provided for maintenance of the breed of horses, and for
keeping and having in redynesse and duly furnysshed for service of horses and
geldynges, and of all manner of armor and weapons. And consequently upon such
inquisitions, her Majesty also means speedyly to have parfite musters made
of the same, and the errors and lackes which therein shall be found, to be by
frequent musteryng and exercise amended and supplied.

And because her Majesty considers, that the intermission of time has bread
some lack of such furniture as by the laws upon great pains are required:
her Majesty being not of a disposition to use severity toward her
subjects, in respect of the penalties already justly due, but to have all her
people, as now the time requires, to be in strength: charge and commands
all manner of persons of all estates, to provide and furnyshe them selves,
according as by any law or statute, or by any other special tenure it shall be
found to be due, of horses, geldynges, armor, and weapons, and of meet
persons to serve therewith: so as the same may be fully ready before the first of
April next, upon such penalties as by the laws shall be by special commissions
through all parts of the Realm found due. Wherein her Majesty means, in
consideration of this favorable warnyng, not to spare or mittigate any manner
of penalty that shall be due for any part of the time past. And thus much of her
general determination in the mean time her Majesty has thought good to
notify by this her proclamation, not doubting but such other things as her
Majesty intends shortly hereafter to propounde to al her subjects for a
further strengthnyng of themselves, shall be well allowed, and duly executed, as
tendyng principally to the benefit of themselves, and to the honor and surety
of the Realm against all euentes.

Given at Hampton Court the third day of February. 1568. in the eleventh year
of her Majesty's reign. God save the Queen.
Imprinted at London in Powles Churchyard, by Richard Jugge and John Cawood,
printers to the Queens Majesty.

Cum priuilegio Regiae Maiestatis.


