By the Queen.
WHereas the Queens Majesty our most gracious sovereign Lady, by reason of
the plague and pestilence, as well in the City of London, as in the city of
Westminster, and in diverse other places and parts of this her Majesty's
Realm, did lately by her Highness Proclamation adjourne part of the Term of
Saint Michael, That is to say, from the vtas thereof, until Mensis Michaelis,
then to have begun at the said City of Westminster. Nevertheless, her
Majesty having then perfect understanding that the said plague and pestilence
did then increase more and more, did then by her Majesty's Proclamation further
adjourne another part of the said Term of Saint Michael, that is to say, from
Mensis Michaelis aforesaid, until the return of the same Term, commonly
called Crastino Martini, then to begin at the said City of Westminster, which
her Majesty then did, for that her Highness had very great hope that the said
sickness by the favor of Almighty God, and by the coldness and season of the
year growing on, and other occasions, by that (...) would have ceased.
Nevertheless, her Highness being lately credibly informed, that the said
sickness continues, not (...) at the said Cities of London and Westminster,
and is very much there dispersed, but also in diverse other places with^^ (...)
Realm, so that it is to be feared, by the resort of her Majesty's subjects to
her said Cities of London and Westmin^^^^ (...) those that be not infected, may
by their coming and tarying there be in great peril and danger of the said
plague (...) that those that come out of the Countries being infected, or from
the places where the plague is, may by their coming (...) accompanying with
those that be clear thereof, put in danger and peril such as they shall
accompany here with. And (...) ^urstie being also credibly informed, that the
certificate which her Highness receives weekly from her said City of (...) is
not so sincerely, truly, and wholly certified, as in truth it should be, but
the number of those that die of the plague (...) then they are, by the
corruption and indirect dealing of some inferior minister, to her Majesty's
great offense, (...)e minded, for the better preservation of her good subjects
of all degrees that should repair to London and West^ by reason of the Term,
to adjourne at the day of Octabis Martini, which shall be Tuesday next, the
two last Re^^^^^ of the said Term of Saint Michael: that is to say, the said
Octabis and Quindena Martini, until the Return of (...) Term next coming,
commonly called Octabis Hilarii, then to begin at Westminster, as has been
accustomed. (...) her Majesty signifies to all and singular her loving
subjects of this her Realm, to the intent that they, and every (...) which
has cause or commandment to appear in any of her Highness Courts at
Westminster, on or at any day or (...) ^^^^on on the said Octabis Martini, may
tarry at their dwellings, or where their business otherwise shall lie, without
(...) to any the said Courts for that cause, before the said return of Hilary
Term, next coming, and that without (...) of forfeiture, penalty, or
contempt, to incur toward her Highness in that behalf. Nevertheless her
Majesty (...) good and necessary considerations, for the weal and benefit
of her Subjects, is contented and pleased, that (...) of C^astino Martini,
until the said Octabis, shall continue and be holden, as if this present
Proclamation were not. (...) Majesty's further pleasure is, that two or more of
her Justices, that is to say, of either Bench, shall the said Octa^^^ (...)
adjourne her said two Courts at Westminister, at which day writtes of
adiournement shall be directed to the said (...) to adjourne the same, in and
from the said Octabis Martini, until the said return of Hilary Term. And
her ^^^^^ties pleasure is, that all matters causes and suites, depending in any
of her other Courts, between party and party, (...) Highness Courts of
Chancerie, Star chamber and Exchequer, Courts of wards and Liueries, and
Duchy of ^ancaster shall have continuance, and the parties shall have day, at
and from the said Octabis Martini, until the said re^^^^^ of Hilary Term.

(...)ed always, and her Majesty's pleasure and commandment is, that all
Collectors, Receivers, Sheriffs, and (...) accomptants, and all other persons
that ought or should account or pay any sum or sums of money in any of
(...) Majesty's court of Exchequer, courts of wards and Liueries, or of her
Duchy of Lancaster, or any them, or that (...) enter into any account in any
of the said courts, shall at their days appointed, repair unto the
accustomed places (...) ^^^^minster, where her Highness has appointed such
officers and ministers, as for that purpose her Majesty has (...) expedient,
and there to pay, and do in every behalf, as though no such Proclamation of
adjournement had (...) or made, any thing mentioned in this Proclamation, or in
any writ of adjournement to the contrary, notwith^^^^ding And her Highness
further pleasure and commandment is, that all Sheriffs shall return their
Writtes and (...) against all such accomptants and debtors at the days therein
appointed. And if any person or persons who (...) to account or pay any sum
or sums of money to her Majesty in any the said Courts and places aforesaid,
do (...) default therein, That then her Highness Writtes and Process shall be a
warded, and sent forth against every such person (...) persons, and the same to
be duly and orderly served and returned by the Sheriffs and Officers
thereunto appointed, (...) like manner and form as the same should have been,
if this present proclamation had not been made. And if any ^^^^^ffe or other
Officer shall make default, or be negligent in serving, executing or returning
any the said writtes and (...) aforesaid: That then every such Sheriff and
other Officer shall incur such pains and penalties, as by the (...) Courts,
or any of them shall be taxed and assessed: Willing and commanding all and every
her Majesty's Sheriffs, ^^^^^s ministers and subjectes, to whom it does or
shall appertain, to observe and keep their assemblies and appearan^^s with all
their returns and certificats in her Highnesses said Courts at Westminster, in
the said return of Hilary term ^^^^only called Octabis Hilarii, next coming,
then, there with the favor of God, to be holden and kept, and there to do
(...) offices and duty sin every behalf, in like manner and form as they
should or ought to have done, if this present Pro^^^mation had not been had or
made, as they will answer to the contrary at their perils.

Yeven at her Majesty's Manor of Richemond the xiiii. day of November, in the
twentieth year of her Majesty's Reign.
Imprinted at London by Christopher Barker, Printer to the Queens Majesty.


