By the Queen.
FOrasmuch as the Queens Majesty our Sovereign Lady is credibly enfourmed,
that the infection of the plague is at this present in sundry places in and
about the city of London, and in other places near adioynyng to the same,
whereas by the continuance thereof through the greater repair and resort of her
loving Subjects, great peril and danger might not only ensue unto her most
royal person, but also unto her most loving Subjects repayryng thither for
their suites and causes, and thereby also give occasion of dispersyng of the
same in other parts of the Realm: Her Majesty for the said necessary
considerations, and hopyng that the same will by the goodness of Almighty God,
with the coldness of the year, and such wholesome orders as are taken in her
said City, the rather sease by the adiorment of part of this next Term of
S. Michael now at hand, from the vtas of the same, until (...) the feast of
all Saints next coming. Her Majesty therefore of her especial favor and
clemency, is pleased and (...)ed to adiourne the said Term of S. Michael:
That is to say, from the vtas thereof, unto Crastino Animarum (...) coming,
which her Majesty signifies to al and singular her loving Subjects of this
her Realm, to the intent (...) and every of them which has cause or
commandment to appear in any of her highness courts at West^^ster in or at
any day or time from and after the said vtas of S Michael, may tarry at their
dwellynges, or where their (...) otherwise shall lie, without resortyng to any
of the said courts for that cause before Crastino Animarum next ^^^^^ng and
that without danger of forfayture, penalty, or contempt to incur toward
her highness in that (...) And nevertheless her Majesty's pleasure is, that
two of her Justices, that is to say of either Benche one, shall (...) of
Michaelmas Term called Octabis Michaelis, according to the ancient order of
her laws, keep the (...) of the said Octabis Michaelis, at which vtas of S.
Michael, writtes of adiorment shall be directed to the said J^^^^ces* geuyng
them authority to adiourne the said Term of S. Michael, that is to say, from
the vtas thereof, until (...) A^^^arum as before is said, and the same
adiorment shall be made in the first day of the said vtas, commonly called the
day of the Essoynes. And further her Majesty's pleasure is, that all matters,
causes, and suites dependyng in any of her other courts between party and
party, as in her highness courts of Chauncerie, Star chaumber, and
Ex^^^quer, Courts of wards and liueries, and Duchy of Lancaster, shall have
continuance, and the parties shall have (...) from the date of these presents,
unto Crastino Animarum as before is said.

Provided always, and her Majesty's pleasure and commandment is, that all
Collectours, Receauers, Sheriffs, and other accomptauntes, and all other
persons that ought or should account or pay any sum, or sums of money in
any of her Majesty's Court of Exchequer, courts of Wards and liueries, or of
her Duchy of Lancaster, or in any of them or to enter into any account in any
of the same Courts, shall repair unto the accustomed places at Westminster,
where her highness has appointed such Officers and Ministers as for that
purpose her Majesty has thought (...), and there to pay and do in every
behalf, as though no such Proclamation of adiorment had been had or made, (...)
mentioned in this present Proclamation, or in any writ of adiorment to the
contrary notwithstanding: (...) and commaundyng all and every of her Majesty's
Officers, Ministers, and Subjects, to whom it does or shall apertayne, to
observe and keep their assemblies and apparaunces, with all their returns and
certificates in her high^^^^ said courts at Westminster in Crastino Animarum
next coming, then and there to be holden and kept, and there (...) their
offices and duties in every behalf, in like manner and form as they should
or ought to have done if this ^^^^^nt Proclamation had not ben had or made, as
they will answer to the contrary at their perils.

Given at her Majesty's Castle of Windsor the. 28. day of September, in the
eleventh year of her Majesty's reign.
God save the Queen.
Imprinted at London in Powles Churchyard by Richard Jugge and John Cawood,
Printers to the Queens Majesty.


