By the Queen.
A proclamation to repress all piracies and depredations upon the Seas.
FOrasmuch as it is come to the Queens Majesty's understanding, by means of
certain complayntes, as well by her own subjects as others, that there are
sundry persons upon the narowe Seas, of diverse nations, and some borne within
her Majesty's dominions, having ships armed in warlike manner, who partly at
the first went manifestly to the Seas in manner of merchants, and have
afterward by sinister means changed their trade, and armed them selves for
the war: some others have secretly stolen out of obscure places, with a
pretense in these troublesome times, that are seen as well eastwarde betwixt
the kingdom of Denmark and Sweden, and their adherentes, as westwarde in the
dominions of France, both lamentable to behold, to serve on the Seas either
on the one part or the other, and yet in deed have at length directed them
selves from all lefull service of wars, to live as pirates, robbyng and
spoylyng al manner of honest merchants of every nation without difference,
whom they are able to subdue. For remedy whereof, although her Majesty has of
late time given certain strayte orders through all her ports, that no manner
of persons, other then known merchants, should be suffered to sell or
distribute any manner of wares or marchaundises in any her ports, nor that any
within her Realm should vittayle, or otherwise relieve any manner of person any
wise to be suspected of piracie. Yet now upon these new complayntes, her
Majesty findyng that thereby has followed no such full remedy as was looked for:
for that purpose her Majesty has thought meet to devise and publishe by her
proclamation some further effectual remedy. And therefore does straytly charge
and command al manner her subjects, to forbear from aydyng or receauyng of
any pirate, or any person having not lefull authority from her Majesty, or
not being a known merchant by contractyng, bying, sellyng or exchaungyng or
by vittaylyng of them or any of their company, whereby they or any of them
shall be the more enhabled to return to the Seas to commit any piracie or
disorder, upon pain for so doing to be punished presently, as the principal
offenders and pirates ought to be. And furthermore, whosoever shall herafter
arm o^ prepare any vessel to the sea, except it be such as shall by her
Majesty's authority be specially appointed to keep the Seas, as her Majesty
now is occasioned to do for some other respects, or such as shall have
express license and permission by her Majesty: the same shall give knowledge
to the officers of the ports of their whole furniture, who shall duly search
and visit the same, to the intent to stay such persons as apparauntly shall be
so furnished for the wars, and not for marchaundise or fishyng. And if there
shall be any manner of suspicion, that the said person though he shall pretend
to trade for marchaundise or fishyng, has or may have any intent by his
provisions or furniture, otherwise then to use the trade of merchandise, or
fishing: that in such case of suspicion, the officers of the ports shall stay,
and no wise suffer the same to pass to the Seas, without good bands by
sufficient suerties first had, to use nothing but a lefull trade of
marchaundise or fishyng. And if the officers shall suffer any person otherwise
to repair to the Seas then above is mentioned, they shall not only answer
for any piracies which any such person shall chance thereafter to do upon the
Sea: but shall suffer imprisonment until the offenders may be apprehended, if
they shall be living. And generally her Majesty declares and denounces all
such pirates and rouers upon the Seas to be out of her protection, and lefully
to be by any person taken, punished, and suppressed with extremity.

Given at her Majesty's Pallaice of Westminster, the. xxvii. day of April, the.
xi. year of her Majesty's most noble reign. God save the Queen.
Imprinted at London in Powles Church yard by Richard Judge and John Cawood,
Printers to the Queens Majesty.

Cum priuilegio Regiae Maiestatis.


