By the Queen.
A Proclamation for bringing into the Realm of unlawful and seditious books.
WHereas diverse books made or translated by certain the Queens Majesty's
subjects, for the more part remaining on the other side of the sea, without
lawful license, containing sundry matters repugnaunt to truth, derogatorie to
the sovereign estate of her Majesty, and stirring and nourishing sedition in
this Realm, are commonly in secret sort here dispearsed by malicious persons
among sundry her Majesty's subjects, to the intent to draw them to error, and
withdraw them sediciously from their duties and allegiance due to her
Majesty, as their only sovereign. For redress hereof, like as of late time
some mylde example has been made in the star chaumber at Westminster, in
correction of certain persons found faulty in the secret dispearu^ng, buying,
and allowing of sundry of the said seditious books: So her Majesty meaning
of her clemency, neither to have any advantage taken for things herein already
past, nor any her honest and quiet subjects to be entangled with the like
hereafter for lack of admonition in due time: wills and earnestly charge
all manner of persons, to forbear utterly from the use or dealing with any
such seditious books, made or translated by any person, containing matter
derogatorie to the Sovereign estate of her Majesty, or impugning the orders
and rites established by the law for Christian religion and divine service
within this Realm, or otherwise stirring and nourishing matter tending to
sedition: and that such as already have any of the said books, shall present,
or cause to be presented the said books, within twenty and eight days after
the publishing of this proclamation, to the bishop of the diocese, or
ordinary of the place, and to receive of him a testimonial of the time of the
delivery thereof: and without express license in writing of the said bishop
or ordinary, or some archbishop, or other bishop of the Realm, not to keep or
read any seditious books, upon pain of her Majesty's grievous indignation,
and to be punished severely, as the qualitte and circumstaunces of the offense
shall require and deserve.

Given at her Majesty's pallaice of Westminster, the first day of March. 1568.
the eleventh year of her Majesty's reign. God save the Queen.
Imprinted at London in Powles Churchyard by Richard Judge and John Cawood,
Printers to the Queens Majesty.

Cum priuilegio Regiae Maiestatis.


