The effect of certain branches of the Statute made in Anno.xxxiii. Henr.
viii. touching the maintenance of Artyllery, and the punishment of such as use
unlawful games, very necessary to be put in execution.
FIrst, that all fathers, governors, and rulers of such as be of tender age,
to teach and bring them up in the knowledge of shooting: and that every man
having a man child, or men children in his house, shall provide, ordeine, and
have in his house for every man child, being of the age of vii. years and
above, till he shall come to the age of xvii. years, a bow and two shaftes, to
induce and learn them, and bring them up in shooting, and shall deliver all
the same bow and arrows to the same young men to use and occupy. And if the
same young men be servants, that then their masters shall abate the money that
they shall pay for the same bows and arrows of their wages. And after all
such young men shall come to the age of xvii. years, every of them shall
provide and have a bow and four arrows continually for him self, at his
proper costs and charges, or else of the gift or provision of his friends, and
use and occupy the same in shooting, as is before rehearsed. And if the master
suffer any of his servants taking wages, being in his household, and under the
age xvii. years, to lack a bow and two arrows, contrary to the form of
this estatute, by the space of one month together, then the master or father
in whom such negligence shall be, shall for every such default forfaite vi. s.
viii. v. and that every servant passing the age of xvii. years, and under the
age of lx. years, and taking wages, which can or is able to shoot, and shall
lack a bow and iii. arrows by the space of one month together, shall for
every such default forfaite and lose vi.s.viii. d.

Item, that no person by him self, factor, deputy, servant, or other person,
shall for his or their gain, lucre, or living, keep, have, hold, occupy,
exercise, or maintain, any common house, Alley, or place of bowling, coyting,
cloyse, coyles, half bowl, tennys, disyng, table, or carding, or any other
manner of gain prohibited by any statute heretofore made, or any unlawful new
game now invented or made, or hereafter to be invented, found, had, or made,
upon pain to forfaite and pay for every day keeping, having, mainteining, or
suffering any such game to be had, kept, executed, played, or maintained within
any such house, garden, Alley, or other place, contrary to the form and
effect of this estatute.xl. s. and the players so taken, to pay for every time.
vi. s. viii. d.

Item, that the Justices of peace, and every Mayor, Sheriff, Baillyffe,
Constable, or other head officer, have authority to enter into all places,
as well within franchises as else where, and the persons offending in any of the
premises, to take put in prison, until such time they put in suerties no more
to suffer, occupy, or commit the said offenses.

Item, that the Majors, Sheriffs, Bailiffes, Constables, and other head
officers within every City, Borough, and town within this Realm, where any
such officers shall fortune to be, as well within the franchises as without,
shall make due search weekly, or at the furthest at all times hereafter once
every month in all places, where any such houses, Alleys, play or plays shall
be suspected to be had, kept, and mainteyned. And if the said Majors,
Sheriffs, Bailiffes, Constables, and other head officers, within their Cities,
Boroughes, and Towns, as well within franchises, as without, do not make due
search at the furthest once every month, if the case so require, according to
the tenor of this Act, and do not execute the same, in all things according to
the purport and force of the same: that then every such Mayor, Sheriffs,
Bailiffes, Constables, or other head officer, to pay and forfaite for every
month not making such search, nor executing the same.xl. s.

Item, that no Artificer, or handy crafts man of any occupation, husbandman,
Apprentice, labourer, servant of husbandry, Iorneyman, or servant or Artificer,
Mariner, Fisherman, Waterman, or any seruingman, may use any unlawful game.

Item, that all that play at bowls or any other unlawful game in the fields, to
loose for every such time vi. s. viii. d. and to be committed to prison, unto
such time they put in sureties no more to use the same.

Item, this statute to be proclaimed four times every year, and the like to
be done in all assizes and sessions, and to continue for ever.

Memorandum, that there is a prouiso in this statute for all men of worship,
which may dispend one hundred pounds yearly and upwards, may use these games
with discretion at their pleasures.

God save the Queen.
Imprinted at London by Christopher Barker, printer to the Queens most
excellent Majesty.

Cum priuilegio Regiae Maiestatis.


