By the Queen
WHereas the Queens Majesty, our most gracious soueraygne Lady, by reason of
the plague and pestilence as well in the city of London, as in the city of
Westminster, did lately by her Highness Proclamation adiorne part of the Term
of Saint Michael: That is to say, from the vtas thereof until Mensis
Michaelis, then to have begun at the said city of Westminster, as at the
place accustomed. Her Majesty had very great hope that the said sickennes, by
the favor of almighty God, and by the coldness of the year, and other
occasions by that time would have cea^^^. Nevertheless her Highness being
credibly informed, that the said sickness increases within the said cities of
London and Westminster, is therefore minded for the better preservation of her
good subjects of all degrees, that should re^^^re to London and Westminster by
reason of the Term, to adiorne the said Term from Mensis Michaelis aforesaid,
^^till the return of the same Term, commonly called Crastino Martini next
coming, then to begin at Westminster, as has been accustomed. Which her
Majesty signifies to all and singular her loving subjects of this her Realm,
To the intent that they and every of them, which has cause or commandment to
appear in any of her Highness Courts at Westminster, on or at any day or time,
from and after the said Mensis Michaelis, may tarry at their dwellings, or where
their business otherwise shall lie, without resorting to any the said Courts for
that cause, before the said Crastino Mar^^^^ next coming. And that without
danger of forfeyture, penalty, or contempt to incur toward her Highness
(...) that behalf.

And nevertheless her Majesty's pleasure is, that two of her Justices, that is
to say, of either Benche one, shall the (...) Mensis Michaelis, according to
the ancient order, adiorne her said two Courts at Westminster: At which day,
^ictes of adiornement shall be directed to the said Justices to adiorne the same,
in and from the said Mensis Michaelis, ^^till the said Crastino Martini, as
before is said. And her Majesty's pleasure is, that all matters, causes and
suits, depending in any of her other Courts Wards between party and party, As
in her Highness Courts of Chauncery, Star Cham^^r Exchequior, Courts of Wards
and Liueries, and Duchy of Lancaster, shall have continuance, and the parties
shall have day from the date of these presents, until the said Crastino
Martini, as before is said.

Provided always, and her Majesty's pleasure and commandment is, that all
Collectors, Receauers, Sheriffs, and other accomptants, and all other persons
that ought or should account or pay any sum or sums of money, in any of
her Majesty's Court of Exchequior, Courts of Wards and Liueries, or of her
Duchy of Lancaster, or any of them, Or that should enter into any account in
any of the said Courts, shall at their days appointed repair unto the
accustomed p^^^es at Westminster, where her Highness has appointed such
Officers and ministers, as for that purpose her Majesty ^^th thought
expedient, And there to pay and do in every behalf, as though no such
Proclamation of adiornement had (...) had or made, Any thing mentioned in this
Proclamation, or in any Writ of adiornement to the contrary notwithstanding.
And her Highness further pleasure and commandment is, that all Sheriffs shall
return their writtes and Process against all such accomptants and debtors, at
the days therein appointed. And if any person or persons, (...) ought to
account or pay any sum or sums of money to her Majesty, in any the said
Courts and places afore^^^^ do make default therein, That then her Highness
writtes and process shall be awarded, and sent forth against every ^^ch person
and persons, and the same to be duly and orderly served and returned, by the
Sheriffs and Officers thereunto appointed in such like manner and form as the
same should have been, if this present Proclamation had not been made. And if
any Sheriff or other Officer shall make defaulte, or be negligent in serving,
executing or returning any the said writtes and process aforesaid, That then
every such Sheriff and other Officer, shall incur such pains and penalties
as by the said Courts, or any of them shall be taxed and assessed: Willing and
commanding all and every her Majesty's Sheriffs, Officers, ministers and
subjects, to whom it does or shall appertain, to observe and keep their
assemblies and appearances, with all their returns and certificates in her
Highness said Courts at Westminster, in the said Crastino Martini next
coming, then there with the favor of God to be holden and kept, and there to
do their offices and duties in every behalf, in like manner and form, as they
should or ought to have done, if this present Proclamation had not been had or
made, As they will answer to the contrary at their perils.

Given at her Majesty's Castle of Wyndesor, the xv. day of October, in the
ninetenth year of her Majesty's reign.
Imprinted at London by Christopher Barkar, Printer to the Queens Majesty.

Cum priuilegio Regiae Maiestatis.


