By the Queen.
A Proclamation for maintenance of Tillage.
THE Queens Majesty our Sovereign Lady, calling to her most gracious
remembrance, the good and profitable laws and statutes made and set forth in
the time of her noble progenitors, for the mayntenaunce of houses and
tenementes of husbandry, and the increase of Tillage, and for the mayntenaunce
of hospitality in diverse of the late priories and monasteries, and against the
lettyng down of towns, and the decay of houses of husbandry, and also against
the conuertyng of earable ground from Tillage into pasture, as by the said
laws and statutes more at large does and may appear: And forasmuch as her
Majesty is given to understand, that notwithstanding the said good and
profitable statutes and laws, diverse and sundry of her subjects in many
shires of this realm, upon a greedy and covetous mind, not having regard to
obey the said laws, have and do daily decay Towns and houses of husbandrye
and enclose their grounds, and convert the same from tyllage into pasture, and
keep not such hospitality as by the said laws they ought to do, to the great
displeasure of almighty God, the provocation of idleness, and destruction of
her Majesty's people, whereby her realm is in some part weakened, and more is
like, if speedy reformation be not had therein. The peril that may ensue many
ways thereby, her highness entendeth to foresee, and to let the parties
offendyng therein to understand, that her Majesty minds to have special
regard thereunto. And yet does nevertheless in the mean season by these
presents straightly charge and command them, and every of them that have
offended in any the premises, that they do forthwith refourme all such
things, as they and every of them have done or suffered contrary to the said
laws and statutes, wherein if her Majesty shall perceive they do neglect her
commandment therein, her highness intends forthwith, and with all
severity to proceed against such offenders, and to see reformation of their
offenses, according to the express words and true meaning of her Majesty's
laws, without any further tolleration or remission. And for the better
understanding of all such offenders, her highness pleasure is, that all her
Justices of assise, and Justices of the peace, within the limittes of their
Commissions, shall make diligent inquiry of the offerences aforesaid, from
time to time in all their assizes and sessions: and shall further make special
report to her highness, what they shall find of any such offenders in the
premises, or any part thereof.

Given at her Majesty's Pallaice of Westminster, the first day of March. 1568.
in the.xi. year of her highness most prosperous reign. God save the Queen.
Imprinted at London in Powles Churchyard, by Richard Judge and John Cawood,
Printers to the Queens Majesty.

Cum priuilegio Regiae Maiestatis.


