By the Queen.
WHere by occasion of certain arrestes made in the low Countries of the king
of Spain, in the year of our Lord 1568. by order of the Duke of Alua
Lieutenaunt and Captain general in the said low Countries, the Queens
Majesty's subjects with all their goods, ships, marchaundizes and moneys
were there taken, deteyned, and seized, and the like after that was executed in
Spain and other the said kings Countries. For remedy whereof, the Queens
Majesty at the instaunce of her merchants and subjects whom the same did
concern, did use such means in staying of the goods and marchaundizes of the
subjects of the said king within her dominions, as by the treatise of peace
and intercourse betwixt the predecessors of her Majesty, and the said king
was lawful, and as had been before times used: and sense that time also her
Majesty of late upon motion made to her by sundry merchants strangers,
pretending interest in some part of the goods here stayed, has been pleased to
admit a communication and treaty to be had as well here in this Realm, as on
the other side of the seas, for the behoof of the merchants of both parts,
to the intent there might be a release, delivery, and restitution or
recompense of and for all manner persons arrested, with their goods, ships,
marchaundizes and moneys, and thereby some further occasion given to revive the
former freendly intercourse of merchants on all parts, according to their
mutual desire: the discontinuaunce whereof was neither intended nor occasioned
by her Majesty. Here upon it has seemed meet to her Majesty, therein
following the like order as in the said kings name by deliberation of the
said Duke of Alua in the said low countries, has been published about the
beginning of this month, that some certain knowledge should be had of the
loss and damage of her Majesty's subjects by reason of the foresaid arrestes,
so as their indempnities might be provided for.

And therefore her Majesty wylleth and commands that all and every her
subjects, or others inhabitauntes within her Realms and dominions, that will
or desire to have delivery and restitution of their goods, or any other
things deteyned and arrested in any her Majesty's countries, shall within one
month after the publication hereof in any shire of this Realm, present or
send into the hands of the principal officers of any one of these cities and
towns following, that is to say, London, Southampton, Bristoll, Chester,
Newcastle, Hull, and Ipswiche, as they shall find it most convenient, a
certain and particular declaration of the persons, ships, goods,
marchaundizes, debtes or money, which has been taken or seized by reason of the
said arrestes in any of the said kings countries and dominions. And after
the same shall be so delivered to the foresaid principal officers of any of the
foresaid Cities or Towns: Her Majesty further wylleth and commands that
to all the said declarations filed together, the common seal of the said
Cities and Towns shall be affixed: and after then, immediately sent and delivered
to the court of the admiraltie in the said City of London, there to remain
to be considered as her Majesty shall further order for the benefit of her
subjects.

Given at her Majesty's manor of Otelande the last day of June. 1570. in the
twelfth year of her Majesty's reign.

God save the Queen.
Imprinted at London in Powles Churchyard by Richard Judge and John Cawood,
Printers to the Queens Majesty.

Cum priuilegio Regiae Maiestatis.


