By the Queen.
A Proclamation against maynteyners of seditious persons, and of traiterous
books and writings.
THe Queens Majesty consydering with her self, how it has pleased
almighty God at this present to conserve her Realm in an universal good
peace, and her subjects in a constant obedience unto her Majesty,
notwithstanding the sundry secret malicious solicitations of certain
fugitives and rebels, being fled, and now remaynyng out of the Realm, by
their seditious messages and false reports sent into the same, tendyng to
provoke others to be partakers of their malicious treasons: Can not but first
give the due thanks and praise thereof to almighty God, and therewith commend
both the loyalty of her good subjects for their obedience, and allow of this
their universal constancy in the conservation of themselves together within
the band of common peace. And furthermore also to give admonition and warnyng,
specially to the simple sort of her good loving subjects, that they be no wise
abused with the wicked practices of the said fugitives and rebels, by any
their adherentes secretly remaining or repayring into the Realm, and wandering
in corners, mouyng good subjects to be disobedient to the laws, and
scattering false rumors and news, both by speech, and by books and
wrytinges, only of intent to break the common peace of the same, and to
procure more partners with them in their treasons and rebellions. And therefore
her Majesty charge and commands all manner her good subjects, to be
earnestly ware hereof, and to employ their uttermost diligence in the
apprehention of such secret perswadors of disobedience, and breakyng of laws,
and of the sowers and stirrers of sedition, and specially of such as do or
shall bring into the Realm any seditious books, wrytinges, or such like
traiterous devises against the laws and government of the Realm, or any wise
prejudicial to the royal state of her Majesty. And if any shall be found
wyllingly to aid or comfort any such seditious persons in their said malicious
attemptes, or shall receive and keep, or conceal any manner of such seditious
books, wrytinges or bulls, in print or written, and shall not presently
discover the said persons, and procure them to be apprehended, nor cause the
said kind of writings to be spedyly presented to the superior officers, as
has been by Proclamation lately last ordered and devised: her Majesty gives
it to be understand, that then al and every such person so offendyng after
this admonition, shall be taken, reputed, and punished, as abettors and
maynteynors of the principal Traitors that were aucthors of the same: Meaning
in this behalf, consydering this plain admonition, not to be hereafter moved
to spare the execution of such offenders, upon pretense or allegation of
simplicity or ignorance, to excuse their defaultes.

Given at our honor of Hampton Court the.xiiii. of November. 1570. the twelfth
year of our reign God save the Queen.
Imprinted at London in Powles Churchyard by Richard Judge and John Cawood,
Printers to the Queens Majesty.

Cum priuilegio Regiae Maiestatis.


