DEEDS AGAINST NATVRE, and Monsters by kind: Tried at the Goal delivery of
Newgate, at the Sessions in the Old Bailey, the 18. and 19. of July last, 1614.
the one of a London Cripple named John Arthur, that to hide his shame and lust,
strangled his betrothed wife. The other of a lascivious young Damsel named
Martha Scambler, which made away the fru^t of her own womb, that the world
might not see the seed of her own shame: Which two persons with diverse others
were executed at Tyburne the 21. o^ July following.

With two sorrowful Ditties of these two aforesaid persons, made by themselves
in Newgate, the night before their execution.

depiction of the execution of a man by hanging depiction of the execution of a
woman by hanging

At London printed for Edward Wright. 1614.

Deeds against nature, and monsters by kind: Tried at the Goal delivery for
Newgate, at the Sessions in the Old Bailey, the 18. and 19. of July, last, 1614.
the one of a London Cripple named John Arthur, that to hide his shame and lust,
strangled his betrothed wife. The other of a lascivious young Damsel named
Martha Scambler, which made away the fruit of her own womb, that the world
might not see the seed of her own shame: Which two persons with diverse others
were executed at Tyburne the 21. of July following.
IS it not a marvel, that fire falls not from heaven to consume an infinite
number of worse then savage natur'de people in this land, when vile wretches,
whom God has marked with his secret brand of secret purpose, so impiously
attempt things against nature, as for example, (which God grant it may so
prove for our amendment) here remained amongst us in this City a deformed
creature, an imperfect wretch wanting the right shape and limbs of a man
though in form and visage like unto one of us, this decreped creature (as I
said) named John Arthur, lived and maintained himself with the charity and
devotions of almes-giuing people, and by his lame and lin bless usage
purchased more kind favors then many others of his base fraternity: money
and means being easily gained by a few beggarly observations, as a wretch
graceless, and unthankful for Gods blessings thus bestowed upon him, made no
good use thereof, but spent the same in the service of the Devil, as in
blasphemy swearing, drunkenness, and such like, all damnable sins and such as
be the nurses and breeders of others: this aforementioned Cripple being on a time
in the middle of his drunkenness heated with lust, fell into familiarity with a
certain woman of his own condition; who purposing to live as he did, upon
charity, and good men's alms, and seeing good benefit to come by his lamenes,
unto whom many people grew willing to give, promised to be his associate, and
as his companion and wife to beg with him, many days and months spent they
together, continually abusing the gifts of charity, and wasting away the same
with drunkenness in the by-places and subburbs of the City, which is evermore
the receipt of such begging vacabonds and disordred livers, instruments of the
devil prepared still for deeds of mischiese. This Cripple having not one good
thought of God grace, so lusted after his begging companion, that he obtained
the daily use of her body, and continually committed so that sin of lust and
shame, making a practice thereof in the contempt of Gods Laws, that the eye of
heaven could no longer wink at them, but with a clear sight see into their
base wickedness: yea more then base in that a deformed lump of flesh and no
perfect creature should thus abuse the seed of generation, and now and then in
the fields and highways commit such beastly offenses: but God we see has
iron hands, and will at last strike heavily, as he did upon these two
shameless malefactors: For the Cripple in time surfeiting upon this his shame,
and growing weary of this hated offense, as all people will do, being not
lawfully married, bgan to cast her off, and to loath her company though he
himself might be thought the more loathsome, which she (abused women)
perceiving, and knowing her self to be but his strumpet, challenged of him the
promise of marriage, and so importuned him thereunto by his former vows and
promises, and that heaven would otherwise call his perjured oaths to account,
all instigations of the devil, and subtle policies to draw them both to
destruction, her importunate suits to marriage so troubled his mind, bred such a
rage in his heart, that a purpose came into his mind to rid her away by some
untimely death: a motion no sooner set on fire, but the devil was ready to
bring more fuel, and never rested till it was all on a flame: so upon a
night, a time fitting for such a dark deed, the Cripple enticed her forth into
the fields near Islington, where secretly at the Brick Kills, the lodging place
for rogues and night walkers, he renewed his former familiarity, and with a
dissembling kindness persuaded her to lodge there with him all night, which she,
mistrustlesse woman, consented too, and little misdoubting his devilish intent
laid her down upon a pallat of straw by him to sleep which as a token of hard
misfortune suddenly possessed her: The Cripple perceiving all secure and
silent, and now thinking to be rid of the shame thus daily following him, took
the woman's own girdle, and putting the same slyly about her neck, where
though nature had denied him strength and limbs, yet by the help of the
devil, which always adds force to villainy, he made means in her sleep to
strangle her, and to take away her life, as it were suddenly without
repentance: therefore all people by this example ought still to be prepared for
death, for he comes as a thief in the night, and gives no warning: who would
have thought such an outcast of the world, such a lame deformed creature, not
able of his own strength to help himself, should have power to take away
another life, but the devil we see is a cunning, and will still make the
simple his strongest assisters, and those that be the most weakest, to be of
the vilest thoughts, but to conclude, the Cripple, blinded thus with his own
shame, had that ignorant opinion of the discovery hereof, that he thought the
world too simple to look into his life, and his decreped carriage would keep
away all suspicion, and that no man would think a lame creature could be able
to do so wicked a deed: but graceless varlet, as he was, too much flattered
in his own opinion, the Devil as he was first beginner of his sin, so was
he last end of his shame, for the same morning the woman was found thus
murdered, and being seen the night before in his company with slender
examinations confessed the fact, where for the same he had his trial at the
Sessions by a Jury of twelve men and his execution at Tyburne in the sight of
many hundreds of men, women and children, which accounts him to be a Monster by
kind and the dooer of a deed against nature.

Like unto this viper of our age, we are to place in our discourse another
Caterpiller of nature, a creature more savage then a she woolfe, more
unnatural then either bird or beast, for every creature has a tender feeling
of love to their young, except some few murtherous-minded strumpets, women I
cannot call them, for a woman esteems the fruit of her own womb, the precious
and dearest Jewel of the world, and for the cherishing of the same will (as it
were) spend her lives purest blood, where, contrariwise the harlot (delighting
in shame and sin) makes no conscience to be the butcher of her own seed, nay
the Image of God created in her own body, and now and then in the conception
makes spoil of the bed of creation before it can receive true form.,
Therefore for an example likewise cast your eyes upon this other monster of
nature, which was a lascivious, lewd and close strumpet, a harlot lodging
privately near Bishops-gate in Bedlam at a kinsmans hause of hirs, which
little suspected this her unwomanly carriage but shame long raked up in the
ashes of secrecy, though close smoking, will at last break forth into open
flame: so this graceles wanton (spending her youth in lascivious pleasures, as
many a one does in and about this City) hapded to prove with child, and having
no husband to cover this her act of shame, and withal soaring the disgrace of
the world, by a diuilish practice sought to consume it in her body before the
birth, but not prevailing (as God would have it) thee was forced by nature to
deliver it alive to the world, and so was made the unhappy mother of a
man-child unhappy I may name her, for her own hand made her unhappy. To our
purpose, her lusty body, strong nature, and fear of shame brought an easines
to her delivery, and required in her agony no help of a midwife which among
women seems a thing very strange, for not so much as the least child in the
house where she lodged had knowledge of her labor, nor hardly was she thought
to be with child, so closely demeaned she her self, but the devil we see
adds force unto wickedness, and puts a kind of strength to nature in that kind,
otherwise had she been discovered in the childbirth.

Consider this the Child being borne with shame and she by it made a scandal
to her acquaintance, renewed the rememberance of her passed sins, and
presented present shame unto her grieved thoughts, which troubled cogitations,
by the persuasions of the Diuill, put her in mind violently to make it away,
and to give it death before the body had well recovered life, whereupon taking
the poor tender babe as it were new dropped from the mothers womb, and not like
a mother, but a monster threw it down into a loathsome privy house, therein to
give it an indecent grave and as she thought thereby make to her self a
ridance of a further Infamy, but God is Just and will reward shame where it is
deserved, and such unnatural deeds, let them be acted in deserts, in the
cauernes of the earth, where never light of day nor Sun shines, yet will they
be discovered and brought to the worlds eye, so happened it with this harlot,
when all fear of suspicion was past, she safely delivered, the Child in the
privy smothered, and in the world no notice taken thereof, yet in the end was
it thus most strangly discovered, the Tunnill of the aforesaid vault or privy
assended up into the next neighbors house, as in many places they do, where
by chance (as God had ordained) dwelled an unto vard ladd that in taking
delight in knauish pastimes took a cur Dog then using the house and carelessly
threw it down the Tunnell into the vault, where the murdered infant lay, and
taking noe regard thereof, suffered the Dog to remain there staruing and
crying for food the space of three days and nights, during which time the
yelping of the dog much disquieted the neighbors, and so troubled the dwellers
there abouts, that they could not sleep a nights for the noise, but especially
the good man of the house, who grieved to see a dumb beast so starued, and for
want of food thus to perish like a kind natured man caused the privy to be
opened and the poor curre taken up, which proved by Gods Justice the only
discouerer of the aforesaid fact for in taking up the dog, they were woeful
witnesses of the sweet Babe lying all besmeared with the filth of that
loathsome place. The sight whereof caused no small amazement, especially to the
good man of the house, who with a diligent care (as his duty was both to God
and his country) and that all such inhumaine deeds might be brought to light,
made it knowns to the Magistrates, which likewise with Christian care caused a
certain number of substantial women to ma^e search of suspected persons, and
of such who were like to be the murdered Infants mother, or murderer, amongst
many other loose livers and common harlots, of which number those by places
have too many, the more is the pity, this aforesaid murtheresse came to the
touch, where upon examination, she confessed the child to be borne with life,
and her self not worthy of life, and so pleading guilty she was brought to her
trial, and for the same araigned and condemned by the ^^nch of assize in the
old Baily the 18. and 19: of July last 1614. and has suffered death at Tyburne
the 21. following as an example, that god, either by beasts of the field,
souls of the air, fishes in the seas, worms in the ground, or things bearing
neither sense nor life will by one means or other make deeds of darkness
clear as day, that the world may behold his high working powers, and that no
malefactor can escape unpunished, though his deeds be as secret as the w^^kes
of hell, beyond the thought of humane imagination, convert us from sin great
God of Israel, so shall we never be endangered with the like persuasions, which
God in his mercy grant. Amen.

The Cripples complaint in the Dungeon at Newgate.
ME thinks I hear a doleful sound,
Within this dungeon under ground:
Prepare thy self (poor soul) to dye,
For so the Belmans voice does cry.
And Beggars all come ring my knell,
The Cripple now bids all farewell:
Both Crutches, Scrip, and patched gown,
Wherewith I begged from town to town.
Though limbs I want and could not go,
Yot was my mind not pleased so:
But had my faults, as others have,
Which brings me thus unto my grave.
In vain delights I spent my days,
And wronged my fortunes many ways:
The alms that good men gave me still,
I wasted to content my will.
For heaven had marked me out for shame,
Whereto I did my courses frame:
And as I was mishapt by kind,
Deformed also was my mind.
For by that sweet intising sin,
My sudden downfall did begin:
Wherein I set my hearts delight,
On wanton women day and night.
At last when I loves pleasures proved,
I hated her whom late I loved:
And sudden loathing, soon begun
Ashamed sore, of follies dun.
And still desired to end the life
Of her, I promised to make Wife:
For love so gaind can never last,
No sooner done, but love is past.
Then as my shame I hated her,
And would her death no time defer:
But armed with wroth in dead of night,
I traind her from all peoples sight.
That never more my follies great,
To my disgrace she should repeat:
Nor say unto the world, that I
Had lived with her most wantonly.
For in the fields we two alone,
With weeping tears and bitter moan:
She craved amends for my amiss.
To make her W^fe as reason is.
But I refused that honest course,
But did an act of sad remorse:
To end her shame with mine as then,
I did exceed the deeds of men.
The devil my helper at that hour,
For he as then had strongest power:
Nor by his means I could not faint,
Though I was lame and limbs did want.
My heart with furious rage possessed,
About her neck her girdle cast,
And forced so away her life,
Rather then make her married wife.
Never like deed by Cripple wrought,
For pleasures being too dearly bought,
Both old and young, both rich and poor,
Make never maid a common Whore.
For doing so my life I loss,
With burdens of repentant woes,
For wanton loves are witched things,
And with them still much sorrow brings.
Adieu vain world, the Cripple dies,
In this my life much wonder lies:
That borne a lame deformed wight,
Should thus take pride in loves delight.
Martha Scamblers Repentance.
Poor I the poorest now on earth,
may well accuse my cause of birth:
Not being borne I nere had known,
This guilt that has me overthrown.
Woe worth the cause of sin and shame,
Which stains my credit and good name:
Woe worth the trains which still are laid,
Whereby we women are betrayed.
When I was won to follies will,
And took delight in doing ill
No thought I had of pleasures past:
But still my youth did vainly wast.
Till at the length my womb did bread,
A substance of unlawful seeds:
Which I supposd a shame to be
(God knows) unto my friends and me.
And to prevent the worlds disgrace,
I sought to find a secret place,
My shameful burdened womb to ease,
That way which did my God displease.
O, when my hour of labor came,
To bring to light this fruit of shame,
No Midwiues help at all I sought,
But soon my own delivery wrought.
The Babe being borne and in my arms,
I should have kept it from all harms,
But like a Bear or Woolfe in wood,
I wished it smothered up in blood.
Whereat strange motions without fear,
From hell to me presented were,
And bad me bury it in a Vault,
For none alive did know my fault.
And so my credit and good name,
Should take no spot of black defame:
And I as pure and chaste should be,
From such a crime as any she.
My shoule then blinded by the Devil,
Bid me consent unto this evil:
Where I full soon thereto agreed,
To act a more then woman's deed.
The loathsome Iakes received my child,
Which all misdoubts and fear exild
For being tumbled down therein,
There well might end my shame and sin.
But God, this deed more dark then night,
In wondrous sort did bring to light,
For by a Dog the Child was found,
As it was thrown therein to drowned.
Three days and nights with yelping cry,
It troubled much the dwellers by,
Which caused them to release him thence,
And so found out this vile offense.
For which I surely now must taste,
Rewards for my offenses past,
And dye for that accursed crime,
That makes me monster of my time.
Both maids and men, both young and old,
Let not good lives with shame be sold,
But bear true virtues to your grave,
That honest burials you may have.
FINIS.

