By the Queen.
FOrasmuch as the Queens Majesty our Sovereign Lady is credibly enfourmed,
that the infection of the plague is at this present in sundry places in and
about the city of London, and in other places near adjoining to the same,
whereas by the continuance thereof through the greater repair and resort of
her loving Subjects, great peril and danger might not only ensue unto her
most royal person, but also unto her most loving Subjects repayring thither
for their suites and causes, and thereby also give occasion of dispersing of
the same in other parts of the Realm: Her Majesty for the said necessary
considerations, and hoping that the same will by the goodness of Almighty God,
with the coldness of the year, and such wholesome orders as are taken in her
said City, the rather sease by the adiorment of part of this next Term of
Sa^nt Michael now at hand, from the vtas of the same, until after the feast
of all Saints next coming. Her Majesty therefore of her especial favor and
clemency, is pleased and contented, to adiourne the said Term of S.
Michael: That is to say, from the vtas thereof, unto Crastino Animarum next
coming, which her Majesty signifies to all and singular her loving Subjects
of this her Realm, to the intent that they and every of them which has cause
or commandment to appear in any of her highness courts at Westminster, in
or at any day or time from and after the said vtas of S. Michael, may tarry at
their dwellynges, or where their business otherwise shall lie, without
resorting to any of the said courts for that cause before Crastino Animarum
next coming, and that without danger of forfayture, penalty, or contempt to
incur toward her highness in that behalf. And nevertheless her Majesty's
pleasure is, that two of her Justices, that is to say of either Benche one,
shall the first day of Michaelmas Term called Octabis Michaelis, according to
the ancient order of her laws, keep the Essoynes of the said Octabis
Michaelis, at which vtas of S. Michael, writtes of adiorment shall be directed to
the said Justices, giving them authority to adiourne the said Term of S.
Michael, that is to say, from the vtas thereof, until Crastino Animarum as
before is said, and the same adiorment shall be made in the first day of the said
vtas, commonly called the day of the Essoynes. And further her Majesty's
pleasure is, that all matters, causes, and suites dependyng in any of her other
Courts between party and party, as in her highness courts of Chauncery,
Star chaumber, and Exchequer, Courts of wards and liueries, and Duchy of
Lancaster, shall have continuance, and the parties shall have day from the date
of these presents, unto Crastino Animarum as before is said.

Provided always, and her Majesty's pleasure and commandment is, that all
Collectours, Receauers, Sheriffs, and other accomptauntes, and all other
persons that ought or should account or pay any sum, or sums of money, in
any of her Majesty's Court of Exchequer, courts of Wards and liueries, or of
her Duchy of Lancaster, or in any of them, or to enter into any account in any
of the same Courts, shall repair unto the accustomed places at Westminster,
where her highness has appointed such Officers and Ministers as for that
purpose her Majesty has thought expedient, and their to pay and do in every
behalf, as though no such Proclamation of adiornement had been had or made,
any thing mentioned in this present Proclamation, or in any writ of adiorment
to the contrary notwithstanding: Wyllyng and commanding all and every of her
Majesty's Officers, Ministers, and Subjects, to whom it does or shall
appertain, to observe and keep their assemblies and apparaunces, with all their
returns and certificates in her highness said courts at Westminster in
Crastino Animarum next coming, then and there to be holden and kept, and there
to do their offices and duties in every behalf, in like manner and form as
they should or ought to have done if this present Proclamation had not ben had
or made, as they will answer to the contrary at their perils.

Given at her Majesty's Castle of Windsor the 28. day of September, in the
eleventh year of her Majesty's reign. God save the Queen.
Imprinted at London in Powles Churchyard, by Richard Judge and John Cawood,
Printers to the Queens Majesty.


