By the Queen.
WHere the Queens Majesty has of late time had of her loving subjects,
certain sums of money by way of loan, for the repayment whereof, her
Majesty caused this last summer, knowledge to be given to the parties that
paid the same, at what time the same should be certaynely paid to every of
them, having respect to the times of their first payment made to the
Collectours: Her Majesty meaning to observe the same her determination, has
thought best to notify by this her proclamation, that the payment shall be made
in this sort following: that is to say, That every person that should, according
to the foresaid signification, and in respect of the time of their paymentes
made, receive any sums of money this month of November, shall have the same
freely and fully paid, before the end of this same present month of
November: and whosoever likewise should have payment according to the
foresaid signification, in the next month of December, shall have the same
also freely and fully paid, immediately after the twentieth of the same month
of December, and so consequently every person shall have like payment every
month afterward, immediately after the.xx. of the same month respectively.

And because her Majesty has been partly infourmed, that some abuse has been
heretofore in some ministers, having charge to make payment of the like sommes
lent to her Majesty, contrary to her meaning, and that in some part of the
Realm, some of her good subjects have been by sinister dealing induced to make
payment of parcels of the money demanded by privy Seal, which sums have been retained and not paid over to her Majesty's use, and some also has been
paid or lent by way of reward, to procure a forbearing to lend any to her
Majesty, which abuses her Majesty means to cause to be searched, tried, and
punished. And therefore for more surety, that none of her subjects, that has
lent to her Majesty, upon her privy Seals, any sum of money, should be
delayed or misused in the repayment: Her Majesty has given commission to the
Lord Keeper of her great Seal, the Earl of Leicester, the Lord of Burghley,
and sir Walter Myldmay knight, to direct the repayment thereof in this sort:
That whosoever shall bring her Majesty's letters of her privy Seal, with the
subscription, or byll of the Collectour, testifying the receipt of any money
demanded and contained in the said privy Seal, and show the same to the
Lord Keeper, or to any of the others, joined with him in commission for this
purpose, shall have order immediately to receive the whole sum due to him, at
Westminster, without paying any manner reward to any officer, or person, for
the payment, or for any manner color of expedition therein. And if any person
to whom the same shall be due, be not hable, or shall not be disposed to come
personally for the same, to any of the said Commissioners, or that (it may be)
the same may be deceassed, and so the debt due to some other: In those cases,
so as the letters of privy Seal, and the subscription or byll of the
Collectour, testifying the receipt thereof, be presented with some letter of
attorney, or other assignation in writing, sufficiently aucthorising the party
that shall present the same for receipt thereof: the said person shall also
have present free and full payment, and without delay or reward, in any sort
or manner. For such is her Majesty's intent, that her loving subjects should
be thankefully and freely paid, which also should have been to their proper
hands in the countries: but for more delays and vncertaynties, that thereof
many ways might follow, to the hynderaunce of her subjects.

Finally, her Majesty most earnestly desires, that if any person has been
misused by pretense of demaundyng any money upon any such privy Seal, to
give any thing in reward, or lend any portion to be spared from lendyng to
her Majesty, that the same persons will speedily notify the same, either to
the Sheryffe of the Shire, or to any such person as has had charge in these
last years past to be Lieuetenauntes of the Shires, or their deputies, or to
any other persons whom they shall think otherwise meet: whom also her
Majesty charge to make certificate to the said Lord Keeper, or any other
of the Commissioners now joined with him, and thereupon her Majesty will
order, that upon the certayntie thereof known, the parties shall have full
repayment thereof.

Given at our Manor of Grynwich, the.xxiiii. day of November. 1571. the.xiiii.
year of our Reign. God save the Queen.
Imprinted at London in Powles Churchyard, by Richard Judge and John Cawood,
Printers to the Queens Majesty.

Cum priuilegio Regiae Maiestatis.


