The form of the Proclamations to be published in the port towns, and market
towns, or other public places, within the limittes of the Commission given
by the Queens Majesty, the first of March, 1571. to sundry persons of
credit, for reformation of disorders upon the sea coasts.
THe Queens Majesty does strayghtly charge and command all the Sea Rouers,
commonly called Frebutters, of what nation or country so ever they be, to
depart, and avoid all her hyghnes Ports, Rodes, and Towns, with all speed,
and hereafter not to return to any of the same again, upon pain of
forfayture of their ships and goods, and imprisonment of their bodies at her
Majesty's pleasure.

And that no subject of her Majesty, nor any other inhabitant of this Realm,
do send or convey any victuales, munitions, or other necessaries to them, or
any of them, or by any ways or means, directly, or indirectly, do traffic
with them, or buy any wares, marchandizes, or other things of them, upon pain
of death.

And her Majesty's pleasure is, that if any shall do to the contrary in any
place, the chief officer of the Town or Port suffryng the same, shall be
committed to prison, to remain at her hyghnes pleasure, or her Counsel: and if
the Town be incorporate, the same shall be seized to her Majesty's hands.

And whosoever shall be manifestly convicted to offend, after the proclamation
hereof, in the premises, shall therefore suffer Marshal law, as a manifest
breaker of the common peace betwixt this Realm, and other Realms and
Countries.

Finally, if any of her Majesty's subjects, seruyng with any of the said
Frebutters, do forsake and avoid from such service, within five days after
knowledge had hereof, they shall have pardon of their lives for their former
offenses. And if they shall refuse to return, or not obey the same, they shall
suffer death by Marshal law, as before is said for the like consyderations

God save the Queen.
Imprinted at London in Powles Churchyard, by Richard Judge, and John Cawood,
printers to the Queens Majesty.

Cum priuilegio Regiae Maiestatis.


