By the Queen.
WHereas the Queens most Excellent Majesty by her highness Proclamation,
given at her Manor of Hauering the xiii. of July last for diverse
considerations in the same expressed, was pleased to shorten the day before
limited for the reading of the Lottery erected within her city of London, and
by the said Proclamation appointed the reading thereof to begin the third of
this present month of November, thinking the said Proclamation to have been a
sufficient warning and knowledge given to all such her Majesty's subjects as
had trust committed to them, in sundry Shires of the Realm, for collection of
the sums of money to be adventured in the said Lottery, for to have returned
the books sent to them for that purpose in time convenient, before the third
of this month. Nevertheless, the negligence of diverse having charge in the
same service, has been such, as until this time they have forborne to make due
return of the whole books, so as the said beginning of the reading of the
said Lottery, can not without prejudice of many of her Highness subjects
adventurers therein, presently proceed. Wherefore her Majesty meaning to have
the said reading neither to be taken in hand to the prejudice of a great number
of her subjects, neither yet to be hereafter longer prolonged then may seem
reasonable: wills all manner of persons, by this her highness Proclamation to
understand, that the said reading shall begin the tenth of January next
ensuing, and for no respect to be further prolonged. And straightly charge
and commands all and every her loving subjects whatsoever, having charge or
trust of any books, or otherwise touching the same committed to them, to
return the said several books before the last day of this month of
November: so as the other ministers having herein to do, may betwixt the said
day and the said tenth of January (which time also is requisite to be had for
the preparation of all things thereunto necessary) without all excuse, take
order and prepare themselves to the due execution hereof. Whereunto her
Majesty straightly charge and commands all her said officers, ministers,
and subjects, having to do therein, to have special regard, as they and every
of them will answer to their negligence at their perils.

Yeuen at our Honor of Hampton Court, the second day of November, the tenth
year of our Reign.
God save the Queen.
Printed at London in Powles Churchyard by Richard Judge, and John Cawood,
Printers to the Queens Majesty.

Cum priuilegio Regiae Maiestatis.


