By the Queen.
A Proclamation for the prices of Wines.
WHere it is ordained and provided by a statute made and established in the
Parliament holden at Westminster the viii. day of June, in the xxviii. year of
the Reign of the Queens Majesty's dearly beloved father of famous memory
King Henry the eight, that the prices of all kind of wines (that is to say) of
the Tun, Butte, Pipe, Punchion, Hogshead, Tyerse, Barrel, and Rundlet, when
it should be sold in gross, should be limited and declared by the Lord
Chauncelour of England, Lord Treasourer of England, Lord President of the said
Kings most honorable privy counsel, Lord privy Seal, and the two chief
Justices of either bench, or five, four, or three of them, and that the same
should be sold according to the same prices so by them set and taxed, upon
pain and penalty contained in the said Act: Forasmuch as the Lord Chancelour
of England, Lord Treasourer of England, and the two Lord chief Justices, for
diverse considerations them moving, and according to the effect and meaning of
the said statute and Act, have in writing by their deliberate aduises, upon
conference had with sundry persons thereto requisite, taxed, limited, assigned
and appointed the prices of Gascoigne and French wines to be sold within this
her highness Realm for this year following (that is to say) Every Tun of
the best Gascoigne and French wines to be sold (the seller bearing all the
charges due and payable to her Majesty in her Custom house) after the rate
and price of xv. li. sterling the Tun and not above: The buyer bearing all
the said charges, after the price and rate of xii. li. vi. s. viii. d. sterling
the Tun, and not above. And every Pipe, Butte, Hogshead, Tyerse, Barrel,
Rundlet, and other vessels of the same several wines to be sold in gross after
their quantities according to the same rates, and not above. And every Tun of
Rochel and other small and thin wines to be sold (the seller bearing all the
charges due and payable to her Majesty in her Custom house) after the price
and rate of xiii. li. sterling the Tun, and not above. And the buyer bearing
the said charges, at x. li. vi. s. viii. d. sterling the Tun and not above.
And every Butte, Pipe, Hogshed, Tyerse, Barrel, Rundlet, and other vessels of
the same several wines to be sold in gross after their quantities, according
to the same rates, and not above.

The Queens most excellent Majesty therefore straightly charge and
commands all and singular her loving Subjects and others putting any manner
Gascoigne, French, Rochel, or other small or thin wines to sale within this
her highness Realm, that they, ne any of them in any manner of wise by any
craft, couin, or private agreement shall sell any Gascoigne, French, Rochel, or
other small or thin wines, otherwise then is above limited, upon pain to
forfeit and pay such penalty as is contained and expressed in the said
statute, or in any other statute made or ordained for the same. And moreover
her highness pleasure and commandment is, that all and singular Majors,
Sheriffs, Bayliffes, Constables and other officers to whom it apperteineth,
that they, and every of them with diligence, cause and see that this her
Proclamation be put in due execution after the tenor of the same, and also
according to an other Act of Parliament established in the Parliament above
rehearsed, against such as will refuse to sell their wines at prices taxed as
is aforesaid, as they will answer thereto at their perils.

Given at our House in the Strond the xxvi. day of November in the xxxi. year
of your reign.
Imprinted at London by the Deputies of Christopher Barker, Printer to the
Queens most excellent Majesty.


