By the Queen.
HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE royal blazon or coat of arms
A proclamation for the prices of wine.
WHere it is ordained and provided by a statute made and established in a
Parliament holden at Westminster the viii. day of June in the xxviii. year of
the reign of the Queens Majesty's dearly beloved father of famous memory
king Henry the eight, that the prices of al kind of wines (that is to say) of
the Tun, Butte, Pipe, Punchion, Hogshed, Tyerse, Barrel, Rundlet, when it
should be sold in gross, should be lymitted and declared by the Lord
Chancellor of England, Lord Treasourer of England, Lord President of the said
Kings most honorable counsel, Lord privy seal, and the two chief Justices
of either benche, or five, four, or three of them, and that the same should be
sold according to the same prices so by them set and taxed upon pain and
penalty contained in the said Act. Forasmuch as the Lord Chancellor of
England, Lord Treasourer of England, and the two Lord chief Justices for
diverse considerations them moving, and according to the effect and meaning of
the said statute and act, have in writing by their deliberate aduices upon
conference had with sundry persons thereto requisite, taxed, limited, assigned
and appointed the prices of Gascoigne and French wines to be sold within this
her highness Realm for this year following (that is to say,) Every Tun of
the best Gascoigne and French wines to be sold (the seller bearing all the
charges due and payable to her Majesty in her Custom house) after the rate
and price of twelve pounds sterling and not about. The buyer bearing all the
said charges after the price and rate of ix. li. vi. s. vii. d. sterling the
Tun, and not above. And every Pipe, Hogshed, Tyerse, Barrel, Rundlette, and
other vessels of the same several wines to be sold in gross after their
quantities according to the same rates, and not above. And euey Tun of
Rochell and other small and thin wines to be sold (the seller bearing all the
charges due and parable to her Majesty in her Custom house) after the price
and rate of Tenne-poundes sterling the Tun and not above. And the buyer
bearing the said charges at vii. li. vi. s. viii. d. sterling the Tun, and
not above. And every Pipe, Hogshed, Tyerse, Barrel, Rundlette, and other
vessels of the same several wines to be sold in gross after their
quantities according to the same rates (and not above.) The Queens most
excellent Majesty therefore straightly charge and commands all and
singular her loving Subjects and others putting any manner Gascoigne, French,
Rochell, or other small or thin wines to sale within this her highness
Realm, that they, ne any of them in any manner of wise by any craft, couin, or
private agreement shall sell any Gascoigne, French, Rochell or other small or
thin wines, otherwise then is above lymitted upon pain to forfeyt and pay
such penalties as be contained and expressed in the said statute, or in any
other statute made or ordained for the same. And moreover her highness
pleasure and commandment is, that all and singular Majors, Sheriffs,
Bayliffes, Constables and other officers to whom it apperteineth, that they,
and every of them with diligence, cause and see that this her Proclamation be
put in due execution after the tenor of the same, and also according to an
other act of Parliament established in the Parliament above rehearsed, against
such as will refuse to sell their wines at prices taxed as is aforesaid, as
they will answer thereto at their perils.

Given at his highness Manor of Richmount the third day of November in the
xvii. years of her highness reign.
Imprinted at London by Christopher Barker Printer to the Queens most
excellent Majesty.


