HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE royal blazon or coat of arms
By the Queen.
WHere in the Parliament holden at Westminster, in the thirteenth year of the
Queens Majesty's Reign, amongst other things, there was one Act and Statute
made, entitled an Act against usury, which Act was then made to continue
for, and during the space of five years next after the end of the said
Parliament, and from the end of the said five years, to the end of the first
Session of the Parliament then next ensuing, as by the same Act more at large
it does appear. And forasmuch as the said five years were ended and expired in
the eighteenth year of her Majesty's reign, during the tune of the second
session of this present Parliament begun at Westminster in the fourteenth year
of her Majesty's reign, and by diverse prorogations yet continuing: therefore
some doubts and questions have bin lately moved, whether the said Act and
Statute should continue but unto the end of the last Session of this present
Parliament, which in deed was the third Session of the said Parliament begun in
the said 14. year of her Majesty's reign, and first holden after the end of
the said five years, or else unto the end of the first Session of the next
Parliament that hereafter shall fortune to be newly summoned. Wherefore her
Highness considering that such doubts and questions being moved and spread
abroad, may breed some troubles and many inconveniences amongst her loving
Subjects, has therefore thought good to use the advice of her Judges and
Counsel learned therein. And finding plainly by their opinions that the said
Act and Statute was not determined or expired at the end of the said last
Session of Parliament, but does yet stand in full strength and force until
the end of the first Session of the next Parliament, which hereafter shall
fortune to be newly summoned: Does now by the advice of her Majesty's privy
Counsel for the avoiding of all troubles that by the occasion of such
fryuolous questions might hereafter ensue, notify and declare by this her
Majesty's Proclamation, to all her loving subjects, that the said Act and
Statute does and shall continue and remain in full force and effect, until
the end of the first Session of the next Parliament, which hereafter shall
fortune to be newly summoned. And so wills and straightly charge and
commands all and every her said subjects, to accept o. it as a law, yet
standing in full force according to the good meaning thereof, without any such
doubts or questions thereupon hereafter to be had, made, or moved by any person
or persons whatsoever, in any of her Highness courts of Record or else where.

Given at her Majesty's Palace of Westminster the nineteenth day of May. In
the xxiii. year of her Highness Reign.
Imprinted at London by Christopher Barker, Printer to the Queens most
excellent Majesty.


