By the Queen.
A Proclamation for the prices of wines.
WHere it is ordained and provided by a statute made and established in the
Parliament holden at Westminster the viii. day of June, in xxviii. year of the
Reign of the Queens Majesty's dearly beloved father of famous memory King
Henry the eight, that the prices of all kind of wines (that is to say) of the
Tun, Butte, Pipe, Punchion, Hogshed, Tyerse, Barrel, and Rundlet, when it
should be sold in gross, should be limited and declared by the Lord
Chauncelor of England, Lord Treasourer of England, Lord President of the said
Kings most honorable counsel, Lord privy seal, and the two chief Justices
of either benche, or five, four, or three of them, and that the same should
be sold according to the same prices so by them set and taxed upon pain and
penalty contained in the said Act: Forasmuch as the Lord Chancelour of
England, Lord Treasourer of England, and the two Lord chief Justices for
diverse considerations them moving, and according to the effect and meaning of
the said statute and act, have in writing by their deliberate aduises upon
conference had with sundry persons thereto requisite, taxed, limited, assigned
and appointed the prices of Gascoigne and French wines to be sold within this
her highness Realm for this year following (that is to say) Every Tun of
the best Gascoigne and French wines to be sold (the seller bearing all the
charges due and payable to her Majesty in her Custom house) after the rate
and price of xii. pounds sterling the Tun and not above, The buyer bearing
all the said charges after the price and rate of ix. li. vi. s. viii. d.
sterling the Tun, and not above. And every Pipe, Butte, Hogshed, Tyerse,
Barrel, Rundlette, and other vessels of the same several wines to be sold
in gross after their quantities according to the same rates, and not above.
And every Tun of Rochel and other small and thin wines to be sold (the
seller bearing all the charges due and payable to her Majesty in her Custom
house) after the price and rate of ten pounds sterling the Tun, and not
above. And the buyer bearing the said charges at vii. li. vi. s. viii. d.
sterling the Tun, and not above. And every Butte, Pipe, Hogshed, Tyerse,
Barrel, Rundlette, and other vessels of the same several wines to be sold in
gross after their quantities according to the same rates and not above. The
Queens most excellent Majesty therefore straightly charge and commands
all and singular her loving Subjects and others putting any manner Gascoigne,
French, Rochel, or other small or thin wines to sale within this her highness
Realm, that they, ne any of them in any manner of wise by any craft, couin, or
private agreement shall sell any Gascoigne, French, Rochel or other small or
thin wines, otherwise then is above limited upon pain to forfeite and pay
such penalty as is contained and expressed in the said statute, or in any
other statute made or ordained for the same. And moreover her highness
pleasure and commandment is, that all and singular Majors, Sheriffs,
Bayliffes, Constables and other officers to whom it apperteineth, that they,
and every of them with diligence, cause and see that this her Proclamation be
put in due execution after the tenor of the same, and also according to an
other act of Parliament established in the Parliament above rehearsed against
such as will refuse to sell their wines at prices taxed as is aforesaid, as
they will answer thereto at their perils.

Given at our Manor of Saint James the sixth day of November in the five and
twentieth year of our reign.
Imprinted at London by Christopher Barker, Printer to the Queens most
excellent Majesty.


