By the Queen.
A Proclamation against the Sectaries of the Family of love.
WHereas by report of sundry of the Bishops of this Realm, and others having
cure of souls, the Queens Majesty is informed, that in sundry places of her
said Realm, in their several Diocesses, there are certain persons which do
secretly in corners, make pryuy assemblies of diverse simple unlearned people,
and after they have craftily and hypocritically allured them to esteem them to
be more holy and perfect men then other are, they do then teach them damnable
heresies, directly contrary to diverse of the principal Articles of our Belief
and Christian faith, and in some parts so absurd and fanatical, as by fayning
to them selves a monstrous new kind of speech never found in the Scriptures,
nor in ancient father of writer of Christ's Church, by which they do move
ignorant and simple people at the first rather to marvel at them, then to
understand them: but yet to color their sect withal, they name them selves
to be of the family of love, and then as many as shall be allowed by them to
be of that family, to be elect and saved, and all others of what Church so
ever thy be, to be rejected and damned: And for that upon conuenting of some of
them before the Bishops and ordinaries, it is found that the ground of their
sect is maintained by certain lewd, heretical, and seditious books first made
in the Dutch tongue, and lately translated into English, and printed beyond
the seas, and secretly brought over into the realm, the author whereof they
name E. N. without yielding to him upon their examination, any other name. In
whose name they have certain Books set forth, called Euangelium Regni, or a
joyful Message of the Kingdom. Documentall sentences. The Prophecy of the
spi^^^ ^^^ue. A publishing of the peace upon the earth, and such like. And
considering also it is found, that these Sectaries hold opinion, that they may
before any Magistrate Ecclesiastical or temporal, or any other person not being
professed to be of their sect (which they term the family of love) by oath or
otherwise deny any thing for their advantage, so as though many of them are
well known to be teachers and spreaders abroad of these dangerous and
damnable s;ects, yet by their own confession they can not be condemned,
whereby they are more dangerous in any Christian Realm: Therefore her Majesty
being very sorry to see so great an evil by the malice of the Devil first begun
and practiced in other countries, to be now brought into this her Realm, and
that by her Bishops and ordinaries, she understands it very requisite, not
only to have these dangerous Heretics and Sectaries to be severely punished,
but that also all other means be used by her Majesty's Royal authorytie,
which is given her of God to defend Christ's church, to root them out from
further infecting of her Realm, she has thought meet and convenient, and so
by this her proclamation. she wills and commands that all her officers and
Ministers temporal, shall in all their several vocations, assist the Archbyshops
and Bishops of her Realm, and all other persons Ecclesiastical, having cure
of soul, to search out all persons duly suspected to be either teachers or
professors of the foresaid damnable seets, and by all good means to proceed
severely against them being found culpable, by order of the laws either
Ecclesiastical or temporal, and that also search be made in all places
suspected for the books and writings maintayning the said heresies and sects,
and them to destroy and burn. And wheresoever such books shall be found after
the publication hereof, in custody of any person, other then such as the
ordinaries shall permit, to the intent to peruse the same for confutation
thereof, the same persons to be attached and committed to close prison, there
to remain, or otherwise by law to be condemned, until the same shall be purged
and cleared of the same Heresies, or shall recant the same, and be thought meet
by the ordinary of the place to be delivered. And that whosoever in this
Realm shall either print, or bring, or cause to be brought into this Realm,
any of the said books, the same persons to be attached and committed to
prison, and to receive such bodily punishment and other mulet, as fautors of
damnable Heresies. And to the execution hereof, her Majesty charge all her
Officers and Ministers both Ecclesiastical and Temporal, to have special
regard, as they will answer not only before God, whose glory and truth is by
these damnable sects greatly sought to be defaced, but also will avoid her
Majesty's indignation, which in such cases as these are, they ought not to
escape, if they shall be found negligent and careless, in the Execution of
their authorities.

Given at our Manor of Richmond the third of October, in the two and twentieth
year of our Reign.
Imprinted at London by Christopher Barker, Printer to the Queens most
excellent Majesty.


