By the Queen.
THe Queens most excellent Majesty being credibly informed that the infection
of the plague is at this present greatly increased and dispersed as well in the
City of London and Westminster, and other places near adjoining to the same,
and also in diverse other parts of this Realm. And considering that great
peril and danger might ensue, not only unto her Majesty's royal Person, but
also to her most loving Subjects, if the people of all sorts, and out of all
parts of this Realm should repair and resort together for their suits and
causes the next Term commonly called Trinity Term: Has therefore thought
good by the advice of her privy Counsel and Justices of her Courts at
Westminster to adiourne part of the same Term, That is to say, from the second
Return of the said Term commonly called Octabis Trinitatis, until the
fourth Return of the same Term commonly called Tres Trinitatis, And that to
be for such causes only, and for such intent and purpose, as hereafter is
declared. And therefore her Majesty does hereby signify and declare, that
her will and pleasure is, that Writs of adiournement shall be directed to the
Justices of either Benche, and to the Judges of all other her Majesty's Courts
to whom like Writs have been usually directed, Giving them authority to
adiourne the said Term from Octabis Trinitatis next, until Tres Trinitatis
then next following. And the said Adiournement to be made the first day of the
said Octabis Trinitatis, called the day of Essoynes.

And whereas her Majesty considering in her princely wisdom what great
prejudice might grow to many her good and loving subjects in their causes and
suites, if the next Term should be wholly adiourned, has therefore by the advice of her said Counsel and Justices, determined to have some part thereof
to be holden and continued for some few days in the beginning and ending of
the same as is aforesaid. Her Highness most gracious intention in that behalf
is, that the same days for which some part of the said Term is to be holden,
shall be used only for the better expediting and continuing of causes and suits,
and returning and suing out of Process, and for such other like things, which
may be performed and done in the absence of the parties by their Atturneis. And
therefore her Majesty does by this her Proclamation signify to al her loving
subjects that her will and pleasure is, that during the said Term there shall
not be any trialles by Iuries or any judgments upon Demurrers, or special
Verdicts, or such like, in any of her Highness Courts of Kings Bench, Common
Pleas, or Exchequer. And also that there shall not be any judicial hearing or
determining of any causes or matters in any of her Majesty's Courts of
Star Chamber, Chauncery, Exchequer chamber, Court of Wards, Duchie-chamber,
or Court of Requests, saving only orders to be given in the same last mentioned
Courts the first, second and third days of the same Term for the better
directing and continuing of causes, and that no party shall need to be present
in person for any such causes or suites, but the same may be attended and done
by their Atturneies.

And her Majesty does hereby further notify and declare, that no party shall
be compelled, or need to appear in person in any of her Majesty's said Courts
at any time during the said next Term, but may make their appearance by their
Atturneis, saving only in cases of outlawrie, and other the cases mentioned in
the prouiso hereafter following. And also that no Iuries, or any whom the same
may concern, shall be compelled or need to appear in any of her Highness Courts
at Westminster at any time during the said Term, for any cause or matter
whatsoever, unless it be for some special and important cause for her
Majesty's service only.

Provided nevertheless, and her Majesty's pleasure and commandment is, that
all Collectors, Receivers, Shiriffes and other Accomptants, and all other
persons, that should or ought to account or pay any sum or sums of money in
any of her Majesty's Courts of Exchequer, Court of Wards and Liueries, or of
her Duchy of Lancaster, or in any of them, or enter into any Account in any
of the said Courts shall repair to the accustomed places at Westminster, and
there to pay and do in every behalf as though no such Proclamation of
Adiournement had been had or made.

And her Highness further pleasure, and commandment is, that all Shirifes
shall return their writtes and process, against all such Accomptantes and
debtors at the days therein appointed: And if any person or persons, who ought
to account or pay any sum or sums of money to her Majesty in any of the
Courts and places aforesaid, do make default therein, that then her
Highness Writs and Process shall be awarded and sent forth against every such
person and persons, and the same to be duly and orderly served, and returned by
the Shiriffes and Officers thereunto appointed, in such like manner and form,
as the same soulde have been if this present Proclamation had not been made.
And if any Sheriff or other Officer shall make default, or be negligent in
serving, executing, or returning of any the Writs and Process aforesaid: That
then every such Shiriffe, and other Officer shall incur such pains and
penalties as by the said Courts shall be taxed and assessed. Willing and
commanding all and every her Majesty's Sheriffs, and other Officers,
ministers, and Subjects, to whom it does or shall appertain, and by this her
Highness Proclamation not dispensed withal, to keep their assemblies and
apparances with all their returns and certificates in her Highness Courts at
Westminster, in the said Crastino Trinitatis, and Tres Trinitatis, then and
there to be holden and kept, as if this Proclamation had not been had as they
will answer to the contrary at their perils.

Given at her Highness Manor of Nonesuch, the xxviii. day of May, in the xxxv.
year of her Highness reign. 1593.
Imprinted at London by the Deputies of Christopher Barker, Printer to the
Queens most excellent Majesty.


