Certain necessary Articles set out by the Archbishop of York and his
Associates, Commissioners in causes Ecclesiastical, to be observed in the
Diocese of York. 1582. Martij. 3.
WHereas not withstandyng the great plenty of knowledge which in these days
of the Gospel it has pleased God to power forth among us in most bountiful
manner: yet diverse of the people in many places remain still in ignorance and
Superstition, not much regardyng godly instruction, and withdrawyng them
selves more and more from divine service on the Sabbath days and other
Hollidaies by law appointed, upon every triefling occasion, which rather
following their own fantasy, and seeking their own pleasures, then studying
to serve God according to his laws. We have thought good on the behalf of the
glory of God, and for the souls health of the people, to have a special
regard to this matter, and by the authority of the high Commission for
causes Ecclesiastical to us committed, to provide that the good and godly
laws on that behalf made, be more diligently put in execution, upon pain
of such censures, punishments, and fines, as by the Queens Maistes laws and
her highness Commission to us directed are already provided: and so much the
rather at this present, because of the want of convenient instruction, and by
means of so much absenting themselves from the Church, and the needful
exercises of Religion used therein, diverse of them do become in the end wilful
recusantes, and very evil subjects besides: as diverse examples of late have
given sufficient testimony thereof.

We therefore, Edwin by the grace of God, Archbishop of York, Primate of
England, and Metropolitan, and other our Associates her Majesty's
Commissioners for causes Ecclesiastical within the Province of York: whose
names are under written, do in the name of God most instantly require, and by
virtue of her Majesty's Commission before said, to us and others directed most
straightly, charge and command that these few points ensewing, be more
diligently observed of all, as unto every one it shall appertain.

FIrst, That Ministers do their duty.
that all which are of the Ministry, do not only read unto the people
distinctly and reverently divine Service and Homilies, and (such as are able
and aucthorised) preach unto them likewise as is appointed, but also that they
Catechize the younger sort as is prescribed, teaching them both to say it by
heart and to understand the same in reasonable manner: And that in quiet and
gentle manner they likewise teach the residue of their Parish (so many ^ (...)
already cannot do it) the Articles of the faith, the ten Commandments, and
the Lords Prayer, both to say them by heart, and in some good measure also to
understand them, and that they do it in so diligent and faithful manner, as
becomes and behooves those which are to give account of the same in the day
of the Lord.

Secondly, That the people keep Church and Catechism.
that the people themselves together with their children and servant come
diligently both to Morning and Euenyng Prayer: and that then and there they
give diligent ear withal reverence to the word of God, and that they have
their servants and children at convenient time in the afternoon at Evening
Prayer, as is already appointed, to the Catechism, to be instructed and
examined therein: and themselves likewise so often as they may conveniently be
also there, to hear those things expounded for their own instruction, that so
they may be more ready to come to the Lords Table so often and accordingly,
as by law they are bound at the least.

Thirdly, That church warde^s take the forfaiture of absentes.
that the Church wardens be not absent themselves neither from Morning nor
Evening Prayer without special cause: and in such case, that they have some
of their honest neighbors sufficient for the office to supply their roumes.
And that they diligently mark what Householders or others of their families are
absent either from divine Service or Catechism, or otherwise misbehaue
themselves there, that after Service together with their Minister they take a
note thereof in writing (especially of the cheifest offenders) and after leuy
of them by way of distress the for faiture by Statute appointed (if they have
not lawful and reasonable cause of their absence) as they are by Statute
directed: and that they bestow the same on the poor as accordingly is
appointed: And that if any Churchwardens make default herein, the Minister
certify us thereof in convenient time, that reformation thereof be not
ouerlong delaied.

Fourthly, That church wardens keep a note thereof.
that the Churchwardens shall keep a continual account of such sommes so
received and bestowed, and once every quarter of the year make by those
accomptes to their own proper Ministers in writing: and that done, lay the
same up in the common Chest under safe custody to be in a readiness to be
showed to the said Archbishopp and his said Associates, or to three of them;
so often as they shall think good to call for the same, or otherwise to be
showed to such as they shall think good from time to time to appoint for the
better execution thereof and ease of the people, that so the offenders therein
may be known and punished accordingly.

Lastly, we exhort and require all Preachers lawfully aucthorised, that they
do not only look to their own charge, but also so much as conveniently they
can, help to supply the want which is in their next and nigh neighbors not
able by themselves to feed their flock. And we also charge and command the
Churchwardens that they suffer none to preach, or serve as Curate, unless
they be allowed and lawfull^ licensed thereunto by sufficient authority.

Edwyne Eborum. William Palmer. Mathewe Hutton. Henry Wright. To. Lougher.
Ry. Percy.



