By the Queen.
THe Queens Majesty being duly informed how greatly and in many places the
infection of the sickness is at this time dispersed, by reason whereof her
Highness in her princely care and wisdom, waying the danger thereof, and how
necessary it is to have restraint made of haunt and repair to her Majesty's
Court, does upon this good consideration, and that her Court may (with Gods
favor) be the better preserved from infection, charge and command, that no
manner persons, but such as have cause to remain or come to her Court for their
ordinary attendance upon her Majesty's person, or to do service in her Court,
shall make their repair to her Court, or within two miles of the same, upon
pain to be committed to prison for their contempt. And where by her Majesty's
commandment there are certain orders made, who, and how many shall be
commanded to attend for the service of her Majesty, either for her Chamber, or
for her household, or for attendance upon her Counsailors, or other her
Majesty's ordinary Servants in Court, and that no mo shall be admitted to
follow the Court, or to enter into the same: Her Majesty straightly charge
both her Counsailors and her principal officers of her Chamber, and of her
Household, that they see the same orders duly observed, and that such as shall
break the same orders, shall be sharply punished. And considering that
Trinity Term begun at Westminster the fifteenth day of this month, in some
part is adiourned, as by her Highness Proclamation is notified, Her Majesty
also commands that all private suitors shall forbear to come to the Court
where her Majesty shall reside, until the ninth day of October next. And if
there be any extraordinary cause for any person to come to the Court with
matter to be certified to her Majesty, or to any of her privy Counsel, who
shall require to be heard presently without further delay, the same party
shall not enter within the gates of her Majesty's Court, until he have either
by her Majesty's Porters of her gates, or by some other person allowed to serve
within the Court, given knowledge of his name, place and Country, from whence
he comes, to be signified to the Lord Chamberlain, or Vice-chamberlaine, or
to some other person of her Majesty's privy Counsel, and thereupon as the
case shall require, to be licenced by any of them to come within the gates of
her Court, and not to tarry any longer then they shall be so licenced. And if
the parties shall have only letters to deliver to any within the Court, then
not to come within the Court gates, but to send the same letters to the persons
to whom they are directed, from whom when they shall have answer, they shall
not longer continue near to the Court, upon pain of imprisonment. Finally,
her Majesty commands that no manner of person allowed to attend in her Court,
shall repair to London, or to the suburbs or places within two miles of the
City, nor any other City, Borough, Town, Village, or places infected,
without special license of the Counsailor or other officer under whom he
serves, in writing to be showed to any officer that shall seek to impeach
him, upon pain to be imprisoned by attachment of the knight Marshall or of
his officers, if the party shall not show in writing sufficient warrant both
for his going and returning. Her Majesty also straightly charge and
commands the Knight Marshall of her Household, that he shall cause due search
to be made of all Vagabonds commonly called Rogues that shall haunt about the
Court, or in any places within the Verge, and them to apprehend and commit, to
be ordered and punished according to the laws provided for such offenders.

Given at her Highness Manor of Nonesuch, the xviii. day of June, 1593. and
in the xxxv. year of her Majesty's Reign.
God save the Queen.
Imprinted at London by the Deputies of Christopher Barker, Printer to the
Queens most excellent Majesty.


