By the Queen.
A Proclamation to restrain access to the Court, of all such as are not bound
to ordinary attendance, or that shall not be otherwise licenced by her
Majesty.
THe Queens Majesty upon good consideration that her Court may (with Gods
favor) be the better preserved from the insection of sickness in this time,
commands that no manner persons, but such as have cause to remain or come to
her Court for their ordinary attendance upon her Majesty's person, or to do
service in her Court, shall make their repair to her Court, or within two miles
of the same, upon pain to be committed to prison for their contempt. And
where by her Majesty's commandment there are certain orders made, who, and
how many shall be commanded to attend for the service of her Majesty, either
for her Chamber, or for her Household, or for attendance upon her Counsailors,
or other her Majesty's ordinary servants in Court, and that no more shall be
allowed to solow the Court, or to enter into the same: Her Majesty straightly
charge both her Counsailors and her principal Officers of her Chamber, and
of her Household, that they see the same orders duly observed, and that such as
shall break the same orders, may be sharply punished. And considering the
Term of S. Michael which should have begun at Westminster the ninth of this
month, is adiourned, as by her proclamation is notified, her Majesty also
commands, That all private suitors shall forbear to come to the Court, where
her Maieslie shall reside, until the twentieth of November next. And if there
shall be any extraordinary cause for any person to come to the Court with
matter to be certified to her Majesty, or to any of her privy Counsel, who
shall require to be heard presently without further delaie, the same party
shall not enter within the gates of her Majesty's Court, until he have either
by her Majesty's Porters of her gates, or by some other person allowed to scrue
within the Court, given knowledge of his name and Country from whence he
comes, to be signified to the Lord Chamberlain or Vicechamberlaine, or to
some other person of her Majesty's privy Counsel, And thereupon, as the case
shall require, to be licenced by any of them to come within the gates of her
Court, and not to tarry any longer then they shall be so licenced. And if the
parties shall have only letters to deliver to any within the Court, Then, not
to come within the Court gates, but to send the same letters to the persons to
whom they are directed: from whom when they shall have answer, they shall not
longer continue near to the Court, upon pain of imprisonment. Finally, her
Majesty commands that no manner of person allowed to attend in her Court,
shall repair to London, or to the suburbs or places within two miles of the
City, without special license of the Counsailor or other Officer under whom he
serves, in writing, to be showed to any officer that shall seek to impeach
him, upon pain to be imprisoned by attachment of the knight Marshal, or of his
officers, if the party shall not show in writing sufficient warrant both for
his going and returning. Her Majesty also straightly charge and commands
the knight Marshal of her household, that he shall cause due search to be made
of all vagabonds, commonly called Rogues, that shall haunt about the Court, or
in any places within the Verge, and them to apprehend and commit either to the
Marshalsea, or to deliver them to the nert Constables to be sent to the common
gaoles next to the place where they shall be apprehended, there to be ordered and
punished according to the laws provided for such offenders.

Given at her Majesty's Honor of Hampton court, the twelfth day or October,
1592, in the four and thirtieth year of her Majesty's reign.
Imprinted at London by the Deputies of CHRISTOPHER BARKER, Printer to the
Queens most excellent Majesty. 1592.


