By the Queen.
ELizabeth by the grace of God etc.
To our right trusty and right well-beloved Counselor, William Lord Burghley
our high Treasorer of England, To all our Judges of all our Courts at
Westminster, to the Barons of our Exchequer, to all olther Judges in any Court
of Record within our Realm of England, and to all Majors, Shirifes, Customers
and Comptrollers of our Ports, Alnagers, Searchers, and all others our officers
and ministers whatsoever, and to all others to whom it shall appertain,
greeting.
Whereas humble suit and petition has of long time ben made unto us by our
loving Subjects the Clothiers Suffolk, Norffolk, and Essex, for some
reasonable mitigation and tolleration of the strictness of the Statutes now
standing in force, touching the making of clothes within the same Counties: And
namely one statute made in the fifth and sixth years of the reign of King
Edward the sixth, entitled an Act for the true making of woollen Cloth, and
one other statute made in the fourth and fifth years of the reigns of King
Philip and Queen Mary, entitled an Act touching the making of woollen Clothes,
which as we are credible informed, are by experience found to be such as the
makers of the said Clothes cannot by any means precisely and fully perform
and observe, albeit they have endeavored themselves thereunto according to
their best skill and industry, and as much as in them did lie: And so the said
Clotheiers in extremity of law, have incurred, and do daily incur the
danger of the penalties and forfeitures limited in and by the said Statutes,
for which many of them have been impleaded and sued, and otherwise grievously
molested and vexed by informers and searchers: By reason whereof they have
forsaken and left their trade, to the great decay of cloth making within the
said Counties, and to the impouerishment and utter undoing of great nombers of
poor people there, which heretofore have been relieved and set on work by the
same; A matter likely to grow to further inconvenience, if some speedy course
be not taken for redress thereof. Whereupon we, of our Princely and godly
disposition having a most tender care and regard of our said good and loving
subjects, and desiring as much as in us lies, to provide convenient and
speedy relief for them, in that behalf: have by the advice of the Lords and
others of our privy Counsel, who have had the examination thereof, and with
great deliberation have caused certain orders to be devised and set down for
mitigation of the extremities and strictnes of the said statutes, and for
tolleration with the said Clothiers for and concerning the same, so as they
should not be vexed with any suits by informatio^s or actions, as long as they
shall observe the said orders, which said orders we have caused to be hereunto
annexed: Straightly charging and commanding as well the Clothiers aforesaid, as
also all others to whom it shall or may in any wise appertain, duly to observe
and perform the same in all things. And our express will and pleasure is, that
none of the Clothiers within our said counties of Suff. Norff. and Essex, which
shall fully and truly in all things observe, fulfill, and accomplish the said
orders according to the effect and true meaning of the same, shall in any wise
be sued, impeached, troubled or molested by any Alnager, searcher or informer,
or any other person or persons whatsoever, for or by reason of the breach or
not performing of the said statutes or any of the^, or for or concerning any
forfeiture or penalty therein contained: which we require you all to see
obeserued in all Courts, where any person shall offer to implead them, contrary
to the good intention of the said orders. And these tollerations to endure
during our pleasure, or until by Parliament the same may be further considered
and established, as the like provision has been made for Western cloths in the
xxvii. year of our reign. We will also that at the request of the clothiers of
Suff. Norff. and Essex or any of them, the orders hereunto annexed shall be
published and fixed up in our city of London, in places convenient, and
likewise published in such market and port Towns as shall be thought needful in
the said Counties. Al which shall be done by order and direction of our privy
Counsel, as they shall think meet from time to time.

Given under our signet at our Manor of Greenewich the xiii, day of March, in
the xxxii, year of our Reign.

