By the Queen.
A Proclamation for adiournment of part of Michaelmas Term. 1581.
FOrasmuch as the Queens Majesty our sovereign Lady is credibly informed,
that the infection of the plague is at this present in sundry places, in and
about the City of London, and in other places near adjoining to ye same:
Whereas by the continuance thereof, through the greater repair and resort of
her loving subjects, great peril and danger might not only ensue unto her
most royal person, but also to her most loving subjects repairing thither for
their suits and causes, and thereby also give occasion of dispersing of the
same into other parts of the Realm, her Majesty for the said necessary
considerations, and hoping that the same will by the goodness of Almighty God,
with the coldness of the year, and such wholesome orders as are taken in her
said (...) the rather cease by the adiournment of part of this next term of
Saint Michael now at hand from the Vtas of the same, until the fourth return
of the said Term, called Mensis Michaelis next coming: Her Majesty
therefore ^^der especial favor and clemency, is pleased and contented adiorne
the said Term of Saint Michael, That is to (...) from the vtas thereof unto
the said fourth return of the said Term, called Mensis Michaelis next
coming, which ^er Majesty signifies to all and singular her loving subjects
of this her Realm, to the intent that they and every of them, (...) has cause
or commandment to appear in any of her Highness Courts at Westminster, in or
at any day or time from and after said vtas of Saint Michael, may tarrye at
their dwellinges, or where their business otherwise (...), without resorting to
any of the said Courts for that cause before Mensis Michaelis next coming,
and that whereat danger of forfeiture, penalty, or contempt to incur
toward her Highness in that behalf. And neuertheless her Majesty's pleasure
is, that two of her Justices, that is say, of either Benche one, shall the
first day of Mi^^^^^mas Term called Octabis Michaelis, according to the
ancient order of her Laws, keep the Essoynes of the (...) (...) Michaelis,
at which vtas of Saint Michael, Writtes of Adiornement shall be directed to the
said Justices, ^^^^ng them authority to adiorne the said Term of Saint
Michael, That is to say, from the vtas thereof until (...) Michaelis, as
before is said. And the said adiournment shall be made in the first day of the
said vtas, commonly (...) the day of the Essoynes. And further her Majesty's
pleasure is, that all matters, causes and suites, depending in any of her other
Courts, between party and party, as in her Highness Courts of Chauncerie,
Star Chamber and Ex^^^^^er, Courts of Wards and Liveries, Duchy of
Lancaster and Courts of Requests shall have continuance, and the (...) shall
have day form the date of these presents until Mensis Michaelis, as before is
said.

Provided always, and her Majesty's pleasure and commandment is, that all
Collectors, Receivers, Sheriffs and other Accomptants, and all other persons
that should or ought to account or pay any sum or sommes of money, in any
of her Majesty's Court of Exchequer, Court of Wards and Liveries, or of her
Duchy of Lancaster, or in any of them, (...) enter into account in any of the
said Courts, shall repair into the accustomed places at Westminster, where
her Highness has appointed such Officers and Ministers, as for that purpose her
Majesty has thought expedient, and (...) to pay and do in every behalf, as
though no such Proclamation of Adiournment had been had or made. And her
^^^^nesse further pleasure and commandment is, that all Sheriffs shall
return their Writtes and process against all (...) Accomptants and detters at
the days therein appointed. And if any person, or persons, who ought to
account or pay (...) sum or sommes of money to her Majesty in any ye Courts
and places aforesaid, do make default therein, That (...) her Highness Writtes
and process shall be awarded, and sent forth against every such person and
persons, and the same to be duly and orderly served and returned by the
Sheriffs and Officers thereunto appointed, in such like (...) and form as the
same should have been, if this present Proclamation had not been made. And if
any Sheriff (...) other Officer shall make default or be negligent in serving,
executing and returning of any the writtes and process ^^^^^said: That then
every such Sheriff and other Officer shall incur such pains and penalties,
as by the said ^ourts or any of them shall be taxed and assessed: Willing and
commanding all and every her Majesty's Sheriffs, Officers Ministers and
subjects, to whom it does or shall appertain, to observe and keep their
assemblies and apparances, with all their Retornes and certificates, in her
highness said Courts at Westminster, in Mensis Michaelis next coming, (...)
and there to be holden and kept, and there to do offices and duties in every
behalf, in like manner and form as they should or ought to have done, if this
present Proclamation had not been had or made, as they will answer is the
contrary at their perils.

Given at our Manor of Grenewich, the xxi. day of September, in the twenty
three year of our reign.
Imprinted at London by Christopher Barker, printer to the Queens most
excellent Majesty.


