By the Queen.
A Proclamation against Retainers.
WHere as the Queens Majesty waying the great inconveniences and enormities
that have universally grown within this her Realm, by the unlawful retaining
of multitude of vnordinarie servants, by liueries and otherwise, contrary to
the good, and ancient laws, and statutes of this Realm, has therefore by her
Proclamation notified the same, and the dangers and penalties of the said
laws unto her loving Subjects, giving unto them express admonition, that if
they should not thereupon forbear any further to offend therein: That her
Majesty's will and pleasure was, that the said Laws and Statutes should be
straightly put in execution, and the penalties and forfeitures growing thereby
to her Highness for the offenses committed against the same, to be duly
leuyed. Whereof notwithstanding, there (...) has followed such reformacion in
the behalf, as was expected, (but the said mischiefs and enormities ^^^e
rather daily more and more increased) neither have the said Laws hitherunto
been put in execution, accor^^^^ to the said former Proclamation. Wherein has
appeared most wilful contempt in the Offenders, and great negligence and lack
of dutiful care in those, to whom the execution of the said laws and
Statutes was commit^^^^ which might justly move her Highness to use therein
hereafter all severity and extremity. Yet nevertheless her (...) having an
earnest and most godly intention, to procure speedy reformation of so
pernicious a sore in this Common wealth: And of her gracious and merciful
disposicion, tendering more the quiet reformation of the faults, (...) to
enriche her treasure by the great forfaitures which by justice are due unto her
in the straight execution of the s^^d laws, means to make some further
trial before she proceed to the severe execution of the same. And therefore
to the end that such as have offended in this behalf (either by unlawful
retaining, or by being unlawfully retained ^^uery, badges, promise, or
otherwise) being eftsoon admonished of the dangers and penalties of the said
laws and Statutes, and of her Majesty's will and pleasure for the straight
execution of the same hereafter, may have conuement tune and respit to reform
themselves and to eschew the perils and dangers of the said laws: Her
Ma^estie of her special grace, does by this her proclamation notify to al
her loving subjects, of what estate or degree soever they be, that whosoever
after the last day of May next coming, shall unlawfully retain, or be retained
by lyuery, badges, token, promise, or any other means whatsoever, contrary to
the laws and statutes of this realm in that behalf provided, shall not have
any manner of favor or grace of her Majesty for any such offense committed, or
to be committed against the said laws, but that the whole penalties, for
faitures, and punishments limited and appointed (...) the same laws and
statutes, shall with all severity be extended against them, as well for their
offenses committed before the said last day of May, as after. And for the
better reformation of the great inconveniences and mischiefs aforsaid and to
the end that the said laws and statutes, may be hereafter the more duly and
severely executed, her Majesty straightly charge and commands al manner her
Justices and officers to whom the execution of the same appertains, (...)
cause inquisition and examination according to the same Laws, to be made in all
places of the Realm, as soon (...) conveniently they may after the said last
day of May next coming. And also wills and commands that all Justices of
Issiles and Jail delivery, shall at their next Sessions, and so at all
Sessions after, have due regard that no person that is so unlawfully retained,
be hereafter admitted to serve in any Jury before them. And shall also (...)
every such Sessions, cause diligent inquisition to be made by a sufficient
Jury, of the points and Articles of all the Statutes being in force against
unlawful reteyners, and specially of the Statute made in the eight year of the
reign of being Edward the fourth, and in the third year of the reign of her
Majesty's most noble Grandfather king Henry the seventh, and to take special
order, that some good evidence may be given to the same Jury in that behalf.
And ^^^ther at their said Sessions from time to time, to use their uttermost
care and diligence for the doing of al things, whereby the inconveniences before
mentioned, may be the more speedily reformed, and the Laws in this behalf
hereafter the better observed and executed.

Given at her Majesty's Manor of Greenewich the xix. Day of April, in the fine
and twentieth year of her Highness reign. 1583.
Imprinted at London by Christopher Barker, Printer to the Queens most
excellent Majesty.


