By the Queen. A Proclamation for Waightes published by the Queens Majesty's
commandment.
FOrasmuch as (by Gods Laws and man's laws) there has been and ought to be
in all places, true, just, and certain Waightes and Measures, and the same
also (by the laws of this Realm) to be established, published, and made
known to all people, that every one may take the benefit and use thereof: Our
Sovereign Lady the Queen being informed, that the greatest part of her loving
Subjects of this Realm of England, and Wales, be ignorant of contents,
differences, and true knowledge and uses of the Waightes of the same Realm,
and that the Waightes commonly used within the Realm be uncertain, and
varying one from an other, to the great slander of the same, and the deceiving
of many does Buyers and Sellers: does by the advice as well of her privy
Council, as of her Counsel learned in the L^wes, and other men of perfect
skill and understanding in Waights, give all her loving Subjects hereby to
understand, that by the Statutes and Ordinances of the Realm, there has been,
is, and ought to be lawfully in use within the same, one Weight, commonly
called the Troy Weight, according to the ancient Laws, Treatize, and
Ordinance, for composing of Waights, and Measures, and is and ought to be used
only for the weying of Gold, silver, Bread and Electuaries, and ought to be
in all parts of the Realm of one and the same content. And that there is and
ought to be one other Weight likewise in use, commonly called the Auoir depoiz
Weight, and is to be used for the weying of Spices, and all other things
vendible by Waights, and ought also to be of one and the same content in all
parts of the Realm: which Waights as well of Troy, as of Auoir depoiz, always
ought to be according to certain Standerds of Waights thereof made and
remaining in the Exchequer at Westminster, heretofore commonly called the Kings
standerd of Waights of his Eschequer. And further, that upon information given
diverse years past to the Lord Treasourer, under Treasourer, and Barons of her
Majesty's said Exchequer, of the said uncertainty and variance of Waights, and
by intermission of long time, no just and perfect standerds being then extant
and remaining in the said Exchequer, to size and reform all other Waights of
the Realm, but such as were there sound extant did vary one from an other:
They caused two several Iuries of Aldermen, and other substantial Merchants
and Goldsmiths of the City of London, to come before them in the said Court of
Exchequer, and charged them upon their oaths, amongst other things, to examine
and try the said standerdes, and certain other Waights delivered unto them
from sundry Cities and other places of the Realm, and by those Waights, and by
other means, to cause one certain, just, and true standerd of all sorts of
Waights within the Realm to be made and sized, and to present the same to the
said Lord Treasourer, under Treasourer, and Barons in the said Court, there to
remain and be kept, as the Queens just and true standerd of the said
Exchequer of Waights, to examine, try, and size all other Waights of the Realm
by from time to time as occasion should require, which Iuries presented to the
said Lord Treasourer, under Treasourer, and Barons, several Brass Piles of
the Troy Weight, and certain Bell Waights, and round flat Waights of the Auoir
depoiz Waights to be standerds of the said several Waightes, and also several
Bores containing in them small Poizes and Waights of the said Troy Weight: and
that thereupon her Majesty after long deliberation, has by the advice of her
privy Counsel, ordained and established such of the said Piles and Waightes
as be hereunder mentioned, to be her just and true standerdes of Waightes of
her Exchequer, for the sizing, examining and trying of all other Waights by,
for that the same be found to be agreeing with the just and true Waightes that
have had long continuance and use in this Realm, and with the standerds used
both for moneys of Plate, of Silver and Gold, and other things sold by Weight.

And further, her Majesty has given order and commandment by her warrant
signed with her hand and under her privy Seal, to the Lord Treasourer, under
Treasorer and Barons of the Exchequer, forthwith to cause to be made, sized,
and approved by the said standerds now brought into the Exchequer, and there
established for the true standerds of weights, so many other like standerds of
brass as shall sustice for her Majesty's Mint, and for her Clerk of the
Market, and for every City and Shire town within the Dominion of Wales, and
also for every City, Borough* Town and place limited by the Statute made in
the xi. year of the reign of the late King of famous memory King Henry the
vii. to have and keep standerds of Waigtes, according to the meaning of that
Statute, and for such other as shall make suite for the having of any of the
said Waightes, and also to cause every of the said Standerds of Troy Waightes
of one halle quarter of a pound or more, to be printed and marked with (...)
crowned, and a Homaine I with R^^^^us R^con^o^ned, and every of the said (...)
of (...) quarter of a pointed and man, to be printed and martied with
^^^crowned and a ^^omane A for a difference to diserne and know both kinds of
Waightes, and all of them with letters and Stampes denoting the true contents.
Her Majesty's will and pleasure is therefore, that the Majors, Bailiffes, and
other head Officers of every of the said Cities, Boroughes, Towns and places,
before the feast of S. John Baptist next coming, at the common charge of the
same place, shall send some sufficient person to the said Exchequer, authorized
to receive such Standerds as shall be delivered unto him by the order of the said
Court, for the said City, Borough, Town, or place, and to pay such reasonable
price for the same, as upon true valuation of the same by the said Court shall be
rated: which Standerds every of the said Majors, Bailiffes, or other head
Officers to whom it shall appertain, shall safely keep or cause to be kept
in the same, in some sure and convenient place of the same City, Borough, or
Town, and by them shall make or size, and cause to be made and sized other
common Waights for the use of all manner of people in the same City, Town or
place, that shall have cause to use those Waightes. And shall also sign and
print with like letters like waightes of Brass, Copper, Lead, Tin, or other
competent stuff, unto every of the Queens Subjects duly requiring the same,
taking such fees for the doing thereof, as by the Statute made in the vii.
year of the said late King Henry the vii. is allowed, and no more, viz. of
every hundred weight one penie, of every half hundred weight, one half penie,
and of every weight under, one farthing, and not above. And every of the said
Majors, Bailiffes, and other head Officers shall further do and cause to be
done all such other Act and acts, thing and things for the providing, having,
and using of the said Standerds and waightes agreeing with the same, and also
true Balances and Scales both common and other, as be limited and appointed
to their or any of their authority, by the said Statute made in the xi. year
of the late King Henry the vii. or any other Statute or ordinance whatsoever,
so as all the waights throughout the Realm may be reformed and made according
to the said Standerd of the Exchequer, as by the Statute in such case provided
is required.

And her Majesty further commands and ordeineth, that no person or persons
shall from the feast of Michaelmas next coming, use in selling, buying, or
weighing of any thing, any other weight or waights, but such as shall be made or
sized, and respectively agreeing to and with the said Standerds, and printed
and marked with such marks and letters, as is before limited, neither shall use
any Troy weight so made, sized, marked and printed, but only for waighing of
Bread, Gold, Silver, and Electuaries, and for no other thing: nor the said
Auoir depoiz Weight for the waighing of any Gold, Silver, Bread, or
Electuaries, but of Spices, Woolles, Lead, and all other things vendible by
Waightes, upon pain to be apprehended and committed to prison, fined and
punished, as contriuers and users of false Waights, according to the Statute
made in the ix. pere of Hen. v. and other Statutes in that case made and
provided.

And that this Proclamation, for the better instructing of her Majesty's
Subjects, shall before the twelfth day of January now next coming, be
proclaimed in every Market Town through the Realm, and be hanged up and
fastened in a Table in the Market place by an Officer, where it may hang dry,
to continue, and be seen and read by any that will. And further, that it
shall be read in every Church, before the feast of the Purification of our Lady
next, in a time and space between the beginning and end of Common prayer, upon
some Sunday or Holy day, by the Minister or Clarke of the Church, and so from
thenceforth, once at every feast of the Annunciation of our Lady, and once at
every feast of S. Michael Tharchangel, by the space of four years next
coming, and be also hanged up and fastened, and preserved in every Church in a
Table, to be seen and read at all times by any that will. And that the
defaults of Officers, and Ministers, Clerks, and Church wardens in this
behalf, shall be enquired of and punished by the Justices of Assise, and
Justices of peace in their Sessions, according to their discretions, as
comtempts of her Majesty's commandment. And that all the Standerds and Waights
whatsoever, not sized, marked and printed, and made respectively agreeing to
and with the said new Standerds, and the meaning of this Proclamation, shall
from the said feast of Michaelmas next coming, be reputed and taken for untrue
Waights, and shall within four weeks after the said feast, be broken,
defaced, and destroyed by the owners of the same, or by the Officers having
authority to enquire of false Waights. And for the execution thereof, all
Majors, Baylifes, and other head Officers of every City, Shire Town, Borough,
or Market Town, shall immediately after the said feast of Michaelmas, and so
from time to time according to the Statute of xi. Hen. vii. cause to be brought
before them all the Waights within the same City, Borough, or Town, to be
duly viewed and examined, and such as they shall find defective, to cause to
be broken, and further punishment to be done, according to that Statute. And
that the Justices of peace, or two of them, whereof one to be of the Quorum,
shall with all diligence, and from time to time, by examination or inquiry,
heart and determine the defaults of all Majors, Bailifes, and other head
Officers within their limits or authorities in that behalf, and also of all
buyers and sellers doing contrary to the same Act and to set Fines and
amerciaments upon the offenders, by their discretions, and those to estreate
into the said Court of E^chequer, (...) that upon pain of the punishment due
for such a contempt. Lastly, her Majesty straightly ^^^^geth and commands
all Justices of Assise, Justices of (...) ^^^^s, Bailifes, Stewards of
Liberties, Clarke of the Market, and all other Officers and Ministers
whatsoever, to cause this present Proclamation, and all Laws, Statutes and
(...) the (...) and (...) of true (...) and (...) the (...) of fa^^^ (...), to
be put in but execution, according to (...), as they tender (...) ^

A Pile of Troy Waightes, containing xiiii. pieces of the several poizes
following, viz.
The Standerd for Troy Weight in the Queens Exchequer.
The Case or Capital Weight being CClvi. ounces. {Cxxviii. ounces. {lxiiii.
ounces. {xxxii. ounces. {xvi. ounces. {viii. ounces. {iiii. ounces. {ii.
ounces. {i. ounce. {di. ounce. {{que}. ounce. {di. {que}. ounce. {ii. pieces
farthing gold Weight. Poiz altogether v. C. xii. ounces, which is xlii. ii.
viii. ounces, every pound containing xii. ounces Troy. One Iuerie box
containing one ounce, which is xx. penny weight, {one half ounce, which is x.
penny weight, {one quarter ounce, which is v. penny weight, {one fifth part of
an ounce which is four penny weight, {iii. penny weight, {ii. penny weight,
{i. penny weight, which is xxiiii. Grains, {i. half penny weight, which is
xii. Grains, {i. fourth part of a penny weight, which is vi. Grains, {iiii.
Grains, {iii. Grains, {ii. Grains, {i. Grain, being in all xiii. pieces.
A Suit of Bell Waights of Auoir de poiz, containing vii. pieces of the
several Poizes following, viz.
The Standerd for Auoir de poiz in the Queens Exchequer.
One half hundred weight being lvi. li. {one quarter of a C. weight being
xxviii. li. {one half quarter of a C. weight being xiiii. li. {vii. li. {iiii.
li. {ii. li. {i. li. Poiz altogether five score xii. li. which is the hundred
weight of Auoir de poiz now in use, every pound containing xvi. ounces Auoir
de poiz. One round flat Pile of small waights of Auoir de poiz, wherein the
pound weight is divided into xvi. ounces, viz. viii. li. {iiii. li. {ii. li.
{i. li. {di. li. {{que}. li. {di. {que}. li. which is ii. ounces {i. ounce {di.
ounce {{que}. ounce {di. {que}. ounce, {ii. xvi. parts of an ounce. Poiz
altoghether xvi. li. Auoir de poiz, and be in number xiii. pieces.
E L. Ao Do 1588 Ao Reg XXXo
Half Hundred.
LXIIII. onz. R LVI. pound A.




God save the Queen.
Imprinted at London by the Deputies of Christopher Barker. Printer to the
Queens most excellent Majesty.


