By the Queen.
THe Queens most excellent Majesty being given to understand, that diverse,
as well Soldiers as Mariners employed in the late Portingall voyage, whereunto
many Soldiers voluntarily offered themselves, to her highness great
contentment, and their own commendation for their willingness to put
themselves into that service, but yet have since their return in most
undutiful sort assembled themselves in disordered troops, contrary to the
Laws and Statutes of this Realm, and have also presumed to repair to her
Majesty's Court, contrary to a former Proclamation made in respect of the
infection of the parts and ships from whence they came: Does therefore
straightly charge and command as well Soldiers as Mariners, upon pain of
imprisonment and such further punishment as shall be thought meet to be
inflicted upon such disordered and undutiful subjects, ^^^ebeare from
henceforth to make any such disordered assemblies. And yet to the end the said
parties employed in the said voyage, (...) receive reasonable contentment after
the examining what sums of money are due to so many of them as have have
been im^^^ed either by virtue of her Majesty's Commission, or by Letters from
the Lords and others of her highness Privy council, it (...) been already
ordered: First for the Mariners, that they should repair unto the officers of
the Admeraltie, and there deliver (...) them their names, the time, and by
whom they were imprested, what they have received, and what is due unto them:
for (...) it both was and is meant immediately upon the repair of Sir John
Norris and Sir Francis Drake the late Generals, who best (...) what has been
paid to them, and what is due to the said Mariners, that there should be some
present order taken for their ^^^nable satisfaction. And for the Soldiers,
the same having been publicly notified unto them by the Lord Mayor of London
by order from her Majesty's Council, that they should repair into those
Counties where they were imprested, and other their milling places, and there
to deliver unto the Justices or any other officers by whom they were
imprested, their names under (...) they have served, what sums of money they
have received by the way of impressed, and what is due unto them for the time
(...) their service, to the end the said Justices might give notice thereof
unto the Lieutenants of the said Counties where the said ^^^^ours were
imprested, whereby a true certificate might be made to her Majesty or her
Council from the said Lieutenants, ^^^h of the numbers that have been
employed, and what was demanded as due unto them, which course of proceeding,
by order from (...) Lords and other of the Privy council, was publicly
notified to the said Soldiers by the said Lord Mayor, for that her Majesty's
princely and most gracious disposition, both was and is, that such, as well
Mariners as Souldious that were imprested (...) virtue of her highness
Commission, or by virtue of Letters directed by the Lords and other of her
Majesty's Privy council (...) the Lieutenants of the Shires, should receive
reasonable contentment.

And therefore her Highness pleasure is, that as well Marryners as Soldiers
shall seek satisfaction, for so much as shall be found (...) due unto them, in
such sort as is above specified, and in no other manner. And for others that did
offer their service, and have (...) as voluntary men in the said voyage, and
were not imprested nor commanded to serve in such sort as is above mentioned:
^^r Majesty commands them upon pain of imprisonment and such further
punishment as shall be thought meet to be in^^^^ted upon them, to repair out
of hand to the countries and places where they were last abiding, and there
to employ themelves in duetifull sort, according to their several vocations
and callings. And yet nevertheless, concerning such sums of money as a great
number of the said Soldiers imprested by Commission, (though it be affirmed
that diverse have been ouerpayd) ^^tend to be due unto them: yet there shall
be due examination taken, what they have received by imprests, victualles,
clothing ^^d arms. And for such sums as shall be found due the imprested
Soldiers, order sahlbe taken to pay them their due ^^^^^t of the goods
seized) in the Countries from whence their certificate shall be sent.

Wherefore for the due execution of this present Proclamation, Her Majesty
straightly charge and commands all Lieutenants, Deputy Lieutenants,
Majors, Sheriffs, and other inferior Officers, to give present order for the
placing of standing ^^^^hes, of sufficient and able men in such Thorowfaires
and places, as by them shall be thought convenient, for the intercepting ^^d
apprehension of such as shall be found to commit any thing in contempt of this
present Proclamation.

Dated at our Man^^ of Otelands, the xxiiii, day of August, in the xxxi. year
of our reign. 1589.
Imprinted at London by the Deputies of Christopher Barker, Printer to the
Queens most excellent Majesty. Anno 1589.


