Whereas the Queens Majesty does understand, that notwithstanding her late
Proclamation concerning such persons as wander abroad in the habit of
Soldiers, there are diverse persons pretending to have served in the late
wars and service as Soldiers, that remain within and about the Cities of
London and Westminster, whereof some are maimed, others have received hurtes
and wounds, or have other infirmity whereof they are not as yet perfectly
cured: And some amongst these have neither been maimed nor hurt, nor yet served
at all in the wars, but take that cloak and color, to be the more pitied,
and do live about the City by begging and the disorderly manner: For which
consideration the Lords of her Majesty's Council have appointed certain of
the Justices of the Peace, as well in the City of London as in the County of
Middlesex, with the Treasourer of the Wars for the Low Countries, and
France, and other discreet persons before whom all these kind of people
shall be brought at the Sessions hall in the Old Balie, and by them to be
examined and viewed in what sort they are hurt, or diseased and maimed, that
some good order may be taken for the relief of such of them as shall be
found to have received any mayme or hurt in Service, and for the punishment of
others that being common Beggars, Roges and able persons, do counterfaite the
name of Soldiers, or though they have served, do remain without any just
cause about this town, and therefore they have commanded that the Sheriffs of
the City of London, and in the county of Middlesex, shall make proclamation
that al such soldiers as have served in these late wars in the low Countries
or France which remain about this City, shall repair unto the Sessions hall
in the old Balie on Saturday next, at one of the clock in the afternoon to
be there: by the Commissioners examined, viewed and tried whether they have
served, and to show their Pasportes: and that such as shall not appear before
the said Commissioners, and shall not be allowed to have served as Soldiers by
the Billets of the said Commissioners signed with their hands to be by the
Justices of the Peace, Constables, Headborowes and all others her Majesty's
officers as well within the City, as in the exempt places for the County of
Middlesex, and the several liberties, committed to Prison to be Indyted and
punished as Rogues and Vagarant persons.

From the Court at White Hall, the last of February. 1591. W. Burghley. C.
Howard. H. Hunsdon. T. Buckhurst. I. Wolley. J. Fortescue.


Imprinted at London by the Deputies of CHRISTOPHER BARKER, Printer to the
Queens most excellent Majesty.


