By the Queen.
A Proclamation for adiournment of part of Michaelmas Term. 1592.
FOrasmuch as the Queens Majesty our sovereign Lady is credibly informed
that the infection of the plague is at this present in sundry places in and
about the City of London, and in other places near adjoining to the same:
Whereas by the continuance thereof, through the greater repair and resort of
her loving subjects, great peril and danger might not only ensue unto her
most royal person, but also to her most loving subjects repayring thither for
their suits and causes, and thereby also give occasion of dispersing of the
same into other parts of the Realm: Her Majesty for the said necessary
considerations, and hoping that the same will by the goodness of Almighty God,
with the coldness of the year, and such wholesome orders as are taken in her ^^d
City, the rather cease by the adiournment of part of this next Term of S.
Michael now at hand, from the Vtas of the same until the fourth return of the
said Term called Mense Michaelis next coming: Her Majesty therefore of her
especial favor and clemency is pleased and contented to adiourne the said
Term of S. Michael, (that is to say,) from the Vtas thereof unto the said
fourth return of the said Term called Mense Michaelis next coming, which her
Majesty signifies to all and singular her loving subjects of this her Realm,
to the intent that they and every of them, which has cause or commandment to
appear in any of her Highness Courts at Westminster, in or at any day or time
from and after the said Vtas of S. Michael, may tarry at their dwellings, or
where their business otherwise shall lie, without resorting to any of the said
Courts for that cause before the said Mense Michaelis next coming, and that
without danger of forfeyture, penalty, or contempt to incur toward her
highness in that behalf. And nevertheless her Majesty's pleasure is, that
two of her Justices (that is to say,) of either Bench one, shall the first day
of Michaelmasse Term, called Octabis Michaelis, according to the ancient order
of the laws, keep the Essoynes of the said Octabis Michaelis, at which Vtas
of S. Michael writs of adiournment shall be directed to the said Justices,
giving them authority to adiourne the said Term of S. Michael, that is to say)
from the Vtas thereof until the fourth return, as before is said: And the said
adiournment shall be made in the first day of the said Vtas, commonly called the
day of the Essoynes. And further her Majesty's pleasure is, that al matters,
causes and suits depending in any of her other Courts between party and
party, as in her Highness Courts of Chancerie, Starchamber and Eschequer,
Courts of Wards and Liueries, Duchy of Lancaster and Court of Requests, shall
have continuance, and the parties shall have day from the date of these
presents, until the fourth return, as before is said.

Provided always, and her Majesty's pleasure and commandment is, that all
Collectors, Receivers, Sherifes, ^^d other Accomptants, and all other persons
that should or ought to account or pay any sum or sums of money in any of
her Majesty's Courts of Eschequer, Court of Wards and Liueries, or of her
Duchy of Lancaster, or in any of them, or to enter into any account in any of
the said Courts, shall repair unto her Majesty's house of Sion, where her
Highness has appointed such officers and ministers as for that purpose her
Majesty has thought expedient, and there to pay and do in every behalf as
though no such Proclamation of adiournment had been had or made. And her
Highness further pleasure and commandment is, that all Sherifes shall return
their Writs and Process against all such Accomptants and debtors at the days
therein appointed: And if any person or persons, who ought to account or pay any
sum or sums of money to her Majesty in any the Courts and places
aforesaid, do make default therein, That then her Highness Writs, and Process,
shall be awarded and sent forth against every such person and persons, and the
same to be duly and orderly served and returned by the Shiriffes and officers
thereunto appointed in such like manner and form as the same should have been,
if this present Proclamation had not been made. And if any Shirife or other
officer shall make default or be negligent in serving, executing, or returning
of any the writs and Process aforesaid, That then every such Shirife and other
officer shall incur such pains and penalties, as by the said Courts or any
of them shall be taxed and assessed. Willing and commanding all and every her
Majesty's Shirifes, Officers, ministers and Subjects, to whom it does, or shall
apperteine, to observe and keep their assemblies and apparances, with all
their Returns and Certificats in her Highness said Courts at Westminster in
Mense Michaelis next coming, then and there to be holden and kept, and there
to do their offices and duties in every behalf, in like manner and form as
they should or ought to have done if this present Proclamation had not been had
or made, as they will answer to the contrary at their perils.

Given at our Manor of Woodstocke the xviii. day of September 1592. and of
our reign the xxxiiii. year.
God save the Queen.
Imprinted at London by the Deputies of Christopher Barker, Printer to the
Queens most excellent Majesty.


