By the Queen.
A Proclamation against vagarant Soldiers and others.
THE Queens most excellent Majesty being given to understand, that what
through the remissness and negligence of the Justices of peace, and other the
inferior officers, and the contempt of vagarant and ill disposed persons, and
others pretending to have served her Highness in the wars, there has not
followed that due execution of the proclamantion lately made concerning such
persons, as was by her Highness expected: Her Majesty therefore, hearing of the
great outrages that have been, and are daily committed by Soldiers, Mariners,
and others that pretend to have served as Soldiers, upon her Highness good
and loving subjects, has thought meet to authorize and appoint as well the
Provost marshall of the several Counties, as also the Right marshall of her
Highness own ^^^^^holde, to proceed to the punishment of such vagarant and ill
disposed persons as shall be found to offend against this ^^^^t Proclamation now
published, by marshall Law. And although her Majesty might in due course of
policy cause the said Marshall, and other the Provost marshals above
mentioned, to proceed out of hand to the punishment of the trans^^^ss^rs of the
late Proclamation, urged by their outrages to take that course: yet her
Highness of her gracious and prince^^^ disposition has thought meet, that
the said persons shall receive before the execution thereof, a second
admonition. And therefore has ordered, and does hereby signify, that all
Soldiers, Mariners, Maisterlesse men, and other vagarant persons whatsoever,
shall within two days after the publishing of this proclamation, repair to
the next Corporate (...), or Justice of the peace (where they shall be at the
time of the publishing of the said proclamation) and shall require of them a
Pasport to repair into their Country. And in case that after the two days
expyred after publication of this Proclamation, any of the said persons shall
be found without his Pasport, or shall not according to the tenor of his or
their ^asport repair to the place where such person was borne or last
resident, according to the statute in that behalf ordained: that then the said
party shall be apprehended and executed by the said Knight marshall or Provost
marshall, and that within the Counties, or Cities where the said person shall
be so apprehended, according to such direction as shall be given by warrant
from her Majesty, in that behalf to be made. And her Majesty commands that
the Majors, and other principal officers Corporate towns, and the Justice of
peace in the several Counties, shall upon the repair unto them of any the
said Soldiers, Mariners, vagarant persons, and Masterlesse men, deliver unto
them Pasports containing a limitation of time for their repair of ye place
where they were borne or last resident, according to the said statute, al^^^ing
unto those that shall be found sound of their limbs, after the rate of xii.
miles by the day agreeable to the distance of the place unto which they shall be
so directed, with permission to require the benevolence of good people for
their relief by the way. And to others that are impotent or maimed, such a
rate of miles by the day, as by the said Majors and Justices in their
discretion shall be thought meet, and that within their Pasports, the notable
Towns and thorowfares for their passings be expressed, from which if they
swerve, then such persons to be punished according to the purport of this
Proclamation.

And whereas her Majesty is also given to understand, that heretofore the
masters of such persons as have been prested (...) her highness service, have
refused upon the return of the said persons, to receive them into their
service, being able to serve: whereby diverse of the said persons have been
enforced for lack of relief, being not set a work, to go up and ^^^ne
begging, contrary to the Laws and statutes of this realm: Her Majesty's
pleasure is, that the said Majors, principal Officers of corporate towns,
and Justices shall take order that the said masters, with whom the said
persons have last served, shall receive them again into their service, and
upon refusal thereof, commit them to prison, or otherwise punish them, as in
their discretions shall be thought meet. And her highness further pleasure and
express commandment is, that the said Majors, and principal Officers in
Corporate Towns, and the said Justices in the several counties, shall take
order, that such as are impotent persons, repayring to the places and parishes
of their last residencie, shall receive some weekly relief either in the said
parish, or for want of ability in that parish, then by some contribution of
the parishes adjoining, as by the statute is provided. And that in case any of
the said majors, officers in Corporate towns, (...) Justices of peace of the
several Counties, shall deal remissely in the execution of this present
proclamation, as heretofore they have done in the execution of other like
proclamations: Her highness pleasure is, that the said persons so offending,
shable called before the Lords and other of the Majesty's privy Counsel in
the Starrechamber, and that then upon information to be given by her Majesty's
Attorney general, or other her learned Counsel for the time being, of their
defaults in this behalf, the said offenses being duly proved, they by order
of that Court shall not only be punished by ^ine and imprisonment, but also
disinhabled ever afterward to bear any public offices within this Realm.

Given at our Manor of Richmond, the xiii. day of November. In the one and
thirtieth year of our reign.

Imprinted at London by the Deputies of Christopher Barker, Printer to the
Queens most exellent Majesty. Anno 1589.


