Articles set down by the right worshipful Thomas Randolph Esquier, Master
and Comptroller general of all her Majesty's Posts, and straightly by him
commanded to be kept by the Posts from London, to the Northern borders
against Scotland, for the better observation, and due execution of such orders
as lately were appointed by the Lords or her Majesty's pruie Council.
FIrst, that every Post for the service of the Packet for her Majesty's
affairs, shall have in his stable, or in a readiness throughout the year,
three good and sufficient post Horses, with sadles and furniture fit and
belonging. Three good and strong leather bags well lined with bays or
cotton, to carry the Pachet in. And three horns to blow by the way, as by
their Lordships order is commanded. Whosoever shall fail hereof, at any time
when they shall be surueyed, shall abide the punishment that the Master of the
Posts shall lay upon him.

2 That every Post, so soon as the Packet directed for her Majesty's affairs
shall be brought unto him, shall forth with or within one quarter of an hour
after, with all speed and diligence carry the same, or cause it to be carried
to the next Post, according to the orders by their Lordships also set down.
The breach of this article shall also be punishable at the Master of the Posts
pleasure.

3 That every Post, either of his own, or such as he shall keep or appoint
under him, shall (...) always in readiness, toure good and sufficient Post
horses, and two horns, to serve at all occasions for such as either by
commission, or other wise for better expedition shall ride in Post. And if the
number of horses exceed their own (...), then that they supply their want,
as by their Lordships is provided for, and set down.

^. That every Post from hence forth keep two fair paper books, or one large
and great one, as well to register the names, ^^^^s and number of horses, of such
as either with commission, or without shall run the Post, as also to enter
the Pac^^^^ that for her Majesty's affairs shall pass and be carried by them.
And the same shall signify at the end every month, (...) then ten days after
unto the Master of the Posts. And so often as he shall upon occasions, either
generally or parti^ ^all and send for the same.

That no Post shall hazard or send any Packets directed for her Majesty's
affairs by any person whatsoever, but by an (...) servant of his own, and
that in post, Upon pain of forfeiture of one quarters wages for the first
offense, whereof (...) to be given to the informer thereof whosoever, and the
other half to be at the disposing of the Master of the (...) And for the
second offense, expulsion out of his office, the same being duly proved
against him.

That all Posts and guides ryding with any Currior, or Through Post, either
with Commission, or without, shall (...) party so riding unto the house and
dwelling place of the next standing Post, that is also to furnish him of fresh
(...) shall signify the same unto him the party being a personage or man of
sort, that for his pleasure will make choice (...) his lodging. And shall not
suffer him so ryding, to pass the next ordinary stage without the consent and
liking of the (...) of the place. Upon pain of forfeiture of ten shillings to
the Post offended, and a full restitution of so much as he should (...) pained.

Also be it especially and duly observed by all her Majesty's Posts, as they
will answer to the contrary, That if any (...) Hackneymen, or other
whatsoever, having horse to hyre, shall take upon him contrary to their
Lordships orders ^^^^out any horses with horn and guide, to any man running
the Post, either with Commission or without, Without knowledge and consent of
the ordinary Post of the place where the horses were delivered (if any Posts
there be ap^^^^. The Post of the next stage, by whom he passes, shall in this
case stay and charge the officer with safe custody of (...) or conductor, and
shall not deliver any horses to the party so ryding, till notice be given
either to her Majesty's (...) or the Master of the Posts.

(...) no Post or guide ride without his horn, and the same to blow as is
prescribed by their Lordships: be it either (...) Packet, or with Through
Post. Neither shall he refuse to carry the male or other carriage of the party
ryding be^^^^^ so that the same exceed not the weight of forty pounds at the
utmost.

^^a^ no Posts servant or boy ryding with the packet, shall deliver any by
letters or private packets, before he have ^^^^^^ged himself of the packet for
her Majesty's affairs by delivering the same into the hands of the next
standing (...) unto whom also he shall commit and deliver all the by letters
and private packets as well as the other, upon pain of (...) ^^^feiture of ten
shillings to the Post offended, and the displeasure of the master of the Posts.

That no Posts servant or boy riding with the packet, and having bp letters or
private packets, or other kind of ca^^^^ committed unto them, shall adventure
to open or break up, or any other ways directly or indirectly, shall
fraudu^^^^ (...) or convey the same wilfully: but shall safely deliver the same
unto the hands of the next Post as is abouesaid. (...) whatsoever he be that
shall be found to be faulty herein, he shall lose his Masters service, and the
Master shall underly (...) punishment as the Master of the Posts shall find
him worthy of.

Lastly. Because that the negligence of servants and boys has always been
the greatest cause of the former disor^^^* And that also to grow and fall out
through the small care and want of government in the Masters: These therein a
warming in time to come, shall be to signify unto all the Posts in general.
That whose servant or boy soever (...) ^^^ster either directly or indirectly,
break, disobey, or be found faulty of any of these Articles above said. The
penal^^ (...) forfeiture thereof shall lie upon the Master himself, without
favor or remission.

And heretunto I will all her Majesty's Posts to have a special care and
regard, as they will answer to the contra^^^

London, the xxii. of January. 1583. Tho. Randolph Comptroller of all her
Majesty's Posts.


