By the Queen.
A Proclamation for the prices of Wines
WHere it is ordained and provided by a Statute, made and established in the
Parliament holden at Westminster the eight day of June, in the xxviii. year of
the reign of the Queens Majesty's dearly beloved Father, of famous memory,
King Henry the eight, that the prices of all kind of Wines (that is to say)
of the Tun, Butt, Pype, Punchion, Hogshead, Tyerse, Barrel and Rundlet, when
it should be sold in gross, should be limited and declared by the Lord
Chauncelour of England, Lord Treasurer of England, Lord President of the said
Kings most honor able Privy Counsel, Lord privy Seal, and the two chief
Justices of either Bench, or five, four, or three of them, and that the same
should be sold according to the same prices so by them set and taxed, upon
pain and penalty contained in the said Act: Forasmuch as the Lord Chancelour
of England, Lord Treasurer of England, and the two Lord chief Justices, for
diverse considerations them moving, and according to the effect and meaning of
the said statute and Act, have in writing by their deliberat aduises, upon
conference had with sundry persons thereto requisite, ta^ed, limited, assigned
and appointed the prices of Gascoigne and French Wines to be sold within this
her Highness Realm for this year following (that is to say) Every Tun of
the best Gascoigne and French Wines to be sold (the seller bearing all the
charges due and payable to her Majesty in her Custom house) after the rate
and price of xi. If, sterling the Tun, and not above: The buyer bearing all
the said charges, after the price and rate of viii. li. vi. s. viii d. sterling
the Tun, and not above. And every Pipe, Butte, Hogshead, Tyerse, Barrel,
Rundlet, and other vessels of the same several Wines to be sold in gross
after their quantities according to the same rates, and not above. And every
Tun of Rochel, and other small and thin Wines to be sold [the seller
bearing all the charges due and payable to her Majesty in her Custom house]
after the price and rate of ix. li. sterling the Tun, and not above: And the
buyer bearing the said charges, at vi. li. vi. s. viii. d. sterling the Tun,
and not above. And every Butte, Pipe, Hogshead. Tyerse, Barrel, Rundlet, and
other vessels of the same several Wines to be sold in gross after their
quantities, according to same rates, and not above.

The Queens most excellent Majesty therefore straightly charge and commands
al and singular her loving Subjects, and others putting any manner Gascoigne,
French, Rochell, or other small or thin Wines to sale within this her
Highness Realm, that they, ne any of them in any manner of wise by any craft,
coum, or private agreement shall sell any Gascoigne, French, Rochell, or other
small or thin Wines, otherwise then is above limited, upon pain to forfait
and pay such penalty as is contained and expressed in the said statute, or in
any other statute, made or ordained for the same. And moreover her Highness
pleasure and commandment is, that all and singular Majors, Sheriffs,
Bayliffes, Constables and other officers to whom it apperteineth, that they,
and every of them with diligence, cause and see that this her Proclamation be
put in due execution after the tenor of the same, and also according to an
other Act of Parliament established in the Parliament above rehearsed, against
such as will refuse to sell their Wines at prices taxed as is aforesaid, as
they will answer there to at their perils.

Given at our Manor of Saint James, the thirteenth day of November, in the
xxvi. year of our reign.
Imprinted at London by Christopher Barker, Printer to the Queens most
excellent Majesty.


