Articles concerning the Admiralty of England, and the jurisdiction thereof.
21. Julij. Anno Domini. 1591. Regnique serenissimae Dominae Elizabethae Reginae
tricesimo tertio.
FIrst you shall enquire if any person sworn upon any Jury or Inquisition in
the Court of our Sovereign Lady the Queen of her Admiraltie of England, have
opened or discovered the counsel of our said Sovereign Lady, or the secrets
of this Realm, and his fellow Jurors.

2 Item ye shall enquire, if any person in or upon the Sea, or in any other
Port, River, Creek or place, or fresh water, where the Lord High Admiral of
England has, or has been accustomed to have authority and jurisdiction,
has committed and exercised any treasons, felonies, spoils, murders,
confederacies and piracies, or who has aided and assisted the said committers
or exercisers of such offense.

3 Item ye shall enquire, if any person with furniture, munition or victualles,
have fortified, strenghthned or animated her Majesty's enemies.

4 Item ye shall enquire if any person in or upon or near the sea, or
elsewhere, within the jurisdiction of our Sovereign Lady the Queens Majesty's
Admiraltie of England, has beaten any of her Majesty's subjects, friends or
confederates, with whom her Majesty has peace, truce, and friendship, or to
whom she has given or granted her safe conduct or protection, contrary to the
peace of our said Sovereign Lady the Queen, or that has taken and carried
away contrary to the peace of our said Sovereign Lady the Queen, any
Ships, Boats, Nets, Ropes, Cords, or other goods whatsoever, or that has
transgressed or offended in the same.

5 Item you shall enquire if any person has permitted or suffered his prisoner
to depart, before it was known of what degree or condition he was. Because if
he were of alliance unto any King or Prince, he is the Kings prisoner, and not
the takers, if of any other condition, then he must satisfy to the Lord
Admiral for his shares as well for his prisoner, as for any goods taken upon
the Sea whatsoever.

6 Item you shall enquire, if any person upon the high Seas, in great rivers,
or else where within the jurisdiction of the Lord high Admiral of England, has
found any ship, iron, lead, or any other goods floating or lying under the
water or in the depth, of which there is no possessor or owner, which commonly
are called Flotzon, Ietson, and Lagon, and has not satisfied the Lord Admiral
for one moitie (thereof) accruing unto him.

7 Item you shall enquire if any person in great rivers, streams or creekes,
and in fresh waters, from the first bridge toward the Sea, or else where
within the jurisdiction of the Lord high Admiral of England has erected made
or set up, any Milles, Riddles, or any other instrument or Engine, which to
those that sail and pass by or to ships, and the same Rivers, are commonly
noysom or hurtful.

8 Item ye shall enquire, if any person upon the high Sea, or in any other
place within the jurisdiction of the Lord high Admiral has found and taken up
the body of any dead person, and has not restored unto the Lord Admiral the
goods and Jewels he found and took with the body, because the Lord Admiral
has the disposition of such goods found.

9 Item ye shall enquire if any person has taken in the Sea, or in any other
place within the jurisdiction of the Lord Admiral, Whales, Sturgions,
Porposes, Balenes, or Graspes, or any other great, fat, and ouergrowen fish,
and has not satisfied the Lord Admiral for the one half thereof.

10 Item ye shall enquire if any person arrested or pressed to serve the Queen,
and has received money so to do, and has absented himself and not served her
Majesty accordingly.

11 Item ye shall enquire if any person has carried or transported to the
parts of beyond the Seas, any merchandises or other goods whatsoever, for the
which the Queens customs and subsidies have not been paid.

12 Item ye shall enquire of all those which take Oysters or Muscles, betwixt
the first day of May, and the feast of the exaltation of the holy Cross, and
also of those which at any time of the year with nets two straight, or
tight, in great Rivers, or in other places within the jurisdiction of the Lord
Admiral, do destroy young Salmons or other young fishes, or spawne and frye of
fish.

13 Item ye shall enquire if any person other then to places licensed, has
transported beyond the Seas, Wool, Sheep skins, Tin, Lead, or other
customable goods, without special license of the Queen.

14 Item ye shall enquire of those which do hinder, resist or let, the
officers of the Admiraltie, to decide and correct transgressions, batteries,
felonies, and other things whatsoever done upon the Sea or upon whatsoever
river, water, or creek of the Sea, unto every first bridge and flowing of the
Sea, or full Sea mark. For all those that so do, are as rebellious and
contemptuous persons to be punished.

15 Item ye shall enquire if any person to the parts of beyond the Seas, have
transported any gold or silver contrary to the form of the statute in that
behalf provided.

16 Item ye shall enquire of those which in the entry or mouth of any Port, or
within any Port do forestall and buy victuals in gross, to the detriment and
damage of the common people next adjoining.

17 Item ye shall enquire of those which do arrest or impleade any in any
other place, then in the Court of the Admiraltie, for matters or causes which
are notoriously known to belong to the Court of the Admiraltie.

18 Item ye shall enquire of those which hinder the Marshall of the Court, or
trouble him and other the Lord Admirals officers and ministers, in executing
and doing those things which the said Lord Admiral has commanded to be
executed.

19 Item ye shall enquire of those which in their ships, wittingly do receive
rebels, felons, outlawes, banished men, or their goods.

20 Item ye shall enquire of those which do steal, cut, or take away, the
sign fixed to the Anchor, which commonly is called he Boy, whereby any Ship,
or Pinnas or other vessel is lost or damnified.

21 Item ye shall enquire of those which do hier, freight, and lade foreign
and strange ships or vessels, whereas they may for a reasonable price hier and
freight the ships of her Majesty's Subjects, which they are specially bound to
maintain and sustain, and not to use strange bottomes or ships.

22 Item ye shall enquire of Shipwrights, and other handicraftesmen, workmen
and ministers, which do exact and receive excessive wages or sallaries,
contrary to her Maisties laws, and the ancient customs of the Sea.

23 Item ye shall enquire of those which make wrecke of ships or other goods
perishing by shipwrecke upon the Sea, whereof some has come to the land, or
who does claim to have such wrecke, except it be granted him by the King, or
that he and his predecessors time out of memory of man, by prescription have
held and possessed the same.

24 Item ye shall enquire who or what persons do throw or cast any Ballastage
or Filth in the Channels of any Port to the hurt and detriment of the same.

25 Item ye shall enquire of those Sailors or Mariners, which upon the Seas are
rebellious against their owners or masters, and contrariwise, whether the said
owners and masters do use and courteously handle their Mariners, according to
the purport of the statute of good behavior in this case provided.

26 Item ye shall enquire, if any has taken upon him the charge or care of
conducting or bringing of any Ship or vessel, from place to place, as
Loadsman, Master or Pilot, by whose ignorance, fault or negligence, the same
ship or vessel with the merchandises, goods, and things in her being, have
perished or any way been damnified.

27 Item ye shall enquire of those who within the jurisdiction of the
Admiraltie, have struck, beaten, or drawn blood of any person, or made any
fray.

28 Item ye shall enquire what person having any victuals, goods or
merchandises, laden in ships, purposing to go unto, and enter any port or
ports, to sell the same there, for the profit of that Country, has returned
and carried away the said victuals and goods, to the prejudice and hurt of her
Majesty and Subjects.

29 Item ye shall enquire also of those that regrate corn (of whatsoever sort)
or salt or fresh fish, or any other goods whatsoever, enhauncing or raising the
first price, and selling them at a greater rate or value, or in a dearer market
then in the beginning they ought to be sold, to the damage and hurt of her
Majesty and her liege people.

30 Item ye shall enquire of those that use (within the jurisdiction of the
Lord Admiral) false bushels or measures, buying or selling with the same
bushels, Corn, Salt, Sea coals, and other measurable goods whatsoever, (which
exceed not the land Bushel called the Queens Standerd by one pottell) for
their own singular or private commodity and profit.

31 Item ye shall enquire of those, which within any of their ships do weigh
merchandises or goods, by or with balances or weights, not agreeing or being
scaled with or according to her Majesty's Stannderd, to the fraud, hurt, and
deceit of her people.

32 Item ye shall enquire of all those, viz. Marshals, Bailiffs, and other
ministers and stewards of Noblemen, that have presumed to take or receive to
the use of their Lords and Masters, any goods or other things whatsoever, upon
the high Sea or other places, within the jurisdiction of the Admiralty, spoiled
and brought to land, have presumed to take or receive to the use of their Lords
and Masters, such goods as are forfetted or the forfeiture of them to the
prejudice and derogation of the Lord high Admiral.

33 Item ye shall enquire of all those which gather and enclose, the salt water
into ditches and make to themselves standing fish ponds, or in draughts, and of
new making, and beginning gulfes and other deep and immovable places,
getting and receiving the commodities and profits thereof to their own proper
and private uses and necessaries which in salt waters ought to be common to all
persons.

34 Item ye shall enquire of those which do gather and receive within any port
or other place, of any Ship of the portage and burden of fifty tons and
upwards for anchorage thereof above four pence, and of any Ship under that
burden for anchorage thereof above two pence, by means whereof, the said
Ships do leave and forsake the said places to the hurt, hinderance, and damage
of the common people adjoining.

35 Item ye shall enquire of the keepers of ports, customers, water bayliffes,
or other officers whatsoever, which claim or begin new customs for their
own or their masters private and proper commodities, by means whereof the
Ships and merchants do forsake the said port and places with their
merchandises, to the hurt, damage, and loss of the common profit and utility
of the Common wealth.

36 Item ye shall enquire of those which are ordained or pressed to serve the
King upon the Sea in any Ship in time of war or peace, and if from the said
service, without leave or unlawfully they have absented themselves.

37 Item ye shall enquire what men of Honors Stewards, and Bailiffs,
inhabiting, or having mansion houses near the Sea coast, do hold and usurp to
hold plea, of any matter or cause concerning merchants, and mariners, or marine
causes, above the sum of forty shillings sterling.

38 Item ye shall enquire of all Ships which have been arrested or pressed to
serve her Majesty upon the Sea, and afterward the masters, owners, and
proprietaries thereof, by fraud and deceit have withdrawn, or keep them
from the same service, defrauding her Majesty.

39 Item ye shall enquire of those which wittingly and willingly have cut the
Cables of any Ship or Ships or other vessel or vessels, or has broken any (no
reasonable cause urging him or them thereunto,) by means whereof the said ship
or vessel is lost or drowned, or some man by that occasion killed.

40 Item ye shall enquire of those which either by day or night have removed
the Anchor of any ship (not giving warning thereof first, to the Master and
mariners thereof) by means whereof the said Ship or Ships, was cast away or
lost, or any man slain.

41 Item ye shall enquire of felonies committed and done upon foreign and
strange Ships or vessels, being, or riding at an Anchor in any port, when it is
not apparent, who or what he or they were, that committed or did the said
spoil or piracie.

42 Item ye shall enquire of petite transgressors, or pickers, which have
stolen or take away upon the Sea, or within any port or creek, Anchors,
Cables, Boys, Sails, Ropes, girdles, Shirts, Breeches, or other small things
whatsoever.

43 Item ye shall enquire of all common and notorious malefactors as well upon
the high Seas, as in any Port, Haven, river, creek or stream.

44 Item ye shall enquire who of custom, force or authority (from merchants or
mariners with their ships fraighted and laden with victuals and merchandises
entering any ports or other places) does take or has taken away victuals
against their wills and pay them for the same at their pleasure, by occasion
whereof the said merchants and mariners do leave and forsake the said ports
and places, to the hurt and damage of her Majesty's good Subjects.

45 Item ye shall enquire of all those persons which commonly fight with, or
beat any of her Majesty's subjects and people within the jurisdiction of the
Lord Admiral, contrary to the peace of her Majesty.

46 Item ye shall enquire of all those, which upon the high Seas, have found
any Ships, Pinnasses, Boats forsaken, or wayfts, driving, or floating, without
any creature in the same, being by the space of a day natural, and has not
answered the Lord Admiral his part, viz. the half thereof.

47 Item ye shall enquire of all those which do receive or conceal any
Deodandes (to the Lord Admiral in virtue of his office of Admiraltie by right
appertaining or belonging) that is Ships or other vessels, out of which all
living creatures in the same by shipwreck, seems to have been perished or
cast away.

48 Item ye shall enquire if any person or persons have been slain, drowned,
or come to his or their death by any Ship or Ships, or their tackle, or
furniture, as Anchor, Cable rope, or any other thing whatsoever to the Ship
belonging, or by the sailing, moving, or going of the Ship upon the Sea.

49 Item ye shall enquire of those which buy any kind of grain or corn, of
whatsoever state, condition, or degree they be upon the sea coasts, and
transport the same to any the parts of beyond the Seas, without the special
license of the Queens Majesty.

50 Item ye shall enquire of those which after some mariners or fishermen, have
set or laid their nets, cords, or engines to fish, do come after them, and
place, pitch or lay their nets and engines so near them, that the fisher men
which first set, cannot fish, but are deprived and bereft of the benefit of
their birth and fishing, or otherwise much grieved and troubled, by means
whereof contentions and debates often grow, and happen, to the great prejudice
of her Majesty, the Lord high Admiral, and other her Majesty's subjects,
against the laws of the Sea in this behalf provided.

51 Item ye shall enquire, and true presentment make of all those, that since
the late proclamation, have had traffic with the Leaguers in France, or
shipped, carried, or sent any victuals, Ordinance, Powder, Shot or other
Artillery for Spain, the Islands, or any leaguer town in France, or other
place in enmity with her Majesty.

52 Item ye shall enquire and present all manner of Ships, Boats, vessels,
and other goods of men outlawed, remaining within jurisdiction of the
Admiraltie.

53 Item ye shall enquire and truly present all those that have set out any
ships or other vessels to sea, without Commission under the great seal of
England, or the great seal of the Admiralty first obtained.

54 Item ye shall enquire what ships, goods, moneys and merchandises, have been
taken at sea, without such Commissions, and brought into any part of her
Majesty's dominions and by whom, and who were owners, Captains, Masters, and
chief officers of such Ships, and where they or their prises taken did arrive.

55 Item ye shall enquire of all manner of breaking bulk of prizes, and
disposing and parting of prize goods before sentence were first given in the
high Court of the Admiraltie, that the same were lawful prize, and truly
present by whom and where the same has been done.

56 Item ye shall enquire for all such that contrary to their Commissions of
reprisall, have carried any prizes by them taken into Barbary, France, Ireland,
or any other place out of this Realm, and there disposed the same, and of what
value they were of.

57 Item ye shall enquire what Captains, Masters, Mariners, or others at Sea,
under color of their Commission of reprisall, have aborded, taken, or spoiled
any ship or ships of England, France, Scotland, Denmark, Italy, Holland,
Zealand, Germany, or any other place in league and amity with her Majesty,
and what goods they have so taken or spoiled, whither they have brought them,
and who have bought, received, or had any part of the same, in any manner sort
or condition, or have borrowed or lent any money to buy the said goods.

Iul. Caesar.

Imprinted at London by the Deputies of Christopher Barker, Printer to the
Queens most excellent Majesty.


