A declaration of the Queens Majesty's will and commandment, to have
certain Laws and orders put in execution against the excess of Apparel,
notified by her commandment in the Starrechamber the xiij. of February in the
xxx. year of her reign.
THE Queens Majesty has considered into what extremities agreat number of
her Subjects are fallen by the inordinate excess in apparel, contrary both to
the good laws of the Realm, and to her Majesty's former admonitions by her
Proclamations, and to the confusion of degrees of all estates, amongst whom
diversity of apparel has been always a special and laudable mark, and
finally to the impouerishing of the Realm, by daily bringing into the same of
superfluity of foreign and unnecessary commodities, not able to be answered
with the natural merchandise of the Realm, as in all former times well
governed has been used, and in all other kingdoms and countries is politiquely
observed. For these and many other weighty considerations, her Majesty upon
special care of the weal and good government of her kingdom, has with the advice of her Counsel, thought it meet and most necessary at this time, to
notify in the latter end of this Term of Hillary in her high Court of the
Star chamber, at an assembly of diverse Lords and others of her privy
Counsel, and all the Justices of her Courts at Westminster, and in the open
hearing of a great number of the Justices of the Peace of all the parts of her
Realm, and of a multitude of other of her Subjects, that her earnest meaning
is, without delay to have (...) speedy reformation of this great intolerable
abuse, grown to an unmeasurable disorder, and the same to be done by due
execution of certain parts of her Laws remaining in force, in such sort as
may best be agreeable to the present time: And to that end, for the best
example of all others that can be, has already for her own most honorable
Household charged and authorized the Lord Steward of her Household, now
present at this assembly, for all persons under his charge, and to the Lord
Chamberlain or Vicechamberlaine for all persons under their rule, to observe
such parts of her said Laws, and some necessary orders against excess of
apparel, (...) are hereafter particularly expressed to be duly observed: which
to do effectually the said Lord Steward for the household, and the
Vicechamberlayne in the absence of the Lord Chamberlayne have undertaken to see
executed. And at the same time also, her Majesty's pleasure was declared in her
said Starrechamber, by the Lord Chancellor of England (as so commanded by her
Majesty) that all the Justices of Assizes of the Realm, who were then there
present, should in their next Circuit through her whole Realm give knowledge
thereof in their open Sessions, and to charge all Justices of peace, that in
their quarter Sessions, and in any other their assemblies, and also all Majors,
and Officers of Towns Corporate, and all Officers of Liberties in their
Courts, should see to the speedy execution thereof, after convenient time to be
limited for a reasonable warning, by the said Justices of Assise, for the due
execution and punishment of the offenders, so as no subject of the Realm shall
^aue cause by ignorance to continue in their offense. The like commandment
also was there in that assembly given by the said Lord Chancellor to all the
Heads, Ancients and Principals of houses of Court and Chancerie, where the
aforesaid excess was noted to be more largely of late years spread amongst
the youth there, then in any other place of England, to see also to the speedy
reformation thereof. The like commandment also was ^here remembered to have
been of late given by her Majesty's own mouth to the Mayor of London, and the
Aldermen of the same, being before her Majesty in her Presence chamber at her
Court. So as it may well appear ^ow earnestly her Majesty is resolved to have
this notable disorder and excess speedily and earnestly reformed for ^he
benefit of her Realm. At the same assembly also was concluded yt in the two
Universities of Cambridge and Oxford, where this infection was seen to have
made entry amongst the youth, there should be by the direction ^f the Lords
the Chancelours of the same, a straight order for repressing of the said
disordered excess of Apparel. and though her Majesty might by justice of her
laws, make great profit by the execution of the same laws ^^maining in force
against the said excess, by leuying the great penalties due to her by
execution of the same, and that also some part of the same laws, being made
diverse years past, by the alteration of time, may seem insome part hard to be
exactly and duly observed in all parts: Therefore her Majesty's meaning was
there declared at this time to be to make some proof of the execution only of
some parts of the same laws, agreeable for the time hereafter expressed,
without charging her subjects with the great forfeitures already due to her
Majesty, except it shall be against such persons as she shall be provoked by
finding them disobedient and unwilling to obey and observe the special clauses
and articles hereafter following.

Certain clauses taken out of the Statute made for reformation of excess of
Apparel, the xxiiij. year of the reign of king Henry the eight.
FIrst, it is ordered, that no man under the degree of a Marquess, Earl, and
their children, or under the degree of a Baron, unless he be a knight of the
order of the garter, shall wear in any part of his apparel, any woollen cloth
made out of any of the Queens Majesty's dominions, except in Bonnettes only.

Item that no man under the degree of a Barons son, or a knight, except he
may expend two hundred pounds by year, for term of life, over all charges,
shall wear any manner of Velvet in his Gown, Coat, or other his uppermost
garment: nor any manner of embrodery, or pricking with gold, silver, or silk,
in any part of his apparel, or on thapparell of his Horse or Mule.

Item that no man under the foresaid estates and degree, saving such as may
dispend in yearly revenues, as is aforesaid, one hundred pounds, above all
charges, shall wear any Satin, Damask, Silk Chamblet, or Taffata in his
Gown, Coat, or other his uppermost apparel or garment: nor any Velvet, saving
in sleeuelesse Iackettes, Doblettes, Coyffes, Partelettes, and Purses.

Item, that no man under the said degrees, saving the son and heir apparent
of a man that may dispend three hundred marks by year, above all charges, and
such other men as may dispend in yearly revenue, as is aforesaid, forty
pounds over all charges, shall wear in his Gown, or any other his uppermost
apparel, Chamblet, or Silk: nor in any other part of his apparel any silk,
saving Satin, Damask, Tafftata, or Sarsenet in his Doblets: and Sarsenet,
Chamblet, or Taffata, in the lyning of his Gowns, or Velvet in his sleeuelesse
Coats, Iackets, Ierkins, Coyffes, Cappes, Purses, or Partelets. The colors of
Scarlet, Crymsin or Blewe, always excepted.

Item, that no man under the said degrees, saving such gentlemen as may dispend
in yearly revenues, as is aforesaid, twenty pounds above all charges, shall
wear any manner of silk in any apparel of his body, or of his Horse, or Mule,
except it be Satin, Taffata, Sarsenet, or Damask in his Doblet, or Coyffe:
and Chamblet in his sleeuelesse Iackets: or points, laces, or garters, made in
England or Wales.

Item, that no person under the same degrees, saving such as may dispend five
pounds by year, as is aforesaid, above all charges, shall wear any silk in
his Doblettes or Iackettes: nor any thing made out of the Realm, saving
Chamblet in their Doblettes and Iackettes.

Item that no Serving man, nor other Yeoman taking wages, nor such other as may
not dispende of freeholde forty shillings by year, as is aforesaid, shall
wear any Shert, or Shert band, under or upper Cappe, Bonet, or Hat garnished,
mixed, made, or wrought with silk, gold, or silver: nor shall wear any Bonet,
or Shert band, made out of the Realm of England or Wales.

Item, no Husbandman shall wear in his Doblette, any other thing then that
which is wrought within this Realm, Fustian and Canuasse only except.

Item, no Serving man in Husbandry, or Iourneyman in handycraftes, taking
wages, shall wear in his Doblet, any other thing then Fustian, Canuas,
Leather, or Woollen cloth.

Item, if any man shall use or wear any Apparel or other thing, contrary to ye
tenor of the Articles before remembered, then he so offending, shall forfaite
the Apparel and thing so worn, wherewith soever it be garnished, or the value
thereof, and also iii. s.iiii. d. in the name of a fine, for every day that he
shall so wear the same, contrary to the tenor hereof.

Certain other clauses of the Statutes, made in the first and second year of
King Philip and Queen Mary, necessary also to be observed, to avoid the
excess of apparel.
FIrst, that no Englishman, saving the son and heir apparent of a Knight, or
such as may of yearly revenues during life, expend twenty pounds above all
charges, or be worth in goods two hundredth pounds, shall wear any manner of
silk, in or upon his Hatte, Bonnet, Nightcap, Gyrdle, Scabberd, Hose, Shoes,
or Spurlethers, upon pain of three months imprisonment, and fine of x.li. for
every days wearing, contrary to the tenor of this Act.

Item, that if any person or persons, of any estate or degree, knowing any
servant of his or theirs to offend, contrary to the Article last before
remembered, do not put the same servant out of his or their service, but shall
keep in his or their service the same offendour or offenders, by the space of
xiiii. days next after such knowledge had: or so put out, retain him again
within one year next after such offense, the same person so retayning or
keeping in service any such offender, shall forfayte one hundredth pounds.

Provided always, that all and every person and persons, which by any statute
law, remaining in force, is licenced or appointed to wear any manner of thing,
contrary to the tenor and meaning of any of the Articles before remembered, or
any part of them, shall and may wear the same to him licenced or appointed to
wear, as is aforesaid: Any thing in these Articles to the contrary
notwithstanding.

Certain other orders meet in this time to be observed for reformation of the
excess in certain kind of Apparel.
FIrst, it is further ordered, that no man under the degree of a Barons son,
except that he be of the order of the Garter, or of the Privy Counsel, or
that may dispend five hundred marks by year, for term of life in possession,
above all charges, shall use any embroderies or passemayns of Gold or Silver:
nor shall wear any manner of silk neatherstocks of hosen, nor of any other
thing, made out of the Queens Majesty's Dominions.

Item, it is further ordered, that all the articles before remembered, shall be
put in execution in all points, by all manner of officers, according to the
Statutes, laws, and proclamations heretofore made and set forth, concerning
the same. And for such as shall contemn any of the orders before mentioned,
being devised by her Majesty's commandment, the offenders to be attached, and
committed to prison, and to be there continued and punished, as appertains to
such as shall wilfully break her Majesty's commandment in causes concerning
the public weal of the Realm.

It is not meant for any thing above expressed, but that the servants of
Noblemen and gentlemen may wear such liuerie coats, as their masters shall
allow them, with their Badges or other ornaments of any velvet or silk, to
be laid, or added to their said liuerie coats.

God save the Queen.
Imprinted at London by the deputies of Christopher Barker, printer to the
Queens most excellent Majesty.

13. Febr. Anno 1587.
Cum priuilegio Regiae Maiestatis.


