By the Queen.
A Proclamation for keeping the Term at Hartford Ca^tle, and for adiournement
of the same from Mense Mi^hae^^^ until Crastino Anim^^um.
WHereas the Queens most excellent Majesty* upon information given unto her
Highness of the infection of the plague grown and dispersed in her Cities of
London a Westminster, did by her Proclamation dated at her Manor of Woodstone
the eighteenth of September for the considerations therein expressed, cause the
Term of S. Michael to be adiourned unto the fourth return thereof commonly
called Mense Michaelis, hoping by that time* through the goodness of Almighty
God, and such orders as by her Majesty's special comman^ement were appointed t^
be kept and observed, the said infection of the plague might have been much
diminished: Forasmuch as her Majesty has since received knowledge by
certificats sent from London and Westminster, that the plague still continues
little abated or diminished, and therefore doubts that (...)the said Term
should be kept at Westminster from the said Mense Michaelis, it could not be
but dangerous to such her loving subjects, who for suits and other causes
should make their necessary repair thither: Therefore upon like considerations,
her Majesty has by advise of her said Counsel, found it very expedient, that
it should be adiourned from the said Return commonly called Mense Michaelis,
until the Return commonly called Crastino Animaru^ next ensuing. And thereby
the rest of the usual term to be continued and kept. For which purpose,
especial choice is made of her Majesty's castle of Hartford in her County o^
where heretofore the Term upon the like occasion has been kept* and at which
place her Majesty's pleasure is that now the residue of the said Term shall be
kept: Does therefore declare and hereby signify her will and pleasure, That
Writs of adiournment shall be directed to the Justices of either Bench, and to
the Judges of all other her Majesty's Courts to whom like Writs have been
usually directed, giving them authority to adiourne the said residue of the
said Term from Westminster aforesaid unto the said castle of Hartford, there
to begin in the said Crastino Animarum next ensuing, and so to continue: And
the same adiournement shall be made at the said Return called Mense Michaelis.
And also that all matters, causes a suits between party and party, as in her
Highness Courts of Chancerie, Starchamber, Eschequer, the courts of Wards and
Liveries, the Duchy of Lancaster and court of Requests shall have continuance,
and the parties shall have day from the said Mense Michaelis until the said
Crastino Animarum at the said castle of Hartford. Willing and commanding them
and every of them to whom it does appertain, to observe and keep their
apparances and assemblies in all and every her Highness said Courts at the said
castle of Hartford in the said Crastino Animarum, in like manner, form and
condition, as they would, should, or ought to have done, if the said Term and
Courts had been holden and kept at Westminster, as they and every of them will
answer at their perils, any thing in her Majesty's said former Proclamation to
the contrary notwithstanding.

And further, her Majesty considering that if there should happen to be any
access and appearance of her loving Subjects at the said Castle or at the Town
of Hartford, during the residue of the Term, of such as have had the plague in
their houses, or have been themselves infected therewith, there might ensue
great peril and damage, to those that have as yet been clear thereof, and so
further inconvenience might grow thereby to the rest of the Realm: her
Highness therefore for the avoiding thereof, does straightly charge and
command, that no such person or persons, who have been so infected or have
had the plague in their houses at any time since the xx. day of July last, of
what estate or degree soever he or they be, shall repair to the said Castle or
town of Hartford, during the residue of the said Term, except he or they
shall be commanded by special process, or otherwise have special
commandment, for his or their personal appearance. And yet nevertheless every
such person or persons so infected before his or their repair to the said
Castle or Town, shall before he or they enter into any house within the said
Town or into the said Castle, openly notify and declare by some message his
or their state, touching his or their infection, with the cause for the which
he or they shall be called by process or other commandment, to such person or
persons, as shall be appointed by the Lord Keeper of the great Scale of
England, to have the charge of the keeping of the gate of the said Castle and
entries into the said Town. So as if the said party shall be ordered to come
into the Town, or into any Court within the said Castle, the same shall after
(during the time of his or their abode there) bear and hold up in his or their
hand upright to be seen, one red rod, of the length of one yard or more, upon
pain of her Majesty's displeasure, and imprisonment of their bodies during her
Highness pleasure. And further her Majesty straightly charge and commands
al Justices of peace of the said County of Hartford dwelling within xii. miles
of the said Town and Castle of Hartford, and all Justices of peace in the
county of Essex dwelling within vii. miles of the said castle, and al
bailiffes, constables, and head officers of any boroughs, towns, villages, or
hamlets within viii. miles of the said Town and Castle of Hartford, that they
and every of them shall from and after the day of the proclaiming of this
Proclamation within the said county, do their best endeavors to make and set
forth such good orders, as by the goodness of God, may tend most to the
preservation of al places within the same circuit of viii. miles from
infection of the plague. And for that purpose to assemble themselves together
weekly at some convenient place in both the said counties, from the time of the
publishing of this Proclamation, until the end of the residue of the said
Term, as well for the devising, as for the execution of such good orders. And
that the said Justices of peace shall in the first day of the sitting in the
residue of the said Term, signify and declare to the L. Keeper of the great
seal of England, all that they and the said constables and other the said
officers shall then have done in and about the premises. And shall also from
time to time follow such directions as they shall receive from the said L. Keeper
and other of her Majesty's counsel, being at Hartford, tending to the
preservation of the places within the circuit above specified from the said
infection of the plague: Not doubting but that as well the said Justices as other
the inferior officers will carefully discharge their duty in that behalf, as
they tender the continuance of her Majesty's favor, and will answer for the
contrary at their perils.

Given at her Majesty's Honor of Hampton Court the xxi. day of October 1592. in
the xxxiiii. year of her Highness reign. God save the Queen.
Imprinted at London by the Deputies of Christopher Barker, Printer to the
Queens most excellent Majesty.


