Orders conceived by the Lords of her Majesty's privy Council, and by her
Highness special direction, commanded to be put in execution for the
restraint of killing and eating of flesh this next Lent, and to be executed
as well by the Lord Mayor within the City and Suburbs of London, and by the
Officers of the liberties and exempt places in and about the same, as by the
Lords Lieutenants in the scuer all Counties of the Realm.
In the xx^^ year of the Queens Majesty's reign.

FIrst her Majesty's pleasure is, upon her understanding of the great disorders
heretofore and especially the last Lent committed in killing and eating flesh
in the time of Lent, especially in the City of London, and the liberties
thereto adtoyning, that the stature made in the fist year of her Majesty's
reign for the restraint thereof, be put in due execution by the way of
inquisition, and charge of Iuries, and by any other good means, both within
the City and all other places requisite.

And for the better information of the truth of this disorder, and redress of
the inconvenience, the said Jury shall call before them, and send for any of
the servants of any Inholders, Victuallers, Cauerners, and keepers of ordinary
tables, and such other that utter victuals, to examine them upon their
corporal oaths, what flesh shall be, or is any day during the Lent season
dressed, killed, uttered, or eaten in their houses: which if they shall refuse
to do, then they shall commit to prison the said servants, so refusing upon
their oaths to declare the truth.

And because a great part of this disorder grows by the Butchers of the City
and also of the Country, that secretly kill (...) bring flesh to the City:
her Majesty's pleasure likewise is, that there shall be only sire Butchers
licensed by the Lord Ma^^^ to kill flesh within the City and liberties
thereof, without exacting any thing of them for their licenses.

And every of these Butchers to be so licenced, shall be first bound in the
sum of two hundredth pounds to her Majesty's (...), and the bonds to be
certified to the Queens Remembrancer in the Exchequer to sell no flesh in the
time of Lent, but to (...) persons as shall show them special warrant from the
Lord Mayor, under his hand, and that the Butchers do truly keep particular
books of their daily sales, and of the names of those to whom they shall so sell,
with the quantities and the times thereof.

That the Lord Mayor give order to these Butchers, not to sell any flesh but at
reasonable prices, and for that purpose the ^^^rs shall be set down by the
said L. Mayor, such as may be reasonable both for the buyer and seller: and if
the Butcher ^^^ll break that order, then to be forthwith discharged, and
committed to prison, and an other put into his place, and his ^^^d to be
certified into the Exchequer to the Queens benefit.

That the Lord Mayor himself shall grant no warrant for buying of flesh in
Lent, but to such as shall have and she we to in license in good writing
according to the laws of the Realm to eat flesh, and the said license to be
viewed and registered, (...) by some two meet persons to be appointed for this
purpose by the Lord Mayor, and Books to be kept thereof, to be ^^^ed further
when the same shall be required, unless it be to Imbassadors and Agents of
foreign Princes, to whom notwithstanding no further quantity shall be
allowed, then ratably for their own household, and that the said Ambassador
(...) give to the Lord Mayor a certificate weekly, what he shall require to be
for his table.

That the L. Mayor shall now presently before Lent cause all Inholders,
Tablekeepers, Victuallers, Ale housekeepers, and Curtners within the City, and
liberties thereof, to appear before him, or such persons as he shall appoint
meet for that expose: and shall take bonds of every of them in good sums of
money not under one hundred pound apiece to her Majesty's use, not to dress
any flesh in their houses this Lent time for any respect, except it be for some
such person that lies in their ^^^t, and that also has license through
sickness, or other necessary cause, to eat flesh. Bonds shall be taken
also of the coulters, not to utter any Poultrie ware, but to such as shall be
likewise licenced to eat flesh, and that such as will not give ^^^h bonds,
that they be secluded from all utterance of victual during the Lent season.

And for the Butchers and others that come with victuals out of the country to
the city, the L. Mayor shall cause certain ^^rsons, whereof some to be named
to the L. Mayor by the Mardens of the Fishmongers, to watch at the gates and
other like places in the suburbs, where flesh may be brought in, to view and
search, and to intercept the same. And in case the same ^^^^be found to be
brought to any person not warranted nor licenced to eat it as is aforesaid,
then the same to be forfeited and (...) at the discretion of the L. Mayor, for
the use of the poor in the Hospitals and prisons in the City, and the
bringers to be ^^prisoned. And this watch to be continued daily during the
whole time of Lent: and if any of these watchmen be found ^^gligent and corrupt
in his charge, then he to be committed to prison, there to continue during the
whole Lent.

And to the end the said Orders may be duly executed, it is thought convenient,
that the L. Mayor should send for the chief ^eads of the Company of the
Fishmongers, and shall cause them to make choice of four wise and discreet
persons of the said company, and men of good wealth and ability, to whom they
shall commit the charge to make inquiry after such as shall be and
transgressors of the said Orders: who in respect of their travel bestowed in
that behalf, shall have the moitie of such ^nds as shall be forfeited by
transgressing of the said Orders, and the other moitie to be converted unto
godly uses, by the discretion of the O. Majesty's high Almner, specially upon
poor and lame soldiers, with the priuity of some of the privy counsel.

And that there may be due execution of the said Orders, as well without, as
within the Liberties, it is thought convenient, that they that have the chief
charge over the places privileged and exempt, where any Leetes or Law days
are kept, ^^^ll authorize under their hand and seal four persons as are above
mentioned, to make search within the said priuiled^^^ and exempt places for
such as shall transgress the said Orders, and shall for their travel therein
employed, receive the ^^^tie of the Bonds forfeited, as is above mentioned. And
for the avoiding of corruption and partiality in the said persons, shall be
necessary to take their oath, and give bond in some good and large sums, to
see, as much as in them lies, a (...) observation of the said Orders.

And for that it is to be doubted, that the said Fishmongers, upon the
observation of the said Orders, will take occasion ^^reby to enhaunse the
prices, as well offresh as of Sea fish: It is thought meet, that the L. Mayor
shall take order with the and fishmongers, that as well the salt as fresh fish
shall be uttered at reasonable prices.

Lastly, it is ordered, that no Butcher shall kill any Beeues, but such as shall be
specially licensed thereunto, for the furnishing ^f such ships as shall be
employed by sea, either in the way of traffic, or other wise. And that such
Butchers, as shall be licensed other within or without the liberties to kill any
flesh, shall every fourteen days at the least, give a true certificate unto
the L. Mayor and head officers of the places exempt, of such numbers of Veales,
Lambs, and Muttons, as shall be by them weekly ^^lled: to the end, there may
be a true certificate made every fifteen days unto the Lords and others of
her Majesty's privy Counsel, what numbers of the several kinds above
mentioned shall be killed, either within the City, or the places exempt.

And as these Orders are expressy devised to be executed in the City of
London, and places near to the same, so her Majesty's pleasure and
commandment is, that the execution of these or like Orders be performed by the
commandment of her Majesty's Lieutenants to be sent to the Justices of the
peace, in all shires within their rule, and to all other officers in towns
Corporate, or in any liberties, with like order for bonds to be taken to her
Majesty's use: the benefit of the forfeiture of which bonds, her Majesty may
at the intercession of the said Lieutenants cause to be distributed amongst
lame and poor soldiers.

Imprinted at London by the Deputies of Christopher Barker, Printed to the
Queens most excellent Majesty.


