Anno xxvij. Reginae Elizabethae.
An Act for the maintenance of the Peer and Cobbe of Lyme Regis, in the
County of Dorset.
WHereas the Mayor and Burgesses of the Borough and Town of Lyme Regis in the
County of Dorset, and other the Inhabitants of the said Town and Borough, be
at importable charges of themselves in the yearly maintenance and defense as
well of the said Town and Borough bordering upon ye maine Sea, as also of the
Peer of Lyme Regis aforesaid, commonly called the Cobbe, being a harbor for
ships made and enforced in the maine Sea in bottom of the great Baye, which
extends from the Isle of Portland, to the haven of Dartmouth, being distant
xlii. miles: By means of which harbor, as well ye ships of the subjects of
this Realm as others (which in passing the narow Seas are many times by
forcible Southerly winds carried into the said Baye) obtain refuge and
safeguard in the said Peer, without the which they must necessity perish: And
where the said Peer is a great relief as well to the said Inhabitants, as
also to the country there adjoining thereby, receiuyng many benefits by
reason of the traffic and intercourse of shipping there used: And where also
the same Peer or Cobbe in times past was partly maintained by reason of a
certain yearly rent of xx. li. which was paid unto the predecessors of the
said Mayor and Burgesses by the Kings and Queens of this Realm, to continue
for certain years now determined, which yearly rent of late time has been,
and is withdrawn and forborne to be paid, and also the same was partly
maintained by the good devotion and charges of diverse wealthy Merchants
heretofore inhabiting in the said Town, whereof some are deceased, and some
decayed, and sometime by collections of the devotion of the country
thereaboutes, and partly the same Peer also was and is repaired and maintained
by reason of certain ancient Cobbe duties time out of memory of man used to
be paid to the said Mayor and Burgesses, of, and for all and all manner of wares
and merchandises brought into the said Peer, or carried out of the same, that
is to say, for every pack of woollen cloth ii. d. for every fardell of linen
cloth, ii. d. for every tun of sweet wines, oils and sackes, viii. d. for all manner of other wines, and al other gross wares, iiii. d. the tun, for ye
killage of every ship, vessel or cockboate, iiii. d. for every tun of
merchandise trouable and weighed at the Queens beam there, ii. d. for the use
of the said beam: all which duties the said Mayor and Burgesses, and their
predecessors, have had, used, and enjoyed, by the time whereof the memory of
man is not to the contrary, as by diverse grantes and confirmations made by the
kings of this Realm to the said Mayor and Burgesies may appear, which said
duties be so small, considering the former helps for maintenance as
aforesaid, do now cease, and that a great part of the old works being set with
piles of great Oaks, are not yet thoroughly defenced and repaired or finished,
and the same old works so eaten with worms called Arts through oldnesse,
that it falls daily in great decay, and the new works which have been in
building these 30. years, do like wise fall into great decay every great
storm, which requires a continual attendance every tide to amend the faults
thereof. And besides that, the said Mayor and Burgesses are driven to a further
charge now then before time, by reason that they are now enfored to fetch their
rocks with caskes two miles further in the sea, then heretofore they have done.
And moreover, all other things needful are at a higher price then informer
times they have been, so that by reason of the premises, without speedy
redress and further help to be had and provided for the maintenance of the
said Peer or Cobbe, the same must needs fall to utter ruin and decay (as y^
like did happen in K. Edward the thirds time, whereby the said king did lose a
great part of the said Town by fretting of the sea) and many of the subjects
of this Realm and others that shall happen there to be imbayed by tempestuous
weather, must needs perish for lack of a convenient place of harbor and
refuge. And like wise, the country thereabouts will be deprived of many
commodities which they were wont to receive, but also the said Town and
Inhabitants thereof, which for the most part live by shipping and traffic
together with their families, and diverse fit, able and skilful men and mariners
there trained and brought up fit for service, will be utterly impouerished for
ever. In consideration whereof, and for that the said Mayor and Burgesses have
of long time and yet do keep within the said Town a platform furnished with
great Ordinance, and with powder and shot at their own costs and charges for
the defense of the enemy: And for that said ancient duties and customs before
mentioned were never heretofore sufficient to support the charges of the said
Peer, but now much more insufficient for the causes above remembered: Be it
therefore enacted by the Queens most excellent majesty, with the assent of
the Lords Spiritual and Temporal, and the Commons of this present Parliament
assembled, and by the authority of the same, that the said Cobbe duties and
customs may from henceforth be increased in manner and form followyng. That is
to say, that it shall and may be lawful to and for the said Mayor and Burgesses
and their successors, to have and take, of, and for all and all manner of wares
and merchandises which after the feast of Pentecost now next coming, shall be
brought into the said Peer, Cobbe, or Town of Lyme Regis, or carried out of
the same, and there shall be laded, landed, or unladen inwards or outward, for
every pack of woollen cloth, iii. d. only, for every fardel of linen cloth,
iii. d. only, for every tun off weete wines, oiles and sackes, viii. d.
only, and for every tun of other wines, or other gross wares (fish
excepted) vi. d. only, for the killage of every ship, vessel, or cockboate,
vi. d. only, for every tun of merchandise trouable iii. d. only and no
more. And that it may be further enacted and established by the authority
aforesaid, that if any master of ship, mercha^t, owner, factour or dealer with
any the said wares, merchandises or other things aforesaid, shall or will
hereafter refuse or deny to pay the said Cobbe duties last above mentioned, or
any of them upon demand, that then it shall and may be lawful to and for the
said Mayor and Burgesses, and their successors, by any one of themselves, or
any of their officers for ye time being within ye said Town, Peer or Cobbe, to
attach and seize the wares, merchandises, and things for the which any such
duty as aforesaid shall be due and unpaid, or any other of the goods of the
owner or owners of the said wares, merchandises, or things there, and the same
to retain and keep in the name of a distress, until the same duties shall be
unto the said Mayor and Burgesses, or to their successors, or to their officer
or officers in yt behalf for the time being satisfied and paid, for, and
toward the maintenance and continuance of the said Peer or Cobbe. And for the
better and true execution of the true intent and meaning of this present act,
Be it further enacted by the authority aforesaid, that from henceforth, two
sufficient persons of the Inhabitants of the same Town, shall be yearly chosen
and appointed by the Mayor there for the time being, for the true collection
and emploiment of the duties aforesaid, which Receivers shall openly in the
Leete and Lawday there holden yearly, next after the feast of S. Michael the
Archangel, make, yield, and deliver up in writing a perfect account upon their
oaths, unto the Mayor of the same town for the time being of their said
receipts and emploiments. Provided always, that such as now are, or hereafter
shall be of the Cinque ports, and of all other haven towns or Creekes within
this realm, which of right had and enjoyed heretofore privilege in those
duties by virtue of any their Charters whatsoever, shall be and continue
discharged as heretofore they have done, any thing in this act contained to
the contrary notwithstanding.

Provided also and be it further enacted by the authority aforesaid, yt al
such Cobbe duties and customs as shall be gathered, received, or taken by virtue
of this Act or other wise, shall be employed and bestowed in and upon the said
Peer or Cobbe, and the sea works and other things thereunto appertaining, and
not otherwise. And yt yearly at the quarter sessions of the Peace to be holden
next before ye feast of S. Michael the Archangel, in the said County of
Dorset, the Justices of Peace of the said County which shall be there present,
or the more part of them, shall in the said open sessions there, choose and
appoint one Justice of Peace of the said County not being a free man of the
same town of Lyme. And also the merchants and inhabitants of Taunton in the
County of Somerset, shall yearly choose one merchant of Taunton, and also the
merchants and inhabitants of Chard in the said County of Somerset, shall yearly
choose one merchant of Chard, which Justice of Peace, merchant of Taunton, and
merchant of Chard so yearly to be chosen and appointed, together with the Mayor
or head officer of the same town of Lyme for the time being, or the more part
of the^, shall have full power and authority yearly in the said Leete and
Lawday, to take the just and true account of the said Collectors and Receivers
upon their oaths of the said Cobbe duties and customs, what has been
collected and received, and how it has been employed, and what remains, and
the same remain to be employed and bestowed as aforesaid. And if the said
Collectors and Receivers or any of them shall refuse to make account as
aforesaid, that then he or they so refusing to make account as aforesaid, shall
forfeite xl. li. of lawful money of England, the same forfaitures to be
recovered by the Mayor of the said town of Lyme, the said Justice of Peace,
merchant of Taunto^, merchant of Charde so to be chosen as aforesaid for the
time being, or by any two of them by action of debt in any of the Queens
majesty's courts of Record, wherein no wager of law, essoigne or protection
shall be allowed, and the same to be employed and bestowed in and upon the
maintenance of the said Peer or Cobbe and other seaworks and things aforesaid
thereunto appertaining. This Act to continue for ye space of v. years next
ensuing, and from thence until the end of the next session of the next
parliament then next ensuing. And also that after the end of the said session
of parliament next after the end of the said v. years, the foresaid ancient
Cobbe duties and customs, shall remain due and payable unto ye said Mayor and
Burgesses of ye said Borough and town of Lyme Regis for ever, as ye same were
due and payable unto the said Mayor and Burgesses before the making of this
Act, and shall be used, ordered, and accounted, as it has been accustomed
before ye making of this Act: Any thing herein contained to ye contrary
thereof notwithstanding.

Imprinted at London by Christopher Barker, Printer to the Queens Majesty.


