By the Queen.
A Proclamation for keeping the Term at Hertford Castle, and for adiournement
of the same, from Mense Michaelis, until Crastino Animarum.
WHereas the Queens most excellent Majesty, upon information given unto her
Highness, of the infection of the Plague, grown and dispersed in her City of
London, doubting by reason thereof, that if this Term of Saint Michael should
have been kept at Westminster, at the ordinary days and times appointed, the
same could not have been done without the peril of her good and loving
subjects, whose preservation she does specially tender, And yet hoping that by
the goodness of Almighty God, through the cold season of the year then
approaching, and through such good orders as by her Majesty's special
commandments were appointed to be kept and observed, within the said City,
the said infection of the plague, might either have been ceased or much
diminished, Did by the advice of her Counsel, think (...) ^ery meet and
expedient, that the said Term of Saint Michael, that is to say, from the vtas
thereof, should be adiourned (...) the fourth return of the same, called Mense
Michaelis, whereof her Majesty caused notice to be given by a Proclamation
lately published, bearing date at her Manor of Otcland, the eighteen day of
September last past:

Forasmuch as her Majesty has since received knowledge by certificate sent
from the Cities of London and Westminster, (...) the plague is greatly
increased, And therefore does doubt, that if the said Term should be kept at
Westminster all the t^^^ about specified, it could not be but dangerous to
such her good and loving subjects, as for suites and other causes should (...)
their necessary repair thither: Has by the advice of her said Counsel, found
it very expedient, that it should be adiour^^d from the said return, commonly
called Mense Michaelis, until the return commonly called Crastino Animarum
next en^^^^^ to be kept in some other place of the realm. And having for that
purpose made an especial choice of her Majesty's castle at Hertford, in her
County of Hertf. where her Highness pleasure is, that the residue of the said
Term shall be kept: Does therefore declare and hereby signify her will and
pleasure, That writtes of Adiournement, shall be directed to the Justices of
either Bench and to the Judges of all other her Majesty's Courts, to whom like
writtes have been usually directed, giving them au^^^^itie to adiourne the said
residue of the said Term from Westminster aforsayd, unto the said Castle of
Hertford, There (...) begin in the said Crastino Animarum next ensuing. And
the same Adiournement shall be made at the said return called Mense
Michaelis. And also that all matters, causes and suites between party and
party, as in her Highness Courts of Chaunce^^ Starte Chamber, Exchequer, the
Courts of Wards and Liveries, the Duchy of Lancaster, and Court Requests,
shall (...) continuance, and the parties shall have day from the date of this
present, until the said Crastino Animarum, at the said Castle of Hertford.
Which her Highness does signify unto all her loving subjects: Willing and
commanding them and every (...) them to whom it does appertain, to observe
and keep their assemblies and apparances in all and every her Highness
Courts, at the said Castle of Hertford in the said Crastino Animarum, in like
manner, form and condition, as they would, should, or ought to have done, if
the said Term and Courts had been holden and kept at Westminster, as they and
every of (...) will answer at their perilles, any thing in her Majesty's said
former Proclamation to the contrary notwithstanding.

And further her Majesty considering that if there should happen to be any
access and appearance of her loving subjects at the (...) Castle or at ye Town
of Hertford, during the residue of the Term, of such as have had the plague in
their houses, or have (...) themselves infected therewith, there might ensue
great peril and damage to those that have as yet been clear thereof, and
(...) further inconvenience might grow thereby to the rest of the realm: Her
Highness therefore, for the avoiding thereof, does ^^ghtly charge and command,
That no such person or persons that so have been infected, or have had the
plague in their ^^^^^s of what estate or degree soever he or they be, shall
repair unto the said Castle or town of Hertford, during the residue of the
said Term, except he or they be or shall be commanded by Process, or otherwise
have special commandment to be there. And that every such person nevertheless
so infected, upon his repair to the said Castle or Town, shall (before he
enter into (...) house within the said Town, or into the said Castle) openly
notify and declare his estate touching his infection, to such person or
persons as shall be appointed by the Lord Chauncelor to have the charge of the
keeping of the gate of the said Castle: And shall after, during the time of his
abode there, bear and hold up in his hand, one white rod, of the length of
one yard, (...) of her Majesty's displeasure, and imprisonment of their bodies
during her Highness pleasure.

And further her Majesty straightly charge and commands all Justices of
peace of the said County of Hertford, dwelling within twelve miles of the said
Town and Castle of Hertford, and all Constables, Bailifes, and head Officers
of any Boroughs, Towns, villages, or Hamlets, within eight miles of the said
Castle and Town of Hertford, that they and cuery them shall from and after the
day of the proclayming of this Proclamation within the said County, do their
best endeavors to make and set forth such good orders, as by the goodness of
God) may tend most to the preservation of all places within the (...) Circuit
of eight miles, from infection of the plague. And for that purpose, to assemble
themselves together weekly, from the time of the proclayming of this
Proclamation, until the end of the residue of the said Term, in some places
convenient, as well for the devising, as for the execution of such good orders.
And that the said Justices of peace, shall in the first day of the ^^^^^g in the
residue of the said Term, signify and declare to ye Lord Chauncelor of
England, all that they and the said Constables, (...) other the said Officers
shall then have done, in and about the premises. And shall also from time to
time follow such directions, as they shall receive from the Lord Chauncelor,
tending to the preservation of the places within the circuit above specified,
from the said infection of the plague: Not doubting but that as well the said
Justices, as other the inferior officers, (...) carefully discharge their
duty in that behalf, as they tender the continuance of her Majesty's favor,
and will answer for the contrary at their perils.

Given at her Majesty's Castle of Windsore, the eight day of October, in the
four and twentieth year of her Majesty's raygne.
Imprinted at London by Christopher Barker, Printer to the Queens most
excellent Majesty.


