Orders agreed upon, and set down by the right honorable Sir William Brook
Knight, L. Cobham, and L. Warden of her Majesty's Cinque Ports: and the right
worshipful Thomas Randolph Esquire, Master and Comptroller general of all her
Highness Posts, for her Majesty's service, concerning the Posts established
in Kent, according to the direction and auctori^ie given by the Lords of her
Highness most honorable privy Council in that behalf.
FOrasmuch as the Lords of her Majesty's most honorable privy Council, have
found it expedient and necessary, by public orders imprinted (both for the
preventing of inconveniences in time to come, and her Majesty's better service
hereafter) to set down and signify her Majesty's pleasure touching the Posts
of this Realm in general: And by those orders have been pleased to give
authority, and specially to appoint us The Lord Warden of the Cinque ports,
and the Master of the Postles, to determine of, and set down some special
Articles for the reformation of matters of Posting particularly within the
shire of Kent: we, according to the direction and intent of their honorable
Lordships in that be half, have appointed and published these Orders and
Articles following.

That all the standing Posts appointed within the shire of Kent, shall enjoy
the benefit granted generally unto all the (...) Realm, and by their
honorable Lordships expressly set down, namely, that for their better
attendance upon (...) and faithful performance of their duties, her Majesty's
pleasure is, that they be exempted from all atten^^^^^ (...), Assses, Sessions,
Enquests and Musters.

(...) every Post, having the name and place of a standing post, shall reside
and dwell upon the same (as by their Lordships commanded and shall have always
in his stable, or in a readiness, six good and sufficient Post horses at the
least, with (...) fit and belonging, whereof two to serve for the packet, the
rest to be ready at all occasions, for such as ei^^^^ (...) Majesty's affairs,
or otherwise, for more speed shall run the Post. They shall also have three
horns, and the same (...) is by their Lordships is set down, viz. passing
through any town, and meeting of company, and thrice at the (...) mile.

(...) every Post shall keep a fair and large paper book well bound, as well
to set down such Packets, as for her Majesty's shall be carried by them, as also
to register the names of all such as in her Majesty's service, or otherwise,
(...) Post. And the same shall signify, either unto her Majesty's Secretary,
the Lord Warden of the Cinque Ports, (...) ^a^et of the Posts, at all times,
and so often, as upon occasions it shall be required at their hands.

(...) all strangers of what nation souer, either coming into this Realm, or
going out, whether they ride in Post, (...) shall take their horses from stage
to stage, and at the hands of the standing Posts only, or with their knowledge
(...)meant. And for every stranger so riding the Post with horn and guide, the
Posts shall take for every stage after the (...) ^^^llings six pence each
horse: But if they ride in journey, whether it be that the Posts do horse them,
or appoint (...) of the horses shall receive the full composition of his hire,
and shall not exact or take above two pence the mile. (...) all Englishmen,
native and borne subjects of this Realm, that either in her Majesty's
affairs, or for their (...) more speed shall ride in Post with horn and
guide, shall also be horsed by the ordinary and standing Posts (...) their
appointment, and shall pay for every stage the prices accustomed and above
mentioned.

(...) in case Carriers shall come so fast, and in such numbers, that the
Posts own furniture shall not suffice. That (...) be lawful for them to take
up, and appoint such as have horses to hire, to supply their want, taking and
yeeld^^^ (...) cases the same prices to the owners of the horses, that the
Posts themselves do take for their own. And to (...) the Posts shall be
assisted and aided by the Majors, Bailiffes, Portreeues, Constables, and other
officers of their (...) according as by their Lordships is provided for, and
commanded.

(...) all ordinary Through Posts appointed for the service of the Merchants
for Flanders and France, at all times (...) all dispatches and voyages, shall
take their horse from stage to stage, and at the hands or appointment of the
(...) Posts, as well for themselves, as all such as are of their company and
conduction.

(...) no Post or guide, ryding with any man in Post, shall ride without his
horn, and the same to blow as is prescri^^^ ^^all not pass the next stage,
without the consent and priuitie of the Post of the place, upon pain of ten
shillings (...) the Post injured, and restitution of so much as he should have
gained, but shall bring the party or company so (...) the house of the
ordinary Post, where he is to receive fresh horses, or shall signify the same
unto the Post, (the (...) company ryding, being men of sort, that for their
pleasure will make choice of their lodging.) Neither shall he refuse (...) ^ale
or other carriage of any man so riding, behind him, so that the same exceed not
the weight of forty pounds (...).

(...) intended hereby to hinder the liberty of any Englishman, or natural
borne subjects of this Realm, ryding (...) but that he or they may make
choice, and at their own pleasure hire such horses, and at such prices as they
can. (...) that they ride not with horn nor guide, which marks are only
reserved for the Posts to use or allow of, for the (...) in ryding, and better
expedition.

(...) any Hackney-man, or others hyring horses by the journey, shall without
the knowledge and liking of the Post, (...) use either horn or guide, the Post
of the next stage by whom he passes, shall arrest and stay the guide, and
com^^^^ to safe custody, and take such further order with the party ryding,
as by the necessity of his business and affairs, (...) discretion shall find
expedient.

(...) that the Posts for the more expedition of such packets as for her
Majesty's service shall be carried by them, shall (...) quarter of an hour
after they shall be brought unto them, depart with them, and use the diligence
in ryding, set (...) the Lordships of her Majesty's Council, that is to say,
in summer, accounting from the Annunciation of our (...) until the feast of S.
Michaell the Archangell, to ride after seven miles the hour, and in the winter
which is the (...), five miles the hour, more or less as the way shall fall
out.

^^^^ly, for the better observation of these orders in general, and every
particular article thereof, it is hereby com^^^^^^ that from henceforth, if any
Hackney-men, Ostelers, Tapsters, or others whatsoever, having horses to hire,
shall (...) to these orders, either directly or indirectly, deliver any horses
either unto Englishmen or strangers, otherwise then ^^^^^ed, without the
priuitie and allowance of the standing Posts of the place, the officer or
officers of the place, or the (...) Justice of the peace of the shire shall
commit the same person so offending to prison, and there to abide, until he
have put in (...) with sufficient surety to the Post of the place for the due
observing and keeping of these orders for the time to come. (...) to this end,
her Majesty, and the Lords of her Highness privy Council, do straightly
charge and command all Iu^^^^^^ (...) the peace, and Sheriffs of the shire,
Majors, Bailiffes, Portreeues, Constables, Headboroughs, and all other her
(...) servants, to see observed, so far as in them lies, and to be assisting
and aiding unto her said ordinary and standing (...) for the due execution of
the same, as they tender her Majesty's service, and will answer to the
contrary. Allowed (...) Lords of her Majesty's privy Council, and by their
direction published the xxix. of January. 1584.

Anno 27. Elizabet. W. Cobham. Fra. Walsingham. Tho. Randolph.



