HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE
royal blazon or coat of arms
A Copy.
WHere sundry Preachers have lately come into sundry places of the Diocese
of London, some of them not being Ministers: others, such as have no sufficient
warrant for their calling: others, such as have been detected in other
Countries, and have notwithstanding taken upon them publicly to preach, to
the infamy of their calling: others, have in their preaching rather stirred up
the people to Innouatio^, than sought the peace of the Church. These are
therefore in her Majesty's name, by virtue of her high Commission for causes
Ecclesiastical to us and others directed, straightly to Inioyne, Command, and
charge al Parsons, Uicars, Curates, and Churchwardens, of all Churches situate
within the Diocese of London, as well in places exempt from the jurisdiction of
the Bishop of London, as not exempt: that they nor any of them do suffer any
to preach in their Churches or Parrishes, or to read any Lectures (not being
in their own Cures) but only such whose licenses, they shall first have seen
and read, and whom they shall find to be lycensed thereto, either by the Queens
Majesty, or by one of the Uniuersities of Cambridge, or Oxford, or by ye L.
Archbishop of Canterbury, or the L. Bishop of London for the time being, under
Seal. And that no private assemblies or conuenticles about Ecclesiastical
exercises, by any persons whatsoever be suffered to be held, either in houses
or elsewhere, by knowledge of the Minister or Churchwardens: but that the parties
so assembling, be detected by them to the Ordinary, with the manner of their
said assemblies, with as convenient speed as may be.

And, that this Iniunction may be published and take the better effect: we will
that a true copy thereof shall be delivered to every Curate, or to the
Churchwarden of every of the Churches aforesaid: And that upon the Sunday next
after the receipt hereof, presently after the reading of the second lesson at
morning prayer, it shall be read openly by the Minister to the congregation:
And afterward it shall be written in the Church Book of accounts, so as it
may be known unto such Ministers and Churchwardens as shall succeed them: And
then it to be fastened up in some convenient place of the Church.

Yeouen the XXvi. day of March in the year of our Lord God 1589. Io: Cantuar.
Ihon London. Tho. Winton. Harb. Hereford. Subsigned.
Valen: Dale. Owyn Hopton. Bar: Clark. W. Aubrey. W. Fletewood. Edw. Stanhope.
W. Lewyn. Ihon Mullins. Richard Cousin.



