By the Queen.
A Proclamation for the prices of Wines.
WHere it is ordained and provided by a Statute made and established in the
Parliament holden at Westminster the viii. day of June, in the xxviii. year of
the Reign of the Queens Majesty's dearly beloved father of famous memory
King Henry the eight, that the prices of all kind of wines (that is to say)
of the Tun, Butte, Pipe, Punchion, Hogshead, Tyerse, Barrel and Rundlet,
when it should be sold in gross, should be limited and declared by the
Lord Chauncellor of England, Lord Treasurer of England, Lord President of
the said Kings most Honorable privy Counsel, Lord privy seal, and the two
chief Justices of either Bench, or five, four or three of them, and that the
same should be sold according to the same prices so by them set and taxed,
upon pain and penalty contained in the sadie Act: Forasmuch as the Lord
Chanceller of England, Lord Treasurer of England, and the two L. chief
Justices, for diverse considerations them moving, and according to the effect
and meaning of the said Statute and Act, have in writing by their deliberate
aduises, upon conference had with sundry persons thereto requisite, taxed,
limited, assigned and appointed, the prices of Gascoigne and French wines to
be sold within this her Highness Realm for this year following, that is to
say: Every Tun of the best Gascoigne and French wines to be sold (the seller
bearing all the charges due and payable to her Majesty in her Custom house)
after the rate and price of xv. li. sterling the Tun, and not above: The
buyer bearing all the said charges, after the price and rate of xii. li. vi. s.
viii. d. sterling the Tun, and not above. And every Pipe, Butte, Hogshead,
Tierse, Barrel, Rundlet, and other vessels of the same several wines to be
sold in gross after their quantities according to the same rates, and not
above. And every Tun of Rochel and other small and thin wines to be sold
(the seller bearing all the charges due and payable to her Majesty in her
Custom house) after the price and rate of xiii. li. sterling the Tun, and
not above. And the buyer bearing the said charges, at x. li. vi. s. viii. d.
sterling the Tun, and not above. And every But, Pipe, Hogshead, Tyerse,
Barrel, Rundlet, and other vessels of same several wines to be sold in
gross after their quantities, according to the same rates, and not above.

The Queens most excellent Majesty therefore straightly charge and
commands all and singular her loving subjects, and others, putting any manner
Gascoigne, French, Rochell, or other small or thin wines to sale, within this
her highness Realm, that they, ne any of them in any manner of wise, by any
craft, couine, or private agreement, shall sell any Gascoigne, French, Rochell,
or other small or thin wines, otherwise then is above limited, upon pain to
forfeit and pay such penalty as is contained and expressed in the said
statute, or in any other statute made or ordained for the same. And moreover,
her Highness pleasure and commandment is, that all and singular Majors,
Shiriffes, Bayliffes, Constables, and other officers to whom it apperteineth,
that they, and every of them, with diligence, cause, and see that this her
Proclamation be put in due execution, after the tenor of the same, and also
according to another Act of Parliament established in the Parliament above
rehearsed, against such as will refuse to sell their wines at prices taxed as
is aforesaid, as they will answer thereto at their perils.

Given at our Manor of Richmond, the first day of December, in the three and
thirtieth year of our reign.
Imprinted at London by the Deputies of Christopher Barker, Printer to the
Queens most excellent Majesty.


