By the Queen.
THe Queens most excellent Majesty in her Princely nature, considering how
dangerous a matter it is by continuance of the Fair called Bartholomew Fair,
usually kept in Smithfield, to increase and disperse the infection of the
sickness, being presently in sundry places, in, and about London, to sundry
other places of her Realm, being clear and not touched with any such
infection, or to bring more infection thither from other places: has thought
it necessary for avoiding of such danger, to stay for this present the holding
or keeping of the said Fair at this time of S. Bartholomewes day, in such sort
as was usual, whereas there was a general resort of all kind of people out of
every part of her Realm to the said Fair. And therefore to prevent these
dangers, her Majesty does now command, that in the usual place of
Smithfield, there be no manner of market for any wares kept, nor any stalles nor
boothes for any manner of merchandise, or for victuals suffered to be set up, but
that the open place of the ground called Smithfield, be only occupied with sale
of horses and cattle, and of stall wares, as butter, cheese, and such like, in
gross, and not by retaile, the same to continue for the space of two days
only. And for vent of woollen Clothes, Kersies, and Linen cloth, to be all
sold in gross, and not by retaile, the same shall be all brought within the
close yard of S. Bartholomewes, where shops are there continued, and have
gates to shut the same place in the nights, and there such cloth to be offered
to sale, and to be bought in gross, and not by Retaile, the same market to
continue but three days, that is, the Even, and day of S. Bartholomew, and the
morrow after: And that the sale and vent of Leather be kept in the outside of
the Ring of Smithfield, as has been accustomed, without erecting of any Shops
or Boothes for the same, or for any victualler, or other occupier of any wares
whatsoever. And for notice hereof to be given to such of her Majesty's good
Subjects, as for lack of knowledge of this her Majesty's princely ordinance,
might resort to London to sell or buie small wares by Retaile, and there
receive infection, and carry the same into their Countries: Her Majesty
commands that the L. Mayor of London shall cause this her Majesty's
Proclamation to be presently published in all usual places of the City, in
the time of two or three Market days, and to be also proclaimed by the
Shirifes of Middlesex, Kent, Surrey, and Essex, in some places of those
Counties near to the said City, whereby none may resort to the City, at this
feast of S. Bartholomew by pretense of any Fair, but such as shall have cause
to sell or buie the commodities in gross, and in the place appointed, as is
above mentioned. And if any shall attempt to do any thing contrary to this
ordinance, the same to be punished by straight imprisonment without bail,
during her Majesty's pleasure, or further punishment according to the quality
of their offense. And for the restraining of any sick and infected persons, or
any of their families from coming abroad to endanger others, and for some
further stay (by Gods permission) of the present infection: Her Majesty has
caused certain orders to be by her Counsel prescribed to be observed by the
Lord Mayor, and other officers of privileged places about London. Given at our
Castle of Windsor the sixth day of August, in the xxxv. year of our Reign.
1593.

God save the Queen.
Imprinted at London by the Deputies of CHRISTOPHER BARKER, Printer to the
Queens most excellent Majesty.


