By the Queen.
THe Queens most ercellent Majesty, being credibly informed that many
vagabonds, rogues, idle persons, and masterlesse men, having nothing to live
on, do daily resort to the Cities of London and Westminster, and the Suburbs
of the same, and also to the Borough of Southwarke, and other Villages and
Towns near adjoining to the said Cities and Borough, and there are suffered
to live very disorderly: by occasion whereof, many robberies, and felonies, and
other horrible crimes and offenses be committed and done, to the high
displeasure of Almighty God, and to the great hurt of her good and loving
Subjects. The chief occasion whereof, seems to be the want of good execution
of the good laws and statutes, made for the punishment of such masterlesse
men, idle, and vagrant persons. Wherefore her Majesty, minding with some
severity presently to have the said good Laws and Statutes already provided
against such persons, to be duly put in execution, has thought good by this
her Proclamation, to notify the same her Highness pleasure, to all her loving
Subjects: And therefore does straightly charge and command, all persons that
by the Laws of this Realm may be taken for rogues or vagabonds, and all idle
persons, and masterlesse men, not having where with to live on, nor living by
any lawful labor or occupation, and being her natural borne Subjects, that
they and every of them, do within two days next after the publishing of this
Proclamation, depart and avoid themselves from the said Cities of London and
Westminster, and the Suburbs of the same, and from the Borough of Southwarke,
and all other Towns and Villages within seven miles compass of the said
Cities and Borough, and from thence to repair to the countries and places
where they were borne, and there to tarry and abide in some lawful work and
exercise, as they ought to do, upon pains and penalties limited and expressed
in the Laws and Statutes provided against such offenders. And her Majesty's
further pleasure and express commandementis, that the Mayor, Aldermen, and
Recorder of the said City of London, and al Justices of Peace within the
Counties of Middlesex, Kent, Surrey, and Essex, and specially al those Justices
that be within the limits aforesaid, that they and every of them, as they will
avoid her Highness displeasure, do from time to time, as occasion shall serve,
cause good watch to be set, and search to be made, in all places where they shall
think convenient, for the apprehending, arresting, and taking of all such idle
vagrant persons, and masterles men, and that they cause the same with all speed
to be imprisoned, and duly punished, according to the tenor and effect of her
Majesty's Laws and statutes in such cases provided, without any tolleration or
favor whatsoever to be showed unto any of them. And her Majesty does also
specially charge and command the said Mayor, Aldermen, and Recorder of London,
and all Justices of Peace, Bailifes of Liberties and Franchises within the
said Cities, Towns, and limits, that they and every of them, within the
limits of their jurisdictions, do from time to time cause good search to be
made, as well in all common Tabling houses, Innes, Alehouses, and
Tiplinghouses, as also in all Bowling Alleyes, and other places where any
gaming or play is used and frequented, and there to apprehend and take such
suspected persons, being masterles men, of evil name and fame, not having
where withal to maintain their idle life, and the same so apprehended and
taken, to commit to prison, there to remain, until they shall receive such
punishment and correction, as by the laws and statutes of this Realm is and
shall be due unto them. And her Highness is further pleased and contented, that
the Mayor of the said City of London, shall have power and authority from time
to time, to proclaim and publish this present Proclamation in all places within
the said City and Suburbs, so often as to him shall seem needeful and
convenient.

Given at her Majesty's Honor at Hampton Court, the xiiii. day of December,
1576. in the xix. year of her Highness reign.
Imprinted at London by the Deputies of Christopher Barker, Printer to the
Queens most excellent Majesty. 1576.

Cum priuilegio Regiae Maiestatis.


