Oders conceived by the Lord of her Majesty's privy Council, and by her
Highness special direction, commanded to be put in execution for the
restraint of killing and eating of flesh this next Lent, and to be executed
as well by the Lord Mayor within the City and Suburbs of London, and by the
Officers of the liberties and exempt places in and about the same, as by order
to be prescribed by the Lords Lieutenants of all the Counties of the Realm to
the Justices of peace, Lords or Liberties, and Officiers of corporate Towns.
In the (...) Q^^^^^^ M^ ^^^g^^.
FIrst her Majesty's pleasure is, upon her understanding of the great disorders
heretofore and especially the last Lent committed in killing and eating flesh
in the time of Lent, especially in the City of London, and the liberties
thereto adionung, that the statute made in the fifth year of her Majesty's
reign, for the restraint thereof, be put in due execution by the way of
inquisition, and charge of Iuries, and by any other good means, both within
the City and all other places requisite within the Realm.

And for the better knowledge of the truth of these disorders, and redress of
the inconveniences, the said Iuries shall call before them, and send for any of
the servants of any Inholders, Victuallers, Tauerners, and keepers of ordinary
Tables, and such other that utter victuals, to examine them upon their
corporal oaths, what flesh shall be, or is any day during the Lent season
dressed, killed, uttered, or eaten in their houses: which if they shall refuse
to do, then they shall commit to prison the said servants, so refusing upon
their oaths to declare the truth.

And because a great part of this disorder grows by the Butchers of the City
of London, and also of the Country, that secret^^ ^ill and bring flesh to the
City: there shall be only six Butchers licenced by the Lord Mator to kill
flesh within the said City (...) liberties thereof, yielding for the relief
of maimed Soldiers and Mariners, such sums as shall be limited for that
pur^ose by order of the privy Counsel.

And every of these Butchers to be so licenced, shall be first bound in the
sum of two hundred pounds to her Majesty's use, ^^d the bonds to be certified
to the Queens Remembrancer in Exchequer to sell no flesh in the time of Lent,
but to such persons as shall show them special warrant from the Lord Mayor,
under his hand, and that the Butchers do truly keep particular ^ookes and of
their daily sales, and the names of those to whom they shall so sell, with the
quantities and the times thereof.

That the L. Mayor give order to these Butchers, not to sell any flesh but at
reasonable prices, and for that purpose the prices shall (...) set down by the
said L. Mayor, such as may be reasonable both for the buier and seller: and if
the Butcher shall break that or^^r, then to be forth with discharged, and
committed to prison, and another put into his place, and his bond to be
certifled into the ^^chequer to the Queens benefit.

That the Lord Mayor himself shall grant no warrant for buying of flesh in
Lent, but to such as shall have and show to him li^^nce in good writing
according to the laws of the Realm to eat flesh, and the said license to be
viewed and registered, first by some ^^o meet persons to be appointed for this
purpose by the Lord Mayor, and books to be kept thereof, to be showed further
when ^^e same shall be required, unless it be to Ambassadors and Agents of
foreign Princes, to whom notwithstanding no further ^^^ntitie shall be allowed,
then ratably for their own household, and that such Ambassadors and Agents shall
give to the L. Mayor (...) certificate weekly, what they shall require to be
for their own tables.

That the L. Mayor shall now presently before Lent, cause al Inholders,
Tablekeepers, Victualers, Alehousekeepers, and Ta^rners within the City and
liberties thereof, to appear before him, or such persons as he shall appoint
meet for that purpose: ^^d shall take bonds of every of them in good sums of
money, not under one hundred pound a piece to her Majesty's use, not to ^^sse
any flesh in their houses this Lent time for any respect, except it be for some
such person that lies in their house, and that al^^ has license through
sickness or other necessary cause, to eat flesh. Bonds shall be taken also of
the Poulters, not to utter any ^oultrie ware, but to such as shall be like wise
licenced to eat flesh, and that such as will not give such bonds, that they be
secluded ^^^m all utterance of victual during the Lent season.

And for the Butchers and others that come with victuals of flesh out of the
Country to the City, the L. Mayor shall cause certain persons, whereof some
to be named to the L. Mayor by the Wardens of the Fishmongers, to watch at the
gates and other like ^laces in the Suburbs, where flesh may be brought in, to
view and search, and to intercept the same. And in case the same shall be f^und
to be brought to any persons not warranted nor licenced to eat it, as is
aforesaid, then the same to be forfeited and sold at the discretion of the L.
Mayor, for the use of the poor in the Hospitals and prisons in the City, and
the bringers to be imprisoned. And otherwise the Carriers of the said victuals
of flesh to be guided to the persons houses that have license, with regard
therein not to be abused. And this watch to be continued daily during the whole
time of Lent: and if any of these watchmen be found negligent and corrupt in
his charge, then he to be committed to prison, there to continue during the
whole Lent.

And to the end the said Orders may be duly executed, it is thought convenient,
that the L. Mayor should send for ye chief Heads of the company of the
Fishmongers, and shall cause them to make choice of four or more wise and
discrete persons of the said Company, and men of good wealth and ability, to
whom they shall commit the charge to make inquiry after such as shall be
found ^ransgressors of the said Orders: who in respect of their travel bestowed
in that behalf, shall have the one moitie of such bonds as ^^all be forfeited
by transgressing of the said Orders, and the other moitie to be converted unto
godly uses, by the discretion of the Queens Majesty's High Almner, specially
upon poor and lame soldiers, with the priuitie of some of the Privy Council.

And that there may be due execution of the said Orders, as well without as
within the Liberties of the City, it is thought con^enient, that they that
have the chief charge over the places priuileged and exempt, where any Leets
or Law days are kept, shall ^uthorize under their hand and seal four persons
as are above mentioned, to make search within the said privileged and exempt
places for such as shall transgress the said Orders, and shall for their travel
therein employed, receive the moitie of the Bonds for^^^ted, as is above
mentioned. And for the avoiding of corruption and partiality in the said
persons, it shall be necessary to take ^^eir oaths, and give bond in some good
and large sums, to see (as much as in them lies) a due observation of the
said Orders.

And for that it is to be doubted, that the said Fishmongers, upon the
observation of the said Orders, will take occasion thereby (...) enhance the
prises as well of Fresh as of Sea fish: It is thought meet, that the L. Mayor
shall take order with the said Fishmon^ers that as well the Salt as Fresh fish
shall be uttered at reasonable prises.

And it is ordered, that no Butchers shall kill any Beeues, but such as shall
be specially licenced thereunto, without any fraud, (...) the furnishing of
such ships as shall be lawfully employed by Sea, either in the way of
traffic, or otherwise. And that such Butchers as shall be licenced within the
Liberties by the head officers of the Liberties to kill any flesh, shall every
fourteen days ^t the least, give a true certificat unto the Lord Mayor and
head officers of the places exempt, of such numbers of Veales, Lambs and
Muttons, as shall be by them weekly killed: to the end, there may be a true
certificat made every fifteen days unto the Lords and others of her Majesty's
Privy Counsel, what numbers of the several kinds above mentioned shall be
killed, either within ^^e City, or places exempt.

Lastly, where any Butchers shall be licenced in any exempt place without the
City of London and the Liberties thereof, before the said Butchers shall be
suffered to kill or sell any Flesh, they shall make payment to the hands of the
Officers that shall give them license, for the relief of maimed Soldiers,
Mariners, and other lame and impotent persons such sums of money as shall be
limited by letters, either of the Privy Counsel, or of the Lieutenants of
the Shires.

And as these Orders are expressy devised to be executed in the City of
London, and places near to the same, so her Majesty's pleasure and
commandment is, that the execution of these or like Orders be performed by the
commandment of her Majesty's Lieutenants to be sent to the Justices of the
Peace, in all Shires within the^r rule, and to all other officers in Towns
corporat, or in any Liberties, with like order for bonds to be taken to her
Majesty's use: the benefit of the forfeiture of which bonds, her Majesty may
at the intercession of the said Lieutenants cause to be distributed amongst
lame and poor soldiers.

Imprinted at London by the Deputies of Christopher Barker, Printer to the
Queens most excellent Majesty.


