By the King.
A Proclamation declaring at what values certain Moneys of Scotland shall be
current within England.
FOrasmuch as both the Realms of England and Scotland are amongst others by
the providence of God Almighty, and lawful right of descent united and
incorporated together under the Imperial Crown of the high and mighty Prince
James by the grace of God King of England, Scotland, France and Ireland,
Defender of the Faith, etc. And his most Excellent Majesty in his Princely
wisdom knowing how necessary it is, for Commerce and Trade between his
loving Subjects of both his said Kingdoms, That the true value at which
certain pieces of his Majesty's Quoyne of Scotland shall be Current within
his Kingdom of England, should certainly be made known and published to all
his loving Subjects of both Nations: And finding upon trial and certificate by
his Majesty's Officers of the Mynte within his Tower of London (upon
Commandment given unto them in that behalf) That the Quoyne of Scotland
called the Six lib. piece, of gold, is of the finenesse of Twenty and two
Carrects, and that six of those pieces do make an ownce: And also that the
Quoyne of Scotland called the Mark piece of silver, is of the value of
Thirteen pence halfe-peny Sterling: Has therefore published and declared, and
by these presents does publish and declare, That the said Quoyne of gold
called the Six lib. piece, shall be from henceforth Current within his
Majesty's Kingdom of England, at the value of Ten shillings Sterling, And
that the said Quoyne of silver called the Mark piece, shall be from
henceforth Current within the said Kingdom of England at the value of
Thirteen pence halfe-peny. And his Majesty does hereby specially Charge and
Command, that the Rates and values before expressed, be from henceforth
accepted and allowed of by all his loving Subjects whatsoever within the said
Realm of England.

Given at his Majesty's palace of Whitehall, the eight of April, in the first
year of his Majesty's Reign. God save the King.
Imprinted at London by Robert Barker, Printer to the Kings most Excellent
Majesty. ANNO DOM. 1603.


