The several Rates and taxations for Wages, made and set forth by the
Justices of Peace, for the County of Deuon.
HONI ^ SOIT ^ QVI ^ MAL ^ Y ^ PENSE
royal blazon or coat of arms
WHere in the Parliament holden at Westminster the xii. day of Januarie, in the
fifth year of the reign of our Sovereign Lady the Queens Majesty, it was
enacted by the Queen our sovereign Lady, the Lords spiritual and temporal,
and the commons in that Parliament assembled, that the Justices of the Peace of
every Shire, Riding, and liberty, within the limits of their several
commissions, or the more part of them, being resiant within the same, and the
Sheriff of the County, if he conveniently might, and every Mayor, Bailife, or
other head officer within any City or Town corporate, wherein is any Justices
of the Peace within the limits of the said City or Town, should by force of
the said Act, yearly after Easter at times convenient, appointed by the same,
assemble themselves together, and calling before them such discreet and grave
persons of the said County, City and Town, as they should think meet, and
conferring together, respecting the plenty or scarcity of the time and other
circumstances necessarily to be considered, should by virtue of the said Act,
within the limits and precincts of their several commissions, limite, rate,
and appoint the wages, as well of such and so many of the said Artificers,
handicrafts men, husbandmen, or any other laborer, servant, or workman, whose
wages in times past has been by any law of Statute rated and appointed, as
also the wages of all other laborers, artificers, workmen, or apprentices of
husbandry, which have not been rated, as the same Justices, Majors, or head
officers within their several co^missions or liberties, should think meet by
their discretions to be rated, limited, or appointed, and the same rates and
taxations should certify unto the Queens highness Court of Chancery before a
certain day limited in ye said Act. Whereupon it should be lawful for the Lord
Chancellor, or Lord keeper of the great seal of England, for the time being,
upon declaration thereof to her Highness, her heirs or successors, or to the
Lords and others of her Majesty's privy Counsel, to cause Proclamations to be
printed and sent down into every of the said shires and places, containing the
several rates appointed by the said Justices and other head officers,
commanding thereby in her Highness name, all persons straightly to observe and
keep the same, upon the danger of the punishment and forfaitures limited and
appointed by the said Act and Statute.

And where also it is further enacted by the authority aforesaid, that all
manner of person and persons, after such Proclamation made, should observe and
keep the said rates for wages, upon pain of the forfaitures and penalties
contained in the said Estatute, until by further order by Proclamation,
according to the purport of the same Estatute, it should be otherwise ordered
and proclaimed: Wherefore the Queens Majesty, having received into her said
Court of Chancery, amongst diverse other Certificates, from sundry her Highness
Shires, Cities and Towns, one Certificate from the County of Deuon,
containing the Rates for wages hereafter following, made and appointed by the
Justices of the County of Deuon, according to the tenor of the same Act: And
minding to have the same rates put in execution in all points, as by the
process of the same Act is prescribed, like as her Majesty has and intends
to do in all other her Highness Counties and Shires, and other places of
Liberty within this her Realm: Therefore her Highness straightly charge
and commands all manner person and persons within the County of Deuon, to
keep and observe in all points the said rates, taxations, orders and
appointments for wages hereafter following and set forth upon the pains and
forfeitures appointed by the said estatute, and upon pain of her Highness
displeasure.

And further her Highness pleasure and express commaudement is, that all
Justices of Peace, Sherifes, and other Officers of the said County of
Deuon(...) (...)e the same rates duly and severely to be observed and kept in
all points: And this Proclamation to be used in every behalf, according to
the tenor and effect of the same Act. And her Majesty's further pleasure and
commandment is, that if any question, scruple (...) doubt, shall arise upon
any of the taxations or rates for the said County of Deuon, hereunder
mentioned: That then the same shall be resolved and determined by her Highness
Justices of Peace, that did make and ordeine the same taxations and rates: And
that all persons shall perform and keep the same resolutions, orders, and
determinations, so by them to be made and determined touching the same.

The County of Deuon.
The Rates of wages of Artificers, Servants, and Laborers, rated by the
Justices of Peace in the County of Deuon at the Castle of Exon, the xxix. day
of April, in the xxxvii. year of the reign of our Sovereign Lady Queen
Elizabeth, by force of a statute made for orders to be taken for Servants,
Artificers, Apprentices and Laborers in the fifth year of the reign of our
said Sovereign Lady Queen Elizabeth, what wages Artificers and Laborers
should take.

INprimis no Bailife of Husbandry, chief Hind, or Milner, shall take above
liii. s. iiii. d. by year and his Livery, or viii. s. iiii. d. for the same.

Item, no common men servants of husbandry above the age of xvi. or under
twenty, shall take for his wages above xxx. s. by the year, and being above
the age of twenty, shall take for his wages by the year above xl. s.

Item, no women servants under the age of fourteen, shall take any wages but
meat drink and cloth, and above xiiii. until xviii. above xii. s. and her
livery, or vi. s. for the same, and from xviii. not above xvi. s. viii. d. and
her livery, or vi. s. viii. d. for the same.

Item, no women laboring at Hay, shall take by the day above ii. d. and meat
and drink, and without meat and drink vi. d. laboring in Corn harvest, not
above iii. d. by the day with meat and drink, or vii. d. without meat and
drink, and at all other work, i. d. by the day and meat and drink, or v. d.
without.

Item, all Laborers in Husbandry at task work, as they can agree.

Item, that all manner of Husbandry laborers, shall take from Alhollontide
until Candlemas for their wages, but iii. d. a day with meat and drink, and
vii. d. without meat and drink, and from Candlemas to Alhollontide being the
residue of the year, not above iiii. d. a day without meat and drink, or
viii. d. a day without meat and drink, (except mowing of Corn and Grass)
for which they shall take by the day vi. d. and meat and drink, or xii. d.
without meat and drink: and all laborers working by week or month, after
the same rate.

Item, a master Mason, a master Carpenter, a master Joyner, a master Plumber, a
master Hellier, a master Plaisterer, a master Thatcher, and every of them
having servants or apprentices according to the statute, and able to take
charge of the work, shall take by the day with meat and drink not above vi.
d. and without meat and drink not above xii. d.

Item, that every other Mason, Carpenter, Plumber, Hellier, Plaisterer, Tyler,
Shingler, Joyner, Cowper, and other laborers, being no masters, shall take by
the day not above v. d. with meat and drink, and xi. d. without meat and
drink, and every apprentice of the said arts, and boys not above ii. d. by
the day with meat and drink, and without meat and drink not above vi. d.

Item, a pair of Sawyers to take by the day with meat and drink not above
xii. d. and without meat and drink ii. s. for every hundredth foot of such as
saw by Task, as they can agree.

God save the Queen. August. 30. 1595.
Imprinted at London by the Deputies of Christopher Barker, Printer to the
Queens most excellent Majesty.


