By the Queen.
A Proclamation for the due observation of Fish days, suppressing of
unnecessary number of Alehouses, and for the better execution of the late act
for punishment of Rogues, Vagabonds and Beggars.
THe Queens most excellent Majesty graciously considering, the great and
manifold inconveniences, which daily increase within this her Majesty's Realm,
for want of due execution of such good and wholesome Statutes, as have from time
to time been made, forbidding the eating of flesh on days and times
prohibited, whereby Almighty God is justly offended, the prices of victuals
are greatly enhaunsed and raised, and the whole common wealth of this Realm
greatly damnifled, and seafaring men and Mariners greatly diminished: And
purposing the redress and reformation thereof, of her Princely care for the
weal and good of her loving Subjects, wills and commands that all and
every the Noblemen, Knights, Esquires, and others being of the better sort of
her Highness Subjects, do from time to time take order that the said Statutes
be duly observed and kept, within their own houses amongst their families,
servants, and followers, whereby others her Highness good and loving Subjects,
may be drawn and admonished by their good example, to use and keep the like
orders within their several houses and abidings. And further, her Highness
straightly charge and commands, that all and every Inn keepers, Tauerners,
Alehouse keepers, and other persons whatsoever, using any trade of victualling
within this Realm, shall with all convenient speed enter into Bond with
sufficient sureties to her Majesty, the sureties to be bound in ten pounds a
piece, and the parties in the sum of twenty pounds, That they shall not
willingly permit or suffer any kind of flesh to be eaten in their houses by any
person, upon any days prohibited by the said Statutes. And that the Justices
of Peace, within all and every the Counties, Cities, Boroughs, Towns, place
and places of this Realm, do with all convenient speed within their several
limits, take the said Bonds, of all and every such persons accordingly. And
that the said Justices of Peace do from time to time certify and return all
and every such Bonds, so by them, or any of them taken, as is aforesaid, unto
the Barons of her Highness Exchequer within the space of three Months after
the taking thereof, to the end that the same Bonds may remain in the custody
of such Officer, as by the said Barons of her Highness Court of Exchequer
shall be assigned and appointed to keep the same. And that the said Justices
of Peace and every of them shall from time to time do their best endeavors, to
learn and find out whether any of the said persons so bound before them shall
not observe the condition of their bonds. And if they shall find any such Bond
to be forfaite, that they do with all convenient speed certify the said
forfaiture, and the cause thereof unto the said Barons, to the end that such
course may forthwith be taken for the leuying of the same forfaitures, as to
Justice appertains, and is agreeable to the course of our said Court of
Exchequer. And her Highness further wills and commands, that if any Inn
keeper, Tauerner, Alehouse keeper, or other Victualler whatsoever, within this
her Highness Realm, shall refuse to enter into such Bond, as is aforesaid,
that then and from thenceforth, all and every such Inn keeper, Tauerner,
Alehouse keeper, and other Victualler, so refusing to enter into Bond, as is
aforesaid, shall be debarred and restrained from keeping of any such Inn,
Tavern, Alehouse, or other victualling house, until such time as he shall
have entered into such Bond with Sureties, as is before. And further, her
Highness straightly charge and commands, that no Butcher be suffered or
licenced to kill any flesh to be spent in the time of Lent, but only in great
Cities, that be Counties of themselves, and in those such only, as shall be
very fit and needful to serve to make provision for the sick and weak, and
as shall be lawfully licenced, without giving any thing for any such license or
sufferance to any person or persons directly or indirectly. And for that the
unnecessary numbers of Alehouses, and victualling houses, since God has
blessed this Realm with a competent store of corn, have been suffered greatly
to increase, seeing they are the occasions not only of great waste, riot, and
expenses, whereby an unlooked for dearth may eftsoons fall on this Realm, but
also of infinite idleness, thefts, and other inconveniences and disorders
within the same, to the great displeasure of Almighty God, and ruin of the
common Weal of this Realm: Therefore her Majesty straightly charge and
commands, that the said unnecessary and superfluous number of Alehouses and
victualing houses, be from time to time kept down and restreined by the
Justices of the Peace, and other her Highness Officers to whom it shall
appertain. And that no Alehouses nor victualling houses be suffered, but such
as shall be very needful, and the same to be only in fit and needful
places, and to be kept by such persons as shall be thought very fit for the same,
and which shall be careful to observe all such good orders, as are or shall be
prescribed unto them.

And where also diverse good Laws and Statutes have been lately made for the
suppressing and punishment of Rogues and Vagabonds, wandering up and down this
Realm idly and insolently, to the great offense of Almighty God, and of her
Majesty, and of all honest and well disposed subjects, and to the great
prejudice of this whole common weal, which Laws and Statutes, so long as by
the good and faithful care and diligence of her Highness Justices of Peace and
other inferior Officers they were duly and carefully pursued and executed, the
said Rogues and Vagabonds in many places for a while were greatly diminished,
and idleness, thefts, and other insolences and disorders very much avoided,
and the wealth and happiness of this Realm were likely thereby to have
increased and grown more abundant: But when and as soon as, through the
negligence and remissness of the said Justices and other Officers, the said
Laws and Statutes were not put in due execution, many great enormities and
disorders began forthwith to trouble and incumber the happy, quiet and good
government of this Realm, which are likely daily more and more to increase and
grow if some speedy remedy be not applied to reform and redress the same. In
consideration whereof her Majesty does straightly charge and command all and
every the high Constables, and other the head Officers of every Hundred,
Wapentake, precinct and liberty within this Realm, that they and every of
them, once in every month do call before them the inferior Officers within
the said Hundred, Wapentake, and Liberty, and to inquire, know, and
understand, how the same Laws and Statutes have been observed within their
several jurisdictions, and in whom any default has been that the same have
not been observed: And that the Justices of the Peace of every limit, once
every six weeks take a like account of the head Constables, and other chief
Officers within their several limits, how the premises have been observed, and
in whom any default or negligence has been, and that thereupon they be
admonished carefully to see to the due and speedy punishment of the offenders
therein according to the laws. And further her Majesty wills and requires
all Justices of peace, to whose trust and care her Highness has, and does
chiefly commit the execution of every part of this her Proclamation, that they
and every of them do faithfully, diligently, and effectually demean
themselves in the due performance thereof in every degree according to the
confidence which her Highness reposeth in them in that behalf. Otherwise, her
Highness has given express order and commandment, that the said Justices,
through whose negligence, remissness, or conniuency the said offenses shall be
continued, shall be called to answer, and give an account thereof, and receive
such condign punishment for the same, as to the quality of such their offense
and contempt shall appear most fit and convenient. And to the end that the
premises may the better be observed and kept, her Majesty has caused an
abstract of such Statutes as are thought fit to be put in execution by force of
this Proclamation, to be annexed hereunto: willing and commanding that the said
abstract be openly read and published by the Clerk of the Peace for the time
being at every quarter Sessions to be holden within this Realm, and once every
quarter at the leaft in every Parish Church by the Parson, Minister or Curate
thereof.

Given at her Highness Manor of Richmond the xiiii. day of January, in the
two and fourtieth year of her Highness reign.
God save the Queen.
Anno 5. Reginae.
cap. 5.
IF any person of what estate or degree soever do within this Realm eat any
flesh upon any days, usually observed as fish days, do forfeit three pound
for every time he shall offend, or else suffer three Months close imprisonment
without bail or mainprise.

And every person of what estate or degree soever, in whose house any such
offense shall be done, and being privy or knowing thereof, and not effectually
punishing or disclosing the same to some public Officer, having authority to
punish the same, for every such offense to forfeite forty shillings, which
forfeits are to be divided into three equal parts, one part to the use of her
Majesty, the second to the use of the Informer, the third to the common use of
the Parish where any such offense is committed.

No person ought to keep any common Alehouse, or use common selling of Ale or
Beer, unless such person be admitted thereunto in open Sessions of the Peace,
or else by two Justices of the Peace, whereof the one to be of the Quorum, and
be bound by surety by recognisance, against the using of unlawful games, and
for the maintenance of good order, upon the penalty contained in that Statute:
this Act does also extend to tippling in Innes by such as are no passengers or
wayfaring men, and to common selling of Ale and Beer by Inholders.

Anno 39. Reg. Eliz.
cap. 4.
THat Justices of Peace and all other Officers and Ministers to whom it
appertains, do see this Act duly and carefully put in execution in all
points: for the better effecting whereof, certain doubts and questions which
have arisen, or may arise upon the general words of the same, are here
expounded and resolved.

A Rogue affirms that he was borne in such a Town in such a County, He
ought to be sent thither, if it may not otherwise appear he was borne else
where. And if he were not borne there in truth, he is to be said an
incorrigible Rogue, and to be sent thence to the house of Correction in the
County to which he is sent. If there be none there, then to the Jail until
the next Sessions, there to be dealt with according to the Statute.

If the husband or wife have a house, and the husband or wife rogue about, they
ought to be sent to the Town where that house is, and so of an Inmate.

If the Parents be able to work, and may have work, they are to find their
children by their labor, not the Parish. But if they be over burdened with
children, it shall be a very good way to procure some of them to be placed
Apprentices according to the Statute.

The same course is to be observed, if it appear not where he was borne, if he
affirms that he was last dwelling in such a Town in such a County by the
space of a year, and was not.

The wife and children under seven years of age being vagrant, must go and be
placed with the husband. If the husband be dead, then with the wife where she
was borne or dwelt. And the vagrant children above seven years of age, must be
sent to the place of their birth. And if after the vagrant Parents with their
children under seven years be placed at the place of the birth of the Parents,
or at their place of last dwelling, as the case shall fall out, If after the
Parents or either of them dye or run away, yet the children once settled must
remain there still, and not be sent to their place of birth, though after they
grow above the age of seven years.

The Rogue whose place of birth or dwelling cannot be known, has wife and
children under seven years of age, they must go with the husband to the place
where they were last wilfully suffered to pass without punishment, where the
children must be relieved by the work of their Parents, though the Parents be
committed to the house of Correction.

If any travel with their children through a Town not being Rogues, and the
Father or Mother dye or run away, the Town is not bound to keep them where
they dye, nor to send them away but in charity, except they become wandering
beggars.

The wife being a vagrant Rogue ought to be sent to the husband, though he be
but a servant in another Town.

Such persons as be of any Parish and have able bodies to work, and be no
wanderers abroad out of the Parish though they refuse to work at such wages as
is taxed or commonly given in these parts, are notwithstanding not to be sent
to their place of Birth or last dwelling by the space of a year, but to the
house of correction, upon consideration had of both the Statutes of the poor
and Rogues, But if they have any lawful means to live by though they be of
able bodies and refuse to work, yet are they not to be sent to the house of
Correction.

No man is to be put out of the Town where he dwelles, nor to be sent to their
place of birth or last habitation, but a vagrant Rogue, nor to be found by the
Town except he be impotent, but ought to set himself to labor if he be able:
And the Overseers must set him to labor, if he can get no labor, And so of
them that have or shall have houses when their estates be expired, And servants
whose times of services are ended though they cannot get houses, for they must
provide themselves houses anew if they be not impotent.

Such as will put any out of the Parish that be not to be put out, this is
against the Statute concerning the relief of the poor, and finable, And if
any have been so sent, they may be sent back again.

If any be sent to a town, whereto he ought to be sent, and is refused being a
sturdy, or an impotent Rogue, the persons refusing shall forfeit v. li. And he
that is so to be sent, is to be offered to the Church wardens and Overseers.

To send the Rogues by a general Pasport, without conueying them from Parish
to Parish, is a let to the conueying of Rogues according to the Statute, and so
a forfeiture of v. li. upon them, And to go with such a Pasport, is still to
continue a Rogue to be punished by whipping.

A Town will not receive a Rogue, to convey him to the place where he was
borne or dwelt, This is a forfeiture of v. li. in the Officers that should
receive that party, to convey him or her over.

None ought to be suffered to take Relief at any man's door, though within the
same Parish, unless it be by the order of the Overseers according to the
Statute, neither may any be suffered to beg by the high ways, though in
their own Parish.

Parents, within this word is included, a Father, or a Grandfather, Mother, or
Grandmother.

Children, within this word is included, any Child, or Grandchilde being able.

Parsons, or Vicars, etc. be bound to the Relief of the poor, as well as
others, being inhabiting in the Parish as an Inhabitant.

Every one that has Tithes impropriate, Cole mines, or Lands in manuell
occupation, etc. is chargeable, and so for such as have salable Woods
proportioning the same to an Annual benefit.

If there be but one Churchwarden, he suffices with the other four Overseers.

Imprinted at London by Robert Barker, Printer to the Queens most excellent
Majesty. 1599.


