royal blazon or coat of arms
By the King.
THE spreading of the Infection in our City of London, and in the places next
about it, does give us just cause to be as provident as a careful Prince can
be, to take away all occasion of increasing the same. And if such directions
as We gave, and our Council, at our first approaching to the City, had been
obeyed, it is like that (with Gods favor) the Sickness had neither grown to
that height, nor spread so far as now it is. But that having been omitted by
the negligence of such whom it most concerned to have had it performed, The
same care of our peoples welfare, moves us as much as we may, to provide for
the time to come. And forasmuch as there are at hand two notable Faires, unto
which there is usually extraordinary resort out of all parts of the Kingdom,
one in Smithfield near our City of London, commonly called Bartlemew Fair,
and the other near Cambridge commonly called Sturbridge Fair, which if they
should be held at the usual times, would in all likelihood be the occasion both
of the increase, and of dispersing of the Contagion into all the parts of our
Realm: We have thought good by open declaration of our pleasure, not only to
admonish, and to require all our loving Subjects, to forbear to resort at this
time to any of the said two Faires, of Bartlemew near London, and of
Sturbridge, but also to enjoin to the Lords of the said Faires, and others
interessed therein, and of al other Faires within fifty miles of our City of
London, that they shall not hold the said Faires, nor any thing appertayning
to them, at the times accustomed, nor any time till they shall be licensed by
Us, upon pain of such punishment, as for a contempt so much concerning the
universal safety of our people, they shall be adjudged to deserve, Which they
shall be assured that We will cause to be inflicted upon them with all
severity. For such is our desire to prevent an universal Contagion among our
people, which this Infection threatens, as We will not spare any one who
shall be cause of dispersing such an evil among them. And we do further charge
and enjoin under like penalty, to all Citizens and inhabitants of our City of
London, that none of them shall repair to any Faires held within any part of
this Realm, until it shall please God to cease the Infection now reigning
amongst them.

Given at our Honor of Hampton Court the viij. day of August, in the first
year of our Reign of England, France and Ireland, and of Scotland, the seven
and thirtieth. God save the King.
Imprinted at London by Robert Barker, Printer to the Kings most Excellent
Majesty. Anno 1603.


