To all and singular Justices of Peace, Majors, Sheriffs, Bailiffes, and other
her Majesty's Officers, etc.
WHereas her Majesty has been credibly informed, that notwithstanding there
is great plenty of Woolls within this Realm, whereby the same ought to be
sold at convenient and reasonable prices, and nevertheless by the greedy
desires of the great Woollgrowers, who keep the same in their hands contrary
to the Statute made in the fifth year of the Reign of king Edward the sixth,
and by the corrupt practices of diverse Broggers, Ingrossers, Woolgatherers and
Regraters of Woolls, buying and selling great quantities of Wool unwrought,
contrary to the said Statute, And after by the means of these Broggers the
Woolls are conveyed to the Sea coasts, and from thence conveyed out of this
Realm, whereby many the Clothiers of this Realm want Woolls to set
themselves, and such as depend upon that Trade in work, to the great prcindice
and hinderance of her Majesty's good and loving Subjects, and consequently to
the general harm of the Realm, the number of these Broggers, Ingrossers and
woolgatherers being grown to so excessine a multitude: These are in her
Majesty's name by virtue hereof to will and require you, That you her Majesty's
Justices of Peace, and all other her Officers, and cuery of you to whom it may
appertain, or within whose Liberties it shall happen, to call all such persons
before you, as shall from time to time be complained of unto you, to have
bought, sold, offered to sell or transport any manner of Woolls contrary to the
said Statute, or shall contemptuously abuse, or any ways withstand any that
are of shall be lawfully licensed to buy and sell Wools, notwithstanding the
said Statute, their Deputies or Servants, and them and every of them (as they
shall be brought before you or any of you) by virtue of these our Letters, and
the place you serve in, straightly to examine, and if any person or persons be
found culpable therein, then to bind all such to their good behauiors, vulesse
they shall desist from such their dealings, and conform themselves to her
Majesty's Laws, and withal to certify ber Majesty's Attorney general of the
names of every such offenders, that shall not so conform himself, whereby
they may be proceeded with according to the Laws, and according to the nature
of so high a contempt. And hereof fail you not, as you and every of you will
answer the contrary at your perils.

From the Court at Greenewich the eight and twentieth day of June, in the
xliiii. year of her Majesty's Reign. Jo. Cant. Tho. Egerton. C.S. Gilb.
Shrews bury. W. Knollis. J. Fortescu. T. Buchurst. E. Worcester. Jo. Stanhope.
Jo. Popham. Notingham. To. Cecyll. J. Herbert.


Imprinted at London by Robert Barker, Printer to the Queens most excellent
Majesty.

Anno Dom. 1602.


