By the lord general.
WHereas it has pleased the Queens Majesty for necessary defense of her
Highness Realm against foreign Inuastion, to cause sundry Troops of Horse
and Footmen to be levied out of diverse adjoining Counties, and to be brought
up and lodged, for some time, in, and about the City of London: To the intent,
that they being employed in so necessary and important service of their Prince
and Country, be not evil used in the prices of their victuals and forage for
Horses: We Charles Earl of Notingham, Baron Haward of Effingham, Knight of the
noble order of the Garter, Lord high Admiral of England, Ireland, Wales, etc.
And her Lieutenant and Captain general over all her subjects, which be or
shall be levied in all Counties of the South parts of the Realm, and assembled
into Army, or Armies, as well to resist the invasion of the Realm by foreign
forces, as against all domestical Traitors and Rebellion: Do by this our
Proclamation straightly charge and command, that all and every person and
persons of whatsoever estate or degree he or they be, do observe and keep
such rates and prices for all kind of Victuals, Horsemeate, lodging, and other
necessaries as from time to time shall be rated and prised by the Clerk of the
Market of her Highness most Honorable Household, or his lawful Deputy or
Deputies, and the Jury before him or them, by virtue of his Office sworn and
charged. Which Rates and Prises shall accordingly (during the time of the abode
of the said forces, in, and about London) be set up and declared in every
Town, Village, Parish and Hamlet, where the said Captains and Soldiers or
any of them are to be placed within the Circuyte of twelve miles every way
distant from the City of London. And further our pleasure and express
commandment is, That all Justices of Peace, and all other her highness
faithful Officers resiant within the said Circuit, shall diligently within
their several authorities (upon the just complaint made for the breach or
other abuse of the same Assise) in the absence of the said Clerk of the Market
employ themselves to see due punishment inflicted upon the Offenders by
imprisonment or otherwise, etc. And also, that no manner Victualers or other
person whatsoever, do withhold, keep back, or hide any Grain or other
Victuals, whereby the Markets usually heretofore served within the said
Precinct of twelve miles, might be unfurnished thereof, upon pain of their
most grievous imprisonment, and further Fine to be made to her Majesty's use
for their contempt in this behalf. Given at Sommerset house the two and
twentieth day of August, in the one and fortieth year of her Majesty's reign.

Notingham.

A limitation of such rates and prices of grain, victuals, horsemeat,
lodgings, and other things, as by virtue of this Proclamation here above
expressed, are to besold and uttered, as well within all manner of liberties, as
without.
FIrst a quarter best wheat clean and sweet in the Market. xxx. s. And a
quarter second wheat in the Market. xvi. s. viii. d. Item a quarter best malt
clean and sweet in the Market. xx. s. And a quarter second malt in the
Market. xviii. s. Item a quarter branes or pease in the Market. xiii. s: iiii.
d. Item a quarter best otes in the Market. ix. s. iiii. d. Item a bushel of
the same otes within every house. xviii. d. Item a bushel best beans or pease
within every house. ii. s. Item a kilderkin of the best Ale or Beer at the
Brewers with carriage. iiii. s. And a kilderkin single Ale or Beer at the
Brewers with carriage. ii. s. Item a full quarte of the best Ale or Beer within
and without every house. i. d. And a full quarte of single Ale or Beer within
and without every house. ob. Item a pound of butter sweet and new the best in
the Market. iiii. d. And a pound of barrel or salt butter in shop or Market.
iiii. d. Item a pound of good Esser cheese in the shop or in Market. i. d. ob.
And a pound of good Suffolk cheese in shop or Market. ii. d. Item seven eggs
the best in the Market. ii. d. And three of the same eggs within every house.
i. d. Item a stone best beef at the butchers weighing viii. pound. xiiii. And
a stone second beef at the butchers. xii. d. Item a quarter best veale at the
butchers. ii. s. iiii. d. And a quarter second veale at the butchers. ii. s.
Item a quarter best weather mutton at the butchers. ii. s. And a quarter second
mutton at the butchers. xx. d. Item a quarter best lamb in the Market. xii. d.
And a quarter second lamb in the Market. x. d. Item a fat pigge the best in
the Market. xvi. d. And a lean or second pigge in the Market. xii. d. Item a
couple capons the best in the Market. xx. d. And a couple second capons in the
Market. xviii. d. Item a couple of chickens or rabbets the best in the Market.
xii. d. And a couple second chickens or rabbets in the Market. viii. d. Item a
dosen pigions the best in the Market. ii. s. Item that every soldier or other
person being placed and appointed in the Band within the circuit of xii.
miles distant from the City of London, under the right honorable the Lord
General, her Majesty's Lieutenant of the same band and army, and receiving
her Majesty's pay by viii. d. the day, having to dinner or supper good wheaten
bread and drink, beef, mutton or veale boiled, and pigge, beef, mutton,
veale or lamb roasted, or otherwise upon the fish days, to have good wheaten
bread and good drink, salt fish or ling, eggs, butter, pease or beans
buttered, and so having competent and sufficient thereof for the sustentation
of their bodies, every man to pay for his meal. iii. d. ob. Item a pound of
Tallow Candels made of cotton. iiii. d. Item a pound of Tallow Candels made of
wicke. iiii. d. Item every halfepeny white loaf to weigh. v. z. Item every
penny white loaf to weigh. x. z. Item every halfepeny wheaten loaf to weigh.
vii. z. di. Item every penny wheaten loaf to weigh. xv. z. Item every penny
household loaf to weigh. xx. z. Item three horseloaues at the bakers, every one
loaf weighing x. ounces Troie. i. d. And two of the same loaves within every
house i. d. Item every C. weight of good sweet hay weighing Cxii. li. auoir de
poiz with carriage xii. d. Item every bottle of bay weighing iii. li. auoir
depoiz ob. Item a load of good straw with carriage. v. s. Item hay and litter
day and night for one horse within every Inn iii. d. ob. Item good grass for
one horse day and night and so depart. ii. d. And the like good grass for one
horse alone by the week. xii. d. Item if any horse abide in any pasture over
and above one day and one night, then the owner of the same horse to pay for
the same after the rate of the whole week, for so long as he shall abide in
the same pasture being as aforesaid. xii. d. Item a hundred good faggots
keeping the assise with carriage. iiii. s. viii. d. And three of the same
faggots within every house. ii. d.
Item that no Inholder or Victualer do utter or put to sale unto any soldier
or other her Majesty's subjects any Beer or Ale with stone pots, cups or
cannes, or with any other unlawful measures upon pain limited in the
Proclamation aforesaid.

Imprinted at London by the Deputies of Christopher Barker, Printer to the
Queens most excellent Majesty. 1599.


