By the Queen.
The Queens Majesty's Proclamation for suppressing of the multitudes of idle
Vagabonds, and for staying of all unlawful assemblies, especially in and about
the City of London, and for orders to punish the same.
FOrasmuch as it is seen that notwithstanding the good Laws provided for the
restrayning of idle people and Vagabonds, yet for want of due execution thereof
by the Justices of Peace, and other ministers authorized thereunto, there are
in many parts of the Realm, and specially about the City of London and her
Majesty's Court, manifestly seen wandering in the common high ways, to the
annoyance of the common people both in their goods and lives, multitudes of
able men, neither impotent nor lame, exacting money continually upon pretense
of service in the wars without relief; whereas many of them never did serve,
and yet such as have served, if they were maimed, or lamed by service, are
provided for in the Countries by order of sundry good Laws and Statutes in
that behalf made and provided: For reformation whereof her Majesty straightly
commands all Iusticers and Officers to have better regard, then heretofore
they have had, and to appoint upon certanine days in the week monthly (for
some convenient season) watches and privy searches in places needful, and
thereby to attach and imprison such idle Vagabonds, and to send the lame and
maimed into the Countries according to the said Statues. And does further
notify hereby to all her Subjects, that because the disorder of those vagarant
persons is through neglect of her ordinary Officers of Justice grown to such
unruliness and undutifulness, that there has been of late diverse routes and
unlawful assemblies of Rogues and Vagabonds, coloring their wandering by the
name of Soldiers, lately come from the wars, who arming themselves with
shot and other forbidden weapons, have not only committed robberies and
murders upon her Majesty's people in their travail from place to place, But
also resisted and murdered diverse Constables and others, that have come to the
rescue: Her Majesty therefore being compelled to look with the eye of
severity into these growing outrages, and being minded to provide for her good
and dutiful Subjects by cutting off in the beginning such lewd and notorious
offenders, means for that purpose to appoint a Provost Marshall with
sufficient authority to apprehend all such as shall not be readily reformed,
and corrected by the ordinary Officers of Justice, and them without delay to
execute upon the Gallows by order of Martial Law. And these her Majesty's
commandments she wills to be duly observed upon pain of her indignation.

Given at her Majesty's Manor of Greenewich the ninth day of September 1598.
in the fourtieth year of her Highness reign.
Imprinted at London by the Deputies of Christopher Barker, printer to the
Queens most excellent Majesty. Anno Dom. 1598.


