Orders conceived by the Lords of her Majesty's Privy Counsel, and by her
Highness special direction, commanded to be put in execution for the
restraint of killing, and eating of Flesh this next Lent, and to be executed
as well by the Lord Mayor within the City and Suburbs of London, and by the
Officers of the Liberties and erempt places in and about the same, as by order
to be prescribed by the Lords Lieutenants of all the Counties of the Realm, to
the Justices of Peace, Lords of Liberties, and Officers of Corporal towns.
1. March, 45. year of her Majesty's Reign.
FIrst, her Majesty's pleasure is, upon her understanding of the great
disorders heretofore, and especially the last Lent, committed in killing and
eating flesh in the time of Lent, especially in the City of London, and the
liberties thereto adjoining, that the Statute made in the fifth year of her
Majesty's Reign for the restraint thereof, be put in due execution by the way
of Inquisition, and charge of Iuries, or by any other good means, both within
the City and all other places requisite within the Realm, and this to be
executed with more diligence then heretofore it has been.

2 And for the better knowledge of the truth of these disorders, and redress
of the inconveniences, the said Iuries shall call before them, and send for any
of the Servants of any Inholders, Victuallers, Tauerners, and Keepers of
Ordinary Tables, and such other that utter Victuals, to examine them upon
their corporal oaths, what flesh is, or has been during the Lent season,
dressed, killed, uttered or eaten in their houses, which if they shall refuse
to do, then they shall make known the same to the Alderman or his Deputy of
that Ward, who shall commit to prison the said sernants, so refusing upon their
other to declare the truth.

3 And because a great part of the disforder growbeth by the Butchers of the
City of London, and also of the Country, that kill secretly and bring Flesh to
the City: It is ordered that there shall be only sire Butchers licensed by the
Lord Mayor within the City of London, and for the liberties thereof, viz. three
in Eastcheape, and three in S. Nicholas Shambles, who shall be of the poorer
fort, and shall not pay any thing for their licenses, nor join with them any
partners.

4 That every of the said Butchers so to be licensed within the City, be
stinted not to kill weekly above the number of wentie sheep, twenty calves,
and twenty lambs, and to utter and sell the same in their open shops in such
fort, as in open time they are accustomed to do, and at such rates and prizes
as shall be set down by order of the Lord Mayor of London for that City and
the liberties thereof. And besides every one of them shall keep a perfect
book, what Flesh they kill every day, and to what persons they sell and utter
the same, and be bound in a sufficient Bond with good Sureties to her Baiesties
use, to observe these Orders in every respert.

5 That there be licensed only to kill and utter flesh in the Suburbs of the
said City, as in the Counties of Middlesex and Surrey near unto London, only
ten Butchers to be licensed by the Justices within the several limits, whereof
two to be of the Quorum, that is, two without Temple Bar in the parish of S.
Clement Danes, two without Smithfield Bars in the parish of S. Pulchers, or
Clarketonwell, or one of them, one in whitecrosse street, one in Norton
Folgate, one in white Chapel, one in S. Katherines, two in Southwarke, and
for the City of Westminster and the liberties thereof two Butchers to be
licensed by the chief Officer of that liberty. And those to be as is before
expressed for the said City and the liberties, of the poorer sort inhabiting
in those places, and to be licensed without any money or other consideration to
be given for the same, and to be bound in the like Bond and Conditions, and to
observe the like Orders in cuery respeet as those that are to be appointed for
London, and the said Clerk of the Market, Officer and Justice, there to see
them, and to set the prizes of the victuals to be uttered in those parts.

6 That no person be permitted to kill or sell any flesh but to those that are
licensed, nor in any other place as before is specified, upon pain to forfeit
the flesh to be given to the poor in the prisons, and to suffer imprisonment.

7 That the Constables, Churchwardens and other public Officers be authorized
in London, and the liberties thereof, by the L. Mayor, and by the Justices in
the Counties of Middlesex and Surrey, and the forenamed Officers in
westminster, to make search, and to see that the licensed Butchers, nor any
other do kill or utter any flesh, nor do any thing contrary to the Orders and
her Majesty's Proclamation in that behalf, and of they find any to offend
therein, that they be bound and ordered to present the same to the Justices of
the Peace, and the Officers of Westminster, who are to see the offenders duly
punished and proceeded withal according to the law and their discretions.

8 Item, that every Butcher licensed to kill for any private persons, do not
sell to any other.


