Orders conceived by the Lords of her Majesty's Privy Council, and by her
Highness special direction, commanded to be put in execution for the
restraint of killing and eating of flesh this next Lent, and to be executed
as well by the Lord Mayor within the City and Suburbs of London, and by the
Officers of the liberties and exempt places in and about the same, as by order
to be prescribed by the Lords Lieutenants of all the Counties of the Realm, to
the Justices of Peace, Lords of Liberties, and Officers of corporate Towns.
1. Febr. xxxviij. year of the Queens Majesty's reign.
FIrst her Majesty's pleasure is, upon her understanding of the great disorders
heretofore and especially the last Lent committed in killing and eating flesh
in the time of Lent, especially in the City of London, and the liberties
thereto adioining, that the statute made in the fifth year of her Majesty's
reign, for the restraint thereof, be put in due execution by the way of
inquisition, and charge of Iuries, and by any other good means, both within
the City and all other places requisite within the Realm.

And for the better knowledge of the truth of these disorders, and redress of
the inconveniences, the said Iuries shall call before them, and send for any of
the servants of any Inholders, Victuallers, Tauerners, and Keepers of ordinary
Tables, and such other utter victuals, to examine them upon their corporal
oaths, what flesh shall be, or is any day during the Lent season dressed,
killed, uttered, or eaten in their houses: which if they shall refuse to do,
then they shall commit to prison the said servants, so refusing upon their
oaths to declare the truth.

And because a great part of this disorder grows by the Butchers of the City
of London, and also of the Country, that secret^^ kill and bring flesh to the
City: there shall be only viii. Butchers licenced by the Lord Mayor to kill
flesh within the said City and liberties thereof, without paying any thing for
their license, because they shall be bound in reasonable sums of money to
^^^serue such order as shall be prescribed to them.

And every of these Butchers, to be licenced, shall be first bound in the sum
of two hundred pounds to her Majesty's use, and the bonds to be certified to
the Queens Remembrancer in the Eschequer) to sell no flesh in the time of
Lent, but to such ^^rsons as shall show them special warrant from the Lord
Mayor under his hand, and that the Butchers do truly keep parti^^lar books of
their daily sales, and the names of those to whom they shall so sell, with the
quantities and the times thereof.

That the Lord Mayor give order to these Butchers, not to sell any flesh but at
reasonable prices, and for that purpose he pri^^ shall be set down by the said
Lord Mayor, such as may be reasonable both for the buyer and seller: and if the
Butcher shall ^take that order, then to be forth with discharged, and
committed to prison, and another put into his place, and his bond to (...)
certified into the Eschequer to the Queens benefit.

That the Lord Mayor himself shall grant no warrant for buying of flesh in
Lent, but to such as shall have and show to him li^ence in good writing
according to the laws of the Realm to eat flesh, and the said license to be
viewed and registered, first by some ^o meet persons to be appointed for this
purpose by the Lord Mayor, and books to be kept thereof, to be showed further
when (...) same shall be required, unless in be to Ambassadors and Agents of
foreign Princes, to whom not withstanding no further ^uantitie shall be allowed,
then ratably for their own household, and that such Ambassadors and Agents shall
give to the L. Mayor Certificate weekly, what they shall require to for their
own tables.

That the L. Mayor shall now presently before Lent, cause all Inholders,
Tablekeepers, Victualers, Alehousekeepers, and Ta^^rners within the City and
liberties thereof, to appear before him, or such persons as he shall appoint
meet for that purpose: and shall take bonds of every of them in good sums of
money, not under one hundred pound a piece to her Majesty's use, not to ^^cesse
and flesh in their houses this Lent time for any respect, except it be for some
such person that lies in their house, and that also has license through
sichnesse or other necessary cause, to eat flesh. Bonds shall be taken also of
the Poulters, not to utter any Poultry ware, but to such as shall be like wise
licenced to eat flesh, and that such as will not give such bonds, that they be
secluded from all utterance of victual during the Lent season.

And for the Butchers and others that come with victuals of flesh out of the
Country to the City, the L. Mayor shall cause ceraine persons, whereof some to
be named to the L. Mayor by the Wardens of the Fishmongers, to watch at the
gates and other like ^^aces in the Suburbs, where flesh may be brought in, to
view and search, and to intercept the same. And in case the same shall be and to
be brought to any person not warranted nor licenced to eat it, as is aforesaid,
then the same to be forfeited and sold at the ^^seretion of the L. Mayor, for
the use of the poor in the Hospitals and prisons in the City, and the bringers
to be imprisoned. And therwise the Carriers of the said victuals of flesh to be
guided to the persons houses that have license, with regard therein not to ^e
abused. And this watch to be continued daity during the whole time of Lent: and
if any of these watchmen be found negligent and corrupt in his charge, then he
to be committed to prison, there to continue during the whole Lent.

And to the end the said Orders may be duly executed, it is hought convenient,
that the L. Mayor should send fory chief Heads the company of the Fishmongers,
and shall cause them to make choice of four or more wise and discrete persons
of the said Commany, and men of good wealth and hability, to whom they shall
commit the Charge to make enquiry after such as shall be found ^ransgressors of
the said Orders, who in respect of their travel besto wed in that behalf, shall
have the one moity of such bonds as all be forfeited by transgressing of the
said Orders, and the other moity to be converted unto godly uses, by the
discretion of the Queens Majesty's High Almner, specially upon poor and lame
soldiers, with the priuitie of some of the Privy Council.

And that there may be due execution of the said Orders, as well without as
within the Liberties of the City, it is thought con^enient, that they that
have the chief charge over the places priuileged and exempt, where any Leets
or Law days are kept, shall ^uthorize under their hand and seal four persons
as are ahoue mentioned, to make search within the said privileged and exempt
places for such as shall transgress the said Orders, and shall for their travel
therein employed, receive the moitie of the Bonds for^^^ed, as is above
mentioned. And for the auofding of corruption and partiality in the sayce
persons, it shall be necessary to take our other, and give bond in some good
and large sums, to see (as much as in them lies) a due observation of the
said Orders.

And for that it is to be doubted, that the said Fishmongers, upon the
observation of the said Orders, will take occasion thereby ^o enhance the
prises as well of Fresh as of Sea fish: It is thought meet, that the L. Mayor
shall take order with the said Fishmon^ers, that as well the Salt as Fresh fish
shall be uttered at reasonable prises.

And it is ordered, that no Butchers shall kill any Beeues, but such as shall
be specially licenced thereunto, without any fraud, on the furnishing of such
ships as shall be lawfully employed by Sea, either in the way of traffic, or
otherwise. And that such Butchers as shall be licenced within the Liberties by
the head officers of the Liberties to kill any flesh, shall every fifteen days
unto the Lords and others of her Majesty's Privy Counsel, what numbers of the
several kinds above mentioned shall be killed, either within the Cities, or
places exempt.

And as these Orders are expressy devised to be executed in the City of
London, and places near to the same, so her Majesty's pleasure and
commandment is, that the execution of these or like Orders be performed by the
commandment of her Majesty's Lieutenants to be sent to the Justice of the
Peace, in all Shires within their rule, and to all other officers in Towns
corporat, or in any Liberties, with like order for bonds to be taken to her
Majesty's use.

Imprinted at London by the Deputies of Christopher Barker, Printer to the
Queens most excellent Majesty.


