royal blazon or coat of arms
By the King.
A Proclamation for the due and speedy execution of the Statute against Rogues,
Vagabonds, Idle, and dissolute persons.
WHereas at a Parliament holden at Westminster in the nine and thirtieth year
of the Reign of his Majesty's late dear Sister deceased Queen Elizabeth, a
profitable and necessary Law was made for the repressing of Rogues, Uagabonds,
idle and dissolute persons, wherewith this Realm was then much infested, by
the due execution of which Law, great good ensued to the whole Common weal of
this Realm, but now of late by the remissness, negligence, and conniuencie
of some Justices of the Peace, and other Officers in diverse parts of the
Realm, they have swarmed and abounded every where more frequently then in
times past, which will grow to the great and imminent danger of the whole
Realm, if by the goodness of God Almighty, and the due and timely execution
of the said Law the same be not prevented.

And where to the end that no impediment might be to the due and full execution
of the same Law, his Highness Privy Council, according to the power to them
in that behalf given by the said Law, have by their Order assigned places and
parts beyond the Seas, unto which such incorrigible or dangerous Rogues should
according to the same Law be banished and conveyed, as by the Order in that
behalf made, and under this present Proclamation particularly mentioned and
set down, more at large appears: His Majesty purposing (for the universal
good of the whole Realm) to have the same Law duly and fully executed, does
by advise of his Privy Council require all Justices of Peace, Majors,
Bayliffes, Hedboroughs, Constables, and other Officers whatsoever to whom it
appertains, to see that the said Law be in all the parts, and branches of the
same carefully, duly and exactly executed, as they and every of them will
answer the contrary at their uttermost perils.

Given at his Majesty's Manor of Woodstocke the seventeenth day of September
1603. in the first year of his Highness Reign of England, France, and
Ireland, and of Scotland the seven and thirtieth. God save the King.
The Order.
FOrasmuch as it has appeared unto us as well by our own viewes in our
travails in this present Progress of his Majesty, as also by good and
credible information from diverse and sundry parts of the Realm, that Rogues
grow again and increase to be incorrigible, and dangerous not only to his
Majesty's loving Subjects abroad, but also to his Majesty and his Honorable
Household and attendants in and about his Court, which growing partly through
the remissenes of some Justices of the Peace, and other Officers in the
Country, and partly for that there has been no Suite made for assigning some
place beyond the Seas, to which such incorrigible or dangerous Rogues might be
banished, according to the Statute in that behalf made: We therefore of his
Majesty's privy Council, whose names are hereunto subscribed, finding it of
necessity to reform great abuses, and to have the due execution of so good
and necessary a Law, do according to the power limited unto us by the same
Statute, hereby Assign and think it fit and expedient, that the places and
parts beyond the Seas to which any such incorrigible or dangerous Rogues shall
be banished and conveyed according to the said Statute, shall be these
Countries and places following, viz. The Newfound Land, the East and West
Indies, France, Germany, Spain, and the Low Countries, or any of them.

T. Buckhurst. Lenox. Notingham. Suffolk. Devonshire. Mar. To. Cecill. E.
Wotton. Io. Stanhop.


Imprinted at London by Robert Barker, Printer to the Kings most Excellent
Majesty. Anno 1603.


