By the King.
We have by our late Proclamation, published for the apprehension of one
Anthony Copley, signified what grief it was unto us, that any Subject of this
Realm, of how mean condition soever, should give us just cause to put in use
the power of our Laws for any offense against us in matter of Loyalty. And
although we have no little comfort in the experience which that first occasion
gave us, of the love and obedience of the universal number of our Subjects, by
whose diligence and care of our person the said Copley has been apprehended:
Yet has the same brought us withal, cause of further grief, in that by the
said Copleys confession, there is discovered a conspiracy of a great number of
others to have made an attempt not only dangerous to our Person, but to our
whole State: whereof some principal Gentlemen of quality are already
apprehended, some others cannot yet be found by the ordinary Ministers of our
Justice. Wherefore, we have thought good to give knowledge of them to all our
Subjects by open Proclamation, not doubting but to find as good fruits of
their love in their diligent inquiry after these persons, as we did of Copley:
Requiring and charging all Lieutenants, deputy Lieutenants, Justices of Peace,
Mayors, Sheriffs, Bayliffes, Constables, and all other our Officers and
Ministers whatsoever, to use all care and diligence in the enquiring, searching
for, and apprehending of Sir Griffia Markham Knight, and such other persons, as
are here in the foot of this Proclamation described. And if they shall be so
happy as to find any of them, to send them presently up to some of our
Council. And though we doubt not but that we shall find good proof of the
care of all good Subjects in doing their duties herein: Yet seeing it is a
cause that does so nearly concern not only our Person, but the subversion
of the State of this Realm, We cannot but add this further Charge, That if
we shall perceive that any shall use remissenes, negligence, or other omission
of their duty in pursuing this our pleasure, We shall have cause to judge
otherwise of them, and to proceed otherwise with them, then willingly we
would have cause to do with any Subject of this Realm; in whom we must
acknowledge that in general we have found as much love and duty, as could
possibly be expressed.

Given at our Honor of Hampton Court the sixteenth day of July 1603. in the
first year of our Reign of England, France, and Ireland, and of Scotland the
six and thirtieth. God save the King. The description of the persons.
SIr Griffin Markham has a large broad face, of a bleake complexion, a big
nose, one of his hands is maimed by an hurt in his arm received by the shot of
a Bullet, he has thin and little hair upon his beard; All his brethren are
tall of stature, young, and without any hair of their faces, or exceeding
swarthy and bad complexions, and have all very great noses.

WIlliam Watson priest is a man of the lowest sort, about xxxvi. years of age,
his hair betwixt abram and flaxen, he looks asquint, and is very purblind,
so as if he read any thing he puts the paper near to his eyes, he did
wear his beard at length of the same colored hair as is his head. But
information is given that now his beard is cut.

WIlliam Clarke priest is a man of middle stature, inclining to the lower sort,
about the age of xxxvi. years, his hair is betwixt red and yellow, he keeps
his beard close cut, he is not lean nor corpulent, but betwixt both, rather
lean.



Imprinted at London by Robert Barker, Printer to the Kings most Excellent
Majesty. Anno 1603.


