By the King.
AT our first entrance into this our Realm, and in all the way as we have
passed, we took no small contentment in the resort Noblemen, Gentlemen and
other our Subjects coming to visit us, holding their affectionate desire to
see our Person, to be a certain testimony of their inward love. And in the
same contentment we have dwelled since our soiourning at this place, and shall
ever remain, as long as such concourse of them to our Court may be without
grieuance and offense to the Body of this Realm. But hearing from all parts of
our Kingdom, that by the remove of great numbers of the principal Gentlement
out of the several Counties, as well of such as have charge there, as Deputy
Lieutenants, or Commissioners for the Musters or for the Peace, as others with
their whole families, both the execution of things incident to their charge is
omitted, and hospitality exceedingly decayed, whereby the relief of the
poorer sort of peole is taken away, who had from such Houses much comfort and
case toward their living: For remedy of the inconveniences like to grow
thereby, and also for that we find the sickness already somewhat forward
within our City of London, which by concourse of people abiding there is very
like to be increased, and imports us as well for our peoples sake, as for the
safety of our own Person (who for the most part live in places near the said
City) to prevent by all provident means: We have been moved rather to want
for a time the contentment we have in the sight and resort of our Subjects to
us, then for our own private delight, to give way to so great a mischief, as
the continual resort hither may breed. Wherefore we do hereby will and command
all Gentlemen and others, as well such as have any kind of charge in the
Counties of their ordinary habitation, as of other sort, That if they have not
some special cause of attendance at our Court for our Service, or for some
necessary cause concerning their own estate, whereof they may inform our
Privy Council, they shall immediately after the end of this Term depart our
said City of London and the Suburbs thereof, and return to their several
habitations in the Counties of their abode, until the time of our Coronation
be come, at what time we shall not mislike to have them return until that
solemnity be passed. And because we perceive that heretofore there has been a
great neglect in obeying Proclamations published upon just causes, we do
admonish all those whom this Proclamation concerns, to be so wary, as We
have not just cause to make them an example of contempt, which we must and
will do, if after the Term ended we shall find any making stay here,
contrary to this direction.

Given at our Manor of Greenewich the 29. of May, in the first year of our
Reign of England, France and Ireland, and the six and thirtieth of Scotland.
Imprinted at London by Robert Barker, Printer to the Kings most excellent
Majesty.

ANNO DOM. 1603.


