ER
HONI SOIT (...) Y ^^NSE DIEV ET MON DROIT
ELIZABETH by the grace of God, Queen of England, France and Ireland, defender
of the faith. etc. To all to whom these presents shall come greeting.
Know ye that as well in consideration of the good, faithful and acceptable
service to be heretofore done, by our trusty and well-beloved servant Sir John
Pakington Knight, as for and in consideration of the sum of forty Pounds of
current money of this our Realm, to be yearly answered and paid to us our
heirs and successors by the said sir John Pakington his Executors or assigns
into the receipt of our Exchequer at the feast of the Nativity of our Lord
God, or within two months next after at one entier payment during all the
years mentioned in these presents for and during the continuance of this our
grant. For the tru^ payment whereof accordingly the said Sir John Pakington
has already put in sufficient bond and assurance to us, as also for and in
consideration that the said Sir John Pakington has likewise put in sufficient
bond and assurance to us for the yearly payment of the sum of five hundredth
Pounds of current money of this our Realm^ to be likewise yearly answered and
paid to us our heirs and successors at the said place, and within the said
time, for and during the continuance of this our grant, for and toward the
satisfaction and payment of a certain debt due to us by Richard Yung deceased,
and for diverse and sundry other considerations us moving:

(...)
WE of our especial grace, certain knowledge and mere motion have given and
granted, and by these presents for us our heirs and successors do give and
grant to the said Sir John Pakington and his assigns, and the assigns of his
said assignee and his and their assigns, full power and license, and authority
that he by himself or by his assigns or the assignee or assigns of his
assigns or his or their assigns, or the Servants, factors or deputies of him
or his assigns or the assignee or assigns of his said assigns, or his or
their assigns, or of any of them as well Englishmen and denizens as strangers
borne under the obedience of any foreign Prince, being with us in league and
amity, shall and may at all times for and during the term of eight whole
years, from and immediately ensuing the date of these our letters Patents
provide and buy in any part beyond the Seas being with us in league and amity,
all and every such sorts of Starch, as he or they or any of them shall think
good, and the same Starch from time to time to bring or send or cause to be
brought or sent and transported into this our Realm or any our Dominions and
there to utter, and sell, distribute and dispose the same in gross or by
retaile, to his or their most commodity, without incurring of any manner of
penalty, forfeiture, or danger in that behalf: any Law, act, statute,
ordinance, or restraint to the contrary in any wise notwithstanding.

And further we will and grant by these presents for us our heirs and
successors, that the said Sir John Pakington and his assigns and the assignee
and assigns of his assignee and his and their assigns, and the servants,
factors, and deputies of him and his assigns only and none other shall during
the said term, have exercise and enjoy the premises to him by these presents
before given and granted, and also the full and whole trade and traffic of
Merchandising and selling of Starch within this our Re^lme and dominions as
aforesaid.

(...).
ANd therefore we do straightly charge and command all and every person and
persons whatsoever, of what estate, degree, or condition soever they be, that
none of them shall during the said term make or cause to be made any manner of
Starch within this our Realm or dominions aforesaid. And likewise that none of
them other then the said Sir John Pakington or his assigns or the assignee or
assigns of his assigns or his or their assigns, or his or their servants,
factors, or deputies as is aforesaid shall during the said term bring or send,
or cause to be brought or sent, transported or laid on land, nor by any manner
of means or color, merchandise, buy, sell, utter, shift, exchange, offer to
sell (...) put to sale, or keep to the intent to sell any manner of Starch into
or within this our Realm or any our Dominions contrary to the effect and true
meaning of this our grant, or of any Law, statute, ordinance, restraint
p^^^^^mation or provision in that case made or provided: Upon pain that every
person offending in that behalf, shall not only incur our high displeasure
and suffer such fine, punishment and imprisonment, as is due for offenses and
offenders in cases of contempt against our Crown, dignity and prerogative
Royal, but also shall likewise loose and forfeit all the Starch which shall be
made, brought in, sold, merchandized, uttered shifted, exchanged, offered, or
put to sale, or kept to the intent to be sold contrary to the tenor or intent
of this our present grant. The one half of which forfeiture, to be to us our
heirs and successors, and the other half we give and grant by these presents,
for us our heirs and successors to the said Sir John Pakington and his
assigns.

(...).
ANd for the better execution of this our grant, we do also for us our heirs
and successors give and grant by these presents to the said Sir John Pakington
full power, free liberty, and authority that he the said Sir John Pakington
and his assigns, and the assignee and assigns of his assigns, and his and
their assigns, and his and their and every of their servants, factors and
deputies and every of them, shall and may at all times, and from time to time
during the said term, enter into any Ship, bottom, vess^ll, boat, shop
warehouse, or other place or places whatsoever, which they or any of them shall
think good within this our Realm, or any other our dominions by water or
land, as well within liberties as without, and there by all lawful and
convenient ways and means try out and search for all such Starch as shall be
made, brought transported l^yde on land, bought, sold, merchandized shifted,
exchanged, uttered, offered or put to sale, or kept to the intent to be put to
sale contrary to the meaning or intent of these our letters Patents, and to
arrest, seize, take, carry away and deteine the same to the uses in these our
letters Patents before m^ntioned and expressed, to the intent that the said Sir
John Pakington and his assigns shall and may quietly have and enjoy the moitie
of all forfeitures as is aforesaid during the term aforesaid according to the
effect of this our grant.

(...) of (...) forfeitures (...) paid to (...) Pa^.
WE do further will and grant that these our letters Patents or the
Inrolement, Duplicate, or exemplification of the same, without any further or
other w^rrant, shall from time to time during the said term of years, be a
sufficient warrant and authority to our Treasorer of England for the time
being, and to the Barons of our Exchequer, and to all other our Officers and
ministers whatsoever to whom it shall or may appertain, to allow, deliver and
pay the one moitie of all the said forfeitures to the said Sir John Pakington
or his assigns, or the assignee or assigns of his assigns or his or their
assigns to his and their own proper use and behoof. Which said allowance and
payment thereof our will and pleasure is, to be from time to time duly made
and performed accordingly during the term aforesaid, without any denial or
delay of any our Officers and ministers whatsoever.

(...) Custom (...) be paid for (...) Starch (...).
ANd further we will and command and by these presents for us our heirs and
successors, do straightly charge and prohibit all and singular our Customers,
Collectors, Comptrollers, and farmers of our Customs and Subsidies of and
within all and every Ports, Havens and Creekes and all other places whatsoever
within this our Realm or any other our Dominions, and all other our Officers
and Minist^rs whatsoever, which have or shall have any dealing or intermedling
couching our said Customs or Subsidies, that they nor any of them by
themselves, their Clearks, Deputies, and servants receive or take or in any
wise cause or suffer to be taken any Custom or Subsidy, or any thing or
things whatsoeu^r, during the said term of years in the name or liew of any
Custom or Subsidy, nor compound or agree, or make any entry into any Book
of or for any Custom Subsidy or other duty which shall hereafter during the
said term happen or grow due to us our heirs and successors for any Starch
which shall be brought into this our Realm or any other our Dominions by any
person or persons, other then the said Sir John Pakington and his assignees,
and the assignee and assignees of his assignees, and his and their assignees,
or his or their servants, factors or deputies, or in the name or names of him
or them, or some of them and for his and their or some of their only use and
uses.

(...) forth of (...) Exche^^^^.
ANd further we will and grant by these presents for us our heirs and
successors that the Treasurer and Barons of our Exchequer for the time being by
the force of this our grant or the Inrolement thereof in the same Court at all
and every time and times during the said term at and upon the request of the
said Sir John Pakington or his assignees, or the assignee or assignees of his
assignees, or his and their assignees, or any other his or their attorney,
factor or deputy shall have full power, or lawful authority to make and
direct under the seal of the same Exchequer, such and so many writ and writs,
Close or Patent unto such Majors, Bailiffes, Sheriffs, Farmers of Customs,
Customers, Collectors, Comptrollers, Seachers, and other Officers of us our
heirs and successors in such Shires, Counties, Cities, Boroughes, Ports,
Havens, and Creekes, or other places whatsoever within any our Dominions as the
said Sir John Pakington or his assignees or the assignee or assignees of his
assignees, or his or their assignees, attorney, servant or factor, shall at any
time require. Commanding and charging them or any of them thereby that they nor
any of them during the said term, receive or take any Custom or Subsidy or
any other thing in the name or liew of any Custom or Subsidy, or compound or
agree or make any composition or agreement, or any entry into any book of or
for any Custom Subsidy or other duty which shall hereafter during the said
term happen or grow due to us our heirs or successors for any manner of
Starch, which shall be brought into this Realm or any other our Dominions,
otherwise then by virtue of and according to this our present lyeence and
grant, and also to do and execute and cause to be done and executed all and
every thing and matter whatsoever, which shall and may be necessary requisite
or convenient for the performing, executing and accomplishment of this our
present grant.

Cu^^omers to (...) and de^i^ as sir John P^^^^gton.
VVIlling and commanding all our said Customers, Collectors, Comptrollers, and
Farmers of our said Customs and Subsidies from time to time and at all times
during the said term in all places within their Office and charge carefully
and diligently by all ways and means to try out and search for all such
Starch as by any person or persons shall be made or caused to be made within
this our said Realm or other our Dominions. And also to try out and search
for all such Starch as by any person or persons, other then the said sir John
Pakington and his assignees or the assignee or assignees of his assignees, or
his or their assignees, servants, factors or deputies or some of them shall
within the said term be brought and laid on land, merchandise, bought, sold,
uttered shifted, exchanged, offered, or put to sale, or kept to be sold into or
within this our Realm or any other our Dominions contrary to the tenor of
these our letters Patents: and to arrest, take, seize, and to deliver the same
to the said sir John Pakington and his assignees and the assignee and assignees
of his said assignees, and his and their assignees, or to his servants, factors
and deputies of them or some of them to the uses above specified.

Puni^^ment for offenders.
ANd further that they do carefully and dilgently endeavor themselves that
th^intent and true meaning of these our letters Patents may be in all things
kept and observed. And if in the execution thereof they shall find any
resistance, that they certify the same into our Court of the said Exchequer,
to the end the offenders therein may receive condign punishment for the same
their offenses, and to the end that the said sir John Pakington and his
assignees and the assignee or assignees of his assignees, and his and their
assignees, deputies, servants, and factors and every of them shall have the
whole benefit and profit of this our grant, accorcording to the true meaning
of these our letters Patents.

Our express will and pleasure is, and we do require and straightly charge and
command our Chauncellor and Barons of our Court of Exchequer, and all other our
Judges, Justices of peace, Majors, officers, and Ministers whatsoever, within
this our Realm of England and other our Dominions, upon complaint unto them or
any of them to be made by the said sir John Pakington his assignees or the
assignee or assignees of his said assignees or his or their assignees, factors,
deputies and servants, or any of them, that any person or persons whatsoever
shall offend in making, transporting, or uttering, putting to sale, shifting,
exchanging, or offering to sale, or keeping to the intent to put to sale any
sort of Starch contrary to the true meaning of these our letters Patents to
enquire of, try out, and examine by all due and lawful means and ways
whatsoever, all and every such offenses, and the offenders therein to cause to
be seuerily punished: as contemners of our Prerogative Royal, by such fine and
emprisonment and otherwise, as shall be due for such Offenders, and as the
quality of their offenses shall deserve and require, and also from time to
time during the said term to take such straight orders for the restraining of
all such offenders as aforesaid, and all other persons whatsoever, from doing
or attempting any thing whereby the said sir John Pakington or his assignees or
the assignee or assignees of his assignees or his or their assignees, deputies,
factors, or servants, shall or may be any way prejudiced or hindered, quietly
to have and enjoy the benefit of this our grant according to our gracious
pleasure and meaning therein expressed, as shall be lawful and reasonable, and as
in their discretions they shall think meet.

(...) Officers (...) be aiding.
ANd further we will and command by these presents that all Majors, Bailiffes,
Sheriffs, Justices of the peace, Constables Comptrolers, Searchers, and all
other our Officers, Minister and subjects whatsoever do not only permit and
suffer the said sir John Pakington and his assignees and the assignee and
assignees of his assignees and his and their assignees and his and their
servants, factors and deputies to have and enjoy the full benefit and
commodity of this our grant, but also that they be helping, ayding and
assisting to him and them in the excution hereof, when they shall be thereunto
required, at all times during the said term as they will answer the contrary
at their uttermost peril.

Saving always to us our Heirs and successors all and all manner Customs
subsidies and duties which shall or ought to be in any wise due or payable of
or for any Starch brought or to be brought, or transported into this our Realm
or any other our Dominions by the said sir John Pakington or his assignees or
the assignee or assignees, or his or their assignees, servants, factors or
deputies or in their or any of their names or name during the said term.

ALl which said Customs, Subsidies and duties, our express will and pleasure
is to be duly and fully answered and paid to us our Heirs and Successors
during the said term of years. Any thing in these presents contained to the
contrary in any wise notwithstanding. In Witness whereof we have caused these
our letters to be made Patents.

Witness our self at Westminster the Twenteth day of May in the Fortith year
of our Reign. Per breue de priuato Sigillo, etc. Powle.
Nos tenorem litterarum patentem predictarum ad requisitionem delectorum nobis,
Georgij Berisford, Thome Fuller, Iosue Crewe, and Guihelmi Nottingham, duximus
exemplificand per presents. In cuius rei testimonium has litteras nostras
fieri fecimus patentes. Test meipsa, etc.




