By the Queen. A Proclamation for the Clothiers of Suffolk, Norffolke, and
Essex.
ELizabeth by the grace of God etc.
To our right trusty and right well-beloved Counselor Sir Thomas Sackeuile of
the most noble Order of the Garter Knight, Lord Buckhurst, Lord High Treasurer
of England, To all our Judges of all our Courts at Westminster, to the Barons
of our Eschequer, to all other Judges in any Court of Record within our Realm
of England, and to all Majors, Shirifs, Customers, and Controllers of our
Ports, Alnagers, Searchers, and all other our Officers and Ministers
whatsoever, and to all others to whom it shall apperteine, greeting.
Whereas humble suit and petition has of long time been made unto us by our
loving Subjects the Clothiers of Suffolk, Norfolk and Essex, for some
reasonable mitigation and tolleration of the Statutes now standing in force,
touching the making of Clothes within the same Counties; and namely one Statute
made in the fifth and sixth years of the reign of King Edward the sixth,
entitled, An Act for the true making of Woollen cloth: and one other Statute
made in the fourth and fifth years of the reigns of King Philip and Queen
Mary, entitled, An Act touching the making of Woollen clothes, which as we are
credibly informed, partly in respect of the more fine spinning of the Yarne,
and better making of Clothes in those parts, then was used in times past; but
specially for that those Clothes being well wrought, rowed, shorn, clean
scoured, and fully dried, do thereby loose much of their weight, whereby the
trade of Clothing in those parts is like to be overthrown, the Clothiers being
continually and grievously molested by Informers and Searchers: By reason
whereof they have forsaken and left their trade, to the great decay of Cloth
making within the said Counties, and to the impouerishment and utter undoing of
great numbers of poor people there, which heretofore have been relieved and
set on work by the same: A matter likely to grow to further inconvenience, if
some speedy course be not taken for redress thereof. Whereupon we, of our
princely and godly disposition, having a most tender care and regard of our
said good and loving Subjects, and desiring as much as in us lies to provide
convenient and speedy relief for them, in that behalf, Have by the advice of
the Lords and others of our Privy Council, who have had the examination
thereof, and with great deliberation have caused certain Orders to be devised
and set down for mitigation of the extremities and strictness of the said
Statutes, and for toleration to the said Clothiers for and concerning the same,
so as they should not be vexed with any suits by informations or actions, as
long as they shall observe the said Orders: which said Orders we have caused to
be heereunto annexed, straightly charging and commanding as well the Clothiers
aforesaid, as also all others to whom it shall or may in any wise apperteine,
duly to observe and perform the same in all things. And our express will and
pleasure is, that none of the Clothiers within our said Counties of Suffolk,
Norffolke, and Essex, which shall fully and truly in all things observe,
fulfill, and accomplish the said Orders according to the effect and true
meaning of the same, shall in any wise be sued, impeached, troubled or molested
by any Alnager, Searcher, or Informer, or any other person or persons
whatsoever, for or by reason of the breach or not performing of the said
Statutes or any of them, or for or concerning any forfeiture or penalty
therein contained: which we require you all to see observed in all Courts,
where any person shall offer to implead them, contrary to the good intention of
the said Orders: And these tolerations to endure during our pleasure, or until
by Parliament the same may be further considered and established, as the like
provision has been made for Western Clothes in the xxvii. year of our
reign. We will also that at the request of the Clothiers of Suffolk,
Norffolke, and Essex, or any of them, the Orders hereunto annexed shall be
published and fixed up in our City of London in places convenient: and likewise
published in such Market and Port towns as shall be thought needful in the
said Counties. All which shall be done by order and direction of our Privy
Council, as they shall think meet from time to time.

Given under our Signet at our Palace of Westminster the seventh day of
February, in the xliii. year of our reign.
God save the Queen.
The Orders, as follows, viz.
FIrst, forasmuch as Clothes commonly called Short clothes, made in the
Counties of Suffolk and Essex* are for the most part carried into the parts
beyond the Seas, and there uttered an^ sold, and but very few thereof within
this Realm: Her Majesty's will and pleasure therefore is, that the same shall be
allowed to pass as good and merchantable Clothes, being made as hereafter is
declared, and viewed to be so by the Alneger of the County, and by him sealed
accordingly.

2. Item, whereas by the statutes now being in force, the said Clothes called
Short clothes, being well thicked, ought to contain in length (being through
wet) between xxiii. and xxv. yards, yard and inch of the rule: and being well
scoured and fully dried, ought to weigh lxiiii. pound the Cloth at the least:
Forasmuch as the said Clothes, by reason of rowing, dressing, and shearing,
do loose of their weight limited by the said Statute: Therefore her
Majesty's pleasure is, That the said Clothiers shall be tolerated for the weight
of four pounds in every such Cloth, well wrought and shorn, and that every of
those Clothes being well rowed, shorn, dressed, clean scowred, dry, and ready
to sale, which shall weigh threescore pounds the Cloth at the least shall be
allowed to be good and sufficient. And that in like manner for the long Clothes
made in those Counties, allowance shall be made of five pounds in every long
Cloth, being well wrought, rowed, shorn, dressed, clean scowred, dry, and
ready to sale.

3. Item, that none of the said Clothes shall be stretched or strained above two
yards in length at the most: And that none of the said Clothes being dry, and
ready to sale, shall contain any more or longer measure then xxvii. yards,
yard and inch of the rule at the most: And none of the long Clothes being dry
and ready to sale, shall contain any more or longer measure then one and
thirty yards, yard and inch of the rule at the most.

4. Item, that the colors of all those Clothes, and all other Clothes
whatsoever within the said Counties, being died, in wool, yarne, or Cloth
mingled or unmingled, shall be good, sure and true in all respects.

5. Item, her Majesty's will and pleasure is, That the said short Clothes
weighing threescore pounds the Cloth at the least, and not exceeding in length
xxvii. yards at the most, and being clean scowred, fully wrought, dried, and
well dressed, as is aforesaid: And the said long Clothes being of such weight
at the least as is before allowed, not exceeding the length of xxxi. yards,
yard and inch of the rule, and not being in breadth above that which the Laws
and Statutes do allow, and being well dressed, as is aforesaid: And also all
unwrought short Clothes not exceeding xxvii. yards in length as aforesaid,
having their full weight of threescore and four pounds, shall be allowed and
permitted to pass without trial by water, by any Searcher or Searchers.

6. Item, That it shall be lawful for all Searchers to make search of all the
said Clothes wheresoever the same may be found, for the colors, weight, and
length thereof, according to these Orders.

7. Item, That the list of any short Cloth shall not be in breadth above one
nail at the most, and shall not weigh by common judgment above five pounds at
the uttermost: and no list of the long Cloth shall be in weight above six pounds.

8. And for the avoiding of great deceits commonly practiced by bad Clothiers,
in caxxying of their false and insufficiently made Clothes to Cloth workers
houses, and other private places in and near about the City of London, and
there uttering and selling the same, not bringing them to the open and common
Market of Blackwelhall: Her Majesty straightly charge and commands, that
all Clothiers of the said Counties, shall hereafter bring to the common Market
of Blackwelhall aforesaid, or to such other open place as shall be for that
purpose assigned by the Lord Mayor and court of Aldermen of London for the time
being, All such Clothes, as they or any of them shall bring, or cause to be
brought to the said City or to the Suburbs or places near thereunto, and
there shall utter and show the same, whether they were sold before or not;
And that no Clothier, or any other person within or near the said City, shall
keep or suffer any private Markets or sales of any such Clothes to be used or
suffered in their or any of their houses, shops, or warehouses, And that no
Clothier shall hereafter take or enjoy any benefit of these Orders and
tollerations for any their Clothes uttered or brought in, or to the said City
of London, or the Suburbs or places near to the same: Saving those only which
shall bring the same their Clothes to the said common Market of Blackwelhall
(or such other open place, as shall be for that purpose assigned by the Lord
Mayor and court of Aldermen of London for the time being) And for their Clothes
made, and wrought according to these Articles; And that all Searchers shall
have power and authority to make search for all defective and insufficient
Clothes in all other private houses, shops and places within the said City of
London, and the Suburbs thereof, according to the Statutes in those cases
provided.

9. And to the end the said Clothiers shall not pretend any ignorance, or
lack of knowledge of her highness pleasure in this behalf; Her Majesty
wills and commands, that the Mayor of London before the twentieth day of
this month of March shall cause the same to be openly published and declared
in the common Market of Blackwelhall aforesaid.

10. And forasmuch as there is great fraud and inconvenience in the over
straining of Clothes, and for that, that in those parts there are two sorts of
Clothes made, the one called A long Cloth, which is to contain in length
between xxviii. and xxx. yards, yard and inche of the Rule: and the other
called A short Cloth, which is to contain in length between xxiii. and xxv.
yards of like measure: Her Majesty charge and commands, that in the said
Counties, all long Tentours shall be cut to xxxi. yards, yard and inch of the
Rule: And all short Tentours and Racks to xxvii. yards, yard and inche of the
Rule, and that one Tentour shall not be permitted to stand near to another by
two yards at the least: And that all Tentours that are not agreeable to the
lengths aforesaid, shall be cut and reformed before the feast of Easter now
next coming: And that no short Cloth shall be tentoured upon any long Tentour,
upon such pains as the Law does appoint.

11. Item, That the chief officer or officers of every City, Town corporate,
or Port town, where any the said kind of Clothes are made, sold, or shipped,
shall appoint an open and convenient place, whereunto we straightly charge and
command, that every Clothier, or Selier of Cloth, shall bring every the said
Clothes to be searched and viewed, not being brought to London or the Suburbs
thereof as aforesaid.

12. And that every such officer or officers, shall search, view, and seal
with some Seal for that purpose to be ordained, or cause to be searched,
viewed, and sealed, every such Cloth before the same be shipped, or set to
sale, upon such pains and penalties, as may be inflicted upon Contemners of
her Highness princely and royal commandment.

13. Provided always, that by color hereof nothing be exacted or taken of
the Clothier or Seller of Cloth, more or otherwise then is allowed by the
Statutes in that behalf made, And that search, view and sealing be made as is
aforesaid, with all expedition that conveniently may be.

14. And that no Clothier shall hereafter take or enjoy any benefit of these
Orders and tollerations for any their said Clothes brought, uttered or sold,
in any part of this Realm, or the dominions thereof, saving those only which
shall bring their Clothes to such places as herein before is ordained, and
there after the said Clothes are viewed, searched and sealed, do in the same
Market or open place sell or utter the same, and for such of the same only, as
shall be made and wrought according to the true intent and meaning of these
Orders.

15. And finally, her Majesty wills and commands, that no person which
shall infringe and break these Orders, or any of them, saving for the matter
of weight, shall in any wise enjoy or claim any benefit thereby, but shall be
subject to all the penalties and forfeitures limited and appointed in and by
the said Statutes, And that all Searchers, Informers, and all other persons,
to whom it shall or may apperteine, shall and may hereupon have and use like
remedy, benefit and advantage against every one so offending, as though these
Orders had never been made.

16. And concerning the reformation of the weight above mentioned, considering
the penalty for want of weight, for every pound not exceeding four pounds, is
ii. s. and for every pound being above four pounds is v.s. by the Statute: It
is ordered that the Statute shall be executed upon all Clothes made contrary to
the form of these Articles, as is aforesaid. The aforesaid Orders to continue
only during her Majesty's pleasure.

Imprinted at London by Robert Barker, Printed to the Queens most excellent
Majesty.

ANNO 1600.


