By the Queen. The Queens Majesty's Proclamation, declaring her Princely
intention to inhibite her Subjects upon most extreme pains from offending on
the Seas, any persons in their Ships or goods, being the Subjects of any
Prince, Potentate or State, in Amity with her Majesty.
THe Queens Majesty understanding of some complaints made against certain of
her Subjects, who go to the Seas with Letters of Reprisal to recover recompense
of the King of Spaines subjects for the notable injuries and losses by arrests
and other barbarous cruelties committed in Spain and Portingale against them
and many others (whereof no remedy could ever be had by order of Justice)
should under color of seeking to recover the proper goods of the Spaniards,
both take the Ships and goods of diverse subjects of other Princes and States
being in Amity with her Majesty: Although all such courses have been ever
odious to her Majesty, and always severely punished, whenever any such
things have been duly proved: Yet her Majesty whose care is infinite to
preserve Justice, as one of the maine pillars of her Estate, whereof not only
her own conscience is sufficient testimony, but all her actions (if they be
duly considered) have left sufficient proof of the same: Has commanded both
her privy Counsel and the Lord high Admiral of England, with all other the
officers of her Ports and marine causes, to cause the truth of all these
general complaints to be heard and examined with all expedition: And as they
shall be found true, to see both restitution and full recompense to be made to
her friends subjects, that are damnified: And the offenders to be grievously
punished, as far forth as the nature of their offenses might deserve.

And for further proof of her Majesty's Princely meaning in this case toward
all Kings, Princes and States in Amity with her Majesty, She declares her
intention to be, (and so commands it to be executed) That if any person
whatsoever shall upon the Seas take any Ships that do belong to any subjects
of her friends and allies with whom she is in Amity, and after knowledge had
that the said Ships do belong to her friends, do not forbear to stay them,
or shall take out of them any goods belonging to her said friends, shall suffer
death, with confiscation of lands and goods. And forasmuch as her Majesty is
infourmed of some complaints that some of her Merchants ships trading as well
into the Straights as to other places in league and Amity with her Highness,
being strongly furnished (as reason is they should be) for the defense of
themselves against the violence of the enemies, should also offend and endamage
her Majesty's good friends upon the Seas, under color of taking the subjects
of the Spanish King: Her Majesty straightly charge and commands all her
loving Subjects for prevention of any such suspicion hereafter, that none of
them shall send to the Seas any ships by way of trade or traffike, but they
shall also enter into bond before the Lord high Admiral of England or his
officers, to the full value of his ship, furniture and victual, that the
company of that ship shall not offend, indammage, hurt, rob, or spoil any ship
or vessel of any her Highness said friends or allies, under pain of
confiscation of such ships as shall be sent to the seas before such bonds so
entered. And to the intent that all persons may understand with what conditions
all persons serving on the Seas against the Spaniards are licensed, her
Majesty has commanded that the very condition of the parties bonds that are
licensed, shall be annexed to this Proclamation: the which being duly observed
(as her Majesty's meaning is it should be) her Majesty doubts not but her
actions shall be thought consonant to Honor and Justice, and to the allowance
of her friends and allies, leaving the false callumniations of her enemies, and
the avenge of their (...) disturbance of the common peace of Christendom to
the judgment of Almighty God, to whose wisdom and power it only belongs.
Given at her Majesty's Palace of Westminster the eight day of February, in the
one and fortieth year of her reign.

The form of the Condition limited to be observed by all such as are licensed
to go to the Seas against the Spaniardes.
THE condition of this Obligation is such, That where there is Commission of
Reprisall granted unto A. B. to send to the Seas the good Ship called the P.
of B. of the burden of Tonnes or thereabouts, whereof I. N. goes Captain and
Master, with men, Ordenance and Victuals, sufficient for the same service, for
the apprehending and taking of the ships, goods and marchandises of the King of
Spain or any of his subjects, as by the tenor of the said Commission more at
large appears: If therefore the said I. N. with the said ship the P. of B.
and her company, do presently after their putting to Seas, with all possible
speed repair to the coasts of Spain, Portingall, the Islands, and other
remote places where the Spaniards and Portingals do most use their traffic
and trade of Marchandises, and do not attempt any thing against any of her
Majesty's loving subjects, or the subjects of the French king, or of the kings
of Scotland, Denmark, or any princes of Italy being in league with her
Majesty, the inhabitants of the united provinces of the Low countries, and
Haunce towns, or any other Prince or Potentate being in good league and amity
with her Majesty, but only against the said king of Spain and his subjects,
and his and their ships, goods and marchandises, and do bring, or cause to be
brought all such ships, goods and Marchandises as they shall happen to take and
apprehend by virtue of the said Commission, together with two or three of the
chiefest persons of every ship which they shall take, (whereof the Master and
Pilot to be two) to some port of this her Majesty's Realm of England, as
shall be most convenient for them, and do not break bulk, waste, spoil,
sell, embezill, or diminish any part thereof, until they shall be adjudged in
her Majesty's high court of the Admiraltie to be good and lawful prise, and
thereupon an Inventory to be taken by the Viceadmirall of the place and port
where they shall so ariue, or his deputy, or other public officers of the
same, and an appraisement be made of the said ships and goods by some six
honest men inhabitants of the said port, and that the said Inventory and
appraisement be returned into the said high court of the Admiraltie, within
six weeks then next after ensuing: That then etc.

God save the Queen.
Imprinted at London by the Deputies of Christopher Barker, Printer to the
Queens most excellent Majesty.


