Eastriding in the County of York.
A Certificate of the rate and appointment of the several wages for
artificers, handicraftsmen, husbandmen, laborers, servants, workmen and
apprentices of husbandry, within the Eastriding of the County of York, made
and agreed upon by John Hotham, Marmaduke Grimstone, Robert Constable, John
Gaite, John Alrede, Lancelot Alford, and John Readman Esquires, Justices of
peace within the Eastriding of the said County, at the general Sessions of
peace holden before us at Dripoole, within the said County, the xxvi. day of
April, in the xxxv. year of the reign of our most gracious Sovereign Lady
Elizabeth, by the grace of God Queen of England, France and Ireland, defender
of the faith, etc. according to the tenor and form of the act of Parliament in
such case lately provided, as follows.

Servants and Artificers of husbandry.
BAyliffe of husbandry, that in these parts is called an ouerman, that is hired
with a gentleman, or rich yeoman that does not labor himself, but puts
his whole charge to his servants, shall not take by the year for his wages
with meat and drink, about xxxiii. s. iiii. d. and a livery, or vi. s. viii.
d. for the same.

A chief servant of a husbandman that ouerseeth his servants, and the chief
sheepeheard or feoman of or to a gentleman, shall not take for his wages with
meat and drink, above xxvi. s. viii. d. and a livery, or vi. s. viii. d. for
the same.

A Milner that is skillful in mending of her Mill, shall have by year xxvi. s.
viii. d and a livery, or vi. s. viii. d. for the same.

A servant in husbandry that can mow or plough well, shall not take for his
wages by year with meat and drink, above xxiii. s. iiii. d. and a livery, or
vi. s. viii. d. for the same. And every other common servant in husbandry,
shall not take by year above xx. s. and v. s. for a livery.

A young man between the age of xii. and xviii. years, shall not take by the
year with meat and drink, above xvi. s. and no livery.

A woman servant that takes charge of brewing, baking, kitching, milkehouse or
malting, that is hired with a gentleman or rich yeoman, whose wife does not
take the pains and charge upon her, shall not take wages by year, with meat
and drink, above xvi. s. livery, iiii. s.

A woman servant that serves an husbandman or feeman, or any other woman
servant shall not take by the year with meat and drink, above xiii. s. iiii.
d and a livery, or iii. s. iiii. d. for the same.

Harvest work.
A mower of grass or corn shall not take by the day with meat and drink,
above iiii. d. without meat and drink, x. d.

A shearer or bindeer of corn shall not take by the day with meat and drink,
above ii. d. without meat and drink, v. d.

No man shall take for the mowing of an acre of med^w, without meat and drink,
above x. d. and for mowing of an acre of corn without meat and drink, viii. d.

A haymaker, weeder, or looker of corn, shall not take by the day with meat
and drink, above i. d. without meat and drink, not above iiii. d.

A master Tailer that shall make gentlemen or gentlewomen their apparel shall
not take by the day above iiii. d. and other common tailers, not above ii. d.
with meat and drink.

Laborers of husbandry.
Every common labourer for ditching, paling, railing, hedging, threshing, and
other common laborers, from the feast of all Saints, to the first of March,
shall not take for wages by the day with meat and drink, above i. d. ob. and
without meat and orinke, not above iiii. d. and from the first of March until
the feast of all Saints, not above ii. d. by the day with meat and drink, and
without meat and drink, not above. v. d.

Threshing of a quarter of hard corn, not above viii. d. for a quarter of
pease or beans, not above v. d. for a quarter of barley, not above iiii. d. a
quarter of Oats, not above iii. d. ob. without meat and drink.

No man shall take for casting or setting of any ditch, having the quick wood
ready laid beside him which ditch is no more then one yard and three quarters
of a yard broad, and an elle deep, above iii. d. for every rod, and when the
ditch is bigger or lesser, more or less, according to the quantity and rate.

No man that scoureth two good graftes with a spade in a ditch shall take for
one rod scouring above i. ob. and if he take there grafts, ii. d. and not
above.

No man shall take for making of a rough dry stone wall, having the stone laid
by him, which wall is one yard and a half high, and half a yard thick, above
xii. d. a rod, without meat and drink.

Artificers and handicraftsmen.
A master Mason that takes the charge of a man's building, having under him or
them, one, two, or three men, that have been two or three years at the
occupation, shall not take for wages for himself by the day at any time of the
year, with meat and drink, above vi. d. and without meat and drink, not
above x. d. and for every one that works under him, he shall not take by the
day with meat and drink from the feast of Saint Michael the Archangell to the
xxv. day of March, not above iii. d. and without meat and drink, not above
viii. d and from the xxv. of March until ye feast of S. Michael the archangel,
with meat and drink, not above iiii. d. and without meat and drink, not above
viii. d.

A master carpenter who takes charge of building, that has one, two or three
men under him that have been two years at the science shall not take for wages
by the day without meat and drink, not above x. d. and with meat and drink,
above iiii. d.

A Mason or other carpenter that has but one man or none, and that are not
master of a charge or of a building, but of other work, a showing, squaring,
w^lling, or such like, or plumber, glasier, limeburner, couper, brickm^ker,
thatchers, turners, bricklayers, scl^ters, and tylers, shall not take by the day
for wages with meat and drink from the the Annunciation of our Lady until
Michaelmas above iiii. d. and without meat and drink, above viii. d. and from
the feast of Saint Michael the Archangell until the feast of the Annunciation
of our Lady, with meat and drink, not above iii. d. and without meat and
drink, not above vii. d. except Thatchers, who may take iiii. d. by the day
throughout the whole yee^e with meat and drink.

A shipcarpenter shall not take for his wages by the day from the Annunciation
of our Lady, until the feast of Saint Michael with meat and drink, above vi.
d. and without meat and drink, not above x. d. and from the feast of S^int
Michael until the Lady day in Lent, not above iiii. d. with meat and drink,
and without, not above viii. d.

A clincher shall not take for his wages by the day, from the Lady day in Lent
until Michaelm^s with meat and drink, not above iiii. d. and without, not
above vi. d. and from the feast of Saint Michael the Archangel until the
Annunciation of our Lady not above iii. d. by the day with meat and drink,
and without, not above vii. d.

I holder shall not take for his wages by the day from the Annunciation of our
Lady, until the feast of Saint Michael with meat and drink, not above iii. d.
and without, not above vi. d. and from the feast of Saint Michael, until the
Annunciation of our Lady, not above ii. d. by the day with meat and drink, and
without meat and drink, not above. vi. d.

All which said wages and liueries by us the said Justices rated in form
aforesaid, we having consideration to the prices of all manner of victual, and
other necessaries in these North parts do think indifferent and meet to
continue within the Eastriding of the said County of York, for the year next
to come.

1593. July. 30.
Imprinted at London by the Deputies of CHRISTOPHER BARKER, Printer of the
Queens most excellent Majesty.


