HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE

royal blazon or coat of arms
ELizabeth by the grace of God, Queen of England, France, and Ireland defendor
of the faith. etc.
To all and singular, Archbishops, Bishops, Archdecons, Deanes, and their
Officials, Parsons, Vicars, Curates, and to all other spiritual perssons: and
also to all Justices of the peace, Majors, Shirifes, Balifes, Constables,
Churchwardens, and Sidemen: Officers, Ministers and all other our faithful
Subjects within the Realm of England, as well within liberties as without, to
whom these presents shall come, greeting.
Know ye, that whereas the Prisoners in the custodye of the Marshall of the
Marshalsey of our house, have made to us supplication that they have not
whereof to live, neither any way be able to be comforted, but of such devout
men to God and faithful in Christ as are willing charitably to relieve them:
we willing in this behalf graciously to foresee their poverty, taking it to be
a charitable act that there may be yearly charity, we have assigned our faithful
subject Hugh Oliver by himself and his sufficient deputy, jointly or seueally
to ask, gather, receive and take, the alms, charity and devotion of our
loving subjects, inhabiting and dwelling within our County of Kent, with our
Cities of Caunterbury and Rochester, and in our five Ports with, the members
of the same, and in our Isles of Tennet and Sheppa: And the alms and gifts
aforesaid so by him or his deputy gathered and received, well and faithfully to
bring into our Court: and yeeldan account thereof, to our Ward or Keeyer or
Clark of the same Prison. As also to arest and attach as well al those which by
our license as yet not obtained, do fame th^eselues collectors of the said
alms, as also al those which by any our letters to th^e thereof made, do gather
the like rewards over and above one year contrary to the tenor of the same our
letters pattents. And those so arrested, to bring before our Marshall
wheresoever he shall then be in England, or to the Prison of the Marshalsey of
our house aforesaid lawfully to lead, there to remain until they be punished
according to the law in that behalf.

Therefore we command you and every of you, that you gentlye receive the
aforesaid Hugh Oliver or his sufficient deputy in this part, to gather and
receive the alms and gifts aforesaid, not doing or suffering to be done him or
his deputye, anyhurt damage, molestatior grief: and if auyiniurye shall be
done him or his deputy, that you do amend the same without delay.

Furthermore we command you the aforesaid Constables, Church wardens and
officers, and and every of you, that yot be counsailers and helpers for the
executing and gathering of the premises. And also we command you the aforesaid
Parsons, Vicars and Curats, that you publish in pour Churches in your Parishes,
he tenor of these presents.

In witness whereof, we have caused these our letters to be made pattents for
the space of one whole year to endure. Witness George Carey Knight, Baron of
Hunsdon, and great Marshal of our house aforesaid. At our Manor of
Castgreenwich the nine and twenteth day of September, in the eight and thirteth
year of our reign.

God save the Queen.

