By the King.
THE care we have to prevent all occasions of dispersing the Infection amongst
our people, does sufficiently appear by our former Proclamations, and that
for that cause We are contented to forbear at our Coronation all such
Ceremonies of honor and pomp used by our Progenitors, as may draw over great
confluence of people to our City. For which cause also being informed that
usually about the day of our Coronation intended, and for some days after, a
Fair has been used to be kept in the fields near our house of S. James,
and City of Westminster, commonly called S. James Fair, which if it should
hold at the time accustomed, being the very instant of our Coronation, could
not but draw resort of people to that place, much more unfit to be near our
Court and Train, then such as by former Proclamations are restrained.
Wherefore We have thought it necessary to put off the keeping of that Fair
for some few days: And to the end that all men may take notice thereof, do
publish the same to all men's knowledge, Requiring those who are Lords of the
Fair, or otherwise interessed therein, That according to this our pleasure,
they do forbear to hold the said Fair, and to resort thither, for the
space of eight or ten days after the first day of the usual holding thereof:
Licensing them after that time to keep the same, as they have used to do.

Furthermore, to avoid over great resort to our Cities of London and
Westminster at that time, for the cause of our Coronation, We have thought
good to limit the Trains of Noblemen and Gentlemen, having necessary Service
or Attendance there, to a number certain, Viz. Earls to sixteen, Bishops and
Barons to ten, Knights to six, and Gentlemen to four: which numbers we
require each of them to observe, and not to exceed, as they tender our favor.

Given at our Castle of Windsor, the xj. day of July, 1603. in the first year
of our Reign of England, France and Jreland, and of Scotland, the six and
thirtieth. God save the King.
Imprinted at London by Robert Barker, Printer to the Kings most Excellent
Majesty. Anno 1603.


