ER
HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE
royal blazon or coat of arms
ELIZABETH by the grace of God Queen of England, France and Ireland, defender
of the faith, etc. To all and singular Archbishops, Bishops, Archdeacons,
Deanes, and their Officials, Parsons, Vicars, Curates, and to all other
spiritual persons whatsoever they be: And also to all Justices of peace,
Majors, Sheriffs, Bailiffes, Constables, Churchwardens, Headboroughes, and
Officers of cities and towns corporate, and all other our officers, ministers,
and faithful subjects whatsoever they be, as well within liberties as without,
to whom these presents shall come, greeting. WHEREAS we are credibly given to
understand, as well by the pitiful supplication and petition of our poor and
true subjects, the poor inhabitants and townsmen of our towns of Pensance,
Mousehole, and Newlin, in our county of Cornwall, as also by the testimonial
of sir Frances Godolphyn knight, sir William Beuill knight, and Richard Carew
of Anthony esquire, deputy lieutenants in our said county of Cornwall,
Reginald Mohun esquire, Charles Treuanion esquire, John VVrey esquire, Hannibal
Viuian esquire, Thomas Seintawbin esquire, Thomas Chiuerton esquire, George
Greinuile esquire, John Hender esquire, and Thomas Trenance esquire Justices of
peace there. THAT upon the three and twentieth day of July last past, about six
of the clock in the morning, being mistie, cloudie, and dark weather,
certain Enemies to our Realm landed in the western part of Mountesbay in our
said county of Cornwall, and by a very sudden incursion spoiled and burnt the
market town of Pensance aforesaid: the towns of Mousehole and Newlin
aforesaid: together with the parish Church of Saint Paul, and diverse dwelling
houses within the said parish, unto the said towns nearest adioining: And
likewise rifeled, wasted, spoiled and burnt diverse fisherboates, and other
goods of our said subjects, to the impouerishing and undoing of the greatest
number of the said poor inhabitants, their wives and children, and the great
loss and hinderance of the rest of the said inhabitants: and presently in all
haste fled to the sea again: by reason whereof a great number of the said
inhabitants that heretofore were very well able to maintain themselves, their
said wives, children and families in good sort, and to be helpful to others
that stood in need, are thereby at this present in such poor estate, that a
great number of them can hardly recover their estates, or maintain themselves,
and their poor wives and children, unless they be charitably helped and
relieved with the devotions and benevolence of well disposed people in that
behalf, Know ye therefore, that we tendering the lamentable estates of the
said poor inhabitants, and esteeming very necessary the reedifying,
building, and erecting of decayed towns and places near the sea side for the
preservation of this our realm, and especially such towns as are very near
borderers upon the sea: Have licenced, and by these presents do license the
inhabitants of the towns of Pensance, Mousehole and Newlin aforesaid, or any
of them, their sufficient deputy or deputies bearers hereof, or the duplicat
or true copy hereof, to ask, gather, receive, and take the charity and
benevolence of our loving subjects inhabiting and dwelling within our counties
of Deuon, Dorset, Somerset, South. Glove. Wigorniensis. Oxon. Berk, VViltsh. Kent,
Sussex, Surrey, Salopp. Midd. Essex, and VVarw. with our city of London, the
suburbs thereof, our cities of Gloucester, Bristoll, Exceter, and Caunterburie,
with all other our cities and towns corporate whatsoever, in any of the same
several counties, and not else where, as well for the relief of the said
poor distressed inhabitants, their wives and children, the reedifying,
building, and new making of the said parish Church and houses, as also for the
better strengthening of that open and naked bay hereafter against the enemy,
and so much the rather, for that we have granted no other collection for the
loss and spoil of the said towns, but only this. Wherefore we will and
command you and every of you, that at such time or times as the said
inhabitants, their deputy or deputies shall come and repair to any your
Churches, or other places, to ask and gather the benevolence and devotion of
our loving subjects (as is aforesaid) quietly to permit and suffer them and
every of them so to do, without any manner your lets, interruption, or
contradiction. And you the said Parsons, Vicars and Curats to declare the
tenor of these our letters pattents unto our said loving subjects, with our
recommendation and request therein: exhorting them to extend their charities in
this behalf. And for the more better and speedy collection of the charity
and devotion as aforesaid: We will and command all and singular you the said
Constables and Churchwardens of the parish Churches where collection shall be
made, that ye immediately upon the declaration hereof, do collect and gather of
our said loving subjects, their charitable benevolence and devotions
accordingly. And to set down in writing, as well the name of every parishioner
in every parish, as also the sum and sums of money by them so given in this
behalf: which sums of money so gathered together, with the names of the
giuers thereof, we will shall be truly accounted and delivered unto our
well-beloved subjects the aforenamed sir Frances Godolphen knight, and sir
William Beuill knight, Hannbaill Viuian esquire, and William Trefrie esquire,
to be equally and proportionably distributed unto the said poor inhabitants
according to their several losses, as in their discretions shall be thought
meet. In witness whereof we have caused these our letters to be made pattents
for the space of two whole years next after the date hereof to endure.

Witness our self at Kew, the second day of October, in the seven and
thirtith year of our reign. G^^ save the Queen. Steward and Steward.


