royal blazon or coat of arms
By the King.
A Proclamation for transplantation of the Greames.
FOrasmuch as all our Subjects in the North parts, who have felt the smart of
the spoils and outrages done upon them at our first entry into this Kingdom
by diverse Borderers, but specially by the Greames, cannot be ignorant what care
we have had that punishment should be done upon the offenders, having for that
purpose to our great charge, maintained both Forces to apprehend them, and
Commissioners to try them according to the Law, by whose travel, namely of our
cosen the Earl of Cumberland our Lieutenant ^here, with assistance of other
Commissioners, things are brought to that point, that the Offenders (...)r
Mercy, and do all (but specially the Greames) confess themselves to be no
meet persons to live in those Countries, And therefore have humbly besought us
that they might be removed to some other Parts, where with our gracious
favor, they hope to live to become new men, and deserve our Mercy. Although we
do confess that we have rather inclined to this course of Mercy, as a thing
more agreeable to our Nature, then the taking of so much blood as would be shed
if we should leave them to the just censure of the Law: Nevertheless, lest our
good Subjects seeing no such execution presently follow of our said Commission,
should make other construction thereof, then is cause; We have thought good to
make known to them, that this course for the present proceeds from no
alteration of our former detestation of such injury, or want of care and
affection to our good Subjects, oppressed by such heinous Offenders; but only
for lack of means to provide presently for the Transplantation of these
Greames elsewhere, to the intent their lands may be inhabited by others of good
and honest conversation. We have thought it not amiss for better effecting
hereof, and for ease of the Prisons, to dismiss the vulgar sort of them,
retaining their Heads and Principals for Pledges, not only to be answerable
for their foorthcomming when they shall be called for, but for their good
behavior also in the mean season. Of all which our resolution, we require all
persons to take notice, and to comfort themselves with full assurance, that
they shall find the effects at all times of our Promises in all things tending
to the weal of our people.

Given at Wilton, the fourth day of December, in the first year of our Reign
of England, France and Ireland, and of Scotland the seven and thirtieth. God
save the King.
Imprinted at London by Robert Barker, Printer to the Kings most Excellent
Majesty. Anno 1603.


