Certain notes out of the Statutes for dispensations with sundry persons not
being in any certainty before expressed, whereof all such persons, as thereby
are to be dispensed withal, may be better informed, by perusal of the said
Statutes unto which they are to be referred.
ALl Officers and servants waiting upon the Queens Majesty in her household,
being in her Highness Chechrolle, may wear such Apparel, as to them shall be
licensed, limited, and declared in writing by her Majesty, or by the Lord
Steward of her Household, Lord Chamberlain, or the Treasurer and Comptroller
of the same, they knowing the same to be the Queens Majesty's pleasure. And it
shall be lawful for a Gentleman in ordinary, and in Householde, attending upon
any person being of her Majesty's privy Counsel, or upon any Baron or
Baronnesse, or other person of higher degree, to wear such Apparel in her
Majesty's Court at any time, as he or they which may dispend an hundred pounds
by the year, are licensed or limited to wear, as is aforesaid.

There are also special and several provisions contained in the said
Statutes for sundry degrees of persons, as hereafter follows: First for the
Lord Chanceller and Lord Treasurer of England, the President of the Kings
Counsel, the Lord Privy seal, of what degree soever they be. And in like
manner there are provisions for all persons having taken degrees of learning in
any University: And also for any of the Kings most Honorable Counsel,
Justices of the Benches, Barons of the Eschequer, Master of the Rolls,
Sergeants of the Law, Masters of the Chancery, Apprentices of the Law, the
Queens Physicians, All head Officers of Towns corporate, Barons of the five
Ports. Provisions also are there expressed for utter Barresters in Innes of
Court, to wear such Apparel, as men that can dispend xx.li.in lands may do.
And in like manner provisions are made for Students of the Innes of Court or
Chancery, and servants to Noblemen, and Gentlemen for their Doublets or
Ierkins. Of all which provisions or exceptions with sundry others contained in
the said Statute, not here particularly expressed, apperteyning to a few other,
every person is to inform himself diligently, how far forth he or they may
by license of the said provisions wear any thing prohibited by the general
words of the Law.

Also, it is not meant for any thing before expressed, but that her Majesty's
servant, and the servant of Noblemen and Gentlemen, may wear such liucrie
Coats or Clokes as their masters shall give or allow unto them, with their
badges and cognizances, or other ornaments of Ueluet or Silk to be laid or
added to their said liuerie Coats or Clokes.

Nor it is not meant hereby to prohibit Henchmen, Heralds, Pursuiuants at
Arms, runners at Iustes, Turneis, or such Martial feats, or such as wear
apparel given by the Queens Majesty, or such as shall have license from the
Queen for the same.

Provided always, that all and every person and persons which by any Statute
law remaining in force, is licensed or appointed to wear any manner of thing,
contrary to the tenor and meaning of any of the Articles before mentioned, or
any part of them, shall and may wear the same to him licensed or appointed to
wear, as is aforesaid, any thing in these Articles to the contrary
notwithstanding.

All which Articles, clauses and premises, her Majesty straightly commands
to be exactly and duly observed in all points from the xxiiii. day of August
next coming, and the parties offending to be further punished, as violaters
and contemners of her Royal and princely commandment by this her highness
proclamation expressed and published.

Given under our Signet, at our Manor of Greenwich, the xxiii, day of July, in
the nine and thirtieth year of our Reign.
Imprinted at London by the Deputies of Christopher Barker, printer to the
Queens most excellent Majesty. 1597.


