THE SCHOLEMASTER Or plain and perfect way of teaching children, to
understand, write, and speak, the Latin tongue, but specially purposed for the
private brynging up of youth in Ientlemen and Noble men's houses, and commodious
also for all such, as have forgot the Latin tongue, and would, by themselves,
without a Scholemaster, in short time, and with small pains, recover a
sufficient ability, to understand, write, and speak Latin.

By Roger Ascham.

An. 1570.

AT LONDON. Printed by John Day, dwelling over Aldersgate.

Cum Gratia and Priuilegio Regiae Maiestatis, per Decennium.

To the honorable Sir William Cecill Knight, principal Secretary to the
Queen's most excellent Majesty.
Sundry and reasonable be the causes why learned men have used to offer and
dedicate such works as they put abroad, to some such personage as they think
fittest, either in respect of ability of defense, or skill for judgment, or
private regard of kindness and duty. Every one of those considerations, Sir,
move me of right to offer this my late husbands M. Aschams work unto you. For
well remembryng how much all good learning owes unto you for defense thereof,
as the University of Cambrige, of which my said late husband was a member,
have in chosing you their worthy Chaunceller acknowledged, and how happily you
have spent your time in such studies and carried the use thereof to the right
end, to the good service of the Queen's Majesty and your country to all our
benefits, thyrdly how much my said husband was many ways bound unto you, and
how gladly and comfortably he used in his life to recognize and report your
goodness toward him, leauyng with me then his poor widow and a great sort of
orphans a good comfort in the hope of your good continuance, which I have
truly found to me and mine, and therefore do duly and daily pray for you and
yours: I could not find any man for whose name this book was more agreeable
for hope protection, more mete for submission to judgment, nor more due for
respect of worthynesse of your part and thankfulness of my husbands and
mine. Good I trust it shall do, as I am put in great hope by many very well
learned that can well judge thereof. Mete therefore I count it that such good as
my husband was able to do and leave to the common weal, it should be received
under your name, and that the world should owe thank thereof to you to whom my
husband the author of it was for good received of you, most dutiefully
bounden. And so besechyng you, to take on you the defense of this book, to
auaunce the good that may come of it by your allowance and furtherance to
public use and benefit, and to accept the thankful recognition of me and my
poor children, trustyng of the continuance of your good memory of M. Ascham
and his, and daily commendyng the prosperous estate of you and yours to God
whom you serve and whoes you are, I rest to trouble you.

Your humble Margaret Ascham.

A Praeface to the Reader.
WHen the great plage was at London, the year 1563. the Queen's Majesty Queen
Elizabeth, lay at her Castle of Windsore: Where, upon the 10. day of December,
it fortuned, that in Sir William Cicells chamber, her Highness Principal
Secretary, there dined together these personages, M. Secretary him self, Sir
William Peter, Sir I. Mason, D. Wotton, Sir Richard Sackuille Treasurer of the
Exchecker, Sir Walter Mildmaye Chauncellor of the Exchecker, M. Haddon Master
of Requests, M. John Astely Master of the Jewel house, M. Bernard Hampton, M.
Nicasius, and I. Of which number, the most part were of her Majesty's most
honorable privy Counsel, and the reast serving her in very good place. I
was glad than, and do rejoice yet to remember, that my chance was so happy, to
be there that day, in the company of so many wise and good men together, as
hardly than could have been piked out again, out of all England beside.

M. Secretary has this accustomed manner, though his head be never so full of
most weighty affairs of the Realm, yet, at diner time he does seem to lay
them always aside: and finds ever fit occasion to taulke pleasantly of
other matters, but most gladly of some matter of learning: wherein, he will
curteslie hear the mind of the meanest at his Table.

Not long after our sitting down, I have strange news brought me, says M.
Secretary, this morning, that diverse Scholars of Eaton, be run away from
the Schole, M. Secretary.
for fear of beating. Whereupon, M. Secretary took occasion, to wish, that
some more disdretion were in many Scholemasters, in using correction, than
commonly there is. Who many times, punish rather, the weakness of nature,
than the fault of the Scholar. Whereby, many Scholars, that might else prove
well, be driven to hate learning, before they know, what learning means: and
so, are made willing to forsake their book, and be glad to be put to any other
kind of living.

M. Peter.
M. Peter, as one somewhat severe of nature, said plainly, that the Rod
only, was the sword, that must keep, the Schole in obedience, and the
Scholar in good order. M. Wotton, M. Wotton.
a man mild of nature, with soft voice, and few words, inclined to M.
Secretaries judgment, Ludus literarum.
and said, in mine opinion, the Scholehouse should be in deed, as it is called
by name, the house of play and pleasure, and not of fear and bondage: and as
I do remember, so says Socrates in one place of Plato. Plato de Rep. 7.
And therefore, if a Rod carry the fear of a Sword, it is no marvel, if
those that be fearful of nature, chose rather to forsake the Play, than to
stand always within the fear of a Sword in a fond man's handling. M. Mason,
M. Mason.
after his manner, was very merry with both parties, pleasantly playing, both,
with the shrew de touches of many courste boys, and with the small discretion
of many leude Scholemasters. M. Haddon.
M. Haddon was fully of M. Peter's opinion, and said, that the best
Scholemaster of our time, was the greatest beater, and named the Person. The
Author of this book.
Though, quoth I, it was his good fortune, to send from his Schole, unto the
University, one of the best Scholars in deed of all our time, yet wise men do
think, that that came so to pass, rather, by the great towardnes of the
Scholar, than by the great beating of the Master: and whether this be true or
no, you your self are best witness. I said somewhat farther in the matter, how,
and why, young children, were sooner allured by love, than driven by beating, to
atteyne good learning: wherein I was the bolder to say my mind, because M.
Secretary curteslie provoked me thereunto: or else, in such a company, and
namely in his praesence, my wont is, to be more willing, to use mine ears,
than to occupy my tongue.

Sir Walter Mildmaye, M. Astley, and the rest, said very little: only Sir
Rich. Sackuill, said nothing at all. After dinner I went up to read with the
Queens Majesty. We red than together in the Greek tongue, Demost. (...).
as I well remember, that noble Oration of Demosthenes against Aeschines, for
his false dealing in his Embassage to king Philip of Macedonie. Sir R.
Sackuiles communication with the Author of this book.
Sir Rich. Sackuile came up sone after: and finding me in her Majesty's privy
chamber, he took me by the hand, and carrying me to a windoe, said, M. Ascham,
I would not for a good deal of money, have been, this day, absent from diner.
Where, though I said nothing, yet I gave as good ear, and do consider as well
the taulke, that passed, as any one did there. M. Secretary said very wisely,
and most truly, that many young wits be driven to hate learning, before they
know what learning is. I can be good witness to this my self: For a fond
Scholemaster, before I was fully fourtene year old, drove me so, with fear
of beating, from all love of learning, as now, when I know, what difference
it is, to have learning, and to have little, or none at all, I feel it my
greatest grief, and find it my greatest hurt, that ever came to me, that it
was my so ill chance, to light upon so lewd a Scholemaster. But seeing it is
but in vain, to lament things paste, and also wisdom to look to things to
cum, surely, God willinge, if God lend me life, I will make this my mishap,
some occasion of good hap, to little Robert Sackuile my sons son. For whose
bringinge up, I would gladly, if it so please you, use specially your good
advice. I hear say, you have a son, much of his age: we will deal thus
together. Point you out a Scholemaster, who by your order, shall teach my
son and yours, and for all the rest, I will provide, yea though they three do
cost me a couple of hundred pounds by year: and beside, you shall find me as
fast a Friend to you and yours, as perchance any you have. Which promise, the
worthy Ientleman surely kept with me, until his dying day.

The chief points of this book.
We had than farther taulke together, of bringing up of children: of the nature,
of quick, and hard wits: of the right choice of a good wit: of Fear, and
love in teachinge children. We passed from children and came to young men,
namely, Ientlemen: we taulked of their to much liberty, to live as they lust:
of their letting louse to sone, to ouermoch experience of ill, contrary to the
good order of many good old common welthes of the Persians and Greeks: of
wit gathered, and good fortune gotten, by some, only by experience, without
learning. And lastly, he required of me very earnestly, to show, what I
thought of the common goinge of English men into Italy. But, says he,
because this place, and this time, will not suffer so long taulke, as these
good matters require, therefore I pray you, at my request, and at your leisure,
put in some order of writing, the chief points of this our taulke,
concerning, the right order of teachinge, and honesty of living, for the good
bringing up of children and young men. And surely, beside contentinge me, you
shall both please and profit very many others. I made some excuse by lack of
ability, and weakness of body: well, says he, I am not now to learn, what
you can do. Our dear friend, good M. Goodricke, whose judgment I could well
believe, did once for all, satisfy me fully therein. Again, I heard you say,
not long ago, that you may thank Sir John Cheke, for all the learning you
have: And I know very well my self, that you did teach the Queen. And
therefore seeing God did so bless you, to make you the Scholar of the best
Master, and also the Scholemaster of the best Scholar, that ever were in our
time, surely, you should please God, benefit your country, and honest your
own name, if you would take the pains, to impart to others, what you learned
of soch a Master, and how ye taught soch a scholar. And, in uttering the stuff
ye received of the one, in declaring the order ye took with the other, ye
shall never lack, neither matter, nor manner, what to write, nor how to write
in this kind of Argument.

I beginning some farther excuse, sodeinlie was called to cum to the Queen.
The night following, I slept little, my head was so full of this our former
taulke, and I so mindful, somewhat to satisfy the honest request of so dear
a friend. I thought to praepare some little treatise for a Newyeares gift that
Christmas. But, as it chances to busy builders, so, in building this my poor
Scholehouse (the rather because the form of it is somewhat new, and differing
from others) the work rose daily higher and wider, than I thought it would at
the beginning.

And though it appear now, and be in very deed, but a small cotage, poor
for the stuff, and rude for the workmanship, yet in going forward, I found
the site so good, as I was loathe to give it over, but the making so costly,
outreaching my ability, as many times I wished, that some one of those three,
my dear friends, with full pursses, Sir Tho. Smithe, M. Smith. M. Haddo^. M.
Watson.
M. Haddon, or M. Watson, had had the doing of it. Yet, nevertheless, I my
self, spending gladly that little, that I gatte at home by good Sir John
Cheke, Sir I. Check. I. Sturmius.
and that that I borrowed abroad of my friend Sturmius, beside somewhat that was
left me in Reuersion by my old Masters, Plato, Aristotle, and Cicero, Plato.
I have at last patched it up, as I could, and as you see. If the matter be
mean, and meanly handled, I pray you bear, Aristotle.
both with me, and it: for never work went up in worse wether, Cicero.
with mo lettes and stoppes, than this poor Scholehouse of mine. Westminster
Hall can bear some witness, beside much weakness of body, but more trouble
of mind, by some soch sores, as grieve me to toche them my self, and therefore
I purpose not to open them to others. And, in mids of outward injuries, and
inward cares, to increase them withal, good Sir Rich. Sackuile dies, Sir R.
Sackuill.
that worthy Ientleman: That earnest fauorer and furtherer of Gods true
Religion: That faithful Seruitor to his Prince and Country: A lover of
learning, and all learned men: Wise in all doings: Curtesse to all persons:
showing spite to none: doing good to many: and as I well found, to me so fast a
friend, as I never lost the like before. When he was gone, my heart was dead.
There was not one, that woare a black gown for him, who carried a heuier heart
for him, than I. When he was gone, I cast this book away: I could not look
upon it, but with weping eyes, in remembering him, who was the only setter on,
to do it, and would have been, not only a glad commender of it, but also a
sure and certain comfort, to me and mine, for it. Almost two years together,
this book lay scattered, and neglected, and had been quite given over of me,
if the goodness of one had not given me some life and spirit again. God, the
mouer of goodness, prosper always him and his, as he has many times
comforted me and mine, and, I trust to God, shall comfort more and more. Of
whom, most justly I may say, and very often, and always gladly, I am wont to
say, that sweet verse of Sophocles, spoken by Oedipus to worthy Theseus.
Soph. in Oed. Col.
(...).
This hope has helped me to end this book: which, if he allow, I shall
think my labors well employed, and shall not much aesteme the misliking of
any others. And I trust, he shall think the better of it, because he shall
find the best part thereof, to cum out of his Schole, whom he, of all men
loved and liked best.

Yet some men, friendly enough of nature, but of small judgment in learning,
do think, I take to much pains, and spend to much time, in settinge forth
these childrens affairs. Plato, in initio Theagis. (...).
But those good men were never brought up in Socrates Schole, who says
plainly, that no man goes about a more godly purpose, than he that is
mindful of the good bringing up, both of his own, and other men's children.

Therefore, I trust, good and wise men, will think well of this my doing. And
of other, that think otherwise, I will think my self, they are but men, to
be pardoned for their folly, and pitied for their ignorance.

In writing this book, I have had earnest respect to three special points,
trothe of Religion, honesty in living, right order in learning. In which three
ways, I pray God, my poor children may diligently waulke: for whose sake, as
nature moved, and reason required, and necessity also somewhat compelled, I
was the willinger to take these pains.

For, seeing at my death, I am not like to leave them any great store of living,
therefore in my life time, I thought good to bequeath unto the^, in this little
book, as in my Will and Testament, the right way to good learning: which if
they follow, with the fear of God, they shall very well cum to sufficiency
of living.

I wish also, with all my heart, that young M. Rob. Sackuille, may take that
fructe of this labor, that his worthy Grauntfather purposed he should have
done: And if any other do take, either proffet, or pleasure hereby, they have
cause to thank M. Robert Sackuille, for whom specially this my Scholemaster
was provided.

And one thing I would have the Reader consider in readinge this book, that
because, no Scholemaster has charge of any child, before he enter into his
Schole, therefore I leaving all former care, of their good bringing up, to wise
and good Parents, as a matter not belonging to the Scholemaster, I do appoint
this* my Scholemaster, than, and there to begin, where his office and charge
begins. Which charge lasts not long, but until the Scholar be made hable
to go to the University, to proceed in Logike, Rhetoric, and other kinds of
learning.

Yet if my Scholemaster, for love he bears to his Scholar, shall teach him
somewhat for his furtherance, and better judgment in learning, that may serve
him seven year after in the University, he does his Scholar no more wrong,
nor deserves no worse name thereby, than he does in London, who selling silk
or cloth unto his friend, does give him better measure, than either his promise
or bargain was.

Farewell in Christ.
The first book for the youth.
AFter the child has learned perfitlie the eight parts of speech, let him
then learn the right joining together of substantives with adjectives, the
nowne with the verb, the relative with the antecedent. And in learning
farther his Syntaxis, by mine advice, he shall not use the common order in
common schools, for making of latins: whereby, the child commonly learneth,
first, an evil choice of words, Cic. de Cla. or.
(and right choice of words, says Caesar, is the foundation of eloquence)
than, a wrong placing of words: and lastly, an ill framing of the sentence,
with a perverse judgment, both of words and sentences. These faults, taking
once root in yougthe, be never, or hardly, plucked away in age. Making of
Lattines marreth Children.
Moreover, there is no one thing, that has more, either dulled the wits, or
taken away the will of children from learning, then the care they have, to
satisfy their masters, in making of latins.

For, the scholar, is commonly beat for the making, when the master were more
worthy to be beat for the mending, or rather, marring of the same: The master
many times, being as ignorant as the child, what to say properly and fitly
to the matter.

Two scholemasters have set forth in print, Horman.
either of them a book, of soch kind of latins, Horman and Whittington.
Whittington.


A child shall learn of the better of them, that, which an other day, if he
be wise, and cum to judgment, he must be feign to unlearn again.

There is a way, touched in the first book of Cicero De Oratore, 1. De Or.
which, wisely brought into schools, truly taught, and constantly used, would
not only take wholly away this butcherly fear in making of latins, but
would also, with ease and pleasure, and in short time, as I know by good
experience, work a true choice and placing of words, a right ordering of
sentences, an easy understanding of the tongue, a readiness to speak, a
facility to write, a true judgment, both of his own, and other men's doings,
what tongue so ever he does use.

The way is this. After the three Concordances learned, as I touched before,
let the master read unto him the Epistles of Cicero, gathered together and
chosen out by Sturmius, for the capacity of children.

The order of teaching.
First, let him teach the child, cherefullie and plainly, the cause, and
matter of the letter: then, let him construe it into English, so often, as the
child may easily carry away the understanding of it: Lastly, parse it over
perfitlie. This done thus, let the child, by and by, both construe and parse
it over again: so, that it may appear, that the child douteth in nothing,
that his master taught him before. After this, the child must take a paper
book, and sitting in some place, where no man shall prompe him, by him self,
let him translate into English his former lesson. Then showing it to his
master, Two paper books.
let the master take from him his latin book, and pausing an hour, at the
least, than let the child translate his own English into latin again, in an
other paper book. When the child brings it, turned into latin, the master
must compare it with Tullies book, and lay them both together: and where the
child does well, either in chosing, or true placing of Tullies words, let the
master praise him, Children learn by praise.
and say here ye do well. For I assure you, there is no such whetstone, to
sharpen a good wit and encourage a will to learning, as is praise.

But if the child miss, either in forgetting a word, or in changing a good
with a worse, or misordering the sentence, I would not have the master, either
froune, or chide with him, if the child have done his diligence, and died no
frewandship therein. Ientlenes in teaching
For I know by good experience, that a child shall take more profit of two
fautes, tentlie warned of, then of four things, rightly hitt. For than, the
master shall have good occasion to say unto him. N. Tullie would have used
such a word, not this: Tullie would have placed this word here, not there:
would have used this case, this number, this person, this degree, this gender:
he would have used this mood, this tens, this simple, rather than this
compound: this aduerbe here, not there: he would have ended the sentence with
this verb, not with that nowne or participle. etc.

In these sewe lines, I have wrapped up, the most tedious part of Grammar: and
also the ground of almost all the Rewles, that are so busily taught by the
Master, and so hardly learned by the Scholar, in all common Schools: which
after this sort, the master shall teach without all error, and the scholar
shall learn without great pain: the master being led by so sure a guide, and
the scholar being brought into so plain and casie a way. And therefore, we do
not contemn Rewles, but we gladly teach Rewles: and teach them, more
plainly, sensibly, and orderly, than they be commonly taught in common
Schools. For when the Master shall compare Tullies book with his Scholars
translation, let the Master, at the first, lead and teach his Scholar, to join
the Rewles of his Grammar book, with the examples of his present lesson,
until the Scholar, by him self, be hable to fetch out of his Grammar, every
Rewle, for every Example: So, as the Grammar book be ever in the Scholars
hand, and also used of him, as a Dictionarie, for every present use. This is a
lively and perfect way of teaching of Rewles: where the common way, used in
common Schools, to read the Grammar alone by it self, is tedious for the
Master, hard for the Scholar, cold and vncumfortable for them both.

Let your Scholar be never afraid, to ask you any dout, but use discretlie
the best allurementes ye can, to encorage him to the same: lest, his euermoch
fearinge of you, drive him to seek some misorderlie shifte: as, to seek to be
helped by some other book, or to be prompted by some other Scholar, and so go
about to begile you much, and him self more.

With this way, of good understanding the matter, plain construinge, diligent
parsinge, daily translatinge, cherefull admonishinge, and heedefull amendinge
of faults: never leauinge behind just praise for well doing, I would have
the Scholar brought up withal, till he had red, and translated over ye first
book of Epistles chosen out by Sturmius, with a good piece of a Comedy of
Terence also.

Latin speaking.
All this while, by mine advise, the child shall use to speak no latin: For,
as Cicero says in like matter, with like words, loquendo, male loqui discunt.
And, that excellent learned man, G. Budaeus, G. Budaeus.
in his Greek Commentaries, sore complains, that when he began to learn the
latin tongue, use of speaking latin at the table, and elsewhere, unadvisedly,
did bring him to soch an evil choice of words, to soch a crooked framing of
sentences, that no one thing did hurt or hinder him more, all the days of his
life afterward, both for readiness in speaking, and also good judgment in
writing.

In very deed, if children were brought up, in soch a house, or soch a Schole,
where the latin tongue were properly and perfitlie spoken, as Tib. and Ca.
Gracci were brought up, in their mother Cornelias house, surely, than the
daily use of speaking, were the best and readiest way, to learn the latin
tongue. But, now, commonly, in the best Schools in England, for words, right
choice is smallie regarded, true propriety wholly neglected, confusion is
brought in, barbariousnesse is bred up so in young wits, as afterward they be,
not only marde for speaking, but also corrupted in judgment: as with much
ado, or never at all, they be brought to right frame again.

Yet all men covet to have their children speak latin: and so do I very
earnestly too. We both, have one purpose: we agree in desire, we wish one
end: but we differ somewhat in order and way, that leads rightly to that
end. Other would have them speak at all adventures: and, so they be speakinge,
to speak, the Master cares not, the Scholar knows not, what. This is, to
seem, and not to be: except it be, to be bold without shame, rash without
skill, full of words without wit. I wish to have them speak so, as it may
well appear, that the brain does govern the tongue, and that reason leads
forth the taulke. Socrates doctrine is true in Plato, Plato.
and well marked, and truly uttered by Horace in Art Poetica, that, where so
ever knowledge does accompany the wit, Horat.
there best utterance does always awaite upon the tongue: Much writing breeds
ready speaking.
For, good understanding must first be bred in the child, which, being
nurished with skill, and use of writing (as I will teach more largely
hereafter) is the only way to bring him to judgment and readiness in
speakinge: and that in far shorter time (if he follow constantly the trade
of this little lesson) than he shall do, by common teachinge of the common
schools in England.

But, to go forward, as you perceive, your scholar to go better and better on
away, first, with understanding his lesson more quickly, with passing more
readelie, with translating more speedily and perfitlie then he was wont,
after, give him longer lessons to translate: and withal, begin to teach him,
The second degree and order in teaching.
both in nownes, and verbes, what is Proprium, and what is Translatum, what
Synonymum, what Diuersum, which be Contraria, and which be most notable Phrases
in all his leisure.

As: Proprium. Rex Sepultus est magnifice. Translatum. Cum illo principe,
Sepulta est and gloria and Salus Republicae.
Synonyma. Ensis, Gladius. Laundare, praedicare.
Diuersa. Diligere, Amare. Calere, Exardescere Inimicus, Hostis.
Contraria. Acerbu^ and luctuosum bellum. Dulcis and laeta Pax.
Phrases. Dare verba. abijcere^ obedientiam.


Your scholar then, must have the third paper book: in the which, The third
paper book.
after he has done his double translation, let him write, after this sort
four of these forenamed six, diligently marked out of every lesson.
Quatuor. Propria. Translata. Synonyma. Diuersa. Contraria. Phrases.

Or else, three, or two, if there be no more: and if there be none of these at
all in some lecture, yet not omit the order, but write these.

Diuersa nulla. Contraria nulla. etc.
This diligent translating, joined with this heedefull marking, in the foresaid
Epistles, and afterward in some plain Oration of Tullie, as, pro lege Manil:
pro Archia Poeta, or in those three ad C. Caes: shall work soch a right choice
of words, so straight a framing of sentences, soch a true judgment, both to
write skilfullie, and speak wittelie, as wise men shall both praise, and
marvel at.

If your scholar do miss sometimes, Ientlenes in teaching*
in marking rightly these foresaid six things, chide not hastily: for that
shall, both dull his wit, and discorage his diligence: but monish him
gentelie: which shall make him, both willing to amend, and glad to go forward
in love and hope of learning.

I have now wished, twice or thrice, this gentle nature, to be in a
Scholemaster: And, that I have done so, neither by chance, nor without some
reason, I will now declare at large, why, in mine opinion, love is fitter then
fear, Love.
ientlenes better than beating, to bring up a child rightly in learning.
Fear.


With the common use of teaching and beating in common schools of England,
Common Schools.
I will not greatly contend: which if I did, it were but a small grammatical
controversy, neither belonging to heresy nor treason, nor greatly touching
God nor the Prince: although in very deed, in the end, the good or ill
bringing up of children, does as much serve to the good or ill service, of God,
our Prince, and our whole country, as any one thing does beside.

I do gladly agree with all good Scholemasters in these points: to have
children brought to good perfitnes in learning: to all honesty in manners: to
have all fautes rightly amended: to have every vice severely corrected: but
for the order and way that leads rightly to these points, we somewhat
differ. For commonly, many scholemasters, some, Sharp Scholemasters.
as I have seen, more, as I have heard tell, be of so crooked a nature, as, when
they meet with a hard witted scholar, they rather break him, than bow him,
rather mar him, than mend him. For when the scholemaster is angry with some
other matter, then will he sonest faul to beat his scholar: and though he him
self should be punished for his folly, yet must he beat some scholar for his
pleasure: though there be no cause for him to do so, nor yet fault in the
scholar to deserve so. These ye will say, be fond scholemasters, and few they
be, that be found to be soch. They be fond in deed, but surely ouermany soch
be found every where. But this will I say, that even the wisest of your great
beaters, Nature punished.
do as often punish nature, as they do correct faults. Yea, many times, the
better nature, is sorer punished: For, if one, by quicknes of wit, take his
lesson readelie, an other, by hardness of wit, takes it not so speedily: the
first is always commended, the other is commonly punished: when a wise
sholemaster, should rather discreetly consider the right disposition of both
their natures, and not so much wey what either of them is able to do now, as
what either of them is likely to do hereafter. Quick wits for learning.
For this I know, not only by reading of books in my study, but also by
experience of life, abroad in the world, that those, which be commonly the
wisest, the best learned, and best men also, when they be old, were never
commonly the quickest of wit, when they were young The causes why, amongst
other, which be many, that move me thus to think, be these few, which I will
reckon. Quick wits commonly, be apt to take, unapt to keep: soon hot
and desirous of this and that: as cold and sone weary of the same again: more
quick to enter speedily, than hable to pearse far: even like over sharp
tools, whose edges be very soon turned. Soch wits delight them selves in
easy and pleasant studies, and never pass far forward in hie and hard
sciences. And therefore the quickest wits commonly may prove the best Poets,
but not the wisest Orators: ready of tongue to speak boldly, not deep of
judgment, either for good counsel or wise writing. Quick wits, for manners
and life.
Also, for manners and life, quick wits commonly, be, in desire, newfangle,
in purpose, unconstant, light to promise any thing, ready to forget every
thing: both benefit and injury: and thereby neither fast to friend, nor
fearful to foe: inquisitiue of every trifle, not secret in greatest affairs:
bold, with any person: busy, in every matter: sothing, soch as be present:
nipping any that is absent: of nature also always, flattering their betters,
envying their equals, despising their inferiors: and, by quicknes of wit,
very quick and ready, to like none so well as them selves.

Moreover commonly, men, very quick of wit, be also, very light of
conditions: and thereby, very ready of disposition, to be carried over
quickly, by any light cumpanie, to any riot and unthriftiness when they be
young: and therefore seldom, either honest of life, or rich in living, when
they be old. For, quick in wit, and light in manners, be, either seldom
troubled, or very sone weary, in carrying a very heuie purse. Quick wits
also be, in most part of all their doings, ouerquicke, hasty, rash, headie,
and brainsicke. These two last words, Headie, and Brainsicke, be fit and
proper words, rising naturally of the matter, and termed aptly by the
condition, of over much quickenes of wit. In yougthe also they be, ready
scoffers, privy mockers, and ever over light and merry. In aige, sone testie,
very waspishe, and always over miserable: and yet few of them cum to any
great aige, by reason of their misordered life when they were young: but a great
deal fewer of them cum to show any great countenance, or bear any great
authority abroad in the world, but either live obscurelie, men know not how,
or dye obscurelie, me^ mark not when. They be like trees, that show forth,
fair blossoms and broad leaves in spring time, but bring out small and not
long lasting fruit in harvest time: and that only soch, as fall, and rotte,
before they be ripe, and so, never, or seldom, cum to any good at all. For
this ye shall find most true by experience, that amongst a number of quick
wits in youth, few be found, in the end, either very fortunate for them
selves, or very profitable to serve the common wealth, but decay and vanish,
men know not which way: except a very few, to whom peradventure blood and
happy parentage, may perchance purchase a long standing upon the stage. The
which felicity, because it comes by others procuring, not by their own
deserving, and stand by other men's feet, and not by their own, what owtward
brag so ever is borne by them, is in deed, of it self, and in wise men's eyes,
of no great estimation.

Some sciences hurt men's wits, and mar men's manners.
Some wits, moderate enough by nature, be many times marde by over much study
and use of some sciences, namely, Music, Arithmetic, and Geometry. Thies
sciences, as they sharpen men's wits over much, so they change men's manners
over sore, if they be not moderatlie mingled, and wisely applied to some good
use of life. Mark all Mathematical heads, Mathematical heads.
which be only and wholly bent to those sciences, how solitary they be
themselves, how unfit to live with others, and how unapt to serve in the
world. This is not only known now by common experience, but uttered long
before by wise men's Judgment and sentence. Galene says, Galen.
much Music marreth men's manners: and Plato has a notable place of the same
thing in his books de Rep. well marked also, Plato.
and excellently translated by Tullie himself. Of this matter, I wrote once
more at large, xx. year a go, in my book of shoting: now I thought but to
touch it, to prove, that over much quicknes of wit, either given by nature,
or sharpened by study, does not commonly bring forth, either greatest
learning, best manners, or happiest life in the end.

Hard wits in learning.
Contrariewise, a wit in youth, that is not over dulle, heavy, knottie and
lumpishe, but hard, rough, and though somewhat staffishe, as Tullie wishes
otium, quietum, non languidum: and negotium cum labor, non cum periculo, such
a wit I say, if it be, at the first well handled by the mother, and rightly
smothed and wrought as it should, not ouerwhartlie, and against the wood, by
the scholemaster, both for learning, and hole course of living, proves always
the best. In wood and stone, not the softest, but hardest, be always aptest,
for portrature, both fairest for pleasure, and most durable for proffit. Hard
wits be hard to receive, but sure to keep: painful without werinesse,
hedefull without wavering, constant without newfanglenes: bearing heavy
things, though not lightly, yet willingly: entering hard things, though not
easelie, yet deeply, and so cum to that perfitnes of learning in the end,
that quick wits, seem in hope, but do not in deed, or else very seldom,
ever attain unto. Also, for manners and life, Hard wits in manners and life.
hard wits commonly, ar hardly carried, either to desire every new thing,
or else to meruell at every strange thing: and therefore they be careful and
diligent in their own matters, not curious and busey in other men's affairs:
and so, they becum wise them selves, and also ar counted honest by others. They
be grave, steadfast, silent of tongue, secret of heart. Not hasty in making, but
constant in keeping any promise. Not rash in uttering, but ware in considering
every matter: and thereby, not quick in speaking, but deep of judgment,
whether they write, or give counsel in all weighty affairs. And these be the
me^, that becum in the end, both most happy for themselves, and alwaise best
esteemed abroad in the world.

I have been longer in describing, the nature, the good or ill success, of the
quick and hard wit, than perchance some will think, The best wits driven
from learning, to other living.
this place and matter does require. But my purpose was hereby, plainly to
utter, what injury is offered to all learning, and to the common welthe also,
first, by the fond father in chosing, but chiefly by the lewd scholemaster in
beating and driving away the best natures from learning. A child that is
still, silent, constant, and somewhat hard of wit, is either never chosen by
the father to be made a scholar, or else, when he comes to the schole, he is
smally regarded, little looked unto, he lacks teaching, he lacks coraging,
he lacks all things, only he never lacks beating, nor any word, that may
move him (...) red horse, but wild and unfortunate Children: and therefore in
the end they find more pleasure in their horse, than comfort in their
children.

But concerning the true notes of the best wits for learning in a child, I
will report, not mine own opinion, but the very judgment of him, that was
counted the best teacher and wisest man that learning makes mention of, and
that is Socrates in Plato, Plato in 7. de Rep.
who expresses orderly thies seven plain notes to choice a good wit in a
child for learning.

1. (...). True notes of a good wit.
2. (...). 3. (...). 4. (...). 5. (...). 6. (...). 7. (...).
And because I write English, and to Englishemen, I will plainly declare in
English both, what thies words of Plato mean, and how aptly they be linked,
and how orderly they follow one an other.

1. (...).

Wit.
Is he, that is apt by goodness of wit, and appliable by readiness of will,
Will.
to learning, having all other qualities of the mind and parts of the body,
that must an other day serve learning, not trobled, ma^gled, and halfed, but
sound, whole, The tongue.
full, and hable to do their office: as, a tongue, not stamering, or over hardly
drawing forth words, but plain, and ready to deliver the meaning of the
mind: The voice.
a voice, not soft, weak, piping, womannishe, but audible, strong, and
manlike: a countenance, not werishe and crabbed, but fair and cumlie: Face.
a personage, not wretched and deformed, but taule and goodly: Stature.
for surely, a cumlie countenance, with a goodly stature, gives credit to
learning, and authority to the person: otherwise commonly, Learning joined
with a cumlie personage.
either open contempt, or privy disfavor does hurt, or hinder, both person
and learning. And, even as a fair stone requires to be set in the finest
gold, with the best workmanshyp, or else it leseth much of the Grace and price,
even so, excellencye in learning, and namely Divinity, joined with a cumlie
personage, is a marvelous Jewel in the world. And how can a cumlie body be
better employed, than to serve the fairest exercise of Gods greatest gift,
and that is learning. But commonly, the fairest bodies, ar bestowed on the
foulest purposes. I would it were not so: and with examples herein I will not
meddle: yet I wish, that those should, both mind it, and meddle with it, which
have most occasion to look to it, as good and wise fathers should do, and
greatest authority to amend it, as good and wise magistrates ought to do:
Deformed creatures commonly set to learning.
And yet I will not l^^, openly to lament the unfortunate case of learning
herein.

For, if a father have four sons, three fair and well formed both mind and
body, the fourth, wretched, lame, and deformed, his choice shall be, to put the
worst to learning, as one good enoughe to becum a scholar. I have spent the
most part of my life in the University, and therefore I can bear good witness
that many fathers commonly do thus: whereof, I have hard many wise, learned,
and as good men as ever I knew, make great, and often complainte: a good horseman
will choice no soch colte, neither for his own, nor yet for his masters sadle
And thus much of the first note.

2 (...).

Good of memory: Memory.
a special part of the first note (...), and a mere benefit of nature: yet
it is so necessary for learning: as Plato makes it a separate and perfect
note of it self, and that so principal a note, as without it, all other
gifts of nature do small service to learning. Aul. Gel.
Afranius, that old Latin Poet makes Memory the mother of learning and
wisdom, saying thus.

Vsus me genuit, Matter peperit memoria, and though it be the mere gift of
nature, yet is memory well preserved by use, and much increased by order, as
our scholar must learn an other day in the University: but in a child, a
good memory is well known, Three sure signs of a good memory.
by three properties: that is, if it be, quick in receiving, sure in keeping,
and ready in delivering forth again.

3 (...).

Given to love learning: for though a child have all the gifts of nature of
wish, and perfection of memory at will, yet if he have not a special love to
learning, he shall never attain to much learning. And therefore Isocrates, one
of the noblest scholemasters, that is in memory of learning, who taught Kings
and Princes, as Halicarnassaeus writes, and out of whose schole, as Tullie
says, came forth, mo noble Capitanes, mo wise Councelors, than did out of
Epeius horse at Troie. This Isocrates, I say, did cause to be written, at the
entry of his schole, in golden letters, this golden sentence, (...), which
excellently said in Greek, is thus rudely in English, if thou love
learning, thou shall attain to much learning.

4. (...).

Is he, that has a lust to labor, and a will to take pains. For, if a child
have all the benefits of nature, with perfection of memory, love, like, and
praise learning never so much, yet if he be not of him self painful, he shall
never attain unto it. And yet where love is present, labor is seldom absent,
and namely in study of learning, and matters of the mind: and therefore did
Isocrates rightly judge, that if his scholar were (...), he cared for no more.
Aristotle, variing from Isocrates in private affairs of life, but agreing with
Isocrates in common judgment of learning, for love and labor in learning, 2.
Rhet. ad Theod.
is of the same opinion, uttered in these words, in his Rhetorike ad
Theodeiten Liberty kindles love: Love refuses no labor: and labor obteyneth
what so ever it seeks. And yet nevertheless, Goodness of nature may do little
good: Perfection of memory, may serve to small use: All love may be employed
in vain: Any labor may be sone graualed, if a man trust always to his own
singular wit, and will not be glad sometime to hear, take advise, and learn
of an other: And therefore does Socrates very notably add the fifte note.

5. (...).

He, that is glad to hear and learn of an other. For otherwise, he shall
stick with great troble, where he might go easelie forward: and also catch
hardly a very little by his own toil, when he might gather quickly a good
deal, by an another man's teaching. But now there be some, that have great love
to learning, good lust to labor, be willing to learn of others, yet, either of
a fond shamefastnes, or else of a proud folly, they dare not, or will not, go
to learn of an another: And therefore does Socrates wisely (...) the sixte note
of a good wit in a child for learning, and that is.

6. (...).

He, that is naturally bold to ask any question, desirous to search out any
doubt, not ashamed to learn of the meanest, not affraide to go to the
greatest, until he be perfitelie taught, and fully satisfiede. The seventh
and last point is.

7. (...).

He, that loves to be praised for well doing, at his father, or masters hand.
A child of this nature, will earnestly love learning, gladly labor for
learning, willingly learn of other, boldly ask any doubt. And thus, by
Socrates judgment, a good father, and a wise scholemaster, should chose a
child to make a scholar of, that has by nature, the foresaid perfect
qualities, and cumlie furniture, both of mind and body: has memory, quick
to receive, sure to keape, and ready to deliver: has love to learning: has
lust to labor: has desire to learn of others: has boldness to ask any
question: has mind holy bent, to win praise by well doing.

The two first points be special benefits of nature: which nevertheless,
be well preserved, and much increased by good order. But as for the five last,
love, labor, gladness to learn of others, boldness to ask doutes, and will to win praise, be won and maintened by the only wisdom and discretion of
the scholemaster. Which five points, whether a scholemaster shall work sooner
in a child, by fearful beating, or curtese handling, you that be wise, judge.

Yet some men, wise in deed, but in this matter, more by severity of nature,
tha^ any wisdom at all, do laugh at us, when we thus wish and reason, that
young children should rather be allured to learning by ientilnes and love, than
compelled to learning, by beating and fear: They say, our reasons (...) only
to breed forth talk, and pass a way time, but we never saw good
scholemaster do so, nor never red of wise man that thought so.

Yes forsothe: as wise as they be, either in other men's opinion, or in their
own conceit, I will bring the contrary judgment of him, who, they them
selves shall confess* was as wise as they are, or else they may be justly
thought to have small wit at all: and that is Socrates, whose judgment in
Plato is plainly this in these words: which, because they be very notable,
Plato in 7. de Rep.
I will recite them in his own tongue, (...): in English thus, No learning
ought to be learned with bondage: For, bodelie labors, wrought by compulsion,
hurt not the body: but any learning learned by co^pulsion, tarieth not long in
the mind: And why? For what soever the mind does learn unwillingly with
fear, the same it does quickly forget without care. And lest proud wits,
that love not to be contraryed, but have lust to wrangle or trifle away troth,
will say, that Socrates means not this of childrens teaching, but of some
other higher learning, hear, what Socrates in the same place does more
plainly say: (...), that is to say, and therefore, my dear friend, bring not up
your children in learning by compulsion and fear, but by playing and pleasure.
And you, The right readyng of Plato.
that do read Plato, as ye should, do well perceive, that these be no Questions
asked by Socrates, as doutes, but they be Sentences, first affirmed by
Socrates, as mere trothes, and after, given forth by Socrates, as right Rules,
most necessary to be marked, and fit to be followed of all them, that would
have children taught, as they should. And in this counsel, judgment, and
authority of Socrates I will repose my self, until I meet with a man of the
contrary mind, whom I may justly take to be wiser, than I think Socrates
was. Young Ientlemen, be wiselier taught to ride, by common ryders, than to
learn, by common Scholemasters.
Fond scholemasters, neither can understand, nor will follow this good counsel
of Socrates, but wise ryders, in their office, can and will do both: which is
the only cause, that commonly, the young ientlemen of England, go so
unwillingly to schole, and run so fast to the stable: For in very deed fond
scholemasters, by fear, do beat into the^, the hatred of learning, and wise
riders, by ientle allurementes, do breed up in them, the love of riding. They
find fear, and bondage in schools, They feel liberty and freedom in
stables: which causes them, utterly to abhor the one, and most gladly to
haunt the other. And I do not write this, that in exhorting to the one, I would
dissuade young ientlemen from the other: yea I am sorry, with all my heart, that
they be given no more to riding, Ryding.
then they be: For, of all outward qualities, to ride fair, is most cumelie
for him self, most necessary for his country, and the greater he is in blood,
the greater is his praise, the more he does excede all other therein. It was
one of the three excellent praises, amongst the noble ientlemen the old
Percians, Alwaise to say troth, to ride fair, and shote well: and so it was
engraven upon Darius tumbe, Strabo 15.
as Strabo bears witness.

Darius the king, lies buried hear,
Who in riding and shoting had never pear.
But, to our purpose, young men, by any means, leesing the love of learning,
when by time they cum to their own rule, they carry commonly, from the schole
with them, a perpetual hatred of their master, and a continual contempt of
learning. If ten Ientlemen be asked, why they forget so sone in Court, that
which they were learning so long in schole, eight of them, or let me blamed,
will lay the fault on their ill handling, by their scholemasters.

Cuspinian does report, that, that noble Emperor Maximilian, would lament
very often, his misfortune herein.

Pastime.
Yet, some will say, that children of nature, love pastime, and mislike
learning: Learning.
because, in their kind, the one is easy and pleasant, the other hard and
werison: which is an opinion not so true, as some men ween: For, the matter
lies not so much in the disposition of them that be young, as in the order and
manner of bringing up, by them that be old, nor yet in the difference of
learning and pastime. For, beat a child, if he dance not well, and cherish
him, though he learn not well, ye shall have him, unwilling to go to dance,
and glad to go to his book. Knock him always, when he draws his shaft ill,
and favor him again, though he faut at his book, ye shall have him very loath
to be in the field, and very willing to be in the schole. Yea, I say more,
and not of my self, but by the judgment of those, from whom few wisemen will
gladly dissent, that if ever the nature of man be given at any time, more than
other, to receive goodness, it is, in innocence of young years, before, that
experience of evil, have taken root in him. For, the pure clean wit of a
sweet young babe, is like the newest wax, most hable to receive the best and
fairest printing: and like a new bright silver dishe never occupied, to receive
and keep clean, any good thing that is put into it.

And thus, Will. in Children. Wit. in Children.

will in children, wisely wrought withal, may easelie be won to be very
well willing to learn. And wit in children, by nature, namely memory, the
only keie and keeper of all learning, is readiest to receive, and surest to
keep any manner of thing, that is learned in yougth: This, lewd and learned,
by common experience, know to be most true For we remember nothing so well
when we be old, as those things which we learned when we were young: And this
is not strange, but common in all natures works. Every man sees, Yo^g years
aptest for learning.
(as I said before) new wax is best for printyng: new claie, fittest for
working: new shorn woll, aptest for sone and surest dying: new fresh flesh,
for good and durable salting. And this similitude is not rude, nor borrowed of
the larder house, but out of his scholehouse, of whom, the wisest of England,
need not be ashamed to learn. Young Graftes grow not only sonest, but also
fairest, and bring always forth the best and sweetest fruit: young whelps
learn easelie to carry: young Popingeis learn quickly to speak: And so, to
be short, if in all other things, though they lack reason, sens, and life,
the similitude of youth is fittest to all goodness, surely nature, in
mankind, is most beneficial and effectual in this behalf.

Therefore, if to the goodness of nature, be joined the wisdom of the teacher,
in leading young wits into a right and plain way of learning, surely,
children, kept up in Gods fear, and governed by his grace, may most easelie
be brought well to serve God, and country both by virtue and wisdom.

But if will, and wit, by farther age, be once allured from innocence,
delited in vain sightes, filed with foull taulke, crooked with wilfulness,
hardened with stubburnesse, and let louse to disobedience, surely it is hard
with ientlenesse, but impossible with severe cruelty, to call them back to
good frame again. For, where the one, perchance may bend it, the other shall
surely break it: and so in stead of some hope, leave an assured desperation,
and shameless contempt of all goodness, Xen. 1. Cyri Pad.
the fardest point in all mischief, as Xenophon does most trewlie and most
wittelie mark.

Therefore, to love or to hate, to like or contemn, to plie this way or that
way to good or to bad, ye shall have as ye use a child in his youth.

And one example, whether love or fear does work more in a child, for virtue
and learning, I will gladly report: which may be hard with some pleasure, and
followed with more profit. Before I went into Germany, I came to Brodegate in
Lecetershire, to take my leave of that noble Lady Jane Gray, Lady Jane Gray.
to whom I was exceeding much beholdinge. Her parents, the Duke and the Duches,
with all the household, Gentlemen and Gentlewomen, were huntinge in the Park:
I found her, in her Chamber, readinge Phaedon Platonis in Greek, and that
with as much delight, as some ientleman would read a merry tale in Bocase. After
salutation, and dewtie done, with some other taulke, I asked her, why she would
leese soch pastime in the Park? smiling she answered me: I wisse, all their
sport in the Park is but a shadoe to that pleasure, that I find in Plato:
Alas good folk, they never felt, what true pleasure meant. And how came you
Madame, quoth I, to this deep knowledge of pleasure, and what did chiefly
allure you unto it: seiuge, not many women, but very few men have atteined
thereunto. I will tell you, quoth she, and tell you a troth, which perchance ye
will meruell at. One of the greatest benefits, that ever God gave me, is, that
he sent me so sharp and severe Parents, and so ientle a scholemaster. For
when I am in presence either of father or mother, whether I speak, keep
silence, sit, stand, or go, eat, drink, be merry, or sad, be sawyng, plaiyng,
dancing, or doing any thing else, I must do it, as it were, in soch weight,
mesure, and number, even so perfitelie, as God made the world, or else I am so
sharply taunted, so cruelly threatened, yea presently some times, with
pinches, nippes, and bobbes, and other ways, which I will not name, for the
honor I bear them, so without measure misordered, that I think my self in
hell, till time cum, that I must go to M. Elmer, who teaches me so ientlie, so
pleasantly, with soch fair allurementes to learning, that I think all the
time nothing, whiles I am with him. And when I am called from him, I fall on
weeping, because, what soever I do else, but learning, is full of grief, trouble,
fear, and whole misliking unto me: And thus my book, has been so much my
pleasure, and brings daily to me more pleasure and more, that in respect of
it, all other pleasures, in very deed, be but trifles and troubles unto me. I
remember this talk gladly, both because it is so worthy of memory, and
because also, it was the last talk that ever I had, and the last time, that
ever I saw that noble and worthy Lady.

I could be over long, both in shewinge just causes, and in recitinge true
examples, why learning should be taught, rather by love than fear. Sturmius de
Inst. Princ.
He that would see a perfect discourse of it, let him read that learned
treatese, which my friend Joan. Sturmius wrote de institutione Principis, to
the Duke of Cleues.

The godly counsels of Solomon and Jesus the son of Sirach, Qui parcit
virgae, odit film.
for sharp kepinge in, and bridleinge of youth, are meant rather, for fatherly
correction, then masterlie beating, rather for manners, than for learning: for
other places, than for schools. For God forbid, but all evil touches,
wantonness, lyinge, pickinge, slouthe, will, stubburnnesse, and disobedience,
should be with sharp chastiseme^t, daily cut away.

This discipline was well known, and diligently used, among the Graecians,
and old Romans, as does appear in Aristophanes, Isocrates, and Plato, and
also in the Comedies of Plautus: where we see that children were under the rule
of three persons: Scholemaster.
Praeceptore, Paedagogo, Parente: the scholemaster taught him learning withal
ientlenes: the Governor corrected his manners, Governor.
with much sharpness: The father, held the stern of his whole obedience: And
so, Father.
he that used to teach, did not commo^lie use to beat, but remitted that over
to an other man's charge. But what shall we say, when now in our days, the
scholemaster is used, both for Praeceptor in learning, and Paedagogus in
manners. Surely, I would he should not confound their offices, but discreetly
use the dewtie of both so, that neither ill touches should be left unpunished,
nor ientlesse in teaching any wise omitted. And he shall well do both, if
wisely he do appointe diversity of time, and separate place, for either
purpose: using alwaise soch discrete moderation, The scholehouse.
as the scholehouse should be counted a sanctuary against fear: and very
well learning, a common perdon for ill doing, if the fault, of it self be not
over heindus.

And thus the children, kept up in Gods fear, and preserved by his grace,
finding pain in ill doing, and pleasure in well studiyng, should easelie be
brought to honesty of life, and perfitenes of learning, the only mark, that
good and wise fathers do wish and labor, that their children, should most
buselie, and carefully shot at.

Youth of England brought up with to much liberty.
There is an other discommoditie, besides cruelty in scholemasters in beating
away the love of learning from children, which hinders learning and virtue,
and good bringing up of youth, and namely young ientlemen, very much in
England. This fault is clean contrary to the first. I wished before, to have
love of learning bred up in children: I wish as much now, to have young men
brought up in good order of living, and in some more severe discipline, the^
commonly they be. We have lack in England of soch good order, as the old
noble Persians to carefully used: Xen. 7. Cyr^ Ped.
whose children, to the age of xxi. year, were brought up in learning, and
exercises of labor, and that in soch place, where they should, neither see that
was vncumlie, nor hear that was dishonest. Yea, a young ientlema^ was never
free, to go where he would, and do what he list him self, but under the keep,
and by the counsel, of some grave governor, until he was, either married, or
called to bear some office in the common wealth.

And see the great obedience, that was used in old time to fathers and
governors. No son, were he never so old of years, never so great of birth,
though he were a kings son, might not mary, but by his father and mothers
also consent. Cyrus the great, after he had conquered Babylon, and subdewed
Rich king Craesus with whole Asia minor, cummyng tryumphantlie home, his uncle
Cyaxeris offered him his daughter to wife. Cyrus thanked his uncle, and praised
the maid, but for marriage he answered him with thies wise and sweet words,
as they be uttered by Xenophon, (...), Xen. 8. Cyri ^ad.
etc. that is to say: Uncle Cyaxeris, I commend the stock, I like the maid,
and I allow well the dowry, but (says he) by the counsel and consent of my
father and mother, I will determine farther of thies matters.

Strong Samson also in Scripture saw a maid that liked him, but he spoke not
to her, but went home to his father, and his mother, and desired both father
and mother to make the marriage for him. Does this modesty, does this
obedience, that was in great king Cyrus, and stout Samson, remain in our
yongmen at this day? no surely: For we live not longer after them by time,
than we live far different from them by good order. Our time is so far from
that old discipline and obedience, as now, not only young ientlemen, but even
very girls dare without all fear, though not without open shame, where they
list, and how they list, marie them selves in spite of father, mother, God,
good order, and all. The cause of this evil is, that youth is least looked
unto, when they stand most need of good keep and regard. It avails not, to
see them well taught in young years, and after wha^ they cum to lust and
youthful days, to give them license to live as they lust them selves. For, if
ye suffer the eye of a young Ientleman, once to be entangled with vain sightes,
and the ear to be corrupted with fond or filthy taulke, the mind shall
quickly fall seick, and sone vomet and cast up, all the wholesome doctrine,
that he received in childhoode, though he were never so well brought up before.
And being ons inglutted with vanity, he will straight way loath all learning,
and all good counsel to the same. And the parents for all their great cost
and charge, reap only in the end, the fruit of grief and care.

Great men's sons worst brought up.
This evil, is not common to poor men* as God will have it, but proper to
rich and great men's children, as they deserve it. In deed from seven, to
seuentene, young ientlemen commonly be carefully enough brought up: But from
seuentene to seven and twenty (the most dangerous time of all a man's life, and
most slipperie to stay well in) they have commonly the reign of all licens in
their own hand, and specially soch as do live in the Court. Wise men fond
fathers.
And that which is most to be merueled at, commonly, the wisest and also best
men, be found the fondest fathers in this behalf. And if some good father would
seick some remedy herein, yet the mother (if the house hold of our Lady) had
rather, yea, and will to, have her son cunnyng and bold, in making him to
live trimly when he is young, than by learning and travel, to be able to serve
his Prince and his contrie, both wisely in peace, and stoutelie in war, when
he is old.

Mean men's sons come to great authority.
The fault is in your selves, ye noble men sons, and therefore ye deserve the
greater blame, that commonly, the meaner men's children, cum to be, the wisest
councillors, and greatest doers, in the weighty affairs of this Realm. And
why? for God will have it so, of his providence: because ye will have it no
otherwise, by your negligence.

And God is a good God, and wisest in all his doings, that will pla^^ virtue,
and displace vice, in those kingdoms, where he does govern. Nobility without
wisdom.
For he knows, that Nobility, without virtue and wisdom, is blood in
deed, but blood trewelie, without bones and sinews: and so of it self,
without the other, very week to bear the burden of weighty affairs.

The greatest ship in deed commonly carries the greatest burden, but yet
always with the greatest ieoperdie, not only for the persons and goods
committed unto it, but even for the ship it self, except it, be governed,
with the greater wisdom. Nobility with wisdom.


But Nobility, governed by learning and wisdom, is in deed, most like a
fair ship, having tide and wind at will, Nobility with Wisdom. Nobility
with Out wisdom.

under the reule of a skillful master: when contrary wise, a ship, carried,
yea with the hiest tide and greatest wind, lacking a skillful master, most
commonly, does either, sinck it self upon sands, or break it self upon
rocks. And even so, how many have been, either drowned in vain pleasure, or
overwhelmed by stout wilfulness, Uaine pleasure, and stout wilfulnes, two
greatest enemies to Nobility.
the histories of England be able to affourde over many examples unto us.
Therefore, ye great and noble men's children, if ye will have rightfullie that
praise, and enioie surely that place, which your fathers have, and elders had,
and left unto you, ye must keep it, as they gat it, and that is, by the only
way, of virtue, wisdom, and worthiness.

For wisdom, and virtue, there be many fair examples in this Court, for young
Ientlemen to follow. But they be, like fair marks in the field, out of a man's
reach, to far of, to shote at well. The best and worthiest men, in deed, be
sometimes seen, but seldom taulked withal: A young Ientleman, may sometime knele
to their person, smallie use their company, for their better instruction.

But young Ientlemen ar feign commonly to do in the Court, as young Archers do
in the field: that is take soch marks, as be nie them, although they be never
so foul to shote at. Ill company marreth youth.
I meene, they be driven to keep company with the worste: and what force ill
company has, to corrupt good wits, the wisest men know best.

And not ill company only, but the ill opinion also of the most part, The
Court judges worst of the best natures in youth.
does much harm, and namely of those, which should be wise in the true
decyphring, of the good disposition of nature, of cumlinesse in Courtly
manners, and all right doings of men.

But error and fantasy, do commonly occupy, the place of troth and
judgment. For, if a young ientleman, be demeure and still of nature, they say,
he is simple and lacks wit: if he be bashefull, and will soon blushe, they
call him a babishe and ill brought up thing, Xea. in 1. Cyr. Pad.
when Xenophon does preciselie note in Cyrus, that his bashfulnes in youth, was
ye very true sign of his virtue and stoutnes after: If he be innocent and
ignorant of ill, they say, he is rude, and has no grace, so vngraciouslie do
some graceless men, misuse the fair and godly word GRACE. The Grace in Court.


But if ye would know, what grace they meene, go, and look, and learn emonges
them, and ye shall see that it is: First, to blush at nothing. And blushyng in
youth, says Aristotle is nothing else, but fear to do ill: which fear being
once lustely fraid away from youth, Grace of Court.
the^ follows, to dare do any mischief, to contemn stoutly any goodness, to
be busy in every matter, to be skillful in every thing, to acknowledge no
ignorance at all. To do thus in Court, is counted of some, the chief and
greatest grace of all: and termed by the name of a virtue, Cic. 3. de Or.
called Courage and boldness, when Crassus in Cicero teaches the clean
contrary, and that most wittelie, saying thus: Boldness yea in a good matter,
not to be praised.
Audere, cum bonis etiam rebus coniunctum, per seipsum est magnopere fugiendum.
Which is to say, to be bold, yea in a good matter, is for it self, greatie to
be exchewed.

Moreover, where the swing goes, there to follow, fawn, flatter, laugh and
lie lustily at other men's liking. To face, stand formest, More Grace of Court.
shoue back: and to the meaner man, or unknown in the Court, to seem somewhat
solume, coye, big, and dangerous of look, taulk, and answer: To think well
of him self, to be lusty in contemning of others, to have some trim grace in
a privy mock. And in greater presens, to bear a brave look: to be warlike,
though he never looked enemy in the face in war: yet somwarlike sign must
be used, either a slouinglie busking, or an ouerstaring frounced head, as though
out of every heeres top, should suddenly start out a good big oath, when
need requires, yet praised be God, Men of war, best of conditions.
England has at this time, many worthy Capitaines and good soldiers, which
be in deed, so honest of behavior, so cumlie of conditions, so mild of
manners, as they may be examples of good order, to a good sort of others, which
never came in war. But to return, where I left: In place also, to be able to
raise taulke, and make discourse of every rishe: to have a very good will, to
hear him self speak: To be seen in Palmestrie, Palmistrie.
whereby to conueie to chaste ears, some fond or filthy taulke:

And, if some Smithfeild Ruffian take up, some strange going: some new mowing with
the mouth: some wrinchyng with the shoulder, some brave proverb: some fresh new
oath, that is not stale, but will rin round in the mouth: some new disguised
garment, or desperate hat, fond in facion, or gaurish in color, what soever it
cost, how small soever his living be, by what shift soever it be gotten, gotten
must it be, and used with the first, or else the grace of it, is stale and gone:
some part of this graceless grace, was discribed by me, in a little rude verse
long ago.

To laughe, to lie, to flatter, to face: Four ways in Court to win men grace.
If thou be thrall to none of thiese, Away good Peek goos, hens John Cheese:
Mark well my word, and mark their deed, And think this verse part of thy
Creed.
Would to God, this taulke were not true, and that some men's doings were not
thus: I write not to hurt any, but to proffit some: to accuse none, but to
monish soch, who, allured by ill counsel, Ill Council. Ill Company.

and following ill example, contrary to their good bringyng up, and against
their own good nature, yield ouermoch to thies folies and faults: I know many
serving men, of good order, and well staide: Seruinge men.
And again, I hear say, there be some serving men do but ill service to their
young masters. Terentius.
Yea, read Terence and Plaut. advisedly over, Plautus.
and ye shall find in those two wise writers, almost in every commedie, no
unthrifty young man, Serui corruptelae iuuenum.
that is not brought there unto, by the sotle inticement of some lewd servant.
And even now in our days Getae and Daui, Gnatos and many bold bawdie Phormios
to, bepreasing in, Multi Getae pauci Parmenones.
to pratle on every stage, to meddle in every matter, when honest Parmenos
shall not be hard, but bear small swing with their masters. Their company,
their taulke, their over great experience in mischief, does easelie corrupt the
best natures, and best brought up wits.

Misorders in the country.
But I meruell the less, that thies misorders be emonges some in the Court, for
commonly in the contrie also every where, innocence is gone: Bashfulnesse is
baninished: much presumption in yougthe: small authority in aige: Reverence is
neglected: duties be confounded: and to be short, disobedience does ouerflowe
the banks of good order, almost in every place, almost in every degree of
man.

Mean men have eyes to see, and cause to lament, and occasion to complain of
thies miseries: but other have authority to remedy them, and will do so to,
when God shall think time fit. For, all thies misorders, be Gods just
plages, by his sufferance, brought iustelie upon us, for our sins, which be
infinite in number, and horrible in deed, but namely, for the great
adhominable sin of unkindness: but what unkindness? even such unkindness as
was in the Jews, Contempt of Gods true Religion.
in contemninge Gods voice, in shrinking from his word, in wishing back
again for Egypt, in committing aduoultrie and hordom, not with the women, but
with the doctrine of Babylon, did bring all the plages, destructions, and
Captiuities, that fell so often and horribly, upon Israel.

We have cause also in England to beware of unkindness, who have had, in so
few years, the Candel of Gods word, so often lightened, so often put out, and
yet will venture by our unthankfulness in doctrine and sinful life, to leese
again, Doctrina Mores.
light, Candle, Candlestick and all.

God keep us in his fear, God grafte in us the true knowledge of his word,
with a forward will to follow it, and so to bring forth the sweet fruits of
it, and then shall he preserve us by his Grace, from all manner of terrible
days.

The remedy of this, Publicae Leges.
does not stand only, in making good common laws for the hole Realm, but
also, (and perchance cheiflie) in observing private discipline every man
carefully in his own house: Domestica disciplina.
and namely, if special regard be had to yougth: C^gnitio boni.
and that, not so much, in teaching them what is good, as in keeping them from
that, that is ill.

Therefore, if wise fathers, be not as well waare in weeding from their
Children ill things, Ignoratio mali.
and ill company, as they were before, in graftinge in them learning, and
providing for them good scholemasters, what fruit, they shall reap of all
their cost and care, common experience does tell.

Here is the place, Some ignorance, as good as knowledge.
in yougthe is the time when some ignorance is as necessary, as much knowledge,
and not in matters of our dewtie toward God, as some wilful wits willingly
against their own knowledge, perniciouslie against their own conscience,
have of late openly taught. In deed S. Chrysostom, Chrisost. de Fato.
that noble and eloquent Doctor, in a sermon contra fatum, and the curious
serchinge of natiuities, does wisely say, that ignorance therein, is better
than knowledge: But to wring this sentence, to wreste thereby out of men's
hands, the knowledge of Gods doctrine, is without all reason, against common
sense, contrary to the judgment also of them, which be the discretest men,
Iulia. Apostat.
and best learned, on their own side. I know, Iulianus Apostata did so, but I
never hard or red, that any ancient father of the primitive chirch, either
thought or wrote so.

But this ignorance in yougthe, Innocence in youth.
which I spoke on, or rather this simplicity, or most trewlie, this
innocence, is that, which the noble Persians, as wise Xenophon does testify,
were so careful, to breed up their yougth in. But Christian fathers commonly
do not so. And I will tell you a tale, as much to be misliked, as the Persians
example is to be followed.

This last somer, I was in a Ientlemans house: where a young child, A child
ill brought up.
somewhat past four year old, cold in no wise frame his tongue, to say, a
little short grace: and yet he could roundly rap out, so many vgle oaths, and
those of the newest facion, as some good man of fourscore year old has never
hard named before: and that which was most detestable of all, Ill Parents.
his father and mother would laughe at it. I much doubt, what comfort, an
other day, this child shall bring unto them. This Child using much the
company of seruinge men, and giving good care to their taulke, did easelie
learn, which he shall hardly forget, all days of his life hereafter: So
likewise, in the Court, if a young Ientleman will ventur him self into the
company of Ruffians, it is over great a ieoperdie, lest, their facions,
manners, thoughts, taulke, and deeds, will very sone, be ever like. The
confounding of companies, Ill company.
breeds confusion of good manners both in the Court, and every where else.

And it may be a great wonder, but a greater shame, to us Christian men, to
understand, what a heithen writer, Isocrates, Isocrates.
does leave in memory of writing, concerning the care, that the noble City of
Athens had, to bring up their yougthe, in honest company, and virtuous
discipline, whose taulke in Greek, is, to this effect, in English.

The City, was not more careful, to see their Children well taught, In Orat
Ariopag.
than to see their young men well governed: which they brought to pass, not so
much by common law, as by private discipline. For, they had more regard, that
their yougthe, by good order should not offend, than how, by law, they might be
punished: And if offense were commit, ted, there was, neither way to hide it,
neither hope of pardon for it. Good natures, were not so much openly
praisedas they were secretly marked, and watchfullie regarded, lest they
should lease the goodness they had. Therefore in schools of singing and
dancing, and other honest exercises, governors were appointed, more diligent
to ouersee their good manners, than their masters were, to teach them any
learning. It was some shame to a young man, to be seen in the open market: and
if for business, he passed through it, he did it, with a marvelous modesty,
and bashefull facion. To eat, or drink in a Tavern, was not only a shame,
but also punishable, in a young man. To contrary, or to stand in terms with an
old man, was more heinous, than in some place, to rebuke and scolde with his
own father: with many other mo good orders, and fair disciplines, which I
refer to their reading, that have lust to look upon the description of such
a worthy common welthe.

And to know, Good sede. worthy fruit.
what worthy fruit, did spring of soch worthy seade, I will tell you the most
meruell of all, and yet soch a trothe, as no man shall deny it, except such as
be ignorant in knowledge of the best stories.

Athens, Athenes.
by this discipline and good ordering of yougthe, did breed up, within the
circute of that one City, within the compass of one hundred year, within the
memory of one man's life, so many notable Capitaines in war, for
worthiness, wisdom and learning, as be scarce matchable no not in the state
of Rome, Roma.
in the compass of those seven hundred years, when it flourished most.

And because, I will not only say it, but also prove it, the names of them
be these. The noble Capitaines of Athens.
Miltiades, Themistocles, Xantippus, Pericles, Cymon, Alcybiades, Thrasybulus,
Conon, Iphicrates, Xenophon, Timotheus, Theopompus, Demetrius and diverse other
mo: of which every one, may iustelie be spoken that worthy praise, which was
given to Scipio Africanus, who, Cicero douteth, whether he were, more noble
Captain in war, or more eloquent and wise councelor in peace. And if ye
believe not me, read diligently, Aemilius Probus in Latin, Aemil. Probus.
Plutarchus.
and Plutarche in Greek, which two, had no cause either to flatter or lie upon
any of those which I have recited.

The learned of Athenes.
And beside nobility in war, for excellent and matcheles masters in all manner
of learning, in that one City, in memory of one aige, were mo learned men,
and that in a manner altogether, than all time does remember, than all place
does affourde, than all other tongues do contain. And I do not meene of those
Authors, which, by injury of time, by negligence of men, by cruelty of fire
and sword, be lost, but even of those, which by Gods grace, are left yet
unto us: of which I thank God, even my poor study lacks not one. As, in
Philosophy, Plato, Aristotle, Xenophon, Euclide and Theophrast: In eloquens
and Civil law, Demosthenes, Aeschines, Lycurgus, Dinarchus, Demades,
Isocrates, Isaeus, Lysias, Antisthenes, Andocides: In histories, Herodotus,
Thucydides, Xenophon: and which we lack, to our great loss, Theopompus and
Ephesians: In Poetry, Aeschylus, Sophocles, Euripides, Aristophanes, and somewhat of
Menander, Demosthenes sister son.

Now, let Italian, and Latin it self, Spanishe, French, Douch, Learning,
chiefly contained in the Greek and in no other tongue.
and English bring forth their lerning, and recite their Authors, Cicero
only excepted, and one or two more in Latin, they be all patched cloutes and
rags, in comparison of fair wouen broad clothes. And trewelie, if there be
any good in them, it is either learned, borrowed, or stolen, from some one of
those worthy wits of Athens.

The remembrance of soch a common welthe, using soch discipline and order for
yougthe, and thereby bringing forth to their praise, and leaning to us for our
example, such Capitaines for war, soch Councelors for peace, and matcheles
masters, for all kind of learning, is pleasant for me to recite, and not
irksum, I trust, for other to hear, except it be soch, as make neither count
of virtue nor learning.

And whether, there be any soch or no, I can not well tell: Contemners of
learning.
yet I hear say, some young Ientlemen of ours, count it their shame to be
counted learned: and perchance, they count it their shame, to be counted honest
also, for I hear say, they meddle as little with the one, as with the other. A
marvelous case, that Ientlemen should so be ashamed of good learning, and never
a whit ashamed of ill manners: soch do lay for them, that the Ientlemen of
France do so: Ientlemen of France.
which is a lie, as God will have it. Langaeus, and Bellaeus that be dead, and
the noble Vidam of Chartres, that is a live, and infinite mo in France, which I
hear tell of, prove this to be most false. And though some, in France, which
will needs be Ientlemen, whether men will or no, and have more ientleshipe in
their hat, than in their head, be at deedlie feude, with both learning and
honesty, yet I believe, if that noble Prince, king Francis the first were
alive, Franciscus 1. Nobilis. Francoru^ Rex.
they should have, neither place in his Court, nor pension in his wars, if he
had knowledge of them. This opinion is not French, but plain Turckishe: from
whens, some French fetch more faults, than this: which, I pray God, keep out
of England, and send also those of ours better minds, which bend them selves
against virtue and learning, to the contempt of God, dishonor of their
contrie to the hurt of many others, and at length, to the greatest harm, and
utter destruction of themselves.

Some other, having better nature, but less wit, (for ill commonly, have
over much wit) do not utterly dispraise learning, Experience without
learning.
but they say, that without learning, common experience, knowledge of all
facions, and haunting all companies, shall work in yougthe, both wisdom, and
ability, to execute any weighty affair. Surely long experience does
proffet much, but most, and almost only to him (if we meene honest affairs)
that is diligently before instructed with precepts of well doing. For good
precepts of learning, be the eyes of the mind, to look wisely before a man,
which way to go right, and which not.

Learning teaches more in one year than experience in twenty: Learning.
And learning teaches safely, Experience.
when experience makes mo miserable then wise. He hasardeth sore, that (...)
good pastime, I meene nothing less: For it is well known, that I both like
and love, and have always, and do yet still use, all exercises and pastimes,
that be fit for my nature and ability. And beside natural disposition, in
judgment also, I was never, either Stoic in doctrine, or Anabaptist in
Religion, to mislike a merry, pleasant, and plaifull nature, if no outrage be
committed, against law, mesure, and good order.

Therefore, I would wish, that, beside some good time, fitly appointed, and
constantly kept, to increase by readinge, the knowledge of the tongues and
learning, young ientlemen should use, and delight in all Courtelie exercises, and
Ientleman like pastimes. And good cause why: For the self same noble City of
Athenes, Learning joined with pastures.
justly commended of me before, did wisely and upon great consideration,
appoint, the Muses, Apollo, and Pallas, to be patrones of learning to their
yougthe. Musa.
For the Muses, besides learning, were also Ladies of dauncinge, Appollo.
mirthe and minstrelsie: Apollo, was god of shooting, and Author of cunning
playing upon Instruments: Pallas also was Laidie mistres in wars. Pallas.
Wherbie was nothing else meant, but that learning should be alwaise mingled,
with honest mirthe, and cumlie exercises: and that war also should be governed
by learning, and moderated by wisdom, as did well appear in those Capitaines
of Athenes named by me before, and also in Scipio and Caesar, the two Diamondes
of Rome.

Learning rewleth both war and peace.
And Pallas, was no more feared, in weering Aegida, tha^ she was praised, for
chosing Oliua: whereby shines the glory of learning, which thus, was Governor
and Mistres, in the noble City of Athenes, both of war and peace.

Therefore, to ride cumlie: to run fair at the tilte or ring: The pastimes
that be fit for Courtly Ientleme^.
to play at all weapones: to shote fair in bow, or surely in gone: to vant
lustely: to run: to leap: to wrestle: to swim: To dance cumlie: to sing,
and play of instruments cunnyngly: to Hawke: to hunte: to play at tennes,
and all pastimes generally, which be joined with labor, used in open place, and
on the day light, containing either some fit exercise for war, or some
pleasant pastime for peace, be not only cumlie and decent, but also very
necessary, for a Courtly Ientleman to use.

But, of all kind of pastimes, fit for a Ientleman, I will, godwilling, in
fitter place, more at large, declare fully, in my book of the Cockpitte: The
Cokpitte.
which I do write, to satisfy some, I trust, with some reason, that be more
curious, in marking other men's doings, than careful in mendyng their own
faults. And some also will needs busy them selves in merueling, and adding
thereunto vnfrendlie taulke, why I, a man of good years, and of no ill place,
I thank God and my Prince, do make choice to spend soch time in writing of
trifles, as the schole of shoting, the Cockpitte, and this book of the first
Principles of Grammar, rather, than to take some weighty matter in hand,
either of Religion, or Civil discipline.

Wise men I know, will well allow of my choice herein: and as for such, who
have not wit of them selves, but must learn of others, to judge right of
men's doings, let them read that wise Poet Horace in his Art Poetica, A book
of a lofty title, bears the brag of over great a promise.
who wills wisemen to beware, of hie and lofty Titles. For, great ships,
require costly tackling, and also afterward dangerous government: Small
boats, be neither very chargeable in making, nor very often in great
ieoperdie: and yet they carry many times, as good and costly ware, as greater
vessels do. The right choice, to chose a fit Argument to write upon.
A mean Argument, may easelie bear, the light burden of a small fault, and
have alwaise at hand, a ready excuse for ill handling: And, some praise it is,
if it so chance, to be better in deed, than a man dare venture to seem. A
hye title, does charge a man, with the heavy burden, of to great a promise:
Hor. in Art Poet.
and therefore says Horace very wittelie, that, that Poet was a very fool,
that began his book, with a goodly verse in deed, but over proud a promise.
Fortunam Priami cantabo and nobile bellum,
And after, as wisely. Quanto rectius hic, qui nil molitur inepte. etc.
Meening Homer, Homers wisdom in choice of his Argument.
who, within the compass of a small Argument, of one harlot, and of one good
wife, did utter so much learning in all kind of sciences, as, by the judgment
of Quintilian, he deserves so hie a praise, that no man yet deserved to sit in
the second degree beneth him. And thus much out of my way, concerning my
purpose in spending pen, and paper, and time, upon trifles, and namely to
answer some, that have neither wit nor learning, to do any thing them
selves, neither will nor honesty, to say well of other.

To join learning with cumlie exercises, Conto Baldesaer Castiglione in his
book, Cortegiane, does trimly teach: which book, The Cortegian, an
excellent book for a ientleman.
advisedly read, and diligently followed, but one year at home in England,
would do a young ientleman more good, I wisse, then three years travel abroad
spent in Italy. And I meruell this book, is no more read in the Court, than
it is, seeing it is so well translated into English by a worthy Ientleman Sir
Th. Hobbie, Sir Tho. Hobbye.
who was many ways well furnished with learning, and very expert in knowledge
of diverse tongues.

And beside good precepts in books, in all kind of tongues, this Court also
never lacked many fair examples, for young ientlemen to follow: Examples better
then precepts.
And surely, one example, is more valiable, both to good and ill, than xx.
precepts written in books: and so Plato, not in one or two, but diverse
places, does plainly teach.

King Ed. 6.
If king Edward had lived a little longer, his only example had breed soch a
raze of worthy learned ientlemen, as this Realm never yet did affourde.

And, in the second degree, two noble Primeroses of Nobility, the young Duke of
Suffolk, The young Duke of Suffolk. L. H. Martreuers.
and Lord H. Matreuers, were soch two examples to the Court for learning, as
our time may rather wish, than look for again.

At Cambrige also, in S. John's College, in my time, I do know, that, not so
much the good statutes, as two Ientlemen, of worthy memory Sir John Cheke,
Sir John Cheke.
and Doctor Readman, by their only example of excellency in learning, of
godlynes in living, D. Readman.
of dilige^cie in studying, of council in exhorting, of good order in all
thing, did breed up, so many learned men, in that one College of S. John's, at
one time, as I believe, the whole University of Louaine, in many years, was
never able to affourd.

Present examples of this present time, I list not to touch: Queen Elizabeth.
yet there is one example, for all the Ientlemen of this Court to follow, that
may well satisfy them, or nothing will serve them, nor no example move them,
to goodness and learning.

It is your shame, (I speak to you all, you young Ientlemen of England) that
one maid should go beyond you all, in excellency of learning, and knowledge of
diverse tongues. Point forth six of the best given Ientlemen of this Court, and
all they together, show not so much good will, spend not so much time, bestow
not so many hours, daily orderly, and constantly, for the increase of learning
and knowledge, as does the Queens Majesty her self. Yea I believe, that
beside her perfect readiness, in Latin, Italian, French, and Spanish, she reads
here now at Windsore more Greek every day, than some Prebendarie of this
Chirch does read Latin in a whole week. And that which is most praise worthy
of all, within the walls of her privy chamber, she has obtained that
excellency of learning, to understand, speak, and write, both wittely with
head, and fair with hand, as scarce one or two rare wits in both the
Uniuersities have in many years reached unto. Amongst all the benefits yt
God has blessed me with all, next the knowledge of Christ's true Religion, I
count this the greatest, that it pleased God to call me, to be one poor
minister in setting forward these excellent gifts of learning in this most
excellent Prince. Whose only example, if the rest of our nobility would
follow, than might England be, for learning and wisdom in nobility, Ill
Examples have more force, then good examples.
a spectacle to all the world beside. But see the mishap of men: The best
examples have never such forse to move to any goodness, as the bad, vain, light
and fond, have to all ilnes.

And one example, though out of the compass of learning, yet not out of the
order of good manners, was notable in this Court, not fully xxiiij. years a
go, when all the acts of Parliament, many good Proclamations, diverse strait
commandments, sore punishment openly, special regard privately, cold not
do so much to take away one misorder, as the example of one big one of this
Court did, still to keep up the same: The memory whereof, does yet remain,
in a common proverb of Birching lane.

Great men in Court, by their example, make or mar, all other men's manners.
Take heed therefore, ye great ones in ye Court, yea though ye be ye greatest of
all, take heed, what ye do, take heed how ye live. For as you great ones use to
do, so all mean men love to do. You be in deed, makers or marrers, of all men's
manners within the Realm. For though God has placed you, to be chief in
making of laws, to bear greatest authority, to command all others: yet God
does order, that all your laws, all your authority, all your commandments,
do not half so much with mean men, as does your example and manner of living.
Example in Religion.
And for example even in the greatest matter, if you your selves do serve God
gladly and orderly for conscience sake, not coldlie, and sometime for manner
sake, you carry all the Court with you, and the whole Realm beside,
earnestly and orderly to do the same. If you do otherwise, you be the only
authors, of all misorders in Religion, not only to the Court, but to all
England beside. Infinite shall be made cold in Religion by your example, that
never were hurt by reading of books.

And in meaner matters, if three or four great ones in Court, Example in
apparel.
will needs outrage in apparel, in huge hose, in monstrous hattes, in gaurishe
colers, let the Prince Proclaim, make Laws, order, punish, command every
gate in London daily to be watched, let all good men beside do every where
what they can, surely the misorder of apparel in mean men abroad, shall never
be amended, except the greatest in Court will order and mend them selves
first. I know, some great and good ones in Court, were authors, that honest
Citizens of London, should watch at every gate, to take misordered persons
in apparel. I know, that honest Londoners did so: And I saw, which I saw
than, and report now with some grief, than some Courtly men were offended with
these good men of London. And that, which grieved me most of all, I saw the
very same time, for all these good orders, commanded from the Court and
executed in London, I saw I say, cum out of London, Masters, Ushers, and
Scholars of sense.
even unto the presence of the Prince, a great rabble of mean and light
persons, in apparel, for matter, against law, for making, against order, for
facion, namely hose, so without all order, as he thought himself most brave,
that durst do most in breaking order and was most monsterous in misorder. And
for all the great commandments, that came out of the Court, yet this bold
misorder, was winked at, and borne withal, in the Court. I thought, it was
not well, that some great ones of the Court, durst declare themselves offended,
with good men of London, for doing their dewtie, and the good ones of the
Court, would not show themselves offended, with ill men of London, for
breaking good order. I fownde thereby a saying of Socrates to be most true
that ill men be more hasty, than good men be forward, to prosecute their
purposes, even as Christ himself says, of the Children of light and darkness.

Beside apparel, in all other things to, not so much, good laws and strait
commandments as the example and manner of living of great men, does carry all
mean men every where, to like, and love, and do, as they do. For if but two
or three noble men in the Court, Example in shootyng.
would but begin to shoot, all young Ientlemen, the whole Court, all London,
the whole Realm, would straight way exercise shooting.

What praise should they win to themselves, what commodity should they bring
to their country, that would thus deserve to be pointed at: Behold, there
goes, the author of good order, the guide of good men. I cold say more, and
yet not ouermoch. But perchance, some will say, I have stepte to far, out of
my schole, into the common welthe, from teaching a young scholar, to monishe
great and noble men: Written, not for great me^, but for great men's children.
yet I trust good and wise men will think and judge of me, that my mind was,
not so much, to be busy and bold with them, that be great now, as to give
true advise to them, that may be great hereafter. Who, if they do, as I wish
them to do, how great so ever they be now, by blood and other men's means, they
shall becum a great deal greater hereafter, by learning, virtue, and their
own deserts: which is true praise, right worthiness, and very Nobility in
deed. Yet, if some will needs press me, that I am to bold with great men, and
stray to far from my matter. I will answer them with S. Paul, sieve per
conte^tionem, Ad Philip.
sieve quocunque modo, modo Christus praedicetur, etc. even so, whether in
place, or out of place, with my matter, or beside my matter, if I can hereby
either provoke the good, or stay the ill, I shall think my writing herein
well employed.

But, to cum down, from great men, and hier matters, to my little children,
and poor scholehouse again, I will, God willing, go forward orderly, as I
purposed, to instruct Children and young men, both for learning and manners.

Hitherto, I have showed, what harm, ouermoch fear brings to children: and
what hurt, ill company, and ouermoch liberty breeds in yougthe: meening
thereby, that from seven year old, to seauentene, love is the best
allurement to learning: from seauentene to seven and twenty, that wise men
should carefully see the steps of yougthe surely staide by good order, in
that most slipperie time: and specially in the Court, a place most dangerous
for youngthe to live in, without great grace, good regard, and diligent
looking to.

Sir Richard Sackuile, that worthy Ientleman of worthy memory, as I said in
the beginning, in the Queens privy Chamber of Windesore, Trauelyng into
Italy.
after he had talked with me, for the right choice of a good wit in a child
for learning, and of the true difference betwixt quick and hard wits, of
alluring young children by ientlenes to love learning, and of the special care
that was to be had, to keep young men from licencious living, he was most
earnest with me, to have me say my mind also, what I thought, concerning the
fancy that many young Ientlemen of England have to travel abroad, and namely
to leadde a long life in Italy. His request, both for his authority, and good
will toward me, was a sufficient commandment unto me, to satisfy his
pleasure, with vtteryng plainly my opinion in that matter. Sir quoth I, I take
going thither, and living there, for a young ientleman, that does not go under
the keep and guard of such a man, as both, by wisdom can, and authority dare
rewle him, to be marvelous dangerous. And why I said so than, I will declare
at large now: which I said than privately, and write now openly, not because
I do contemn, either the knowledge of strange and diverse tongues, The Italian
tongue.
and namely the Italian tongue, which next the Greek and Latin tongue, I like
and love above all other: or else because I do despise, the learning that is
gotten, or the experience that is gathered in strange contries: or for any
private malice that I bear to Italy: Italia.
which contrie, and in it, namely Rome, I have always specially honored:
Roma.
because, time was, when Italy and Rome, have been, to the great good of us
that now live, the best breeders and bringers up, of the worthiest men, not
only for wise speakinge, but also for well doing, in all Civil affairs,
that ever was in the world. But now, that time is gone, and though the place
remain, yet the old and present manners, do differ as far, as black and
white, as virtue and vice. Virtue once made that contrie Mistres over all the
world. Uice now makes that contrie slave to them, that before, were glad to
serve it. All men sees it: They themselves confess it, namely soch, as be
best and wisest amongst them. For sin, by lust and vanity, has and does
breed up every where, common contempt of Gods word, private contention in many
families, open factions in every City: and so, making them selves bond, to
vanity and vice at home, they are content to bear the yoke of seruyng
strangers abroad, Italy now, is not that Italy, that it was wont to be: and
therefore now, not so fit a place, as some do count it, for young men to fetch
either wisdom or honesty from thence. For surely, they will make other but
bad Scholars, that be so ill Masters to them selves. Yet, if a ientleman will
needs travel into Italy, he shall do well, to look on the life, of the
wisest traueler, that ever traueled thither, set out by the wisest writer, that
ever spoke with tongue, Gods doctrine only excepted: and that is Ulysses in
Homere. Ulysses.
Ulysses, and his travel, I wish our trauelers to look upon, Homere.
not so much to fear them, with the great dangers, that he many times
suffered, as to instruct them, with his excellent wisdom, which he always
and euerywhere used. Yea even those, that be learned and witty trauelers, when
they be disposed to praise traueling, as a great commendacion, and the best
Scripture they have for it, they gladly recite the third verse of Homere, in
his first book of Odyssea, (...).
conteinyng a great praise of Ulysses, for the wit he gathered, and wisdom
he used in his traueling.

Which verse, because, in mine opinion, it was not made at the first, more
naturally in Greek by Homere, nor after turned more aptelie into Latin by
Horace, than it was a good while ago, in Cambrige, translated into English,
both plainly for the sense, and roundly for the verse, by one of the best
Scholars, that ever S. John's College bred. M. Watson, mine old friend, sometime
Bishop of Lincoln, therefore, for their sake, that have lust to see how our
English tongue, in auoidyng barbarous ryming, may as well receive, right
quantity of sillabes, and true order of verifiyng (of which matter more at
large hereafter) as either Greek or Latin, if a cunning man have it in
handling, I will set forth that one verse in all three tongues, for an Example
to good wits, that shall delight in like learned exercise.

Homerus. (...).
Horatius. Qui mores hominum multorum vidit and vrbes.
M. Watson. All travelers do gladly report great praise of Ulysses,
For that he knew many men's manners, and saw many Cities.
And yet is not Ulysses commended, Vlyss. (...). Vlyss. (...).

so much, nor so often, in Homere, because he was (...), that is, skillful in
many men's manners and facions, as because he was (...), that is, wise in all
purposes, and ware in all places: which wisdom and warenes will not serve
neither a traueler, Pallas from heaven.
except Pallas be always at his elbow, that is Gods special grace from
heaven, to keep him in Gods fear, in all his doings, in all his ieorneye.
For, he shall not always in his absence out of England, light upon a ientle
Alcynous, Alcynous. (...). 2.

and walk in his fair gardens full of all harmless pleasures: but he shall
sometimes, fall, either into the hands of some cruel Cyclops, Cyclops. (...).
1.

or into the lap of some wanton and dalying Dame Calypso: Calypso. (...).

and so suffer the danger of many a deadly Den, not so full of perils,
Sirenes. (...).

to distroy the body, as, full of vain pleasures, to poison the mind. Some
Siren shall sing him a song, sweet in tune, but sownding in the end, Scylla.
(...).

to his utter destruction. If Scylla drown him not, Carybdis may fortune
swalow him. Caribdis. (...).

Some Circes shall make him, Circes. (...).

of a plain English man, a right Italian. And at length to hell, or to some
hellish place, (...).
is he likely to go: from whence is hard returning, although one Ulysses, and
that by Pallas aid, and good counsel of Tiresias, once escaped that horrible
Den of deadly darkness.

Therefore, if wise men will needs send their sons into Italy, let them do it
wisely, under the keep and guard of him, who, by his wisdom and honesty, by
his example and authority, may be hable to keep them safe and sound, in the
fear of God, in Christ's true Religion, in good order and honesty of living:
except they will have them run headling, into over many ieoperdies, as Ulysses
had done many times, if Pallas had not always governed him: if he had not
used, (...).
to stop his ears with wax: to bind him self to the mast of his ship: (...).
to feed daily, upon that sweet herb Moly with the blake root and white
floor, given unto him by Mercury, Moly Herba.
to avoid all the inchantme^tes of Circes. Whereby, the Divine Poet Homer meant
covertly (as wise and Godly men do judge) that love of honesty, and hatred of
ill, which David more plainly does call the fear of God: Psalm. 33.
the only remedy against all inchantementes of sin.

I know diverse noble personages, and many worthy Ientlemen of England, whom
all the Siren songs of Italy, could never untwine from the maste of Gods
word: nor no enchantment of vanity, ouerturne them, from the fear of God, and
love of honesty.

But I know as many, or mo, and some, sometime my dear friends, for whose sake
I hate going into that country the more, who, partyng out of England fervent
in the love of Christ's doctrine, and well furnished with the fear of God,
returned out of Italy worse transformed, than ever was any in Circes Court. I
know diverse, that went out of England, men of innocent life, men of excellent
learning, who returned out of Italy, not only with worse manners, but also
with less learning: neither so willing to live orderly, nor yet so hable to
speak learnedlie, as they were at home, before they went abroad. And why?
Plato,, yt wise writer, and worthy traueler him self, tells the cause why.
He went into Sicilia, a country, no nigher Italy by site of place, tha^ Italy
that is now, is like Sicilia that was the^, in all corrupt manners and
lice^ciousnes of life. Plato found in Sicilia, every City full of vanity,
full of factions, even as Italy is now. And as Homere, like a learned Poet,
does feyne, that Circes, by pleasant inchantme^tes, did turn men into beasts,
Plat. ad Dionys. Epist. 3.
some into Swine, some into Asses, some into Foxes, some into Wolves etc. even
so Plato, like a wise Philosopher, does plainly declare, that pleasure, by
licentious vanity, that sweet and perilous poison of all youth, does engender
in all those, that yield up themselves to her, four notorious properties.

1. (...). The fruits of varne pleasure.
2. (...). 3. (...). 4. (...).
The first, Causes, why men return out of Italy, less learned and worse
manered.
forgetfulness of all good things learned before: the second, dulnes to receive
either learning or honesty ever after: the third, a mind embracing lightly
the worse opinion, and baren of discretion to make true difference betwixt
good and ill, betwixt troth, and vanity, the fourth, a proud disdainfulnes of
other good me^, in all honest matters. Homere and Plato, have both one meaning,
look both to one end. Homer and Plato joined and expounded.
For, if a man inglutte him self with vanity, or walter in filthiness like a
Swyne, all learning, all goodness, is sone forgotten. Than, quickly shall he
becum a dull Ass, to understand either learning or honesty: A Swyne
and yet shall he be as sutle as a Fox, in breedyng of mischief, in bringyng
in misorder, An Ass.
with a busy head, a discoursing to^g, and a factious heart, A Fox.
in every private affair, in all matters of state, with this pretty property,
(...). Quid, et vnde.
always glad to commend the worse party, and ever ready to defend the falser
opinion. And why? For, where will is given from goodness to vanity, the mind
is sone carried from right judgment, to any fond opinion, in Religion, in
Philosophy, or any other kind of learning. The fourth fruit of vain
pleasure, (...).
by Homer and Platos judgment, is pride in them selves, contempt of others,
the very badge of all those that serve in Circes Court. The true meenyng of
both Homer and Plato, is plainly declared in one short sentence of the holy
Prophet of God Hieremie, Hieremias 4. Cap.
crying out of the vain and vicious life of the Israelites. This people (says
he) be fools and dulhedes to all goodness, but sotle, cunning and bold, in any
mischief, etc.

The true medicine against the inchantmentes of Circes,, the vanity of
licencious pleasure, the inticementes of all sin, is, in Homere, the herb
Moly, with the black root, and white flooer, sower at the first, but sweet
in the end: which, Hesiodus terms the study of virtue, Hesiodus de virtute.
hard and irksome in the beginning, but in the end, easy and pleasant. And
that, which is most to be marueled at, the divine Poet Homere says plainly
that this medicine against sin and vanity, Homerus, diuinus Poeta.
is not found out by man, but given and taught by God. And for some one sake,
that will have delight to read that sweet and Godly Uerse, I will recite the
very words of Homere and also turn them into rude English meter.

(...)
(...).
(...).
In English thus.

No mortal man, with sweat of browe, or toil of mind,
But only God, who can do all, that herb does find.
Plato also, that divine Philosopher, has many Godly medicines against the
poison of vain pleasure, in many places, Plat. ad Dio.
but specially in his Epistles to Dionisius the tyrant of Sicilie: yet against
those, that will needs becum beasts, with seruyng of Circes, the Prophet
David, cries most loud, Psalm. 31.
Nolite fieri sicut equus and mulus: and by and by gives the right medicine,
the true herb Moly, In camo and freno maxillas little constringe, that is to
say, let Gods grace be the bitte, let Gods fear be the bridle, to stay them
from runnyng headlong into vice, and to turn them into the right way again.
Psalm. 33.
David in the second Psalm after, gives the same medicine, but in these
plainer words, Diuerte a malo, and fac bonum. But I am affraide, that over
many of our trauelers into Italy, do not exchewe the way to Circes Court: but
go, and ride, and run, and fly thither, they make great have to cum to her:
they make great suit to serve her: yea, I could point out some with my finger,
that never had gone out of England, but only to serve Circes, in Italy.
Uanitie and vice, and any license to ill living in England was counted stale
and rude unto them. And so, being Mules and Horses before they went, returned
very Swyne and Asses home again: A true Picture of a knight of Circes Court.
yet every where very Foxes with sutlie and busy heads: and where they may,
very wolves, with cruel malicious hearts. A marvelous monster, which, for
filthiness of living, for dulnes to learning him self, for wiliness in dealing
with others, for malice in hurting without cause, should carry at once in one
body, the belie of a Swyne, the head of an Ass, the brain of a Fox, the
womb of a wolf. If you think, we judge amiss, The Italia^s judgment of
Englismen brought up in Italy.
and write to sore against you, hear, what the Italian says of the English
man, what the master reports of the scholar: who utters playnlie, what is
taught by him, and what is learned by you, saying, Englese Italianato, e un
diabolo incarnato, that is to say, you remain men in shape and facion, but
becum devils in life and condition. This is not, the opinion of one, for some
private spite, but the judgment of all, in a common Proverb, which rises,
The Italian diffameth him self* to shame the English man.
of that learning, and those manners, which you gather in Italy: a good
Scholehouse of wholesome doctrine: and worthy Masters of commendable Scholars,
where the Master had rather diffame him self for his teaching, than not shame
his Scholar for his learning. A good nature of the master, and fair
conditions of the scholars. And now chose you, you Italian English men, whether
you will be angry with us, for calling you monsters, or with the Italianes,
for calling you devils, or else with your own selves, that take so much
pains, and go so far, to make your selves both. If some yet do not well
understand, what is an English man Italianated, I will plainly tell him. In
English man Italianated.
He, that by living, and traueling in Italy, brings home into England out of
Italy, the Religion, the learning, the policy, the experience, the manners of
Italy. That is to say, for Religion, The 1 Religion. gotten in Italy. The 2
Learning. gotten in Italy. The 3 Policy. gotten in Italy. The 4 Experience.
gotten in Italy. The 5 Manners. gotten in Italy.

Papistrie or worse: for learning, less commonly than they carried out with
them: for policy, a factious heart, a discoursing head, a mind to meddle in
all men's matters: for experience, plenty of new mischieues never known in
England before: for manners, variety of vanities, and change of filthy living.
These be the inchantementes of Circes, brought out of Italy, to mar men's
manners in England: much, by example of ill life, but more by precepts of fond
books, of late translated out of Italian into English, Italian books
translated into English.
sold in every shop in London, commended by honest titles the sooner to corrupt
honest manners: dedicated over boldly to virtuous and honorable personages, the
easielier to begile simple and innocent wits.
It is pity, that those, which have authority and charge, to allow and
dissalow books to be printed, be no more circumspect herein, than they are.
Ten Sermons at Paul's Cross do not so much good for mouyng me^ to true
doctrine, as one of those books do harm, with enticing men to ill living.
Yea, I say farther, those books, tend not so much to corrupt honest living, as
they do, to subvert true Religion. Mo Papists be made, by your merry books of
Italy, than by your earnest books of Louain. And because our great
Phisicians, do wink at the matter, and make no count of this sore, I, though
not admitted one of their fellowship, yet having been many years aprentice to
Gods true Religion, and trust to continewe a poor journey man therein all
days of my life, for the dewtie I owe, and love I bear, both to true
doctrine, and honest living, though I have no authority to amend the sore my
self, yet I will declare my good will, to discover the sore to others.

S. Paul says, Ad Gal. 5.
that sects and ill opinions, be the works of the flesh, and fruits of sin,
this is spoken, no more trewlie for the doctrine, than sensibly for the
reason. And why? For, ill doings, breed ill thinkinges. And of corrupted
manners, Voluntas Respicit Bonum. Men's Respicit Verum.

spryng peruersed judgments. And how? there be in man two special things:
Man's will, man's mind. Where will inclines to goodness, the mind is bent to
troth: Where will is carried from goodness to vanity, the mind is sone drawn
from troth to false opinion. And so, the readiest way to entangle the mind
with false doctrine, is first to entice the will to wanton living. Therefore,
when the busy and open Papists abroad, could not, by their contentious
books, turn men in England fast enough,
from troth and right judgment in doctrine, than the sutle and secret
Papists at home, procured bawdie books to be translated out of the Italian
tongue, whereby over many young wills and wits allured to wantonness, do now
boldly contemn all severe books that sound to honesty and godliness. In our
forefathers time, when Papistrie, as a standing poole, covered and ouerflowed
all England, few books were read in our tongue, saving certain books of
Cheualrie, as they said, for pastime and pleasure, which, as some say, were
made in Monasteries, by idle Monks, or wanton Chanons: as one for example,
Morte Arthure: Morte Arthur.
the whole pleasure of which book stands in two special points, in open
man's slaughter, and bold bawdrye: In which book those be counted the noblest
Knights, that do kill most men without any quarrel, and commit fowlest
aduoulteres by sutlest shifts: as Sir Launcelote, with the wife of King
Arthure his master: Sir Tristram with the wife of king Mark his uncle: Sir
Lamerocke, with the wife of king Lote, that was his own aunte. This is good
stuff,
for wise men to laughe at, or honest men to take pleasure at. Yet I know, when
Gods Bible was banished the Court, and Morte Arthure received into the Princes
chamber. What toys, the daily readyng of such a book, may work in the will
of a young ientleman, or a young maid, that lives welthelie and idlelie, wise
men can judge, and honest me^ do pity. And yet ten Morte Arthures do not the
tenth part so much harm, as one of these books, made in Italy,
and translated in England. They open, not fond and common ways to vice, but
such sutle, cunnyng, new, and diverse shifts, to carry young wills to vanity,
and young wits to mischief, to teach old bawdes new schole points, as the
simple head of an English man is not hable to invent, nor never was hard of in
England before, yea when Papistrie ouerflowed all. Suffer these books to be
read, and they shall soon displace all books of godly learning. For they,
carrying the will to vanity, and marryng good manners, shall easily corrupt the
mind with ill opinions, and false judgment in doctrine: first, to think ill
of all true Religion, and at last to think nothing of God him self, one
special point that is to be learned in Italy, and Italian books.
And that which is most to be lamented, and therefore more needful to be looked
to, there be more of these ungracious books set out in Printe within these few
months, than have been seen in England many score year before. And because
our English men made Italians, can not hurt, but certain persons, and in
certain places, therefore these Italian books are made English, to bring
mischief enough openly and boldly, to all states great and mean, young and old,
every where.

And thus you see, how will intised to wantonness, does easelie allure the mind
to false opinions: and how corrupt manners in living, breed false judgment in
doctrine: how sin and fleshlines, bring forth sects and heresies: And
therefore suffer not vain books to breed vanity in men's wills, if you
would have Gods trothe take root in men's minds.

That Italian, that first invented the Italian Proverb against our English
men Italianated, The Italian proverb expounded.
meant no more their vanity in living, than their lewd opinion in Religion:
For, in calling them Deuiles, he carries them clean from God: and yet he
carries them no farther, than they willingly go themselves, that is, where they
may freely say their minds, to the open contempt of God and all godliness,
both in living and doctrine.

And how? I will express how, not by a Fable of Homere, nor by the Philosophy
of Plato, but by a plain troth of Gods word, sensibly uttered by David
thus. Thies men, abhominabiles facts in studijs suis, think verily, and singe
gladly the verse before, Psalm. 14.
Dixit insipiens in Cord suo, non est Deus: that is to say, they giving
themselves up to vanity, shakinge of the motions of Grace, driving from them
the fear of God, and running headlong into all sin, first, lustily contemn
God, than scornefullie mock his word, and also spitefully hate and hurt all
well willers thereof. Than they have in more reverence, the triumphs of
Petrarche: than the Genesis of Moses: They make more accounte of Tullies
offices, than S. Paul's epistles: of a tale in Bocace, than a story of the
Bible. Than they count as Fables, the holy mysteries of Christian Religion.
They make Christ and his Gospel, only serve Civil policy: Than neither
Religion cummeth amiss to them: In time they be Promoters of both openly: in
place again mockers of both privily, as I wrote once in a rude ryme.

Now new, now old, now both, now neither,
To serve the worlds course, they care not with whether.
For where they dare, in cumpanie where they like, they boldly laughe to
scorn both protestant and Papist. They ear for no scripture: They make no
count of general councels: they conte^ne the consent of the Chirch: They
pass for no Doctores: They mock the Pope: They rail on Luther: They allow
neither side: They like none, but only themselves: The mark they shote at,
the end they look for, the heaven they desire, is only, their own present
pleasure, and private proffit: whereby, they plainly declare, of whose schole,
of what Religion they be: that is, Epicures in living, and (...) in doctrine:
this last word, is no more unknown now to plain English men, than the
Person was unknown sometime in England, until some English man took peines, to
fetch that deuelish opinion out of Italy. Thies men, thus Italianated abroad,
can not abide our Godly Italian Chirch at home: The Italia^ Church in London.
they be not of that Parish, they be not of that fellowship: they like not ye
preacher: they hear not his sermons: Except somtymes for company, they cum
thither, to hear the Italian tongue naturally spoken, not to hear Gods
doctrine trewly preached.

And yet, thies men, in matters of Divinity, openly pretend a great
knowledge, and have privately to them selves, a very compendious
understanding of all, which nevertheless they will utter when and where they
list: And that is this: All the mysteries of Moses, the whole law and
Ceremonies, the Psalms and Prophets, Christ and his Gospel, GOD and the
Devil, Heaven and Hell, Faith, Conscience, Sin, Death, and all they shortly
wrap up, they quickly expound with this one half verse of Horace.

Credat Iudaeus Appella.
Yet though in Italy they may freely be of no Religion, as they are in England
in very deed to, nevertheless returning home into England they must
countenance the profession of the one or the other, howsoever in wardlie, they
laugh to scorn both. And though, for their private matters they can follow,
fawn, and flatter noble Personages, contrary to them in all respects, yet
commonly they allie themselves with the worst Papists, to whom they be
wedded, and do well agree together in three proper opinions: Papistrie and
(...) agree in three opinions.
In open contempt of Gods word: in a secret security of sin: and in a
bloody desire to have all taken away, by sword or burning, that be not of
their faction. They that do read, Pigius.
with indifferent judgment, Pygius and Machianel, two indifferent Patriarchs
of thies two Religions, Machianelus.
do know full well that I say true.

Ye see, what manners and doctrine, our English men fetch out of Italy: For
finding no other there, they can bring no other hither. And therefore, many
godly and excellent learned English men, Wise and honest trauelers.
not many years ago, did make a better choice, when open cruelty, drove them
out of this contrie, to place themselves there, where Christ's doctrine, the
fear of God, Germany.
punishment of sin, and discipline of honesty, were had in special regard.

I was once in Italy my self: Venice.
but I thank God, my abode there, London.
was but ix. days: And yet I saw in that little time, in one City, more
liberty to sin, than ever I hard tell of in our noble City of London in ix.
year. I saw, it was there, as free to sin, not only without all
punishment, but also without any man's marking, as it is free in the City of
London, to chose, without all blame, whether a man lust to wear She or
pantocle. And good cause why: For being unlike in troth of Religion, they must
needs be unlike in honesty of living. For blessed be Christ, in our City of
London, Service of God in England.
commonly the commandementes of God, be more diligently taught, and the
service of God more reverently used, and that daily in many private men's
houses, Service of God in Italy.
than they be in Italy once a week in their common Chirches: where, masking
Ceremonies, to delight the eye, and vain soundes, to please the ear, do quite
thrust out of the Chirches, all service of God in spirit and troth. Yea, The
Lord Mayor of London.
the Lord Mayor of London, being but a Civil officer, is commonly for his
time, more diligent, in punishing sin, the bent enemy against God and good
order, than all the bloody Inquisitors in Italy be in seven year. The
Inquisitors in Italy
For, their care and charge is, not to punish sin, not to amend manners, not
to purge doctrine, but only to watch and ouersee that Christ's true Religion
set no sure footing, where the Pope has any Jurisdiction. I learned, when I
was at Venice, An ungodly policy.
that there it is counted good policy, when there be four or five brethren
of one family, one, only to marie: and all the rest, to waulcer, with as
little shame, in open lechery, as Swyne do here in the common mire. Yea, there
be as fair houses of Religion, as great provision, as diligent officers, to
keep up this misorder, as Bridewell is, and all the Masters there, to keep
down misorder. And therefore, if the Pope himself, do not only grant
pardons to further thies wicked purposes abroad in Italy, but also (although
this present Pope, in the beginning, made some show of misliking thereof)
assign both meede and merit to the maintenance of stews and brothelhouses at
home in Rome, than let wise men think Italy a safe place for holsom doctrine,
and godly manners, and a fit schole for young ientlemen of England to be
brought up in.

Our Italians bring home with them other faults from Italy, though not so
great as this of Religion, yet a great deal greater, tha^ many good men can
well bear. For commonly they cum home, Contempt of marriage.
common contemners of marriage and ready persuaders of all other to the same:
not because they love virginity, nor yet because they hate pretty young
virgins, but, being free in Italy, to go whither so ever lust will carry them,
they do not like, that law and honesty should be soch a bar to their like
liberty at home in England. And yet they be, the greatest makers of love, the
daily daliers, with such pleasant words, with such smilyng and secret
countenances, with such signs, tokens, wagers, purposed to be lost, before
they were purposed to be made, with bargains of wearing colors, flowers, and
herbs, to breed occasion of ofter meeting of him and her, and bolder talking
of this and that etc. And although I have seen some, innocent of all ill, and
stayde in all honesty, that have used these things without all harm, without
all suspicion of harm, yet these knackes were brought first into England by
them, that learned the^ before in Italy in Circes Court: and how Courtly
curtesses so ever they be counted now, yet, if the meaning and manners of some
that do use them, were somewhat amended, it were no great hurt, neither to them
selves, nor to others.

An other property of this our English Italians is, to be marvelous singular
in all their matters: Singular in knowledge, ignorant of nothing: So singular
in wisdom (in their own opinion) as scarce they count the best Counselor
the Prince has, comparable with them: Common discoursers of all matters: busy
searchers of most secret affairs: open flatterers of great men: privy
mislikers of good men: Fair speakers, with smiling countena^ces, and much
curtessie openly to all men. Ready bakbiters, sore nippers, and spiteful
reporters privily of good men. And being brought up in Italy, in some free
City, as all Cities be there: where a man may freely discourse against what
he will, against whom he lust: against any Prince, against any government, yea
against God him self, and his whole Religion: where he must be, either Guelphe
or Gibiline, either French or Spanish: and always compelled to be of some
party, of some faction, he shall never be compelled to be of any Religion: And
if he meddle not over much with Christ's true Religion, he shall have free
liberty to embrace all Religions, and becum, if he lust at once, without any
let or punishment, Jewish, Turkish, Papish, and Deuillish.

A young Ientleman, thus bred up in this goodly schole, to learn the next and
ready way to sin, to have a busy head* a factious heart, a talkatiue tongue:
fed with discoursing of factions: led so contemn God and his Religion, shall
cum home into England, but very ill taught, either to be an honest man him
self, a quiet subject to his Prince, or willing to serve God, under the
obedience of true doctrine, or with in the order of honest living.

I know, none will be offended with this my general writing, but only such,
as find them selves guilty privately therein: who shall have good leave to be
offended with me, until they begin to amend them selves. I touch not them
that be good: and I say to little of them that be naught. And so, though not
enough for their deserving, yet sufficiently for this time, and more else when,
if occasion so require.

And thus far have I wandered from my first purpose of teaching a child, yet
not altogether out of the way, because this whole taulke has tended to the
only advancement of trothe in Religion, an honesty of living: and has been
wholly within the compass of learning and good manners, the special points
belonging in the right bringyng up of youth.

But to my matter, as I began, plainly and simply with my young Scholar, so
will I not leave him, God willing, until I have brought him a perfect Scholar
out of the Schole, and placed him in the University, to becum a ^^tte student,
for Logic and Rhetoric: and so after to Physic, Law, or Divinity, as
aptnes of nature, advise of friends, and Gods disposition shall lead him.

The end of the first book.
The second book.
AFter that your scholar, is I said before, shall cum in deed, first, to a
ready perfitnes in translating, than, to a ripe and skillful choice in markyng
cut his six points, as, 1. Proprium. 2. Translatum. 3. Synonymum. 4.
Contrarium. 5. Diuersum. 6. Phrases.


Than take this order with him: Read daily unto him, some book of Tullie,
Cicero.
as the third book of Epistles chosen out by Sturmius, de Amicitia, de
Senetute, or that excellent Epistle conteinyng almost the whole first book ad
Q. fra: some Comedy of Terence or Plautus: Terentius.
but in Plautus, skillful choice must be used by the master, Plautus.
to train his Scholar to a judgment, in cutting out perfitelie over old and
improper words: Iul. Caesar.
Caes. Commentaries are to be read with all curiosity, in specially without
all exception to be made, either by friend or foe, is seen, the unspotted
propriety of the Latin tongue, even when it was, as the Grecians say, in (...),
that is, at the hiest pitch of all perfitenesse: or some Orations of T. Liuius,
T. Liuius.
such as be both longest and plainest.

These books, I would have him read now, a good deal at every lecture: for he
shall not now use dalie translation, but only construe again, and parse,
where ye suspect, is any need: yet, let him not omit in these books, his
former exercise, in marking diligently, and writing orderly out his six
points. And for translating, use you your self, every second or third day, to
chose out, some Epistle ad Atticum, some notable common place out of his
Orations, or some other part of Tullie, by your discretion, which your scholar
may not know where to find: and translate it you your self, into plain
natural English, and than give it him to translate into Latin again: allowyng
him good space and time to do it, both with diligent heed, and good
aduisement. Here his wit shall be new set on work: his judgment, for right
choice, trewlie tried: his memory, for sure reteyning, better exercised, than
by learning, any thing without the book: and here, how much he has proffited,
shall plainly appear. When he brings it translated unto you, bring you forth
the place of Tullie: lay them together: compare the one with the other: commend
his good choice, and right placing of words: Show his faults iently, but
blame them not over sharply: for, of such missings, ientlie admonished of,
proceeds glad and good heed taking: of good heed taking, springs chiefly
knowledge, which after, grows to perfitnesse, if this order, be diligently
used by the scholar and iently handled by the master: for here, shall all the
hard points of Gra^mer, both easily and surely be learned up: which, scholars
in common schools, by making of Latins, be groping at, with care and fear,
and yet in many years, they scarce can reach unto them. I remember, when I was
young, in the North, they went to the Grammar schole, little children: they came
from thence great lubbers: always learning, and little profiting: learning
without book, every thing, understanding with in the book, little or nothing:
Their whole knowledge, by learning without the book, was tied only to their
tongue and lips, and never ascended up to the brain and head, and therefore was
sone spitte out of the mouth again: They were, as men, always going, but ever
out of the way: and why? For their whole labor, or rather great toil without
order, was even vain idleness without proffit. In deed, they took great
pains about learning: but employed small labor in learning: When by this way
prescribed in this book, being straight, plain, and easy, the scholar is
always laboring with pleasure, and ever going right on forward with proffit:
Always laboring I say, for, or he have co^strued, parced, twice translated
over by good aduiseme^t, marked out his six points by skillful judgment, he
shall have necessary occasion, to read over every lecture, a dosen times, at
the least. Which, because he shall do always in order, he shall do it always
with pleasure: And pleasure allureth love: love has lust to labor: labor
always obteineth his purpose, as most trewly, both Aristotle in his Rhetoric
and Oedipus in Sophocles do teach, Rhet: 2. In Oedip* Tyr.
saying, (...). et cet and this often reading, is the very right following, of
that good Counsel, which Pliny does give to his friend Fuscus, Epist lib. 7
saying, Multum, non multa. But to my purpose again:

When, by this diligent and spedie reading over, those forenamed good books of
Tullie, Terence, Caesar, and Liuie, and by this second kind of translating out
of your English, time shall breed skill, and use shall bring perfection, than
ye may try, if you will, your scholar, with the third kind of translation:
although the two first ways, by mine opinion, be, not only sufficient of
them selves, but also surer, both for the Masters teaching, and scholars
learning, than this third way is: Which is thus. Write you in English, some
letter, as it were from him to his father, or to some other friend, naturally,
according to the disposition of the child, or some tale, or fable, or plain
narration, according as Aphthonius begins his exercises of learning, and let
him translate it into Latin again, abiding in soch place, where no other
scholar may prompe him. But yet, use you your self soch discretion for choice
therein, as the matter may be within the compass, both for words and sentences,
of his former learning and reading. And now take heed, lest your scholar do
not better in some point, than you your self, except ye have been diligently
exercised in these kinds of translating before:

I had once a proof hereof, tried by good experience, by a dear friend of
mine, when I came first from Cambrige, to serve the Queens Majesty, than
Lady Elizabeth, lying at worthy Sir Ant. Denis in Cheston. John Whitneye, a
young ientleman, was my bedfeloe, who willing by good nature and provoked by
mine advise, began to learn the Latin tongue, after the order declared in this
book. We began after Christmas: I read unto him Tullie de Amicitia, which he
did every day twice translate, out of Latin into English, and out of English
into Latin again. About S. Laurence tide after, to prove how he proffited, I
did chose out Torquatus taulke de Amicitia, in the later end of the first book
de finib. because that place was, the same in matter, like in words and
phrases, nigh to the form and facion of sentences, as he had learned before in
de Amicitia. I did translate it my self into plain English, and gave it him
to turn into Latin: Which he did, so choislie, so orderly, so without any
great miss in the hardest points of Grammar, that some, in seven year in
Grammar schools, yea, and some in the Uniuersities to, can not do half so
well. This worthy young Ientleman, to my greatest grief, to the great
lamentation of that whole house, and specially to that most noble Lady, now
Queen Elizabeth her self, departed within few days, out of this world.

And if in any cause, a man may without offense of God speak somewhat
ungodly, surely, it was some grief unto me, to see him hie so hastlie to God,
as he did. A Court, full of soch young Ientlemen, were rather a Paradise than a
Court upon earth. And though I had never Poetical head, to make any verse, in
any tongue, yet either love, or sorrow, or both, did wring out of me than,
certain careful thoughts of my good will toward him, which in my murning
for him, fell forth, more by chance, than either by skill of use, into this
kind of misorderlie meter.

Mine own John Whitney, now farewell, now death does part us twain,
No death, but partyng for a while, whom life shall join again.
Therefore my heart cease sighs and sobbes, cease sorrows seed to sow,
Whereof no gain, but greater grief, and hurtful care may grow.
Yet, when I think upon soch gifts of grace as God him lent,
My loss, his gain, I must a while, with joyful tears lament.
Young years to yield soch fruit in Court, where seed of vice is sown.
Is sometime read, in some place seen, amongst us seldom known.
His life he led, Christ's lore to learn, with ill to work the same,
He read to know, and knew to live, and lived to praise his name.
So fast to friend, so foe to few, so good to every weight,
I may well wish, but scarcely hope, again to have in sight.
The greater joy his life to me, his death the greater pain:
His life in Christ so surely set, does glad my heart again:
His life so good, his death better, do mingle mirth with care,
My spirit with joy, my flesh with grief, so dear a friend to spare.
Thus God the good, while they be good, does take, and leaves us ill,
That we should mend our sinful life, in life to tarry still.
Thus, we well left, be better rest, in heaven to take his place,
That by like life, and death, at last, we may obtain like grace.
Mine own John Whiteney again fairewell, a while thus part in twain,
Whom pain does part in earth, in heaven great joy shall join again.
In this place, or I proceed farther, I will now declare, by whose authority I
am led, and by what reason I am moved, to think, that this way of duble
translation out of one tongue into an other, in either only, or at least
chiefly, to be ^^^^^ised, specially of youth, for the ready and sure obteining
of any tongue.

There be six ways appointed by the best learned men, for the learning of
tongues, and encreace of eloquence, as 1. Translatiolinguarum. 2. Paraphrasis.
3. Metaphrasis. 4. Epitome. 5. Imitatio. 6. Declamatio.


All these be used, and commended, but in order, and for respects: as person,
ability, place, and time shall require. The five last, be fitter, for the
Master, than the scholar: for men, than for children: for the universities,
rather than for Grammar schools: yet nevertheless, which is, fittest in mine
opinion, for our schole, and which is, either wholly to be refused, or partly
to be used for our purpose, I will, by good authority, and some reason, I
trust perticularlie of every one, and largely enough of them all, declare
orderly unto you.

Translatio Linguarum.
Translation, is easy in the beginning for the scholar, and brings all much
learning and great judgment to the Master. It is most common, and most
commendable of all other exercises for youth: most common, for all your
constructions in Grammar schools, be nothing else but translations: but because
they be not double translations, as I do require, they bring forth but simple
and single commodity, and because also they lack the daily use of writing,
which is the only thing that breeds deep root, both in ye wit, for good
understanding, and in ye memory, for sure keeping of all that is learned. Most
comme^dable also, and that by ye judgment of all authors, which entreat of
these exercises. Tullie in the person of L. Crassus, 1. de. Or.
whom he makes his example of eloquence and true judgment in learning, does,
not only praise specially, and chose this way of translation for a young man,
but does also discommend and refuse his own former wont, in exercising
Paraphrasin and Metaphrasin. Paraphrasis is, to take some eloquent Oration, or
some notable common place in Latin, and express it with other words:
Metaphrasis is, to take some notable place out of a good Poet, and turn the
same sens into meter, or into other words in Prose. Crassus, or rather Tullie,
does mislike both these ways, because the Author, either Orator or Poet, had
chosen out before, the fittest words and aptest composition for that matter,
and so he, in seeking other, was driven to use the worse.

Quintilian also prefers translation before all other exercises: Quint. ^.
yet having a lust, to dissent, from Tullie (as he does in very many places, if
a man read his Rhetoric over advisedly, and that rather of an envious mind,
than of any just cause) does greatly commend Paraphrasis, crossing spitefully
Tullies judgment in refusing the same: and so do Ramus and Talaeus even at
this day in France to. But such singularity, in dissenting from the best men's
judgments, in liking only their own opinions, is much misliked of all
them, that join with learning, discretion, and wisdom. For he, that can
neither like Aristotle in Logic and Philosophy, nor Tullie in Rhetoric and
Eloquence, will, from these steps, likely enough presume, by like pride, to
mount hier, to the misliking of greater matters: that is either in Religion, to
have a dissentious head, or in the common wealth, to have a factious heart: as I
knew one a student in Cambrige, who, for a singularity, began first to
dissent, in the schools, from Aristotle, and sone after became a perverse
Arrian, against Christ and all true Religion: and studied diligently Origene,
Basileus, and S. Hierome, only to gleane out of their works, the pernicious
heresies of Celsus, Eunomius, and Heluidius, whereby the Church of Christ, was
so poisoned withal.

But to leave these hye points of divinity, surely, in this quiet and
harmeles controversy, for the liking, or misliking of Paraphrasis for a young
scholar, even as far, as Tullie goes beyond Quintilian, Ramus, and Talaeus, in
perfect Eloquence, even so much, by mine opinion, cum they behind Tullie, for
true judgment in teaching the same.

Plinius Secundus. Plinius de dit Quintiliano praeceptor: suo, in matrimoniu^
filiae, ^^^^numu^.
Plinius Secundus, a wise Senator, of great experience, excellently learned
him self, a liberal Patron of learned men, and the purest writer, in mine
opinion, of all his age, I except not Suetonius, his two scholemasters
Quintilian and Tacitus, nor yet his most excellent learned Uncle, the Elder
Plinius, Epist. lib. 6 7. li. Epist.
does express in an Epistle to his friend Fuscus, many good ways for order in
study: but he begins with translation, and prefers it to all the rest:
and because his words be notable, I will recite them.

Vtile in primis, vt multi praecipiunt, ex Graeco in Latinum, and ex Latino
vertere in Graecum: Quo genere exercitationis, proprietas splendorque verborum,
apta structura sententiarum, figuraerum copia and explicandi vis colligitur.
Praeterea, imitatione optimorum, facultas similia inueniendi paratur: and quae
legentem, fefellissent, transferentem fugere non possunt. Intelligentia ex hoc,
and iudicium acquiritur. Ye perceive, how Pliny teaches, that by this
exercise of double translating, is learned, easily, sensibly, by little and
little, not only all the hard congruities of Grammar, the choice of aptest
words, the right framing of words and sentences, cumlines of figures and
forms, sit for every matter, and proper for every tongue, but that which is
greater also, in marking daily, and following diligently thus, the steps of
the best Autors, like invention of Arguments, like order in disposition, like
utterance in Elocution, is easelie gathered up: whereby your scholar shall be
brought not only to like eloquence, but also, to all true understanding and
right judgment, both for writing and speaking. And where Dionys.
Halicarnassaeus has written two excellent books, the one, de delectu
optimorum verborum, the which, I fear, is lost, the other, of the right
framing of words and sentences, which does remain yet in Greek, to the great
proffet of all them, that trewlie study for eloquence, yet this way of double
translating, shall bring the whole proffet of both these books to a dilligent
scholar, and that easelie and pleasantly, both for fit choice of words, and
apt composition of sentences. And by these authorities and reasons am I moved
to think, this way of double translating, either only or chiefly, to be
fittest, for the spedy and perfect atteyning of any tongue. And for spedy
atteyning, I durst venture a good wager, if a scholar, in whom is aptnes, love,
diligence, and constancy, would but translate, after this sort, one little
book in Tullie, as de senectute, with two Epistles, the first ad Q. fra: the
other adlentulum, the last save one, in the first book, that scholar, I say,
should cum to a better knowledge in the Latin tongue, tha^ the most part do, that
spend four or five years, in tossing all the rules of Grammar in common
schools. In deed this one book with these two Epistles, is not sufficient to
affourde all Latin words (which is not necessary for a young scholar to know)
but it is able to furnishe him fully, for all points of Grammar, with the
right placing ordering, and use of words in all kind of matter. And why not?
for it is read, that Dion. Prussaeus, that wise Philosopher, and excellent
orator of all his time, did cum to the great learning and utterance that was in
him, by reading and following only two books, Phaedon Platonis, and
Demosthenes most notable oration (...). And a better, and nerer example herein,
may be, our most noble Queen Elizabeth, who never took yet, Greek nor Latin
Grammar in her hand, after the first declining of a nowne and a verb, but
only by this double translating of Demosthenes and Isocrates daily without
missing every forenone, and likewise some part of Tullie every afternone, for
the space of a year or two, has atteyned to soch a perfect understanding in
both the tongues, and to soch a ready utterance of the latin, and that with
soch a judgment, as they be few in number in both the universities, or else
where in England, that be, in both tongues, comparable with her Majesty. And to
conclude in a short rowme, the commodities of double translation, surely the
mind by daily marking, first, the cause and matter: than, the words and
phrases: next, the order and composition: after the reason and arguments: than
the forms and figures of both the tongues: lastelie, the measure and compass of
every sentence, must needs, by little and little draw unto it the like shape of
eloquence, as the author does use, which is red.

And thus much for double translation.

Paraphrasis.
Lib. x.
Paraphrasis, the second point, is not only to express at large with more
words, but to strive and contend (as Quintilian says) to translate the best
latin authors, into other latin words, as many or thereaboutes.

This way of exercise was used first by C. Crabo, and taken up for a while, by
L. Crassus, but sone after, upon dew proof thereof, rejected justly by
Crassus and Cicero: yet allowed and made sterling again by M. Quintilian:
nevertheless, shortly after, by better assaye, disalowed of his own scholar
Plinius Secundus, who terms it rightly thus Audax contentio. It is a bold
comparison in deed, to think to say better, than that is best. Soch turning
of the best into worse, is much like the turning of good wine, out of a fair
sweet flagon of silver, into a foul mustie bertell of ledder: or, to turn
pure gold and silver, into foul brass and copper.

Soch kind of Paraphrasis, in turning, chopping, and changing, the best to
worse, either in the mynte or schools, (though M. Brokke and Quintilian both
say the contrary) is much misliked of the best and wisest men. I can better
allow an other kind of Paraphrasis, to turn rude and barbarus, into proper
and eloquent: which nevertheless is an exercise, not fit for a scholar, but
for a perfect master, who in plenty has good choice, in copy has right
judgment, and grounded skill, as did appear to be in Sebastian Castalio, in
translating Kemppes book de Imitando Christo:

But to follow Quintilianus advise for Paraphrasis, were even to take pain, to
seek the worse and fowler way, when the plain and fairer is occupied before
your eyes.

The old and best authors that ever wrote, were content if occasion required
to speak twice of one matter, not to change the words, but (...), that is,
word for word to express it again. For they thought, that a matter, well
expressed with fit words and apt composition, was not to be altered, but
liking it well their selves, they thought it would also be well allowed of
others.

A scholemaster (soch one as I require) knows that I say true.

He reads in Homer, Homerus.
almost in every book, and specially in Secundo et nono Iliodos, not only
some verses, but whole leaves, (...). 2. (...). 9.

not to be altered with new, but to be uttered with the old self same words.

He knows, Xenopho^.
that Xenophon writing twice of Agesilaus, once in his life, again in the
history of the Greeks, in one matter, keeps always the self same words.
He does the like, speaking of Socrates, both in the beginning of his Apology
and in the last end of (...).

Demosthenes also in 4. Philippica, Demosthenes.
does borow his own words uttered before in his oration de Chersoneso. He
does the like, and that more at large, in his orations, against Andration and
Timocrates.

In latin also, Cicero in some places, Cicero. Virgilius.
and Virgil in mo, do repeat one matter, with the self same words. Thies
excellent authors, did thus, not for lack of words, but by judgment and
skill: whatsoever, other, more curious, and less skillful, do think, write,
and do.

Paraphrasis nevertheless has good place in learning, but not, by mine
opinion, for any scholar, but is only to be left to a perfect Master, either
to expound openly a good author withal, or to compare privately, for his
own exercise, how some notable place of an excellent author, may be uttered
with other fit words: But if ye alter also, the composition, form, and
order than that is not Paraphrasis, but Imitatio, as I will fully declare in
fitter place.

The scholar shall win nothing by Paraphrasis, but only, if we may believe
Tullie, to choose worse words, to place them out of order, to fear ouermoch
the judgment of the master, to mislike overmuch the hardness of learning, and
by use, to gather up faults, which hardly will be left of again.

The master in teaching it, shall rather increase his own labor, than his
scholars pr^s^et: for when the scholar shall bring unto his master a piece of
Tullie or Caesar turned into other latin, then must the master cum to
Quintilians goodly lesson de Emendatione, which, (as he says) is the most
profitable part of teaching, but not in mine opinion, and namely for youth in
Grammar schools. For the master now takes double pains: first, to mark what
is amiss: again, to invent what may be said better. And here perchance, a
very good master may easelie both deceive himself, and lead his scholar into
error.

It requires greater learning, and deeper judgment, than is to be hoped for
at any scholemasters hand: that is, to be able always learnedlie and
perfitelie.

Mutare quod ineptum est: Transmutare quod peruersum est: Replere quod deest:
Detrahere quod obest: Expungere quod inane est.
And that, which requires more skill, and deaper consideracion.

Premere tumentia: Extollere humilia: Astringere luxuriantia: Componere
dissoluta.
The master may here only stumble, and perchance fault in teaching, to the
marring and mayning of the Scholar in learning, when it is a matter, of much
readyng, of great learning, and tried judgment, to make true difference
betwixt.

Sublime, et Tumidum: Grande, et immodicum: Decorum, et ineptum: Perfectum, et
nimium.
Some men of our time, counted perfect Masters of eloquence, in their own
opinion the best, in other men's judgments very good, as Omphalius every
where, Sadoletus in many places, yea also my friend Osorius, namely in his
Epistle to the Queen and in his whole book de Iusticia, have so over reached
the^ selves, in making true difference in the points before rehearsed, as
though they had been brought up in some schole in Asia, to learn to decline
rather then in Athens with Plato, Aristotle, and Demosthenes, (from whence
Tullie fetched his eloquence) to understand, what in every matter, to be
spoken or written on, is, in very deed, Nimium, Satis, Parum, that is for to
say, to all considerations, Decorum, which, as it is the hardest point, in all
learning, so is it the fairest and only mark, that scholars, in all their
study, must always shote at, if they purpose an other day to be, either
sound in Religion, or wise and discrete in any vocation of the common wealth.

Again, in the lowest degree, it is no low point of learning and judgment for
a Scholemaster, to make true difference betwixt.

Humile and depressum: Lene and remissum: Siccum and aridum: Exile and macrum:
Inaffectatum and neglectum.
In these points, some, loving Melancthon well, as he was well worthy, but
yet not considering well nor wisely, how he of nature, and all his life and
study by judgment was wholly spent in genere Disciplinabils, that is, in
teaching, reading, and expounding plainly and aptly schole matters, and
therefore employed thereunto a fit, sensible, and caulme kind of speaking and
writing, some I say, with very well living, but not with very well weying
Melancthones doings, do frame them selves a style, cold, lean, and weak,
though the matter be never so warm and earnest, not much unlike unto one, that
had a pleasure, in a roughe, raynie, winter day, to clothe him self with
nothing else, but a demie, bukram cassok, plain without plites, and single with
out lyning: which will neither bear of wind nor wether, nor yet keep out the
sun, in any hot day.

Paraphrasis in use of teaching, has hurt Melanchtons style in writing.
Some suppose, and that by good reason, that Melancthon him self came to this
low kind of writing, by using over much Paraphrasis in reading: For studying
therbie to to make every thing straight and easy, in smothing and playning
all things to much, never leaves, whiles the sense it self be left, both
lowse and lasie. And some of those Paraphrasis of Melancthon be set out in
Printe, as, Pro Archia Poeta, and Marco Marcello: But a scholar, by mine
opinion, is better occupied in playing or sleping, than in spendyng time, not
only vainlie but also harmefullie, in soch a kind of exercise.

If a Master would have a perfect example to follow, how, in Genere sublimi, to
avoid Nimium, or in Mediocri, to atteyne Satis, or in Humili, to exchew Parum,
let him read diligently for the first, Cicero.
Secundam Philippicam, for the mean, De Natura Deorum, and for the lowest,
Partitiones. Or, if in an other tongue, ye look for like example, in like
perfection, for all those three degrees, Demosthenes.
read Pro Cresiphonte, Ad Leptinem, and Contra Olympiodorum, and, what wit,
Art, and diligence is hable to affourde, ye shall plainly see.

For our time, the odd man to perform all three perfitlie, whatsoever he
does, and to know the way to do them skilfullie, Joan. Stur.
when so ever he list, is, in my poor opinion, Ioannes Sturmius.

He also councelleth all scholars to beware of Paraphrasis, except it be, from
worse to better, from rude and barbarous, to proper and pure latin, and yet no
man to exercise that neither, except soch one, as is already furnished with
plenty of learning, and grounded with steadfast judgment before.

All these faults, that thus many wise men do find with the exercise of
Paraphrasis, in turning the best latin, into other, as good as they can, that
is, ye may be sure, into a great deal worse, than it was, both in right choice
for propriety, and true placing, for good order is committed also commonly
in all common schools, by the scholemasters, in tossing and trobling young
wits (as I said in the beginning) with that boocherlie fear in making of
Latins.

Therefore, in place, of Latins for young scholars, and of Paraphrasis for the
masters, I would have double translation specially used. For, in double
translating a perfect piece of Tullie or Caesar, neither the scholar in
learning, nor yt Master in teaching can err. A true tochstone, a sure met wand
lies before both their eyes. For, all right co^gruitie: propriety of words:
order in sentences: the right imitation, to invent good matter, to dispose it
in good order, to confirm it with good reason, to express any purpose fitly
and orderly, is learned thus, both easelie and perfitlie: Yea, to miss
sometime in this kind of translation, brings more proffet, than to hit right,
either in Paraphrasi or making of Latins. For though ye say well, in a latin
making, or in a Paraphrasis, yet you being but in doubt, and uncertain whether
ye say well or no, ye gather and lay up in memory, no sure fruit of learning
thereby: But if ye fault in translation, ye ar easelie taught, how perfitlie to
amend it, and so well warned, how after to exchew, all soch faults again.

Paraphrasis therefore, by mine opinion, is not meet for Grammar schools: nor
yet very fit for young men in the university, until study and time, have
bred in them, perfect learning, and steadfast judgment.

There is a kind of Paraphrasis, which may be used, without all hurt, to much
proffet: but it serves only the Greek and not the latin, nor no other tongue,
as, to alter linguam Ionicam aut Doricam into meraui Atticam: A notable example
there is left unto us by a notable learned man Diony: Halicarn: who, in his
book, (...), does translate the goodly story of Candaulus and Gyges in 1.
Herodoti, out of Ionica lingua, into Atticam. Read the place, and ye shall
take, both pleasure and proffet, in conference of it. A man, that is exercised
in reading, Thucydides, Xenophon, Plato, and Demosthenes, in using to turn,
like places of Herodotus, after like sort, should shortly cum to soch a
knowledge, in understanding, speaking, and writing the Greek tongue, as few or
none has yet atteyned in England. The like exercise out of Dorica lingua may
be also used, if a man take that little book of Plato, Timaeus Locrus, De
Animo et natura, which is written Dorice, and turn it into soch Greek, as
Plato uses in other works. The book, is but two leaves: and the labor would
be, but two weeks: but surely the proffet, for easy understanding, and true
writing the Greek tongue, would conteruaile with the toil, that some men takes,
in otherwise coldlie reading that tongue, two years.

And yet, for the latin tongue, and for the exercise of Paraphrasis, in those
places of lan, that can not be bettered, if some young man, excellent of wit,
corragious in will, lusty of nature, and desirous to contend even with the
best latin, to better it, if he can, surely I commend his forwardness, and
for his better instruction therein, I will set before him, as notable an
example of Paraphrasis, as is in Record of learning. Cicero him self, does
contend, in two sondrie places, to express one matter, with diverse words:
and that is Paraphrasis, says Quintilian. The matter I suppose, is taken out
of Panaetius: and therefore being translated out of Greek at diverse times, is
uttered for his purpose, with diverse words and forms: which kind of
exercise, for perfect learned men, is very profitable.

2. De Finib.
a. Homo enim Rationem habet a natura menti datam, quae, et causasrerum and
consecutiones videt, and similitudines transfert, and disiuncta coniungit, and
cum praesentibus futura copulat, omnemque complectitur vitae conscquentis
statum. b. Eademque ratio facit hominem hominum appetentem, cumque his, natura,
and sermon and vsu congruentem: vt profectus a caritate domesticoru^ as
suorum, currat longius, and se implicet, primo Ciuiu^, deinde omnium mortalium
societati: vtque non sibi soli se natu^ meminerit, sed patriae, sed suis, vt
exigua pars ipsi relinquatur. c. Et quonia^ eadem natura cupiditatem ingenuit
homini very inueniendi, quod facilime apparet, cum vacui curis, etiam quid in
coelo fiat, scire auemus. etc.

1. Officiorum.
a. Homo autem, qui rationis est particeps, per quam consequentia cernit, and
causas rerum videt, earumque progressus, and quasi antecessiones non ignorant,
similitudines comparat, rebusque praesentibus adiungit, atque annectit futuras,
facile totius vitae cursum videt, ad eamque degendam praeparat res necessarias.
b. Eadamque natura vi rationis hominem conciliat homini, and ad Orationis, and
ad vitae societatem: ingeneratque imprimis praecipuum quendam amorem in eos,
qui procreati sunt, impellitque vt hominum caetus and celebrari inter se, and
sibi obediri velit, ob easque causas, studeat parare ea, quae suppeditent ad
cultum and ad victum, nec sibi soli, sed coniugi, liberis, caeterisque quos
charos habeat, tuerique debeat. c. Quae cura exuscitat etiam animos, and
maiores ad rem gerendam facit: imprimisque hominis est. propria very inquisitio
atque inuestigatio: ita cum sumus necessarijs negocijs curisque vacui, tum
auemus aliquid videre, audire, addiscere, cognitionemque rerum mirabilium. etc.

The conference of these two places, conteinyng so excellent a piece of
learning, as this is, expressed by so worthy a wit, as Tullies was, must
needs bring great pleasure and proffit to him, that makes true count, of
learning and honesty. But if we had the Greek Author, the first Pattern of
all, and thereby to see, how Tullies wit did work at diverse times, how, out
of one excellent Image, might be framed two other, one in face and favor, but
somewhat differing in form, figure, and color, surely, such a piece of
workmanship compared with the Pattern it self, would better please the ease
of honest, wise, and learned minds, tha^ two of the fairest Uenusses, that
ever Appeles made.

And thus much, for all kind of Paraphrasis, fit or unfit, for Scholars or
other, as I am led to think, not only, by mine own experience, but chiefly
by the authority and judgment of those, whom I my self would gladliest
follow, and do counsel all mine to do the same: not contendyng with any other,
that will otherwise either think or do.

Metaphrasis.
This kind of exercise is all one with Paraphrasis, save it is out of verse,
either into prose, or into some other kind of meter: or else, out of prose into
verse, which was Socrates exercise and pastime (as Plato reports) when he was
in prison, Plato in Phaedone.
to translate Aesopes Fabules into verse. Quintilian does greatly praise also
this exercise: but because Tullie does disalow it in young men, by mine opinion,
it were not well to use it Grammar Schools, even for the self same causes,
that be recited against Paraphrasis. And therefore, for the use, or misuse of
it, the same is to be thought, that is spoken of Paraphrasis before. This was
Sulpitius exercise: and he gathering up thereby, a Poetical kind of talk, is
justly named of Cicero, grandis et Tragicus Orator: which I think is spoken,
not for his praise, but for other men's warning, to exchew the like fault Yet
nevertheless, if our Scholemaster for his own instruction, be desirous, to see
a perfect example hereof, I will recite one, which I think, no man is so bold,
will say, that he can amend it: and that is Chrises the Priests Oration to the
Greeks, in the beginning of Homers Ilias, Hom. 1. Il.
turned excelle^tlie into prose by Socrates him self, Pla. 3. Rep.
and that advisedly and purposelie for other to follow: and therefore he calls
this exercise, in the same place, (...), that is, Imitatio, which is most true:
but, in this book, for teaching sake, I will name it Metaphrasis, reteinyng
the word, that all teachers, in this case, do use.

Homerus. 1. (...).
(...):
(...):
(...),
(...).
(...).
(...),
(...),
(...).
(...),
(...).
(...)
(...).
(...),
(...):
(...),
(...),
(...).
(...),
(...)
(...).
(...)
(...).
(...).
(...)
(...).
(...),
(...)
(...),
(...)
(...).
(...).
Socrates in 3. de Rep says thus, (...).
(...).

To compare Homer and Plato together, two wonders of nature and art for wit
and eloquence, is most pleasant and profitable, for a man of ripe judgment.
Platos turning of Homer in this place, does not ride a loft in Poetical
terms, but goes low and soft on foot, as prose and Pedestris oration should
do. If Sulpitius had had Platos consideration, in right using this exercise, he
had not deserved the name of Tragicus Orator, who should rather have studied to
express vim Demosthenis, than furorem Poaetae, how good so ever he was, whom
he did follow.

And therefore would I have our Scholemaster wey well together Homer and Plato,
and mark diligently these four points, what is kept: what is added: what is
left out: what is changed, either, in choice of words, or form of sentences:
which four points, be the right tools, to handle like a workman, this kind
of work: as our Scholar shall better understand, when he has been a good
while in the University: to which time and place, I chiefly remitte this kind
of exercise.

And because I ever thought examples to be the best kind of teaching, I will
recite a golden sentence out of that Poet, which is next unto Homer, not
only in time, but also in worthiness: which has been a pattern for many
worthy wits to follow, by this kind of Metaphrasis, but I will content my
self, with four workmen, two in Greek, and two in Latin, soch, as in both
the tongues, wiser and worthier, can not be looked for. Surely, no stone set in
gold by most cunning workeme^, is in deed, if right count be made, more
worthy the looking on, than this golden sentence, diversely wrought upon, by
soch four excellent Masters.

Hesiodus. 2.
1.
(...)
(...):
2.
(...):
3.
(...)
(...).
Thus rudely turned into base English.
1.
That man in wisdom passes all,
to know the best who has a head:
2.
And meetlie wise eeke counted shall,
who yeildes him self to wise men's read:
3.
Who has no wit, nor none will hear,
amongst all fools the bell may bear.
Sophocles in Antigone.
1.
(...)
(...):
2.
(...)
(...).
Mark the wisdom of Sophocles, in leauyng out the last sentence, because it
was not cumlie for the son to use it to his father.

D. Basileus in his Exhortation to youth.
(...): 2. (...): 3. (...).

M. Cic. Pro A. Cluentio.
1. Sapientissimum esse dicunt eum, cui, quod opus sit, ipsi veniat in mente^:
2. Proxime accedere illum, qui alterius been inuentis obtemperet. 3. In
stulticia contra est: minus enim stultus est is, cui nihil in mentem venit,
quam ille, qui, quod stulte alteri venit in mentem comprobat.

Cicero does not plainly express the last sentence, but does invent it fitly
for his purpose, to taunt the folly and simplicity in his adversary Actius,
not weying wisely, the sutle doings of Chrysogonus and Stalenus.

Tit. Liuius in Orat. Minutij. Lib. 22.
1. Saepe ego audiui milites: eum primum esse virum, qui ipse consulat, quid in
rem sit: 2. Secundum eum, qui been monenti obediat: 3. Qui, nec ipse consulere,
nec alteri parere scit, eum extremi esse ingenij.

Now, which of all these four, Sophocles, S. Basil, Cicero, or Liuie, has
expressed Hesiodus best, the judgment is as hard, as the workmanship of
every one is most excellent in deed. An other example out of the Latin tongue
also I will recite, for the worthiness of the workman thereof, and that is
Horace, who has so turned the beginning of Terence Eunuchus, as does work in
me, a pleasant admiration, as often so ever, as I compare those two places
together. And though every Master, and every good Scholar to, do know the
places, both in Terence and Horace, yet I will set them hear, in one place
together, that with more pleasure, they may be compared together.

Terentius in Eunucho.
Quid igitur faciam? non eam? ne nunc quidem cum accersor vltro? an potius ita
me comparem, non perpeti meretricum contumelias? exclusit: reuocat, redeam?
non, si me obsecret. PARMENO a little after. Here, quae res in se neque
consilium neque modum habet vllum, eam consilio regere non potes. In Amore haec
omnia insunt vitia, iniuriae, suspiciones, inimicitiae, induciae, bellum, pax
rursum. Incerta haec si tu postules ratione certa facere, nihilo plus agas, q
si des operam, vt cum ratione insanias.

Horatius. lib. Ser. 2. Saty. 3.
Nec nunc cum me vocet vltro,
Accedam? an potius mediter finire dolores?
Exclusit: reuocat, redeam? non si obsecret. Ecce
Seruus non Paulo sapientior: o Here, quae res
Nec modum habet, neque consilium, ratione modoque
Tractari non vult. In amore, haec sunt mala, bellum,
Pax rursum: haec si quis tempestatis prope ritu
Mobilia, et caeca fluitantia sort, laboret
Reddere certa, sibi nihilo plus explicet, ac si
Insanire paret certa ratione, modoque.
This exercise may bring much profit to ripe heads, and stayed judgments:
because, in traueling in it, the mind must needs be very attentive, and
busily occupide, in turning and tossing it self many ways: and conferryng
with great pleasure, the variety of worthy wits and judgments together:
But this harm may sone cum thereby, and namely to young Scholars, less, in
seeking other words, and new form of sentences, they chance upon the worse:
for the which only cause, Cicero thinks this exercise not to be fit for
young men.

Epitome.
This is a way of study, belonging, rather to matter, than to words: to
memory, than to utterance: to those that be learned already, and has small
place at all among young scholars in Grammar schools. It may proffet privately
some learned men, but it has hurt generally learning it self, very much. For
by it have we lost whole Trogus, the best part of T. Liuius, the goodly
Dictionarie of Pompeius festus, a great deal of the Civil law, and other
many notable books, for the which cause, I do the more mislike this exercise,
both in old and young.

Epitome, is good privately for himself that does work it, but ill commonly
for all other that use other men's labor therein: a silie poor kind of study,
not unlike to the doing of those poor folk, which neither till, nor sow, nor
reap themselves, but gleane by stelth, upon other men's growndes. Soch, have
empty barnes, for dear years.

Grammar schools have few Epitomes to hurt them, except Epitheta Textoris, and
such beggarlie gatheringes, as Horman, whittington, and other like vulgares for
making of latins: yea I do wish, that all rules for young scholars, were
shorter than they be. For without doubt, Grammatica it self, is sooner and
surer learned by examples of good authors, than by the naked rewles of
Grammarians. Epitome hurts more, in the universities and study of
Philosophy: but most of all, in divinity it self.

In deed books of common places be very necessary, to induce a man, into an
orderly general knowledge, how to refer orderly all that he reads, ad
certa rerum Capita, and not wander in study. And to that end did P. Lombardus
the master of sentences and Ph. Melancthon in our days, write two notable
books of common places.

But to dwell in Epitomes and books of common places, and not to bind
himself daily by orderly study, to read with all diligence, principally
the holiest scripture and withal, the best Doctors, and so to learn to make
true difference betwixt, the authority of the one, and the Counsel of the
other, makes so many seeming, and sonburnt ministers as we have, whose
learning is gotten in a summer heat, and washed away, with a Christmas snow
again: who nevertheless, are less to be blamed, than those blind bussardes,
who in late years, of wilful maliciousnes, would neither learn themselves,
nor could teach others, any thing at all.

Paraphrasis has done less hurt to learning, than Epitome: for no
Paraphrasis, though there be many, shall never take away David's Psalter.
Erasmus Paraphrasis being never so good, shall never banishe the new Testament.
And in an other schole, the Paraphrasis of Brocardus, or Sambucus, shall never
take Aristotle's Rhetoric, nor Horace de Art Poetica, out of learned men's
hands.

But, as concerning a schole Epitome, he that would have an example of it, let
him read Lucian (...) which is the very Epitome of Isocrates oration de
laudibus Helenae, whereby he may learn, at the least, this wise lesson, that a
man ought to beware, to be over bold, in altering an excellent man's work.

Nevertheless, some kind of Epitome may be used, by men of skilful judgment,
to the great proffet also of others. As if a wise man would take Halles
Cronicle, where much good matter is quite marde with Indenture English, and
first change, strange and inkhorne terms into proper, and commonly used
words: next, specially to wede out that, that is superfluous and idle, not
only where words be vainlie heaped one upon an other, but also where many
sentences, of one meaning, be so clowted up together as though M. Hall had
been, not writing the story of England, but varying a sentence in Hitching
schole: surely a wise learned man, by this way of Epitome, in cutting away
words and sentences, and diminishing nothing at all of the matter, should leave
to men's use, a story, half as much as it was in quantity, but twice as good
as it was, both for pleasure and also commodity.

An other kind of Epitome may be used likewise very well, to much proffet. Some
man either by lustines of nature, or brought by ill teaching, to a wrong
judgment, is over full of words, se^tences, and matter, and yet all his words
be proper, apt and well chosen: all his sentences be rownd and trimly framed:
his whole matter grownded upon good reason, and stuffed with full arguments,
for his intent and purpose. Yet when his talk shall be heard, or his writing be
red, of soch one, as is, either of my two dearest friends, M. Haddon at home,
or John Sturmius in Germany, that Nimium in him, which fools and unlearned
will most commend, shall either of thies two, bite his lip, or shake his
head at it.

This fulness as it is not to be misliked in a young man, so in farther aige, in
greater skill, and weightier affairs, it is to be temperated, or else
discretion and judgment shall seem to be wanting in him. But if his style be
still over rank and lusty, as some men being never so old and spent by
years, will still be full of youthful conditions as was Sir F. Bryan, and
evermore would have been: soch a rank and full writer, must use, if he will do
wisely the exercise of a very good kind of Epitome, and do, as certain wise
men do, that be over fat and fleshie: who leaving their own full and
plentiful table, go to soiorne abroad from home for a while, at the temperate
diet of some sober man: and so by little and little, cut away the grosnesse that
is in them. As for an example: If Osorius would leave of his lustines in
striving against S. Austen, and his over rank railing against poor Luther,
and the troth of Gods doctrine, and give his whole study, not to write any
thing of his own for a while, but to translate Demosthenes, with so strait,
fast, and temperate a style in latin, as he is in Greek, he would becume so
perfect and pure a writer, I believe, as has been few or none sense Ciceroes
days: And so, by doing himself and all learned much good, do others less
harm, and Christ's doctrine less injury, tha^ he does: and with all, wyn unto
himself many worthy friends, who agreing with him gladly, in ye love and liking
of excellent learning, are sorry to see so worthy a wit, so rare eloquence,
wholly spent and consumed, in striving with God and good men.

Emonges the rest, no man does lament him more than I, not only for the
excellent learning that I see in him, but also because there has passed
privately betwixt him and me, sure tokens of much good will, and friendly
opinion, the one toward the other. And surely the distance betwixt London and
Lysbon, should not stop, any kind of friendly dewtie, that I could, either
show to him, or do to his, if the greatest matter of all did not in certain
points, separate our minds.

And yet for my part, both toward him, and diverse others here at home, for
like cause of excellent learning, great wisdom, and gentle humanity, which I
have seen in them, and felt at their hands my self, where the matter of
difference is mere conscience in a quiet mind inwardly, and not contentious
malice with spiteful railing openly, I can be content to follow this rewle,
in misliking some one thing not to hate for any thing else.

But as for all the bloody beasts, Psalm. 80.
as that fat Boore of the wood: or those brauling Bulls of Basan: or any
lurking Dormus, blind, not by nature, but by malice, and as may be gathered of
their own tstimonie, given over to blindness, for giving over God and his word:
or soch as be so lusty runnegates, as first, run from God and his true
doctrine, than, from their Lords, Masters, and all dewtie, next from them
selves and out of their wits, lastly from their Prince, country, and all dew
allegea^ce, whether they ought rather to be pitied of good men, for their
misery, or contemned of wise men, for their malicious folly, let good and wise
men determine.

And to return to Epitome again, some will judge much boldness in me, thus to
judge of Osorius style: but wise men do know, that mean lookers on, may
trewelie say, for a well made Pictture: This face had been more cumlie, if that
hie read in the cheek, were somewhat more pure sanguin than it is: and yet the
stander by, can not amend it himself by any way.

And this is not written to the dispraise but to the great commendation of
Osorius, because Tullie himself had the same fulness in him: and therefore went
to Rodes to cut it away: and says himself, recepi me domum prope mutatus, nam
quasi referuer at iam oration. Which was brought to pass I believe, not only
by the teaching of Molo Appollonius but also by a good way of Epitome, in
binding him self to translate meros A^ticos Oratores, and so to bring his
style, from all lowse grosnesse, to soch firm fastnes in latin, as is in
Demosthenes in Greek. And this to be most true, may easelie be gathered, not
only of L. Crassus talk in 1. de Or. but specially of Ciceroes own deed
in translating Demosthenes and Aeschines orations (...) to that very end and
purpose.

And although a man growndlie learned all ready, may take much proffet him
self in using, by Epitome, to draw other men's works for his own memory
sake, into shorter rowme, as Conterus has done very well the whole
Metamorphosis of Ovid, and David Cythraeus a great deal better, their. Muses
of Herodotus, and Melanchthon in mine opinion, far best of all, the whole
story of Time, not only to his own use, but to other men's proffet and his
great praise, yet, Epitome is most necessary of all in a man's own writing, as
we learn of that noble Poet Virgill, who, if Donatus say true, in writing
that perfect work of the Georgickes, used daily, when he had written 40. or
50. verses, not to cease cutting, paring, and pollishing of them, till he had
brought them to the number of x. or xy.

And this exercise, is not more nedefullie done in a great work, than wisely
done, in your common daily writing, either of letter, or other thing else,
that is to say, to peruse diligently, and see and spy wisely, what is
always more then needs: For, twenty to one, offend more, in writing to much,
than to little: even as twenty to one, fall into sickness, rather by over much
fulness, than by any lack or emptiness. And therefore is he always the best
English Physician, that best can give a purgation, that is, by way of Epitome,
to cut all over much away. And surely men's bodies, be not more full of ill
humors, than commonly men's minds (if they be young, lusty, proud, like and
love them selves well, as most men do) be full of fancies, opinions, errors,
and faults, not only in inward invention, but also in all their utterance,
either by pen or taulke.

And of all other men, even those that have ye inuentiuest heads, for all
purposes, and roundest tongues in all matters and places (except they learn and
use this good lesson of Epitome) commit commonly greater faults, than dull,
staying silent men do. For, quick inuentors, and fair ready speakers, being
boldned with their present ability to say more, and perchance better to, at
the soden for that present, than any other can do, use less help of diligence
and study than they ought to do: and so have in them commonly, less
learning, and weaker judgment, for all deep considerations, than some duller
heads, and slower tongues have.

And therefore, ready speakers, generally be not the best, playnest, and
wisest writers, nor yet the deepest iudgers in weighty affairs, because they
do not tarry to weye and judge all things, as they should: but having their
heads over full of matter, be like pens over full of incke, which will sooner
blotte, than make any fair letter at all. Time was, when I had experience of
two Ambassadors in one place, the one of a hot head to invent, and of a hasty
hand to write, the other, cold and stayed in both: but what difference of their
doings was made by wise men, is not unknown to some persons. The Bishop of
Winchester Steph: Gardener had a quick head, and a ready tongue, and yet was
not the best writer in England. Cicero in Brutus does wisely note the same in
Serg: Galbo, and Q. Hortentius, who were both, hot, lusty, and plain
speakers, but cold, lowse, and rough writers: And Tullie tells the cause
why, saying, wha^ they spoke, their tongue was naturally carried with full tide
and wind of their wit: when they wrote their head was solitary, dull, and
caulme, and so their style was blonte, and their writing cold: Quod vitium,
says Cicero, peringeniosis hominibus neque satis doctis plerunque accidit.

And therefore all quick inuentors, and ready fair speakers, must be
careful, that, to their goodness of nature, they add also in any wise, study,
labor, leisure, learning, and judgment, and than they shall in deed, pass
all other, as I know some do, in whom all those qualities are fully planted,
or else if they give over much to their wit, and over little to their labor
and learning, they will sonest over reach in taulke, and fardest cum behind in
writing whatsoever they take in hand. The method of Epitome is most necessary
for soch kind of men. And thus much concerning the use or misuse of all kind
of Epitomes in matters of learning.

Imitatio.
Imitation, is a faculty to express lively and perfitelie that example:
which ye go about to follow. And of it self, it is large and wide: for all the
works of nature, in a manner be examples for art to follow.

But to our purpose, all languages, both learned and mother tongues, be gotten,
and gotten only by Imitation. For as ye use to hear, so ye learn to speak:
if ye hear no other, ye speak not your self: and whom ye only hear, of
them ye only learn.

And therefore, if ye would speak as the best and wisest do, ye must be
conversant, where the best and wisest are: but if you be borne or brought up in
a rude contrie, ye shall not chose but speak rudely: the rudest man of all
knows this to be true.

Yet nevertheless, the rudenes of common and mother tongues, is no bar for wise
speaking. For in the rudest contrie, and most barbarous mother language, many
be found can speak very wisely: but in the Greek and latin tongue, the two
only learned tongues, which be kept, not in common taulke, but in private
books, we find always, wisdom and eloquence, good matter and good
utterance, never or seldom a sonder. For all soch Authors, as be fullest of
good matter and right judgment in doctrine, be likewise always, most proper
in words, most apt in sentence, most plain and pure in uttering the same.

And contrariwise, in those two tongues, all writers, either in Religion, or any
sect of Philosophy, who so ever be found fond in judgment of matter, be
commonly found as rude in uttering their mind. For Stoickes, Anabaptists,
and Friars: with Epicures, Libertines and Monks, being most like in learning
and life, are no fonder and pernicious in their opinions, than they be rude and
barbarous in their writings. They be not wise, therefore that say, what care I
for a man's words and utterance, if his matter and reasons be good. Soch men,
say so, not so much of ignorance, as either of some singular pride in
themselves, or some special malice of other, or for some private and perciall
matter, either in Religion or other kind of learning. For good and choice
meats, be no more requisite for helthie bodies, than proper and apt words be
for good matters, and also plain and sensible utterance for the best and
depest reasons: in which two points stands perfect eloquence, one of the
fairest and rarest gifts that God does give to man.

Ye know not, what hurt ye do to learning, that care not for words, but for
matter, and so make a deuorse betwixt the tongue and the heart. For mark all
aiges: look upon the whole course of both the Greek and Latin tongue, and ye
shall surely find, that, when apt and good words began to be neglected, and
properties of those two tongues to be confounded, than also began, ill deeds to
spring: strange manners to oppress good orders, new and fond opinions to
strive with old and true doctrine, first in Philosophy: and after in
Religion: right judgment of all things to be perverted, and so virtue with
learning is contemned, and study left of: of ill thoughts cummeth perverse
judgment: of ill deeds springs lewd taulke. Which four misorders, as they
mar man's life, so destroy they good learning withal.

But behold the goodness of Gods providence for learning: all old authors and
sects of Philosophy, which were fondest in opinion, and rudest in utterance,
as Stoickes and Epicures, first contemned of wise men, and after forgotten of
all men, be so consumed by times, as they be now, not only out of use, but
also out of memory of man: which thing, I surely think, will shortly
chance, to the whole doctrine and all the books of fantastical Anabaptists
and Friars, and of the beastly Libertines and Monks.

Again behold on the other side, how Gods wisdom has wrought, that of
Academici and Peripatetici, those that were wisest in judgment of matters, and
purest in uttering their minds, the first and chiefest, that wrote most and
best, in either tongue, as Plato and Aristotle in Greek, Tullie in Latin, be so
either wholly, or sufficiently left unto us, as I never knew yet scholar, that
gave himself to like, and love, and follow chiefly those three Authors but he
proved, both learned, wise, and also an honest man, if he joined with all the
true doctrine of Gods holy Bible, without the which, the other three, be but
fine edge tools in a fool or mad man's hand.

But to return to Imitation again: There be three kinds of it in matters of
learning.

The whole doctrine of Comedies and Tragedies, is a perfect imitation, or fair
lively painted picture of the life of every degree of man. Of this Imitation
writes Plato at large in 3. de Rep but it does not much belong at this time to
our purpose.

The second kind of Imitation, is to follow for learning of tongues and sciences,
the best authors. Here rises, emonges proud and envious wits, a great
controversy, whether, one or many are to be followed: and if one, who is that
one: Seneca, or Cicero: Salust or Caesar, and so forth in Greek and Latin.

The third kind of Imitation, belongs to the second: as when you be
determined, whether ye will follow one or mo, to know perfitlie, and which way
to follow that one: in what place: by what mean and order: by what tools and
instruments ye shall do it, by what skill and judgment, ye shall trewelie
discern, whether ye follow rightly or no.

This Imitatio, is dissimilis materei similis tractatio: and also, similis
materei dissimilis tractatio, as Virgill followed Homer: but the Argument to the
one was Vlvsles, to the other Aeneas. Tullie persecuted Antonie with the same
wepons of eloquence, that Demostheues used before against Philippe.

Horace follows Pindar, but either of them his own Argument and Person: as
the one, Hiero king of Sicilie, the other Augustus the Emperor: and yet both
for like respects, that is, for their coragious stoutnes in war, and just
government in peace.

One of the best examples, for right Imitation we lack, and that is Menander,
whom our Terence, (as the matter required) in like argument, in the same
Persons, with equal eloquence, foot by foot did follow.

Some pieces remain, like broken Iewelles, whereby men may rightly esteem, and
justly lament, the loss of the whole.

Erasmus, the ornament of learning, in our time, does wish that some man of
learning and diligence, would take the like pains in Demosthenes and Tullie,
that Macrobius has done in Homer and Virgill, that is, to write out and join
together, where the one does imitate the other. Erasmus, wish is good, but
surely, it is not good enough: for Macrobius gatherings for the Aeneodos out
of Homer, and Eobanus Hessus more diligent gatherings for the Bucolikes out of
Theocritus, as they be not fully taken out of the whole heap, as they should
be, but even as though they had not sought for them of purpose, but fownd them
scatered here and there by chance in their way, even so, only to point out,
and nakedlie to join together their sentences, with no farther declaring the
manner and way, how the one does follow the other, were but a cold help, to the
increase of learning.

But if a man would take this pain also, when he has laid two places, of
Homer and Virgill, or of Demosthenes and Tullie together, to teach plainly
withal, after this sort. 1. Tullie reteyneth thus much of the matter, thiee
sentences, their words: 2. This and that he leaves out, which he does
wittelie to this end and purpose. 3. This he adds here. 4. This he
diminishes there. 5. This he orders thus, with placing that here, not there.
6. This he alters and changes, either, in property of words, in form of
sentence, in substance of the matter, or in one, or other convenient
circumstance of the authors present purpose.
In thies few rude English words, are wrapped up all the necessary tools and
instruments, wherewith true Imitation is rightly wrought withal in any
tongue. Which tools, I openly confess, be not of mine own forging, but
partly left unto me by the cunnigest Master, and one of the worthiest
Ientlemen that ever England bred, Sir John Cheke: partly borrowed by me out of
the shop of the dearest friend I have out of England, Io. St. And therefore I
am the bolder to borow of him, and here to leave them to other, and namely to
my Children: which tools, if it please God, that an other day, they may be
able to use rightly, as I do with and daily pray, they may do, I shall be more
glad, than if I were able to leave them a great quantity of land.

This foresaid order and doctrine of Imitation, would bring forth more
learning, and breed up trewer judgment, than any other exercise that can be
used, but not for young beginners, because they shall not be able to consider
duly thereof. And trewelie, it may be a shame to good students who having so
fair examples to follow, as Plato and Tullie, do not use so wise ways in
following them for the obteyning of wisdom and learning, as rude ignorant
Artificers do, for gayning a small commodity. For surely the meanest painter
uses more wit, better art, greater diligence, in his shop, in following
the Picture of any mean man's face, than commonly the best students do, even
in the university, for the atteining of learning it self.

Some ignorant, unlearned, and idle student: or some busy looker upon this
little poor book, that has neither will to do good him self, nor skill to
judge right of others, but can lustily contemn, by pride and ignorance, all
painful diligence and right order in study, will perchance say, that I am to
precise, to curious, in marking and piteling thus about the imitation of
others: and that the old worthy Authors did never busy their heads and
wits, in following so preciselie, either the matter what other men wrote, or
else the manner how other men wrote. They will say, it were a plain slavery,
and injury to, to shakkle and tie a good wit, and hinder the course of a
ma^s good nature with such bonds of servitude, in following other.

Except soch men think them selves wiser then Cicero for teaching of
eloquence, they must be content to turn a new leaf.

The best book that ever Tullie wrote, by all men's judgment, and by his own
testimony to, in writing whereof, he employed most care, study, learning and
judgment, is his book de Orat. ad Q. F. Now let us see, what he did for the
matter, and also for the manner of writing thereof. For the whole book
consists in these two points only: In good matter, and good handling of
the matter. And first, for the matter, it is whole Aristotle's, what so ever
Antonie in the second, and Crassus in the third does teach. Trust not me, but
believe Tullie him self, who writes so, first, in that goodly long Epistle ad
P. Lentulum, and after in diverse places ad Atticum. And in the very book it
self, Tullie will not have it hidden, but both Catulus and Crassus do often and
pleasantly lay that stelth to Antonius charge. Now, for the handling of the
matter, was Tullie so precise and curious rather to follow an other man's
Pattern, than to invent some new shape him self, namely in that book, wherein
he purposed, to leave to posterity, the glory of his wit? yea forsooth, that
he did. And this is not my gessing and gathering, nor only performed by
Tullie in very deed, but uttered also by Tullie in plain words: to teach
other men thereby, what they should do, in taking like matter in hand.

And that which is specially to be marked, Tullie does utter plainly his
conceit and purpose therein, by the mouth of the wisest man in all that
company: for says Scaeuola him self, Cur non imitamur, Crasse,
Socratemillum, qui est in Phaedro Platonis etc.

And further to understand, that Tullie did not obiter and bichance, but
purposelie and mindfullie bend him self to a precise and curious Imitation of
Plato, concerning the shape and form of those books, mark I pray you, how
curious Tullie is to utter his purpose and doing therein, writing thus to
Atticus.

Quod in his Oratorijs libris, quos tantopere laudas, personam desideras
Scaeuolae, non eam temere dimoui. Sed feci idem, quod in (...) Deus ille noster
Plato, cum in Piraeeum Socrates venisset ad Cephalum locupletem and festiuum
Senem, quoad primus ille sermo haberetur, adest in disputando senex. Deinde,
cum ipse quoque commodissime locutus esset, ad rem diuina^ dicit se velle
discedere, neque postea reuertitur. Credo Platonem vix putasse satis consonum
fore, si hominem id aetatis in tam longo sermon diutius retinuisset: Multo ego
satius hoc mihi cauendum putaui in Scaeuola, qui and aetate and valetudine erat
ea qua meministi, and his honeribus, vt vix satis decorum videretur eum plures
dies esse in Crassi Tusculano. Et erat primi libri sermo non alienus a
Scaeuolae studijs: reliqui libri (...) habent, vt scis. Huic ioculatoriae
disputationi senem illum vt noras, interesse sane nolui.

If Cicero had not opened him self, and declared his own thought and doings
herein, men that be idle, and ignorant, and envious of other men's diligence and
well doings, would have sworn that Tullie had never minded any soch thing,
but that of a precise curiosity, we feign and forge and father soch things of
Tullie, as he never meant in deed. I write this, not for naught: for I have
heard some both well learned, and otherwise very wise, that by their lusty
misliking of soch diligence, have drawn back the forwardnes of very good
wits. But even as such men them selves, do sometimes stumble upon doing well
by chance and benefit of good wit, so would I have our scholar always able
to do well by order of learning and right skill of judgment.

Concerning Imitation, many learned men have written, with much diversity for
the matter, and therefore with great contrariety and some stomach amongst
them selves. I have read as many as I could get diligently, and what I think
of every one of them, I will freely say my mind. With which freedom I trust
good men will bear, because it shall tend to neither spiteful nor harmefull
controversy.

Cicero.
In Tullie, it is well touched, shortly taught, not fully declared by Ant. in
2. de Orat: and afterward in Orat. ad Brutum, for the liking and misliking of
Isocrates: and the contrary judgment of Tullie against Caluus, Brutus, and
Calidius, de genere dicendi Attico and Asiatico.

Dio. Halicar.
Dionis. Halic. (...). I fear is lost: which Author, next Aristotle, Plato,
and Tullie, of all other, that write of eloquence, by the judgment of them
that be best learned, deserves the next praise and place.

Quintil.
Quintilian writes of it, shortly and coldlie for the matter, yet hotelie and
spitefully enough, against the Imitation of Tullie.

Erasmus, being more occupied in spying other men's faults, Erasmus.
than declaryng his own advise, is mistaken of many, to the great hurt of
study, for his authority sake. For he writes rightly, rightly
understood: he and Longolius only differing in this, that the one seems
to give ouermoch, the other over little, to him, whom they both, best loved, and
chiefly allowed of all other.

Budaeus.
Budaeus in his Commentaries roughly and obscurelie, after his kind of
writing: and for the matter, carried somewhat out of the way in overmuch
misliking the Imitation of Tullie.

Ph. Melanch. Ioa. Camer.
Phil. Melanctthon, learnedlie and trewlie.

Camerarius largely with a learned judgment but somewhat confusedly, and with
over rough a style.

Sa^bucus.
Sambucus, largely, with a right judgment but somewhat a crooked style.

Other have written also, as Cortesius to Politian, Cortesius.
and that very well: Bembus ad Picum a great deal better, P Bembus.
but Joan. Sturmius de Nobilitate literata, Joan. Sturmius.
and de Amissa dicendi ratione, far best of all, in mine opinion, that ever
took this matter in hand. For all the rest, declare chiefly this point,
whether one, or many, or all, are to be followed: but Sturmius only has most
learnedlie declared, who is to be followed, what is to be followed, and the
best point of all, by what way and order, true Imitatio^ is rightly to be
exercised. And although Sturmius herein does far pass all other, yet has he
not so fully and perfitelie done it, as I do wish he had, and as I know he
could. For though he has done it perfitelie for precept, yet has he not done
it perfitelie enough for example: which he did, neither for lack of skill, nor
by negligence, but of purpose, contented with one or two examples, because he
was minded in those two books, to write of it both shortly, and also had to
touch other matters.

Barthol. Riccius Ferrariensis also has written learnedlie, diligently and
very largely of this matter even as he did before very well de Apparatu
linguae Lat. He writes the better in mine opinion, because his whole doctrine,
judgment, and order, seems to be borrowed out of Io. Stur. books. He adds
also examples, the best kind of teaching: wherein he does well, but not well
enough: in deed, he commits no fault, but yet, deserves small praise. He
is content with the mean, and follows not the best: as a man, that would
feed upon Acornes, when he may eat, as good cheap, the finest wheat bread.
He teaches for example, where and how, two or three late Italian Poets do
follow Virgil: and how Virgil him self in the story of Dido, does wholly
Imitate Catullus in the like matter of Adriadna: Wherein I like better his
diligence and order of teaching, than his judgment in choice of examples for
Imitation. But, if he had done thus: if he had declared where and how, how often
and how many ways Virgil does follow Homer, as for example the coming of
Ulysses to Alcynous and Calypso, with the coming of Aeneas to Cartage and
Dido: Likewise the games running, wrestling, and shoting, that Achilles makes
in Homer, with the self same games, that Aeneas makes in Virgil: The harness
of Achilles, with the harness of Aeneas, and the manner of making of them both
by Vulcane. The notable combat betwixt Achilles and Hector, with as notable a
combat betwixt Aeneas and Turmis. The going down to hell of Ulysses in Homer,
with the going down to hell of Aeneas in Virgil: and other places infinite mo,
as similitudes, narrations, messages, discriptions of persons, places,
battles, tempests, shipwrackes, and common places for diverse purposes, which
be as precisely taken out of Homer, as ever did Painter in London follow the
picture of any fair personage. And when thies places had been gathered
together by this way of diligence than to have conferred them together by this
order of teaching as, diligently to mark what is kept and used in either
author, in words, in sentences, in matter: what is added: what is left out:
what ordered otherwise, either praeponendo, interponendo, or postponendo: And
what is altered for any respect, in word, phrase, sentence, figure, reason,
argument, or by any way of circumstance: If Riccius had done this, he had not
only been well liked, for his diligence in teaching, but also justly
commended for his right judgment in right choice of examples for the best
Imitation.

Riccius also for Imitation of prose declares where and how Longolius does
follow Tullie, but as for Longolius, I would not have him the pattern of our
Imitation. In deed: in Longolius shop, be proper and fair showing colers,
but as for shape, figure, and natural cumlines, by the judgment of best
judging artificers, he is rather allowed as one to be borne withal, than
specially commended, as one chiefly to be followed.

If Riccius had taken for his examples, where Tullie him self follows either
Plato or Demosthenes, he had shot than at the right mark. But to excuse
Riccius, somewhat, though I can not fully defend him, it may be said, his
purpose was, to teach only the Latin tongue, when this way that I do wish, to
join Virgil with Homer, to read Tullie with Demosthenes and Plato, requires a
cunning and perfect Master in both the tongues. It is my wish in deed, and that
by good reason: For who so ever will write well of any matter, must labor to
express that, that is perfect, and not to stay and content himself with the
mean: yea, I say farther, though it be not vnposible, yet it is very rare, and
marvelous hard, to prove excellent in the Latin tongue, for him that is not also
well seen in the Greek tongue. Tullie him self, most excellent of nature, most
diligent in labor, brought up from his cradle, in that palce, and in that time,
where and when the Latin tongue most flourished naturally in every man's mouth,
yet was not his own tongue able it self to make him so cunning in his own
tongue, as he was in deed: but the knowledge and Imitation of the Greek tongue
withal.

This he confesses himself: this he utters in many places, as those can
tell best, that use to read him most.

Therefore thou, that shotest at perfection in the Latin tongue, think not thy
self wiser than Tullie was, in choice of the way, that leads rightly to the
same: think not thy wit better than Tullies was, as though that may serve
thee that was not sufficient for him. For even as a hawk flies not hie with
one wing: even so a man reaches not to excellency with one tongue.

I have been a looker on in the Cokpit of learning thies many years: And one
Cock only have I known, which with one wing, even at this day, does pass
all other, in mine opinion, that ever I saw in any pit in England, though
they had two wings. Yet nevertheless, to fly well with one wing, to run
fast with one leg, be rather, rare Maistreis much to be merueled at, than sure
examples safely to be followed. A Bushop that now lives, a good man, whose
judgment in Religion I better like, than his opinion in perfitnes in other
learning, said once unto me: we have no need now of the Greek tongue, when all
things be translated into Latin. But the good man understood not, that even
the best translation, is, for mere necessity, but an evil imped wing to fly
withal, or a heuie stompe leg of wood to go withal: soch, the hier they fly,
the sooner they falter and faill: the faster they run, the ofter they
stumble, and sorer they fall. Soch as will needs so fly, may fly at a Pie,
and catch a Dawe: And soch runners, as commonly, they shoue and sholder to
stand foremost, yet in the end they cum behind others and deserve but the
hopshakles, if the Masters of the game be right iudgers.

Optima ratio Imitationis.
Therefore in perusing thus, so many diverse books for Imitation, it came into
my head that a very profitable book might be made de Imitatione, after an
other sort, than ever yet was attempted of that matter, containing a certain
few fit precepts, unto the which should be gathered and applied plenty of
examples, out of the choicest authors of both the tongues. This work would
stand, rather in good diligence, for the gathering, and right judgment for the
apt applying of those examples: than any great learning or utterance at all.

The doing thereof, would be more pleasant, than painful, and would bring also
much proffet to all that should read it, and great praise to him would take it
in hand, with just desert of thanks.

Erasmus order in his study.
Erasmus, giuyng him self to read over all Authors Greek and Latin, seems to
have prescribed to him self this order of readyng: that is, to note out by the
way, three special points: All Adagies, all similitudes, and all witty
sayings of most notable personages: And so, by one labor, he left to
posterity, three notable books, and namely two his Chiliades, Apophthegmata
and Similia. Likewise, if a good student would bend him self to read
diligently over Tullie, and with him also at the same time, as diligently
Plato, Cicero. Plato. Cicero. Xenophon. Cicero. Isocrates. Cicero. Demosth.
Cicero. Aristoteles.

and Xenopho^, with his books of Philosophy, Isocrates, and Demosthenes with
his orations, and Aristotle with his Rhetorickes: which five of all other, be
those, whom Tullie best loved, and specially followed: and would mark
diligently in Tullie, where he does exprimere or effingere (which be the very
propre words of Imitation) either, Copiam Platonis or venustate^ Xenophontis,
suauitatem Isocratis, or vim Demosthenis, propriam and puram subtilitatem
Aristotelis, and not only write out the places diligently, and lay them
together orderly, but also to confer them with skillful judgment by those
few rules, which I have expressed now twice before: if that diligence were
taken, if that order were used, what perfect knowledge of both the tongues, what
ready and pithie utterance in all matters, what right and deep judgment in
all kind of learning would follow, is scarce credible to be believed.

These books, be not many, nor long, nor rude in speech, nor mean in matter,
but next the Majesty of Gods holy word, most worthy for a man, the lover of
learning and honesty, to spend his life in. Yea, I have heard worthy M. Cheke
many times say: I would have a good student pass and journey through all
Authors both Greek and Latin: but he that will dwell in these few books
only: first, in Gods holy Bible, and than join with it, Tullie in Latin,
Plato, Aristotle: Xenophon: Isocrates: and Demosthenes: in Greek: must needs
prove an excellent man.

Some men already in our days, have put to their helping hands, to this
work of Imitation. As Perionius, Perionius. H. Steph. P. Victorius.
He^r. Stephanus in dictionario Ciceroniano, and P. Victorius most praise
worthelie of all, in that his learned work containing xxv. books de varia
lectione: in which books be joined diligently together the best Authors of
both the tongues where one does seem to imitate an other.

But all these, with Macrobius, Hessus, and other, be no more but common
porters, caryers, and bringers of matter and stuff together. They order
nothing: They lay before you, what is done: they do not teach you, how it is
done: They busy not them selves with form of buildyng: They do not declare,
this stuff is thus framed by Demosthenes, and thus and thus by Tullie, and so
like wise in Xenophon, Plato and Isocrates and Aristotle. For joining Virgil
with Homer I have sufficiently declared before.

Pindarus. Horaetius.
The like diligence I would wish to be taken in Pindar and Horace an equal
match for all respects.

In Tragedies, (the goodliest Argument of all, and for the use, either of a
learned preacher, or a Civil Ientleman, more profitable than Homer, Pindar,
Virgill, and Horace: yea comparable in mine opinion, with the doctrine of
Aristotle, Plato, and Xenophon,) the Grecians, Sophocles. Euripides. Seneca.
Sophocles and Euripides far over match our Seneca in Latin, namely in (...) et
Decoro, although Senecaes elocutio^ and verse be very commendable for his
time. And for the matters of Hercules, Thebes, Hippolytus, and Troie, his
Imitation is to be gathered into the same book, and to be be tried by the same
touchstone, as is spoken before.

In histories, and namely in Liuie, the like diligence of Imitation, could
bring excellent learning, and breed stayde judgment, in taking any like
matter in hand.

Tit. Liuius.
Only Liuie were a sufficient task for one man's study, to compare him, first
with his fellow for all respects, Dion. Halicarnassaeus: Dion. Halicarn.
who both, lived in one time: took both one history in hand to write:
deserved both like praise of learning and eloquence. Polibius.
Than with Polybius that wise writer, whom Liuie professes to follow: and if
he would deny it, yet it is plain, that the best part of the third Decade in
Liuie, is in a manner translated out of the third and rest of Polibius: Lastly
with Thucydides, Thucidides.
to whose Imitation Liuie is curiously bent, as may well appear by that one
Oration of those of Campania, 1. Decad. Lib. 7.
asking aid of the Romans against the Samnites, which is wholly taken,
Sentence, Reason, Argument, and order, out of the Oration of Corcyra, asking
like aid of the Athenienses against them of Corinth. Thucid. 10.
If some diligent student would take pains to compare them together, he should
easelie perceive, that I do say true. A book, thus wholly filled with examples
of Imitatio^, first out of Tullie, compared with Plato, Xenophon, Isocrates,
Demosthenes and Aristotle: than out of Virgil and Horace, with Homer and
Pindar: next out of Seneca with Sophocles and Euripides: Lastly out of Liuie,
with Thucydides, Polibius and Halicarnassaeus, gathered with good diligence,
and compared with right order, as I have expressed before, were an other manner
of work for all kind of learning, and namely for eloquence, than be those
cold gatheringes of Macrobius, Hessus, Perionius, Stephanus, and Victorius,
which may be used, as I said before, in this case, as porters and caryers,
deserving like praise, as soch men do wages, but only Sturmius is he, out of
who^, the true survey and whole workmanship is specially to be learned.

I trust, this my writing shall give some good student occasion, to take some
piece in hand of this work of Imitation. And as I had rather have any do it,
Opus de recta imitandi ratione.
than my self, yet surely my self rather tha^ none at all. And by Gods
grace, if God do lend me life, with health, free laysure and liberty, with
good likyng and a merry heart, I will turn the best part of my study and time,
to toil in one or other piece of this work of Imitation.

This diligence to gather examples, to give light and understanding to good
precepts, is no new invention, but specially used of the best Authors and
oldest writers. For Aristotle him self, Aristoteles.
as Diog. Laertius declares) when he had written that goodly book of the
Topickes, did gather out of stories and Orators, Commentarij Graeci et Lati ni
in Dialect. Aristotelis.
so many examples as filled xv. books, only to express the rules of his
Topickes. These were the Commentaries, that Aristotle thought fit for his
Topickes: And therefore to speak as I think, I never saw yet any Commentary
upon Aristotle's Logic, either in

Nicolaus, that learned Bishop. He was a Papist in deed, but would to God,
among all us Protestants I might once see but one, that would win like
praise, in doing like good, for the advancement of learning and virtue. And
yet, though he were a Papist, if any young man, given to new learning (as they
termed it went beyond his fellows, in wit, labor, and towardnes, even the
same, neither lacked, open praise to encorage him, nor private exhibition to
mainteyne him, as worthy Sir I. Cheke, if he were alive would bear good witness
and so can many mo. I my self one of the meanest of a great number, in that
College, because there appeared in me some small show of towardnes and
diligence, lacked not his favor to forder me in learning.

And being a boy, new Bacheler of art, I chanced among my companions to
speak against the Pope: which matter was than in every man's mouth, because D.
Haines and D. Skippe were cum from the Court, to debate the same matter, by
preaching and disputation in the university. This happened the same time, when I
stood to be fellow there: my taulke came to D. Medcalfes ear: I was called
before him and the Seniores: and after grievous rebuke, and some punishment,
open warning was given to all the fellows, none to be so hardy to give me his
voice at that election. And yet for all those open threats, the good father
himself privily procured, that I should even than be chosen fellow. But, the
election being done, he made countinance of great discontentation thereat. This
good man's goodness, and fatherly discretion, used toward me that one day,
shall never out of my remembrance all the days of my life. And for the same
cause, have I put it here, in this small record of learning. For next Gods
providence, surely that day, was by that good fathers means, Dies natalis, to
me, for the whole foundation of the poor learning I have, and of all the
furderance, that hitherto else where I have obtained.

This his goodness stood not still in one or two, but flowed abundantly over
all that College, and brake out also to norishe good wits in every part of
that university: whereby, at his departing thence, he left soch a company of
fellows and scholars in S. Iohnes College, as can scarce be found now in some
whole university: which, either for divinity, on the one side or other, or
for Civil service to their Prince and contrie, have been, and are yet to this
day, notable ornaments to this whole Realm: Yea S. Iohnes did the^ so flourish,
as Trinity college, that Princely house now, at the first erectio^, was but
Colonia deducta out of S. Ihones, not only for their Master, fellows, and
scholars, but also, which is more, for their whole, both order of learning, and
discipline of manners: and yet to this day, it never took Master but such as
was bred up before in S. Iohnes: doing the dewtie of a good Colonia to her
Metropolis, as the ancient Cities in Greice and some yet in Italy, at this
day, are accustomed to do.

S. Iohnes stood in this state, until those heuie times, and that grievous
change that chanced. An. 1553. when mo perfect scholars were dispersed from
thence in one month, than many years can rear up again. For, when Apor de
Sylua had passed the seas, Psalm. 80.
and fastened his foot again in England, not only the two fair groves of
learning in England were either cut up, by the root, or trodden down to the
ground and wholly went to wrack, but the young spring there, and every where
else, was pitifully nipt and ouertroden by very beasts, and also the fairest
standers of all, were rooted up, and cast into the fire, to the great weakening
even at this day of Christ's Chirch in England, both for Religion and learning.

And what good could chance than to the universities, when some of the greatest,
though not of the wisest nor best learned, nor best men neither of that side,
did labor to persuade, that ignorance was better than knowledge, which they
meant, not for the laity only, but also for the greatest rabble of their
spirituality, what other pretense openly so ever they made: and therefore did
some of them at Cambrige (whom I will not name openly,) cause hedge priests
fette out of the contrie, to be made fellows in the university: saying, in
their talk privily, and declaring by their deeds openly, that he was, fellow
good enough for their time, if he could were a gown and a tipet cumlie, and
have his crown shorn fair and roundly, and could turn his Portesse and pie
readily: which I speak not to reprove any order either of apparel, or other
dewtie, that may be well and indifferently used, but to note the misery of
that time, when the benefits provided for learning were so fowlie misused. And
what was the fruit of this seade? Uerely, judgment in doctrine was wholly
altered: order in discipline very sore changed: the love of good learning,
began suddenly to wax cold: the knowledge of the tongues (in spite of some that
therein had flourished) was manifestly contemned: and so, ye way of right study
purposely perverted: the choice of good authors of malice confownded. Old
sophistry (I say not well) not old, but that new rotten sophistry began to
beard and sholder logic in her own tongue: yea, I know, that heads were cast
together, and counsel devised, that Duns, with all the rabble of barbarous
questionistes, should have dispossessed of their place and rowmes, Aristotle,
Plato, Tullie, and Demosthenes, when good M. Redman, and those two worthy
stars of that university, M. Cheke, and M. Smith, with their scholars, had
brought to florishe as notable in Cambrige, as ever they did in Greece and in
Italy: and for the doctrine of those four, Aristoteles. Plato. Cicero. Demost.
the four pillars of learning, Cambrige than giving no place to no
university, neither in France, Spain, Germany, nor Italy. Also in outward
behavior, than began simplicity in apparel, to be laid aside: Courtly
galantnes to be taken up: frugalitie in diet was privately misliked: Town
going to good cheer openly used: Shoting.
honest pastimes, joined with labor, left of in the fields: unthrifty and idle
games, haunted corners, and occupied the nights: contention in youth, no where
for learning: facttions in the elders every where for trifles. All which
miseries at length, by Gods providence, had their end 16. Nouemb. 1558. Since
which time, the young spring has shot up so fair, as now there be in Cambrige
again, many goodly plants (as did well appear at the Queens Majesty's late
being there) which are like to grow to mighty great timber, to the honor of
learning, and great good of their-contrie, if they may stand their time, as the
best plants there were wont to do: and if some old dotterell trees, with
standing over nie them, and dropping upon them, do not either hinder, or crook
their growing, wherein my fear is ye less, seeing so worthy a Justice of an
Oyre has the present oversight of that whole chase, who was himself somtym,
in the fairest spring that ever was there of learning, one of the forwardest
young plants, in all that worthy College of S. Ihones: who now by grace is
grown to soch greatness as, in the temperate and quiet shade of his wisdom,
next the providence of God, and goodness of one, in these our days, Religio for
sincerity, literae for order and advancement, Respub. for happy and quiet
government, have to great rejoicing of all good men, specially reposed them
selves.

Now to return to that Question, whether one, a few, many or all, are to be
followed, my answer shall be short: All, for him that is desirous to know all:
yea, the worst of all, as Questionistes, and all the barbarous nation of
scholemen, help for one or other consideration: But in every separate kind
of learning and study, by it self, ye must follow, choselie a few, and
chiefly some one, and that namely in our schole of eloquence, either for
pen or talk. And as in portiacture and paintyng wise men chose not that
workman, that can only make a fair hand, or a well facioned leg but soch
one, as can furnish up fully, all the fetures of of the whole body, of a man,
woman and child: and with all is able to, by good skill, to give to every one
of these three, in their proper kind, the right form, the true figure, the
natural color, that is fit and dew, to the dignity of a man, to the beauty of
a woman, to the sweetness of a young babe: even likewise, do we seek soch one in
our schole to follow, who is able always, in all matters, to teach plainly, to
delight pleasantly, and to carry away by force of wise talk, all that shall
hear or read him: and is so excellent in deed, as wit is able, or wish can
hope, to attain unto: And this not only to serve in the Latin or Greek tongue,
but also in our own English language. But yet, because the providence of God
has left unto us in no other tongue, save only in the Greek and Latin tongue,
the true precepts, and perfect examples of eloquence, therefore must we seek
in the Authors only of those two tongues, the true Pattern of Eloquence, if in
any other mother tongue we look to attain, either to perfect utterance of it our
selves, or skillful judgment of it in others.

And now to know, what Author does meddle only with some one piece and member
of eloquence, and who does perfitelie make up the whole body, I will declare,
as I can call to remembrance the goodly talk, that I have had oftentimes, of
the true difference of Authors, with that Ientleman of worthy memory, my
dearest friend, and teacher of all the little poor learning I have, Sir John
Cheke.

The true difference of Authors is best known, per diuersa genera dicendi,
that every one used. And therefore here I will divide genus dicendi, not into
these three, Tenue, mediocre, and grande, but as the matter of every Author
requires, as in Genus. Poeticum. in Genus. Historicum. in Genus.
Philosophicum. in Genus. Oratorium.


These differ one from an other, in choice of words, in framyng of
Sentences, in handling of Arguments, and use of right form, figure, and
number, proper and fit for every matter, and every one of these is diverse
also in it self, as the first.

Poeticum, in Comicum. Poeticum, in Tragicum. Poeticum, in Epicum. Poeticum, in
Melicum.
And here, who soever has been diligent to read advisedly over, Terence,
Seneca, Virgil, Horace, or else Aristophanus, Sophocles, Homer, and Pindar, and
shall diligently mark the difference they use, in propriety of words, in
form of sentence, in handlyng of their matter, he shall easelie perceive, what
is fit and decorum in every one, to the true use of perfect Imitation. When
M. Watson in S. John's College at Cambrige wrote his excellent Tragedy of
Absalon, M. Cheke, he and I, for that part of true Imitation, had many pleasant
talks together, in comparing the precepts of Aristotle and Horace de Art
Poetica, with the examples of Euripides, Sophocles, and Seneca. Few men, in
writing of Tragedies in our days, have shot at this mark. Some in England,
more in France, Germany, and Italy, also have written Tragedies in our time:
of the which, not one I am sure is able to abide the true touch of Aristotle's
precepts, and Euripides examples, save only two, that ever I saw, M. Watsons
Absalon, and Georgius Buckananus Iephthe. One man in Cambrige, well liked of
many, but best liked of him self, was many times bold and busy, to bring
matters upon stages, which he called Tragedies. In one, whereby he looked to win his spurs, and whereat many ignorant fellows fast clapped their hands,
he began the Protasis with Trochaeijs Octonarijs: which kind of verse, as it
is but seldom and rare in Tragedies, so is it never used, save only in
Epitasi: when the Tragedy is hiest and hotest, and full of greatest troubles.
I remember full well what M. Watson merely said unto me of his blindness and
boldness in that behalf although otherwise, there passed much friendship between
the^. M. Watson had an other manner care of perfection, with a fear and
reverence of the judgment of the best learned: Who to this day would never
suffer, yet his Absalon to go abroad, and that only, because, in locis
paribus, Anapestus is twice or thrice used instead of Iambus. A small fault,
and such one, as perchance would never be marked, no neither in Italy nor
France. This I write, not so much, to note the first, or praise the last, as to
leave in memory of writing, for good example to posterity, what perfection,
in any time, was, most diligently sought for in like manner, in all kind of
learning, in that most worthy College of S. John's in Cambrige.

Historicum in Diaria. Historicum in Annals. Historicum in Commentarios.
Historicum in Instam Historiam.
For what propriety in words, simplicity in sentences, plainness and light,
is cumelie for these kinds, Caesar and Liuie, for the two last, are perfect
examples of Imitation: And for the two first, the old paternes be lost, and as
for some that be present and of late time, they be fitter to be read once for
some pleasure, than often to be perused, for any good Imitation of them.

Philosophicum in in Sermonem, as officia Cic. and Eth. Arist. Philosophicum in
Contentionem.
As, the Dialoges of Plato, Xenophon, and Cicero: of which kind of learning,
and right Imitation thereof, Carolus Sigonius has written of late, both
learnedlie and eloloquentlie: but best of all my friend Joan. Sturmius in his
Commentaries upon Gorgias Platonis, which book I have in writing, and is not
yet set out in Print.

Oratorium in Humile. Oratorium in Mediocre. Oratorium in Sublime.
Examples of these three, in the Greek tongue, be plentiful and perfect, Lisias.
as Lycias, Isocrates, and Demosthenes: and all three, Isocrates.
in only Demosthenes, in diverse orations as contra Olimpiodorum, Demost.
in leptinem, and pro Ctesiphonte. And true it is, that Hermogines writes of
Demosthenes, that all forms of Eloquence be perfect in him. In Ciceroes
Orations, Cicero.
Medium and sublime be most excellently handled, but Humile in his Orations is
seldom seen: yet nevertheless in other books, as in some part of his
offices, and specially in Partitionibus, he is comparable in hoc humili and
disciplinabili genere, even with the best that ever wrote in Greek. But of
Cicero more fully in fitter place. And thus, the true difference of styles, in
every Author, and every kind of learning may easelie be known by this
division.

in Genus Poeticum. in Genus Historicum. in Genus Philosophicum. in Genus
Oratorium.
Which I thought in this place to touch only, not to prosecute at large,
because, God willing, in the Latin tongue, I will fully handle it, in my book
de Imitatione.

Now, to touch more particularly, which of those Authors, that be now most
commonly in men's hands, will some affourd you some piece of Eloquence, and
what manner a piece of eloquence, and what is to be liked and followed, and what
to be misliked and eschewed in them: and how some again will furnish you fully
withal, rightly, and wisely considered, some what I will write as I have heard
Sir Ihon Cheke many times say.

The Latin tongue, concerning any part of pureness of it, from the spring, to
the decay of the same, did not endure much longer, than is the life of a well
aged man, scarce one hundred years from the time of the last Scipio Africanus
and Laelius, to the Empire of Augustus. And it is notable, that Velleius
Paterculus writes of Tullie, how that the perfection of eloquence did so
remain only in him and in his time, as before him, were few, which might
much delight a man, or after him any, worthy admiration, but soch as Tullie
might have seen, and such as might have seen Tullie. And good cause why: for
no perfection is durable. Increase has a time, and decay likewise, but all
perfect ripeness remains but a moment: as is plainly seen in fruits, plummes
and cherries: but more sensibly in flowers, as Roses and such like, and yet as
trewlie in all greater matters. For what naturally, can go no hier, must
naturally yield and stoop again.

Of this short time of any pureness of the Latin tongue, for the first forty
year of it, and all the time before, we have no piece of learning left, save
Plautus and Terence, with a little rude imperfect pamflet of the elder Cato. And
as for Plautus, except the scholemaster be able to make wise and ware choice,
first in propriety of words, than in framing of Phrases and sentences, and
chiefly in choice of honesty of matter, your scholar were better to play,
the^ learn all that is in him. But surely, if judgment for the tongue, and
direction for the manners, be wisely joined with the diligent reading of
Plautus, than trewlie Plautus, for that pureness of the Latin tongue in Rome,
when Rome did most flourish in well doing, and so thereby, in well speaking
also, is soch a plentiful storehose, for common eloquence, in mean matters,
and all private men's affairs, as the Latin tongue, for that respect, has not
the like again. When I remember the worthy time of Rome, wherein Plautus did
live, I must needs honor the talk of that time, which we see Plautus does use.

Terence is also a storehouse of the same tongue, for an other time, following
soon after, and although he be not so full and plentiful as Plautus is, for
multitude of matters, and diversity of words, yet his words, be chosen so
purelie, placed so orderly, and all his stuff so neetlie packed up, and
wittely compassed in every place, as, by all wise men's judgment, he is
counted the cunninger workman, and to have his shop, for the rowme that is in
it, more finely appointed, and trimlier ordered, than Plautus is.

Three things chiefly, both in Plautus and Terence, are to be specially
considered The matter, the utterance, the words, the meter. The matter in both,
is altogether within the compass of the meanest men's manners, and does not
stretch to any thing of any great weight at all, but stands chiefly in
vtteryng the thoughts and conditions of hard fathers, foolish mothers,
unthrifty young men, crafty servants, sotle bawdes, and wily harlots, and so,
is much spent, in finding out fine fetches, and packing up pelting matters,
soch as in London commonly cum to the hearing of the Masters of Bridewell.
Here is base stuff for that scholar, that should be cum hereafter, either a
good minister in Religion, or a Civil Ientleman in service of his Prince and
contrie: except the preacher do know soch matters to confute them, when
ignorance surely in all soch things were better for a Civil Ientleman, than
knowledge. And thus, for matter, both Plautus and Terence, be like mean
painters, that work by halfes, and be cunning only, in making the worst part
of the picture, as if one were skillful in painting the body of a naked
person, from the navel downward, but nothing else.

For word and speech, Plautus is more plentiful, and Terence more pure and
proper: And for one respect, Terence is to be embraced above all that ever
wrote in his kind of argument: Because it is well known, by good record of
learning, and that by Ciceroes own witness that some Comedies bearyng Terence
name, were written by worthy Scipio, and wise Lilius, and namely Heauton: and
Adelphi. And therefore as often as I read those Comedies, so often does sound in
mine ear, the pure fine talk of Rome, which was used by the flower of the
worthiest nobility that ever Rome bred. Let the wisest man, and best learned
that lives, read advisedly over, the first scene of Heauton, and the first
scene of Adelphi, and let him consideratlie judge, whether it is the talk of a
servile stranger borne, or rather even that mild eloquent wise speech, which
Cicero in Brutus does so lively express in Laelius. And yet nevertheless, in
all this good propriety of words, and pureness of phrases which be in
Terence, ye must not follow him always in placing of them, because for the
meter sake, some words in him, sometime, be driven awrie, which require a
straighter placing in plain prose, if ye will form, as I would ye should do,
your speech and writing, to that excellent perfitnesse, which was only in
Tullie, or only in Tullies time.

Meter in Plautus and Terence.
The meter and verse of Plautus and Terence be very mean, and not to be
followed: which is not their reproach, but the fault of the time, wherein they
wrote, when no kind of Poetry, in the Latin tongue, was brought to perfection,
as does well appear in the fragmentes of Ennius, Cerilius, and others, and
euidenlie in Plautus and Terence, if thies in Latin be compared with right
skill, with Homer, Euripides, Aristophanes, and other in Greek of like sort
Cicero him self does complain of this vnperfitnes, but more plainly
Quintilian, saying, in Comaedia maxim claudicamus, et vix leuem consequimur
vmbram: and most earnestly of all Horace in Art Poetica, which he does namely
propter carmen Iambicum, and refers all good students herein to the
Imitation of the Greek tongue, saying.

Exemplaria Graeca nocturna versate manu, versate diurna. This matter makes me
gladly remember, my sweet time spent at Cambrige, and the pleasant talk which
I had often with M. Cheke, and M. Watson, of this fault, not only in the old
Latin Poets, but also in our new English Rymers at this day. They wished as
Virgil and Horace were not wedded to follow the faults of former fathers (a
shrewd marriage in greater matters) but by right Imitation of the perfect
Grecia^s, had brought Poetry to perfitnesse also in the Latin tongue, that we
Englishmen likewise would acknowledge and understand rightfully our rude
beggarly ryming, brought first into Italy by Goths and Hunnes, when all good
verses and all good learning to, were destroyed by them: and after carried into
France and Germany: and at last received into England by men of excellent wit
in deed, but of small learning, and less judgment in that behalf.

But now, when men know the difference, and have the examples, both of the
best, and of the worst, surely, to follow rather the Goths in Ryming, than
the Greeks in true versifiyng, were even to eat ackornes with swyne, when we
may freely eat wheat bread emonges men. In deed, Chauser, Th. Norton, of
Bristow, my L. of Surrey, M. Wiat, Th. Phaer, and other Ientlemen, in
translating Ouide, Palingenius, and Seneca, have gone as far to their great
praise, as the copy they followed could carry them, but, if soch good wits,
and forward diligence, had been directed to follow the best examples, and not
have been carried by time and custom, to content themselves with that barbarous
and rude Ryming, emonges their other worthy praises, which they have justly
deserved, this had not been the least, to be counted emonges men of learning
and skill, more like unto the Grecians, than unto the Gothians, in handling of
their verse.

In deed, our English tongue, having in use chiefly, words of one syllable which
commonly be long, does not well receive the nature of Carmen Heroicum, because
dastylus, the aptest foot for that verse, co^teining one long and two short,
is seldom therefore found in English: and does also rather stumble than stand
upon Monasyllabis. Quintilian in his learned Chapter de Compositione, gives
this lesson de Monasyllabis, before me:
and in the same place does justly inuey against all Ryming, that if there be
any, who be angry with me, for misliking of Ryming, may be angry for company
to, with Quintilian also, for the same thing: And yet Quintilian had not so
just cause to mislike of it than, as me^ have at this day.

And although Carmen Exametrum does rather trotte and hoble, than run smothly
in our English tongue, yet I am sure, our English tongue will receive carmen
Iambicum as naturally, as either Greek or Latin. But for ignorance, men ca^
not like, and for idleness, men will not labor, to cum to any perfitenes at all.
For, as the worthy Poets in Athens and Rome, were more careful to satisfy
the judgment of one learned, than rash in pleasing the humor of a rude
multitude, even so if men in England now, had the like reverend regard to
learning skill and judgment, and durst not presume to write, except they came
with the like learning, and also did use like diligence, in searchyng out, not
only just measure in every meter, as every ignorant person may easily do,
but also true quantity in every foot and syllable, as only the learned
shall be able to do, and as the Greeks and Romans were wont to do, surely than
rash ignorant heads, which now can easily reckon up fourten sillabes, and
easelie stumble on every Ryme, either durst not, for lack of such learning: or
else would not, in avoiding such labor, be so busy,
as every where they be: and shoppes in London should not be so full of lewd
and rude rymes, as commonly they are. But now, the ripest of tongue, be readiest
to write: And many daily in setting out books and balettes make great show of
blossoms and buddes, in whom is neither, root of learning, nor fruit of
wisdom at all. Some that make Chaucer in English and Petrach in Italian,
their Gods in verses, and yet be not able to make true difference, what is a
fault, and what is a just praise, in those two worthy wits, will much
mislike this my writing. But such men be even like followers of Chaucer and
Petrarke, as one here in England did follow Sir Tho. More: who, being most
unlike unto him, in wit and learning, nevertheless in wearing his gown awrye
upon the one shoulder, as Sir Tho. More was wont to do, would needs be counted
like unto him.

This mislikyng of Ryming, begins not now of any newfangle singularity, but
has been long misliked of many, and that of men, of greatest learning, and
deepest judgment. And soch, that defend it, do so, either for lack of
knowledge what is best, or else of very envy, that any should perform that in
learning, whereunto they, as I said before, either for ignorance, can not, or
for idleness will not, labor to attain unto.

And you that praise this Ryming, because ye neither have reason, why to like
it, nor can show learning to defend it, yet I will help you, with the
authority of the oldest and learned time. In Greece, when Poetry was even as
the hiest pitch of perfitnes, one Simmias Rhodius of a certain singularity
wrote a book in ryming Greek verses, naming it (...), containing the fable,
how Jupiter in likeness of a swan, gat that egg upon Leda, whereof came Castor,
Pollux and fair Elena. This book was so liked, that it had few to read it,
but none to follow it: But was presently contemned: and sone after, both Author
and book, so forgotten by men, and consumed by time, as scarce the name of
either is kept in memory of learning: And the like folly was never followed of
any, many hundred years after until ye Hunnes and Gothians, and other
barbarous nations, of ignorance and rude singularity, did revive the same
folly again.

The noble Lord Th. Earl of Surrey, Th. Earl of Surrey.
first of all English men, in tra^slating the fourth book of Virgill: and
Gonsaluo Periz that excellent learned man, Gonsaluo Periz.
and Secretary to king Philip of Spain, in translating the Ulysses of Homer
out of Greek into Spanish, have both, by good judgment, avoided the fault of
Ryming, yet neither of them has fully hite perfect and true versifiyng. In
deed, they observe just number, and even feet: but here is the fault, that
their feet: be feet without joints, that is to say, not distinct by true
quantity of sillabes: And so, soch feet, be but numme feet: and be, eue^ as
unfit sor a verse to turn and run roundly withal, as feet of brass or
wood be vnweeldie to go well withal. And as a foot of wood, is a plain show
of a manifest maine, even so feet, in our English versifiing, without
quantity and joints, be sure signs, that the verse is either, borne
deformed, unnatural and lame, and so very unseemly to look upon, except to
men that be gogle eyed the^ selves.

The spying of this fault now is not the curiosity of English eyes, but even
the good judgment also of the best that write in these days in Italy: and
namely of that worthy Senese Felice Figlincci, Senese Felice Figlincci.
who, writing upon Aristotle's Ethickes so excellently in Italian, as never did
yet any one in mine opinion either in Greek or Latin, amongst other things
does most earnestly inuey against the rude ryming of verses in that tongue: And
when soever he expresses Aristotle's precepts, with any example, out of Homer
or Euripides, he translateth them, not after the Rymes of Petrarke, but into
soch kind of perfect verse, with like feet and quantity of sillabes, as he
found them before in the Greek tongue: exhortyng earnestly all the Italian
nation, to leave of their rude barbariousnesse in ryming, and follow diligently
the excellent Greek and Latin examples, in true versifiyng.

And you, that be able to understand no more, then ye find in the Italian
tongue: and never went farther than the schole of Petrarke and Ariostus abroad, or
else of Chaucer at home though you have pleasure to wander blindlie still in
your foul wrong way, envy not others, that seek, as wise men have done
before them, the fairest and rightest way: or else, beside the just reproach of
malice, wisemen shall trewlie judge, that you do so, as I have said and say yet
again unto you, because, either, for idleness ye will not, or for ignorance ye
can not, cum by no better your self.

And therefore even as Virgill and Horace deserve most worthy praise, that they
spying the vnperfitnes in Ennius and Plautus, by true Imitation of Homer and
Euripides, brought Poetry to the same perfitnes in Latin, as it was in Greek,
even so those, that by the same way would benefit their tongue and country,
deserve rather thanks than disprayse in that behalf.

And I rejoice, that even poor England prevented Italy, first in spying out,
than in seeking to amend this fault in learning.

And here, for my pleasure I purpose a little, by the way, to play and sport
with my Master Tully: from whom commonly I am never wont to dissent. He him
self, for this point of learning, in his verses does halt a little by his
leave. He could not deny it, if he were alive, nor those defend him now that
love him best. This fault I lay to his charge: because once it pleased him,
though somewhat merely, yet oueruncurteslie, to rail upon poor England,
Tullies saying against Enland.
obiecting both, extreme beggerie, and mere barbariousnes unto it, writing thus
unto his friend Atticus: There is not one scruple of silver in that whole Isle,
Ad At. Lib. 4. Ep. 16.
or any one that knows either learning or letter.

But now master Cicero, blessed be God, and his son Jesus Christ, whom you
never knew, except it were as it pleased him to lighten you by some shadow, as
covertly in one place ye confess saying: Offic.
Veritatis tantum vmbra^ consectamur, as your Master Plato did before you:
blessed be God, I say, that sixten hundred year after you were dead and gone,
it may trewly be said, that for silver, there is more cumlie plate, in one
City of England, than is in four of the proudest Cities in all Italy, and
take Rome for one of them. And for learning, beside the knowledge of all
learned tongs and liberal sciences, even your own books Cicero, be as well
read, and your excellent eloquence is as well liked and loved, and as trewlie
followed in England at this day, as it is now, or ever was, sense your own
time, in any place of Italy, either at Arpinum, where ye were borne, or else at
Rome where ye were brought up. And a little to brag with you Cicero, where you
your self, by your leave, halted in some point of learning in your own tongue,
many in England at this day go straight up, both in true skill, and right
doing therein.

This I write, not to reprehend Tullie, whom, above all other, I like and love
best, but to excuse Terence, because in his time, and a good while after,
Poetry was never perfited in Latin, until by true Imitation of the Grecians,
it was at length brought to perfection: And also thereby to exhort the goodly
wits of England, which apt by nature, and willing by desire, give the^
selves to Poetry, that they, rightly understanding the barbarous bringing in
of Rymes, would labor, as Virgil and Horace did in Latin, to make perfect also
this point of learning, in our English tongue.

And thus much for Plautus and Terence, for matter, tongue, and meter, what is to
be followed, and what to be exchewed in them.

After Plautus and Terence, no writing remains until Tullies time, except a
few short fragmentes of L. Crassus excellent wit, here and there recited of
Cicero for example sake, whereby the lovers of learning may the more lament the
loss of soch a worthy wit.

And although the Latin tongue did fair blome and blossom in L. Craslus, and M.
Antonius, yet in Tullies time only and in Tullie himself chiefly, was the
Latin tongue fully ripe, and grown to the hiest pitch of all perfection.

And yet in the same time, it began to fade and stoop, as Tullie himself, in
Brutus de Claris Oratoribus, with weeping words does witness.

And because, emongs them of that time, there was some difference, good reason
is, that of them of that time, should be made right choice also. And yet let
the best Ciceronian in Italy read Tullies familiar epistles advisedly over,
and I believe he shall find small difference, for the Latin tongue, either in
propriety of words or framing of the style, betwixt Tullie, and those that
write unto him. As ser. Sulpitius, A. Cecinn^, Epi. Plauci x. lib. Epist. 8.
M. Caelius, M. et D. Bruti, A. Pollia, L. Plaucus, and diverse other: read the
epistles of L. Plaucus in x. Lib. and for an assay, that Epistle namely to the
Coss. and whole Senate, the eight Epistle in number, and what could be, either
more eloquently, or more wisely written, yea by Tullie himself, a man may
justly doubt. Thies men and Tullie, lived all in one time, were like in
authority, not unlike in learning and study, which might be just causes of
this their equality in writing: And yet surely, they neither were in deed, nor
yet were counted in men's opinions, equal with Tullie in that faculty. And how
is the difference hid in his Epistles? verelie, as the cunning of an expert Sea
man, in a fair calm fresh River, does little differ from the doing of a meaner
workman therein, even so, in the short cut of a private letter, where, matter
is common, words easy, and order not much diverse, small show of difference
can appear. But where Tullie does set up his sail of eloquence, in some broad
deep Argument, carried with full tide and wind, of his wit and learning, all
other may rather stand and look after him, than hope to overtake him, what
course so ever he hold, either in fair or foul. Four men only when the
Latin tongue was full ripe, be left unto us, who in that time did flourish, and
did leave to posterity, the fruit of their wit and learning: Varro, Salust,
Caesar, and Cicero. When I say, these four only, I am not ignorant, that even
in the same time, most excellent Poets, deserving well of the Latin tongue, as
Lucretius, Cattullus, Virgill and Horace, did write: But, because, in this
little book, I purpose to teach a young scholar, to go, not to dance: to
speak, not to sing, (when Poets in deed, namely Epici and Lyrici, as these
be, are fine dauncers, and trime singers, but Oratores and Historici, be those
cumlie goers, and fair and wise speakers, of whom I wish my scholar to wait
upon first, and after in good order, and dew time, to be brought forth, to the
singing and dancing schole: And for this consideration, do I name these four,
to be the only writers of that time.

Varro.
Varro.
Varro, in his books de lingua Latina, et Analogia as these be left mangled
and patched unto us, does not enter there in to any great depth of eloquence,
but as one carried in a small low vessel him self very nie the common shore,
not much unlike the fisher me^ of Rye, and Hering men of Yarmouth. Who deserve
by common men's opinion, small commendacion, for any cunning saling at all, yet
nevertheless in those books of Varro good and necessary stuff, for that mean
kind of Argument, be very well and learnedlie gathered together.

De Rep. Rustica.
His books of Husbandry, are much to be regarded, and diligently to be read,
not only for the propriety, but also for the plenty of good words, in all
country and husbandmens affairs: which can not be had, by so good authority,
out of any other Author, either of so good a time, or of so great learning, as
out of Varro. And yet because, he was fourscore year old, when he wrote those
books, the form of his style there compared with Tullies writing, is but even
the talk of a spent old man: whose words commonly fall out of his mouth,
though very wisely, yet hardly and coldlie, and more heauelie also, than some
ears can well bear, except only for age, and authorities sake. And
perchance, in a rude country argument, of purpose and judgment, he rather
used, the speech of the country, than talk of the City.

And so, for matter sake, his words sometime, be somewhat rude: and by the
imitation of the elder Cato, old and out of use: And being deep stepped in age,
by negligence some words do so escape and fall from him in those books, as be
not worth the taking up, by him, that is careful to speak or write true
Latin, Lib. 3. Cap. 1.
as that sentence in him, Romans, in pace a rusticis alebantur, et in bello ab
his tuebantur. A good student must be therefore careful and diligent, to read
with judgment over even those Authors, which did write in the most perfect
time: and let him not be affrayd to try them, both in propriety of words,
and form of style, by the touch stone of Caesar and Cicero, whose purity was
never foiled, no not by the sentence of those, that loved them worst.

All lovers of learning may sore lament the loss of those books of Varro, The
love of Uarroes books.
which he wrote in his young and lusty years, with good leisure, and great
learning of all parts of Philosophy: of the goodliest arguments, perteyning
both to the common wealth, and private life of man, as, de Ratione studij, et
educandis liberis, which book, is often recited, and much praised, in the
fragmentes of Nonius, even for authority sake. He wrote most diligently and
largely, also the whole history of the state of Rome: the mysteries of their
whole Religion: their laws, customs, and government in peace: their manners,
and whole discipline in war: And this is not my gessing, as one in deed that
never saw those books, but even, the very judgment, and plain testimony of
Tullie him self, who knew and read those books, in these words: Tu aetatem
Patriae: Tu descriptiones temporum: Tu sacrorum, tu sacerdotum Iura: Tu
domesticam, tu bellicam disciplinam: Tu sedem Regionum, In Acad Quest.
locorum, tu omnium diuinarum humanarumque reru^ nomina, genera, officia,
causas aperuisti. etc.

But this great loss of Varro, is a little recompensed by the happy coming of
Dionysius Halicarnassaeus to Rome in Augustus days: who getting the possession
of Varros library, out of that treasure house of learning, did leave unto us
some fruit of Varros wit and diligence, I mean, his good lie books de
Antiquitatibus Romanerum. Varro was so esteemed for his excellent learning, as
Tullie him self had a reverence to his judgment in all doutes of learning.
And Antonius Triumuir, Cic. ad At.
his enemy, and of a contrary faction, who had power to kill and bannish whom
he listed, when Varros name amongst others was brought in a schedule unto him,
to be noted to death, he took his pen and wrote his warrant of sauegard with
these most goodly words, Viuat Varro vir doctissimus. In later time, no man
knew better, nor liked and loved more Varros learning, than did S. Augustine,
as they do well understand, that have diligent lie read over his learned books
de Ciuitate Dei: Where he has this most notable sentence: When I see, how much
Varro wrote, I meruell much, that ever he had any leisure to read: and when I
perceive how many things he read, I meruell more, that ever he had any leisure
to write. etc.

And surely, if Varros books had remained to posterity, as by Gods
providence, the most part of Tullies did, than trewlie the Latin tongue might
have made good comparison with the Greek.

Saluste.
Salust.
Salust, is a wise and worthy writer: but he requires a learned Reader, and a
right considerer of him. My dearest friend, and best master that ever I had or
heard in learning, Sir I. Check, Sir John Chekes judgment and counsel for
readyng of Saeluste.
soch a man, as if I should live to see England breed the like again, I fear,
I should live over long, did once give me a lesson for Salust, which, as I
shall never forget my self, so is it worthy to be remembered of all those, that
would cum to perfect judgment of the Latin tongue. He said, that Salust was not
very fit for young men, to learn out of him, the purity of the Latin tongue:
because, he was not the purest in propriety of words, nor choicest in aptnes
of phrases, nor the best in framing of sentences: and therefore is his writing,
said he neither plain for the matter, nor sensible for men's understanding. And
what is the cause thereof, Sir, quoth I. Uerilie said he, because in Salust
writing, is more Art than nature, and more labor than Art: and in his labor
also, to much toil, as it were, with an discontented care to write better than
he could, a fault common to very many men. And therefore he does not express
the matter lively and naturally with common speech as ye see Xenophon does in
Greek, but it is carried and driven forth artificially, after to learned a
sort, as Thucydides does in his orations. And how cummeth it to pass, said I,
that Caesar and Ciceroes talk, is so natural and plain, and Salust writing
so artificial and dark, when all they three lived in one time? I will freely
tell you my fancy herein, said he: surely, Caesar and Cicero, beside a
singular prerogative of natural eloquence given unto them by God, both two, by
use of life, were daily orators emonges the common people, and greatest
councellers in the Senate house: and therefore gave themselves to use soch
speech as the meanest should well understand, and the wisest best allow:
following carefully that good council of Aristotle, loquendum vt multi,
sapiendum vt pauci. Salust was no soch man, neither for will to goodness, nor
skill by learning: but ill given by nature, and made worse by bringing up,
spent the most part of his yougth very misorderly in riot and lechery. In the
company of soch, who, never giving their mind to honest doing, could never
inure their tongue to wise speaking. But at last cummyng to better years, and
bying wit at the dearest hand, that is, by long experience of the hurt and
shame that cummeth of mischief, moved, by the council of them that were wise,
and carried by the example of soch as were good, first fell to honesty of life,
and after to the love of study and learning: and so became so new a man, that
Caesar being dictator, made him Praetor in Numidia, where he absent from his
contrie, and not inured with the common talk of Rome, but shut up in his
study, and bent wholly to reading, did write the story of the Romans. And for
the better accomplishing of the same, he red Cato and Piso in Latin for
gathering of matter and troth: and Thucydides in Greek for the order of his
story, and furnishing of his style. Cato (as his time required) had more troth
for the matter, than eloquence for the style. And so Salust, by gathering troth
out of Cato, smells much of the roughnes of his style: even as a man that
eats garlike for health, shall carry away with him the savor of it also,
whether he will or not. Lib. 8. Cap. 3. De Orna^^.
And yet the use of old words is not the greatest cause of Salustes roughnes
and darkness: There be in Salust some old words in deed as patrare bellum,
ductare exercitum, well noted by Quintilian, and very much misliked of him:
and supplicium for supplicatio, a word smellyng of an older store, than the
other two so misliked by Quint: And yet is that word also in Varro, speaking of
Oxen thus, boues ad victimas faciunt, atque ad Deorum supplicia. and a few old
words mo. Read Saluste and Tullie advisedly together: and in words ye shall
find small difference: yea Salust is more given to new words, than to old,
though some old writers say the contrary: as, Claritudo for Gloria: exact for
perfect: Facundia for eloquentia. Thies two last words exact and facundia
now in every man's mouth, be never (as I do remember) used of Tullie, and
therefore I think they be not good: For surely Tullie speaking every where so
much of the matter of eloquence, would not so precisely have absteyned from the
word Facundia, if it had been good: that is proper for the tongue, and common
for men's use. I could be long, in reciting many soch like, both old and new
words in Salust: but in very deed neither oldnes nor newness of words makes
the greatest difference betwixt Salust and Tullie, The cause why Salust is not
like Tully.
but first strange phrases made of good Latin words, but framed after the
Greek tongue, which be neither choisly borrowed of them, nor properly used by
him: than, a hard composition and crooked framing of his words and sentences,
as a man would say, English talk placed and framed outlandish like. As for
example first in phrases, nimius et animus, be two used words, yet homonimius
animi, is an unused phrase. Vulgus, et amat, es fieri, be as common and well
known words as may be in the Latin tongue, yet id quod vulgo amat fieri, for
solet fieri, is but a strange and grekish kind of writing. Ingens et vires be
proper words, yet vir ingens virium is an improper kind of speaking and so be
likewise, aeger consilij. promptissimus belli. territus animi.
and many soch like phrases in Salust, borrowed as I said not choisly out of
Greek, and used therefore improperly in Latin. Again, in whole sentences,
where the matter is good, the words proper and plain, yet the sense is hard
and dark, and namely in his prefaces and oration, wherein he used most labor,
which fault is likewise in Thucydides in Greek, of whom Salust has taken the
greatest part of his darkness. For Thucydides likewise wrote his story, not
at home in Greece, but abroad in Italy, and therefore smells of a certain
outlandish kind of talk, strange to them of Athens, and diverse from their
writing, that lived in Athens and Greece, and wrote the same time that
Thucydides did, as Lysias, Xenophon, Plato, and Isocrates, the purest and
playnest writers, that ever wrote in any tongue, and best examples for any man to
follow whether he write, Latin, Italian, French, or English. Thucydides also
seems in his writing, not so much benefited by nature, as helped by Art, and
carried forth by desire, study, labor, toil, and over great curiosity: who
spent xxvii. years in writing his eight books of his history. Dionys.
Halycar. ad Q. Tub. de Hist. Thuc.
Salust likewise wrote out of his contrie, and followed the faults of Thuc. to
much: and boroweth of him some kind of writing, which the Latin tongue can not
well bear, as Casus nominatiuus in diverse places absolute positus, as in that
place of Iugurth, speaking de leptitanis, itaque ab imperatore facile quae
petebant adepti, missae sunt eo cohortes ligurum quatuor. This thing in
partici^les, used so often in Thucyd. and other Greek authors to, may better be
borne with all, but Salust uses the same more strangely and boldly, as in
thies words, Mu^tis sibi quisque imperium petentibus. I believe, the best
Grammarien in England can scarce give a good* reule, why quisque the nominative
case, without any verb, is so thrust up amongst so many oblique cases. Some
man perchance will smile, and laugh to scorn this my writing, and call it idle
curiosity, thus to busy my self in pickling about these small points of
Grammar, not fit for my age, place and calling, to trifle in: I trust that
man, be he never so great in authority, never so wise and learned, either, by
other men's judgment, or his own opinion, will yet think, that he is not
greater in England, than Tullie was at Rome, nor yet wiser, nor better learned
than Tullie was him self, who, at the pitch of three score years, in the
mids of the broyle betwixt Caesar and Pompeie, when he knew not, whether to
send wife and children, which way to go, where to hide him self, yet, in an
earnest letter, Ad At. Lib. ^. Epistola. ^.
amongst his earnest councelles for those heuie times concerning both the
common state of his country, and his own private great affairs he was neither
unmindful nor ashamed to reason at large, and learn gladly of Atticus, a
less point of Grammar than these be, noted of me in Salust, as, whether he
should write, ad Piraeea, in Piraeea, or in Piraeeum, or Piraeeum sine
praepositione: And in those heuie times, he was so careful to know this small
point of Grammar, that he adds these words Si hoc mihi (...) persolueris,
magna me molestia liberaris. If Tullie, at that age, in that authority, in
that care for his country, in that ieoperdie for him self, and extreme
necessity of his dearest friends, being also the Prince of Eloquence him
self, was not ashamed to descend to these low points of Grammar, in his own
natural tongue, what should scholars do, yea what should any man do, if he do
think well doing, better than ill doing: And had rather be, perfect than
mean, sure than doutefull, to be what he should be, in deed, not seem what he
is not, in opinion. He that makes perfitnes in the Latin tongue his mark, must
cume to it by choice and certain knowledge, not stumble upon it by chance and
doubtful ignorance: And the right steps to reach unto it, be these, linked
thus orderly together, aptnes of nature, love of learning, diligence in right
order, constancy with pleasant moderation, and always to learn of them that
be best, and so shall you judge as they that be wisest. And these be those
reules, which worthy Master Cheke did impart unto me concerning Salust, and
the right judgment of the Latin tongue.

Caesar.
Caesar for that little of him, that is left unto us, is like the half face of
a Venus, the other part of the head being hidden, the body and the rest of the
members vnbegon, yet so excellently done by Apelles, as all men may stand
still to mase and muse upon it, and no man step forth with any hope to perform
the like.

His seven books de bello Gallico, and three de bello Civilly, be written, so
wisely for the matter, so eloquently for the tongue, that neither his greatest
enemies could ever find the least note of parcialitie in him (a marvelous
wisdom of a man, namely writing of his own doings) nor yet the best ludegers
of the Latin tongue, nor the most envious lookers upon other men's writings, can
say any other, but all things be most perfitelie done by him.

Brutus, Caluus, and Calidius, who found fault with Tullies fulness in words
and matter, and that rightly, for Tullie did both, confess it, and mend it,
yet in Caesar, they neither did, nor could find the like, or any other fault.

And therefore thus justly I may conclude of Caesar, that where, in all other,
the best that ever wrote, in any time, or in any tongue, in Greek or Latin, I
except neither Plato, Demosthenes, nor Tullie, some fault is justly noted, in
Caesar only, could never yet fault be found.

Yet nevertheless, for all this perfect excellency in him, yet it is but in one
member of elequence, and that but of one side neither, when we must look for
that example to follow, which has a perfect head, a whole body, forward and
backward, arms and legs and all.

FINIS.


AT LONDON.

Printed by John Day dwelling over Aldersgate.

Cum gratia and Priuilegio Regiae Maiestatis. 1570.


