By the Queen.
A Proclamation for Measures, published by the Queens Commandment.
WHere for the avoiding of variety and deceits of Weights and Measures,
diverse Statutes, Arts and Ordinances have heretofore been made, That one
Weight, and one Measure should be used throughout the Realm, And where,
according to the Statutes made in the eleventh and twelfth years of the reign
of the late king of famous memory King Henry the seventh, there have been
made, sent, and delivered into diverse Cities and Towns, specified in a
Schedule unto the said Act of 11. H. 7. annexed, Weights and Measures of
Brass according to the Standards thereof remaining in the Treasury of the
Exchequer, to remain in the keeping of the Mayor, Bayliffe, or other head
Officer for the time being, of every of the same City or Town, as the kings
Standard of Weight and Measure, with authority and power given by the same
Statute, to the said Mayor, Bailiffe, or other head Officer, having the said
Weights and Measures, to make, sign and print like Weights and Measures unto
every of the kings subjects, duly requiring the same, as by the said Statutes
more at large appears: Our Sovereign Lady the Queen, being informed that
the said Standard measures remaining in those Cities and Towns, for the most
part are by long continuance of time, or for want of good keeping, or other
defects or abuses differing and not agreeing with the ancient Standard of
Measures remaining in her Highness Exchequer at Westminster, by occasion
whereof the Measures commonly used within the Realm be uncertain, and varying
one from another to the great slander of the same, and the deceiving of many
both buyers and sellers: Has given order and commandment to the L. Treasurer
and under Treasurer, to cause all the ancient Standard measures of all those
several Cities and Towns to be brought in before them at the Exchequer at
Westminster, to be examined and tried by the Queens Standard measure there
remaining, according to which her Majesty's commandment, the Lord Treasurer
and under Treasurer have caused all the ancient Standard measures of all those
several Cities and Towns to be brought before them into her Highness said
Exchequer, where diverse of them upon diligent and due trial and examination
have been found defective, differing and disagreeing from the true and ancient
Standard of the Exchequer. Whereupon her Majesty intending the common and
public good of all her loving Subjects, and to avoid all differences and
deceipts of Measure within this her Highness Realm, upon good and deliberate
advise, and due consideration therein had, Has not only established the
foresaid true and ancient Standard of Measures remaining in her Majesty's
Exchequer, there to continue and be, as her Majesty's Standard, to examine,
try, and size all other Measures of Realm by, from time to time as occasion
shall require: But also has given commandment to the Lord Treasurer and under
Treasurer to cause all the other Measures which were brought before them (from
the Cities and Towns aforesaid) found upon trial to be differing and
disagreeing from the true and ancient Standards of measures of her Highness
Exchequer, to be broken.

And further her Majesty has given order and commandment unto the said Lord
Treasurer and under Treasurer, forthwith to cause new Standards of measures in
Brass to be made, tried, and approved by the said true and ancient Standard
of the Exchequer, and after true and just examination and trial thereof had
and made, to size and seal (with the letter E crowned) such and so many
Standard measures, for every of the said several Cities and Towns limited to
have the custody of weights and measures, according to the Queens Standard
for every Shire by the said schedule annexed unto the said Statute made in the
eleventh year of the Reign of King Henry the seventh, there to remain for
ever in the keeping of the Mayor, Bayliffe, or other head Officer for the time
being of the said City and Town as the Queens Standard of measure, as to them
shall seem necessary and convenient. And also as many as may serve and be
convenient for the Clerk of the Market of her Highness household (and through
the Realm) or his Deputies, according to the Statute of Anno 16. R. 2. Cap 3.
And also as may or shall serve for any other her Majesty's Officers or Subjects
within this Realm as shall make suite for the having and obtaining of the same.

Her Majesty's will and pleasure therefore is, That the Mayor, Bayliffes,
Portreues, Wardens, and other head Officers of every of the said Cities,
Boroughes, Towns, Cinqueports, and places mentioned in the schedule annexed to
the said Statute of Anno 11. H. 7. before the Feast of S. John Baptist next
coming, at the common charge of the same place, shall send some sufficient
person unto the said Exchequer, authorized to receive such Standards as shall be
delivered unto him, by the order and appointment of the said Lord Treasurer
and under Treasurer, for the said City, Borough, Town, or place, And to pay
such reasonable prices for the same, as upon true valuation of the same shall be
by the said Lord Treasurer and under Treasurer rated or assessed: Which
Standards, every of the said Mayors, Bayliffes, and other head Officers unto
whom it shall appertain, shall safely keep or cause to be kept in some sure
and convenient place in the same City, Borough, or Town, and by them make or
size, or cause to be made and sized, other common Measures for the use of all
manner of people in the same City, Borough, Town, or place that shall have
cause to use Measures. And shall also make, sign, and print with the first
letter of the name of the same City, Borough, Town, or place where the same
Measure shall be so made, sized, and printed, like Measures unto every of the
Queens Subjects duly requiring the same, taking such fees for the doing
thereof as by the Statutes of the Realm are allowed, and no more. And every of
the said Mayors, Bayliffes, and other head Officers of Cities, Boroughes,
Towns, and places within this Realm shall further do and cause to be done,
all such other Act and Acts, thing and things, for the providing, having, and
using of the said Standards of measures as be limited and appointed to their
or any of their authority by the said Statutes made in the eleventh and
twelfth years of the late King Henry the seventh, or any other Statute or
Ordinance whatsoever: So as all the Measures through the Realm may be reformed
and made agreeable according to the Standard of the Exchequer, as by the
Statutes in such case is required. And her Majesty further commands and
ordains, That no person or persons shall from the first day of August next
coming, use any other Measure or Measures; but such as shall be made or sized,
and respectively agreeing with the said Standards, and printed and marked with
such marks and letters as before is limited, upon pain to be apprehended,
committed to prison, fined and punished, as contriuers and users of false
Measures, according to the Statutes in that case made and provided. And that
this Proclamation for the better instructing of all her Majesty's Subjects,
shall before the feast of Easter now next coming, be proclaimed in every
Market town through the Realm, and be hanged up, and fastened in a Table in the
Market place by an officer, where it may continue to be seen and read by any
that will. And further, That it shall be read in every Parish Church before the
said feast of Easter next coming, in a time and space between the beginning
and ending of Common prayer, upon the Sunday or Holy day, by the Minister or
Clerk of the Church, and so from thenceforth once at every feast of the
Annunciation of the blessed Virgin Marie, And once at every feast of S. Michael
the Archangel, by the space of five years next coming, or be hanged up, and
preserved in every Church in a Table, to be seen and read at all times by any
that will: And that the defaults of Officers, Ministers, Clerks, and
Churchwardens in this behalf, shall be enquired of and punished by the Justices
of Assise, and Justices of Peace in their Sessions, according to their
discretions, as contemners of her Majesty's commandment. And that all the
Standards and Measures whatsoever, not sized, marked and printed, and made
respectively agreeing to and with the foresaid Standards, and the true meaning
of this proclamation, shall from the said feast of S. John Baptist next
coming, which shall be in the year of our Lord God 1602. be reputed and
taken for untrue measures, and shall be broken, defaced and destroyed by the
owners of the same, or by such officers as have or shall have authority to
enquire of false Weights and Measures.

And for the better execution hereof, all Majors, Bailiffes, and other head
Officers of every City, Shire, Town, Borough, or Market within this Realm,
shall immediately after the said Feast of S. John Baptist, and so from time to
time according to the said Statute, as all other Corporate, Borough, or Market
Towns within this Realm, cause to be brought before them all the Measures
within the same Cities, Boroughes, Corporate or Market Towns, to be duly
viewed and examined, and such as they shall find defective or disagreeing unto
the foresaid Standard Measures, either in greatness or smalnesse, to cause to
be broken and defaced, and further punishment to be done upon the offenders
therein, according to the Statute. And that the Justices of Peace, or two of
them (whereof one of them to be of the Quorum) shall with all diligence and
from time to time, by examination or inquiry hear and determine the defaults
of all Mayors, Bayliffes, and other head Officers of Cities, Boroughes,
Corporate or Market Towns within their limits or authorities on that behalf,
and to set Fines and Amercements upon the offenders in that behalf by their
discretions, and those to estreate into the Court of Exchequer, and that upon
pain of the punishment due for such contempt.

And lastly, her Majesty straightly charge and commands all Justices of
Assize, Justices of Peace, her Highness Clerk of the Market, Majors,
Bailiffes, Stewards of Liberties, and all other her Majesty's Officers and
Ministers whatsoever, to cause this present Proclamation, and all Laws,
Statutes, and ordinances, for the having and using of true Measures, and for
the abolishing the use of false Measures, to be put in execution according to
their several authorities and Jurisdictions, as they tender her Majesty's
service herein, and the Common wealth of this Realm.

God save the Queen.
Imprinted at London by Robert Barker, Printer to the Queens most excellent
Majesty.

Anno Dom. 1602.


