Orders prescribed by her Majesty's commandment by advise of her Counsel,
published in London, and other places near to the same, for the observation of
her Majesty's present Proclamation. 4. Iulij. 1595.
THat no person, but such as are Officers for preservation of peace, or such as
shall assist them, or such as be of known honest conversation, do walk up and
down in the streets or fields after Sun set, or nine of the clock at night,
upon pain to be apprehended and committed to prison, and to be punished
according to their quality.

That no persons, (except they be public Officers) do assemble themselves in
any company at any time in any place, other then in Churches for prayers or
Sermons, or for appearances before Officers of Justice, or by their
commandment, or in the common Halles of Companies, upon pain to be taken and
punished.

That no Householder, nor any person that keeps Innes or lodging for any
Strangers, do suffer their Servants or their Ghestes, being not Gentlemen, or
others of good value and conversation, to go out of their houses in the
Evening after nine of the clock, upon pain to be imprisoned as an offendour:
or other wise, if they cannot restrain them, then to inform presently the
Constable or Officers thereof, and to have them speedely apprehended.

That no person do write, or be privy to any seditious Bills, to be
dispersed or set up, upon pain to be executed by Martial law: and if any
person shall come to the knowledge of any person that has written, or set up,
or dispersed any such seditious Bill, and will reveal the same to any Officer,
the information being found true, and the party taken, the Reuealers shall
have xx.li. or a better reward.

That all persons that are not known to be servants in the Queens Majesty's
House, or not ordinarily perteining to any Lord or Gentleman, and do wander
abroad either by the name of Soldiers, or that seek service, or do come as
Suitors to her Majesty, or to any of her Officers for suites in Law, shall
present themselves to certain persons of judgment hereafter named, that are
appointed by the Counsel to examine their conditions according whereto they
shall be directed how to leave their wandering, and if they shall be meet to
be relieved, or to be retained in service, or come as Suitors to any common, or
to any public Officer, they shall be so provided for, as their causes shall
require, and not to be suffered to wander abroad, to the offense or terror of
other good quiet people, that have cause to travel by the hie ways for their
lawful business.

That all persons that shall be arrested by any officer lawfully authorized,
shall obey the same Officer, and that if any shall make resistance, every
other person being present, and required by the Officer to assist him shall so
do, to the best of his power, upon pain to be committed to the same place,
where the party that did disobey the officer ought to be: and if any person
shall attempt to aid the party that should be arrested to be rescued, such
person and all that shall accompany him, shall be apprehended, and shall be
executed by the Provost Martial, by Martial law.

That all Officers of the City, and all other places near the City, as is
before mentioned having authority to apprehend Rogues and to punish them, shall
in the circuites of their Jurisdiction meet together twice every Meek or
oftener, and shall cause search to be made in the common streets, and the high
ways by some company of able men, to apprehend such Rogues and Vagabonds, and
shall also take order for the disposing of the poor and lame to repair to the
places where they ought to be provided by the alms of their Parishes, and not
be suffered to wander abroad without provision and reliese.

The names of certain persons appointed to sit at the Sessions hall near
Newgate, to examine the conditions of such persons as shall be taken wandering
in the common streets or high ways, having no certain habitation.
For such as pretend to have served as Soldiers.
Sir Thomas Sherley. Sir Thomas Morgan. Sir Roger Williams. Captain Oliver S.
John. Captain Iackson. Captain Hinder. Captain Bucke.
Or any three of them.

For such other as pretend not to be Soldiers, but pretend to come to seek
service, or to follow suites, or that have no reasonable cause to be suffered
to wander, but are of the nature of Rogues.
Sir Owen Hopton. Recorder of London. Robert Wroth. Richard Warren. Will.
Fleetwood receiver of the Wards. Arthur Atie. Richard Skeuington. George
Ashbie of Westminster. Thomas Fowler. Town Clerk of London. Clerk of the
Peace of Middlesex.
Or any three of them.

Who upon examination of the said Wanderers, are to direct them by their
precepts to their native Countries according to the Statute, or if they shall
not depart then, to have them punished as Rogues, and for such as are found
impotent and lame, to appoint them so to be relieved, as they may repair to
their native countries, or to the places where they did last inhabit. All
these persons above named to agree amongst themselves, how at least three or
more of them may by turns attend at the foresaid Sessions hall twice every
week, and that as they shall find cause, they do advertise her Majesty's
Council of their proceedings, and this their meetings to continue, until upon
order from the Council the same shall be discharged.

Imprinted at London by the Deputies of CHRISTOPHER BARKER Printer to the
Queens most excellent Majesty 1595.


