By the Queen.
The Queens Majesty's Proclamation for staying of all unlawful assemblies in
and about the City of London, and for Orders to punish the same.
THe Queens Majesty being infourmed of sundry great disorders committed in
and about her City of London, by unlawful great assemblies of multitudes of a
popular sort of base condition, whereof some are Prentises and servants to
Artificers, and to such like as are not able or not disposed to rule their
servants as they ought to do, And some attempting to rescue out of the hands
of public Officers such as have been lawfully arrested, whereby her Majesty's
peace has been of late notably violated and broken, to the dishonor of her
Majesty's government, and chiefly for lack of due correction in time of such
manifest offenders by the Officers of her City and others in the places round
and about her City: For reformation whereof, her Majesty has had conference
with her Counsel, of the most ready means both for punishment of such
offenses already committed, and for stay of the like. And to that purpose does
most straightly charge all her Officers both in the City, and in places near to
the City, in the Counties of Middlesex, Kent, Surrey and Essex, that have
authority to preserve the Peace, and to punish the offenders of the Peace,
That they do more diligently, to the best of their powers, see to the
suppression of all offenders against the Peace, And especially of all unlawful
assemblies, upon pain to be not only removed from their Offices, but to be
also punished as persons maintayning or rather comforting such offenders. And
because these late unlawful assemblies and rowtes are compounded of sundry
sorts of base people, some known Prentises, such as are of base Manual
occupation, and some others wandering idle persons of condition of Rogues and
vagabonds, and some coloring their wandering by the name of Soldiers returned
from the wars: Therefore her Majesty has for better direction to her
Officers of Justice, and for the inquisition and knowledge of all such kind of
persons, so either vnlawflully gathering themselves in companies or wandering
about like Vagabonds, without any known manner of honest living, notified her
pleasure to her Counsel, to prescribe certain Orders to be published in and
about the said City, which she will have straightly observed. And for that
purpose means to have a Provost Marshall with sufficient authority to
apprehend all such as shall not be readily reformed and corrected by the
ordinary Officers of Justice, and them without delay to execute upon the
gallows, by order of Martial law. And these her Majesty's commandments, She
wills to be duly observed, upon pain of her indignation.

Given at her Majesty's Manor of Greenewich the fourth day of July 1595. in
the seven and thirtieth year of her Highness reign.
Imprinted at London by the Deputies of Christopher Barker, Printer to the
Queens most excellent Majesty. 1595.


