The several Rates and taxations for Wages, made and set forth by the
Justices of Peace, for the Town of Higham Ferrers, in the County of
Northampton.


WHere in the Parliament holden at Westminster the xii. day of January, in the
fifth year of the reign of our Sovereign Lady the Queens Majesty, it was
enacted by the Queen our sovereign Lady, the Lords spiritual and temporal,
and the commons in that Parliament assembled, that the Justices of the Peace of
every Shire, Riding, and liberty, within the limits of their several
commissions, or the more part of them, being reu^ant within the same, and the
Sheriff of the County, if he conveniently might, and every Mayor, Bailife, or
other head officer within any City or Town corporate, wherein is any Justices
of the Peace within the limits of the said City or Town, should by force of
the said Act, yearly after Easter at times convenient, appointed by the same,
assemble themselves together, and calling before them such discreet and grave
persons of the said County, City and Town, as they should think meet, and
conferring together, respecting the plenty or scarcity of the time and other
circumstances necessarily to be considered, should by virtue of the said Act,
within the limits and precincts of their several commissions, limite, rate,
and appoint the wages, as well of such and so many of the said Antificers,
handicrafts men, husbandmen, or any other laborer, servant, or workman, whose
wages in times past has been by any law of Statute rated and appointed, as
also the wages of all other laborers, artificers, workmen, or apprentices of
husbandry, which have not been rated, as the same Justices, Majors, or head
officers within their several co^missions or liberties, should think meet by
their discretions to be rated, limited, or appointed, and the same rates and
taxations should certify unto the Queens highness Court of Chancery before a
certain day limited in ye said Act. Whereupon it should be lawful for the Lord
Chancellor, or Lord keeper of the great seal of England, for the time being,
upon declaration thereof to her Highness, her heirs or successors, or to the
Lords and others of her Majesty's privy Counsel, to cause Proclamations to be
printed and sent down into every of the said shires and places, containing the
several rates appointed by the said Justices and other head officers,
commanding thereby in her Highness name, all persons straightly to observe and
keep the same, upon the danger of the punishment and forfaitures limited and
appointed by the said Act and Statute.

And where also it is further enacted by the authority aforesaid, that all
manner of person and persons, after such Proclamation made, should observe and
keep the said rates for wages, upon pain of the forfaitures and penalties
contained in the said Estatute, until by further order by Proclamation,
according to the purport of the same Estatute, it should be otherwise ordered
and proclaimed: Wherefore the Queens Majesty, having received into her said
Court of Chancery, amongst diverse other Certificates, from sundry her Highness
Shires, Cities and Towns, one Certificate from the Town of Higham Ferrers,
containing the Rates for wages hereafter following, made and appointed by the
Justices of the Town of Higham Ferrers, according to the tenor of the same
Act: And minding to have the same rates put in execution in all points, as by
the process of the same Act is prescribed, like as her Majesty has and
intends to do in all other her Highness Counties and Shires, and other
places of Liberty within this her Realm: Therefore her Highness straightly
charge and commands all manner person and persons within the Town of
Higham Ferrers, to keep and observe in all points the said rates, taxations,
orders and appointments for wages hereafter following and set forth upon the
pains and forfeitures appointed by the said estatute, and upon pain of her
Highness displeasure.

And further her Highness pleasure and express commandment is, that all
Justices of Peace, Sherifes, and other Officers of the said Town of Higham
Ferrers, shall see and cause the same rates duly and severely to be observed
and kept in all points: And this Proclamation to be used in every behalf,
according to the tenor and effect of the same Act. And her Majesty's further
pleasure and commandment is, that if any question, scruple or deubt, shall
arise upon any of the taxations or rates for the said Town of Higham Ferrers
hereunder mentioned: That then the same shall be resolved and determined by her
Highness Justices of Peace, that did make and ordeine the same taxations and
rates: And that all persons shall perform and keep the same resolutions,
orders, and determinations, so by them to be made and determined touching the
same.

Higham Ferrers in the County of Northampton.
Hereafter ensues the Certificat of Richard Warner Gentleman, Mayor of the
Town and Bought of Higham Ferrers, in the County of Northampton, William
Hughse esquire, Justice of Peace there, Thomas Rudde, John Iakson, Christopher
Freeman, John Dewbery, and Robert Kyddall Aldermen of the same Borough,
touching the order and rate taken by them concerning the wages of Artificers,
Laborers, Servants of Husbandry, and other workmen, according to the Act made
in the late Session of Parliament had at Westminster in the fifth year of the
reign of our Sovereign Lady the Queen, at the Court there holden the xv. day
of April, in the xxxvii. year of our said Sovereign Lady the Queen.

Artificers.
FRee Masons, Carpenters, Ioyners, or Caruers, Sawyers, Wheelewrights, Ropers,
Collermakers, Brickelayers, rough Masons, Turners, Glasi^rs, Curriers, Bakers,
Butchers, Shoomakers, Plasterers, Tylers, Taylers, Turners, Glouers, Sadlers,
and Cowpers, the best sort by the day from the midst of September to the
midst of March with meat and drink iiii. d. without, vi. d. from the midst
of March to the midst of September with meat and drink vi. d. without, viii.
d. by the year with livery, xl. s. without, lvi. s. viii. d. The master
Carpenter, and free Mason, having three or four men, and able to take charge
of work, with meat and drink vi. d. without, x. d. and according to the rate
in Winter, iiii. d. with meat and drink, without, viii. d. The second sort by
the day from the midst of September to the midst of March, with meat and
drink iii. d. without, vi. d. From the midst of March to the midst of
September with meat and drink, v. d. without, viii. d. by the year with
livery, xxxiii. s. iiii. d. without livery, xl. s.

Laborers by the year.
Common Laborers by the year from the midst of September to the midst of
March with meat and drink ii. d. without, iiii. d. from the midst of March,
to the midst of September with meat and drink, iii. d. without, vi. d.

Thatchers, Lath-renders, Mole takers, by the day from the midst of September
to the midst of March with meat and drink iiii. d. without, vi. d. from the
midst of March to the midst of September, with meat and drink vi. d.
without, viii. d.

Servants of Husbandry.
A Carter which uses carrying by the high way, with livery, xl. s. without
livery, xlvi. s. viii. d.

A servant able to be a Bailife of Husbandry, with livery xxxiii. s. iiii. d.
without xl. s.

A Hind servant of the best sort with livery, xxvi. s. without, xxxiii. s.
iiii. d.

A Hind servant of the second sort, with livery, xx. s. without, xxv. s.

Maidens.
A maid servant of the best sort with livery, xvi. s. without livery, xx. s.

A maid servant of the second sort, with livery xii. s. without livery, xvi. s.

Mowers and Reapers.
A mower of Corn and Grass with meat and drink iiii. d. without viii. d

A man reaping Corn with meat and drink iiii. d. without vii. d.

A woman reaping Corn with meat and drink iii. d. without, v. d.

A man for Hay and Harvest work, with meat and drink iii. d. without, vi. d.

A woman for the like work, with meat and drink ii. d. without iiii. d.

A mower of Grass well grown, for every acre viii. d. Barley and Oats well
grown, every acre iiii. d.

Beans, Pease, Fitches, and such like, every acre v. d. Wheat, Rye, Stubble
and Hame, for every acre, v. d.

A Reaper for reaping and binding, and laying in shockes, Wheat and Rye, for
every acre, x. d.

Threshers.
A Thresher of Wheat and Rye for every quarter vi. d. Barley and Oats, for
every quarter, iiii. d. Beans, Pease, Fitches, and Tares, for every quarter v.
d.

Hedgers.
A Hedger, for making a quick Hedge well plashed, for every pole containing
xviii. foot, ii. d. A dead Hedge for every pole containing xviii. foot, i. d.
ob.

Ditchers.
A Ditcher for making a ditch out of the ground being iii. foot deep, and
iii. foot wide, and one foot wide in the bottom, and double set with quick
set, every Pole v. d. For a Ditch of iii. foot wide, and ii. foot and a half
deep, with like quick set, for every Pole iii. d.

Ploughwrights.
A Ploughwright for axelling every Cart, iiii. d. for making every Plough, vii.
d.

Lath-renders.
For every hundredth of Lath well made, ii. d. ob.

Faggoters.
For every hundredth of brush Faggots felling and making, ix. d. every hundredth
containing ii. loades.

Sawyers.
For Sawing Board, every hundred xvi. d. and for every hundredth Slit work,
xviii. d.

Millers.
A Miller that can take charge to cogge and round, and lay new Milstones, and
all other things perteining to a Miller, xl. s. of the second sort, xxxiii. s.
iiii. d.

A Shepherd of the best sort for the fallowe field, xxxvi. s.

God save the Queen. 1595. August. 30.
Imprinted at London by the Deputies of CHRISTOPHER BARKER Printer to the
Queens most excellent Majesty 1595.


