By the King.
The effect of certain Letters Patents granted to Adam Newton, John Southcot,
and John Wood Esquiers, for the use of a new Invention of Steeping all kind of
Grain, that is to be sown, for the benefit of Husband^y.
Whereas the said Adam Newton, Io. Southcot and Io. Wood, have through their
great charge, industry, and experience devised and invented a new Invention of
Steeping all kind of grain (that is to be sown) in a certain liquour
compounded of sundry materials of very small value, which every Husbandman
has, or with little charge may procure: the which Art or Invention has been
found by many that have made trial of the same, to be very beneficial for the
increase of Corn and Grain, as well in sparing of Soil, as also in preserving
the Seed from birds, foul and vermin, as by Certificate exhibited unto his
Majesty's Commissioners has very clearly been testified: Whereupon the Kings
most Excellent Majesty has been pleased by his Highness Leters Patents,
sealed with his great Seal of England, to grant unto the said Adam Newton,
John Southcot. and John Wood, and their Deputies and Assigns, the sole use,
exercise and benefit of the said Invention. And h^s Majesty has also thereby
straightly prohibited all persons, that none of them do attempt directly or
indirectly, the using, or practicing of the said Invention of Steeping of Seed
corn and Grain, as is aforesaid, without the special License of the said
Patentees, upon pain of forfeiture thereof, with other penalties expressed in
the said Letters Patents.

Given at Westminster the fifth day of June 1613. in the xj. year of Our Reign
of Great Britain, France and Ireland.
ALso these are to give notice and knowledge to all and every person and
persons, that are or shall be desirous to have the use and commodity of the said
Invention, That if they please to resort to the house of (...)there the said
Patentees, or some of their Deputies, shall be ready to confer and agree with
any such person or persons, for the licensing, using, and instructing them in
the said Invention.

Imprinted at London by Robert Barker, Printer to the Kings most Excellent
Majesty.


