A Looking Glass for England. Wherein those enormities and foul abuses may
most evidently be seen, which are the destruction and overthrow of every
Christian Commonwealth. () Likewise, the only means how to prevent such
dangers: by imitating the wholesome aduertisements contained in this Book.
Which sometime was the Jewel and delight of the right honorable Lord and
father to his Country, Fraunces Earl of Bedforde, deceassed.

AT LONDON, Printed by John C. for Henry Car, and Thomas Butter. Anno. Dom.
1590.

To the right Honorable Sir Thomas Henage, Knight, vize Chamberlain to her
excellent Majesty, Treasurer of her royal Chamber, and one of her highness
most honorable privy Counsel: all happiness in this life, and the fullness of
felicity in the life to come, heartily wished and prayed for.
Needless were it for me (right honorable) to trouble your learned ears
with any frivolous dyscourse, concerning the manifold virtues contained in
this little Book: because the work sufficiently declares it self, and your
judgment exceeds my simple demo^stration. As for the noble man, who sometime
made account of this worthy Jewel, and kept it (as has been known) with
no little care, declaring in his own honorable course of life, the perfect
imitation of so singular precepts, as he was generally reputed a fatherly
friend to his Country, and a bright shining star in his Princes Court: Let
this crystal mirror, wherein may be seen the lively shapes of virtue and
vice (honorable Sir Thomas) be patronized by you, for noble Fraunces Earl of
Bedfordes sake, let this his daily and hourlie looking glass, be the more
welcome to you.

Many are the copies in writing hereof, secretly delivered abroad among both
noble and other, who for the matter it self, and entire affection to the man
while he lived, keep them as the apple of their eye, and are fearful to
loose such excellent documcnts. Long did I travail to get a copy of this
famous work, yet all in vain, till being sent for to a dear friend of mine,
that lay (under the fatherly correction of God) upon his death bed: and for
he had nothing of greater esteem to leave his friend (albeit he had the
blessing of God in some measure) gave me this sweet Book, whereof I was more
glad, than had he given me what terrestrial affection to much coueteth.

Being possessed of this noble Bedfordes Jewel, whose name I honor while I
live, for many benefits received: I could not conceal it to my self, but
showing it to diverse my friends, who daily desired copies thereof, as I my
self had done, and finding my self unable to furnish the desire of so many:
as well to satis-fie them, as other (who I know are in like sort affected) I
was persuaded to make the same common by impression, and so have done to their
no little contentment.

And for your honors forvvard zeal to virtue, favoring all such as are true
professors thereof, as also for defense of this Book from wicked detractors: I
make as humble present thereof to your honor, that as you are in lively follower
of that worthy Earl and Counselor in life: so pray I, that your reward may
be with him in the kingdom of Heaven.

A looking Glass for England: Wherein those blemishes and abuses may be
perfectly seen, which are the destruction and overthrow of every Christian
Commonwealth.
The first abuse. A wise man without works. Capit. 1.
AMong those several maimes and blemishes in any estate whatsoever, the first
that presents it self, is a wise man or a Preacher without good works: that
is to say, such a one as does not work according to his teaching, and to the
wisdom which he delivers with his own tongue. For the hearers do despise
the good and wholesome doctrine, if they perceive that the works of the Preacher
do differ from his teaching. And the authority of the Preacher shall never be
good, except (by example of good life) he fasten it in the heart of the hearer:
especially when the Preacher himself is fallen into the love of sin, and will
not apply the wholesome salues of other Preachers to his own wounds. The Lord
therefore willing to instruct his Disciples both in doctrine and good works,
taught them how they should take heed thereunto, saying. Math. 5.13.
If the salt be unsavory, wherein shall it be made sauorie? that is to say, if
the Preacher be out of the way, and do not as he ought to do, what Preacher
shall bring him in again? And if the light that is within thee is become
darkness, how great then shall the darkness be it self? If the eye have lost the
use and office of sight: what man can require that same service of ye hand or
foot, or any other member of the body? Therefore let Preachers take heed, that
they incur not a sharper vengeance, if they be the greater occasion to many
that they do perrish.

Example of a wise man without works.
For Solomon himself, while he did transgress, and work contrary to his
great wisdom: was the cause, that by his salt only, the kingdom of all the
people of Israel was divided. Wherefore those persons to whom many things are
committed, have the greater loss if they bestow not that well, which they have
received of their head and Governor: and therefore he that has the greater
charge, shall make the greater answer and reckoning. For the servant which
knows the will of his Master and does it not, shall suffer sharp scourges
and bitter punishments.

The second abuse. An old man without devotion and godly fear. Cap. 2.
The weaker and more old a man is in his body, the younger and more strong
should he be in his soul.
THe second stain and shameful abuse, is an old man that has no holiness in
him: but when the members and parts of his body be old and feeble, the limbs
of his mind, that is to say, of the inward man, are nothing the stronger. It
is decent and comely, that old men should give themselves to more perfect
holiness and devotion, then other men, whom the flourishing time of this world
has not as yet forsaken. The example may be gathered in wood, that even as the
Tree is accounted naught and evil, which after it has blossomed, brings
forth no good fruit: so among men, he is a wicked and evil person, who when
the flower of his youth is past, does not in the old time of his body, bring
forth ripe works of good fruits. For what thing can be more ridiculous, then
a man's mind not to endeavor to attain strength and perfection, when all the
parts of his body (by age) are come to defection and end? When his eyes were
dim, his ears hard of hearing, his head balde, his cheeks withered
through lack of blood: when he begins to want his teeth, to have his
breath strong and earthly, his breast stuffed with phlegm, evermore troubled
with the cough: and finally, when his legs do fail under him as he goes, by
age, and swelling with diseases: the inward man that feels no age, being
also pained with the self same diseases. And all these sickenesses and
infirmities rehearsed, are signs and tokens before, that the house of this
body shall shortly decay.

What have we to do then, while the end of this life draws so fast on? but
that such as are old, should desire to covet nothing else, then how they
might soonest obtain the felicity of the life to come. Although the time of
death be uncertain to al men, yet it is most natural to old men.
For to young men, the end of their life is always at hand and uncertain, but
unto old men it is more ripe and natural, as also agreeable to their age.

Two things in a man never wexe old.
Wherefore a man must take heed of two things, which never do were old in his
flesh, and do draw the whole man unto sin: that is to say, the heart and
the tongue. For the heart is always imagining of new thoughts, and the tongue is
evermore swifte in speaking whatsoever the heart does imagine or think.

Let old men therefore beware, that these young members do not bring the
whole harmony of their bodies out of tune: causing the other parts of the body
(which do show gravity) to be laughed to scorn. For every man ought to take
heed, what becomes the age which he bears, that he may do those things
which shall cause, that neither his life, age nor behavior may be touched with
despising.

The third abuse. A young man without obedience. Cap. 3.
Disobedience is the disorder of all the world.
Here must we entreat on the third eye sore, namely: if a young man be found
without obedience, whereby the world is brought out of good order. For how
does he think to be reverenced when he comes to age, that in his youth will
show no obedience or reverence to them which are old? And therefore it is a
common saying among old men, that he can never play the Master well, who has
not one way or other declared himself serviceable and obedient to some other
before.

Example of our Savior Christ his obedience.
For the which cause, our Lord Jesus Christ, in the time of his being upon the
earth in his flesh, til the lawful time and age of a teacher, that he should
teach: did serve and minister obediently to his Parents. Likewise then, as
gravity, sadness, and perfect godly manners, are looked for and beheld in old
men, so to young men belongs (of right) humble service, subjection and
obedience.

Wherefore in those precepts and commandments of the Law, which appertain to
the love of our neighbor, the first is the honor of Father and Mother, being
commanded unto us: that although the carnal father be not alive, or is
unworthy, yet you must to some other which is alive, show obedience and give
honor, till such time thou co^mest to an age, worthy to be honored thy self.
The vocable father is taken four manner of ways.
For this word Father, is taken four manner of ways in the Scripture, that is
to say, by nature: by the nation or people: for counsel: and for age. Of the
natural father, Jacob speaks to Laban, saying. Gene. 31.42.
If the fear of my father Isaac had not been here, thou would have taken
all that I have. Of the father of the people, it is said, when the Lord spoke
to Moses out of the bush. Deuteronomy. 32.
I am the God of thy Fathers, the God of Abraham, the God of Isaac, the God of
Jacob. Of the father for age and counsel, it is likewise written. Deuteronomy. 10.12.
Ask the father and he shall tell thee, and the Elders, and they shall show
unto thee.

Wherefore, if thy natural Father be dead, and so not worthy to be obeyed, if
any other old man do give thee good counsel, thou must show the obedience
of a young man unto him. For how shall he be honored in his old age, which
refused to follow the good lessons of obedience, when he was a young man
himself? Whatsoever a man does labor, that shall he reap and gather. In like
manner, all discipline (at the first) seems to be unpleasant and painful:
but afterward it shall give to them that have exercised themselves therein, the
most pleasant and quiet fruit of right and justice. For like as there is no
fruit found on that Tree, which first did bear no blossoms: so in age, that
man shall never have the due honor to age, who in his youth has not first
been exercised with some discipline. And which way can discipline be without
obedience?

Obedience is the mother of discipline.
It follows then, that a young man without obedience, is a young man without
discipline: for obedience is the mother of all discipline. It requires great
exercise: example and rule whereof, it has taken by our Lord Jesus Christ,
Example of obedience.
who being obedient unto his father, yea to the death, and that to the death of
the cross, took upon him gladly ignominy and rebuke.

The fourth abuse. A rich man without charity. Capit. 4.
NExt ensues the fourth argument of evil, which is a rich man destitute of
alms deeds or charity: such a one as does hide and lay up til the time to
come, more then is sufficient for him, distributing nothing to the poor and
needy, and so while he uses so great diligence, in keeping the goods
gathered on the earth, he leeseth the treasure which is everlasting of the
heavenly Country. Whereto our Lord Jesus called the rich young man, who
demanded of him the way to perfection, saying to him. Math. 19.21.
If thou will be perfect, go and sell all that thou have, and give it to the
poor, and come and follow me, and thou shall have treasure in heaven. Which no
man ever can have, except he comfort the poor.

Let not him therefore sleep upon his riches, which may do good unto ye
poor, for although a rich man have gathered together great store of goods, The
nature of man is sustained with small things.
yet can he not enjoy them all alone, in respect the nature of man is sustained
with few and small things. Then what greater folly can there be in the
world, then for the excessive feeding and clothing of one man: to loose all
the pleasures of the kingdom of heaven, and so to purchase the everlasting
pains of hell, without hope of any comfort or help?

That thing therefore which of necessity thou must once forsake, in hope to
be rewarded again everlastingly, do thou distribute willingly and
cheerfully. For all things which we behold with our eyes, are temporal,
but those which we see not, are eternal and everlasting. For so long as we
are temporal, things of like quality do us service, but when we depart
from this earthly abode, everlasting joy shall attend upon us, and felicity
without limit or ending.

What reason have we to love those things which we cannot alwaie have with
us? when we evidently behold, that the lands and substance of a rich man, do
declare him to be without wit and judgment, because he loves those things
with the desire of his whole heart, which never do render him love again. For
if a man love gold, silver, lands, dainty fare, fine meats, and brute beasts,
the natural course of things do teach us, that none of these can yield him
love again. What thing is then further from al reason, then to love that which
cannot love thee again, and to neglect that, which gives to thee all things
with love? For that cause, God commanded us to love, not the world, but our
neighbor, since that he can render love again for love: which thing worldly
goods cannot do, it is well known. Even so GOD commands us to love our
enemy, that the same love may make him of our enemy, our freende.

Let every covetous rich man therefore, who would have everlasting riches,
distribute (while he is here) to the poor and needy, those riches which are
but temporal, and do not continue for ever. For if a man will not sell ye
thing which he loves, how can another man bye that thing which he coueteth?
Covetous men are called curssed of GOD.
and therefore the covetous men are called curssed of the most righteous Judge,
because they which past by them, did not say unto the^: The blessing of God be
upon you, and we do bless you in the name of God. Therefore the covetous men
are cursed and unhappy: who for transitory goods do go to everlasting
damnation.

But on the other side: Math. 5.7.
Blessed are the pitiful, for they shall find mercy and pity. In deeds
of charity, the will is taken for the deed, where the power is not to show the
deed.
Happy is that man that is merciful, for so much as God (in this virtue) does
not look upon the substance and riches: but upon the affection and heart of
man.

The fifth abuse. A woman without shamefastness. Cap. 5.
PRoceeding to the fifth notorious kind of abuse, I find it to be a Woman
without modesty or shamefastnes. For even as wisdom does both get and
keep good manners in men, so in Women, shamefastnes does bring forth,
nourish and keep, all honest and good works.

The effects of shamefastnes.
Shamefastness keeps them chaste and pure, it plucketh in wary respect of
life, it refraineth from strife and debate, it asswageth anger, it quenches
the desire of the flesh, it does moderate the desire of the mind, it
chasteneth wantonness, it banisheth drunkenness, it makes few words, it
brideleth the greedy desire of the gut, and utterly condemns theft, what
more? It brideleth and tameth all vice, it nourishes all virtues, and
whatsoever is before God and man acceptable.

A life which is unchaste, is neither The reward of immodestie.
praised of men in this world, nor rewarded of God in the world to come. The
reward of a chaste life.
But the contrary, which is a chaste life, is well spoken of among men, and
rejoices also in the hope of the bliss to come. It does win the love of
men which are living and do perceive it, and to them which come after, if
leaves a goodly example of imitation, being a pleasant and a godly memory.
It delights always in good manners, and agrees unto them, evermore refreshing
the soul with continual reading and meditation of the holy Scriptures. Like
does well agree with like.
And besides this, it keeps the examples of good which are gone, being always
acquainted and joined in company with them that are perfect and honest.

By what tokens a man shall perceive the virtue of shamefastnes in a woman.
The exercise of shamefastness, consists in two things, that is to say, in
the outward behavior of the body, and the inward affection of the mind. In
the body, by giving good examples before men, as the holy Apostle says: and
in ye mind, before God we do provide and begin good works. The properties
of shamefastnes
For the shamefastness and chastity of the body is, not to covet other men's
goods, and to fly all uncleanness: not to eat and drink but in time: not to
be a gigler and a prouoker of other men to laughter: no speaker and teller of
false and vain tales: to be soberly apparrelled, all things being set in
comely order, according to godliness in all parts of the body, as well in the
hair on the head as in the raiment. Not to company with the ungodly, neither
to look proudly or disdainfully upon any man, nor yet wantonlie to cast up
the eyes, to the evil provocation of other: not to go nicely and trypping in
the street, having a pace like as it were in a game or a play, to be seen,
and to tempt other therewith.

To be also inferior unto no man in good works, to be occasion to no man of
reproach or shame, to blaspheme or slander no man: to hate none that is good,
nor to scorn such as are old, not to meddle with those things which thou
know not, nor to contend or strive with thy better: and finally, not to blab
abroad all things that thou know. These things do make a man loved of his
neighbor, and acceptable in the sight of God,

The chastity of the soul, and the properties thereof.
The shamefastnes and chastity of the soul, is to do those things which thou
do, more for the sight of GOD, then to be seen of men: to stay the desire
of evil thoughts: to esteem every man better then thy self: not to infect
thy judgment with false doctrine: to agree with them that are to the Catholic
and universal faith: to cleave only to God: to presume nothing of thy self,
but to commit al thy doings to the help of God: to be always humble in his
sight: to offer to our Lord Jesus Christ, the chastity of thy inward mind:
never to make an end, or to cease from good works during thy life: and with a
strong heart to despise the present tribulations of thy mind: of things
worldly, to love nothing but thy neighbor: to set and lay up the treasure of
all thy love in heaven: and finally, to be assured, that for thy well doing,
thou shall not leese the reward in heaven.

What especial benefits ensue by shamefastness.
Shamefastnes, is a goodly ornament of noble persons. It exalts those which
be humble, making them noble. It is the beauty of the^ that are feeble and
weak: the prosperity of them which be sick, the comfort of them that are in
heaviness, the increase of all beauty: the flower of Religion: the defense and
buckler against sin: a multiplier of good deeds: and to be short, it is the
only paramour and darling of God the creator of all.

The sixth abuse. A Master or a Ruler without virtue. Capit. 6.
Virtue consists not in the outward, but inward strength
IN this place follows the sixth abuse, namely: a Lord or Master that is
without virtue. For it profits nothing to have power and authority, or to
rule, if the Master have not in himself, the direct and orderly sway of
virtue. But this virtue consists not so much in the externe and outward
strength of the body, which is very requisite and necessary for such as are
worldly Rulers, as it is to be exercised in the inward strength, in good and
virtuous manners. For often times a man does leese the might and power to rule,
through the negligence of the inward part: as it appeared by Eli the Priest, 1.
Kings. 2 32. Ely was punished for his children.
who while he punished not his children with the rigorous and strait rod of
justice, when they did sin: God, (as one that would be revenged for their
wickedness upon him) sharply punished him, as one that consented to their
naughtines.

Three necessary points for a Ruler.
Therefore it is necessary, that Rulers have these three things in them, that
is to say: terror to be feared, good governance, and love. For except the
Governor be feared and loved, his ordinance and rule cannot stand. Which way
a Ruler must get the love of his subjects.
Therefore through his goodness and honest familiare conditions, let him procure to
get the love of them which are under him, and also by just and discreet
punishment. Not that he would or should appear to revenge his own quarrel or
injury: but that the transgression or breaking of the Law of God, might be
punished, and so to be had in fear.

Wherefore, while many persons do depend and hang upon him, he himself must
altogether depend and hang upon God, and cleave only to him: who has set him
in that rule: who has established him, and made him to be a stronger man,
whereby to bear the burdens of many. Except the foundation be good, the
building decays.
For except a beam be laid fast and sure, upon a stronger thing which is able
to bear it, all that is laid upon it shall fall down: yea and it self
also, through the very bigness and weight of it self, shall fall to the
ground with the burden thereof. So a Prince or Ruler, except he stick fast to
his maker, both he himself, and all that is with him does quickly perrish.

Promotions do change conditions, either to the better or worse.
There be some, who after they be set in authority, do become better men, and
do cleave more near to God, then they did before: and some are contrariwise
thereby made the wurse.

Example of Moses and Saul.
For Moses after he was made Governor of the people, he had communication with
God more familiarly the^ he had before. But Saul the son of Cys, after he
was King, through his pride and disobedience, highly sinned and offended against
God.

Example of king Solomon and Jeroboam.
King Solomon, after he sat in the seat of his Lord and father King David,
God increased and made him rich with the gift of wisdom, to govern over
innumerable people. And contrariwise, after that Jeroboam the servant of
Solomon, had usurped part of the kingdom of the house of David, he turned
ten Tribes of the people of Israel, which were in the part of Samaria, from
the true and right worship of God, to the wicked and deuillish worshipping of
Idols.

This has been much seen in our days.
By which examples, it is apparent and manifest, that some men when they do
come to dignity, do grow more perfect and better: and some again, through
pride of their advancement and rising up, do fall and were worse. By both the
which is to be understood, that they which increase in goodness, do it by the
virtue and godly disposition of the mind, eue^ by the only help of GOD: and
the other, that they do fall by the weakness of the mind, through the
negligence and small regard they have to virtue, which no man can have without
the help of GOD.

Mark well this lesson.
The man that has many things under him, whereof he has charge, and has not
the strength and virtue of the mind, is no way able to fulfill or perform what
he should do. For many things do bring with the^ many troubles and vexations.

Trust in the Lord, and he shall nourish thee.
Therefore let every man that is a Ruler, procure first with all industry of his
mind, that in all things he may be sure of the help of God. For if in his
doings he have the Lord and governor of all Lords and Governors to his
helper, no man can set light or despise his ordinance and rule, because
there is no power but of God. He lifts up the poor and needy out of the
very dunghill, and makes him to sit with the Princes of his people. Likewise
he casts down the mighty from their seat, exalting them which are meek
and lowly: that all the world might be obedient unto God, and his glory only
exalted.

The seventh abuse. A Christian man full of brawling and contention. Capit. 7.
A Most yrksome and pernicious thing is this seventh abuse, which now we have
in hand, to wit: a Christian man full of contention, who by faith and
baptism, being a partaker and a bearer of the name of Christ, does (against
the sayings and mind of Christ) delight in pleasures of the world, which are
transitory, and do daily fall always. Whatsoever a man loves, it is either
for the love of the thing it self loved: or for the love of some other thing
got thereby.
Because all manner of things for which a man does strive, do cause the same
strife, either for the love that is borne to them, being a covetous desire
for himself, or for the love of some other thing, which lies, hid under an
odious and hateful matter.

As for example, war, although it be odious and an hateful thing, yet is it
holden and maintained on both sides with a bold and fierce courage, for the
love and desire which men have to win the victory, and for the purchasing of
liberty. In like manner, many other things are desired and sought after, with
contention, who may have them first before another: by no less hateful and
painful labor, yea and fear, then the other which are got by most
detestable war.

The reward of contention, is the obteyninge of his purpose, for that he loved
And therefore a man may perceive, there is no contention but for that which is
loved, that is to say, for a loving and a freendly reward, which follows to
their mind after it is ended. Whosoever therefore strives for any manner of
thing of this world, shows evidently and plainly, that he loves this world.

How then does the holy Ghost by the mouth of Saint John, forbid that this
world should be loved? to whom he says. 1 John, 2.15.
Love not the world, nor the things that be in the world. The love of god and
of ye world, are always separated.
For the love of God, and the love of the world, cannot dwell together in one
heart: An apt similitude.
even as the eyes of a man cannot behold the heaven above, and the earth
beneath, both at once with one look.

But let us search and see, whether there be in the world, any thing indeed
that is to be loved, and what is ye world which the speech of God forbids us
to love. What we are commanded to love in ye earth.
We are not commanded to love the earth, nor the things which come out of the
earth, but only our neighbor, for whose sake all things are made. Him thou
art commanded to love: for all other things which do perrish and fade away,
cannot go up with us to heaven. But our neighbor is heir (as well as we)
of the kingdom which shall never fail: and therefore we must love together
one another heartily.

For so much therefore as we shall not continue always in the world, but shall
fail also with the world: Wherefore we are commanded to love our neighbor.
we are commanded not to love the world but our neighbor, because (yea, being
on earth) he is a part and portion of the heavenly kingdom, although he be
among these low Elements, which makes him worthy to be loved of all such as
are desirers of the heavenly bliss: for so much as in the high Country, which
is the kingdom of heaven, he shall be heir with his brethren for ever. Why
the love of the world is forbid.
For this cause God does forbid us to love this world: least he which so
loves, be separated and made a stranger from the love of God. That thing then
should not be striuen for, which a man may not love, because a man bearing
the name of Christ, must see that he have also the self same or like manners
in him, that Christ had. Who is a Christian man.
For no man can worthily be called a Christian man, except he agree with Christ
in manners and good living. As touching Christ, the prophet does write of
himself these words. Esaias, 42.1.2.
Behold the child whom I have chosen, mine elect, my soul is well pleased in
him: I will send my spirit upon him. He shall not strive, he shall not be an
outcryer, nor extend his voice in the street.

Behold, Christ does not strive or cry out: therefore if thou do covet to be
like him in manners, strive not, least thou appear to do nothing, but abuse
the name of Christ in the Church. For God commands them which follow him,
saying. Math. 23.8.9.10.
Be not ye called Masters, for there is but one your Master, who is in
heaven. And call ye not father upon the earth, for ye have one father which is
in heaven. For ye are altogether brethren: whom he commands to make
common supplication, and prayer after this manner. Math. 6.9.
O our father which art in heaven, hallowed be thy name. etc.

He then contendeth and labors in vain to have a father in earth, when he
professes, that both his Country and father is in heaven, which Country no
man can possess and enjoy, but he that refuses to set all his care on this
world, as one passing not for it.

The eight abuse. A poor man proud. Cap. 8.
TO behold a poor man proud, may worthily in this place stand for the
eight abuse: because although he have nothing, yet is he puffed up with an
high aspiring mind, which thing, even they that are rich men are forbidden to
do: Math. 23.12.
That they should not be high minded. What thing is more foolish, then that he
who through great poverty and extreme misery is brought low, and as it were to
the very ground, because (that in respect of that consideration) he might
behave himself lowly: should in this mean estate bear a proud heart against
GOD? The Angels cast down from heaven for pride.
For this fault, even they that were created in the high habitacle of heaven,
were dejected and thrown down from thence.

Wherefore then will he be proud and high minded here on earth, as though he
were a man of exceeding great power: who (before al other men) should carry and
behave himself both humble and lowly?

But that the poor people shall not bear their poverty heavenly, with
sorrowfulnes and sadness of heart: let them hear what they shall receive of
God, he says. Math. 5.3.
Blessed are the poor in spirit, for theirs is the kingdom of heaven. For the
merciful Judge does handle all things so indifferently, that to them to whom
he has not given the riches of this world, he gives the kingdom of heaven,
that he may be a rich man in ye glorious place, who on earthly things has not
set his care or delight.

A christian caveat for poor men.
Poor men therefore must take heed, least while in poverty and need they
pass over the pleasure and kingdom of this world: they should (through the
lack of wisdom) leese also the kingdom of heaven. Mark this well, and it
will return to thy benefit.
For although by the order and dispensation of God, they do live in earthly
poverty, yet they may endeavor to be poor and meek in spirit. For the
kingdom of God is not promised to all poor men, without exception
indifferently: but to them only, in whom the humble and lowly meekenes of
the heart, does accompany the want and lack of outward riches. Why the poor
are called poor in spirit.
Because an humble poor man, is called poor in spirit, who when he is
outwardly poor and needy, does not inwardly extol himself with a proud
heart, for the lowlines of the mind shall do more to the attaining of the
kingdom of heaven, then the temporal poverty and lack a worldly riches.
For meek and lowly men possessing riches, may be called poor in spirit:
whereas those that are proud, and yet have nothing, without doubt are
dispossessed of the blessing, which is promised to the poor in spirit.

Of both these sorts, the holy Scripture speaks on this wise. Proverb. 13.7.
Some make themselves rich, although they have nothing, and some make
themselves poor, albeit they have never so great riches.

The rich man then being poor in spirit, is as a poor man notwithstanding al
his riches: and ye poor man that is proud in heart, is as a rich man although
he be naked and poor. Hu^blenes of the mind is a glorious poverty.
It follows, that humblenes of the mind, is a noble and glorious poverty,
and the proud stubbornness of the heart, a foolish kind of riches. Therefore
poor men must have in mind what they are, and because they cannot obtain in
worldly goods what they would have, let not their hearts be puffed up with
pride, as though they had all that they cannot have.

The ninth abuse. A wicked and an unjust King. Capit. 9.
The office of a King, and what his name imports.
NOw come we to a capital abuse indeed, namely: an unjust or a wicked King or
Prince: for a King must not be wicked or unjust, but correct and punish the
wicked, and in his own person defend and maintain the dignity of his name.
For by the name of a King, is understood, that he may rule well all his
subjects which are under him.

But how can he correct and rebuke other, who does not amend his own manners,
if they be wicked? For in the righteousness and justice of a King, is his seat
exalted: and in the fidelity and truth of a Prince, is his government and
rule established and made strong.

Wherein appears the righteousness of a King.
The righteousness and justice of a King, is to oppress no man wrongfully by
power: to judge and give sentence between man and man indifferently, without
affection of any person: to defend Strangers, Orphane children, and widows:
to see that robbery and theft reign not in his Realm: to punish straightly
adulterous and fornicating persons: not to promote and exalt such as are
wicked: Esaias, 10.33.
to give no living to such as are unchaste persons, and makers of vicious
pastimes, to destroy out of his land all that are wicked against God and their
Parents: to suffer no murderer or man queller to live, much less such as do
kill either father or mother: to defend the Church: to comfort the poor with
deeds of charity: to take heed that his Officers under him be just and good
men: to have of his Counsel, ancient, wise, and sober men: to give no ear to
Soothsayers, Witches, or Enchaunters: not to keep anger in his stomach: to
defend his Country justly and valiantly against adversaries: to put his whole
trust and confidence for all things in God: not to be the prouder in heart, if
things do succeed after his mind, and to bear the contrary pacientlie: to
keep steadfastly the Catholic or universal Faith: not to suffer his
children to do wickedlie: to bestow certain hours daily in prayer, not to
eat and drink out of season. Esaias. 30.19.
For woe be to that Land, (as the Prophet says) whose King is a child, and
whose great men do rise up early to eat and drink.

How happy the King and kingdom is, being thus governed.
The keeping of these things, makes a kingdom in this world to be prosperous,
and afterward brings the king himself to a more excellent and royal
kingdom. But he that rules and governs not his Kingdom after this
prescript, does maintain, suffer and bear many evils, inconveniences, and
adversities in his Realm, whereinto it falls for the lack of good rule. The
discommodities which happen to a Realm, where is an unrighteous Prince.
Because oftentimes hereby, the peace of tranquillity of the people is broken,
and the Realm evil spoken of, the fruits of the ground are diminished, and
the ground made bare, and finally, it causes the people to be negligent in
doing their duty.

Many and sundry sores do infecte a Realm, and hinders the prosperous
weal thereof. The death and loss of friends and children, do bring sadness
and heaviness unto men's hearts, for when enemies do invade the Country, they
waste and impouerish the land on all sides, they sley up the Cattle great
and small. Again, troublesome wether and great winds, do hinder the grows
and increase of the ground: it makes also the Sea as troubled and unable to
do service, yea, oftentimes blasts and lightnings wither the Corn on the
ground, and blossoms on the trees. How dangerous the unrighteousness of a King
is.
But above all things, the unrighteousness of a King, does make dark and
clowdie the face of his whole Realm: being the cause oftentimes (through his
iniquity and wicked government) that his Nephews, yea, nor his children after
him, do inherit the Crown of their Father.

The Lord for the offense of Solomon, divided the Kingdom of the house of
Israel, out of the hands of his children. Behold what great goodness comes
of a righteous and good Prince: there is none so blind but may see it if they
will. What goodness ensues by a righteous Prince.
Of him comes the peace of the people, he is the defense of his Country, the
safeguard and liberty of his people, the strength of the whole Nation, the
remedy of all sorrows, the joy of men, the temperatnes of the wether, the
stilnes of the sea, the fruitful increase of the earth, the help and comfort of
the poor, the sure heritage of his children, and finally, to himself it is a
certain argument and hope, of eternal felicity to come.

A notable lesson for Kings and Rulers.
But yet let every King take this lesson with him, and mark it well: that as
among men he is set highest in his throne, so (if he minister not justice) he
shall be deepest in pain. For in this life, as many transgressors and
offenders as he had under him, so many in the time to come shall he have above
him, to his extreme sorrow and pain remediless.

two with thee, that in the mouth of two or three, all words may be ratified.
If he will not hear them, tell the Church. And if he will not hear the
Church, take him as an Ethnike and a Pulicane.

After such an order must he be driven out, which will not obey the Bishop and
teacher: and he that is thus expulsed, ought not to come in company either of
Teacher or Bishop. For it is written of the Priest in the Law: Leuit. 27.7.
Let him not take a wife that is a whore, or polluted, nor put from her
husband: for such an one is unholy unto his God. He means the spiritual
ministration which they have in punishing sin.
Therefore he that does join to him in company such a body, being
excommunicated by a faithful Minister, without the consent of him: breaks
the Law of holy Priest-hoode, which is an elect kind of Christian men. After
this fashion must a Bishop behave himself, over them to whom he is a
watchman: but what manner of man, he must be himself, the Apostle S. Paul
shows in this wise. 1. Tim 3 2 3.4.5.6. What a Bishop ought to be.
A Bishop must be blameless, and husband of one wife, watching, sober, comely
apparrelled, a lover and maintainer of hospitality, apt to teach. Not given to
overmuch Wine, no striker, not greedy of filthy lucre: but gentle, abhorring
fighting, abhorring covetousness. One that rules well his own house, having
children in subjection with all gravity and cleannes of life. Not a young
Scholar, least he, being puffed up, fall into the snares of the devil. He
must also have a good report of the^ which are with out, least he fall into the
rebuke and snare of the devil, that he may show in work, that thing which he
teaches in doctrine. Therefore let negligent Bishops take heed, for in the
time of vengeance, the Lord complains by the mouth of his Prophet, saying.
Ezekiel. 34.2.
My Pastors have ground my people to powder, the sheepheards did not feed my
flock, but they did feed themselves.

Gods flock must be fed in due season.
But rather let them whom the Lord has set over his family, procure to give
them meat in due season: a measure of Wheat, that is to say, pure and true
doctrine, that when the Lord comes, they may deserve to have these
comfortable words. Math. 25.21.
My good and faithful servant, because thou have been faithful over a few,
I shall set thee over many, enter into the joy of the Lord.

The eleventh abuse. A people without discipline. Capit. 11.
People without obedience, run hedlong to perdition.
Coming now to the eleventh blemish in this life, it is comprehended in these
words: a people without discipline: who when they do not practice obedience
in their living to good and godly doctrine, do choke themselves with the
common snare of perdition. For they do not escape the wrath of God, except
they earnestly follow those things which they are taught. And therefore the
Psalmist says to the people which will not receive discipline: Psalm. 2.12.
Apprehende and receive dyscipline, least God be stirred to anger.

What discipline is.
Discipline is a manner of teaching, which leads men to the amendment of
evil and naughty manners: it is also a keeping and following of the rules and
lessons of our Elders, whereof S. Paul speaks, saying: Abide and continue in
discipline, God offers himself to you, as to his children. But if ye be out
of discipline, whereof ye are made already partakers, then are ye aduouterers,
and not his children. They therefore which are gone from him, and be out of
discipline, do receive no inheritance of the Kingdom of heaven: but if
children do receive and bear the correction of their fathers discipline, let
them not despair or doubt, but they shall receive in time to come, the
inheritance of the Father.

Of this discipline Esaias speaks, saying: Esaias. 1.16.17.
Cease from doing wickedly, and learn to do well. And the like sentence is
found in the Psalmist, who says: Psalm. 36.10.
Decline from evil and do good. Wherefore that man is very miserable and
unhappy, which throws from him discipline: for he is bolder then the
Soldiers which crucified Christ, and did cut out his garment, for he does cut
the discipline of Christ's Church. And likewise as the coat does cover all
the body saving the head, even so is the whole Church clad and defended with
discipline, saving only Christ, who is the head of the Church. And as that
coat was whole without any seame, so is this discipline given to the Church
whole and sound.

Example of discipline by Christ's own words
Of this discipline, the Lord when he should ascend up to his Father, after
he was risen from death, spoke to his disciples, saying: Luke. 24.49.
Abide ye here still in the City of Jerusalem, till ye be clad from above
with power. The discipline of the Church is the coat of Christ.
Then the discipline of the Church is the coat of Christ, and he which is not
within this discipline, is out of the body of Christ.

Let us not therefore cut that coat, but let us cast lots who shall have it,
that is to say: let us break nothing of the commandments of God, but every
man whereunto he is called, therein let him constantly abide with the Lord.

The twelfth abuse. A people without Law. Cap. 12.
THe last of this Catalogue of abuses, is a people without Law, who while they
despise the sayings of God, and the ordinances of his Laws: do run through
diverse ways of errors, into the snare of transgression and breaking of the
Laws.

As concerning those ways of error, the Prophet (under the person of a
transgressor) does lament and bewail mankind on this wise. Esaias. 54.13.
We have erred (says he) and gone astray like sheep, every one after his
own way.

Of these ways it is spoken in the Book of wisdom, by the mouth of Solomon,
saying: Prou. 14.1
Many ways appear good and strait unto men: but the last end of their
ways, brings them to death. And truly there are many ways of perdition,
when men do not regard the Kings high way, which is right and straight out,
turning neither on the right hand nor on the left: the which way, our Lord
Jesus Christ (who is the end of the Law, to the justification of all that do
believe) plainly shows us, saying. Math. 11.29.
I am the way, the truth, and the life, no man comes unto the Father, but by
me. To which way he calls all men without respect, saying: Come unto me al
ye that labor and are heavy laden, and I will refresh you. For there is no
exception of persons before GOD, with whom there is neither Jew nor Greek,
man nor woman, bond nor free: but Christ is all things in all, and all are
one in Christ Jesus.

The people without Law, are without Christ.
For so much as Christ is the end of the Law, those which are without the Law,
are without Christ: then the people that be without the Law, are likewise
without Christ.

It is a great abuse, that in the time of the Gospel, any people should be
with out the Law: for so much as the Apostles were commanded to preach to all
Nations, and the thunder-clappes of the Gospel, were heard over all the parts
of the earth, and the Gentles which sought not after righteousness, have
received it. And finally, considering that they which were far off, were
made nigh in the blood of Christ, and they which sometime were not a people,
are now made the people of GOD in Christ: being now a glad time, and the day
of salvation, the time of comfort in the sight of the Highest.

And since that every Nation has a witness of the resurrection, yea, since the
Lord himself bears witness thereunto, saying: Behold, I am with you always
to the end of the world. Therefore let not us be without Christ in this
transitory life, least Christ be without us in the world to come.

FINIS.

