I R HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE English royal blazon surmounted by a crown
JAMES By the grace of God King of England, Scotland, France, and Ireland
Defender of the Faith etc.
TO all to whom these presents shall come, greeting.
WHEREAS diverse great Deceipts and abuses tending not only to the prejudice of
us in our Customs and other duties, but also to the great deceit and
hinderance of many of our loving subjects are daily practiced and committed by
diverse persons using or exercising the Art, Mystery, and Trade of Dying, and
coloring of Woolles, Yarnes, Clothes, Kersies, Dozens, Bays, Says,
Knit-hose, Cottons, Rugges, and other Clothes, Stuffes, and Commodities within
this our Realm and Domynions of the same, being for the most part dyed and
colored with such Colors as are not perfect nor durable, but do within short
time decay and wear out, or otherwise become so stained and changed in such
sort, as they grow thereby altogether unprofitable and unfit for the use of our
loving subjects, and yet are uttered and sold as for good and perfect Colors,
to the great loss, hinderance, and detriment of such of our loving subjects as
do or shall buy or use the same, and to the discredit, and slander of the
said Commodities both at home and in all other foreign parts, being the
principal Commodities of our Realm, and yet the prizes and rates of the same
Dyings and Colorings are become so great and high by only seeming in show to
be good, as thereby the prizes of all kinds of the foresaid Commodities are not
only much increased and raised, (...) ^ompounded (...) for Dying out by Sir
^^^^ure Aston (...) ^t, and others.
but the same also exceedingly discredited both at home and abroad. Now for
as much as our trusty and well-beloved servants and subjects Sir Arthure Aston
knight, John Acamonty, Richard Harding Esquiers, George Silver, Robert Web,
and Frauncis Block Gentlemen, have by their own proper labor and industry,
and at their own great cost, charges, and expenses, found out not only the
true and perfect mean of working and dying with certain woods which by the laws
and statutes of this Realm are forbidden to be used in the Art of Dying, But
also a secret not heretofore discovered in Commixing and Compounding certain
stuff or stuffes with the said Wooddes or some of them for the binding and
fixing of the Colors to be made therewithal, with which composition, and with
other grounds to be used in the Art of Dying, they have undertaken to Dye and
Color, and to give directions to die and color, or cause to be dyed or
colored, All or any kinds of Woolles, Yarnes, Clothes, Kersies, Dozens, Bays,
Says, Knit-hose Cottons, Rugges, and all and every other stuffes and
Commodities whatsoever used or occupied within our Realm of England or the
Domynions thereof or of any part thereof with good and durable dies and
colors, such as shall continue, endure, and hold out all manner of wearing,
trials, and also to utter and sell the same at convenient and reasonable
prizes.

(...) grant for ^^inging in prohibited ^s, for the ^g of the Composition.
KNOW ye therefore that we greatly tendering and affecting the public and
general good and profit of all our loving Subjects, and for the advancement
of the trade and traffiique of Clothes and other the premises into all
foreign parts, in consideration of the premises, and for diverse other
weighty causes us thereunto especially moving, Of our especial grace, certain
knowledge, and mere motion, Have given and granted, and by these presents for
us, our heirs, and Successors do give and grant full, free, and lawful
power, license and authority unto the said Sir Arthure Aston, John Acamonty,
Richard Harding, George Silver, Robert Web, and Frauncis Block and either of
them, their and every of their executors administrators and assigns and every
of them, and to their and every of their servants, factors, and deputies to be
thereunto authorized by writing under the hands and seals of them or the
suruiuors of them or of any three or more of them, at all times and from time
to time during the space of One and Forty years next and ymmediatly coming
after the date hereof, to convey and bring, or cause to be conveyed or brought
into any the parts of this our Realm or the Domynions of the same from any the
parts beyond ye seas, All and all manner of Wood and Woods called or known by
the name or names of Log-wood and Block-wood and either of them, and all and
every such other Wood and Woods whatsoever by what name or names soever they
are or shall be called or known, which now be, or at any time heretofore have
been prohibited or forbidden to be used in ye said Art or mystery of Dying, by
any law, or statute of this our Realm of England in that case made and
provided, the said laws or statutes, or any other law, stature, act of
Parliament, or other matter or thing whatsoever to the contrary
notwithstanding.

PAYING unto us our heirs and successors such Customs, Subsidies, and other
duties for all and every the same Woods so to be brought in as is aforesaid, as
are, or shall be due, answerable, or payable to us, our heirs, and successors
of or for the same.

^^ver to make ^nie, stuff, to (...) in Dying, or ^er, and sell (...) ^^me.
AND further we do by these presents for us, our heirs, and successors, of our
especial grace, certain knowledge, and mere motion, give and grant unto the
said Sir Arthure Aston, John Acamonty, Richard Harding, George Silver, Robert
Web, and Frauncis Block, and to every of them, their and every of their
executors, administrators and assigns and every of them, and to their and
every of their servants, factors, and deputies to be thereunto authorized by
writing under the hands and seals of them or the suruiuors of them or of any
three or more of them, fall, free, and lawful power, license, and authority,
that it shall or may be lawful to them and every of them during the Term
aforesaid, in all and every County, City, town Corporate, and other Towns,
Villages, Hamblets, and other places within this Realm or any the Domynions
thereof, as well in places exempt as not exempt, to make, work, commixe, or
compound, and cause to be made, wrought, commixed, or compounded the said
stuff or stuffes with the said Woods or some of them to be made and compounded
as is aforesaid and for the purpose before mentioned, And the same to use in
dying, or to utter and sell the same to any the subjects of us, our heirs, and
successors to be used in dying or coloring of any colthes or other commodities
or things whatsoever within this our Realm or any the Domynions thereof, Any
laws, statutes, or ordinance to the centrarie in any wise notwithstanding.
(...) to those (...) shall buy the (...) to ^se, and ^e the same ^ng.
AND also that it shall and may be lawful to and for them and every of them to
whom the same stuff or stuffes shall be so sold (being subjects to us our
heirs and successors, and being borne and living under the obedience of us our
heirs and successors) their workmen, servants, and apprentices to use and
occupy the said stuff or stuffes so commixed or compoundded, or caused to be
commixed or compounded by them the said Sir Arthure Aston, John Acamontie,
Richard Harding, George Silver, Robert Web, and Frauncis Block, or any of
them, their executors administrators or assigns or any of them, or by their or
any of their servants, factors, or deputies to be thereunto authorized by
waiting under the hands and seals of them or the suruiuors of them or of any
three or more of them, in and for the dying and coloring of all and all manner
of Woolles, Yarnes, Clothes, Kersies, Dozens, Bays, Says, Knit-hose, Cottons,
Rugges, and other stuffes and commodities whatsoever within this our Realm or
the Domynions thereof in any house or houses, place or places by them or any of
them to be employed for the same, being thought fit and convenient for that
purpose, Any law, statute, act of parliament, or ordinance, or other matter or
thing to the contrary in any wise notwithstanding.

^wer to utter (...) ^^ll the como^^^^^s so dyed (...) the said (...).
AND the Commodities and things with the said commixtion, composition, or dying
stuff so to be dyed as aforesaid, shall and may likewise be lawfully sold and
uttered to any person or persons whatsoever, Any law, statute, act of
parliament, ordinance, or other matter, cause, or thing whatsoever to the
contrary thereof in any wise notwithstanding.

TO HAVE and to hold all and singular the said Licenses, powers, and
authorities and other the premises before in and by these presents granted,
to the said Sir Arthure Aston, John Acamontie, Richard Harding, George Silver,
Robert Web, and Frauncis Block, end to every of them, their and every of
their executors, administrators, and assigns, from and after the date hereof
until the end and term of One and Forty years from thence next ensuing and
fully to be complete and ended. AND forasmuch as our purpose, will, and
pleasure is to avoid and suppress in this our Realm and the Domynions thereof
all and all manner of working in the Art or mystery of Dying with any manner of
deceitful woods not sufficiently commixed or compounded as aforesaid, by what
name or names soever they be called, other then such as shall be so co^mixed or
compounded by the said sir Arthure Aston, John Acamontie, Richard Harding,
George Silver, Robert Web, and Frauncis Block, or any of them, their
executors, administrators or assigns or any of them, or by their or any of
their servants, factors, or deputies or any of them to be thereunto authorized
as aforesaid. (...) ^^wer to search and seize all ^^^^ibited woods
WE do therefore of our especial grace, certain knowledge, and mere motion by
these presents nominate, ordain and appoint the said sir Arthure Aston, John
Acamontie, and Richard Harding, and every of them, their and every of their
executors, administratos, deputies and assigns to be Searches for and
concerning the finding out of the said Woods, and do by these presents give
full power and authority unto the said sir Arthure Aston, John Acamontie, and
Richard Harding, and every of them, their and every of their executors,
administrators and assigns, and to their and every of their Deputies showing
forth these our Letters Patents, or the Duplicate, Transcript, or the
Exemplification thereof at all times, and from time to time during the term
aforesaid in the day time with the Constable or other head Officer of the
Town, parish, or place at all convenient times to Enter into every Ship,
Bark Boat Bottom, Crayer, Lighter, or other Vessel, and into every shop,
celler, warehouse, place and places as well within Cities, Towns corporate,
market towns, villages, and hamblets, as in all other places as well within
liberties as without within this our Realm of England and the Domynions
thereof, in all convenient, lawful, and reasonable manner to search and find out
all or any of the said deceyuable woods, and the same so found to seize and
dispose of as by the laws and statutes of this our Realm of England is in
that behalf limited and appointed, or otherwise as shall seem to them fit and
convenient for the making and compounding of the stuff to die therewith as is
before mentioned.

(...) entr^ie to be ^e, or custom (...) ^e paid for any ^idden woods, (...)
than such as be brought in be said Paten^^^^ etc.
AND furthermore we do hereby for us, our heirs, and successors forbid, and
our express will and pleasure is, That no Customer, Controller, or Collector
of the Customs or Subsidies of Tonnage or Pondage of us our heirs and
successors, or any of our or their Farmers or Officers, shall at any time
during the term of yaeres above mentioned accept of, or take any entry, or
receive any custom or subsidy, or make any composition of or for any custom
or subsidy of or for any Log-wood or Blockewood, or any other wood or woods
commonly used in Dying, prohibited and forbidden by the laws and statutes of
this Realm of England, (or any of them) to be brought into this our Realm or
other the Domynions of the same or any part thereof, other then of the said sir
Arthure Aston, John Acamontie, Richard Harding, George Silver, Robert Web,
and Frauncis Block, or any of them, their executors, administrators or
assigns or any of them, or their or any of their deputy or deputies thereunto
authorized as is aforesaid, Any law, statute, custom, or usage to the
contrary notwithstanding. ^l Customers, upon every entry to be ^ed, to give
^nt notice to ^atentees, etc. (...) ^e end the (...) may be sea^^^ and disposed
according to (...) ^aw.
AND we do further hereby will and appoint, that upon every such entry to be
offered to any the said Customers, Controllers, Farmers or Officers of any the
Woods aforesaid by any other person or persons other then the said sir Arthure
Aston, John Acamontie, Richard Harding, George Silver, Robert Web, and
Frauncis Block, or any of them, their executors administrators or assigns or
any of them, or their or any of their Deputies thereunto authorized as
aforesaid, every such Customer, Controller, Collector, Farmer or Officer to
whom any such entry shall be offered, shall thereof with all convenient speed
after every such entry offered, Certify the said sir Arthure Aston, John
Acamontie, Richard Harding, George Silver, Robert Web, and Frauncis Block,
or one of them, or one of their executors, administrators, deputies, or
assigns of the same, to the end that they and enery of them may cause the said
Log-wood and Block-wood and other the woods aforesaid to be burned, according
to the laws of this Realm in that behal^e ^ade and provided, or otherwise to
dispose thereof as shall be by them thought fit and convenient for the making and
compounding of the stuff to Die therewith as is before mentioned. AND
forasmuch as our further will and pleasure is, that these our Letters Patents
and all things therein contained shall be held in due regard, and be duly
executed in all points as well within Cities, Boroughes, towns corporate,
Market towns, as in all other place and places whatsoever within this our
Realm or the Dominions thereof, any Charters, Letters Patents, Privileges,
liberties, grants, prescription, or restraint to the contrary notwithstanding.

WE do therefore by these presents straightly charge, will, and require all
and every Justices of Peace, Majors, Sheriffs, Bayliffes, Governors of towns,
Headboroughes, Constables, Alnegers, Customers, Controllers, Searchers, and all
other our Officers, ministers, and subjects whatsoever within this our Realm
or any the Domynions thereof or any part thereof, at all times and from time to
time during the term of years before by these presents granted (as occasion
shall be offered) to be obedient, ayding, assisting and helping unto the said
Officers to ayding and ^ng to the Pa^es of their ^es.
sir Arthure Aston, John Acamontie, Richard Harding, Geroge Silver, Robert
Web, and Frauncis Block, and every of them, their and every of their
executors, administrators, deputies, factors, servants, and assigns, and to
every or any of them, They or any of them showing forth these our Letters
Patents, or the Duplicate, Transcript, or Exemplification thereof for the
performance, accomplishment, and due execution of these our Letters Patents in
all things and by all things according to the purport, true intent, and plain
meaning of these presents.

PROVIDED always nevertheless, That if the said sir Arthure Aston, John
Acamonty, Richard Harding, George Silver, Robert Web, and Frauncis Block, or
any of them their or any of their executors, administrators, assigns,
servants, or deputies, shall willingly and unlawfully convert any the said
Woods so by them or any of them their or any of their means brought into this
Realm or any the Domynions thereof, ^^^uided always, any of the said is be
converted (...) other use, than (...) kind the said (...), or if, (...) is
(...) the dire^ (...) said, it (...) ^gh the de^ of the Pa^ die good ^ors, That
(...) their parts (...) default, (...) ^^gnificati^^ (...) void.
or seized as aforesaid, otherwise than in compounding or printring the same to
make and dye therewith such true and good colors as is before mentioned to be
undertaken by them, Or if upon due proose thereof made, it shall appear and
prove hereafter that the stuff, so hereafter to be made or compounded by them
or any of them, shall through any of their defaults, not dye or make good
wearing colors as is above mentioned the Dyers using the same, working it upon
such grounds, and according to such directions as shall be given by the said sir
Arthure Aston, John Acamonty, Richard Harding, George Silver, Robert Web, and
Frauncis Block, or their assigns or the suruiuors of them or their assigns,
or any three or more of them under their hands in writing, or by the executors
or administrators of the suruiuors of them or any three or more of them under
their hands in writing. That then and from thenceforth the power, interest and
term before by these presents granted of such and so many of them as so shall
offend, or make default or shall procure or consent to any such offense or
default contrary to the true meaning of this Prouisoe, at the will and
pleasure of us, our heirs and successors, in that behalf to be signified
under our Sign Manuell and privy Signet, shall as to him or them only that
so shall offend or make default, or procure or consent to any such offense or
default, be utterly void and of none effect. Any thing before mentioned to the
contrary thereof in any wise notwithstanding. AND yet nevertheless for the
residue of them that shall not offend, or make default, nor procure or consent
to any such offense or default as is aforesaid, These presents shall remain in
full strength and effect. This Prouisoe or any thing therein contained to the
contrary notwithstanding. In witness whereof we have caused these our Letters
to be made Patents.

Witness our self at Hatefield the Three and Twentieth day of August the year
of our Reign of England, France, and Ireland, the Second: and of Scotland,
the Eight and Thirtieth. Per Breue de priuato Sigillo. Wilkinson.

Printed by Thomas Purfoot.


