By the King.
THe Kings most Excellent Majesty, finding that the infection of the Plague is
at this present in sundry places of the City of London, and near adjoining to
the same, though not (God be thanked) with the mortality of great numbers; yet
so dispersed in diverse of the best and most open streets of the said City, as
do give just cause to doubt, that the contagion thereof, by great resort of
people, might be further spread, as well in the City, as into other parts of the
Realm, whereby, danger might ensue both to his Royal person, the Queen his
dearest wise, and his Royal issue, and to his most loving Subjects repairing
thither for their Suits and causes: His Majesty, for these necessary
considerations, and hoping that the infection will, by the goodness of Almighty
God, with the coldness of the year, and such wholesome Orders as are taken in
his said City, the rather cease by the adiournement of part of this next Term
of S. Michael now at hand, from the Vtas of the same, until the fourth Return
of the said Term called Mense Michaelis next coming. His Majesty therefore,
of his especial favor and clemency, is pleased and contented, to adiourne
the said Term of S. Michael, that is to say, in and from the Vtas thereof,
unto the said fourth Return of the said Term, called Mense Michaelis next
coming; Which his Majesty signifies to all and singular his loving Subjects
of this his Realm, to the intent that they and every of them, which have cause
or commandment to appear in any of his Highness Courts at Westminster, in or
at any day or time from and after the said Vtas of S. Michael, may tarry at
their dwellings, or where their business otherwise shall lie, without
resorting to any of the said Courts for that cause, before the said Mense
Michaelis next coming, and that without incurring danger of forfeiture,
penalty, or contempt toward his Highness in that behalf. And nevertheless
his Majesty's pleasure is, That two of his Justices, that is to say, of either
Bench one, shall the first day of Michaelmas Term, called Octabis Michaelis,
according to the ancient order of the Laws, keep the Essoignes of the said
Octabis Michaelis. At which Vtas of S. Michael, Writs of adiournement shall be
directed to the said Justices, giving them authority to adiourne the said
Term of S. Michael, that is to say, From the Vtas thereof, until the fourth
Return, as before is said. And the said adiournement shall be made in the
first day of the said Vtas, commonly called, the day of Essoignes. And further
his Majesty's pleasure is, That all matters, causes and Suits, depending in any
of his other Courts between party and party, as in his Highness Courts
Chancery, Starchamber, and Exchequer, Courts of Wards and Liueries, Duchy of
Lancaster, and Court of Requests, shall have continuance, and the parties shall
have day from the date these presents, until the said fourth Return, as
before is said.

Provided always, and his Majesty's pleasure and commandment is, That all
Collectors, Receiuors, Sheriffs, and other Accomptants, and all other persons,
that should or ought to Account or pay and sum or sums of Money in any of
his Majesty's Courts of Exchequer, Court of Wards and Liueries, and of his
Duchy of Lancaster, or in any of them, or to enter into any Account in any of
the said Courts, shall repair unto the accustomed places at Westminster, where
his Highness has appointed such Officers and Ministers, as for that purpose
his Majesty has thought expedient, and there to pay and do in every behalf,
as though no such Proclamation of Adiournement had been had or made. And his
Highness further pleasure and commandment is, That all Sheriffs shall
return their Writs and Process against all such Accomptants and Debtors, at
the days therein appointed. And if any person or persons, who ought to account
or pay any sums of Money to his Majesty in any of the Courts and places
aforesaid, do make default therein, That then his Highness Writs and Process
shall be awarded and sent forth against every such person and persons, and the
same to be duly and orderly served, and returned by the Sheriffs and Officers
thereunto appointed, in such like manner and form, as the same should have
been, if this present Proclamation had not been made. And if any Sheriff or
other Officer shall make default, or be negligent in serving, executing, or
returning of any the Writs and Process aforesaid, That then every such
Sheriff and other Officer, shall incur such pains and penalties, as by the
said Courts, or any of them shall be taxed and assessed; Willing and commanding
all and every his Majesty's Sheriffs, Officers, Ministers and Subjects, to
whom it does or shall appertain, to observe and keep their assemblies and
apparances with all their Returns and Certificats, in his Highness said
Courts at Westminster in Mense Michaelis next coming, then and there to be
holden and kept, and there to do their Offices and duties in every behalf,
in like manner and form, as they should or ought to have done, if this present
Proclamation had not been had or made, as they will answer to the contrary at
their perils.

Given at our honor of Hampton Court the two and twentieth day of September,
in the seventh year of our Reign of Great Britain, France and Ireland.
Imprinted at London by ROBERT BARKER, Printer to the Kings most Excellent
Majesty. Anno Dom. 1609.


