By the King.
Orders for the Posts of our Realms, and for all men to observe and obey in
the speedy carriage of Packets, directed for our Affairs.
WHereas heretofore the Lords of the Privy Counsel to the Queen our sister
deceased, for great and weighty causes concerning the State, have endeavored
to set down, and publish sundry Orders, and general directions for matters of
Posting, especially for the speedy dispatch of Packets and Letters importing
the Princes immediate Affairs, the color whereof serving private turns, has
greatly frustrated their endeavors: It is now therefore, for the better
warrantise and direction of our Posts, thought meet and convenient, that the
former Orders be revived, and (according to the necessity of the times)
renewed and published in our name in manner as follows.

1. FIrst, every Post receiving a daily Fee, and entertained specially for the
Packet, according to the proportion of his wages by the day, shall keep
certain Horses, to the number of two at the least, with furniture convenient,
and those always to have at hand in a readiness to run with our Packets
only in Post, so soon as the same are brought to his hands. He shall have
also two Bags of Leather at the least well lined with Bays or Cotton, to carry
the Packet in, and Horns to sound and blow, as often as he meets company, or
four times in every mile. 2. EVery Post thus furnished, shall at all hours
receive and carry, or send away, all Packets or Letters brought unto him,
directed for our special Affairs, dated on the outside, with the time and
place of their first delivery, and subscribed by the hands of our Principal
Secretaries, and Master and Comptroller general of the Posts: And for matters
of the Navy, or to the Maritime Forts upon the Sea coast, or principal Port
Towns, by our Admiral of England: For matters of the Cinque Ports, by our
Warden: For matters of Scotland, by our Treasurer and Secretary of Scotland:
And for Ireland, by our Lieutenant the L. Mountioy, Or addressed to them in the
proper business of their places, or to the body of our Counsel, from what
persons or places whatsoever: Of whose names, and address only, the Posts
shall take notice, according to the first Institution, and Original use of
their service, and of none other. 3. EVery Post so receiving our Packets,
directed and subscribed as abouesaid, shall within one quarter of an hour at
the most after they come to his hands, dispatch them away in Post, and shall
run therewith in Summer (that is, from the first of April to the last of
September) after seven Miles the hour: and in Winter (which shall be esteemed
the rest of the year) after the five Miles the hour at the least, as the
ways afford, and the weather fall out. ANd that it may appear from time to
time (when, and as often as it shall be required) with what care and diligence
the service is at all hands applied and performed, Every Post shall keep a
large and fair ledger Paper Book to enter our Packets in, as they shall be
brought unto him, with the day of the Month, hour of the day or night, that
they came first to his hands, together with the name of him or them, by whom
or unto whom they were subscribed and directed, taking and entering only such
for our Packets, as come warranted as aforesaid, and all others to pass as
by-Letters. 5. LAstly, to the end that the Posts generally may the better
attend their several Services, and perform their duties in that behalf. Our
pleasure is, that they and every of them shall brook and enjoy the benefit of
all former favors allowed them, Namely, That they and their servants be holden
free and exempted from all Prests and attendances at Assizes, Sessions,
Inquests, and Musters.
Signed by his Majesty, and subscribed by Sir John Stanhop Knight, Master and
Comptroller general of his Highness Posts.

Imprinted at London by Robert Barker, Printer to the Kings most Excellent
Majesty. Anno 1608.


