THE PRISONERS PLAINT, A SERMON PREACHED BY GVALTER ASHTON, Master of Arts,
Prisoner in the Kings Bench for Debt, before the Imprisoned and others in that
place, upon the 25. of August. 1622.

1. SAM. 2. 6, 7. The Lord kills, and makes alive, brings down to the
grave, and raises up.

The Lord makes poor and makes rich, brings low, and exalts.

LONDON, Printed by Augustine Mathewes. 1623.

TO THE COURTEOUS READER.
CHristian READER, this Sermon was preached for the comfort of the Imprisoned,
and now Printed as a Card and Polestar for thy direction, when the same Lot
shall fall into thy Lap; expect not in it Philareta verba, picked words, or
matter of transcendent consequence; Only Items to sustain thee, when the Lord
shall hedge up thy way, Lament. 3.
and compass thee about with Gall and Wormwood. I freely acknowledge, that
when I first thought upon this Text, it was not in my thoughts to expose his
Context to public view, for I know my Infirmities, and my Country my
grieuances, which have well nigh made a divorce betwixt me and my Studies. The
Authors aim is to increase thy patience, against thou come to mourn in David's
Deepes. The wind may change, though it long have kept his quarter; and he that
stands may fall, although most watchful. Read, traduce not, shauings may have
their weight, so well as greater Wedges. Thus referring these Lines to thy
perusal, and Thee to thy Maker, I rest

From my distracted studies in the Kings Bench, Jan. 26. Anno 1622. Thine in
the Lord, GVALTER ASHTON.

TO THE CVRIOVS READER.
THough others have trodden this Tract, and discust these words, yet it is
Saint Paul's Rule, (...), That every man should abound in his own Sense.

Thine, G. A.

THE PREFACE.
WHen the people of God were captiuated by the Babylonians, they requested them
to sing some of the Songs of Sion: to which they answered, How can we sing the
Lords Song, being in a strange land, and full of heaviness? Psalm. 127. 3. 4.
Mutato nomine de me narretur historia: change but the name, and the case is
mine own; They captiuated, I imprisoned; they suited to sing some of Sions
Notes and Ditties, I requested (not to sing I must confess) but to say, to
speak some word of Exhortation; They answered, How can we sing the Lords Song
being in a strange land, and full of heaviness? I might have replied, How can
a man Preach in a strange place, a house of mourning? But calling to mind,
that Saint Paul, and Sylas, when they were confined, did not intermit to pray
and praise the name of the Lord their God, Acts 16. v. 25. Hence have I
resolved to make their Pattern my Practice, and at this time to undertake this
days Task.

THE PRISONERS PLAINT.
PSALM. 130. VER. 1. Out of the Deep places have I called to thee O Lord, etc.
THe Text is one of David's Petitions, when he was in his Prosunditatibus, as
Iunius, and Tremellius read the words, in the depth of deepes, distressed in
body, distracted in soul, persecuted in person, wounded in spirit. Distracted,
wounded both in soul and conscience, with the fear of Gods wrath for his
sins committed, which many times even in this life, breaks forth into due
strokes of vengeance, against all such as trade in sin, and go on in the
works of their own invention: yet herein the Prophet David bewraies a
wonderful measure of faith, in giving the Lord no rest, nor himself any ease,
but prefers Petition after Petition, request upon request, and still is not
satisfied, like an importunate Suitor, until the ears of his God be possessed
with the voice of his complaint, and he in mercy have obtained the desires of
his heart; which is not usual with many in their days of trial, and hour of
temptations, who are so far from wrestling with God by devout supplications
for deliverance, that they either fall off, from their affiance and trust in
God, or else faint under the weight of the Cross, thinking that God has
forgotten to be gracious, and that he will be no more entreated, if one poor
libera nos Domine, do not produce the effect of their longing and languishing
desires; which is to be marked, as a direction for us the imprisoned, that
seeing the Lord has written bitter things against us, and hemb'd us in on
every side, with wants, oppressions, reproaches, and the like, therefore we
should not suffer our eyes to sleep, nor the lids thereof to slumber, until
we have made our peace with God, by true conversion and godly sorrow, for all
those sins, which have brought upon us this bondage and immuerement; which
being done, the Lord he cannot but grant us his gracious liberate, I mean
discharge from this house of Tears, the common Inn of all the Oppressed.

The Epigraphe or Title of my Text, with the rest of the context, is a Song of
Degrees, and so called as Arius Montanus gives the reason, because the Priests
and the Levites (as they ascended from that place of the Temple, which was
called the great Court into a higher room, named the inner Court of the house
of the Lord) did at solemn feast days, sing this Psalm, with others of the
like Inscription, upon every staire once; Teaching us, as in a Ceremony, that
all those who serve God must do it with lifted up hearts, and spiritual
affections, according as we are called upon, with the words of Sursum corda,
in the suffrages of our Church ^^^hurgie, and English service Book.

Others be of another mind as Apolinarius in his Metaphrasis, who says, that
because the voice was more lifted up, and strained in the singing of this
Psalm, then it was in others, hence had it this denomination of A Song of
Degrees.

Well, to pass by conjectures, our later expositors as Iunius and the rest,
think that nothing is meant, but that a certain excellency lies hid in this
Psalm above the rest, as being a choice and heavenly Epigrame, and therefore
called a Song of Degrees, as the Canticles a Song of Songs; The ten
Commandments, a Doctrine of Doctrines, the Creed, a History of Histories; the
Lords prayer a Prayer of Prayers, only to show the eminency and excellency
thereof.

To conclude then, we are not to be too inquisitiue and curious, in searching
out the reason of each particular, sed quaedam ignorare, non tantum est boni
Christiani, sed etiam and docti Theologi: not only a good Christian, but a
learned Divine may (without disparagement to his profession be ignorant of
some things.

In the Text these parts be remarkable.









the (Vbi) or the place where the Prophet David was, when he does thus plant
and supplicate.

The party suiting, is expressed in the vowel I. being David by name.

The party suited, is the Lord, and more pathetically, O Lord.

The matter of his suite, is for Audience, or that the Lord would hear his
voice. Lord hear my voice.

The manner of his suite, is expressed in the word ( called) or as some translate
it, cried; I have cried; to note David's feruency, and earnestness in this his
suite, together with the Condition of time expressed in the word ( have) which
being a note of the Preterperfect tense, argues his continued and constant
suite, as the learned well observe upon this place.

Vbi, or the place where the Prophet David was, when he thus called and cried;
and that is in Profundis, in the deep places: under the name whereof the
Prophet David, Sanctified Jeremy, and other the Penmen of the Holy Scriptures
do by a Tropicall, or a borrowed kind of speech, signify great afflictions
and distresses; which often are resembled to deep waters, and so is the phrase
taken in the. 69. Psalm. verse. 2. as also in the 124. Psalm. 4. And the Jews
having upon them the perfection of misery, find not how to express their
woeful condition, but by this kind and propriety of speech. Lament. 3. 54.

Moreover, this phrase is used in the same sense among heathen writers, as
Aeneas escaping the danger of war, and other manifold troubles, is said to
be delivered from the Deluge, or* ouer-flowing of waters, as Virgil has it in
the 7. of his Aeneads, Diluuio ex illo tot vasta per aequora vectus. And
Pindar, writing of a great Battle, between the Persians, and the Grecians
calls it (...): The destroying shower of Jupiter; and this seems to be the
reason of this Translation, because distresses hold a certain Analogy, or
correspondencie with waters, and that in diverse respects, according to the
properties of water.

First, other dangers assault the body but in one part, either shouldering, or
siding, or affronting us; but water in respect of his liquid nature, in a
moment of time, does enclose us in on all sides, leaving us no ordinary means
of escape; So I appeal to the experience of us all, who can witness that we
never have been overtaken with one only trouble alone, but upon the instant a
second, or a third calamity, like Jobs Messengers, has come posting one in
the neck of another upon us, and sicut vnda, vndam trudit; and as every wave
shoues forward his fellow, so the ending of one misery, is but the beginning of
another.

Secondly, water has a swallowing and stifeling quality, witness the people
that perished in the river Kison, and the river Kison swept them away, Judge. 5.
21. as also the forefathers of the Egyptians, who took a surfeit of the Red
Sea, and gave up the ghost: So afflictions they drown our spiritual enemies,
our vices, our vanities; and while we be under the Cross, our sins they
become sick, and languish in us, and we in some measure eased from the
tyranny and commanding power thereof, He that suffers in the flesh, cease
from sin, 1. Pet. 4. 1.

Lastly, as water is an allay, for the tempering of our strong and fuming
Wines; so tribulations they moderate our earthly pleasures, least we should be
drunk with the delights thereof, and grow exorbitant, extra orbem, exceeding
the listes of Sobriety and Temperance; and as wine will soon infatuate and
besot the brain, if it be not mixed with his quantity of water: so our
pleasures and prosperity, our wealth and wit, will soon turn to our own
decay, if we be not put in mind to recollect our selves, to walk wisely and
discreetly in the use thereof, by some divine whip, some nip, some scourge.

But to return to the mentioned points: and first of the first, as namely of
the party suiting, which is David by name, employed in the vowell I. A man
highly in the favor of God, nay, Gods favorite, as I may so term him, his
advancement will testify no less: from a Shepherd he is raised to be a
King; from a Subject, to a Sovereign; yet this glorious bud is blasted, his
honor is eclipsed, and his pomp inueloped in the greatness of distress, he
is totus in Profundis, deep in the share of misery.

The Conclusion is obuious, that God out of his unsearchable wisdom, does
often plunge his dearest and nearest children in extreme miseries and
calamities; in miseries which attend their persons, as wants, oppressions,
reproaches, and the like; in miseries which attend their Souls, as fits of
despair, spiritual desertion, doubting of their salvation: so that if they
had not hope of another life after this, they were of all Creatures most
miserable, as Saint Paul concludes, discoursing of the same subject, in the 1.
Cor. 15. 19.

The Son of the morning, CRIST JESUS, the brightness of his Father, Qui
licet intrauit mundum sine peccato, tamen non exiuit sine flagello, who
although he was spotless and without exception, yet was he spotted with the
spittle of the Jews, disgraced, contemned, tormented, and lastly, put to
death, and having thus suffered, he is entered into glory, Luke 24. 26. and we
his members must tread in the same steps, not expecting here in this valley of
tears, Halcionis dies agere, to live a life of delicacie or delight, for never
have any of Gods Saints enjoyed such a Privilege or liberty. Come we to
great Eliah, whose tongue was (...), the bridle of heaven, in regard that by
his prayers he could bind or loose, the influence of the heavens, procure
rain, or make a stayall thereof; yet this great Saint has his diuident in the
Cross, he is persecuted by Iezabel, becomes a man of sorrows, and bewayles
himself, sitting under a Juniper tree, 1. Kings 19. 4. Come we to John
Baptist, the second Eliah, who was Eliah in spirit, though not in person, and
behold (his) sufferings, which be no less then the loss of his blood, the
loss of his head; which being cut off, it is made a recompense for a dancing,
vaulting Damsel, and a satisfaction for an incestuous bloody minded mother.
Who more beloved of God, then Lazarus the beggar? for being dead, he is
attended of Angels, and placed in Abraham's bosom, Luke 16. 22. so that we may
remember him, with Lazarus non est mortuus, sed miseria mortua est, Lazarus is
not dead, his misery only is dead and buried: And yet who more miserable then
Lazarus while he lived? who more beggarly? who more pincht with famine, and
cleanness of teeth? not obtaining a few crummes for his relief, at the rich
gluttons door, nor any mercy save of his dogs only, that licked his sores.
Whereby it appears how the estate of Gods children, has been always full of
woes, and wants; the temptation whereof has almost shaken the faith of the
strongest Saints: for the Prophet Jeremy, though sanctified from the womb,
complains that he cannot sound the depth of this Judgment, Ier. 2. 1. 2. and
illuminate David, from the 2. of the 73. Psalm. unto the ^3. does acknowledge
that he could not obtain, the understanding of this so deep a mystery,
scilicet, why the Lord should thus clap up his children in the houses of
correction, and give unto the wicked Countries of liberty, and Kingdoms of
treasure; in so much that the eye of flesh and reason would seem to conclude,
that they are the only happy men, and the Lords beloved; and that others who
be afflicted, how they be rejected and casheered of him. And although no man is
able to diue into the depth of Gods counsel, nor yet to clime up into heaven
to search the cause, why God should thus afflict those, whom he does affect;
yet I will propound some arguments, such as humane frailty will afford, both
to manifest Gods wisdom and Justice, in thus correcting and humbling us, as
also to prevent our repyning and murmuring against him for the same.

First the cause is in man, that brings God thus upon his back to scourge him,
and that is his sin, man suffers for sin, Lamen. 3. 4. and there being in
each man (...) the Sullage of Adams clay, and the relics of sin, which are
increased by our daily vncleann^sse, and actual offenses, therefore that we
may reform our selves, and that others may tak^ us for an example, God does
wash the best of the sons of men, in the bitter waters of Marah, in the sea
of affliction. Manasses, Dau^d, Josias, have drunk deep of this tart cup*
there being no exemption with him from punishment if men take liberty for to
sin. Sed quicunque stultus est in culpa, sapiens erit in paena, whosoever
will jest with sin, may in time grow wise when he comes to smart for h^s
folly; therefore the Prophet Micha does confess in the 7. of his Prophecy,
verse. 9. That he will bear the wrath of the Lord, because he had sinned
against him; and this wrath of the Lord toward his Saints, is not like the
sword of a Judge prepared for destruction, but rather the rod of father
ordained for correction. (...) says the Apostle (...) we are chastned of the
Lord, that we should not be condemned with the world. Corthin. Epist. 1. 11.
32.

The next cause is in the Devil, whose malice is boundless toward mankind,
who like a common Informer cannot endure to be out of practice, but must be
always nibling at our heels, slaundering and accusing of us unto God, that
he may get a Commission to meddle with us, as he did with the holy man Job,
and to persecute us, as he d^^h the woman in the wilderness, Reu. 12. ^. and
therefore no marvel if that we be ^^flicted, distressed, and lodged in a
Labyrin^h of miseries, having such a vigilant aduer^ary, who is fit at every
turn, to give us the grand lash and to ierck us for each slip, if the Lord
chief Justice of heaven and earth, ^ill say but Amen to his wishes and desires.

Thirdly, the Lord does this plunge us, to awake us out of the dead slee^e of
sin, and to open our eyes, that we may see our natural wretchedness and
n^kednesse, in respect of Grace and Purity, which having once espied, it should
ma^e us, run to God to petition him, that we may share in that long white
Robe, the righteousness of his Son, the Ornament and covering of all his
Saints. Aristotle tells us in the 3. of his Meteorologicks, that, Omne animal,
fulmine percussum, vertit faciem ad fulmen. Every creature, struck with a
Thunderbolt, presently affronts it. Beloved these that have not an ear to
hear God, when he calls for amendment of life, saying, Return, O Shulamite,
return, return. Cant. 6. 13. 1. For those the Lord has a smiting hand, with
the which he will either awake them, if they do belong unto him, or break
them in pieces like a Potters vessel. The Horse, that he may spring forwards
in his pace, must be remembered either with Spur or Switch; The sluggish or
carnal Christian, following his voyage and pilgrimage unto heaven, Necesse est
prematur, vt ad Deum ire compelletur, says Saint Gregory, he must be lasht
with the rod of affliction, that so he may learn to hasten to the
happiness of all the glorified Saints. This is prefigured in Ioab, in the
second of Samuel 14. 29. who being sent for by Absolon, once and again, yet
refused to go; but when Absolon set fire on his fields of Corn, then Ioab
arose and went to the house of Absalon: So the Lord inuites us to repentance,
not once but often by the mouth of his Ministers, by the knock of his Spirit,
by the charm of his mercies; and if we neglect these blessed Calls and
Summons, as Ioab did the inuitement of Absolon, the Lord he will then set fire
upon our Corn fields, he will make the Heavens as brass, that they shall
deny us their deawe, or else the land shall surfeit with a surplage of Showers,
and bring forth nothing but crude and raw fruits, as of late this Kingdom
has had a share in this Judgment; and all to awake us out of the slumber of
our cruelty, uncleanness, with other our wickedness, that so we may arise
and seek him while he may be found, lest he being not opened to, while he
knocks at the door of our hearts, by the hammer of his Judgments, he depart
and leave us to a reprobate sense, so shall our last end be worse then our
beginning.

Fourthly, the Lord does thus plunge us, that he may try our faith and
patience, kindle our prayers, and provoke us to the practice of all holy
duties: for what graces soever lie hidd in the souls of his Saints, in the
Summer of their Prosperity, will break forth and show themselves in the
Winter of Adversity: That faith which was faint in their days of wealth and
peace, will grow strong in the hour of trial and trouble, not parting with
GOD, no more then Jacob would do with the Angel, until the Lord have
graciously answered the wishes and desires of their hearts; that prayer which
was weak while the world smiled upon them, come once but trouble, it will grow
strong, like the Sun in the Firmament, when he comes to his Vertical, or
Noone point. Indeed our Prayers they be most potent with God, when we begin
to fall off from the world, and decline from the height of sin. The Roman
Captain Scipio by name, would say of his Soldiers, that their estate stood in
the worst terms, when they had the most peace. Want of exercise makes both
body and soul rustie. And Saint Jerome well observes, that Solomon fell so
foul, because he lived in delights; for prosperity is the Stepmother of all
holy virtues; the Stars show brightest in the darkest night; sweet Spices
smell most pleasantly, when they are crushed and pounded; and Christian virtues
are most apparent under the Cross: Therefore we rejoice in tribulation, says
the Apostle, Romans 5. 3. 4.

Fifthly, the Lord does thus afflict us for a double subordinate end: First, to
testify the respective care that he has of his own glory. Secondly, to
manifest his providence and care over us.

Israel at the Red Sea, who being inter mare and hosts, inter gladios and
vndas, having the Sea before them, their enemies behind them; the sword
pursuing them, the waves affronting them, the mountains on both sides
enclosing them, and in the eye of flesh, without all means or hope of help,
yet see, says Philo Iudens, that vbi desinit humanum auxilium, ibi incipit
Diuinum: That even when men be most in misery, that then is Gods fittest time
to show his mercy that even then the Lord diuides the Sea, making a Lane, or
passage for his people to walk in, and so preserues them, showing that he is
our hope beyond hope, and a present remedy in needful time of trouble,
manifesting his strength in our weakness, and his infinity in our infirmity.

Eliah: 1. Kings 17, 4, 9. and all to show his mighty protection and providence
over us, which never more shows it self, then when his people be in greatest
straites, and strangest exigents.

Lastly, the Lord does thus afflict us, least when we hear of Eliahs
persecutions, or Jobs distresses, or other of the Saints calamities, we should
account them to be but fables; therefore he brings upon (Us) days of mourning
and nights of sorrow, that we may have experience in our selves of their
sufferings; and to this purpose Saint Gregory speaks fitly, Deus electis iter
asperum facit in via, ne obliuiscantur eorum, qui sunt patria, the Lord paues
our way with thorns, lest we should suppose our forefathers walked upon
pillowes. To conclude, seeing there is in the Cross occultae qualitates,
hidden virtues, powerful for the curing of our soul infirmities; Let us
therefore submit our selves unto Gods hand, as Saint Peter does advise us in
his first Epistle, Chap. 5. v. 6. David of his own experience does acknowledge
a Sovereign benefit therein, when he said, It is good for me that I was
afflicted, for thereby have I learned to keep thy Commandments; and an
ancient Writer glossing upon these words, tells us that there is in the Cross
a double virtue, (...), a preservative power and a sauatiue power: The
Preservative power is like Jonas Whale, which although it seemed to swallow up
and devour him; yet the Whale was the means of his life and safety; so the
Cross although it make show to crush and curse us, yet thereby are we
blessed; Blessed is the man that is corrected. Job. 5. 17. And as for the
Sauatiue power, it is like the Poole of Bethesda, which did not heal unless
it were stirred and moved by the Angel: So except we be racked of the lees of
sin, by some sharp handling of us, our hearts will grow so hard, that it is
impossible we should take out the lesson of Repentance, motion is a step to
dissolution; exercise of the body, rarefies and thinnes the blood, as also
cheeres the spirits. So trialls and temptations, make the affections more
spiritual, and our hearts less earthly minded, Therefore think it not
strange (says Saint Peter) in his 1. Epist. at the 13. verse. of his 4. Chap.
for the fiery troubles which light upon you, and a fitter word could not have
been devised, then to resemble them to Fire.

Fire, is of a light ascending nature; so afflictions, make us spiritual
minded, and ascend by holy afflictions, and divine meditations into Sions
Mountain the Church Triumphant, which like a hill is exalted above the Church
Militant.

Fire, is of a hot and heating nature; So afflictions make us hot suitors for
relief, impatient of the Lords delaying us, giving him no rest, nor our selves
any ease, until he grant and we enjoy whatsoever we shall become suitors to
him for.

Fire, shines and gives light; So trouble opens the eyes, Schola Crucis,
schola Lucis, says Saint Bernard; and Manasses who forgot the Lord while he
was at liberty in his palace, could pray unto him when he was in prison, and
humble himself greatly; And Manasses being in tribulations, called upon the
God of his Fathers, 2. Chr. 33. 10.

Fire, sortneth the hardest iron: So there is no heart so stony, but it will
yield and melt with tribulations, even Pharao the cruel will yield for a time,
while he and his people be under the ten plagues, though after he turn
Apostata, fall off, and ask, who is the Lord, that he should let the people
go, Exodus 8. verse. 9.

Fire, works according to his object; it burnisheth gold, but it annihilats
dross; it melts wax, but it hardens clay; so the godly and the godless are
both sufferers, but in this similitudine passionum, there is dissimilitudo
patientium, though they be both burdened alike, yet they differ in their
carriage: The wicked in their sufferings, they murmr against the Lord; and
seek to help themselves by the devils Emissaries, his Witches, and Wizards;
whereas the godly are patiently obedient, remembering their Masters Motto,
Father not my will, but thy will be done, and if it please thee, let this
bitter cup of imprisonment, and other distresses pass from me, yet not my
will, but thy will be done, Therefore let us rejoice though now for a season
we be in heaviness, 1. Pet. 1. 6, 7.

The Inferences follow. to comfort our selves if the same be laid upon us, not
conceiving that either they or we be out of Gods favor; for (...), that is,
although the rod be sharp, yet the hand that smites is sweet and full of
refreshment; therefore suffer afflictions, and say with the holy man Job,
Though the Lord kill me, yet still will I put my trust in him.

Salomons Sluggard, and make new leagues with iniquity; And whereas before,
they were but bunglers and dullards in acting of sin, O, now they are Masters
of the sinning Art, as we have woeful experience in all the Prisons of the
Kingdom, into which many Prisoners at their first entrance have been ciuilly
demeaned, but within a small continuance after, I cannot express how they have
been Metamorphosed, and grown more stupid then Cyparissus, and altogether
insensible of that divine stroke which was upon them, by giving themselves over
to all uncleanness and intemperance, the high road way to hell. It is recorded
in the second of the Chron. 28* 22. that Ahaz is noted for a special Monster,
because in the time of his tribulation, he did trespass more and more; This
is Ahaz, says the Text, which is a remarkable Item of his gross sinning: So
these are monsters in religion, who follow their sinful Byas, when the Lord is
dealing with them, to break off their sins. For when the hand of the Lord is
upon us, it should span, and weane us from our sinful courses, and abridge us
of our former pleasures and delights, making us Votaries to his worship and
service, and for ever obseruant of his Laws and Edicts, not turning away like
a stubburne generation, nor starting aside like a broken Bow.

Sam. 15. 25, 26, etc. where David being pursued by Absalon, and in danger of
no less then the loss of his Kingdom, flies to God, and thus vnfoldes
himself, O Lord, if I shall find favor with thee, restore me; if not, here
I am, do with me as it seems good in thy sight. Beloved, we are persecuted
by our cruel and merciless Creditours, and here immured, deprived, not of a
Kingdom I confess, but of our Lands, Livings, Liberties: Let David's pattern
be our practice, and let us all join in one, and say, O God, if we have
found favor in thy sight, number the days of our trouble, enlarge us, restore
us to our former habitations; if not, here we are, dispose of us as it seems
good in thy sight.

FINIS.

