A Proclamation touching the Kings Majesty's Audit now shortly to be kept and
holden at (...) for the Revenues of his Highness Crown, within the County of
(...) for the year ending at the Feast of S. Michael the Archangell now next
coming. Anno Domini 162^
WHere it is enacted by Authority of Parliament, that every Auditor of the
Revenues of the Imperial Crown of this Realm, shall yearly before the time
of the Audit, cause Proclamations to be made in sundry Market Towns, in every
County within the limits and circuit of their several Offices, to the end that
all and singular Receivers, Bailiffes, Collectors, Reeues, Farmers, and other
Occupiers, Officers, and Ministers accountable, and all others whatsoever
having to do at that Audit, may the better be prepared with their Money, and
all other things requisite for the finishing and clearing of their accounts, as
appertains.

Know ye therefore, that his Highness Auditor of the said Revenues, within the
county of (...) does by this present Proclamation, notify and declare to all
and singular Majors, Sheriffs, Receivers, Stewards, Vnderstewards, Clarks of
Courts, woodwards, Bayliffes, Collectors, Reeues, Farmers, and to all other the
Kings Majesty's Officers and Subjects, that his Highness Audit for his said
revenues within the said County of (...) for the year ending at the Feast of
Saint Michael the Archangell now next coming, shall be kept and holden at
(...) in the County of (...) and shall there begin upon (...) morning, the
(...) day of (...) next.

Wherefore his Highness said Auditor, on his Majesty's behalf, wills and
charge as well all and singular his Highness Stewards, Vnderstewards, and
Clerks of Courts, or their sufficient Deputies, to be attendant at the said
Audit: and to bring thither with them, the Court Rowles belonging to their
several Offices, for the said year and all other years, whereof the profits
be not yet answered. As also all and singular Receivers, Woodwards, Bailiffes,
Collectors, Reeues, Bedles, Farmers, and all other his Highness officers,
occupiers, and ministers accountable, and all other his Subjects that owe to
his Majesty any arrerages, tenthes, rents reserved, or other duties, to appear
at the said Audit, then and there to yield account and make payment of the
same and all other issues, commodities and profits due to his Highness, within
the said County of (...) And to bring with them all Rentals, Letters Pattents
Indentures, Leases, Coppies, and Extracts of Court Rowles, Warrants,
Commissions, Tallies, Aquittances, and all other writings and things concerning
any of the premises. And thereof not to fail, as they and every of them,
tender their duties toward his Highness, and will avoid the forfaiture of
their several Fees and Offices, and other the penalties (by sundry Statutes)
limited for punishment of all such as do not therein according to their
duties. Dated the (...) day (...) in the (...) year of the reign of our said
most gracious Sovereign Lord JAMES, by the grace of God King of England,
Scotland, France, and Ireland, Defender of the Faith etc.

Also at the same time and place the Audit for the most Noble Prince CHARLES,
Prince of Wales, Duke of Cornwall, and Earl of Chester, is to be kept by the
same Auditor, for his Highness Possessions and Revenues in the said county of
(...) for the same year. Whereof in like manner all his Highness Stewards,
Receivers, Bailiffes, Farmers, Tenants, Officers and Ministers, and all others
to whom in that behalf it does and may appertain, are hereby required and
admonished to take knowledge and warning, and then and there likewise to
appear, yield accounts, and make payment of all Rents, Debts, duties and
things due to his Highness within the said county. And in like manner to bring
and show forth all court rolls, Rent rolls, Letters patents, Indentures,
Leases, copies, and Estreats of court rolls, Warrants, Commissions,
Acquittances, and other Evidences, writings and things concerning any the
premises touching the Princes Highness: and to tender and perform their
duties toward his Highness in that behalf.

Dated the (...) day of (...) in the (...) year of the Reign of our most
gracious Sovereign Lord JAMES, by the grace of God King of England, Scotland,
France and Ireland, Defender of the Faith, etc.

