By the King.
WHereas some of the meaner sort of our people did of late assemble themselves
in riotous and tumultuous manner within our County of Northampton, sometimes in
the night, and sometimes in the day, under pretense of laying open enclosed
grounds of late years taken in, to their damage, as they say; The repressing
whereof we did first refer only to the due course of Justice, and the
ordinary proceedings of the Commissioners of the Peace, and other our Ministers
in such cases: Forasmuch as We have perceived since, that lenity has bred in
them, rather encouragement then obedience, and that they have presumed to
gather themselves in greater multitudes, as well in that County, as in some
others adjoining, We find it now very necessary to use sharper remedies.

Wherefore, We will and command all Lieutenants, deputy Lieutenants, Sheriffs,
Justices of Peace, Majors, Bailiffes, Headboroughs, Constables, and all other
our Officers and Ministers to whom it may appertain, if the said persons shall
continue so assembled, after Proclamation made, or any such new Assemblies be
gathered in those, or any other parts of our Realm, immediately to suppress
them by whatsoever means they may, be it by force of Arms, if admonitions and
other lawful means do not serve to reduce them to their duties. For We
cannot but be justly moved to such severity against those, who unjustly throw
a slander upon our Government, by taking that pretense for their disobedience:
Seeing it is manifest by Act of Parliament, passed since our coming to this
Crown, that we have been careful to prevent such Enclosures, and
Depopulations, and that it has been an ordinary charge given by Us to our
Justices of Assizes, when they went to their Circuits, to enquire of all
unlawful Depopulations and Enclosures, and to take order to remedy the same,
and to punish the Offenders therein according to the due course of Law. And it
is well known to many, that We were now also in hand with some course to be
taken by advise of our Counsel for the performance thereof: From which our
good purpose and intent, this their presumptuous and undutiful proceeding,
might rather give Us cause to desist, then increase in Us any affection to
relieve such disordered persons, so far attempting against our Crown and
Dignity, who choose rather to trust to their own pride and rashness, then to
the care and providence of their Sovereign. Willing and commanding all our
said Lieutenants, Deputy Lieutenants, Shiriffes, and other our Officers and
Ministers above mentioned, to attend diligently to the execution of this our
pleasure, and all other our loving Subjects to be obedient to them in the
performance thereof, as they will answer the contrary at their peril.

Given at our Palace of Westminster the thirtieth day of May, in the fifth
year of our Reign of Great Britain, France and Ireland. God save the King.
Imprinted at London by Robert Barker, Printer to the Kings most Excellent
Majesty. ANNO DOM. 1607.


