By the King.
A Proclamation for Buildings, in and about London.
THE Kings most excellent Majesty seeing of what necessary use Timber is,
as well for the maintenance of the Shipping and Navy of this Realm, being
aprincipall mean for the defense thereof, As for building, and other needful
uses: And understanding withal, how much and how extraordinarily the same has
been and is decayed and consumed in all parts of this Realm, In so much as in
the bery City by London (being the principal City of this Realm) they are
now daily driven to build with Beech, and other like kind of Timber, being of
small continuance, which in time will be (if the same he not prenented) the
notorious peril and decay of the same City: Does therefore straightly charge
and command, that as well all Statutes and Laws heretofore made, and now in
force, for the preservation of Timber, As that also concerning Inmates, and the
erecting and continuing of Cottages, be from henceforth duly and exaetly put
in execution. Forbidding withal, that none be so hardy upon pain of
contempt, and his Majesty's high displeasure, as to convert any part of any
Tree, that may serve for any use of Timber, to any Coal or Firewood. And for
the better preservation of Timber, and to avoid the unnecessary consumption
thereof, His Majesty also straightly charge and commands, That between
this and the feast of S. Michael the Archangel coming, no new house be built
within the same City of London, or the Suburbs thereof, or within one mile of
the same Suburbs, contrary to the Proclamations in that behalf heretofore
made. And that from and after the said feast of S. Michael the Archangel, no
person shall build or erect any new House, or the forefront of any House in any
new building, where any former building was, within the same City or Suburbs,
or within one mile of the said Suburbs, except all the utter walls and windows
thereof, and the forefront of the same be wholly made of Brick, or Brick and
stone, And the forefront thereof in every respect shall be made of that
uniform order and form, as shall be prescribed unto them for that Street
where such Building shall happen to be, by the chief Magistrates of the same
City, being within the City and the Liberties thereof, and being out of the
City by such Justices of the Peace or other Magistrates, as have the
government in that place, upon pain to be fined and imprisoned for the same,
by order of the Court of Starchamber.

And to the end that some fitting and orderly course may be taken and set down
for uniformity to be kept in every Street, where such Buildings shall be, His
Majesty purposes to direct our his Commission to discreet and skillful
persons, to consider of, and set down some fit Orders and direction for the
same. And his Majesty further expressly chargethe and commands all Majors,
Justices of the Peace, Constables, Stewards of Leets and Lawdayes, and all
others his Majesty's loving Subjects, to whom it shall or may appertain,
carefully to look into, and execute the premises, and not to permit or suffer
any thing to be done contrary to the true intent and meaning of this
Proclamation. And that they take order that such offenders or workmen, as
shall persist in doing any thing to the coutrary thereof after admonition to
them in that behalf to be given, be bound to appear in the said Court of
Starchamber at the next sitting day of the same Court, there to be proceeded
against as conteinners of his Majesty's erpresse commandment, Proclamation and
Prerogative Royal.

Given at Thetford the first day of March, in the second year of his Majesty's
reign of Great Britain etc.
Imprinted at London by Robert Barker, Printer to the Kings most Excellent
Majesty. ANNO 1604.


