By the King.
A Proclamation against the use of Pocket-Dags.
WHereas the bearing of Weapons covertly, and specially of short Dagges, and
Pistols, (truly termed of their use, pocket Dagges, that are apparently made
to be carried close, and secret) has ever been, and yet is by the Laws and
policy of this Realm straightly forbidden, as carrying with it inevitable danger
in the hands of desperate persons. We are nevertheless given to understand,
that the use of them is suddenly grown very common: So as for the gain
coming thereof, both many are daily made and wrought within the Kingdom, and
as many brought in from foreign parts. And some persons being questioned for
bearing of such about them, have made their excuse, That being decayed in their
estates, and indebted; and therefore fearing continually to be Arrested, they
wear the same for their defense against such Arrests. A case so far from
just excuse, as it is of it self a grienous offense for any man to arm
himself against Justice, and therefore deserves (without more) sharp and
severe punishment. But besides this evil consequence (which alone is not to be
neglected.) We have just cause to provide also against those deuilish spirits,
that maligning the quiet and happiness of this Estate, may use the same to more
execrable ends. And therefore by this Our Proclamation, We do straightly charge
and command all Our subjects and other persons whatsoever, that they neither
make, nor bring into this Realm, any Dagges, Pistols, or other like short
Gunnes, by what name soever they be, or may be called or known, which are
not, or shall not be of the full lenght of twelve inches in the Barrel at the
least: And that no person or persons shall bear or carry, about him or them,
any such. And further, We do will and command all and every Our subjects, and
others whomsoever, that have or possess any such in their own hands, or in
the hands of any other to their use, That they do before the Feast of the
purification of the blessed Virgin MARY next ensuing the date hereof, either
break the same in pieces, so as they may not be used in any wise to shoot
withal: Or else that they deliver and yield up the same to some Justice of the
Peace, Mayor, Baliffes, or their principal Officer, of, or near the County,
City, Town, or place of his, or their abode, respectively, there to remain
in safe custody, upon pain of Our heavy displeasure, and of such
imprisonment, penalties, and other punishments, as are due to the contemners of
Our Royal Commandments.

Given at Newmarket the sixteenth day of January, in the tenth year of Our
Reign of Great Britain, France, and Ireland.
Imprinted at Lodon by Robert Barker, Printer to the Kings most Excellent
Majesty.

ANNO DOM. 1612.


