A Proclamation touching the Kings Majesty's Audit now shortly to be holden and
kept (...) in the (...) of (...) for the revenues of his Highness Crown,
within the County of (...) for the year ending at the feast of Saint Michael
Th'archangell now next coming. Anno domini (...)
WHere it is enacted by authority of Parliament, that every Auditor of the
revenues of the imperial Crown of this Realm (sometime belonging to the late
Court of Augmentations, and now to his Highness Court of Eschequer) shall
yearly and every year before the time of the Audit cause Proclamations to be
made in sundry Market Towns, in every County within the limits and circuit of
their several offices, to the end and intent that all and singular Receivers,
Bailiffes, Collectors, Recues, Farmers, and other Occupiers, Officers, and
Ministers accomptable, and all others whatsoever having to do at that Audit,
may the better be prepared with their money, and al other things requisite for
the finishing and clearing of their accounts there, as appertains.

Know ye therefore that his Highness Auditor of the said revenues, within the
said County of (...) does, by this present Proclamation, notify and declare to
all and singular Mayors, Shiriffes, Receivers, Stewards, vnderstewards, Clerks
of Courts, Woodwards, Bailifs, Collectors, Reeues, Farmers, and to all other
the Kings Majesty's Officers and Subjects, that his Highness Audit for his
foresaid revenues, within the said County of (...) for the year ending at the
feast of S. Michaell the Archangell now next coming shall be kept and holden
at (...) in the (...) and there shall begin upon (...) morning, which shall
be the (...) day of (...) next, and there continued until (...) at night
then next following, the space of (...) whole days. Wherefore his Highness
said Auditor, on his Majesty's behalf wills and charge as well al and
singular his Highness Stewards, vnderstewards, and Clerks of Courts, or their
sufficient Deputies, to be attendant at the Audit: and to bring thither with
them, the Court Roules belonging to their several Offices, for the said year,
and all other years, whereof the profits be not yet answered: As also all and
singular Receivers, Woodwards, Bailifs, Collectors, Reeues, Bedels, Farmers and
al other his Highness Officers, Occupiers, and ministers accomptable, and all
other his Subjects that owe to his Majesty any arrerages, tenthes, rents
reserved, or other duties, to appear at the said Audit then and there to yield
account and make payment of the same, and of al other issues, commodities and
profits due to his Highness, within the said (...) And to bring then also with
them, all Rentals, Letters Patents, Indentures, Leases, Copies, and Extracts of
Court Rouls, Warrants, Commissions, Tallies, Acquittances, and all other
Writings and things concerning any of the premises. And thereof not to fail as
they and every of them tender their duties toward his Highness, and will avoid
the forfaiture of their several fees and offices and other the penalties (by
sundry good Statutes) limited for punishment af all such as do not therein
according to their duties.

Dated the (...) day of (...) in the (...) year of the Reign of our said most
gracious soueraign Lord James, by the grace of God King of England, France, and
Ireland, and the (...) year of his reign of Scotland Defender of the faith
etc.

