Who so ever ly^eth, and believes in me, shall never dye. Joan. 11.



He that hears my words, and believes on him that sent me, has everlasting
life, and shall not come into dampnacyon, but pass from death unto life.
Joan. 5.

The lattre examinacyon of Anne Askewe, latelye martyred in Smythfelde, by the
wicked Synagoge of Antichrist, with the Elucydacyon of Johan Bale.

Anne Askewe stood fast by this veryte of God to the end.

Psalm 116.

The veryte of the lord endures forever.



I will pour out my sprete upon all flesh (says God) your sons and your
daughters shall prophecye. And who so ever call on the name of the lord /
shall be saved. Iohel. ij.

Johan Bale to the Christen Readers.
IN the prymatyne church, as the horrible pe^secucyo^s increased, many
dylyge^t writers collected the godly answers and tryumphan^t sufferynges of
the mattyrs, as necessary examples of Christen constancye to be followed of
other. Of this no^bre was Lucas, which wrote the Apostles acts Sowere after
him Linus, Writers.
Marcellus, Egesippus, Meliton (...), Abdias Babylonius, Josephus Antiochenus,
Clemens Alexandrinus, Antherus, Phileas, Eusebius, ^icephorus, and a great sort
more, Fabianus, not a chair Bishop, but a pulpet Bishop of Rome, ordained in
his time for that only office vij. deaco^s and so many notayres, about the
year of our lord. CC.XXXVI. that they should faythfullye regestre there
martyrdomes, notairey^
to hold the^ in contynuall remembrance, as witnesses Platina Polydorus,
Masseus, and soch other chronyclers. No less necessary is that office now,
though few me^ attempt it, nor no less profitable to the christian co^mo^welth
than it was in those terryble days. For now are persecucyo^s all Christendom
over, martyrs
so well as were than. Now are the true Christyanes vexed of the sitting
Bishops for their Christen believe, so well as than. Now are they reuyled,
ponnyshed, imprisoned, and have all evil spoken against them for Christ's
verytees sake. Math. 5. so well as than.

And what can be more confortable to the sufferers, sufferers.
than to know the ernest constancye of their troubled companyons in that
kyngedome of pacye^ce? Apo. 1. or to mark in them the strong workynge of
faith, and behold the mighty mageste of God in their agonyes? what though
they were before, sinners of the world. Bernardus.
Saint Bernarde says in his homelyes upon Salomons cantycles, that the godly
sufferaunce of martyrs has given as good erudycyon to the christen church, as
ever ded the doctrine of the saints. Than is it mete that some be sterynge,
and not that all men in these days be ydell / concerning that godly office.
Barnes. and other
Many have suffered in this realm of late years, by the bold calling on of
Antichrists furyouse advocates, whose lattre confessyons, causes, and answers,
are a great deal more notable and godly, if they be ryghtlye wayed, than ever
were the confessyons, causes and answers of the old canonysed martyrs, which
in the popes Englysh church have had so many solempnytees, seruyces, and
sensynges. Reca^ter^
Many have also most desperatlye recanted through their most wicked
persuasyons and threttenynges, in whose vain recantacyons are both to be
seane, their blasphemies against God, and manifest treasons against their king.

Now in conferring these martyrs, the old with the new / and the popes with
Christ's. I seclude first of all the Brytayne church, Brytayne church.
or the prymatyue church of this realm, which never had autoryte of the
Romysh pope. Her martyrs in deed were agreeable to that Christ spoke before in
the Gospel concerning his martyrs, whereby we should know the^, as we
euydentlye find in the lives of Emerita king Lucyes sister, Amphibalus,
Albanus, Aaron, Julius, ^i^nothus, and soch other. I ^ende you forth (says he)
as sheep among wol^es. Me^ Christ.
shall deliver ye up in their counsels and synagoges. Ye shall be brought
before rulers, and kings, and be hated of all men in a manner for my names
sake, Mathei 10. Cast not before in your minds what answer to make. For I in
that hour shall give ye both vtteraunce and wisdom, which all your
adversaries shall not be hable to withstand, Bishops*
Luce 21. They shall excommunycate you or conde^pne you for heretykes. Yea,
they shall bring you in soche hate of the world, that who so ever kylleth you,
will think he does God great good service. And this shall they do because they
know ryghtlye neither the father nor yet me, Joan. 16.

Many other like sentences left the forde Jesus Christ in his holy Gospel,
that we should always by the^ dyscerne his true martyrs, from the popes and
Mahome^es con^terfe^t martyrs. In England here sens the first pla^tacyon of the
popes Englysh church, Englysh church.
by Augustyne and other Romysh monks of Benettes superstycyo^, ij. kinds of
martyrs has been, ^ne of monasterye buylders and chaunterye founders, whom the
temporal princes and secular magistrates have dyuersiye done to death,
sumtyme for dysobedyence, and sumtyme for manifest treason, as we have of
Wallenus of Crowlande, Martyrs
Thomas of Lancaster, Richard Scrope, Becket and soch other. The images of
these have been set^ up in their temples, like the old gods of the paganes,
and have had there vygyls, holy days, ryngynges, sacryfysynges, ca^dels,
offerynges, feastynges, and much a do besides, as they had. The other sort were
preachers of the Gospel, or poor teachers thereof i^ corners, Other martyrs.
wha^ the persecucyo^ was soche, that it might not be taught abroad. And these
poor sowles, or true servants of God, were put to death by the holy
spirytuall fathers Bishops, prestes, monks, chanons, and friars, for heresye
and Iollerye, they say. These Christen martyrs were never sole^pnysed of the^.
No, No dyrge
they had not so much ^s a penye dyrge or a grote mass of Requ^em, no more than
had Johan Baptyst and Steven among the Jews. But they have been holden for
condemned heretykes ever sens.

Who ever heard any goodness yet reported of Dionothus with his M. and CC.
companyons, whom Augustyne caused to be slain at Westchestre in his Augustyne.
churches beginning, because they would not preach as he ded apoynt them. nor
baptyse after the Romysh manner, neither yet hallowe the eastre feast as they
ded. Many a blessed creature, both men and women, Wycleue
have been bre^t sens Ioha^ Wyclenes time and before, for only dysclosynge the
pharysees yokes and teaching the Gospels lyberte. And the^ have that bawdye
bloudye Synagoge of Satan dyffamed, blasphemed, conde^pned. execrated and
cursed to hell as most detestable heretykes and dogs. Where as if they were
of Christ, Suffer.
they ought (in case they were their haters or enemies) to suffer the^, to say
well of them, to do them good, and to pray for them. Math. 5. Luce 6. and not
thus to use more tyranny over them, than ever ded Saracene, Turk, Tyra^^t or
devil. A great dyfference is there of the martyrs whom they make, Dyfference
of martyrs.
from the martyrs whom they canonyse. Of them whom they dampne, from them whom
they worshypp. Yea, so great a dyfference or dyuersyte betwyn them (if ye mark
them well) as is betwixt gold and dyrt, or light and darkness.

The martyrs, Martyrs
whose deaths they have procured by all ages of their bloudthurstye church,
harkened unto Christ, he alde of ryghtousnesse, and sought their lord God in
sprete, Esa. 51. but the martyrs for the most part, whom they have with so
many latyne wawlynges, torches and candell burnynges, magnyfyed in their
temples, harkened to the pope, healde of his vnryghtousnesse, and sought out
his superstycyouse ydolatryes. Compare
In the conferring of their old canonysed martyrs, with our newlye condemned
martyrs here. Anne Askewe and her other iij. companyons, with soch like, their
dyfference will be much more easelye perceived. First let us begin with
Thomas Becket, Becket.
which was so gloryouse a martyr and precyouse advocate of theirs, that they
made his blood equal with Christ's blood and desired to clyme to heaven
thereby. miracles
Many wonderful miracles could that mytred patron of theirs do in those
days, when the monks had fryre Bakons books and knew the bestowynge of fryre
^o^^ayes mystes but now he can do non at all. This Becket in all his
floryshynge doings, harkened to the pope, defended his pomponse kyngedome,
supported his churches excess, and wretchedlye dyed for the synnefullly
bertees of the same. ^yght martyrs.
Anne Askewe and her sort, gave dylyge^t head to their lord Jesus Christ,
sought the kyngedome of heaven in daily repentance, myghtelye detested all
ydolatrouse worshyppynges, and in conclusyon suffered most tryumphaunt death
for the same.

Concerning other martyrs. As Wene fryd, Bonifacius Anglus
otherwise called Bonyface an Englysh monk and archebyshopp of Magunce was
flayne co^firmynge neophytes, orprofessyng his newlye baptized broad to the
Romysh popes obedience. There was found about him a casket full of rellyckes
or dead me^nys bones, wha^ he was put to death in the year of our lord. 755.
Anne Askewe and her felyshypp, had non other rellyckes about the^, wha^ they
stood at the stake to be brent in Smyth field. but a bundell of the sacred
scriptures enclosed in there hearts, and redye to be uttered against
Antichrists ydolatryes, Sayn^ Clar^ of Orchestre contemnynge lawful marryage,
Clarus,
made him self an ydell pressed, and was byheaded in his own gardene by
procureme^t of a woman. Clita^cus
S. Elytanke of Southwales, was in like case stabbed in with a dagger, because
a young maiden loved him. The only true honor of God was it, and no wordlye
cause, that Anne Askewe and her company dyed for. Saint Edwyne Edwinus
being weleanned, was slain in battle at ^at field in the North, Edwardus.
and S. Edwardery dynge a Hunting in the forest of Warham in the weast, was
killed upon his horse in drinking a cup of wine. And all this was done for
the kyngedomes of this world. The martyrdom of Anne Askewe and her Brethren,
was neither in battelynge nor hunting, riding nor drykynge, but in that right
course which Christ prescrybed unto his dyscyples under the cruel Bishops,
for his only glory.

Saynce Cadock of Cowbridge a Bishop, Cadocus.
was pierced through with a spear, as he stood at his Mass at one of the
clock at after none, because he would be of the order of martyrs. Saint
Elphege archebyshopp of Caunterburye was stoned to death of the Danes, because
he would not pay them three.M. Mark, Lanfrancus.
in the year of our lord.M. and xij. Of soch martyrs, much doubted
Lanfrancus, which succeeded him in that office about a iiij. score years after,
and dysputed thereof with Anselmus. The cause of Anne Askewe and her companyons,
was neither madness no^ money, Indractus
but the only seeking of their lord God a right. As Saint Indract with other
devout pilgrims of Rome lay in bed in their inn at Shapwyck by Glastenbury,
their throtes were cut in the night for money, which was reckened to be in
their pilgrims scryppes. Saint Iuthware a vyrgyne was by headed also, Iuthwara.
for layenge fresh chese or cruddes whether ye will, to her breasts. The cause
of Anne Askewe and her other fellawes, conferred with Christ's sriptures,
seems a far other matter, Hewalde Hewaldidu^.
the black and Hewalde the whyght ij. Englysh monks, going from place to
place with cruettes, chalyce, and superaltare, to do their daily sacryfyces,
were done to death in Frislande by the bowers of the cuntraye for teaching a
stra^nge relygyon, and are worshypped at Coleyne for martyrs. For bearing
about Christ's testament, which is most heavenly treasure, and for spredynge
the wholesome doctrine thereof, was Anne Askewe Anne Askewe.
and her sort brent by the prestes procurement, yet axe they no honor for it.

Osytha runnynge away from her husband, Ositha
by the intysement of ij. monks bycame a professed nonne, and was murdered of
the Danes. Wenefryda Wenefrida.
by counsel of a pressed, dysdaynouslye refusing the marryage of a prince
christened, lost her head for it. Maxe^ti^
Maxentia also played a part not all unlike to this. Soch pylde popysh
martyrdomes, compared to the martyrdom of Anne Askewe and her faithful
cumpanye, is as is rustye iron compared to pure silver. Guilhelmus.
S. Wyllyam of Rochestre a Scotte. leaving both wife and howsholde, ydellye to
trudge on pilgrimage, was strycken in the head with an ax^/of his own
companyon by the way. Saint Thomas Thomas.
of Dover a monk was soch a wone, as was slain of the french men for hydynge
the churc^e (...), crosses, ^^^lyces and cepes. No soch light corruptyble
vanyrees were they, that Anne Askewe and her constaunt brethren dyed for, but
for the precyouse veryte of God. Young S. Young Saints.
Wyllyam of Norwych. young S. Robert of Burye, young S. Hugh of Lyncolne, yo^ge
S. Melor of Cornewayle, yo^g S. Renelme of Glocestre, yo^ge S. Eldrede of
Ra^saye and his brother, with soch other like, were but very babes (they say)
and were martyred of the Jews and of other enemies. Wherefore their martyrdomes
shall be but babysh in comparyson of these. the veryte having by them so small
furtheraunce.

Foillanus and his iij. Foillanus
brethren, going homeward in the night, after they had well bankered with S.
Gertrude and her nonnes, were killed in a wood of one murderer, and their
horses sold in the next market rowne. Iustinanus, S. Dauyes ghostlye father in
Wales, Iustinanus.
was slain in a gardene of his iij. monks, because he compelled them to do
more labor than he would do his self. After Rilianus Rilianus
was come home from Rome, he was murdered in his selle with other holy
pilgrims by a woman, as they lay there a sl^p^ in the night. Saint Vrsula
also and her she pilgrims, with their chaplaynes, Vrsula^
nurses, and suckynge babes, were but homelye handeled at Coleyn^ of the hunnes
and pyc^^s (if that legende be true) as they were coming homewardes from
Rome. Compare me Anne Askewe and her condemned cumpanye, with these clow^ed,
Prouethe spretes.
canonysed, solempnysed, sensed, mattensed, and massed martyrs, and tell me by
the Gospels trial, which of them seem most Christenlyke martyrs, Yea, bring
saint Edmonde of Burye. S. Fremu^de of Dunstable, S. Ethelbert of Herforde, S.
Oswalde of Glocestre, S. Oswyne of Tynmoth, Edmu^d^ Fremn^dus and other.
and Saint Wynstane of Euesham (which are the best of the Englysh martyrs) to
the touch stone of Gods word, and ye shall fynhe their martyrdomes and causes
full unlike to theirs whom the Bishops murder now apace in England.

In all these Englysh martyrs reherced here before, Token^
ye shall find very few colors or yet tokens, that Christ said his martyrs
should be known by, unless ye take pylgrymages, po^pes rellyckes, women,
battles, hu^tynges, ydelnesse, mo^keryes, money, the author
treasure, worldly kyngedomes, contempt of marryage, superstycyo^s and soch
other vanytees for the^. And than will I say, and not lie in it / that ye are
much better ouerseane tha^ learned in the scriptures of God / as your old
blind bl^dderynge predecessors has been. Ye will axe me here, Good store.
if I recke^ England tha^ all barre^ of Christian martyrs? Nay marry do I not.
For I know it has had good store se^s the popes faith came first into
England to the Gospels obscuracyo^ / though their names be not known to all
me^. Great tyra^nye was showed by the heythnysh emprours and kings / at the
first preaching of the^ Gospel in the prymatyue church of the Brytaynes
Brytannysh.
/ by the cruel calling on of the pagane prestes But nothing like to that
has been showed se^s in the Englysh Englysh.
church by the spirytuall tyran^t of Rome and his mytred termagau^tes / at the
prouocacyo^ of there oyled swylbolles and blind Balaamytes. For they most
cruellye bre^t those innoce^tes / which ded but only read the testament of God
in their mother tunge / and do not yet repent them of that myschefe but
contynewe therein.

If ye mark well these ij. examynacyons of Anne Askewe, ye shall find in her
and in her other ^ij. Tokens.
companyons, besides other who^ the Bishops in our time and before has brent,
the express tokens that Christ seals his martyrs with. They apered as sheep
among wolves They were thrown in strong preson. They were brought forth into
counsels and synagoges. Answer^
Their answers were out of Gods sprete (as her in apereth) and not out of their
own. They were reuyled, mocked, stocked, racked, execrated, condemned, and
murdered, as is said before, Tyrau^tes
By a spirytualte also, as he promised they should be, Math. 23. and 24 Yea,
those spirytuall tyrauntes besides their mortal malice upon the innocent
bodies, have most blasphemouslye uttered in their spyghtfull sermons and
writings, that their sowles are dampened, as is to be sea^e in the books of
wynchestre and Peryn. Wynchestre Peryn.
But let them be ware least they dampne not their own wretched sowles. For
full sure we are by Christ's strong promise, Luce 12. That their sowles they
can not harm with all their popes black c^rses, Full swetelye rese they now
in the peace of God, where their slaunderouse and malycyon se judgments can
not ^urte them at all. ^api. 3. Let those Epycures pigs dampne them with as
many blasphemouse epycures pigs.
lies as they can ymagyne, for other armor they have no^. and we shall on the
other side can^nyse them again with the mighty words and promyses of Christ,
which they shall never be ^able to resist. The father of our lord Jesus
Christ, Light.
grant the light of his word so to sprede the world over that the dark
mystes of Satan may clerelye be expelled, to the special confort of his
redeemed church, and glory of his eternal name.

Amen.
The lattre examinacion of the worthy servant of God mastres Anne Askewe the
yo^ger daughter of Sir Wyllyam Askewe knight of Lyncolne shyre, latelye
martyred in Smithfelde by the wicked Synagoge of Antichrist. The censure or
judgment of Johan Bale thereupon, after the sacred Scriptures and Chronycles.
CHrist wylled his most dear Apostle and secretarye Gaynt Ioha^ the S. Ioha^.
Evangelist, to sygnyfye by writynge to the ever fear or preacher of the
congregacyon of Pergamos, that there only are his faithful members murdered,
where Satan inhabyteth or holds resydence. And for example he brings forth
his constaunt witness Antipas, which was there most cruellye slain of that
Synagoge of his, for confessing the veryte, Apoca. 2. That Behemorh (says
Job) that Leuyathan, that Satan, Satan.
regneth as a most mighty king over all the spirytuall children of pride. Job
42. A murderer (says Christ to the spirytual^e of the Jews) and a
blasphemouse liar, is that father of yours, and has been from the worlds
beginning Joan. 8. These manners has he not yet left, but contynueth them
still in his wicked posteryte.

Iu the prymatyue church (as restyfyeth Bedas) they persecuted the hears of
Christ's head, Christ's hears.
which were so pure as the white w^lle that is apt to receive all colors,
Apoca, 1. They slew those true beleuers which his word and sprete had depured
from all false worshyppynges, and made fytt for all trybulacyons to be suffered
for his names sake. In these lattre days they meddele with his fete, Christ's
fete.
which are like unto brass, burynge as it were in an whote furnace, Apo. 1.
For they that believe now agreably to his word, and not after there corrupted
and cursed customs, Fire.
are consumed in the fire. As here after will apere by this godly woman Anne
Askewe, which with other more was brent at London in the year of our lord a
M.D.XLVI. For the faithful testymonye of Jesus against Antichrist. Whose lattre
handelynge here follows in course, like as I received it in coppye, Coppye.
by serten duche merchauntes coming from thens, which had been at their
burning, and beholden the tyrannouse vyolence there showed. First out of the
preson she wrote unto a secret frynde of hers, after this ma^er following.

Anne Askewe.
I do perceive (dear frynde in the lord) that thu art not yet persuaded
throughlye in the truth concerning the lords supper, Christ.
because Christ said unto his Apostles. Take, eat This is my body which is
given for you. In geuynge forth the bread as an outward sign or token to be
received at the mouche, he minded them in a perfyght believe to receive that
body of his which should dye for the people, or to think the death thereof,
the only h^lthe and salvation of their sowles. The bread and the wine were
left us, Bread.
for a sacramental communyon, or a mutual pertycypacyon of the inestymable
benefyghtes of his most precyouse death and blood shedynge. And that we should
in the end thereof, be thankful together for that most necessary grace of
our redempcyon. For in the closing up thereof, he said thus. This do ye, in
remembrance Remember
of me. Yea, so often as ye shall eat it or drink it, Luce 22. and 1. Corinthians.
11. ^ls should we have been forgetful of that we ought to have in daily
remembrance, and also been altogyther unthankful for it.

Johan Bale.
Agreeable to this woma^nis doctrine here, Edere and Bibere.
are the scriptures of both testame^ice. Wherein these words Edere and Bibere,
to eat and to drink, are often times spirytuallye taken for Credere, to believe
or receive in faith. The poor (says David) shall eat and he satisfyd. All
that seek to please the lord shall praise him, and their sowles shall never
perysh, Psalm. 21. They that eat me (says the veryte of God) shall hungre more
and more, Believe*
and they that drink me shall thirst more desyerouslye for me. Eccles. 24.
Unless ye eat the flesh of the son of man (says Christ) and drink his
blood, ye can have no life in you, Ioa^. 6. These scriptures expound the
doctors spirytuallye, Euangelystes.
yea, the papists and all Where as the other iij. Evangelists. Matthew, Mark,
and Luke, shows nothing else of the lords supper but the plain history, S.
Johan writynge last of the^ all, Doctry^ne
manyfesteth there the whole co^plte^ doctrine and full understanding thereof
after Christ's own (...) and meaning. (...) is it there, that the true
receyuers thereof, be taught of God, and learned of the heavenly father and not
of synnefull men's customs.

The work of God, or that pleases God. Faith.
is not there the putting of bread into the mouth and bellye, but to believe
or exactlye to consydre, that Christ dyed for us to cleanse us from sin, to
join us into one mystycall body, and to give us the life everlasting. And
that there is non other but he that can procure us that life. For that which
enters the mou^he, feadeth only ^he body. But that enters faith, feade^h
the soul. Christ.
I am the living bread says he) which came down from heaven. He only that
believes in me, has the life everlasting, Joan. 6. the sprete is it that
quyckeneth, the fleshelye under standing, or only mouth eating, profyteth
nothing at all. Here will an obstyna^e papyst parauenture say, that we
attrybute nothing to the corporal communyon. Communyon.
Yeas, we reuerentlye, grant, that ryghtlye mynystred after Christ's
instytucyon it both confirms our faith in the necessary consyderacyons of
his death, and also sturreth up that brotherlye Christian love which we ought
to have toward our neyber, Love.
besides that this faithful woman has spoken here of it a force. And these
are the only fruits which he requires of us in that supper or sacramental
metynge.

Anne Askewe.
Therefore it is mete, that in prayers we call unto God, to grafte in our
foreheades, the true meaning of the holy Ghost concerning this communyo^.
Letter.
For S. Paul does say that the letter slays. The sprete is it only that
gives life. 2. Cor. 3. Mark we^le the vj. chaptre of Johan, where all is
applied unto faith. ^ore also the fort chaptre of S. Paul's first epistle to
the Corynthes, and in the end thereof ye shall find playnelye, that the
things which are seane are temporal, but they that are not seane are
everlasting. Yea, look in the third chaptre to the Hebrews, and ye shall find
that Christ Christ.
as a son and no servant* rules over his house (whose house are we, and not
the dead temple) if we hold fast the confydence and reioysynge of that hope to
the end. Wherefore as says the holy Ghost. To day if you shall hear his
voice, harden not your hearts, etc, Psalm. 94.

Johan Bale.
By the fore heads Foreheades.
understand she the hearts or minds of men, for so are they take of S. Ioha^,
Apoc. 7. and 22. I can not think, but herm she had respect unto the plate of
fine gold which the lord commanded to be set upon Aaro^s foreheade, for the
acceptacyon of the people of Israel, Hearts.
Exodi 2. For here would she all mennys hearts to be endued and lyghtened with
the most pur^ sprete of Christ, for the understanding of that most holy and
necessary co^munyon, the corrupted dreams and f^ntasyes of synnefull men set
a part. She knew by the syngular gift of the holy Ghost, that they are lyenge
masters, procurers of ydolatrye, and most spyghfull enemies to the soul of
man, that applies that office to the corruptyble lypp^^, Liars
which belongs to an uncorrupted faith, so setting the creature that is
corruptyble bread, in place of the creator Christ both God and man, Roma. 1.
lamenting it with the ryghtouse, at the very heart ro^e. A member.
And in this she showed her self to be a natural membre of Christ's mystycall
body. 1. Cor. 12. relygyouslye careful for her Christen brethren and
systerne, least they should take harm of the popes masmongers.

Anne Askewe.
The sum of my examynacyo^ before the kings counsel at Grenewyche. Your
request as concerning my preso^ fellows, Co^panyons.
I am not hable to satysfye, because I heard not their examynacyo^s. But the
effect of mine was this I before the counsel, was asked of mastre kyme. I
answered, that my lord cha^cellour knew all redye my mind in that matter,
They with that answer were not contented, but said, it was the kings
pleasure, Ryme.
that I should open the matter to them. I answered the^ playnelye, that I would
not so do. But if it were the kings pleasure to hear me, I would show him
the truth. Then they said, it was not mete for the king with me to be
troubled. I answered, that Solomon Solomon
was reckened the wysest king that ever lived, yet myslyked not he to
hear.ij. poor common women, much more his grace a simple woman and his
faithful subject. So in co^clusyon, I made the^ non other answer in that
matter.

Johan Bale.
Concerning mastre Ryme, Ryme.
this should seem to be the matter. Her father Sir Wyllyam Askewe knight and his
father old mastre Ryme, were sumtyme of famylyaryte and neybers within the
countye of Lyncolne shyre. Whereupon the said Sir Wyllyam, couenaunted with him
for lucre, to have his eldest ^oughter married with his son and (...) (as an
ungodly manner it is in England much used among neble men) And as it was her
chance to dye before the time of marryage, An use.
to save the money he constrained this to supplye her rowme. So that in the
end she was compelled against her will or fre consent to marrye with him.
Notwithstanding the marryage ones past, she demeaned her self like a Christen
wife, Married
and had by him (as I am infourmed) ij. children. In process of time by often
reading of the sacred Bible, she fell clerelye from all old superstycyons of
papystrye, to a perfyght believe in Ihesus Christ Whereby she so offended the
prestes (as is to be seane after) that he at their suggestion, Exyled.
vyolentlye drove her out of his house. Whereupon she thought her self free
from that uncomely (...) marr^age, by this doctrine of S. Paul 1 Cor. 7. If a
faytfull woman have an unbelieving husband, which will not tarrye with her she
may leave him. For a brother or sister is not in subieccyo^ to soch*
specyallye where as the marryage before is unlawful. Upon this occasyo^ (I
hear say) she s^ught of the law a dyuorceme^^ D^uorcement.
from him, namelye and above all, because he so cruellye drove her out of his
house in despyght of Christ's veryte. She could not think him worthy of her
marryage which so spyghtfullye hated God the chief author of marryage. A beast.
Of this matter was she first examyned (I think) at his instaunt labor an^
suit.

Anne Askewe.
Then my lord chancellor asked me of my opinion in the sacrament. Sacrament.
My answer was this. I believe, that so often as I in a Christen congregacyon, do
receive the bread in remembrance of Christ's death, and with thanks geuynge
according to his holy instytucyo^, I receyne therewith the fruits also of his
most gloryouse passion. (...).
The Bishop of wynchestre bad me make a dyrect answer. I said, I would not
sing a new song to the lord in a strange land.

Johan Bale.
Dyrect enough was this answer after Christ's syngle doctrine, but not after
the popes double and couetouse meaning for his ^yled queresters advantage.
Answer.
And here was at hand his general advocate or steward, to look upon the
matter, that nothing should perysh perteynynge to the mayntenaunce of his
superstycyouse vain glory, if any cra^tye polycye might help it. Tyraun^.
What offended this godly Christen woman here, either in opinion or faith, ye
cruel and vengeable tyraunies? But that ye must (as David says) temper your
tunges with venemouse words to destroy that innocent. Psalm. 63. Could you
have brought in against her a matter of more danger concerning your laws, to
depryue her of life, ye would have done it, Danger
soch is your gostlye charity. But be sure of it, as hawtye as ye are now, the
hard plage thereof will ^e yours, when the great vengeance shall fall for
shedynge of innocents blood. Mathe^ 23.

Anne Askewe.
Then the Bishop said, I spoke in parables. Parable^
I answered it was best for him. For if I show the open truth (quoth I) ye
will not accept it. The^ he said I was a paratte. I told him again, I was
ready to suffer all things at his hands. Not only his rebukes, but all that
should follow besides, yea, and that gladlye. Then had I diverse rebukes of the
counsel. Rebukes.
because I would not express my mind in all things as they would have me.
But they were not in the mean time unanswered for all that, which now to
rehearce, were to much. For I was with them there above five hours. v. hours
Then the clerk of the counsel conveyed me from thens to my lady Garnyshe.

Johan Bale.
Most co^monlye Christ used to speak in dark symylytudes and parables, wha^
he perceived his audyence rather geuon to the hearing of pharysaycall
constytucyons and customs, than to his heavenly veryte, Math. 13. Mar. 4.
Luce 7. Which rule this woman being his true dyscyple, forgote not here, in
co^menynge with this proud Bishop. Wyuchesnstre.
who^ she knew to be always a most obstynate withstander of that wholesome
veryte of his. And as concerning mockes and scornful re^ylynges, they have
been ever in that generacyon of scorners more plenteouse than good counsels to
the ryghtwyse. Mockers
And therefore as a name after their condycyons, it is unto them appropryate of
the holy Ghost in many places of the scriptures. In the lattre days (says
Judas the apostle) shall come mockers, walking in ungodliness all after their
own lusts. These are they which separate themselves from the common sort by a
name of spirytualtie, being in conuersacyon beastlye, and having no sprete
that is godly. Hypocrytes.
But derelye beloved (says he) ground your selves surely upon our most holy
faith, etc.

Anne Askewe.
The next day I was brought again before the counsel. Then would they needs
know of me, what I said to the sacrament. Sacrament.
I answered, that I alredye had said that I could say Then after diverse
words* they bad me, go by. Then came my lord Lyle, Wynchestre.
my lord of Essexe, and the Bishop of wynchestre requyrynge me ernestlye,
that I should confess the sacrament to be flesh, blood and bone. Then said I
to my lord Para^d my lord Lyle, that it was great shame for them to counsel
contrary to their knowledge. Godly.
Whereunto in few words they ded say, that they would gladlye all things
were well.

Johan Bale.
Always have the worldelye governors showed more gentylnesse and fauer to the
word of God, Prynces^
than the consecrate prestes and prelates. As we have for example in the old
law* that Ezechias the king of Judah would in no case at their calling on.
put Micheas Michea^
the true prophet unto death, when he had prophesied the destructyon of
Samaria for their ydolatrye, and for the tyranny of their princes and false
prophets, Miche 1. and 3. Neither would the princes at the prestes headye
exclamacyons, murder Hieremye hieremye
for the lords veryte preaching, but mercyfullye delivered him out of their
malycyouse hands, Hieremye 26. Pylate in Pylate^
like case, concerning the new Iawe, plea^ed with the Jews spirytualte, to
have saved Christ from the death, Math. 27. Joan. 18. So ded the captain
Claudius Lisias Lisias
deliver Paul from their mortal malice, after that the high pressed Ananias had
commanded him to be smytten, and his retynewe co^spyred his death, Acto. 23.
At the prestes only prouocacyon was it, that the heythnysh emprours so
greuouslye vexed and tormented the Christen beleuers in the prymatyue church,
Cesares.
as testyfyeth Egesyppus. Clemens Alexandrinus, Eusebius, and other old
hystoryanes.

Anne Askew.
Then the Bishop said, he would speak withme famylyarlye. I said, so ded
Judas when he vnfryndelye betrayed Christ Then desyered the Bishop to speak
with me alone. Wynchestre.
But that I refused. He asked me, why? I said, that in the mouth of two or
three witnesses every matter should stand, after Christ's and Paul's doctrine.
Math. 18. and 2. Cor. 13.

Johan Bale.
Ded she not (think you) hytt the nail on the head* in thus tauntynge this
Bishop? yeas. Treason.
For as great offense does he to Christ, that gives one of his beleuynge
members unto death, as ded he that betrayed first his own body. That ye have
done unto those little ones (shall he say at the lattre day) which have
believed in me, Christ's.
ye have done unto mine own person, Math. 25. Who so touches them (says
Zacharye) shall touch the apple of the lords own eye. Zacha. ^. But this
believes not that perverse generacyon.

Anne Askewe.
Then my lord chancellor began to examyne me again of the sacrament.
Sacrament.
Then I axed him, how long he would halte on both sides? Then would he needs
know, where I found that? I said in the scripture 3. Reg. 18. The^ he went
his way.

Johan Bale.
Of Helias the prophet were these words spoken, to the people of Israel. soch
time as they halted betwyne ij. Halte,
opynyo^s or walked vnryghtlye betwyne the true living God, and the false God
Baal as we do now in England betwyne Christ's Gospel and the popes old
rotten customs. England
We slenderlye consydre with S. Paul, that Christ will have no felyshypp or
concord with Belial, light with darkness, ryghtwysnesse with
vnryghtwysnesse, the temple of God with images, or the true beleuers with the
infydels, 2. Corinthians. 6. For all our newo Gospel, yet will we still bear the
strau^gersyoke with the unbelievers, and so be come neither whote nor cold,
that God may spewe us out of his mouth as unsavory morsels. ^epidi.
Apoc. 3. Saying unto us as to the folysh vyrgynes. Verelye I know you not.
Mathei 25.

Anne Askewe.
Then the Bishop said, I should be bre^te. Brenn^.
I answered, that I had serched all the scriptures yet could I never find
there that either Christ or his Apostles put any creature to death. Well,
well, said I, God will laughe your threttenynges to scorn, Psalm. 2. Then was I
commanded to stand a side.

Johan Bale.
Among other signs, that the holy scripture gives us to know an Antichrist
by, antichrist
it shows that he shall be an aduersarye, 2. These. 2. An insatiable dog,
Esa. 56. A persu^nge enemy* psa. 4. An enemy in the sanctuarye, Psalm 73 A
rauenynge wolf, T^br^^ne,
Mat. 7. Luce 10. Joan. 10. Act^. 20. And a most cruel murderer, Dani. 11.
Ioa^. 16. Apoc. 13. Unto soche (says S. Ioha^) is it given to vex me^ with
heat of fire, Apo. 16. The wickedness of prestes (says Hiere.) shedeth
innoce^tes bleud^. Yea (say they) ye must ^e brent, ye must dwell among the
gentyles, Tren^. 4. Or be committed to prison of the worldly powers, and so
put unto death by them. Prestes.
We maruele not therefore though these parts be played of proud Bishops.
Co^syderynge the holy Ghost must be found true in his fore judgments, and
that some there must be to do the feats. But truly ded this woman conclude
with the prophecye of David, Psalmer. That God which dwells in heaven shall
have their tyranny in derysyon, and bring all their wicked counsels to
naught, God law heth.
in the clear opening of his word, have they never so many painted colors
of false right wysnesse.

Anne Askewe.
Then came mastre Pagett to me with many gloryouse words, and desired me to
speak my mind to him. Pagett.
I might (he said) deny it again, if need were. I said, that I would not
deny the truth. He asked me, how I could avoid the very words of Christ.
Take, care. This is my body, which shall be broken for you. I answered,
Christ's meaning
that Christ's meaning was there, as in these other places of the scripture. I
am the door, Joan* 10. I am the vine, Joan. 15. Behold the lamb of God, Joan.
1. The rock stone was Christ. 1 Cor. 10. and soch other like. Ye may not here
(said I) take Christ for the materyall thing that he is sygnyfyed Sygnyfye.
by. For than ye will make him a very door, a vine, a lamb, and a stone,
clean contrary to the holy Ghostes meaning. All these in deed do sygnyfye
Christ, like as the bread does his body in that place. And though he ded say
there. Take, Remembrance.
eat this in remembrance of me. Yet ded he not bid them hang up that bread
in a boy, and make it a God, or bow to it.

Johan Bale.
Much a do is here made, and many subtyle ways are sought out, to bring
this woman into their corrupted, and false believe, Idolatrye.
that the corruptyble creature made with hands, might stand in place of the
eternal creator or maker God and man for the prestes advantage. But all is in
vain. Not in bread.
In no case would he so accept it. Nothing less minded Christ, than to dwell
in the bread, or to become a feadynge for the body, when he said. Take, eat.
This is my body. For a contrary doctrine he taught his dyscyples the year
before his last supper, as we have in the vi. chaptre of Johan Where as he
declares his flesh to be a spirytuall meat, spirytuall
his blood a spirytuall drink, and both the^ to be received in faith, the
bread and the wine remaining as signs of his ever lasting covenant. Reason
is it, that he rather be judged the receyuer which lives in that refeccyon,
than he which lives not thereby. the eater
Which is the soul and not the body, What neaded Christ to have given to
those bodies a new body lie feadynge, which were suffycyentlye fed before with
the pass over lamb? If he had not meant therein some other manner of thing?

But he suffycye^tlye enough declares his own meaning, Luce 22. Where he
commands us to do it in his remembrance, and not to make him again by
blowynge upon the bread. Remembrance.
This sacramental eating and drinking in his remembrance, S. Paul more
largely declares, 1, Cor, 11. So often (says he) as ye shall eat of that
bread and drink of that cup, ye shall show the lords death till he come.
If ye ernestlye mark that lattre clause (till he come) Till he come.
ye shall well perceive that his bodylye presence in the bread, is utterly
denied there. More over in the before said xxij. chaptre of Luke, because we
should not be to scrupul^se. Christ shows what that wine and bread of his
supper were, yea, as he left the^ there, eue^ i^ these words. I say unto you
(says he) that hens forth I shall not drink of this fruit of the vine Fruit
of the vine.
(or eat of this fruit of wheat) till the kyngedome of God be come, or till I
drink it new with you in my fathers kyngedome, Math 26. Marci 14. Here
calls it he the iuse of the grape or fruit of the vine, and not the blood
yssuynge from his body. Yet is that cup (as S. Paul says) the partakynge
Partkyng
of Christ's blood, and the bread that we break there, the partakynge of
Christ's body, 1. Corint. 10. But that is in faith and sprete, as afor^^ ^han.

Anne Askewe.
Then he compared it unto the king, Pagett.
and said, that the more his magestees honor is set forth, the more
commendable it is. Then said I, that it was an abhomynable shame unto him, to
make no better of the eternal word of God, than of his slenderlye conceived
fantasye. A far other meaning requires God therein, Idell wit.
than mannys ydell wit can deuyse, whose doctrine is but lies without his
heavenly veryte. Then he asked me, if I would commen with some wyser man? That
offer, I said, I would not refuse. Then he told the counsel. And so went I to
my laydes again.

Johan Bale.
(...) first Patron. S. Frances, S. fra^ces
as we find in the hystorye of his ydolatrouse feast, and also in the book of
conformytees of Fra^ces to Christ, written by an Italysh fryre called
Bartholomeus Pisanus. In Frances (they say) is expressed the full
sygnifycacyon of Christ, by reason of his wounds. A compaeryson.
And Pagett here compares Christ's presence in the sacrament, to the kings
presence, I wot not where. And as great pleasure (I think) he does the king
therein, as though he threw dust in his face or salt in his eyes, but that
soch flattering Gnatoes must do their feats, though they be most
blasphemouse. Neither head nor^tayle has this wytlesse comparyson of his, to
make good his enterprise with this woman. And much doubt it is, whether he
makes here Christ a shaddowe to the king, or the king a shaddowe to Christ.
Christ a shaddo^*
But he should seem rather to take Christ for the shaddowe. O graceless
papystes, when will ye be godly wise? Thus to your own damp^^^^ (...)

Anne Askewe.
The^ came to me doctor Coxe, Coxe and Robynso^.
and doctor Robynson. In conclusyon we could not agree. Then they made me a
byll of the sacrament, willing me to set my hand thereunto, but I would not.
Then on the sunday I was sore sick, thinking no less than to dye. Therefore I
desired to speak with ^atymer it would no be. Then was I sent to Newgate
newgate
in my extremyte of syckenesse. For in all my life before, was I never in soch
pain. Thus the lord strengthen you in the truth. Pray, pray pray.

Johan Bale.
What an hurlye burlye is here, for this new believe? that Christ should dwell
in the bread, In bread.
which is ma^nys creature and not gods, Christ is the living bread which came
from heaven, Joan. 6. But that is not suffycye^t (say the prestes) unless ye
believe also, that he is that dead bread which came from the waffer A waffer
bakers And theru^to must ye set your own hand writynge, else will it not be
allowed in the spirytuall court. For he that speaks great things and
blasphemies (which is Antichrist antichrist
) making war with the saints, will have it so, Apo. 13 In the Apostles
time, and many years after, it was enough for a christian ma^nys
ryghtwysnesse, to believe with the heart, that Jesus is the lord, and that God
raised him up from the dead. Roma. 10. But now we must believe that he comes
down again at the will of the prestes, to be inpaned Inpaned
or inbreaded for their bellyes common welthe, like as he before came down, at
the will of his heavenly father, to be incarnated or infleshed for our
universal sowles health. And unto this we must set our hand writynge, that we
may be known for Antichrists cattle. Else shall we to stynkynge Newgate
newgate.
by their spirytuall appointment, be we never so sick, and within a while
after, to the fire in Smythfelde For Christ's membre must taste with him both
esell and gall.

Anne Askewe.
The confession of me Anne Askewe, for the time I was in Newgate, concerning
my believe.
I find in the Scriptures (says she) that Christ took the bread, Bread.
and gave it to his dyscyples, saying. Eat, This is my body, which shall be
broken for you, meaning in substance his own very body, the bread being
thereof an only sign or sacrament. For after like manner of speaking, he said,
he would break down the temple, and in iij. days build it up again,
sygnyfyenge his own body by the temple, Temple.
as S. Johan declares it. Ioa^. 2. And not the stonye temple it self. So that
the bread is but a remembrance of his death, or a sacrament of thanks
geuynge for it, wherhy we are knytt unto him, by a communyon of Christen love.
Although there be many that can not perceive the true meaning thereof, Moses
veil.
for the veil that Moses put over his face before the children of Israel, that
they should not se the clerenesse thereof, Exo. 34. and 2. Cor. 3. I perceive the
same veil remains to this day. But when God shall take it away, than shall
these blind men se.

Johan Bale.
Ye will say paraueuture, that the symylytudes here of bread and of the
temple, are not like. For he blessed the bread with thanks geuynge. So will
ye say, an other time for your pleasure and advantage, Blessed
that he blessed the temple also, and called it both the house of his father
and also the house of prayer. I pray ye, be as good here to your market place,
as ye are to your sale wares therein, for your only bellyes sake. For the one
will not do well to your commod^te in ydelnesse, Temple.
without the other. But take good head of it, if ye list. For Christ has
alredye called one of them an house of merchaundyse and a den of thieves, by
reason of your unlawful occupyenge therein, Joan. 2. and Luce 19. Be has also
promised to overthrow it, Math. 24. and not to leave one stone thereof
standing upon another, Marci 13. Because ye have not regarded the time of your
vysytacyon, warnyng
or not accepted his eternal word of health. A warning might the turnynge
over of your monasteryes have been unto you, if ye were not, as ye are
altogyther blind.

I cannot think the contrary, but he calls the other also, as ye handle it
now a days in the popes old toys of conueyaunce, The mass.
the abhomynacyon of desolacyon, or soch an abhomynable ydoll as subuertynge
Christ's true relygyon, will be your fynall destruccyon both here and in the
world to come. Idolles,
For ydolles are called abhomynacyon, all the Scriptures over. Yet shall it
endure (says Daniel) sumwhere, unto the end of all, Daniel 9. Whereby ye may
we^e. perceive, that it comprehends not only the tryumphauut stremers of
Tyberius, Tyberius Caligula
or golden images of Caligula, which both prevented the subuersyon of
Jerusalem, but some other ^doll else which should contynewe. And it follows in
the Gospel text, that he should sytt in the holy place for the time of his
contynuaunce, Mathei 24. And not in the paganes temples. Tell me if your Masses
Masses
be done any where else, than in your hallowed sanctuaryes, upon your
sanctyfyed aulters, and in your holy ornaments and consecrate cups? Neither
may any do the^, unless they be an^ynted thereunto of your Bishops and
sorcerers.

Not without the holy place (says Christ) is that abomynacyon, but in it,
Math. 24. Antichrist antichrist
(says S. Paul) shall sytt, not without, but within the very temple of God.
^. Thessalon. 2. The papacye is not without, but within the very church of
Christ, what though it be no part thereof, Apoca. 11. Thefor it shall be mete
that we be ware, Shurne them.
and separate our selves from them at the admonyshmentes of his holy doctrine,
least we be partakers with you in their promised dampnacyo^, Apoca. 18. By the
veil over Moses face, she means the blind confydence that many men yet
have in old Iewysh ceremonies and beggerlye tradycyons of men, the ^ayle
as S. Paul does call them, Gala. 4. Whereby the veryte of God is soreble
myshed. The spirytuall knowledge, which comes by the clear doctrine of the
Gospel, mynystreth no soch impedymentes of darkness. Darkness.
But all things are clere^lye s^ane to them which are endued the^ with. They
can be deceived by non o^ Satan's subtyle conuayers, but perceyueth all
things, Sight.
which have obtayne^ the pure eyes of faith.

Anne Askewe.
For it is playnelye expressed in the hystorye of Bell in the Bible, that God
dwells in n^thynge materyall. I king (says Daniel Daniel.
) be not deceived Daniel 14. For God will be in nothing that is made with
hands of men, Acto. 7. Oh what styffnecked people are these, that will always
resyst the holy Ghost. But as their fathers have done, so do they, because
they have stonye hearts. Written by me Anne Askewe, that neither wyshe death,
Strength.
nor yet fear his might, and as merye as one that is bowne toward heaven.
Truth is laid in prison, Lu^ce 21, The law is turned to wormwood, Amos 6.
And there ca^no right judgment go forth. Esaie 59.

Johan Bale.
Mark here how gracyouslye the lord keeps promise with this poor serua^nt
Promise.
of his. He that believes on me says Christ) out of his bellye shall ^owe
ryuers of living water, Joan. 7. Neither lasheth this woman out in her extreme
troubles, language of despair nor yet blasphemouse words against God with the
unbelieving, but utters the scriptures in wonderful habundaunce to his lawde
and praise. She rebukes here the most pestylent vice of ydolatrye. Faith.
Not by old narracyons and fables, but by the most pare word of God, as ded
Daniel and Steven. And in the end she shows the strong stomach of a most
Christen martyr, in that she is neither desyerouse of the death, neither yet
stands in fear of the vyole^ce or extremyte thereof. A martyr
What a constancye was this of a woman, frail, te^dre, young and most
delycyouslye brought up? But th^^ Christ's sprete was mighty in her who bad
her be of good chere, For though the tyrauntes of this world have power to
slay the body, Tyrau^tes
yet have they nopower over the soul, Mathei 20. Neither have they power in
the end to demynysh one hear of the head, Luce 21.

She faynteth not in the mids of the battle, Stedefast.
1. Cor. 9. But perseuereth strong and stedefast to the very end, Math. 10.
Not doubting but to have for her faithful perseuerau^ce, the crown of
eternal life, Apoc. 2. So merye am I (says she good creature, in the mids
of Newgate) as one that is bowne toward heaven. A voice was this of a most
worthy and valcaunt witness, in the paynefull kyngedome of pacyence, Apoca.
1. Valeau^t.
She faythfullye reckened of her lord God, that he is not as men are, fyckle,
Numeri 23. But most sure of word and promise, Psalm 144. And that he would
most faythfullye keep covenant with her, when time should come, Apoca. 2. She
had it most grounded lie planted in her heart, that though heaven and earth ded
pass, yet could not his words and promise pass by vnfulfylled, Luc. 21.
Faith.
Ashamed may these carnal Helchesytesbe, Oelchesytes,
which have not only denied the veryte of their lord God, but also most
shamefullye blasphemed and dishonored both it and themselves for the pleasure
of a year or ij. to dwell still in this flesh. They co^sydre not, that he,
with whom they mock, has power to send them to hell, for their blasphemye,
Luce 12. They shall nor find it a matter light, for their inconstancye to be
^ometed out of the mouth of God, as unsavory morsels, Apoca. 3. Neither shall
they prove it a Christmas game, Inconstaunt.
to be denied of Christ before his heavenly father and his angels, for
denyenge here his veryte, Math. 10.

Anne Askewe.
Oh forgive us all our sins and receive us gracyouslye. Prayer.
As for the works of our hands, we will no more call upon the^. For it is thu
lord that art our God. Thu show ever mercy unto the fatherless. Oh if
they would do this (says the lord) I should heal their sores, yea withal my
heart would I love them. ephraim.
O Ephraim, what have I to do with ydolles any more Who so is wise, shall
understand this. And he that is ryghlye enstructed, will regard it. For the
ways of the lord are ryghteouse. Soch as are godly will walk in them. And
as for the wicked, they will stomble at them, Osee 14.

Johan Bale.
All these words alleged she, out of the last chaptre of Useas the prophet,
where as he prophesied the destruccyon of Samaria for the only vice of
ydolatrye. Useas.
In the word of the lord, she declares her self therein, to detest and
abhor that vice above all, and to repent from the heart, that she has at any
time worshypped the works of mennys hands, either stone, idolatrye
wode, bread, wine, or any soch like, for the eternal living God.
Consequentlye she confessyth him to be her only God, and that she had at that
time trust in non other else, neither for the remyssyon of her sins, nor yet
sowles comfort at her need. And like soch a wone as is unfeignedly converted
unto the lord, she axeth of the spirytuall Ephraimytes Ephraimytes.
in his word, what she has any more to do with ydolles? or why they should
so tyrannouslye enforce her to the worshypynge of them? considering that he so
ernestlye abhors them. Fynallye ij. ij. sorts.
sorts of people she reckeneth to be in the world, and shows the diverse
manner of them. The one in the sprete of Christ obeys the word, the other in
the sprete of error co^tempneth it, And like as S Paul does say. To the one
part is it, the savor of life unto life and to the other, the savor of death
unto death. 2. Corinthians. 2.

Anne Askewe.
Solomon (says S. Steven) S. Steue^
builded an house for the God of Jacob. Howbeyt the highest of all dwells not
in temples made with hands. As says the prophet, Esa. 66. heaven is my seat
and the earth is my footstool. What house will ye build for me? says the
lord, or what place is it that I shall rest in: has not my hand made all
these things? Temple.
Acto. 7. Woman believe me (says Christ to the Samarytane) the time is at hand
that ye shall neither in this mountain nor yet at Jerusalem worshypp the
father. Ye worshypp ye wot not what, but we know what we worshypp. worshypp
For salvation comes of the Jews. But the hour comes, and now is, wherein
the true worshyppers shall worshypp the father in sprete and veryte, Joan. 4.
Labor not) says Christ) for the meat that perysheth, Meat.
but for that endures into the life everlasting. which the son of man shall
give you. For hymgod the father has sealed, Joan. 6.

Johan Bale.
Here bring she iii. ^. bulwe^kes.
strong restymdnyes of the new testament, to confirm her own Christen
believe therewith, and also both to confute and condemn the most execrabyle
heresye and false filthy believe of the papystes. The first of them proves,
that the eternal God of heaven, will neither be wrapped up in a clow^e, nor
yet shut up in a box. The second declares, that in no place of the earth,
is he to be sought, neither yet to be worshypped* but within us, in sprete and
veryte. The third of them concludes, that Christ is a feadynge for the soul
and not for the body. More over he is soch a meat, as neither corrupts,
mouldeth, nor perysheth, Romystes
neither yet consumes or wastes away in the bellye. Let not the Romysh
popes remnaunt in England think, but in condempnynge the faith of this
godly woman, they also condemn the veryte of the lord, unless they can
discharge these iij. textes of the scripture with other iij. more effectual.
As I think, they shall not, nisi ad Calendas Grecas. If they allege for their
part, the saying of Christ, Math. 24. Lo here is Christ, Lo, here, Set here.
or there is Christ. They are confounded by that which follows. Wherein he
ernestlye charge his faythf^ll folowers not to believe it, calling the
teachers of soch doctrine, false anointed, deceyuable prophets, and sorcerouse
workmen. Marci. 13.

Anne Askewe.
The sum of the condempnacyon of me Anne Askewe, at yield hawle.
They said to me there, that I was an heretyke Heretyke
and condemned by the law, if I would stand in my opinion. I answered that I
was no heretyke, neither yet deserved I any death by the law of God. But as
concerning the faith which I uttered and wrote to the counsel, I would not
(I said) deny it, because I knew it true. The^ would they needs know, if I
would deny the sacrament Sacrament.
to be Christ's body and blood: I said, yea. For the same son of God, that
was borne of the vyrgyne Marie* is now gloriouse in heaven, and will come
again from thens at the lattre day like as he went up. Acto. 1. And as for
that ye call your God, is but a piece of breade^ For a more proof thereof (mark
it when ye list) let it lie in the box but iij. months, Moulde in the box.
and it will be moulde, and so turn to nothyge that is good. Whereupon I am
persuaded, that it can not be God.

Johan Bale.
Christ Jesus the eternal son of God, Christ condemned
was condemned of this generacyon for a sedicyouse heretyke, a breaker of
their sabbath, a subuerter of their people, a defyler of their laws, and a
destroyer of their temple or holy church, Joan. 7. Luce 23. Mathei 26. Marci
14. and suffered death for it at there procurement, by the law than used. Is
it than any maruele, if his inferior subject here, and faithful membre Membre
do the same, at the cruel calling on and vyolent vengeance of their
posteryte? No, no, the servant must follow her mastre, and the foot her head,
and may be found in that point no frear tha^ he, Joan. 13. Saint Augustyne
dyffynyng^ a sacrament, Sacrament.
calls it in one place, a sign of an holy thing. In an other place a
vysyble shappe of an inuysyble grace. Whose office is to instruct, anymate,
and strengthen our faith toward God, and not to take it to it self, and so
depryue him thereof. Christ's body and blood are neither signs nor shadows,
no signs
but the very effectual things indede. sygnyfyed by those fygures of bread
and wine. But how that dry and corruptyble cake of theirs should become a God,
many men wondre now a days in the light of the Gospel, the wine*
like as they have done before time also. And specyallye why the wine should not
be accepted and set up for a God also so well as the bread, considering that
Christ made so much of the one as of the other.

Anne Askewe.
After that they wylled me to have a pressed. And than I smyled. Then they asked
me, if it were not good? Confessy^
I said, I would confess my fawtes to God. for I was sure that he would hear
me with fauer. And so we were condemned without a quest.

Johan Bale.
Prestes of godly knowledge she ded not refuse. Teachers
For she knew that they are the massengers of the lord, and that his holy
words are to be sought at there mouths, Mala.2. Of them she instaunt lie
desired to be instructed, and it was denied her, as is written before. What
should she than else do, but return unto her lord God? in whom she knew to be
habundaunce of mercy for all them which do from the heart repent, Belles
prestes.
Deutro.30. As for the other sort of prestes, she ded not amys to laugh both
them and their maynteners to scorn. For so does God also, Psalm 2. And
curses both their absolueyons and blessings, Mala.2. A thief or a murderer
should not have been condemned without a quest, by the laws of England. But
the faithful members of Jesus Christ, for the spyght and hate that this world
has to his veryte, Tyranny
must have an other kind of tyranny added thereunto, besides the vnryghtouse
bestowynge of that law. Woe be unto you (says the eternal God of heaven by
his prophet) or dampnacyon be over your heads, that make wicked laws, Wicked
laws.
and deuyse cruel things for the poor oppressed innocents. Esaie 10. Woe
unto him that buyldeth Babylon with blood, and maynteyneth that wicked city
still in vnryghtwysnesse. Abacuch 2. Nahum. 3. Ezech. 24.

Anne Askewe.
My believe which I wrote to the counsel was this. That the sacramental bread
was left us to be receyned with thanks geuynge, Remembrance.
in remembrance of Christ's death, the only remedy of our sowles recover.
And that thereby we also receive the whole henefyghtes and fruits of his most
gloryouse passion.

Johan Bale.
We read not in the Gospel, that the materyall bread at Christ's holy
supper* was any otherwise taken of the Apostles, tha^ thus. Neither yet that
Christ our mastre and sauer required any other taking of them. If so many
strange doubts had been therein, and so high dyffycultees, as be moved and are
in controuersye among men now a days both papystes and other, they could no
more have been left vndyscussed of him, than other high matters were. Apostles.
The dyscyples axed here neither how nor what as doubtless they would have
done, if he had minded them to have taken the bread for him. They thought it
enough to take it in his remembrance, like as he than playnelye taught them,
Luce 22. Eating
The eating of his flesh and drinking of his blood therein, to the releuynge
of their sowles thirst and hunger, they knew to perteyne unto faith
according to his instruccyons in the vj. of Johan. What have this godly woman
than offended, which neither have denied his incarnacyon nor death in this her
confession of faith, The su^me of believe.
but most firmelye and groundedlye trusted to receive the fruits of them both.

Anne Askewe.
Then would they needs know, whether the bread in the box were God or no? I
said. God is a sprete, O beastlye ydolaters.
and will be worshypped in sprete and truth, Joan. 4. Then they demanded.
Will you planelye deny Christ to be in the sacrament? I answered that I
believed faythfullye the eternal son of God not to dwell there. In witness
whereof I recyted again the hystorye of Bell, O constaunt martyr.
and the ix. chaptre of Daniel, the vij. and xvij. of the Acts, and the
xxiiij. of Matthew, concludynge thus. I neither wyshe death, nor yet fear his
might, God have the praise thereof with thanks.

Johan Bale.
Among the old ydolaters, some took the su^ne, Old yd^laters.
some the moon, some the fire, some the water, with soch other like for their
Gods, as witnesses Diodorus Siculus, Herodotus, Plynius, Lacrantius and
diverse autours more. Now come our dottynge papystes here, wading yet more
deper in ydolatrye, and they must have bread for their God, new ydolaters.
yea, a waffer cake which is scarce worthy to be called bread. In what
sorrowful case are Christian people now a days? that they may worshypp their
lord and redemer Ihesus Christ in no shappe that his heavenly father has set
him forth in, but in soch a shappe only as the waffer baker has ymagyned by
his slendre wit. A waffer
Gods creatures were they whom the ydolaters took for their Gods, but this
cake is only the bakers creature, for he alone made it bread, if it be
bread. And so much is it a more unworthy God than the other. Far was it
from Christ to teach his dyscyples to worshypp soch a God, either yet to have
himself honored in soch a symylytude. Nothing is here spoken against the most
holy table of the lord, The supper.
but against that abhomynable ydoll of the prestes, which has most detestablye
blemyshed that most godly and wholesome communyon.

A gloryouse witness of the lord ded this blessed woman show her self,
Answer
in the answer making to this blasphemouse beggerye, wha^ she said, that god
was a sprete and no waffer cake, and would be worshipped in sprete and veryte,
and not in superstycyon and iuglynge of the ydoll prestes. An ydoll.
Godly was she to deny. Christ's presence in that execrable ydoll but much
more godly to give her life for it. Her alleged scriptures prove, that God
dwells not in temples, but a foul abhomynacyon in his stead, as is showed
before. Death.
In that she fears not the power of death, she declares her self a most
constaunt martyr praysynge her lord God for his gift. She called to
remembrance the promyses of her lord Ihesus Christ, that they should se no
death which observed his word, Joan. 8. Again they that believed on him,
should ioyfullye pass through from death unto life, Joan. 5. And upon these
promyses, she most stro^gelye trusted. She considered also with Peter, Promyses
that Christ had swallowed up death, to make us the heirs of everlasting
like, 1. Petri 3. More over that he had overthrown him which sumtyme had the
rule of death, Hebre. 2. And also taken away the sharp stynge of the death
it self. ^see 13.

Anne Askewe.
My lettre sent to the lord Chancellor.
The lord God, by whom all creatures have their being, To the Chau^cellour.
bless you with the light of his knowledge, amen. My duty to* your lordshyppe
remembered etc. It might please you to accept this my bold suit, as the suit
of one, which upon due co^syderacyons is moved to the same and hops to
obtain. My request to your lordeshypp is only, The king
that it may please the same to be ameane for me to the kings magestie, that
his grace may be certifyed of these few lines which I have written
concerning my believe. Which when it shall be truly co^ferred with the hard
judgment given me for the same. I think his grace shall well perceive me to
be wayed in an vneuenpayer of balau^ces. But I remytt my matter and cause to
almyghtye god, To God.
which ryghtlye judges all secrets. And thus I commend your lordeshypp to
the governance of him, and felyshypp of all saints. Amen. By your handemayde
Anne Askewe,

Johan Bale.
In this byll to the chancellor, apereth it plain, all froward affeccyo^s
sequestered, Strong
what this woman was. She is not here dejected with the desperate, for
vnryghtouse handelynge, mourning, cursynge, and sorowynge, as they do
commo^lye. But sta^dynge up stro^gelye in the lord, most gentyllye she obeys
the powers, she blesses her vexers and persuers and wysheth them the light of
Gods necessary knowledge, Obedy^^
Luce 6. She consydereth the powers to be ordained of God, Romanorum 13. And
though their autoryte be sore abused, yet with Christ and his Apostles, she
humblye submytteth herself to them, thinking to suffer under them as no ill
doer but as Christ's true servant, 1. Pet. 4. Notwithstanding she lays
forth here both before chau^cellour and king, the matter whereupon she is
condemned to death, Her matter.
that they according to their b^unde duty, might more ryghtlye way it, 3.
Regum 10. Not that she co^^ted thereby to avoid the death, but to put them in
remembyaunce of their office concerning the sword, Their office.
which they ought not vaynelye to mynystre, Roma, 13. and that they should also
be without excuse of ignorance in the great day of reckenynge, for
permittynge soch vyole^ce to be done, Roma. 2. In the end yet to make all
sure, To god.
she commytteth her cause and quarrel to God, wherein she declares her only
hope to be in him, and no man. Psalm. 145.

Anne Askewe.
My faith breuelye written to the kings grace.
I Anne Askewe of good memory although God has given me the bread of
aduersyte and the water of trouble, Trouble.
yet not so much as my sins have deserved, desire this to be known to your
grace. That for as much as I am by the law co^de^pned for an evil doer, Here
I take heaven and earth to record, that I shall dye in my innocencye. And
according to that I have said first, and will say last, I utterly abhor
and detest all heresies. And as concerning the supper of the lord, Heresies
I believe so much as Christ has said therein. which he confirmed with his most
blessed blood. I believe also so much as he wylled me to follow and believe, and
so much as the catholyck church of him does teach. For I will not forsake the
commandment of his holy lyppes. Faith.
But look what God has charged me with his mouth, that have I shut up i^ my
heart. And thus breuelye I end, for lack of learning. Anne Askewe.

Johan Bale.
In this she dyschargeth her self to the world against all wrongefull
accusacyons and judgments of heresye, Dyscharge.
what though it be not accepted to that blind world, unto whom the lord
said by hysprophete. Your thoughts are not my thoughts, neither yet are your
ways my ways. But so far as the heavens are hyer than the earth, so far
do my ways excede yours, and my thoughts yours, Esa. 55. Heresye is not to
dyssent from the church of Rome in the doctrine of faith, Heresye.
as La^fra^cus in his book de Eucharistia aduersus Berengariu^, and Thomas
walde^ in his work of sermons, Ser.21. Dyffyneth it. But heresye is a
voluntarye dysse^tynge from the veryte of the scriptures of God, What it is.
and also a blasphemouse deprauyuge of them, for the wretched bellyes sake, and
to maynteyne the pompes of this world. Thus is it dyffyned of S. Hierome in
co^m^ntar^^^ Hiere. S. Augustyne and Isidorus a greynge to the same, Co^sydre
tha^ whether he be the these that sytteth upon the be^che, or he that stands
at the bar? Who is the heretyke.
The popysh clergy that condempneth, or the innocent that is condemned?
Athanasius in his book defuga aduersus Arrianos, calls them the heretykes,
which seeks to have the Christen beleuers murdered as ded the said Arryanes.
This godly womau, her innocencye to clear, labors not here to an inferyour
membre of the realm, but to the head thereof, the kings own person. Whom
she believes to be the high mynyster of God, the kyng^
the father of the land, and vpholder of the people, Sapi. 6. that he might
faythfullye and ryghtlye judge her cause. But who can think that ever it came
before him? Not I, for my part.

Anne Askewe.
The effect of my examynacyon and handelynge, sens my depature from Newgate.
On tewesday I was sent from newgate to the sign of the crown where as mastre
Rich Rich.
and the Bishop of London with all their power and flattering words went
about to persuade me from God. But I ded not exteme their glosynge pretenses.
Then came there to me Nicolas Shaxton, Shaxton
and counseled me to reca^t as he had done. The^ I said to him, that it had
been good for him, never to have been borne with many other like words.

Johan Bale.
After that Christ had ones over commen Satan Satan.
in the desert, where he had fasted long time, Math. 4. We read not in the
scriptures that he was much assaulted or vexed of the world, the flesh, and
the fyende, which are reckened the common enemies of man. But yet we find in
the Gospel, 3. ghostlye enemies.
that these iij. ghostlye enemies, the prelates, the prestes, and the lawers,
or the Bishops, pharysecs, and scrybes, never left him afterward, till they
had throughlye procured his death. Mark it (I desire you) if it be here any
otherwise with his dear membre. What other enemies tempts here A^ne Askewe,
tha^ the Bishop of London, mastre Rich, and doctor Shaxton, Wynchestre.
besides the great Cayphas of Wynchestre with his spyghtfull (I should say)
spirytuall rabble, or who else procures her death? Ye will think parauenture,
concerning mastre Rich, that though he be an enemy, yet is he no spirytuall
enemy, because he is not anointed with the popes grese. But than are ye much
deceived. spirytuall
For it is the sprete (of blasphemye, auaryce, and malice) and not the oil,
that makes them spirytuall. And where as they are anointed in the hand with
oil, he is in the heart anointed with the sprete of Mammon, Mammo^
betraynge with Judas at the Bishops malycyouse calling on, the poor
innocent sowles for money, or at the least for ambycyouse fauer.

O Shaxton, Shaxto^.
I speak now unto the and (I think) in the voice of God. What devil
bywytched the to play this most blasphemouse part* as to become of a faithful
teacher, a temptynge sprete? Was it not enough, that thu and soch as thu art,
Double.
had forsaken your lord God and trodden his veryte most irreverently under
your fete, but with soch feats (as this is) thu must yet procure the a more
deper, or doubled a^pnacyo^? Ryghtlye said this true servant of God, that it
had been better for the and thy fellawes, that ye never had been borne. Ye were
called of God, Unworthy
to a most blessed office. If ye had been worthy that vocacyon (as ye are but
swyne, Mathei 7.) ye had perseuered faithful and constaunt to the end, Mathei
10. and so have worthelye received the crown thereof, Apoca. 2. But the love of
your beastlye flesh, has very far in you ouerwayed the love of the lord
Jesus Christ. Ye now show what ye are in deed, even wauerynge reeds with
every blast moved, Luce 7. Yea very faint hearted cowardes and hypocrytes,
Hypocrytes.
Apo. 3. Ye abide not in the sheep fold as true shepeherdes, but ye flee like
hyrelynges, Joan. 10. Had ye been builded upon the hard rock, as ye were on
the fycklesande, Math. 7. neither Romysh floodes nor Englysh wyndes had over
thrown you. But now look only, after your deseruynge, for this terryble
judgment of God. For them (says S. Paul) which voluntarylye blaspheme the
truth, Judgment.
after they have received the Gospel in faith and in the holy Ghost,
remains no expyacyon of sin, but the fearful judgment of hell fire. For a
mock have they made of the son of God, Hebreo. 6. and 10.

Anne Askewe.
The^ mastre Rich Rich.
sent me to the tower, where I remaynedtyll three of the clock. Then came Rich
and one of the counsel, chargynge me upon my obedience, to show unto them, if
I knew man or woman of my sect. My answer was, that I knew none, Then they
asked me of my lady of Sothfolke, my lady of Sussex, Christen ladye^.
my lady of Hertforde, my lady Dennye, and my lady Fizwyllyams. I said, if I
should pronounce any thing against the^, that I were not hable to prove it.

Johan Bale.
Never was there soche turmoylynge on the earth, Babylon.
as is now a days for that wretched blind kyngedome of the Romysh pope. But
trust upon it truly, ye terryble termagauntes of hell, There is no practyse,
there is no wisdom, there is no counsel, that can against the lord prevail,
Prouer^. 21. Ye look to be obeyed in all deuylyshnesse. But ye consydre not,
Obedyence.
that where God is dishonored by your obedyence, there belongs non to you,
Acto. 5. Ye have much a do here with sects, as though it were a great heresye,
ryghtlye to believe in our lord Jesus Christ, after the Gospel and not after
your Romysh father. But where A s^cte.
was ever yet a more pestylent and deuylysh sect, than is that Sodomytysh
secre, whom ye here so ernestlye maynteyne with tyranny and myschefe? How
gredylye seek you the slaughter of Gods true servants, ye blood thurstye
wolves? as the holy Ghost does call you. Psalm. 25. If the virtuous ladies and
most noble women, Ladies.
whose lives ye cruellye seek in your mad ragynge furye, as rauyshynge lions
in the dark, Psalm. 9. have thrown of their shulders for Christ's easy and
gentle burdene, Mathei 11. the popes uneasy and importable yoke, Luce 11.
Happy are they that ever they were borne. For thereby have they procured, a
great quietness and health to their sowles. Health.
For Christ's word is quycke, and brings nothing else to the soul but life,
Hebreo. 4. The popes old tradycyons and customs, being but the wisdom of
the flesh, are very poison and death, Roma. 8.

Aune Askewe.
Then said they unto me, that the king The king
was infourmed, that I could name, if I would a great nombre of my sect. Then
I answered, that the king was as well deceived in that behalf, as dyssembled
with in other matters.

Johan Bale.
Great Assuerus, king of the Perseanes and Medes, was infourmed also, that the
servant of God Mardocheus Mardocheus.
was a traitor, which nevertheless had dyscouered ij. traitors a little
before, and so saved the kings life, Hester 3. But Haman that false counselor,
which so infourmed the king, was in the end proved a traitor in deed (as I
doubt it not Haman.
but some of these will be found after this) and was worthelye hanged for it,
so falling into the snare that his self had prepared for other, Psalm. 7.
Albertus Pyghius, Cochleus, Papystes
Eckius, and soch other pestylent papystes, have filled all Christendom with
raylynge books of our king, for renouncing the Romysh popes obedience, but
thereof ye infourme not his grace. No, neither excuse ye, nor yet defe^deye his
godly act in that behalf. Crastye.
But ye are (as apereth) very well co^te^ted, that he be ill spoken of for it.

It is not a year a go, sens our wynche stre was at Vtrecht in holla^de (where
as the said Pyghius Pyghius.
dwelt, and was for his papystrye in great autoryte) I know certaynlye, the
man there was much more casye to please in that cause, tha^ in an other
sleuelesse matter of his own concerning Martyne Bucer. Bucer.
His gallau^tes also warran^ted there (I know to whom) that the Romysh pope,
by the Emprours good help, should within few years have in England, as great
autoryte as ever he had before. I doubt not but su^ what they knew of their
masters good co^ueyan^ce, but of this is not the king infourmed. I could
write here of many other mysteryes, concerning the obseruaunt Obseru^untes.
fryres and other ran^gynge Rome ronners, what news they receive wekelye out
of England from the papystes there, and in what hope they are put, of their
return thydre again. For I have seane there bragging letters thereof, sent
from Emeryck to Frisla^de, Letters.
and from the cu^traye of Coleyne into Westphalye. Of this and soch other
co^ueyan^ces, the king is not yet in fourmed, that (I trust) he shall be.

Anne Askewe.
The^ commanded they me to show, how I was maynteyned in the Counter, and who
wylled me to stycke by my opinion. I said that there was no creature, that
therein ded strengthen me. to accuse.
And as for the help that I had in the Counter, it was by the means of my
maid. For as she went abroad in the streets, she made to the prentyses, and
they by her ded send me money. But who they were, I never knew.

Johan Bale.
Joseph Joseph.
was in prison under Pharao the fearce king of Egypt, yet was he fauourablye
handeled and no man forbidden to consort him, Gene. 39. When Johan Baptist was
in strong duraunce under Herod the tyrant of Galile, his dyscyples ded
frelye vysytt him, and were not rebuked for it, Math. 11. Paul Paul.
being emprysoned and in cheanes at Rome, under the most furyouse tyra^^te
Nero, was never blamed for sendynge his servant Onesimus abroad, not yet for
writynge by him to his fryndes for socour, Philem. 1. Neither yet was Philemon
troubled for releuynge him there by the said Onesimus, Onesymus.
nor yet his old frynde Onesipherus, for personallye there vysytynge him, and
supporting him with his money, like as he had done before also at Ephesus. Now
confer these stories and soch other like, with the present handelynge of Anne
Askewe and ye shall well perceive our Englysh rulers and judges in their new
Christyanyte of renouncing the pope, Judges.
to excede all other tyrauntes in all crueltye, spyght and vengeance. But look
to have it no otherwise, so long as mytred prelates are of counsel. Prelates
Be ashamed cruel beasts, be ashamed, for all Christendom wondereth on your
madness above all.

Anne Askewe.
Then they said, that there were diverse gentyl women, Gentyllwomen.
that gave me money. But I knew not their names. The^ they said that there
were diverse ladies, which had sent me money. I answered, that there was a man
in a blewe coat, which delivered me, x, shyllynges, and said that my lady of
Hertforde sent it me. Ladies.
And an other in a vyolet coat ded give me viij. shyllynges, and said that my
lady Dennye sent it me. Whether it were true or no, I can not tell. For I am
not suer who sent it me, but as the men ded say.

Johan Bale.
In the time of Christ's Christ.
preaching what though the holy clergy were than not pleased therewith, but
judged it (as they do still to this day) most horrible heresye, yet serten
noble women, Noble women.
as Mar ye Magdalene. Ioa^na the wife of Chusa Herodes high steward, Susanna,
and many other followed him from Galile, and mynystred unto him of their
substance, concerning his bodylye needs Luce 8. These with other more, after
he was by the said clergy done to most cruel death for the veryte
preaching, both prepared oyntmentes and spyces to anoynte his body, Luce 24.
and also proclaimed abroad his gloryouse resurreccyon to his Apostles and
other, Ioa^. 20 contrary to the Byhoppes in hybycyon, Acto. 4. Yet read we
not that any man or woman was racked for the accusement of them. A woman
among the Macedonyanes, dwelling in the city of Thya^^ra, Eydia*
and called Lydia by name, a purple seller very rytche in merchau^dyse,
received Paul, Sylas, and Timothe with other suspected brethren in to her
house and habn^dauntlye releued the^ there. Act. 16. yet was she not troubled
for it. In like manner at Thessalonica, a great no^bre of the Greeks and many
noble woman Noble women.
among the^, believed Paul's forbidden doctrine, and resorted boldelye both to
him and to Sylas, Acto. 17. yet were they not cruellye handeled for it.

Be ashamed than ye tyrauntes Tyrau^tes
of England, that your horrible tyra^nyes should excede all other, Jews or
Gentyles, turks or Idolaters. More noble were these w^me^ here rehearced,
forthus releuynge Christ and his members, than for any other act, either yet
degree of nobylyte. For where as all other have peryshed, these shall never
perysh, but be censerued in the most noble, and worthy e^ scriptures of God,
the tyrannouse Bishops and prestes with their tyrannouse maynteners there
condemned. Prelates.
A through Christian charity is not lightlye terryfyed, with the tempests of
worldly affliccyons, Faith.
, no more than true faith is changed in men that be Christenlye co^staunt. Soch
can not chose but consydre, that it is both gloryouse to be afflicted for
Christ, 1. Petri 3. and also most merytoryouse to releue them here in their
afflyccyons, Math. 25. Unto that Christen office has Christ promised the life
everlasting at the lattre day, Mass hearing
where as Mass hearing is like to remain without reward, except it be in
hell for ydolatrye and blasphemye. Not unto them that in prison vysyteth
murderers and thieves (if ye mark well the text) is this reward promised.
For they are not there allowed for Christ's dear members, but unto them that
releue the afflicted for his verytees sake.

Anne Askewe.
Then they said, there were of the counsel that ded maynteyne me. And I said,
no. Then they ded put me on the rack, the rack
because I confessed no ladies nor gentle women to be of my opinion, and
thereon they kept me a long time. And because I lay still and ded not cry,
my lord Chancellor and mastre Rich, took peynes to rack me their own
hands, till I was nygh dead.

Johan Bale.
Nicodemus, Nicodemus.
one of the high counsel, was sore rebuked among the senyours of the Jews,
for defe^dyng Christ's innoce^cye, wha^ they went about to slay him, Joan. 7.
And therefore it is no new thing that Christ's doctrine has supp^rtacyon
among the counsels of this world. All men be not of one corrupted appetyte,
nor yet of one ungracious dyete. Christ promised his dyscyples, that they in
one how should should find both his enemies and fryndes. Fryndes.
I am come (says he) to set man at varyaunce against his father, and the
daughter against her mother, and the daughter in law against the mother in
law. He that loves his father or mother, his son or daughter, his prince or
governor, above me, high treason.
he is not mete for me, Math. 10. I fear me this will be judged high treason.
But no matter. So so^ge as it is Christ's word, he shall be also v^dre the
same judgment of treason. Let no man care to be conde^pned with him, for he
in the end shall be hable to rectyfye all wrongs.

Mark here an example most wonderful, and se how madlye in their ragynge
furyes, Frenesye.
men forget themselves and lose their right wits now a days A kings high
counselor, a Judge over life and death, yea, a lord Chancellor of a most
noble realm, is now become a most vile slave for Antichrist, A tourmentour.
and a most cruel tormentoure. Without all dyscressyon, honestye, or manhood,
he casts of his gown, and takes here upon him the most vile office of an
ha^gema^ and pulls at the rack most vyllanouslye. O Wrisleye and Rich
Wrisleye and Rich.
ij. false christianes and blasphemouse apostara^s from God. What chaplayne of
the pope has inchau^ted you, or what devil of hell bewytched you* to execute
upon a poor co^de^pned woman, Ma^mon*
so prodygyouse a kind of tyra^nye? Even the very Ma^mon of inyquyte, and
that insacyable hunger of avarice, which compelled Judas to betray unto death
his most loving master, Ioa^. 12. The wynnynges were not small that ye
reckened upon, wha^ ye took on ye that cruel enterprise, and would have had so
many great men and women accused But what else have ye won in the end,
wretch^^
than perpetual shame and confusyon? God has suffered you so to dyscouer your
own myscheues, that ye shall no more be forgotten of the world, than are now
Adonisedech, Saul, Hieroboam, Tyran^tes
Manasses. Olophernes, Haman, Tryphon, Herod, Nero, Traianus, and soche other
horrible tyrauntes.

And as concerning the innocent woman, A lamb.
who^ you so cruellye tormented. Where could be seane a more clear and open
experyment of Christ's dear membre, than in her mighty sufferynges? like a
lamb she lay still without noise of cryenge, and suffered your uttermost
vyolence, till the synnowes of her arms were broken, and the strings of her
eyes peryshed in her head. Right far does it pass the strength of a young,
tender, weak, Tyrau^tes
and sick woman (as she was at that time to your more confusyon) to abide so
vyolent handelynge, yea, or yet of the strongest man that lives. Think not
therefore but that Christ has suffered in her, Christ.
and so myghtelye showed his power, that in her weakness he has laughed your
mad enterpryses to scorn, Psalm. 2. Where was the fear of God, ye
tyrauntes? Where was your christen professyon, ye hell hounds? Where was your
oath and promise to do true justice, Periures
ye abhomynable periures, when ye went about these cursed feats? More fytt
are ye for swyne keeping, than to be of a princes counsel, or yet to govern a
Christen commen welthe. If Christ have said unto them which do but offend his
little ones that believe in him, A mylstone.
that it were better they had a mylstone tied about thyir necks, and were so
thrown into the bottom of the sea, Luce 17. What will he say to them that so
vyllaynouslye pull at the rack in there myscheuouse malice? These are but
warnynges take heed if ye list, for a full sorrowful plage will follow here
after.

Anne Askewe.
Then the lyefetenaunt caused me to be loused from the rack. Unloosed.
Incontynentlye I swounded, and then they recovered me again. After that I
sat ij. long hours reasonynge with my lord Chancellor upon the bare
floor, where as he with many flattering words, persuaded me to leave my
opinion. But my lord God (I thank his everlasting goodness) gave me grace
to persevere, Persevere.
and will do (I hope) to the very end.

Johan Bale.
Evermore have the old modye tyrauntes, used this practyse Practyse.
of deuylyshnesse. As they have perceived themselves not to prevail by extreme
handelynges they have sought to prove masteryes by the contrary. With gaye
glosynge words and fair flattering promyses, they have craftelye ^n^passed
the servants of God, to cause them consent to their wickedness. And in this
temptynge occupacyon, Te^ptacyo^
are Wrisleye and Rich very c^nnynge. Notwithstanding they shall never find
the chosen of God, all one with the forsaken reprobates. The elect vessels
hold the eternal God for their most special treasure, and have him in soch
inteire love, that they had much Iener to lose themselves, than him. The wicked
desperates have the voluptuouse pleasures of this vain world so dear, 3.
sorts.
that they had lever to forsake God and all his works, than to be sequestered
from them. This godly young woman refers praise Praise.
unto her lord God, that he has not left her in this paynefull conflycte for
his verytees sake, but perseuered strong with her, being in hope that he
would so still contynewe with her, to the very end, as without fail he ded.

Many men sore wondre now a days that ^risleye which was in my lord Wrisleye
Cromwels time so ernest a doer against the pope, is now becomen again for his
pedlarye wares so mighty a captain. But they remember not the common adage,
that honor changes manners, ynne kepers.
and lu^re judgments. These great ynne kepers (they say) had lever to have
one good horse man to host, than v^. men on foot, specyallye if they wear
velvet whodes or fine rochettes. What else follows Christ but beggerye and
sorrows which are very harefull to the world? Where fatness is cawte of
every mannys labor, there is yet sumwhat to be looked for, If his christian
zele be soch, Profyght
that he will have no she heretykes vnponnyshed let him do first of all, as we
read of diverse ryghtfull gouerners among the heythen. Let him search his
own house well. my lady.
Paranenture* he may find about my lady his wife, a rellyck of no little
virtue, a practyse of Pythagoras, or an old midwyues blessing, which she
carries closelye on her, for preseruacyon of her honor. Her opynyo^ is
(folk say) that so long as she has that upon her, her worldly worship can
never decay. Honor
I pray God this prouysyon in short space deceyueth her not as it has done
pope Siluester the second, and as it ded of late years Thomas Swolsye our late
Cardynall. cardynall
This heresye goes neither to the rack nor the fire, to Newgate nor yet
Smythfelde, as contynuallye does the pore Gospel.

Anne Askewe.
Then was I brought to an house, and laid in a bed, with as werye and payneful
bones, as ever had pacye^t Job, I thank my lord God thereof. A tyrau^t.
Then my lord Chancellor sent me word if I would leave my opinion. I should
want nothing If I would not, I should fourth to Newgate, and so be burned I
sent him again word, that I would rather dye, tha^ to break my faith. Sweet
woman.
Thus the lord open the eyes of their blind hearts, that the truth may take
place. Fare well dear frynde, and pray, pray, pray.

Johan Bale.
Behold in this last parcel, A marty^*
most euyde^t signs of a Christian martyr and faithful witness of God,
besides that went before. She allegeth not in all this long process, lyenge
legendes, popysh fables, nor yet old wives parables, but the most lyuelye
autorytees and examples of the sacred Bible. Gods creature.
She puts her self here in remembrance, not of desperate Cayne, nor yet of
sorrowful Judas, but of most pacyent Job, for example of godly sufferaunce.
For Anguysh and pain of her broken joints and broused arms and eyes, she
curses not the time that ever she was borne, as the manner of the unfaithful
is. But she hyghlye magnyfyeth and prayseth God for it. Christ's servant.
Neither was she perverted with flattering promyses, nor yet ouercommen with
terryble threttenynges of death. Neither doubted she the stynke of Newgate,
nor yet the burning fire in Smythfelde. But coueted rather death of her body
for the sincere doctrine of Christ, than life of the same under the ydolatrouse
doctrine of the Romysh pope. She desired God to take mercy of her enemies, and
exhorted all Christen people instauntlye to pray for them. If these be not the
fruits of a true beleuer, A very Saint.
what other fruits else can we axe?

Anne Askewes answer unto Johan Lassels letter.
Oh frynde most derelye beloved in God. I maruele not a little, what should move
you, to judge in me so sle^dre a faith, Death.
as to fear death. which is the end of all myserye. In the lord I desire
you, not to believe of me soch wickedness. For I doubt it not, but God will
perform his work in me, like as he has begone.

Johan Bale.
I would but know of them which are common readers of chronycles and Saints
lives, Chronycles.
where they ever read of a more seruent and lyuelye faith than was in this
godly young woman As light a matter esteemed she death, as ded Eleazarus that
au^cyent senyour, or yet the vij. Machabees with their most worthy mother, 2.
Match. 6. and 7. For she said, Death.
that it was but the end of all sorrows. She reckened not with the couetouse
man, the remembrance thereof bitter, Eccle. 14. But with the ryghteouse she
thought it a most redye and swyfte passage vntolyfe, Joan. 5. The fear of
death judged she great wickedness in a Christian beleuer, and was in full hope
that God would not suffer her to be troubled therewith. For why, No fear.
death loses us no life, but brings it in unto us like as the hard winter
brings in the most plesau^t somer. Who ca^ think, wha^ the sun goes
down, that it utterly so perysheth? Death unto the ryghteouse beleuer,
Harvest.
is as a profitable harvest, which after fweate and labor brings in most
dylectable fruits. No^ otherwise thought it Anne Askewe, than a very entrance
of life, when she had it thus in desire, and faythfullye trusted with Paul,
that God would fynysh in her that he than begone to his own glory.
Philippen. 1.

Anne Askewe.
I understand, the counsel is not a little dyspleased, that it should be
reported abroad, that I was racked Racked.
in the tower They say now, that they ded there, was but to fear me. Whereby I
perceive, they are ashamed of their uncomely doings, and fear much least the
kings mageste should have in fourmacyon thereof. No noise
Wherefore they would no man to noise it. Well, their crueltye God forgive them.
Your heart in Christ Jesus. Fare well, and pray.

Johan Bale.
Hypocrytes and tyrauntes would never be gladlye known abroad, Wrisleye and
Rich.
for that they are in deed. But for that they are not, they look always to be
gloryouslye noysed. Wrisleye and Rich would yet be judged of the world, ij.
sober wysemen, and very sage counselors. But this tyrannouse example of
theirs, makes a most manifest show of the contrary. Yea, and the God of
heaven will have it so known to the universal world, to their ignomynye and
shame. So is he wont to reward all cruel Apostataes, as he rewarded
Iulianus. Iulianus
for their wylfull contempt of his veryte. The martyr of Christ for her pacyent
sufferaunce shall leave here behind her a gloryouse report, where as these
forsworn enemies and pursuers of his word, have purchased themselves a
perpetual infamye by their cruelte and myschefe. In excuse an excuse
of their madness, they say, they ded it only to fear her. Is it not (think
you) a propre frayenge play, wha^ our arms and eyes are compelled to leave
their natural holds? Ye meant no light dallyaunce, when ye would have had so
many great women accused, and took the hangemannys office upon your own
precyouse persons. O tormentours and tyrauntes Tyrau^tes
abhomynable. Ye fear least your temporal and mortal king should know your
mad frenesyes. But of the eternal king, which will ryghtlye ponnysh you for
it, with the devil and his angels (unless ye sore repent it) ye have no fear
at all. It is so honest a part, ye have played, that ye will not have it
noysed. No noise
But I promise you, so to dy^^lg^ this unseemly fact of yours in the latyne,
that all christendom over, it shall be known what ye are.

Anne Askewe.
I have read the process, which is reported of them that know not the
truth, to be my reca^tacyon. But as sure as the lord lives. I never me^t
thing less, than to reca^t. Notwithstanding this I confess, Of Cayphas.
that in my first troubles. I was examyned of the Bishop of London about the
sacrament. Yet had they no grant of my mouth but this. That I believed therein
as the word of God ded bind me to believe. More had they never of me.

Johan Bale.
In the end of her first examynacyon* is this matter treated of more at large.
Here do she repete it again, only to be known for Christ's stedefast membre,
and not Antichrists. Christ's martyr.
To the voice of him she faythfullye obeyed, but the voice of that Romysh
monstre and other strangers she regarded not, Joan. 10. As she perceived when
she was before the Bishop of London, Bonner*
that all passed still after their old tyranny, and nothing after the rules
of scripture, she suspected their doctrine more than before, and thought them
non other than Christ warned his dyscyples to be ware of, Wolves.
Luce 12. Whereupon she throughlye couenaunted with her self, never to deny his
veryte before men at their calling on, least he should again deny her before
his eternal father. Mathei 10. For if the confessing thereof brings
salvation, saluacyo^.
as saint Paul says it does, Roman. 10. The denyenge thereof on the other
side, must needs bring in dampnacyon.

Anne Askewe.
The^ he made a coppye, which is now in prynt, and required me to sent thereunto
my hand. But I refused it. Then my ij. suertyes ded will me in no wise to
stycke thereat. Hand writynge
For it was no great matter, they said. Then with much a do, at the last I
wrote thus. I Anne Askewe do believe this if Gods word do agree to the same, and
the true catholic church,

Johan Bale.
Commonly is it spoken of popysh prestes, that in doing their false feats,
they sytt in Gods stead. Gods stead.
This point followed the bludderynge Bishop of London here, which for their
old fantasyed superstycyon. labored in this woman to dysplace the sincere
veryte of the lord. Builded.
But so surely was she builded upon the hard rock, that neither for enmyte
nor fryndeshypp, w^lde she ones remove her fo^e, Mathei 7. Neither anguyshe,
trouble, torment, nor fire, could separate her from that love of her lord God
Roma. 8. Alambe.
Though she were for his sake rebuked and vexed, and also appointed as a sheep
to be slain, Psalm. 43. Yet ded she strongelye through him overcome, and have
(I doubt it not) obtained the crown of life, Apoca. 2.

Anne Askewe.
Then the Bishop, being in great dyspleasure with me, because I made doubts
in my writynge, commanded me to prison. Prison.
Where I was a while. But afterward by the means of fryndes. I came out
again. Here is the truth of that matter. And as concerning the thing that
ye couere most to know, Eucharystye.
Resort to the vj. of Johan, and be ruled always thereby. Thus fare ye well.
Quoth Anne Askewe.

Johan Bale.
In all the scriptures we read not. that either Christ or yet his Apostles
commanded any man or woman to prison Prison.
for their faith, as this tyrant Bishop ded here. But in deed we find that
Christ's holy Apostles, were ofttymes cruellye commanded to prison of the
same spyghtfullye spirytuall generacyon, Acto. 4. 5. 12. 16. Christ Christ.
wylled his true beleuers to look for non other at their spirytuall hands,
than enprysonmentes and death, Mathei 10. Joan. 16. And therefore said Peter
unto him. I am redye to go with the, lord, both into prison and to death,
Luce 22. Paul greatly complayneth of his enprysonmentes and scourgynges by
them, 2. Corinthians, 11. Diverse in the congregacyon of Smyrna Smyrna.
were enprysoned by that fearce synagoge of Satan, Apoca. 2. Esaye
prophecyenge the condycyons of the spirytuall Antichrist, ^ntichrist
says among other, that he should hold men captyue in preson, Esaie 14.
Ezechiel reports that he should churlyshlye check, and in cruelte rule,
Ezechie. 34. Zacharye shows that he should eat up the flesh of the fattest,
Zachary 11. Daniel declares that he should persecute with sword and fire.
with fire
Daniel 11. And saint Johan verefyeth that he should be all drunk with the
blood of the witnesses of Jesus, Apoca. 17. And therefore in these feats, his
Bishops do but their kinds.

Thus ends the lattre examynacyon. The confession of her faith which Anne
Askewe made in Newgate before she suffered.
I Anne Askewe, of good me morye, although my merciful father has given me
the bread of aduersyte, and the water of trouble, Trouble.
yet not so much as my sins has deserved, confess my self here a sinner
before the trone of his heavenly mageste desyerynge his eternal mercy. And
for so much as I am by the law vnryghtouslye conde^pned for an evil doer
concerning opynyo^s, Condemned.
I take the same most merciful God of mine, which has made hoth heaven and
earth, to record, that I hold no opynyons contrary to his most holy word.

Johan Bale.
What man of sober dyscressyon, can judge this woman ill, indyfferentlye but
markynge this her last confession? Nor a few of most euydent arguments are
therein, to prove her prove her
the true servant of God. Her wits were not ones dystracted, for all her
most tyra^nouse handelynges. She was still of a perfyght memory, accountynge
her emprysonmentes, re^ylynges, rackynges, and other torments, but the bread
of aduersyte and the water of trouble, as ded David before her. Fruits of faith.
Psalm. 79. As the loving child of God, she received them without grudge, and
thought them deserved on her party. She took them for his hand of mercy, and
gave most high thanks for them. She mekelye confessed her self in his sight a
sinner, but not an haynouse heretyke, as she was falselye judged of the world.
Obedye^t to God.
In that matter she took him most stronglye to witness, that though in faith
she were not agreeable to the worlds wild opinion, yet was she not therein
contrary to his heavenly truth. She had before that proved their spretes
conferring both their judgments, 1. Joan. 4. and perceived them far
unlike, Esaie 55.

Anne Askewe.
And I trust in my merciful lord, which is the geuer of all grace, that he
will gracyouslye assyst me against all evil opynyons, No heretyke.
which are contrary to his blessed veryte. For I take him to witness, that I
have, do, and will do unto my lives end, utterly abhor them to the
uttermost of my power. But this is the heresye which they report me to hold,
Bread,
that after the pressed has spoken the words of consecracyon, there remains
bread still.

Johan Bale.
Consydre without froward, parcyall or wylfull affection, the points herin
contained, and than judge of what heart or conscience they have risen. Prove yet
The hope of this woman was only in God. Him she confessed to be of all grace
the geuer. Alone in his mercy she trusted. She instauntlye desired him to
defend her from all errors. She abhorred all heresies. She detested mennys
superstycyouse inuencyons. And most firmelye clea^ed to his eternal word. If
these with those that went before, be not fruits of true christyanyte, Fruits of
faith.
or of a perfyght membre of Gods eleccyon, what fruits will we demand? S.
Paul faith No man can confess that Jesus is the lord (as she has done here)
but in the holy Ghost, 1. Corinthians. 12. David also specifyeth, that the
lordeneuer forsakes them which call upon his name, and put their trust in him,
Psalm. 9. And as touching the prestes consecracyo^, Consecracyon,
which is soch a charm of inchaunteme^t as may no^ be d^ne but by an oyled
offycer of the popes generacyon, she ded godly to reject it in that clow^ynge
kind. For in all the Bible is it not that any man can make of a dry waffer
Waffer.
cake, a new sauer a new redemer, a new Christ, or a new God, No though he
should utter all the words and scriptures therein.

Anne Askewe.
But they both say, and also reach it for a necessary article of faith,
that after those words be ones spoken, there remains no bread, but even the
self same body that hynge upon the cross on good frydaye, Bread*
both flesh, blood, and bone. To this believe of theirs, say I nay. For then
were our commen Creed false, which says that he sytteth on the right hand of
God the father almyghtye, and from thens shall come Shall come.
to judge the quyck and the dead. Loo, this is the heresye that I hold, and
for it must suffer the death.

Johan Bale.
Of Antichrist antichrist
read we in the scriptures, that he and hysoyled Apostles should do false
miracles, Math. 24. 2. These. 2. and Apoca. 13. We find also in the same self
places, that he should exalte himself above all that is called God, or that is
worshypped as God. Who ever heard of so great a wondre* that a dry cake might
become a God to be worshypped? A miracle Miracle
were this above all the miracles that ever were wrought, and a work above all
the works that ever were done, if it were true as it is most false. Though our
eternal God created heaven and earth in the first beginning, and fourmed all
other creatures, Gene. 1. Yet read we not of him, that he made of his
creatures any new God to be worshypped. No God.
In that point are our oyled Antichrists before him. And where as he rested
whollye in the seventh day, from that office of creacyon, Gene. 2. and never
took it upon him sens that time, as testyfyeth Johan Chrysostom, Augustyne,
Hierome, Bedas, Alcuinus, and all there other doctors. Doctors.
Yet will they take upon the^ to create every day a fresh, and when their
old God stynketh in the box, Moulde in the box.
remove him out of the way, and put a new in his rowme. yea, they can make of
bread (wkych is but mannys corruptyble creature, and ordained only to be
eat) soch a God as shall stand check mate with the great God of heaven, and
parauenture deface him also. Oh blasphemouse wretches and thieves. Be ones
ashamed of your abhomynable blyndenesse, Godmakers.
and submytt your selves to a just reformacyon.

Anne Askewe.
But as touching the holy and blessed supper The supper.
of the lord, I believe it to be a most necessary remembrance of his
gloryouse sufferynges and death. More over I believe as much therein, as my
eternal and only redemer Jesus Christ would I should believe. Fynallye I believe
all those scriptures Scriptures.
to be true. whom he has confirmed with his most precyouse blood.

Johan Bale.
No godly instytucyon nor ordinance of Christ, do this faithful woman
contempne, Without Mass.
but reuerentlye submytteth herself thereunto, in the kind that he ded leave
them. She protests here to believe so much, as can be showed by the scriptures
of both testamentes. And what is more to be required of a Christen beleuer?
Only ded she in conscience refuse and abhor, Idolatryes.
the ydell obseruacyons, the paganes superstycyons, the sorcerers in
chauntmentes, and the most parellouse ydolatryes, which the Romysh pope and his
clergy have added to their Mass for covetousness. In this (I suppose) she
remembered the words of saint Paul, 1. Corinthians. 2. My talking (said he) and
my preaching, was not with persuasyble or entysynge words of mannys corrupt
wisdom, Mannys wisdom
but in vtteraunce of the sprete and of power, that your faith should not
stand in the wisdom of men, but in the power of God. For that (says Christ)
which seems high and holy before men, is filthy abhomynacyon before God, Luce
16.

Anne Askewe.
Yea, and as S. Paul says, those scriptures Scriptu^es.
are suffycyent for our learning and saluacyo^, that Christ has left here
with us. So that I believe, we need no unwritten verytees to rule his church
with. Therefore look what he has laid unto me with his own mouth, in his
holy Gospel, Hope.
that have I with Gods grace, closed up in my heart. And my full trust is (as
David saych) that it shall be a lantern to my footsteps, Psalm 118.

Johan Bale.
Still are these fruits of inestymable wholsomnesse, declarynge this woman a
most perfyght and innocent membre of Jesus Christ. pr^nestyll
In this whole process (mark it hardelye) she ^^nneth not for socour to the
muddye waters or broken pyttes of the Phylistynes, Hieremye 2. Which are the
corrupt doctrynes and tradycyons of men. But she seeks to the very welsprynge
of health, and fou^tayne of salvation. Ioa^. 4. All unwritten verytees left she
to those wauerynge wanderers which will eternally perysh with them. Fruits of
faith.
And in the verytees written, appointed she to iournaye among the true
Christen beleuers toward the land everlasting. In all her affairs most
fyrmelye she cleaves to the scriptures of God, which gives both sprete and
life, Joan. 6. As the heart in the forest desires the plesaunt water brokes,
so longed her soul and was desyerouse of the manifest glory of her eternal
God, Her god.
Psalm. 41. If her porcyon be not in the land of the living, Psalm. 141. Yea,
if she be not allowed a cytezen with the Saints, Ephe. 1. And her name
regestred in the book of life, Apoca. 20. Yt will be hard with many. But
certain and sure I am, that with Marye Marthaes systre, A sure part.
soch a sure part have she chosen, as will not be taken away from her, Luce 10.

Anne Askewe.
There be some do say, that I deny the Eucharystye Eucharystye.
or sacrament of thanks geuynge. But those people do untruly report of me.
For I both say and believe it, that if it were ordered like as Christ
instytuted it and left it, a most syngular confort it were unto us all. But as
concerning your Mass, as it is now used in our days, I do say and believe
it, to be the most abhomynable ydoll that is in the world. mass. an ydoll.
For my God will not be eaten with tethe, neither yet dies he again. And upon
these words, that I have now spoken, will I suffer death.

Johan Bale.
All the works of God and ordynaunces of Christ, she reuerentlye admytted, as
grounded matters of Christen believe But the Romysh popes creatures would she in
no case allow to stand up check mate with them. obedience.
The Mass (which is in all points, of that filthy Antichrists creacyon)
took she for the most execrable ydoll upon earth. The Mass.
And ryghtlye. For non other is the child to be reckened, than was his father
before him* be he man or beast. The whelpe of a dog ^e, is non other than a
dog, when he comes ^nest^ his age. ^dolaters
Idolles (says Sauid) are ly^e them that ma^e them. ^o are they also which put
their trust in them, Psalm 113. An yd^ll does Zacharye call that proud
slaughterouse shepehearde, Zacharye 11. Who then can deny his prodygyouse
ordynaunces to be the same? An ydoll.
What other is the work of an ydolatrouse worker, than an exccrable ydoll? And
look what propyrrces any ydoll has had, or feats has wrought yet sens the
worlds beginning, the popes prodygyouse Mass has had and wrought the same,
with many conueyaunces more.

Of popes Popes.
^ath it received dysgysynges, instruments, blessings, turnynges and
legerdemaynes, with many strange obseruacyons borrowed of the Jews and
paganes ^lde sacryfyces, be sides pardons for delyucraunce of sowles. Of monks
Monks.
have it gotten a purgatory after many strange apparycyo^s, with a long
ladder from thens to scale heaven with. It has obtained also, to be a remedy
for all dyseases both in man and beast, with innumerable sup^r stycyons else. Of
vnyuerfytees and their doctors, have it cawte all the subtyltees and craftye
lernynges of the profane philosophers, to be defended by, Vniuersytees.
as is to be seane in the works of their sentencyoners, like as I have showed
in the mysterye of iniquyte, fo. 33. It serves all wytches in their wytcherye,
all foreerers, the mass
charmers, inchaunters, dreamers, sothsayers, necromansers, coniures, cross
dyggers, devil raysers, miracle doers, doggeleches, and bawdes. For without a
mass, they can not well work their feats. The lawers like wise, which seek
in Westmynstre hawle to get most money be falfehede, can neither be well
without it. It vpholdeth vain glory, pride, ambycyon, Profitable.
auaryce, gluttony, sloth, ydelnesse, hypocresye, heresye, tyranny, and all
other deuylyshnesse besides, It maynteyneth the spirytuall souldyers of
Antichrist, Necessary.
in all superfluouse living and wanton lecherouse lusts, with the chaste
occupyenges of Sodom and ^omor.

What other ghostlye fruits it has. I shall more largelye show in my book
called, The miracles of the Mass against Peryne. miracles of themasse.
Perchance some deuou^e Mass hearers will lay for the holiness thereof, that
it contains both pystle and Gospel. Truly that Epistle and that Gospel
may well have a name of life. as S. Johan says of the church of Sardis,
Apoca. 3. Yet is it in that office of massynge, no^ other than the dead or
mortyfyenge letter. 2. Cor. 3. For the spre^e that should quyeken, Sead letter.
is clearly taken from it, So that nothing else thereof remains to the common
people, but a dead noise and an idle sound, as it is now in the Romysh
language. Who can say, but it was the scripture, that Satan Satan.
alleged unto Christ upon the pynnacle of the temple? Math. 4. Yet remains it
there still, after his ungracious handelynge thereof, as a false craftye
suggestyon, a deuylysh error, or a shyelde of his wickedness, and will do
evermore. Where are the names of God, of his Angels, and of his saints, more
ryfe, tha^ among witches, Wytches
charmers, inchau^ters, etc sorcerers? Yet can ye not say, that they are
among the^ to any ma^nys saluacyo^. as they would be in right handelynge^.
What it is that serves an ydoll, let godly wise men comecture, An ydoll.
which are not all ignorant how Angel became a devil.

Anne Askewe.
I lord, I have more enemies Enemies
now, than there be heeres on my head. Yet lord let the^ never over come me
with vain words, But fight thu lord, in my stead. For on the cast I my care.
With all the spyght they can ymagyne, they fall upon me which am thy poor
creature, hate the^.
Yet sweet lord, let me not se^ by them which are against the. For in the is
my whole delyght.

Johan Bale.
Oblessyd woman, and undoubted cytyzen of heaven. Truth it is, that thu have
had many adversaries, Adversaries.
yea, and a far greatter nombre of them, than thu have here reckened. And the
more thu have had, the greatter is now they vyctorye in Christ. The great body
of the Beast thu have had to enemy. which co^prehendet the malygnaunt muster
of (...) one side, ^^ters.
and the erthly worsh^^pers of his blasphemose beastlynesse (...) the other
side, Daniel 11. Apo. 13. whose no^bre is as the sand of the sea, in fynyte,
Apoc. 20. But consydre again, what fryndeshypp thu have gotten for it on the
other part. Thu have now to frynde Fryndes.
for thy faithful perseueraunce against those ydoll mongers, the sempyternall
trynyte, the father, the son, and the holy Ghost, Ioa^. 14. With the
gloryouse multitude of Angels, the patriarchs, Prophets, Apostles and Martyrs,
with all the electno^bre from ryghtcouse Abel hitherto. Favorers
Thu have also here upon earth, and evermore shall have, the fauer of all the^
which have not bowed to that filthy Beast, whose names are regestred in the
book of life, Apo. 21. And as for thy ungodly and cruel enemies, as dust in
the wind the lord will scattre them from the face of the earth, Northfolke.
be they never so stowte and many, Psalm. 1.

Anne Askewe.
And lord I hartelye desire of the, that thu will of thy most merciful
goodness, forgive the^ that vyolence, which they do and have done unto me.
Prayer.
Open also thu their blind har^es, that they may her after do that thing in
thy sight, which is only acceptable before the. And to set fourth thy veryte
a right, without all vain fanta syes of synnefull men. So be it. I lord, so
be it. By me Anne Askewe.

Johan Bale.
Before here she confessed with David that on God she had cast her care, Sweet
woman.
and that in him was all her hearts delyght. Psalm. 60. She desired him also,
never to fail her in this hard conflict, but stro^glye to assist her, and in
no case to permytt her to be over commen of the flattering world, neither yet
to give place to his enemies. Gods true servant.
And I doubt it not, but these are most euydent signs that she was his
faithful servant. I know certaynlye, that all the power of hell, can not
prevail against so ernest a faith, Math. 16. For he has so spoken it there,
which can not lie, Luce 21. and 1. Petri 2. In this lattre part, she shows
the nature of Christ's lyuelye membre, Christ's membre.
and of a perfyght christen martyr in ij. points first she desyre^h God to
forgive her enemies as Christ desired him in the time of his passion, Luce 23.
And as holy Steven also ded for the time of his death, Acto. 7. Secondlye she
desires their hearts to be opened, Charity.
that they may truly believe and be saved, Acto. 16. This supernatural affect
of charity had she only of the sprete of Christ, which wylleth not the death
of a froward sinner, but rather that he be from his wickedness turned, A
Saint.
and so live Ezech. 33. Thus is she a Saint canonysed in Christ's blood,
though she never have other canonysacyon of pope, pressed, nor Bishop.

The destroyer shall be destroyed without hands. Daniel. 8.
The Balade which Anne Askewe made and sange when she was in Newgate.
Like as the armed knight
Appointed to the field
With this world will I fight
And faith shall be my shield.
Faith is that weapon strong^
Which will not fail at need
My foes therefore among
Therewith will I proceed.
As it is had in strength
And force of Christ's way
It will prevail at length
Though all the deuyls say nay.
Faith in the fathers old
Obtained ryghtwysnesse
Which make me very bold.
To fear no worlds dystresse.
I now rejoice in heart
And hope bid me do so
For Christ will take my part
And ease me of my woe.
Thu say lord, who so knock.
To them wylt thu attend
Undo therefore the lock
And thy strong power send.
More enmyes now I have.
Than heeres upon my heed
Let them not me deprave
But fight thu in my steed.
On the my care I cast
For all their cruel spyght
I set not by their have
For the art my delyght.
I am not she that list
My anchor to let fall
For every dryslynge mist
My ship substancyall.
Not often use I towryght
In prose nor yet in ryme
Yet will I show one sight
That I saw in my time.
I saw a ryall trone
Where Justice should have syt^
But in her stead was one
Of modye cruel wytt.
Absorpt was rygtwysnesse
As of the ragynge floude
Satan in his excess.
Suc^e up the gyltelesse blood.
Then thought I, Jesus lord
When thu shall judge us all
Hard is it to record
On these men what will fall.
Yet lord I the desire
For that they do to me
Let them not taste the hyre
Of their inyquyte.
FINIS.
God save the king. God has chosen the weak things of the world, to
co^fou^de things which are mighty. Yea, and things of no reputacyon, for to
bring to naught things of reputacyon, that no flesh should presume in his
sight. 1. Cormth. 1.



The Conclusyon.
THus have thu (dylygent reader) the end of these ij. examynacyons and answers
of the most Christen martyr Anne Askewe, with other addycyons besides. Mark in
them the horrible mad furye of Antichrist antichrist
and the devil, how they work in this age by their tyrannouse members, to
bring the last vengeance swyftlye upon them. Before time has not been seane,
soch frantyck outrage as is now, the judges without all sober dyscressyon,
ronnynge to the rack, toggynge, halynge, and pulling thereat, like tormentours
in a play. Co^passyo^.
Compare me here Pylate with Wrisleye the high chancellor of England, with
Rich and with other which will be counted no small moates. And se how much the
pagane Judge excels in virtue and wisdom, the false christened Judge, yea,
rather prodygyouse tyrant. When Pylate Pylate.
had inquired, what accusacyon the Jews clergy had against Christ, he
perceived they ded all of malice, and refused to meddle therein. Joan. 18. In
Wrisleye Wrisleye
and Rich is no soch equity. But they rather seek occasyon to acco^plysh the
full malice of Antichrist.

Pylate Pylate.
showed the accused all fauer possible. He examyned him pryuatelye, he gave him
fryndelye words, he had him not fear to speak, he heard him with
gentylnesse, he counseled with him that he might the more frelye suppress
their mad furye, and he promised, they should do him no wrong in case he
would utter his full mind, Joan. 18. Far contrary to this were Wrisleye
Wrysley^
and Rich, which not all ignorant of the Bishops beastlye errors,
malycyouslye without all fear of God and shame of the world, executed upon
this godly woman most terryble tyranny. Pylate Pylate.
spoke for the innocent, excused him, defended him, laid fourth the law,
pleated for him sharpelye, required them to show mercy, alleged for him their
custom, declared him an innocent and sought by all means to deliver him,
Math. 27. These perjured magystrates Wrysleye Wrisleye
and Rich, not only examyned this innocent woman with rigor, but also hated
her, scorned her, reuyled her, condemned her for an heretyke, and with
unspeakable torments sought to enforce her to bring by accusacyon other noble
women and men to death.

More over Pylate Pylate.
would shede no innocent blood, but labored to mytygate the Bishops furye,
and insta^ited them as they were relygyouse, to show godly fauer, concludynge
that he could by no law of justice, judge him worthy to dye Marci 15. These
vengeable tyrauntes Wrisleye Wrisleye
and Rich insacyably thirsted, not only the innocent blood of this faithful
servant of God, but also the blood of the noble duchess of Sothfolke, the
blood of the worthy countess of Hertforde, and of the virtuous countess of
Sussexe, the blood of the faithful lady Ladies.
Dennye, of the good lady Fizwyllyams, and of other godly women more, soche
wydowes and wy^es as Paul, Peter, and Johan commends in their epistles,
besides the blood of serten noble men of the kings high counsel. And all at
the spyghtfull calling on of the Bishops. Slack care gave Pylate Pylate.
to the prestes, he regarded not there dyspleasure, he detected their
proteruouse madness, by delays he dyfferred the sentence, and fynallye washed
his hands as one that was clear from their tyranny, Luce 23. Swyft ear gave
Wrisleye and Rich Wrisleye and Rich*
with their wicked affynyte to the pu^fed up pork^lynges of the pope Gardyner,
Bonner, and soch other, they followed their cruel counsel, they enprysoned
her, judged her, condemned her, and racked her at the last with their own
poluted bloudye tormentours hands, till the veins and synnowes brast.

If ye mark the scriptures well, ye shall easelye perceive that Pylate Pylate.
was not in fawte of Christ's buffetynges, beatynges, scornynges, face
spyttynges, crownynge with thorn, and soch other extreme handelynges. But the
malycyouse Bishops and prestes Prestes.
which waged Judas to be^raye him, hired false witnesses to accuse him, monyed
the multitude to dyffaine him, feigned false matter against him, compelled the
law and terryfyed the judge, to have their full myschefe accomplyshed, as our
Bishops have done in this cruel act and soch other. Pylate.
When the prestes would have blemyshed his name by the ignomynyouse death
which he suffered among thieves on the cross, Pylate proclaimed it gloryouse
unto all the world, writynge his title in Hebrew, Greek, and Latyne, Jesus of
Nazareth king of the Jews, and would not at their instau^t calling on, change
it, Ioa^. 19. Wrisleye Wrisleye
and Rich with their ungracious affynyte, have in every point followed here
the execrable affectes of the prestes. Fauorablye Pylate lycensed Joseph of
Arymathye to take down Christ's body, and to burye it, Math. 27. Wrisleye
commanded this martyr of God with her faithful companyons to be brent to
ashes. Pylate Pylate.
was ignorant of Gods laws, and a pagane. Wrisleye Wrisleye
and Rich know both the law and the Gospel, and are christyanes, the more
is it to their dampnacyon, to execute soch turkysh tyranny.

Now to conclude with Anne Askewe as the argument of this book requires In the
year of our lord a M.D.ELVI And in the monthe of Iulye, Brent.
at the prodygyouse procurement of Antichriste^ furyouse remnaunt, Gardyner,
Bonner and soch like, she suffered most cruel de^the i^ Smythfelde with her
iij. faithful companyons, Ioha^ Lassels a gentylma^ which had been her
instructour, Johan Adlam a tailor, Martyr^
and a pressed so constaunt in the veryte against the said Antichrists
superstycyons as they, whose name at this time I had not. Credyblye am I
infourmed by diverse duche merchauntes which were there present, that in the
time of their sufferynges, A sign*
the sky abhorrynge so wicked an act, suddenly altered color, and the
clouds from above gave a tho^der clappe, not all unlike to that is written,
Psalm. 76. The elements both declared therein the high dyspleasure of God for so
tyra^nouse a murder of innocents, Gods hand.
and also expreslye sygnyfyed his mighty hand present to the confort of them
which trusted in him, besides the most wonderful mutacyon which will within
short space thereupon follow. And like as the Centuryon Centurio
with those that were with him, for the tokens showed at Christ's death,
confessed him to be the son of God, Math. 27. So ded a great nombre at the
burning of these martyrs, upon the sight of this open experyme^t, afferme them
to be his faithful members.

Full many a Christen heart have risen and will rise from the pope to Christ
through the occasyon of their consumynge in the fire. Christyanes.
As the saying is, of their ashes will more of the same opinion arise. Many a
wone says yet both in England and Duchelande, also, O that woman that woman,
take heed
O those men those men. If the popes generacyon and wicked remnaunt make many
more soch martyrs, they are like to mar all their whole market in England.
It were best for them now a days to let men be at lyberte for their holy
fathers ga^dy she ceremonies, as they are for bear baytynges, cock fyghtynges
tennys play, Ceremonies.
tables, tombelynge, daunsynge, or hu^tynge, who list and who may. For as
little have those tradycyo^s of his of the word of God, in their prowdest
outshewe, as they have. Here will some tender Tenderlynges.
stomakes be grieved, and report that in our headye hastynesse, we refuse to
suffer with our weak brethren according to the doctrine of Paul. But I say
unto them, what so ever they be which are so scrupulouse wanderers, that they
most execrablye err in so bestowynge the scriptures. For abhomynable is that
tolleraunce of our brethernes weakness, Hypocresye.
where God is by ydolatrouse superstycyons, dysobeyed, dishonored, and
blasphemed. A plain practyse were this of Satan in hypocresye to uphold all
deuylyshnesse.

On the other side was there an other sort at the death of these blessed
martyrs, Papystes
and they judged of this alteracyon of the air and thonder clappe, as ded the
Iewysh Bishops with their perverted multitude. Which waggynge their heads,
rayled, reuyled, iangled, iested, scorned, cursed, mocked, and mowed at
Christ's precyouse sufferynges on the cross, Prestes.
Math. 27. and Luce 23. These were the idle wytted prestes at London and their
beastlye ygnoraunt broodes, with old superstycyouse bawdes and brethels,
Bawdes.
the popes blind cattle. These cried there like mad modye bedlemes, as they
heard the thonder, They are dampened, they are dampened, their wise preachers
outasynge the same at Paul's cross. In deed full nobylle are they ouerscane in
the Bible that judge the thonders Tho^ders.
to sygnyfye da^pnacyon. Thonder (says the scripture) is the voice of God,
Eccle. 43. Thonder is the helping power of the lord, Job 26. and no
dampnacyon. Christ called Johan and James the sons of thonder, Marci 3. Which
betokened that they should be ernest preachers, and no children of dampnacyon.
The lord by thonder, Thonder.
shows his inscrutable workynge, Job 38. Moses received the law, Helyas the
sprete of prophecye, the Apostles the holy Ghost, and all in thonder. What
wicked fool will say, they received so dampnacyon?

As the lamb had opened the first seal of the book, the voice that went forth
was as it had been thonder, Apoca. 6. Apocal.
which is no dampnacyon, but a sharp calling of people to Godwarde. The
thonderynges that apered when the Angel filled his censer. Apoca. 8. were no
dampnacyons but Gods ernest words rebukynge the world for sin. Tho^ders.
The best interpretours do call those* tho^derynges which came from the trone
of God. Apocal. 4. soche verytees of the scripture as terryfyeth sinners, and
no dampnacyons. Neither were the vij. thonderynges which gave their voices,
Apoc. 10. any other than mysteryes at their times to be opened, Eucherius
Eucherius
Lugdunensis and other moralysers, call thonders in the scripture, the voices
of the Gospel, and their lyghtenynges, the clear openynges of the same. If
tho^der be a threttenynge or a fearful judgment of God (as in Psalm. 103.) it
is to them that abide here, For tyrauntes.
and not to them that depart from hens, A token is it also that the horrible
tyrauntes shall be as the meledust, that the wind takes away suddenly, Esaie
29. If plage do follow of thonder, as it ded in Egypt, when Moses stretched
forth his rod. Northfolke.
Exodi 9. It shall light upon them which has showed the tyra^nouse vyolence on
the people of God, as it ded upon pharao and his cruel mynysters.

At the mighty voice which was both sensyblye heard and understood of the
Apostles from heaven, Mark well.
that the father was and would be gloryfyed by Christ the people said notthynge
b^t. It thondereth, Joan. 12. For nothing else they understood thereof. What
Anne Askewe and her companyons both heard and s^ in this thonder to their
sowles consolacyon in their paynefull sufferynges, no mortal understanding
can dyscerne. Only was it Steven S. Steue^
(and parauenture a few dyscyples) that se the heavens open when he suffered,
and not the cruel multitude which ran upon him with stones, Acto. 7. Let
beastlye blind babbyllers and bawdes with their charmynge chaplaynes than
prate at large, out of their malycyouse sprete and idle brains. We have in
habundaunce the veryte of Gods word gods word.
and promise, to prove them both saved and gloryfyed in Christ. For God ever
preserves them which trust in him, Psalm. 16. All that call upon his holy
name, are saved, Iohel. 2. What reasonable man will think that they can be
lost, which have their lord God more dear than their own lives? No man shall
be hable (says Christ) to pluck myshepe out of my hands, Not lost.
but I will give the^ eternal yfe, Joan. 10. Believe (says Paul to the iayler
at Philippos) on the lord Jesus Christ, and thu shall be saved and thy whole
howsholde, Acto. 16. They that seem in the sight of the unwise to go into
destruccyon, do rest in the peace of God, and are replenyshed with immortalyte,
Sapien. 3. With other innumerable scriptures, to the praise of God, whose name
be gloryfyed world without end, Amen.

FINIS.
God save the king. Thus ends the lattre conflict of Anne Askewe, latelye
done to death by the Romysh popes malycyouse remnaunt, and now canonysed in
the precyouse blood of the lord Jesus Christ Imprented at Marpurg in the
land of Hessen, 16* die Ianuarij, anno 1. 5. 4. 7.



A table compendyouse of this lattre book.
ANne Askewe a martyr, 6. 54. 55 Anne Askewes sufferynges, 45. 49. 62. 67
Antichrists badges, 20. 53. 56. Antichrist, where he dwells, 26 Augustyne, a
blood sheder, 4 BOnuer Bysh. of London, 52 Bread is no God, 21. 34. 56.
Brittayne church. 3. 8 Ceremonies at lyberte, 67 Christ, what meat he is, 30
Christ, wherefore condemned, 31 Chronycle writers, ^ Consecracyon of prestes, 55
Constancye of Anne Askewe, 27. 35. 46 Death not feared, 27. 35 Dyfference of
martyrs, 4. 5 Doctrine of the supper, 12 Edere, what it is, 12. 33 Enemies iij.
ghostlye, 38 Englysh church, 4. 8 Eucherius Lugdunensis, 69 Faith plentuouse,
28, 50. 55 Frances above Christ, 23 Fruits of faith, 54. 55 Fryndes and
enemies, 45. 61 GOdlynes of Anne Askewe. 27 Governors worldly, ^8 Graye
fryres Christ, 23 HEresye dyffyned, 37 Hewaldes white and black, 6 House of
merchaundyse, 25 IDolatrye of Bread. 21. 24. 59 Idolaters of ij. sorts, 34
Inco^staunt Chrystyanes, 28. 39 Johan wycle^es time, 6 Johan lassels brent, 49.
67 Iuthwara a martyr, 6 Kilianus and his fellawes, 7 Ryme, a gentylman, 15
Ladies, sought to death, 40. 6^ Lady chancellor, 48 Lanfrancus and walden,
37 MArryage of Anne Askewe, 14 Martyrs of England, 3. 4 Mass is ydolatrye,
26. 44. 59 Mass with his receytes, 59 Mass with his fruits, 60 Masses, who do
them, 26 Mass hearing unrewarded. 44 Miracles of the mass 60 Moulde in the
box, 31. 56 NAmes of Englysh martyrs 5. 6 Noble women, 40. 43 Northfolke, and
tyrant, 61. 69 OBedyence, where, 40 Oswalde and Oswyne, 8 PEryn all fryerysh,
9. 60 Pylate with Wrisleye, 64 Prestes of 2. sorts 32 Prestes and bawdes, 66.
68 Prisoners have favor, 41 RAckedis Anne Askewe, 45. 64 Renouncers of God,
3. 28. 39 Right martyrs, 5 SAcrament, what it is, 32 Sacramental co^munyon, 22
Saints of England, 5. 6. Shaxton recanteth, 39 Song of Anne Askewe, 63
Strength of a martyr, 36. 46 Tyranny of rulers 45. 47. 65. 69 Thomas walden
37 Thonder declared, 67* 69 Tokens of martyrs, 9. 45. 49. 54 UAyle of Moses,
26 Vrsula with other, 8 WAffer cake, no God, 24. 34. 56 Wynchestre at Vtrecht,
42 Wrys^eye, a tyrant, 45. 50. 64. Young martyrs, 7
God save the King

