ELIZABETHA TRIVMPHANS. Containing The Damned practizes, that the devilish
Popes of Rome have used ever sithence her Highness first coming to the
Crown, by moving her wicked and traitorous subjects to Rebellion and
conspiracies, thereby to bereave her Majesty both of her lawful seat, and
happy life. With a declaration of the manner how her excellency was
entertained by her Souldyers into her Camp Royal at Tilbery in Essex: and of
the overthrow had against the Spanish Fleet: briefly, truly, and effectually
set forth. Declared, and handled by I. A.

Post victoriam gloria.

AT LONDON Printed by Thomas Orwin, for Thomas Gubbin, and Thomas Newman. 1588.

To the Right Worshipful, endued with all singularity, Julius Caesar, Doctor
of the Civil Law, chief Judge of her Highness honorable Court of the
Admiraltie, and one of the Masters of the Requests to the Queens most
excellent Majesty.
THE remembrance (Right Worshipful) of the great courtesies I have received
at your ever bou^tifull hands, makes me ashamed (seeing my hap has been so
bad) as that I could in no time, sithence I first tasted of the abundance
thereof, gratify your Worship with some token of my not-vngratefull heart.

Some, while they are too curious (or rather careless) in making choice of
duetifull requitals, purchase the crime of vngratfulnes deservedly for their
labor. And many nothing at all esteeming of benefits, or otherwise thinking
them to come of course, cast the remembrance of the giuers courtesy at their
heels.

Misliking therefore the ouer-curiousnes of the former, and altogether
condemning the ungratefulness of the latters forgetfulness, least I should make
my self suspected to be of both sex, I present to your Worships liking the
first fruit that my barren wit yielded. No gift (I confess) because so
unworthy by reason of the ruff and unskillful handling of the matter therein
contained: but a Pamphlet greatly standing in need of your Worships
patrocinie, that by the protexion of so learned a Maecenas, it may be defended
from the biting jaws of snatching Carpers. Which, if of your Worships wonted
bounty and neuer-ouer shadowed clemency, you shall voutchsafe; my study
shall be how to prepare presents which may be more be seeming your Worships
service, and my prayers to the Almighty for the continuance of this your
obtained happiness, with the daily increase of all worldly commodities, and in
the end to grant you eternal faelicitie.

Your Woorships in all humblenes, Ia. Ask.

To the gentle Reader.
When I considered with my self (Gentle Reader) of the sundry kinds of
delights; of the fine wits yielding, most pleasant conceits: of the diversity
of inventions, with the profunditie of every man's judgment, I find that
(thereby) this is the hardest world that might happen to gross heads and
green wits. The redoubling of phrases running with words beginning all with
one letter, in the amorous discourses of young Gallants, jointly with the lives
of their inamoured Mistrisses: in Histories lively desciphering foolish dotage
ordinarily in old men and stale widows, with the inconueniencie of matching
crooked old age, and wily youth together are so commonly used; as they who
spend their time, dull their heads, and bestow their travel in penning such
books, are either thought to steal their invention from othermens labors, or
else accounted of as wittals, for spending their studies about such common
devises. But if any man write loving Songs, and amiable Sonnets, they, as
foolish toys nothing profitable, are of every one misliked, if of famous men's
acts done long ago, they are termed lies, and therefore to be rejected, if
of things happened in our days, the events of those but now performed practices,
need no discourses to cause remembrance. What shall I say, the Booke-hinders
shops, and every Printers press are so cloyed and clogged with Books of these
and suchlike matters, that they are good for nothing (as they say) but to make
wast-paper, whereby it falls out, that through the misprising of the Authors
minds, and misconstruing of their meanings, with the innumerable swarm of
Momus followers, that a man were better to go to plough one whole year, then
to toil his head but one month about publishing any of his studyes. The
consideration whereof, has been such an impediment to the printing of this my
Pamphlet (I term it so, not in respect of the matter there-in handled, but of
the handling thereof,) that when it was (at the earnest request of one that
might have commanded) both begun and finished very near with-in the space of
one whole month, I was after-wards three long months studying, whether it
were better for me to burn it, or to give it to the Press: which the rather
happened, for that my proceedings were crossed by diverse backward events. For
first of all (after the finishing of it) when I had gone through with the
Printer, so that within two days it should have been ready for his trade,
there fell out a cross matter, whereby it was dashed for the space of ten
weeks, then having intelligence of the commonnesse of Ballads, with Books to
this purpose, I resolved my self to bestow this my Pamphlet on the fire. But
crabbed Fortune (who ever hinders willing enterprises) through the entreaty of
diverse of my dearest friends, stayed my determinate purpose, by persuading me
that those Books and Ballads did very little touch the matter my Book
entreats of, which caused me rather to publish this my work (entitled
Elizabetha Triumphans) truly and effectually declaring the wicked attempts of
the devilish Pope, with his damned adherents practiced to the praise or
dispraise of me it Author, then to let such broken tales, told in plain
Ballets, express the unspeakable acts, and wondrous overthrows had against
the Pope by this our royal Queen and her (by this made famous) Island.
Committing therefore both this Book my first work, with my self a young
versefier to your liking, I desire nothing of you for my pains, but that you
will not condemn the beginning, until you have read to the ending, and then
of Gods name be free with your censure. Fare you well.

Yours, as he would wish you his, Ia. Ask.

E Elizabeth sole rectrix of this Land,
L Long time with thee has reigned happy Peace:
I In all thy deeds assisteth Pallas hand,
Z Zenobia-like thy Fame shall never cease.
A All other Soyles throughout the wondrous world
B Behold and see thy sweet prosperity:
E Even by thy force of late they soon were thrald,
T That falsely bragged of their dietie.
H Honor, with Peace, Prosperity, and Fame
A Accord with thee, and highly praise thy name.
T Triumph (O English people) leap for joy,
R Redouble often the lawding song ye sing,
I In praise of her, who banisheth Anoy.
V Unto Iehouahs alters offerings bring,
M Mir, Franckinscence, with every sweetest flower:
P Play on your Timbrels, let your Cornets sound;
H Heave up your hands to him that gives power,
A And did of late your threatening foes confound.
N No Traitors be but honor still her name,
S Sithence for her sake Jehovah wrought the same.
ELIZABETHA triumphans.
I Write not of the labors (passing strange,)
Which Jove's base son with wondrous fame atchiu'd:
He of the acts, the never dying acts,
That English Kings have done long time ago.
But all my drift is to declare the deeds,
The famous deeds that this our sacred Queen
Performed has, sithence Sol has passed the Signs
Just thirty times, with those his shining lights.
Then mighty Jove, who guides each moving thing,
Direct my Muse to that thy flowing stream,
Whence flow amain both sweet and thundering words,
That with those words she may set down both peace,
And warlike deeds this maiden Queen has done.
The royal state of famous English soil,
(Right happy made by this their noble Queen,)
Declares the virtues of a heavenly mind,
Adorned with all the gifts which Nature can
Bestow, on any of her dearest Nymphs,
So dear a darling is Elizabeth,
Renowned Queen of this renowned land,
Renowned land, because a fruitful soil:
Renowned land through people of the same:
And thrice renowned by this her Uirgin Queen,
A maiden Queen, and yet of courage stout,
Through Wisdom, rare, for Learning, passing all,
Her mother tongue is not her only speech,
For Spanish, Greek, Italian, and French,
With Romans tongue, she understands and speaks,
He are these all, though more then may be found
In female sex, except her stately self:
For other Virtues are (no less of force)
Within her royal breast and outward parts.
Her comely stature does not Beauty want,
Ne Beauty is from seemly favor barred,
But both of them do (in the hyest-degree,
Conioyn'd together) beautefie her port.
Among the rest, this must not be forgot,
(No less praiseworthy then the other are,)
Which is. Although she be by Nature weak,
Because her sex no otherwise can be:
Yet wants she not the courage of her Sire,
Whose valor wanne this Island great renown,
So great renown as never Island had.
Which high renown, as yet has not bin lost,
But far enlarged through wonders passing strange,
Which have bin done next under God of heaven,
By rectrix of these famous Western parts.
FOr first of all (which is not least in force)
When by the space of six whole winter times, In the year 1558. began our
gracious Sovereign to reign.

The glittering Stars of heaven did nere appear,
Ne Luna bright, for dim and duskie clouds
Could show her lights from out the Firmament:
When Darkness ruled Queen of all the earth,
Then did a Wolf (the Pope, a ravenous Wolf)
By stealth break in among a flock of Sheep,
And there did slay, and having slain, did glut
His greedy paunch, with their most guiltless blood.
But when Auror' had sent abroad her lights,
And Phoebus bright begun to spread his beams,
This Wolf then feared longer there to stay,
But theeuishly did haste unto his den.
This ravening Wolf, this foul deceiptfull Pope,
He hates the light because his deeds are naught.
But England joy, The true preaching of the Gospel vpholden by her Majesty.
O England thankful be,
The Night is gone, and now the Day appears:
The God of heaven, who knows every thought,
And rules them by his eternal power:
The God of Gods, who is the morning Star,
Which gives light in every creatures heart,
That God (I say) did see his wickedness,
And seeing, would not let it longer last,
For by the Sun, Elizabeth our Queen,
Whose virtues shine as bright as Sol it self,
By that same Sun the Wolf is put to flight,
And by that Sun Gods flock does live in rest.
From that bright Sun, Religion has her beams,
Which lightens those who did in darkness sit:
By that same Sun, Sincerity is plast,
Where heretofore false Error ruled Lord,
Through that same Sun Gods word is truly preached,
And by that Sun all Popish relics burnt.
Which happy change did cause the Pope to rage, Paulus Quartus Pope of Rome.

And put him sore unto his shifting tricks,
He studies now how to renew again
His credit cracked through this so foul a foil,
He beats his brains, he craves his Counsels aid,
And yet in all he strives against the stream,
But that his father Satan (King of Hell)
His dearest friend, and wisest counselor,
Will have him try, and see to what event
His fond devises will by practice come.
Wherefore the Pope, much like a crauin curre,
Who quarrel will with every passenger,
But having had a knock for that his fault,
He seeks unto his neighbor curres for aid,
Them once in fight (though speeding too too bad)
H'il leave alone, and standing thence aloof,
Will ever bark, but never come to bite.
So does the Pope, for chased by our Queen,
Whose valiant heart can not abide his brags,
From this her land, unto his seat at Rome.
He sitting there, 1560
does bark, and barking sends
In all post haste unto the land of France,
(Because he thinks the Frenchmen soonest will
Be drawn to think that every tale is true,)
With this Embassage to the young french King.
Salute King Frauncis, This Popes Embassage was to the King of France to this
effect.
second of that name,
And let him wit, that by the contract made
Twixt him and Mary Queen of Scottish land,
His rightful heir unto the English Crown.
And furthermore, we will he understand,
That she who now by force vsurps the same,
Can lay no claim unto that land by right.
Which forged tale did please the King so well,
Because he was of young and tender years,
And therewithal the counsel of the Guise,
His faithless friend, which pricked him forward still,
Did so prevail, as that the french King sent
To Scotland diverse forces day by day.
Where landed, they do sore torment the Scots,
They rule like Kings, who do but ask and have,
They waste their country, lavish out their goods,
Their houses burn, their lives bereave with sword.
But when our Queen (a full of mercy Queen,)
Had knowledge of their treason full of baine, The Duke of Norfolk sent toward
Scotland against the French. The Lord Gray of Wilton fought a battle with the
French in Scotland.

She ready made within a little space,
A company of brave and valiant men.
The Duke of Norfolk was their general,
Who did remain at famous Barwick town:
And worthy Gray of Wilton noble Lord,
Lieutenant was. He into Scotland went,
And with his power did on the Frenchmen set,
Where worthy Gray did so their forces quail,
As weary soon they wear of handie blows.
There did the French (who so triumphed before)
Like scatterd sheep, for fear run fast away.
There might you see great streams of French-mens blood,
And heaps of bodies, which by us were slain.
There men lament for loss of faithful friends,
And women houle, who there were widows made.
The children weep, to see their mothers sad:
And servants grieve because the children cry.
These with their tears a running river make:
These with their sighs do fill the air with smoke.
These with their noise do cause an Echo sound,
And make the Earth to quake and shake therewith.
Our gracious Queen, who never thurst for blood,
(When thus the Frenchmen once had felt her force)
Did use a mean which nearer was to Peace.
For why: she sent Sir William Cicill Knight,
Her Majesty's chief Secretary then:
But now by his deserts and worthy deeds,
Lord Treasorer of all this worthy land,
Accompanied with wise and learned men,
To parle with the Frenchmen which were there.
Whose wisdom did therein so much prevail, A peace concluded between the
Frenchmen and us, by the Lord high Treasorer, the^ chief Secretary.

As at that time concluded was a Peace:
Whereby the wars of late fire-hote did end,
And naught at all redoun'd to France but shame.
This enterprise so peaceably performed,
In what I pray now does the Pope triumph?
His hope quite frustrate soon against his will
Makes him neglect to be at morning Mass.
He raues as mad, he curses Books and Beads,
All Pater-nosters quite are laid aside:
His Images do want their wonted due
Of honor now, because so ill he sped.
Not any Pardons are dispersed abroad,
Nor merry looks on any of his Monks:
But dolefully (or rather doultishly)
He keeps his Chamber, free from any mirth.
Thus lives the Pope still mourning for his loss:
Thus mournes the Pope for want of better luck:
Thus want of luck does make him wish to dye:
Thus with his wish his death is come at last.
HE being dead, Pius quartus installed Pope.
and for his soul a Mass
Next morning sung within his Chapel Church,
His Popedomship with Myter, 1561.
Crowns and Cross,
Are all bestowed on Pius quintus grace.
A man (I wish) not less with envy frought,
(Although the days wherein he lived were few)
Then was the man, which last before him reigned.
For when he was installed in his seat,
He straight was troubled with the Popish pippe:
He cannot quench his thirst he is so dry:
But judge for what: For English Martyrs blood.
He seeks thy bane, O England, thine he seeks:
He starues because h'is barred from thy flock,
(This English flock, Christ's dear and sacred flock)
Where are his sheep within a strong kept hold,
Where feed his sheep of his most heavenly word,
Of that same Manna which did fall from heaven.
Where sheepheards are, who carefully them keep,
As nere a Wolf can hurt the poorest sheep:
Though this new Pope does now revive again
Of Trent the Counsel, The Counsel of Trent revived by this Pope this year.
to that damned end,
By Legates sent to diverse foreign Coasts.
Five Cardinals with many Bishops are
To go about this work, by Pius chos'de
To this intent, least that the glorious light
Which shines most bright among us Englishmen:
Least that same light, Christ with his sacred word
Should clearly shine throughout his placed globe.
Whereby the Pope withal his damned deeds,
His painted Gods, his senceles stocks and stones
Should be forlorn'd, foreseen of every one,
To let this good, and further that too bad.
These Cattle were from Rome dispersed abroad:
But God of heaven, against whose holy will
The Pope did call this Counsel wickedly:
That God did laugh to scorn his fond devise,
And made it frustrate, and of none effect.
His Legates sent, are home again returned
(To Rome I mean) but with as bad success,
As had the Frenchmen in their former deed.
THe Queen of Scots (who late was Queen of France) The Queen of Scots found in
England.

Consenting to the death of James the King
Of Scotland late, her husband too too true:
Was feign to fly for that unnatural deed
From that her native and long-holden land.
From whence escaped, she took her passage thence
To this our land (to happy English land)
Where happily she was descri'd by chance,
But basely clad and with a simple train:
And till the cause of this her landing here
Was truly known, she closely here was kept.
Yet had she all things for a Princess meet,
For where of late she had no train at all,
But like a simple gentell did remain:
Now has she men with women at her call,
To run, to ride, to do her any work;
Now has she sommes, great sommes of English quoyne,
To serve her turn at every needful time.
And yet for all these too too good deeds done
To her so bad, quite banished from all good:
By this Popes mean, she does persuade the Duke
Of Norfolk to rebel against his Queen.
He drawn thereto, The Duke of Norfolk persuaded by this Pope to rebel.
does go about to bring
Great foreign powers unto his native soil:
He seeks the death of his dread Sovereign,
Whereby he may enjoy her royal seat.
But (thanks to God) in stead of that he had
A Scaffold made, whereon he lost his head.
And now for this the Popes so bad success,
He perished as had done all the rest.
ANd for although these Pecocks tails were pulled: Pius quintus Pope.

Yet does succeed a bird of that same brood,
Who will not let to iet and brave it out.
He will not move the King of France or Spain
With foreign forces, to invade this land:
But butcher-like he sends abroad his Bulls,
So grace within a strangers fertile land. 1569.

This Pope affirms: Doctor Morton sent into the North parts of this Realm
with a commission to the like effect.
The Queen of English soil
Has lost the right of this her lawful seat:
And by his power he will absolve from oath
Her Subjects, who against her will rebel.
This this the Pope, and thus he stirs his stumps:
He thirsts for blood, and blood h'ile have to drink:
He will not send unto his neighbor coasts,
For to revive a Counsel once again:
But traytor-like he will his Pardons give
To Rebels, Rebellion in the North.
rising in their native soil.
This Pope does send Magitians to her land
To seek her death, Pastral and Pliar, with D. Story.
by that their deuillish art:
Yea which is more, h'il cause a deuillish doult
Of France, Parry alias up Harry was pardoned by the Queen, condemned for a
violent uproar against Hare.
a Doctor (Parry I do mean)
With smiling face for to discharge a Dagge
At her kind heart, who saved had his life.
See here the fruit of kindness ill bestowed:
See here a wight, worse then the doggest beast;
Ungrateful wretch, to Nature far unlike:
For Nature wil's we love for love should give:
But thou (alas) by Nature never taught,
Did seek the death of this thy happy Queen,
Whose sacred life did save thy dying death.
O damned villain fostred by a Wolf,
Borne of a Tiger, nursed by a Bear.
Nay worse then these, did nourish this foul impe:
For Belzabub by black Proserpina,
Could never have had a devil half so bad.
But what ensued thereof: but this of right:
The God of heaven, who searches every heart,
And has regard unto the innocent,
Reueil'd their thoughts, their treasons did display,
Before they were by them in practice put,
And they who sought to spill her guiltles blood,
Did lose their blood, and Parry gained a rope.
These were the deeds of Pius quintus Pope,
Wherein the devil had no little share:
But took great pains, and for his pains he ha^
The Pope himself, with all his Instruments.
NOw seeing Paulus nothing could atchieue
By Francis means: Gregory 13. Pope.
And also seeing that
The Northern power got naught in Pius tune:
An other Pope (Pope Gregory forsooth)
He needs must shoot as have the others done,
But yet will have his bow and arrows new.
His mark is that, Rebellion in Ireland.
whereat the other shot,
But takes his aim from Ireland thereto.
Fitzmorises, with wretched Desmons Earl,
Were chiefest shafts which in his quiver were.
With these same shafts he thought to hit the white,
And therefore placed them first within his bow:
But ere he could unloose the string thereof
And let them fly, whereat they leuel'd were:
The mighty God did cause the warlike Gray
To blow a blast, yea such a boisterous blast,
As arrows brake, and bow in pieces flew,
And Pope himself constrayn'd to leave his stand.
THis Pope though foiled, yet will not leave off so,
But since that this his purpose will not fadge,
H'il practice now, as have the other done,
By private traitors to revenge his foil.
And like a Fox who takes his Cubbes abroad
Unto a place, where Pullen are at feed:
He thither come, will not go in himself,
But sends them, and says h'il keep the watch.
Go, spare no blood (says he) there is enough,
Behead the Geese, destroy both Cock and Hens,
Leave never a Chicke but shall be motherles.
Which done, return that we may all rejoice,
And glut our selves with their desired blood:
You for your hire shall have your share therein.
The simple Cubbes less guilie then the Fox,
Do straight believe their Sire is sure a God,
And think at least they shall be Kings or Lords:
But as they went about their purpose meant,
In certain trappes (which th'owner of that place
Had set, to catch the Cattle of that kind)
They fast were caught (a strange and sudden change)
They call for aid unto their crafty Sire:
But he (forsooth) when as he heard the clappe,
Did run away post-hast unto his den,
And leaves his Cubbes to shift to save their lives.
Thus deals the Pope, 1580.
a subtle dealing Fox:
For when he has with Popish Pardons sent
The Priests (his Cubbes) unto this happy land, Edmond Campion and others,
Priests.

Where is the foul whereat he aims still.
These Iewes-like Cubbes do seek by all their shifts
To move rebellion here against our Queen. Francis Throgmorton and the Earl
of Northumberland moved to rebellion.

These Catterpillers, persons traitors borne
Encourage then to kill her Majesty.
These seek to bring in strange and foreign powers,
Which should destroy their native Counterie.
These published tails and lies in every place, Sommerfield moved to kill the
Queen.

And blas'd abroad that this our Sovereign
A tyrant is, (O damned enterprise)
When they themselves forsaken of their Sire,
By law condemned, have openly confes'd,
That naught they sought, nor ought they could look for,
Except the Queen did mercy to them show.
ABout this time did Phillip King of Spain, Don John died which prevented the
King of Spain his purpose.

By this Popes means prepare a mighty power,
England therewith he would have overrun:
But Don John died who should have meruels done,
Whereby he was debarred from that his course.
The Pope so grieves for this so bad success, 1583.

As h'is half mad with finding out new means,
Which once may quench his neuer-ceasing thirst.
H'il now leave of his warlike kind of shifts,
And play a while the Grasier in his deeds.
He sends abroad his Seminary Priests
To drive his Bulls unto the English soil.
They being there within a fruitful land,
Do fat apace, and too too lusty grow:
They cannot live unless they have some Kowes,
By whom their courage may abated be.
They bull them often, and bulling get fair Calves
Like to themselves, within a little space
Which grow so fast, as within twise-three years
They able are to draw the Popish wayne.
THe Queen of Scots is chiefest instrument 1586.

This Pope does use soon after he does reign:
For by her means there were a company
Of forward gallants brought unto their ends.
Fourteen brave youths, with diverse other are
By her intised to conspire the death
Of their thrice sacred and renowned Queen.
Proud Babbington with all his wretched crew, Babbington and his company
persuaded by the Queen of Scots to rebellion.

Do seek the spoil of this their native soil.
These with their friends will aid such foreign powers,
As shall to dare to land within this Realm.
These Catholics (nay Catterpillers then)
Will set this Pope within his former seat
In England here, or else thei'l dye the death.
These by their oaths have bound themselves thereto:
Oh Heavens: O Earth: O neuer-dying Fame:
Lament with me for Englands haples luck:
Her haples luck through these unnatural sons
Who seek to ruin her their mother dear,
And lay in wait to slay their careful Nurse
Elizabeth, their Queen and royal Nurse,
Whose milk her laws (her sacred life-full laws)
Was for them food, if that they would have sucked:
Whose sacred laws a cradle (none so sure)
Was for their ease, would they have lien therein.
And last whose laws did carefully them warn
Least they should fall, by pain which longed thereto.
But these fond youths (as wayward Children) did
Despise the counsel of their careful Nurse,
And for the same they seek her death (alas)
With the confusion of their mother dear.
These moved were for sacred Conscience sake
To do these deeds (a Devil sure they were)
When they themselves did at their ends confess,
For this their facts promotion they should have.
I that is the Conscience which has moved them
To seek an alteration in this land.
The Pope he thinks he so deserves the place,
As nere he shall it get by just deserts.
The youthful Sirs so well esteem of Fame,
As if they may attain unto her Court,
Thei'l spare no means how to obtain that place.
The Queen of Scots desires to rule this Realm
With such whoate zeal, as that she does not care
How many souls unto Elysium
Are sent, so she the English Crown may wear.
But mark the end which did ensue thereof.
As foolish Flies, which cannot rest at night
If that they see a light within their sight,
But still will fly unto the flame thereof,
Until they have themselves consumed therewith:
So little power have they how to resist
The burning flames which do ensue there-fro.
Or as a Bird, which being set to rest
Within a bush, when as he sees the light
The which the Fowler carries in his hand,
Does straight approach unto the flame thereof,
Whereby h'is catched in his limed bush.
These foolish flies, these fond faceted birds,
These witless youths, these thursting paragons
Can not abide to see so clear a light,
As be the beams which glide from this our Queen,
But still they storm, and envy at the same,
And never cease till they consumed are
By those the fire-like burning flames thereof.
For Babbington with all his company
Attained were with these their traitorous acts, Babbington with his company
executed.

And had the hire which is to Traitors due.
The Queen of Scots was guilty found by law, The Queen of Scots beheaded.

And suffered death for this conspiracy.
THe raging Panther so abhorres to see 1588

The majesty the which a man presents,
As at the sight thereof he frets and fumes,
And tryes all means how to destroy the same.
Yea which is more, if happily he spies
A painted man, he so enuyes thereat,
As nere h'il leave till he defaced has
The fained face which in the picture is.
This devilish Pope a Panther borne by birth,
No less abhors our dread Sovereign,
Her Majesty does so offend his sight,
As all his thoughts are how it to disgrace.
The King of Spain who as you heard before,
Debarred was from coming hitherwards,
Has ever sithence enlarged that his power,
Until this year wherein it complet is:
In this same year of eighty eight, the King
Catholic has (unto the end he may,
In England here the credit of the Pope
Renew again) had from his holiness
Both money, men, with many of his Bulls.
In which he sings the Coockoes song (all one)
Except this clause, He has both disposs'd
Our royal Queen of this her happy seat, A clause of the Popes last Bull.

And all her Nobles with grave Counselors
Which shall alliant be unto our Queen.
Eke all her Subjects who shall her defend
Against Spanish King (the King of Catholics:)
And also does his Holiness give power,
That this our Queen with all her subjects true,
Should every one be put unto the sword:
And all their Lands with livings he bestows
On vanquishers, which come to execute
His holy will, and devilish purposes.
See these the works of Christ's Uicker on earth,
Who does forsake his charge (the cure of souls)
And practices how to destroy both souls
And bodies of Christ's dear and sacred flock
Through this his damned doom in that his Bull.
Through which his Bull (much like the horned beast
Which sent the same:) the King of Spain naught fears
But that he shall receive his former seat,
In England here, ere end of eighty eight,
And therefore has imbarqued all his men
Within a sort of huge and warlike Ships.
Seauenscore and ten of the best fighting Ships,
Which could provided be within seven years,
With all his men which able are to fight,
Are ready now to sail to England-ward.
But when the Ruler of this little Isle,
(A famous Isle through this her Governor,)
Did understand of this their whole pretense,
She was not flacke in mustrings of her men:
For less then in the space of two whole months,
She mustered had out of all her Shires,
A hundred thousand able fighting men.
The Lord Haward her worthy Admiral, The Lord high Admiral sent to Sea.

Sir Frauncis Drake Vize-Admirall under him,
Lord Thomas Howard and the Sheffild Lord,
With diverse other forward Gentlemen:
To Sea were sent with all her royal Fleet,
To guard the Streights, and meet with that his Fleet.
BUt least they should perhaps escape their hands,
And land their forces on her aim'd-at land,
A Camp of fifty thousand able men, A Camp on top of Tilbery hill in Essex.

Appointed should have layne on Tilbery hill,
Where Leicesters thrice made renowned Earl
Lieutenant was unto our royal Queen.
And Sir John Norris honored for his deeds,
Lord Marshall was among that company.
Eake Deuorax of Essex famous Earl, The names of the Officers of the field
belonging to the Camp.

Whose forwardness has made his house renowned,
Was General of brave five thousand horse,
Which should have come unto that royal Camp.
Sir Thomas Laiton chiefest Colloner
Of all the footmen which should thither come.
Sir Francis Knowles of the great Ordinance,
Was Master there (a place of great account.)
And Nicholas Dawterie (Captain long ago
For former deeds) her Seriant mayor was,
Sir Roger Williams had the second chardge
Of Complet horse, which armed Launcers bore,
And Robert Sidney Knight had equal chardge
Of brave light Horse belonging to that Camp.
There Captain Edward York obtained the place
Of quarter-Mayster to the placed Camp,
And Captain Crispe, her Prouish-mershall now,
Did bear that office in the royal place.
The regiments which out of every Shire
Elected were, for this most famous Camp,
Except those Shires next neighbors to the Sea,
Did daily march by companyes thereto.
Now mighty Mars a stranger heere-tofore,
In armor bright with neuer-yeelding sword,
Commes bravely mounted on a foming Steed,
Whose trampling causes such a fearful noise,
As all the world is shaked with his power.
Now might you see the field late pasture green,
Wherein the beasts did take their food and rest,
Become a place for brave and worthy men.
Here noble men, who stately houses have,
Do leave them void, to live within their Tents.
Here worth' Esquires, who lay on beds of down,
Do Cabben now upon a coutch of straw:
In stead of houses strong, with timber built
They Cabbins make of powles, and thin green bows:
And where of late their Tables costly were,
They now do dine but at an earthie bank:
Ne do they grieve at this so hard a chainge,
But think themselves thereby thrice happy made:
For when there were a twenty thousand come
Of brave footmen unto this placed Camp,
And twise-tenne hundred well appointed Horse,
To serve with Lance, and Demilances there,
They all on heaps do make so brave a show,
As it was thought that then there were ynowe,
For to encounter with their look'd-for foes:
Wherefore there went commandment from the Lords,
Who of her honorable Counsel are,
That those which were as yet not thither come,
Should stay from thence within their several Shires,
Until there came some news of farther need.
They thereby stayed, do greatly grieve thereat,
And often say for that their hap is bad.
Yea which is more, A regiment of a thousand footmen of Dorset shire offered
five hundred pounds that they might go forward to the Camp. An Essex-man a
soldier, able to keep in pay three months 500. men*
there was a regiment
But of one thousand men of Dorset-shire
Which offered five hundred pounds that they
Might forward go unto the royal Camp.
And further mark. (I tell a right strange tale,
I hard of one who was of great regard
In Tilb'ry Camp,) There served with the rest
An Essex-man, who was a Muskater,
Who being met by one which near him dwelt,
Was asked why he served with a gunne,
The soldier said, my friend you are deceived,
This is no gunne, a Musket we it call.
The other said, but sir you have enough
Of servants who are very able men,
And might have had performed this your charge
In better sort then can your weakly self.
It is right true (replied the soldier then,)
I have some store of servants at my house,
And (thanks to God) I able am and will
(If that our Queen shall stand in any need,)
Provide five hundred well appointed men,
To serve where-as her Highness shall think good:
And they even there at mine own cost shall serve
Just three whole months, and yet will I my self
There like-wise be (as now a Muskater.)
The fame of this her Subjects forwardness,
Did please so well our sacred Sovereign,
As she desires to see her placed Camp,
There-fore there was by her a downe-set day,
Where-in she would fulfill her purpose meant.
NOw came the day, The Queen came to the Camp.
the happy blisse-full day,
Where-in Aurora putting forth her head,
Her curled head with wirey hanging locks
Of brightest Silver, whence did newly shine
Her clearest streams, and neuer-darkened lights.
The morning gray, wher-in the houering Larks,
(Whose sweet shrill notes recording hermonie
Resound with-in the heavenly creatures ears,)
Did notise give to wretched Phaetons Sire,
To harness up his fierce and furious Streeds,
To draw him thence unto his Western home.
From whose clear beams once in his Chariot plast,
Did gladsome glimps as bright as burnisht Gold,
Shine all displayed upon the Weighty Globe.
On this same day, a fair and glorious day,
Came this our Queen, (a Queen most like her self)
Unto her Camp, (now made a royal Camp,)
With all her troop, (her Court-like stately troop,)
Not like to those who coutch on stately Down,
But like to Mars, the God of fearful war,
And heauing often to Skies her warlike hands,
Did make her self Bellona-like renowned.
The Lord Lieutenant notice had thereof,
Who did forthwith prepare to entertain
The sacred Goddess of this English soil,
The order how, The order of the Queens entertainment into the Camp.
thus presently ensues.
On every side of that directest way
From Block-house where she should be set on land
Unto the outward quarter of the Camp,
There rancked were both armed men and shot,
With Captains, who of them had taken charge,
To entertain their sacred General.
The other Captains with their companies,
Still resident were at their Corpse du guard,
Where-as they ranked all their arm'd-men first:
Behind them were the shot in several ranks,
With equal distance twixt the placed rows,
Which made a passing brave and warlike show.
The Earl of Leicester with those Officers
Which chosen were to govern in the field,
At waterside within the Block-house stayed
In readiness there to receive our Queen.
Who landed now, does pass along her way,
She thence some-way still marching kinglike-on,
The Canons at the Block-house were discharged:
The Drums do sound, the Phiphes do yield their notes,
And Ensigns are displayed through-out the Camp.
Our peerless Queen does by her Soldiers pass,
And shows her self unto her Subjects there:
She thanks them often for their (of duty) pains,
And they again on knees do pray for her.
They coutch their Pikes, and bow their Ensigns down
When as their sacred royal Queen past by,
In token of their loyal beared hearts
To her alone, and none but only she.
A troop of brave and warre-like Horssemen did
(Conducted by Sir Roger Williams Knight,)
Meet with the Queen amid the way she came,
The half whereof, which was five hundred Horse,
Most stately Steedes, A thousand Horse march behind and before her Majesty.
made complete for the field,
With neighing sounds, and fomed champing bitts,
Betrampling sore the ground whereas they stood
Attended on her sacred self. The rest
Five hundred more (in naught to them unlike)
Before her train in stately order marched,
These jointly did with twenty hundred men
Which footmen were, Two thousand footmen guarded her person to her lodging.
our gracious Sovereign guard,
Unto the house whereas she lay all night.
Whether once come, the horsemen turned back,
But all the rest with her great Seriant did
Watch there all night aloof her royal Court.
The souldyers which placed were far off
From that same way through which she past along,
Did hollow often, the Lord preserve our Queen.
He happy was that could but see her Coatch,
The sides whereof beset with Emmerods,
And Diomonds with sparkling Rubies red
In Checker-wise by strange invention,
With curious knots embrodered with gold
Cast such a glimse as if the heavenly place
Of Phoebus were by those his foming Steedes
On four round wheels drawn all along that way.
Thrice happy they who saw her stately self,
Who Iuno-like drawn with her proudest birds,
Whose tails do hold her Heard-mans hundred eyes,
Passed along through quarters of the Camp.
Thus all along her Highness like her self
Has passed by her subjects (joyful made
Through this her loving and renowned deed)
From out the Camp unto her lodging then,
Full three miles distant from that warlike place
Prepared for her to Master Ritche his house,
With purpose meant for to return next day
That way again, the better it to view.
NOw when Bright-day was to her palace gone,
And by that time had locked up her lights
Within their place strong walled with clear glass,
To take their rest until the morning tide:
By this same time our sacred General
Was come unto her new prepared Court.
There entered once and in their lodgings plast,
The Courtiers talk is of the warlike show
They saw that day within the royal Camp.
Some praise the place whereas they camped are:
Some praise the discipline is used therein:
And othersome the passing forwardness
Of Noble men, and Gentels lying there:
But all of them do say, the Soldiers are
Most comely men appointed well thereto.
Thus with this talk, Time hasted fast away,
And wished for Rest did come among them then,
Who bids them all unto his loved house:
They willingly do yield to her request,
And every one is come unto her place:
The door whereof was called Wearines,
And Drowsines bore name of her first room:
The other were termed Slumbers (passing sweet)
A Sound-sleepe was the name of that her house.
Her servants who did entertain her guestes
Were these, A mind free from all worldly care,
An earnest will, with A convenient place.
The guests thus come at this their welcome joy,
And there do find all things they could desire.
But Envy, who does joy in naught but wars,
Does help to end this their so pleasant mirth:
For fearful Dreams, with foolish fantasies,
The foremost foes that quiet Rest torments,
Come first to make an hurly-burly there.
Then brightest Day the others General,
Does banish Rest quite from her late-held house,
And leaves her guests unto their day-ment deeds.
NOw by the time that Phoebus had beyok'd
His foming Steedes within their harnesses
To draw his bright and neuer-darkned lights:
The Captains of the Camp with all their men
Did from their quarters with their several charge
Come marching to the place prepared for Arms.
When thither come was every officer,
A royal battle royally was set
With two most strong and brave Battallians.
The Vangard whereof by the Lord Marshall: A Battle set with two Battallians
against her Majesty came again to the Camp.

The Reerward by Sir William Knowles was set:
And last the Seriant Mayor General
The Battle set in like most warlike sort.
Twixt every fight their several troops of horse,
And two brave troops did guard the outward Flanks.
The Battles set do match in brave array
Both too and fro the stately General,
Who now was come unto the place of Arms
With all her noble and renowned train.
Where glittering harness gives such gleaming lights,
And from those lights reflecteth such a heat,
As Heaven and Earth with Planets greatly fear,
Least Phaeton again to Heaven was come,
And had obtained to guide his fathers lights.
The trampling horses with their mist-like breath,
Do fill the Air with such a sudden smoke,
As Jupiter did fear least Terra was
New set on fire by that forenamed heat.
The Drommes, the Phiphes, the Trumpets passing-shrill,
Do sounded yield such marching forward notes,
As Mars himself with all his train'd-vp men,
In Arms are pressed, as if the Goddess Peace
Were coming now to banish him the field.
Which warlike show with that Mars thundering noise,
So ravished our princely Sovereign,
(Addicted only then to Marshall prowes)
As that she does (her train forbid therefro)
Most bravely mounted on a stately Steed
With Trunchion in her hand (not used thereto)
And with her none, The Queen^ leaves her train to go to see her battles.
except her Liutenant,
Accompaned with the Lord Chamberlain,
Come marching toward this her marching fight.
In naught unlike the Amazonian Queen,
Who beating down amain the bloody Greeks,
Thereby to grapple with Achillis stout,
Even at the time when Troy was sore besieged.
He had that wight (that thrice puissant wight)
Who well performed twelve labors passing strange,
A brauer grace encountering with his foes,
Then this our Queen in that her marching pace.
Thus comes our Queen (our thrice renowned Queen)
A General beseeming such a Camp:
Thus comes our guide, a princely careful guide,
In warlike sort to see her warring men,
Who couched had their strong defensive Pikes,
As if they were to fight at push thereof.
She nigh them come, they pitch their fore-couch'd Pikes,
And she stands still to see the Battle set,
With joy to see her men to keep their ranks.
Now Voada once Englands happy Queen,
Through Romans flight by her constrained to fly:
Who making way amidst the slaughtered corpse,
Pursued her foes with horror of the day
With Vodice her daughter (her too like,
Who urging wounds with constant courage died)
Are now revived, their virtues live (I say)
Through this our Queen, now Englands happy Queen.
For they no more did in those actual deeds,
Thrice famous deeds through Cactes fatal fall,
With loss which there the valiant Planch'us lost
Their Prowes show, then did our sacred Queen
Here signs display of courage wonderful.
For when our Queen (an Amazonian Queen)
Most carefully the Vauward had beheld,
She thence does go the Reerward for to see,
And takes a view of it two strong set Flanks:
At whose by passing, Homage done to her Highness by the Soldiers.
Lance with Pike are bowed,
And all yield reverence to her sacred self.
Her officers with all her Soldiers there,
Do tokens show of their made-ioyfull hearts.
She gives them thanks as had she done before:
Who naught have done but what their duties bid.
Her statelines was so with loue-show'd joined,
As all there then did jointly joy and fear.
They joyed in that they see their rulers love:
But feared least that in ought they should offend
Against her self, the Goddess of this land.
Thus causing joy and fear, she passed thence
With cherefull heart for this her late viewed sight
Unto the Tent of her Liuetenant there:
Were ready were in readiness each thing,
Which could be fit to entertayne a Queen.
The Battle set, The Battle broke up.
is soon again broke up:
Where foming Steedes, right fearce and raging Steedes,
Now marching raise the loose and scatterd dust:
As Sols bright beams, ne Ayre-much Azure-like
Within a space could be discerned, so thick
This raised dust obsuscated the light.
The companies asunder parted once,
Do now return to whence they first were brought,
Where naught is heard among the Soldiers,
But how the Queen did lately show her self
The only Empress that on earth has lived.
WHen Phoebus lights were in the middle part
Twixt East and West fast hasting to his home: The Queen went out of the Camp.

Our Sovereign (our sacred blisfull Queen)
Was ready to depart from out her Camp.
Against whose coming, every Captain was
There prost to show themselves in readiness,
To do the will of their high General.
There might you see most brave and gallant men,
Who lately were beclad in Mars his clothes,
Inranked then in Court-like costly suites.
Through whom did pass our Queen most Dido-like,
(Whose stately heart does so abound with love,
As thousand thanks it yields unto them all)
To waterside to take her royal Barge.
Amidst the way (which was the outward Ward
Of that her Camp) her Seriant Mayor stood
Among those Squadrans which there then did ward.
Her eyes were set so earnestly to view,
As him unseen she would not pass along,
But calls him to her rich-built Couches sides, The Queen called her Seriant
Mayor unto her, and delivered a message.

And thanking him (as often before she had)
Did will him do this message from her mouth,
Delivered with full of wisdom words.
Which that it may not altogether be
(Through unfit words hewed from a stony wit)
Obliterated to my utter shame:
Ye sacred Dames, ye seauen-fold Nymphs (I mean)
Whose thickie groves resound your heavenly words:
Whence every Art had first their several names)
Be-bathe my temples with those peerl-like drops
Which fall amain from that your silver stream:
That through your aid my wit now dulled sore,
May quickened be with that your flowing Art.
Then shall I write in these my lines too rude
Her royal speech (though nothing like her speech)
Which in effect was it that here ensues.
We will them know that now by proof we see
Their loyal hearts to us their lawful Queen. The effect of the Queens
speech.

For sure we are that none beneath the Heavens
Have readier Subjects to defend their right:
Which happiness we coumpt to us as chief.
And though of love their duties crave no less,
Yet say to them that we in like regard,
And estimate of this their dearest zeal,
(If time of need shall ever call them forth
To dare in field their fearce and cruel foes)
Will Be our self their noted General.
Ne dear at all to us shall be our life,
Ne Palaces or Castles huge of stone
Shall hold as then our presence from their view:
But in the midst and very heart of them,
Bellona-like we mean as then to march;
On common lot of gain or loss to both,
They well shall see we recke shall then betide.
And as for honor with most large rewards,
Let them not care they common there shall be:
The meanest man who shall deserve a might,
A mountain shall for his desert receive.
And this our speech, and this our solemn vow,
In fervent love to those our Subjects dear,
Say Seriant Mayor, tell them from our self,
On Kingly faith we will perform it there.
Which said, she bowed her princely body down,
And passed thence unto the waterside:
Where once imbarg'd the roaring Cannons were
Discharged, both those which were on Tilb'rie hill,
And also those which at the Block-house were:
And there even then the fore-white mant'led Air,
From whence the Sun shed forth his brightest beams,
Did cloathe it self with dark and duskie hue,
And with thick Clouds barred Phoebus gladsome streams
From lightning then the Earth with glorious show.
It powers forth showers in great and often drops,
Signs of the grief for her departure thence.
And Terra now her Highness footstool late,
Refuses quite those drops desired before,
To moysten her dried up and parched parts,
And of her self even then she yielded forth
Great store of waters from her late-dri'd heart,
Now deeply droun'd for this the parted loss
Of that her sacred and renowned Queen.
But happy Thames (thrice happy at this time)
Turns back with speed his lately ebbing course:
He calmes his billows raging sore before,
And makes it flow with a swift running stream.
And Aeolus to him a friendly King,
Recals his boisterous Boreas to his den,
Sent late abroad with such sore thundering blasts
As be the cracks which come, when angry Jove
Throws from his seat his hurtful Thunder-hoults.
Him he ties up within an hollow cave,
With three linked chains with huge and strong-made locks
Least that he should annoy her sacred self,
Who now was carried on the river Thames.
THese jointly thus convey our royal Queen
Unto her Palace by S. James his fields: Diverse troops of horse showed by
her Noble men at S. James her Palace.

Where resident her forward Noble men
Do orderly their forwardnes her show.
There by her gates do every day pass by
Diverse brave troops of well appointed horse:
They thither come, triumphant triumphs make,
And bravely run at Tilt and Turny then,
To show their prowes to our Goddess there.
THus they at home, thus they in Camp who lie
With those who coast upon the narrow Seas,
Do daily look, when those our looked for foes
Will dare to tread, The Fleet of Spain first descried by Captain Flemming.

Who now perchance by Captain Flemmings hap
Descried were, fast sailing hether-ward
With such a Fleet, as never bore the Seas
So hugh a Fleet (except this Spanish-fleete.)
Now worthy Haward lodged in Plimmouth sound,
Most of the Fleet within the Haven then,
(By his great care with much inquiry made,)
Receiving notise by the fore-nam'd man,
Brought out the Fleet the same next following night
Into the sound by his incessant toil.
Although the wind (the hurtful Sotherne-winde)
Did blow amain into the Havens mouth:
A wondrous thing, and worthy right to note.
Which done (Aurora puttting forth his head
With wirie locks, the glimpsing light whereof
Did chase black Night unto his darksome cave)
The General with all his warlike power
Did hoyst up sails (yea all their helping sails)
To meet with that the Spanish late-seene Fleet.
Thus arrow-like they scouring on the Seas,
Are within sight of that long look'd-for Fleet,
Now do they see the Spaniards Ships on heaps,
In all things like a huge and pop'ler town:
Their bigge-made Barks with huge and mighty Masses,
Like Churches are with steeples very high:
Their lesser Ships like stately Palaces
Which Princes build to keep their braue-kept train:
Their Galleys small, like smaller houses stand,
Inhabited by those which meaner are:
In brief, they all in nothing are unlike
Unto the Trojans stately new-built town,
Which naught did fear the Greeks bewrong'd by them.
Thus ride these ships, the Spanish strong-made ships,
Which nothing daunt our neuer-yeelding men,
But makes their hearts (before half dead for fear,
Least they would not fulfill the rumor noised)
To leap within their bodies new revived
By this the sight of that discerned Fleet.
THence swift Disdain, The pinnesse Disdain went to call for the Queen of
England.
(disdaining Englands foes)
With worthy Jonas Captain of her men,
By his three times made famous General,
To cry to them for Englands royal Queen,
Was sent forthwith unto the Spanish Fleet.
Where strong Disdain performed so her part
In that charge late given to her care,
As all her foes her now attein'd-to foes,
Were half struck dead at that her Captains tale.
Although for shame they made no show thereof,
But in a bravery by the brave Disdain,
Do offer fight unto our ready Fleet.
And marvel not why they so forward were,
For Aeolus (a full of pity King)
Perceiving well their dismal coming doom,
Kept in his Winds within their dwelling cave,
The door thereof fast locked by himself:
And quiet Calm was over all the Seas
To help their strength abated very much,
Whereby the Spaniards Gallyes safely might
Row too and fro t'indanger us by fight,
The greatest helps they possibly might have
Next God of heaven, who rules and guides both these.
And yet although their strength is twice as great
As is the Fleet which must withstand their blows,
For that their Ships with chains together linckt
Did seem much like a fair and strong-built Town,
But (as they said) ours were but Fisher-boasts:
And lastly though King Aeolus himself,
With Neptunes Calm did aid their monstrous Fleet,
Yet (thanks to thee, o everliving God,
The God of Gods, a careful helping God
To those thy Saints, thy well beloved flock,
Who put their trust in none, but only thee:)
Thy servant Haward through thy mighty power
(The General thereof, but too-too bold
In forwardness to finish dangerous acts,)
With those his Ships (with them but Fisher-boates)
Be battered the thick bombasted sides
Of their most strong and tall at fighting Ships, Certain of the Spaniards
Ships sunk.

As most of them did carry messengers
Unto King Neptune ruler of the Seas.
The smaller part which made the greater haste,
Did Triton meet, his thundering Trumpetter,
Who bids them welcome toward his Kings Court,
And asks them where all their fellows are.
They like so well of this his Court-like speech,
As ravished they are with these his words,
Which make them turn to fetch their company,
Who somewhat slow in that their warrant meant,
Were forward sent by Lord high Admiral
And Noble men, made Noble through their deeds.
There might you see the Arc by Rawley built,
With her defender, General of the Fleet,
Put in amain amongst his thickest foes,
And there and then performed worthily
Such enterprises as he took in hand.
And after him for his more safe a-gard,
Came noble Howard then a forward Lord,
In charging there his late triumphing foes:
Lord Sheffild eke though but of tender years,
Gave place to none for forwardness to fight,
Nor worthy Drake, (no stranger to the Ships
Which Spain does owe) was quailed with their sight.
Ne Suthwell stern, with valiant Frobisher,
Did there stand still to look upon the fight.
But jointly these, with all them present there,
Do prease so sore their now sore weakened foes
(Through five hours fight) as feign they are to rest
The battered sides of their bombasted Ships
For space of one whole hour, and somewhat more.
THat time expired they fight afresh again, The fight renewed before the I Will
of Wight.

And jointly meet before the Isle of Wight,
Where then began a fierce and greater fight.
There Musket Shot discharged of either Fleet,
Did fall like hail into the raging Seas.
There Crosse-barres flew most liberally bestowed,
Which brake the sides of their late battered Ships:
And there was cast against each others foe,
A thousand balls of wildfire merciless,
By which were sent great store of Spanish Ships,
To follow those that were to Neptune gone.
And least the first should troubled be too sore,
In coming back to fetch this late-sent train,
These meet with them halfe-way (their look'd-for friends)
Whence all make have unto King Neptunes Court,
Where they do find such pleasant pleasing friends,
As near they will to King Phillips Palace turn.
A world it is to see what messengers
They send to show in what estate they stand,
For Spanish-felts with Spaniards dearest blood
Becheckereth the Sea with black and red,
As there no white could possibly be seen.
Don Pedro with his Ship and company
Did like so ill (the cause I know not why)
Of that the news these messengers did bring, Don Pedro taken prisoner.

As they do better Englands bondage like,
Then Neptunes Court from whence these lately came.
The other Ships in better case then his,
Do neither like their state, ne yet his choice,
But think it best to trust unto to their heeses.
Wherefore they hoise up all their Sails at once,
And take their way to Callice Haven, whereas
They lie at Rode, with often wishes that
They were again in Spain from whence they came.
Ours not far off, do rest their toyled corpse
Sore ouerchargd by too-too forwardnes
In prosequting their late quailed foes.
Where for their deeds, their well-perfourmed deeds,
Lord Thomas Haward, with the Sheffild Lord, Certain of our Fleet Knighted.

And Roger Towns-end forward in those wars,
With Martin Frobisher (not a little known,)
Most worthy Gentelles newly entertained,
By mighty Mauors, from Bellona Queen,
Received from her the gift of Knighthood there.
Which deed performed, England was not slack
In trying means which might anoy her foes.
For presently a wondrous Stratageme
Did then ensue, English Ships set on fire by the Lord Charles Hawards
commandment.
by her in practice put.
For certain Ships of our worst English-Ships,
By Lord Charles Haward worthy General
Commanded, were forthwith then set on fire:
Which driven thence through a swift running stream
Did fall among the Spaniards roding-Ships.
At which strange sight they so astonished were,
As they reioic'd that could the Cables cut,
Which fastened were unto their Anchors cast.
This sudden maze which nothing settled wits,
Were chiefest cause of this their second baine:
For then each Ship on others cables foul,
And run on rocks to their ensuing loss:
They hoist up Sails, and as they thither came
So hye they fast unto the Northern Seas.
These thus in flight are chased very sore
By General of this our conquering Fleet:
Who Lion-like (sufficed nere enough
With Honors lawd) pursues his flying foes.
And Comberland a wondrous forward Earl
But new imbarkt, attayning to this flight
Did show himself, and showing made them feel
His power, not felt before of Spaniards.
What shall I say, or what could that her Fleet
Perform in better sort then there was done.
Their Spanish foes with all that conquered Fleet
(Although they said that English-land was theirs:
And therefore when they first received word
That then but thirty little English Boats
Could be descri'd, cried often Victoria)
Are sunk, are drowned, are burnt with Englands fire,
And grounded lie before the French-townes Haven.
The rest (even then remaining weakly) fail
They know not whether, guided by their Fate,
Now chased far beyond this Islands bounds.
Our little Fleet, our famous General
Does shame to follow them that will not fight,
And therefore turns his course unto his charge,
Still sailing with an happy Sotherne-winde
Attaines unto the same the Narrow Seas:
Where setting every thing in needful sort, The Lord high Admiral goes to
the Court.

Left then the Fleet and hasted to the Court
Of his thrice sacred Sovereign our Queen:
Whose welcome thither was as his deserts
And famous deeds performed, had deserved.
OUr gracious Queen (for this Gods mercy showed
To her, her land, through conquest over them,
Who came to seek her death, and death of those
Who steadfast are unto his holy word)
Does yield him thanks devoutly on her knees,
And wills her Subjects throughout all her land
To fast and pray for this his providence.
But Sixtus quintus Pope of whorish Rome, Sixtus Quintus now Pope of Rome.

Has lost his Bulls, and has his Soldiers lost
With credit cracked, and all in eighty eight.
And well I wit, what was the cause thereof,
Belike his Saints, himself, and Cardinals,
With Friars, Monks, and Seminary Priests,
Were all at Dice for Englands peoples goods,
And quite forgot to fall to morning Mass.
Or otherwise, they told their Beads so often,
And said so many Mattins to their gods,
(Their wodden gods,) as that they fell asleep,
And so left off to persevere in prayers;
Whereby their Saints at that time sleepie too,
Did like-wise nod, and sued not to their gods.
Or lastly thus (which likest is of all,)
His Silver scant, where-by his Crosses few,
And holy water niggardly bestowed,
Did scarsly bless his Souldyers going forth:
For which hard dearth the God of heaven (our God)
Did wash them all with-in his hallowed Seas,
Where plenty is of water like the Popes.
By which, (as by his goodness ever showed
To England, where his little flock remains,
With always loss unto the hapless Pope)
His holiness, with all deceived by him,
Or instruments he to that end has sent,
May now confess with sore repenting heart,
That long enough they all provoked have
Our loving God, to never ceasing ire.
But if his Father Beelzebub that feend
Has bound the Pope so to his damned lore,
As that he cannot turn unto the Lord:
Yet Englishmen Recusants, (ah I grieve
To term ye so because my Contrymen,)
Despise his deeds, (his mere deceiptfull deeds,)
And turn your hearts unto your sacred Queen:
And with your Queen beloved of our God,
Turn to Gods word, and shun the devilish Pope.
So God will joy in this his little flock,
And bless this Land with still increasing store,
Where-as he now like to a natural Sire
Weeps over it, as once he shedded tears,
When that he saw Jerusalem he loved.
Which (heavenly God) with threefold Nestors years
Given to our Queen, to Englands ever joy,
Fulfill (I pray) with such convenient speed,
As shall seem good unto thy holy will.
FINIS.

