

Rejoice England, be glad and merry,
TROTHE ouerco^mmeth thine enemies all,
The Scot, the Frencheman, the Pope, and heresy,
OVERCOMMED by Trothe, have had a fall;
Stick to the Trothe, and evermore thou shall
Through Christ, King Henry, the Book and the Bow
All manner of enemies, quite overthrow.
Gualterus Haddonus Cantabrigien.

Mittere qui celeres summa uelit art sagittas,
Ars erit ex isto summa profecta libro.
Quicquid habent arcus rigidi, neruique rotundi,
Sumere fi libet, hoc sumere font licet.
Aschamus est author, magnu^ que^ fecit Apollo
Art sua, magnum Pallas and art sua.
Docta manus dedit hu^c, dedit hu^c men's doct a libellu^:
Quae ui det Ars Vsus uisa, parata facit.
Optimus haec author quia tradidit optima scripta,
Conuenit bec uobis optima uelle sequi.
To the most graciouse, and our most drad Sovereign lord, King Henry
the.viii. by the grace of God, king of England, France and Irelande. Defender
of the faith, and of the church of England and also of Irelande in earth
supreme head, next under Christ, be al health victory, and felicity.
WHAT time as, most gracious Prince, your highness this last year past, took
that your most honorable and victorious journey into France, accompanied
with such a port of the Nobility and yeomanrie of England, as neither has
been like known by experience, nor yet red of in History: accompanied also
with the daily prayers, good hearts, and vvilles of all and every one your
graces subjects, left behind you here at home in England: the same time, I
being at my book in Cambrige, sorry that my little ability could stretche
out no better, to help forvvard so noble an enterprice, yet with my good
vvylle, prayer, and heart, nothing behind him that was formoste of all,
conceived a wonderful desire, by the prayer, vvishing, talking, and
communicatio^ that was in every ma^s mouth, for your Graces most victoriouse
return, to offer up sumthinge, at your home cumming to your Highness, which
should both be a token of mi love and deutie tovvard your Majesty, and also a
sign of my good mind and zeal tovvarde mi country.

This occasion given to me at that time, caused me to take in hand again, this
little purpose of shoting, begone of me before, yet not ended tha^, for other
studies more mete for that trade of living, which God and mi friends had set
me unto. But when your Graces most ioifull and happy victory prevented mi
daily and spedie diligencie to perform this matter, I was compelled to
wait an other time to prepare and offer up this little book unto your
Majesty. And when it has pleased your Highenesse of your infinite goodness,
and also your most honorable Counsel to know and pervse over the contents,
and some part of this book, and so to alovv it, that other me^ might read it,
through the furderaunce and setting forth of the right worshipful and mi
Singular good Master sir William Pagette Knight, most vvorthie Secretary to
your highness, and most open and ready succoure to al poor honest learned men's
suits, I most humbly beseech your Grace to take in good worth this little
treatise purposed, bego^, and ended of me only for this intent, that Labor,
Honest pastime and Virtue, might recover again that place and right, that
Idleness, Unthrifty gamning and Vice has put them fro.

And although to have written this book either in latin or Greek (which
thing I would be very glad yet to do, if I might surely know your Graces
pleasure there in) had been more easier and fit for mi trade in study, yet
nevertheless, I supposinge it no point of honesty, that mi commodite should
stop and hinder any part either of the pleasure or profit of many, have
written this English matter in the English tongue, for English men: where
in this I trust that your Grace (if it shall please your Highness to read it)
shall perceive it to be a thing Honest for me to write, pleasant for some to
read, and profitable for many to follow, conte ning a pastime, honest for the
mind, wholesome for the body, fit for eueri man, vile for no man, using the day
and ope^place for Honesty to rule it, not lurking in corners for misorder to
abuse it. Therefore I trust it shall apere, to be both a sure token of my zeele
to set forwards shootinge, and some sign of my mind, toward honesty and
learning.

Thus I vvil trouble your crace no longer, but with my daily prayer, I vvil
beseech God to preserve your Grace, in all health and felicity: to the fear
and overthrow of all your ennemies: to the pleasure, ioyfulnesse and succor
of al your subjects: to the utter destruction of papistrie and heresy: to the
continual setting forth of Gods word and his glory.

Your Graces most bounden Scholar, Roger Ascham.

TO ALL GENTLE MEN AND YOMEN OF ENGLAND.
BIas the wise man came to Cresus the rich king, on a time, when he was
making new ships, purposyng to have subdued by water the out yles lying
betwixt Greece and Asia minor: What news now in Greece, says the king to Bias?
None other news, but these, says Bias: that the yles of Greece have prepared
a wonderful company of horsemen, to ouerrun Lydia withal. There is nothing
under heaven, says the king, that I would so soon wisshe, as that they
durst be so bold, to mete us on the land with horse. And think you says
Bias, that there is any thing which they would sooner wysshe, then that you
should be so fond, to mete them on the water with ships? And so Cresus
hearing not the true news, but perceyuyng the wise man's mind and counsel,
both gave then over making of his ships, and left also behind him a
wonderful example for all commune wealths to follow: that is evermore to
regard and set most by that thing whereunto nature has made them most apt,
and use has made them most fit.

By this matter I mean the shotyng in the long bow, for English men: which
thing with all my heart I do wysh, and if I were of authority, I would counsel
all the gentlemen and yomen of England, not to change it with any other
thing, how good soever it seem to be: but that still, according to the oulde
wont of England, youth should use it for the most honest pastyme in peace,
that men might handle it as a most sure weapon in war. Other strong
weapons which both experience does prove to be good, and the wysdom of the
kings Majesty and his counsel prouydes to be had, are not ordained to take
away shotyng: but yt both, not compared together, whether should be better then
the other, but so joined together that the one should be always an aid and
help for the other, might so strengthen the Realm on all sides, that no kind
of enemy in any kind of weapon, might pass and go beyond us.

For this purpose I, partelye provoked by the counsel of some gentlemen,
partly moved by the love which I have always borne toward shotyng, have
written this little treatise, wherein if I have not satisfied any man, I (...) he
will the rather be content with my doing, because I am (I suppose) the first,
which has said any thing in this matter (and few begynnynges be perfect,
says wise men) And also because if I have said a miss, I am content that any
man amend it, or if I have said to little, any man that will to add what him
pleases to it.

My mind is, in profitynge and pleasynge every man, to hurt or displease no
man, intendyng none other purpose, but that youth might be styrred to labor,
honest pastyme, and virtue, and as much as lay in me, plucked from ydlenes,
unthrifty games, and vice: which thing I have labored only in this book,
she wynge how fit shootyng is for all kinds of men, how honest a pastyme for
the mind, how wholesome an exercise for the body, not vile for great men to
use, not costlye for poor men to sustain, not lurking in holes and corners
for ill men at their pleasure, to misuse it, but abiding in the open sight and
face of the world, for good men if it fault by their wisdom to correct it.

And here I would desire all gentlemen and yomen, to use this pastime in such
a mean, that the outragiousnes of great gamyng, should not hurt the honesty of
shotyng, which of his own nature is always joined with honesty: yet for
men's faults oftentimes blamed unworthily, as all good things have been, and
evermore shall be.

If any man would blame me, either for taking such a matter in hand, orels
for writing it in the English tongue, this answer I may make him, that when
the best of the realm think it honest for them to use, I one of the meanest
sort, ought not to suppose it vile for me to write: And though to have written
it in an other tongue, had been both more profitable for my study, and also
more honest for my name, yet I can think my labor well bestowed, if with a little
hynderaunce of my profyt and name, may come any fourtheraunce, to the pleasure
or commodity, of the gentlemen and yeomen of England, for whose sake I took
this matter in hand. And as for ye Latin or greek tongue, every thing is so
excellently done in them, that none can do better: In the Englysh tongue
contrary, every thing in a manner so meanly, both for the matter and
handelynge, that no man can do worse. For therein the least learned for the
most part, have been always most redye to write. And they which had least
hope in latin, have been most boulde in english: when surely every man that
is most ready to taulke, is not most able to write. He that will write well
in any tongue, must follow this council of Aristotle, to speak as the common
people do, to think as wise men do: and so should every man understand him,
and the judgment of wise men allow him. Many English writers have not done so,
but vsinge strange words as latin, french and Italian, do make all things
dark and hard. Ones I communed with a man which reasoned the english tongue
to be enryched and increased thereby, saying: Who will not praise that feast,
where a man shall drink at a diner, both wine, ale and beer? Truly quod I,
they be all good, every one taken by him self alone, but if you put Maluesye
and sack, read wine and white, ale and beer, and al in one pot, you shall
make a drink, neither easy to be known, nor yet holsom for the body. Cicero
in following I focrates, Plato and Demosthenes, increased the latin tongue
after an other sort. This way, because diverse men yt write, do not know, they
can neither follow it, because of their ignorauncie, nor yet will praise it,
for very arrogauncie, ii. faults, seldom the one out of the others company.

Englysh writers by diversity of time, have taken diverse matters in hand. In
our fathers time nothing was red, but books of feigned cheualrie, wherein a man
by redinge, should be led to none other end, but only to manslaughter and
baudrye. If any man suppose they were good enough to pass the time with all, he
is deceived. For surely vain words do work no small thing in vain,
ignorant, and young minds, specially if they be given any thing thereunto of
their own nature. These books (as I have heard say) were made the most part
in Abbayes, and Monasteries, a very lickely and fit fruit of such an idle and
blind kind of living.

In our time now, when every manne is given to know much rather than to live
well, very many do write, but after such a fashion, as very many do shoot.
Some shooters take in hand stronger bows, than they be able to maintain.

This thing makes them su^mtyme, to outshoote the mark, su^mtyme to shote far
wide, and perchance hurt su^me that look on. Other that never learned to
shote, nor yet knows good shafte nor bow, will be as busy as the best, but
such one commonly plucketh do^ne a side, and crafty archers which be against
him, will be both glad of him, and also ever ready to lay and bet with him:
it were better for such one to sit down than shote. Other there be, which
have very good bow and shaftes, and good knowledge in shootinge, but they have
been brought up in such evil favored shootynge, that they can neither shoore
fair, nor yet nere. If any man will apply these things together, shall not se
the one far differ from the other.

And I also among all other, in writing this little treatise, have followed
su^me young shooters, which both will begin to shoot, for a little money,
and also will use to shote ones or twice about the mark for naught, before they
begin a good. And therefore did I take this little matter in hand, to assaye
my self, and hereafter by the grace of God, if the judgment of wise men, that
look on, think that I can do any good, I may perchance cast my shafte
among other, for better game.

Yet in writing this book, some man will maruayle perchance, why that I being
an imperfect shoter, should take in hand to write of making a perfyte archer:
the same man peradventure will maruayle, how a whettestone which is blunte,
can make the edge of a knife sharp: I would ye same man should consider also,
that in going about any matter* there be.iiii. things to be considered,
doing, saying, thinking and perfectness: First there is no man that does so
well, but he can say better, or else sum men, which be now stark naught,
should be to good: Again no man can utter with his tongue, so well as he is able
to imagine with his mind, and yet perfectness it self is far above all
thinking. Than seeing that saying is one step nerer perfectenesse than doing,
let every man leave maruaylyng why my word shall rather express, than my deed
shall perform perfect shootinge.

I trust no man will be offended with this little book except it be su^me
fletchers and bowiers, thinking hereby that many that love shootynge shall be
taught to refuse such noughtie wares as they would utter. Honest fletchers
and bowyers do not so, and they that be dishonest, ought rather to amend them
selves for doing ill, than be angry with me ^o: saying well. ^ fletcher has
even as good a quarrel to be angry with a^ archer that refuses an ill shaft, as
a bladesmith has to a fletcher yt forsakes to bye of him a noughtie knyfe:
For as an archer must be content that a fletcher know a good shafte in every
point for the perfecter making of it, So an honest fletcher will also be
content that a shooter know a good shafte in every point for the perfiter
using of it: because the one knows like a fletcher how to make it, the other
knows like an archer how to use it. And seeing the knowledge is one in them
both, yet the end diverse, surely that fletcher is an enemy to archers and
artillery, which can not be content that an archer know a shafte as well for
his use in shotynge, as he him self should know a shafte, for his advantage
in selling. And the rather because shaftes be not made so much to be sold,
but chefely to be used. And seeing that use and occupiyng is the end why a
shafte is made, the making as it were a mean for occupying, surely the
knowelege in every point of a good shafte, is more to be required in a shooter
than a fletcher.

Yet as I said before no honest fletcher will be angry with me, saying I do not
teach how to make a shafte which belongs only to a good fletcher, but to
know and handle a shafte, which belongs to an archer. And this little book I
trust, shall please and profit both parts: For good bows and shaftes shall
be better known to the commodity of al shoters, and good shotyng may
perchance be the more occupied to the profit of all bowyers and fletchers.
And thus I pray God that all fletchers getting their living truly, and al
archers using shootynge honestly, and all manner of men that favor artillery,
may live continuallye in health and merinesse, obeying their prince as they
should, and loving God as they ought, to whom for all things be al honor and
glory for ever. Amen

TOXOPHILVS, The schole of shootinge contained in two books.
To all Gentlemen and yomen of England, pleasant for their pastyme to read,
and profitable for their use to follow, both in war and peace.

The contents of the first book.
Earnest business ought to be refreshed with honest pastyme. Fol. 1. Shootyng
most honest pastyme. 3. The invention of shootinge. 5. Shootynge fit for
princes and great men. 5. Shootyng, fit for Scholars and students. 8.
Shootynge fitter for students than any music or Instruments. 9. Youth ought
to learn to singe. 11. No manner of man does or can use to much shootynge. 14.
Against unlawful gammes and namelye cards and dise. 16. Shootyng in war. 24.
Obedience the best property of a Souldyar. 25. Reasons and authorites against
shootynge in war with the confutacion of the same. 26. God is pleased with
strong wepons and valiant feats of war. 28. The commodity of Shootyng in
war through the Histories Greek and Latin, and all nations Christen and
Herhen. 29. Use of shootynge at home causethe strong shootinge in war. 41.
Use of shootynge at home, except men be apt by nature, and conning by
teaching, does little good at all. 43. Lack of learning to shoot causethe
England lack many a good archer. 46. In learning any thing, a man must couete
to be best, or else he shall never attain to be mean. 47
A Table con^teyning the second book.
Hitting the mark, by Shotyng areyght. Keeping a length.
Both come partly. By knowing things belonging to shootyng. Proper for every
sere man's use. Braser Shotingloue String Bow Shaftes
General to all men. ^ether Mark.

By handelinge things belonging to shotyng. without a man. Standinge Nockynge
Drawinge Holding Lowsinge.
within a man. Bold courage. Avoiding all affection.




TOXOPHILVS, A,
The first book of the schole of shoting.
Philologus. Toxophilus. PHILOLOGVS. You


TOX. I will not hurt my self ouermoche I warrau^t you.


PHI. Take heed you do not, for we Physicions say, that it is nether good for
the eyes in so clear a Sun, nor yet wholesome for ye body, ^o soon after
meat, to look upon a man's book.


TOX. In eatinge and studyinge I will never follow any Physike, for if I did,
I am sure I should have small pleasure in the one, and less courage in the
other. But what news drove you hither I pray you?


PHI. Small news truly, but that as I came on walking, I fortuned to come with
three or four that went to shote at the pryckes: And when I saw not you
among them, but at the last espied you lokynge on your book here so sadlye,
I thought to come and hold you with some communication, lest your book should
run away with you. For me thought by your waueryng pace and earnest lokyng,
your book led you, not you it.


TOX. In deed as it chanced, my mind went faster then my feet, for I
happened here to read in Phedro Platonis, a place that entretes wonderfully
of the nature of souls, In Phedro.
which place (whether it were for the passing eloquence of Plato, and the
Greek tongue, or for the high and godly description of the matter, kept my
mind so occupied, that it had no leisure to look to my feet. For I was reding
how some souls being well fethered, flewe always about heaven and heavenly
matters, other some having their feathers mowted away, and droupinge, sanke
down into earthly things.


PHI. I remember the place very well, and it is wonderfully said of Plato, and
now I se it was no marvel though your fete failed you, seeing your mind flewe
so fast.


TOX. I am glad now that you let me, for my head aches with loking on it, and
because you tell me so, I am very sorry yt I was not with those good feloes you
spoke upon, for it is a very fair day for a man to shote in.


PHI. And me think you were a great deal better occupied and in better
company, for it is a very fair day for a man to go to his book in.


TOX. Al days and wethers will serve for that purpose, and surely this
occasion was ill lost.


PHI. Yea but clear wether makes clear minds, and it is best as I suppose, to
spend y^ best time upon the best things: And me thought you shot very well,
and at that mark, at which every good scoler should most busily shote at.
And I suppose it be a great deal more pleasure also, to se a soul fly in
Plato, then a shafte fly at the pricks. I grant you, shoting is not the
worst thing in the world, yet if we shote, and time shote, we are not like to be
great winners at the length. And you know also we scholars have more ernest and
weighty matters in hand, nor we be not borne to pastime and pley, as you know
well enough who says.


TOX. Yet the same man in the same place Philologe, M. Cic. 1 (...).
by your leave, does admit wholesome, honest and manerlie pastimes to be as
necessary to be mi^gled with sad matters of the mind, as eating and sleping
is for the health of the body, and yet we be borne for neither of both. And
Aristotle him self says, Arist. de moribus. 10. 6.
y^ although it were a fond and a chyldish thing to be to ernest in pastime
and play, yet does he affirm by the authority of the oulde Poet Epicharmus,
that a man may use play for ernest matter sake. And in an other place, Arist.
Pol, 8. 3.
y^ as rest is for labor, and medicines for health, so is pastime at times for
sad and weighty study.


PHI. How much in this matter is to be given to y^ authority either of
Aristotle or Tul lie, I ca^ not tell, seeing sad me^ may well enough speak merrily
for a merry matter, this I am sure, which thing this fair wheat (god save it)
makes me remember, y^ those husba^dmen which rise erliest, and come latest
home, and are content to have their diner and other drinckinges, brought into
the field to them, for fear of losing of time, have fatter barnes in har
uest, than they which will either sleep at none time of the day, or else make
merry with their neighbors at the ale. And so a scholar yt purposes to be a
good husband, and desires to repe and enjoy much fruit, of learning, must
tylle and sow thereafter. Our best seed time, which be scholars, as it is
very tymelye, and when we be young: so it endures not ouerlonge, and therefore
it may not be let slip one hour, our ground is very hard, and full of
wedes, our horse wherwt we be drawn very wild as Plato says. In Phedro.
And infinite other mo lettes which will make a thriftie scholar take heed how
he spe^deth his time in sport and pleye.


TOX. That Aristotle and Tullie spoke earnestly, and as they thought, the
ernest matter which they entreat upon, does plainlye prove. And as for your
husbandry, it was more probably told with apt words propre to ye thing,
then thoroughly proved with reasons belonging to our matter. For contrariwise I
herd my self a good husband at his book ones say, that to omit study
sometime of the day, and sometime of the year, made asmoche for the increase of
learning, as to let the la^d lie sometime falloe, makes for the better
increase of corn. This we se, if the land be plowed every year, the corn
comes thin up: the ear is short, the grain is small, and when it is
brought into the barn and threshed, gives very evil faul. So those which
never leave poring on their books, have oftentimes as thin invention, as
other poor me^ have, and as small wit and weight in it as in other men's. And
thus your husbandry me think, is more like the life of a couetouse s^^dge
that often very evil preues, then the labor of a good husband that knows well
what he does. And surely the best wits to lerning must needs have much
recreation and ceasing from their book, or else they mar them selves, when
base and dompys^he wits can never be hurt with continual study, as ye se
in luting, that a treble mi^^kin string must always be let down, but at such
time as when a man must needs play: when ye base and dull stryng needs never
to be moved out of his place. The same reason I find true in two bows that I
have, whereof the one is quick of cast, trick, and trime both for pleasure and
profit: the other is a lugge slow of cast, following the string, more sure for
to last, then pleasant for to use. Now sir it chanced this other night, one
in my chamber would needs bend them to prove their strength, but I can not tell
how, they were both left bente till the next day at after dinner: and when I
came to them, purposing to have gone on shoting, I found my good bow clean
cast on the one side, and as weak as water, that surely (if I were a rich
man) I had rather have spent a crown: and as for my lugge, it was not one why^
the worse: but shot by and by as well and as far as ever it did. And even so
I am sure that good wits, except they be let down like a treble string, and
unbent like a good casting bow, they will never last and be able to continue in
study. And I know where I speak this Philologe, for I would not say thus
much before young men, for they will take soon occasion to study little enough.
But I say it therefore because I know, as little study gets little learning
or none at all, so the most study gets not y^ most learning of all. For a
man's wit sore occupied in ernest study, must be as well recreated with some
honest pastime, as the body sore labored, must be refreshed with sleep and
quietness, or else it can not endure very long, as the noble poet says.
What th^g wa^t^ quiet and meri rest endures but a small while* Ovid.





PHI. Hinders learning little or nothing at all? that were a marvel to me
truly, and I am sure seeing you say so, you have some reason wherewith you
can defend shooting wtall, and as for will (for the love that you bear toward
shotinge) I think there shall lack none in you. Therefore saying we have so
good leisure both, and no body by to trouble us: and you so willinge and able
to defend it, and I so ready and glad to hear what may be said of it I
suppose we can not pass the time better over, neither you for ye honesty of
your shoting, nor I for mine own mindsake, than to se what can be said with
it, or against it, and specially in these days, when so many does use it,
and every man in a manner does common of it.


TOX. To speak of shootinge Philologe, truly I would I were so able, either
as I my self am willing or yet as the matter deserves, but seeing with
wisshing we can not have one now worthy, which so worthy a thing can
worthily praise, and although I had rather have any other to do it than my
self, yet my self rather then no other. I will not fail to say in it what I
can wherein if I say little, lay that of my little ability, not of the matter
it self which deserves no little thing to be said of it.


PHI. If it deserve no little thing to be said of it Toxophile, I marvel how
^t chances than, that no man hitherto, has written any thing of it: wherein
you must grant me, that either the matter is naught, unworthy, and barren
to be written upon, or else some men are to blame, which both love it and use
it, and yet could never find in their heart, to say one good word of it,
saying that very triflinge matters has not lacked great learned men to set
them out, as gnattes and nuttes, and many other mo like things, wherefore
either you may honestly lay very great faut upon men because they never yet
praised it, or else I may justly take away no little thing from shooting,
because it never yet deserved it.


TOX. Truly herein Philologe, you take not so much from it, as you give to
it. For great and commodious things are never greatly praised, not because
they be not worthy, but because their excellency needs no man his praise,
having all their commendation of them self not borrowed of other men his
lips, which rather praise them self, in speaking much of a little thing than
that matter which they entreat upon. Great and good things be not praised.
For who ever praised Hercules (says the Greek proverb) And that no man
hitherto has written any book of shoting the fault is not to be laid in the
thing which was worthy to be written upon, but of men which were negligent in
doing it, and this was the cause thereof as I suppose. Men^e that used shootyng
most and knew it best, were not learned: men that were learned, used little
shooting, and were ignorant in the nature of the thing, and so few men has
been that hithetto were able to write upon it. Yet how long shotyng has
continued, what common wealths has most used it, how honest a thing it is
for all men, what kind of living so ever they follow what pleasure and profit
comes of it, both in peace and war, all manner of tongues and writers,
Hebrew, Greek and Latin, has so plentifully spoken of it, as of few other
things like. So what shooting is how many kinds there is of it, what
goodness is joined with it, is told: only how it is to be learned and
brought to a perfectness among men, is not toulde.


PHI. Than Toxophile, if it be so as you do say, let us go forward and examine
how plentifully this is done that you speak, and first of the invention of
it, than what honesty and profit is in the use of it, both for war and
peace, more than in other pastimes, last of all how it ought to be learned
among men for the increase of it, which thing if you do, not only I now
for your communication but many other mo, when they shall know of it, for
your labor, and shotyng it self also (if it could speak) for your kyndnesse,
will can you very much thank


TOXOPH. What good things me^ speak of shoting and what good things shooting
bringes to men as my wit and knowledge will serve me, gladly shall I say my
mind. But how the thing is to be learned I will surely leave to some other which
both for greater experience in it, and also for their lerninge, can set it out
better than I.


PHI. Well as for that I know both what you can do in shooting by experience,
and y^ you ca^ also speak well enough of shooting, for your learning, but go
on with the first part. And I do not doubt, but what my desire, what your love
toward it, the honesty of shoting, the profit that may come thereby to many
other, shall get the second part out of you at the last.


TOXOPH. Of the first finders out of shoting, di^ers Clandianus in histri.
Claudiane the poet says that nature gave example of shotyng first, by the
Porpentine, which does shote his pricks, and will hitte any thing that
fightes with it: whereby men learned afterward to immitate the same in findyng
out both bow and shaftes. Plin. 7. 56.
Pliny refers it to Schythes the son of Jupiter. Better and more noble
writers bring shoting from a more noble inuentour: as Plato, In sympo.
Calimachus, In him.
and Galene from Apollo. Apol^.
Yet long before those days do we read in the bible of shotinge expreslye.
Genesis 21.
And also if we shall believe Nicholas de Lyra, Nic. de lyra.
Lamech killed Cain with a shafte. So this great continuance of shoting does
not a little praise shotinge: nor that neither does not a little set it out,
that it is referred to thinuention of Apollo, Galen in e^hor. ad bon^^ art^^.
for the which point shoting is highlye praised of Galene: where he says, y^
mean crafts befirst found out by men or beasts, as weauing by a spider, and
such other: but high and commendable sciences by gods, as shotinge and
music by Apollo. And thus shotynge for the necessity of it used in Adams
days, for the nobleness of it referred to Apollo, has not ben only
commended in all tunges and writers, but also had in great price, both in the
best common wealths in war time for the defense of their and laws for it,
^crod. I clio.
as the Persians which under Cyrus conquered in a manner all the world, had a
law that their children should learn three things, only from v. year oulde
unto.xx. to ride an horse well, to shote well, ^^o de stra^^g. 20.
to speak truth always and never lie. The Romans (as Leo the emperor in his
book of sleightes of war tells) had a law that every man should use
shoting in peace time, while he was.xl. year old and that every house should
have a bow, and.xl. shaftes ready for all needs, the omitting of which law
(says Leo) among the youth, has been the only occasion why the Romans
lost a great deal of their empire. But more of this I will speak when I come to
the profit of shoting in war. If I should rehearse the statutes made of noble
princes of England in parliamentes for the setting forward of shoting,
through this realm, and specially that act made for shoting the third year
of the reygne of our most drad soueraygne lord king Henry the.viii. I could
be very long. But these few examples specially of so great men and noble
common wealths, shall stand instead of many.


PHI. That such princes and such common welthes have much regarded shoting,
you have well declared. But why shotinge ought so of it self to be regarded,
you have scarcelye yet proved.


TOX. Examples I grant out of histories do show a thing to be so, not prove a
thing why it should be so Yet this I suppose, y^ neither great men's qualities
being co^me^dable be without great authority, for other men honestly to follow
them: nor yet those great learned men that wrote such things, lack good
ceaso^ justly at al times for any other to approve the^. Princes being
children ought to be brought up in shoting: both because it is an exercise
most holsom, and also a pastyme most honest: wherein labor prepares the body
to hardness, the mind to couragiousnesse, sufferyng neither the one to be
marde with tenderness, nor yet the other to be hurt with idleness: as we
read how Sardanapalus and such other were, because they were not brought up
with outward honest payneful pastymes to be men: but cockerde up with inward
noughtie idle wantonness to be women. For how fit labor is for all youth,
Jupiter or else Minos among them of Greece, Ci^. 2. ^u^. Qu.
and Lycurgus among the Lacedaemonians, do show by their laws, which never
ordained any thing for y^ bringyng up of youth that was not joined with labor.
And the labor which is in shoting of al other is best, both because it
increases strength, and preserves health most, being not vehement, but
moderate, not ouerlaying any one part with werysomnesse, but softly exercisynge
every part with equalness, as the arms and breasts with drawinge, the other
parties with going, being not so paynfull for the labor as pleasant for the
pastyme, which exercise by the judgment of the best physicions, is most
alowable. Gal. 2. de san. tu^^d.
By shoting also is the mind honestly exercised where a man always desires
to be best (which is a word of honesty) and that by the same way, that
virtue it self does, couetinge to come nighest a most perfect end or mean
standing betwixt.ii. extremes, eschewinge short, or gone, or eithersyde wide,
Ari^^.1. de morib.
for the which causes Aristotle him self says that shoting and virtue be very
like. Moreover that shoting of all other is the most honest pastyme, and has
leest occasion to noughtinesse joined with it.ii. things very playnelye do
prove, which be as a man would say, the tutours and overseers to shotinge:
Day light and open place where every man does come, the maynteyners and
kepers of shoting, from all dishonest doing. If shotinge fault at any time, it
hydes it not, it lurkes not in corners and huddermother: but openly accuses
and bewrays it self, which is the next way to amendment, as wise men do
say. And these things I suppose be signs, not of noughtinesse, for any man
to disalowe it: but rather very plain tokens of honesty, for every man to
praise it.

The use of shotinge also in great men's children shall greatly increase the
love and use of shotinge in all the residue of youth. For mean men's minds
love to be like great men, as Plato and Isocrates do say. Iso. in ni^.
And that every body should learn to shote when they be young, defense of
the common wealth, does require when they be old, which thing can not be done
mightelye when they be men, except they learn it perfitelye when they be
boys. And therefore shotinge of all pastymes is most fit to be used in
childhode: because it is an imitation of most ernest things to be done in
manhood.

Wherefore, shoting is fit for great men's children, both because it
strengthens the body with wholesome labor, and pleases the mind with honest
pastime and also encourages all other youth ernestlye to follow the same. And
these reasons (as I suppose) stirred up both great men to bring up their
children in shotinge, and also noble commune wealths so straytelye to
command shoting. Therefore saying Princes moved by honest occasions, has in all commune wealths used shotynge, I suppose there is none other degree of men,
neither low nor hye, learned nor leude, young nor oulde


PHIL. You shall need Toxophile, but if you can prove me that scholars and men
given to learning may honestly use shoting, I will soon grant you that all
other sorts of men may not only lelullie, but ought of duty to use it. But
I think you can not prove but that all these examples of shotinge brought from
so long a time, used of so noble princes, confirmed by so wise men's laws
and judgments, are set before temporal men, only to follow them: whereby
they may the better and stro^glyer defend the commune wealth withal. And
nothing belongs to scholars and learned men, which have an other part of the
commune wealth, quiet and peaceable put to their cure and charge, whose end
as it is diverse from the other, so there is no one way that leads to them
both.


TOXO. I grant Philologe, that scholars and lay men have diverse offices and
charges in the common wealth, which requires diverse bri^ging up in their
youth, if they shall do them as they ought to do in their age. Yet as temporal
men of necessity are compelled to take somewhat of learning to do their office
the better withal: So scholars may the boldlyer borowe somewhat of lay men's
pastimes, to maynteyne their health in study withal. And surely of al other
things shoting is necessary for both sorts to learn. Which thing, when it
has been evermore used in England how much good it has done, both oulde men
and Chronicles do tell: and also our enemies can bear us record. For if it
be true (as I have heard say) when the king of England has been in France,
the priests at home because they were archers, have been able to overthrow all
Scotland. Again there is an other thing which above all other does move me,
not only to love shotinge, to praise shoting, to exhort all other to
shotinge, but also to use shoting my self: and that is our king his most
royal purpose and will, which in all his statutes generallye does command
men, and with his own mouth most gently does exhortemen, and by his great
gifts and rewards, greatly does encourage men, and with his most princely
example very often does provoke all other me^ to the same. But here you will come
in with temporal man and scholar: I tell you plainlye, scholar or vnscholer, yea
if I were.xx. scholars, I would think it were my duty, both with exhortinge
men to shote, and also with shoting my self to help to set forward that
thing which the king his wisdom, and his counsel, so greatly labors to
go forward: which thing surely they do, because they know it to be in
war, the defense and wall of our country, in peace, an exercise most wholesome
for the body, a pastime most honest for the mind, and as I am able to prove
my self, of al other most fit and agreeable with learning and learned men.


PHI. If you can prove this thing so plainly, as you speak it ernestly, the^
will I, not only think as you do, but become a shooter and do as you do. But
yet beware I say, lest you for the great love you bear toward shootinge,
blindlie judge of shootinge. For love and al other to ernest affections be not
for naught painted blind. Take heed (I say) least you prefer shootinge before
other pastimes, as one Balbinus through blind affection, preferred his lover
before all other women, although she were deformed with a polypus in her nose.
And although shooting may be mete sometime for some scholars, and so forth:
yet the fittest always is to be preferred. Therefore if you will needs grant
scholars pastime and recre ation of their minds, let them use (as many of the^
does) Musyke, and playing on instruments, things most semely for all
scholars, and most regarded always of Apollo and the Muses.


TOX. Even as I can not deny, but some music is fit for lerning so I trust you
can not chose but grant, that shoting is fit also, as Calimachus does signify
in this verse. Both merry songs and good shoting deliteth Appoll^. Call. him. ^


Butas concerning whether of them is most fit for learning, and scholars to
use, you may say what writing, in exercise of body, and singing, do make
mention of Music and all kinds of it, wherein they both agree, that Music
used among the Lydians is very ill for young men, which be students for
virtue and learning, for a certain nice, soft, and smoth swetnesse of it,
which would rather entice the^ to noughtines, than stir them to honesty.

An other kind of Music invented by the Dorians, they both wonderfully
praise, alowing it to be very fyt for the study of virtue and learning,
because of a manlye, rough and stout sound in it, which should encourage
young stomakes, to attempt manlye matters. Now whether these balades and
roundes, these galiardes, pauanes and daunces, so nicelye fingered, so swetely
tuned, be lyker the Music of the Lydians or the Dorians, you that be learned
judge. And what so ever ye judge, this I am sure, yt lutes, harpes, all manner
of pypes, barbitons, sambukes, with other instruments every one, which
stands by fine and quick fingeringe be condemned of Aristotle, Aristot. pol.
^. 6.
as not to be brought in and used among them, which study for learning and
virtue.

Pallas when she had invented a pipe, cast it away, not so much says
Aristotle, because it deformed her face, but much rather because such an
Instrumente belonged nothing to learning. How such Instruments agree with
learning, the goodlye agreement betwixt Apollo god of learning, and Marsyas the
Satyr, defender of pipinge, does well declare, where Marsyas had his skine
quite pulled over his head for his labor.

Much music marreth men's manners, says Galen, although some man will say
that it does not so, but rather recreateth and makes quycke a man's mind,
yet me think by reason it does as honey does to a man's stomach, which at
the first receives it well, but afterward it makes it unfit, to abide any
good strong norishynge meat, ^rels any wholesome sharp^ and quick drink. And
even so in a manner these Instruments make a man's wit so soft and smoothe so
tender and quaisie, that they be less able to brook, strong and tough
study. Wits be not sharpened, but rather dulled, and made blunte, with such
sweet softness, even as good edges be blonter, which men whette upon
soft chalk stones.

And these things to be true, not only Plato Aristotle and Galen, prove by
authority of reason, Herodotus in Clio.
but also Herodotus and other writers, show by plain and evident example, as
that of Cyrus, which after he had overcome the Lydians, and taken their king
Cresus prisoner, yet after by the mean of one Pactyas a very headie manne
among the Lydians, they rebelled against Cyrus again, then Cyrus had by an
by, brought them to utter destruction, if Cresus being in good favor with
Cyrus had not hertelie desired him, not to revenge Pactyas fault, in shedynge
their blood. But if he would follow his counsel, he might bring to pass,
that they should never more rebel against him, And y^ was this, to make them
wear long kyrtils, to y^ foot like woomen, and that every one of them should
have a harp or a lute, and learn to play and sing which thing if you do
says Cresus (as he did in deed) you shall se them quickelye of men, made
women. And thus lutinge and singinge take away a manlye stomach, which should
enter and pearce deep and hard study.

Even such an other story does Nymphodorus an old greek Historiographer
write, Nymphod.
of one Sesostris king of Egypt, which story because it is somewhat long,
and very like in all points to the other and also you do well enough remember
it, seeing you read it so late in Sophoclis commentaries, Comment. in Antig.
I will now pass over. Therefore either Aristotle and Plato know notwhat was
good and evil for learning and virtue, and the example of wise histories be
vainlie set before us or else the minstrelsie of lutes, pipes, harpes, and all
other that stands by such nice, fine, minikin finge^ing (such as the most
part of scholars whom I know use, if they use any) is far more fit for
the womannishn^sse of it to dwell in the court among ladies, than for any
great thing in it, which should help good and sad study, to abide in the
university among scholars. But perhaps you know some great good nesse of
such music and such instruments, where unto Plato and Aristotle his brain
could never attain, and therefore I will say no more against it.


PHI. well Toxophile is it not enough for you to rail upon Music, except
you mock me to? but to say the truth I never thought my self these kinds of
music fit for learning, but that which I said was rather to prove you,
than to defend the matter. But yet as I would have this sort of music
decay among scholars, even so do I wysshe from the bottom of my heart, that
the laudable custom of England to teach children their plainesong and
priksong, were not so decayed throughout all the realm as it is. Which thing
how profitable it was for all sorts of men, those knew not so well than
which had it most, as they do now which lack it most. And therefore it is
true that Teucer says in Sophocles. Seldom at all good things be known how
good to be
Before a man such things do miss out of his hands. Sophocle^ in A^ac^.



That milk is no fitter nor more natural for the bringing up of children than
music is, both Gallen proves by authority, and daily use teaches by
experience. For even the little babes lacking the use of reason, are scarce so
well stilled in suckyng their mo there is pap, as in hearing their mother sing.

Again how fit youth is made, by learning to sing, for grammar and other
sciences, both we daily do see, and Plutarch learnedly does prove, and Plato
wisely did allow, which received no scholar in to his schole, that had not
learned his song before.

The godly use of praising God, by singinge in the church, needs not my
praise, seeing it is so praised through all the scripture, therefore now I will
speak nothing of it, rather than I should speak to little of it.

Beside al these commodities, truly.ii. degrees of me^ne, which have the
highest offices under the king in all this realm, shall greatly lack the use
of Singinge, preachers and lawiers, because they shalnot without this, be able
to rule their breasts, for every purpose. For where is no distinction in
telling glad things and fearful things, gentilnes and cruelnes, softenes and
vehement^es, and such like matters, there can be no great persuasion.

For the hearers, as Tullie says, be much affectioned, as he is that
speaks. At his words be they drawn, if he stand still in one facion, their
minds stand still with him: If he thundre, they quake: If he chyde, they
fear: If he compain, they sorry with him: and finally, where a matter is
spoken, with an apt voice, for every affection, the hearers for the most
part, are moved as the speaker would. But when a man is always in one tune,
like an Humble be, or else now up in the top of the church, now down that
no man knows where to have him: or piping like a reed, or roaring like a
bull, as some lawyers do, which think they do best, when they cry lowdest,
these shall never greatly move, as I have known many well learned, have done,
because their voice was not stayed before, with learning to sing. For all
voices, great and small, base and shril, weke or soft, may be helped and
brought to a good point, by learning to sing.

Whether this be true or not, they that stand most in need, can tell best,
whereof some I have known, which, because they learned not to sing, when they
were boys, were feign to take pain in it, wha^ they were men. If any man
should hear me Toxophile, that would think I did but fondly, to suppose that
a voice were so necessary to be looked upon, I would ask him if he thought not
nature a fool, for maki^g such goodly instruments in a man, for well vttring
his words, orels if the.ii. noble orators Demosthenes and Cicero were not
fools, whereof the one did not only learn to sing of a man: But also was not
ashamed to learn how he should utter his sou^des aptly of a dog, the other
sets out no point of thetorike, so full^e in all his books, as how a man
should order his voice for all kind of matters.

Therefore saying men by speaking, differ and be better than beasts, by
speaking well, better than other men, and that singing is an help toward the
same as daily experience does teach, example of wyseme^ does allow, authority
of learned men does approve wherewith the foundation of youth in all good common
wealths always has been tempe^ed: surely if I were one of the parliament
house, I would not fail, to put up a bill for the amendment of this thing,
but because I am like to be none this year, I will speak no more of it, at
this time.


TOX. It were pity truly Philologe, that the thing should be neglected, but
I trust it is not as you say.


PHI. The thing is to true, for of them that come daily to y^ university,
where one has learned to singe, vi. has not. But now to our shotinge
Toxophile again, wherein I suppose you can not say so much for shotyng to be
^itte for learning, as you have spoken against Music for the same.

Therefore as concerning Music, I can be content to grant you your mind: But
as for shooting, surely I suppose that you can not persuade me, by no means,
that a man can be earnest in it, and earnest at his book to: but rather I
think that a man with a bow on his back, and shaftes under his girdell, is
more fit to wait upon Robin Hoode, than upon Apollo or the Muses.


TOX. Over ernest shooting surely I will not over ernestlye defend, for I ever
thought shooting should be a wayter upon lerning not a mastres over learning.
Yet this I marvel not a little at, that ye think a man with a bow on his
back is more like Robin Hoode servant, than Apollose, seeing that Apollo him
self in Alcestis of Euripides, which tragidie you red openly not long ago, in
a manner glories saying this verse. It is my wont always my bow with me to
bear

Therefore a learned man ought not to much to be ashamed to bear that some
time, (...)
which Apollo god of lerning him self was not ashamed always to bear. And
because ye would have a man wayt upon the Muses, and not at all meddle with
shotyng I marvel that you do not remember how that the ix. muses their self
as soon as they were borne, were put to norse to a lady called Euphemis which
had a son named E^otus with whom the nine Muses for his excellent shootinge,
kept ever more company wall, and used daily to shoot together in y^ mount
Pernasus: and at last it chanced this Erotus to dye, whose death the Muses
lamented greatly, and fell all upon their knees before Jupiter their father, and
at their request, E^otus for shooting with the Muses in earth was made a sign,
and called Sagittarius in heaven. Therefore you se, that if Apollo and the Muses
either were examples in deed, or only feigned of wise men to be examples of
learning, honest shoting may well enough be companion with honest study.


PHI. Well Toxophile, if you have no stronger defense of shotinge then Poets,
I fear if your companions which love shotinge, heard you, they would think
you made it but a triflyng and fabling matter, rather then any other man that
loves not shotinge could be persuaded by this reason to love it.


TOXO. Even as I am not so fond but I know that these be fables, so I am sure
you be not so ignorant, but you know what such noble wits as the Poets
had, meant by such matters: which oftentimes under the covering of a fable, do
hyde and wrappe in goodly precepts of philosophy, with the true judgment of
things. Which to be true specially in Homer and Euripides, Plato, Aristotle
and Galene playnelye do show: when through all their works (in a manner) they
determine all controversies, by these.ii. Poets and such like authorities.
Therefore if in this matter I seem to fable, and nothing prove, I am content
you judge so on me: saying the same judgment shall condemn with me Plato,
Aristotle, and Galene, whom in that error I am well content to follow. If these
oulde examples prove no thing for shoting, what say you to this* that the best
learned and sagest men in this Realm, which be now alive, both love shoting
and use shoting, as the best learned bisshoppes that be: among whom
Philologe* you your self know.iiii. or.v. which as in all good learning,
virtue and sagenesse they give other men example what thing they should do,
even so by their shoting, they plainly show what honest pastime, other me^
given to learning, may honestly use. That ernest study must be recreated with
honest pastime sufficientlye I have proved before, both by reason and authority
of the best learned men that ever wrote. Then seeing pastymes be lefull, the
most fittest for learning, is to be sought for. A pastyme, says Aristotle,
(...)
must be like a medicine. Medicines staude by contraries, therefore the nature
of studying considered, the fittest pastyine shall soon appear. In study
every part of the body is idle, which thing causes gross and cold humors,
to gather together and ^ere scholars very much, the mind is altogyther bent
and set on work. A pastyme then must be had where every part of the body
must be labored to separate and lessen such humors withal: the mind must be
unbent, to gather and fetch again his quickness withal. Thus pastymes for
the mind only, be nothing fit for students, because the body which is most
hurt by study, should take no profit at all thereat. This knew Erasmus
very well, when he was here in Cambrige: which when he had been sore at his
book (as Garret our bookebynder has very often told me) for lack of better
exercise, would take his horse, and ride about the markette hill, and come
again. If a scholar should use bowls or tennies, the labor is to vehement
and vuequall, which is condemned of Galene: the example very ill for other
men, when by so many acts they be made unlawful.

Running, leaping, and coyting be to vile for scholars, and so not fit by
Aristotle his judgment: walking alone into the field, Aristot. pol. 7. 17.
has no token of courage in it, a pastyme like a simple man which is neither
flesh nor fisshe. Therefore if a man would have a pastyme wholesome and equal
for every part of the body, pleasant and full of courage for the mind, not
vile and unhonest to give ill example to lay men, not kept in gardynes and
corners, not lurkynge on the night and in holes, but evermore in the face of
men, either to rebuke it when it does ill, or else to testifye on it when it
does well: let him seek chefelye of all other for shotynge.


PHILOL. Such comm^ne pastymes as men commenlye do use, I will not greatly
allow to be fit for scholars: saying they may use such exercises very well
(I suppose) as Galene him self does allow.


TOXOPH. Gal. de (...)
Those exercises I remember very well, for I read them within these two days,
of the which, some be these: to run up and down an hill, to clyme up a
long powle, or a tope, and there hang a while, to hold a man by his arms
and wave with his heels, much like the pastyme that boys use in the church
when their master is away, to swinge and totter in a belrope: to make a fiste,
and stretche out both his arms, and so stand like a roode. To go on a man his
tiptoes, stretching out the one of his arms forward, the other backewarde,
which if he blered out his tunge also, might be thought to dannce A^ticke very
properlye.

To tu^ble over and over, to top over tail: To set back to back, and se
who ca^ heave an other his heles highest, wi^h other much like: which
exercises surely must needs be natural, because they be so childisshe, and
they may be also wholesome for the body: but surely as for pleasure to the mind
or honesty in the doing of them, they be as like shotinge as York is foul
Sutton. Therefore to look on al pastymes and exercises wholesome for the body,
pleasant for the mind, comlye for every man to do, honest for all other to
look on, profitable to be set by of every man, worthy to be rebuked of no
man, fit for all ages persons and places, only shoting shall appear, wherein all
these commodities may be found.


PHIL. To grant Toxophile, that students may at times convenient use shoting
as most wholesome and honest pastyme: yet to do as some do, to shote hourly
daily, wekelye, and in a manner the hole year, neither I can praise, nor any
wise man will allow, nor you your self can honestlye defend.


TOXOPH. Surely Philologe, I am very glad to se you come to that point that
most lies in your stomach, and greueth you and other so much. But I trust
after I have said my mind in this matter, you shall confess your sel^fe that
you do rebuke this thing more tha^ ye need, rather then you shall find that any
man may spend by any possibilittie, more time in shotinge then he ought. For
first and formoost the hole time is divided into.ii. parts, the day and the
night: whereof the night may be both occupied in many honest businesses, and
also spent in much unthriftiness, but in no wise it can be applied to
shoting. And here you se that half our time, granted to all other things in
a manner both good and ill, is at one swappe quite taken away from shoting. Now
let us go forward, and se how much of half this time of ours is spent in
shoting. The hole year is divided into.iiii. parts, Spring time, Somer, faule
of the leaf, and winter whereof the whole winter, for the roughness of it, is
clean taken away from shoting: except it be one day among.xx. or one year
among.xl. In Somer, for the fervent heat, a man may say likewise: except
it be sometime against night. Now then spring time and faule of the leaf be
those which we abuse in shoting. But if we consider how mutable and chaungeable
the wether is in those seasons, and how that Aristotle him self says, that
most part of rain fauleth in these two times: we shall well perceive, that
where a man would shote one day, he shall be feign to leave of.iiii. Now when
time it self grau^teth us but a little space to shote in, let us se if
shoting be not hindered among all kinds of men as much otherwise. First,
young children use not, young men for fear of them whom they be under tomoche
dare not: sage men for other greater businesses, will not: aged men for lack
of strength, can not: Rich men for covetousness sake, care not: poor men
for cost and charge, may not: masters for their household keeping, head not:
servants kept in by their masters very often, shall not: crafts men for
getting of their living, very much leisure have not: and many there be that
often begins, but for unaptness proves not: and most of all, which when they
be shoters give it over and list not, so that generallye men every where for
one or other consideration much shoting use not. Therefore these two things,
straytenesse of time, and every man his trade of living, are the causes that so
few men shotes: as you may se in this great town, where as there be a
thousand good men's bodies, yet scarce.x. y^ uses any great shoting. And those
whom you se shote the most, with how many things are the drawn, or rather
driven, from shoting. For first, as it is many a year or they begin to be
great shoters, even so the great heat of shotinge is gone within a year or
two: as you know diverse Philologe your self, which were sometime the best
shoters, and now they be the best students.

If a man faule sick, farewell shoting, may fortune as long as he lives. If
he have a wrentche, or have taken cold in his arm, he may hang up his bow (I
warraunt you) for one season. A little blayne, a small cut, yea a silie poor
worm in his finger, may keep him from shoting well enough. Breaking and ill
luck in bows I will pass over, with an hundred mo sere things, which
chances every day to them that shote most, whereof the leest of them may
compel a man to leave shoting. And these things be so true and evident, that
it is impossible either for me craftelye to feign them, or else for you justly
to deny the^. Tha^ seeing how many hundred things are required altogyther to
give a man leave to shote, and any one of the^ denied, a man can not shote: and
seeing every one of them may chance, and does chance every day, I marvel
any wise man will think it possible, that any great time can be spent in
shoting at all.


PHI. I^ this be true that you say Toxophile, and Cards and dyse.
And I shall tell you what I heard spoken of the same matter. A man no shoter,
(not long agoo) would defend playing at cards and dise, if it were honestly
used, to be as honest a pastime as your shotinge: For he laid for him, that a
man might pleye for a little at cards and dyse, and also a man might shote away
all that ever he had. He said a pair of cards cost not past.ii. d. and that
they neded not so much reparation as bow and shaftes, they would never hurt
a man his hand, nor never wear his gere. A man should never slay a man with
shoting* wide at the cards. In wete and dry, hot and could, they would
never forsake a man, he showed what great variety there is in them for every
man's capacity: if one game were hard, he might easelye learn an other: if a
man have a good game, there is great pleasure in it: if he have an ill game,
the pain is short, for he may soon give it over, and hope for a better:
with many other mo reasons.

But at the last he concluded, that betwixt playinge and shoting, well used or
ill used, there was no dif^erence: but that there was less cost and trouble,
and a great deal more pleasure in playing, then in shotynge.


TOX. I can not deny, but shoting (as all other good things) may be abused.
And good things vngoodlye used, are not good, says an honorable bishop in
an ernester matter then this is: yet we must beware that we lay not men's
faults upon the thing which is not worthy, for so nothing should be good. And
as for shoting, it is blamed and marked of men for that thing (as I said
before) which should be rather a token of honesty to praise it, then any
sign of noughtinesse to disalowe it, and that is because it is in every man
his sight, it seeks no corners, it hydeth it not: if there be never so little
fault in it, every man sees it, it accuses it self. For one hour spente in
shoting is more seen and further talked of, then.xx nights spent in dysing,
even as a little white stone is seen among.iii. hundred black. Of those that
blame shotinge and shoters, I will say no more at this time but this, that
beside that they stop and hinder shoting, which the kings grace would have
forward, they be not much unlike in this point to Wyl^ Somer the king his
fool, which smites him that stands always before his face, be he never so
worshipful a man, and never greatly lokes for him which lurkes behind an
other man his back, that hurt him in deed.

But to him that compared gamning with shoting somewhat will I answer, and
because he went before me in a comparison: and comparisons says learned men,
make plain matters: I will surely follow him in the same. In (...)*
Honest things (says Plato) be known from dishonest things, by this
difference, unhonesty has ever present pleasure in it, having neither good
pretense going before, nor yet any profit following after: which saying
descrybeth general lie, both the nature of shooting and gamning which is
good, and which is evil, very well.

Gamninge has joined with it, a vain present pleasure, but there follows,
loss of name, loss of goods, and winning of an hundred gowtie, dropsy
diseases, as every man can tell. Shoting is a peynfull pastime, whereof follows
health of body quiknes of wit, ability to defend our country, as our
enemies can bear record.

Loath I am to compare these things together, and yet I do it not because there
is any comparison at al betwixt them, but thereby a man shall se how good the
one is, how evil the other. For I think there is scarce so much
contrariousnes, betwixt hot and cold, virtue and vice, as is betwixt
these.ii. things: For what so ever is in the one, the clean contrary is in
the other, as shall plainly appear, if we consider, both their beginnings,
their encreasynges, their fructes, and their ends, which I will soon rydde
over.

The first brynger in to the world of shootynge, Pla. (...).
was Apollo, which for his wisdom, and great commodities, brought among men
by him, was esteemed worthy, to be counted as a God in heaven.

Disyng surely is a bastard borne, because it is said to have.ii. fathers, and
yet both naught: The one was an ungracious God, called Theuth, Plato In
Phedro.
which for his noughtines, came never in other gods companyes, and therefore
Homer does despise onse to nam^ him, in all his works. The other father was a
Lydian borne, which people for such gamnes, ^^rodot. in (...)
and other vuthriftines, as boowlyng and hauntyng of tauernes, have been ever
had in most vile reputation, in all stories and writers.

The Fosterer up of shoting is Labor, y^ companion of virtue, the maynteyner
of honesty, the encreaser of health and welthinesse, which admytteth nothing
in a manner in to his company, that stands not, with virtue and honesty, and
therefore says the oulde poet Epicharmus very pretelye in Xenophon, ^en. de
dict. ^ (...). So^.
that God sells virtue, and all other good things to men for labor. The
Nource of dise and cards, is werisom Idleness, enemy of virtue, y^ drowner of
yo^the, that tarieth in it, and as Chauser does say very well in the Parsons
tale, the gree^e path way to hell, having this thing appropriat unto it, that
where as other vices have some cloak of honesty, only ydlenes can neither do
well, nor yet think well. Again, shooting has two Tutours to look upon it,
out of whose company, shooting never stirs, the one called Day light, y^
other Open place, which.ii. keep shooting from evil company, and suffers it
not to have to much swinge, but evermore kepes it under awe, that it darre do
nothing in the open face of the world, but that which is good and honest.
Likewise, dysinge and cardynge, have.ii. Tutours, the one named
Solitariousenes, which lurketh in holes and corners, the other called Night an
vngratiouse cover of noughtynesse, which two things be very In^^pers and
receyuers of all noughtynesse and noughtye things, and thereto they be in a
manner, ordained by Nature. For on the night time and in corners, Spirits and
thieves, rattes and mise, toodes and oules, nyghtecrowes and poulcattes, foxes
and foumerdes, with all other vermin, and noisome beasts, use most
styrringe, when in the day light, and in open places which be ordained of God
for honest things* they darre not ones come, which thing Euripides noted
very well, saying. I^ things the night, good things the day does haunt and
use. (...)


Companions of shoting, be prouidens, good heed giving, true meatinge, honest
comparison, which things agree with virtue very well. Ca^dinge and dysinge,
have a sort of good fellows also, going commonly in their company, as blind
Fortune, stumbling chance, spittle luck, false dealyng crafty conueyaunce,
braynlesse brawling, false forswerynge, which good feloes will sone take a
man by the ste^e, and cause him take his Inn, some with beggerye, some with
gout and dropsy, some with theft and robbery, and seldom they will leave a
man before he comme either to hangyng or else sum other extreme misery. To
make an end, how shoting by all men's laws has been allowed, cardyng and
dysing by all men's judgments condemned, I need not show the matter is so
plain.

Therefore, when the Lydians shall invent better things than Apollo, when
slothe and ydlenes shall increase virtue more than labor, when the night and
lurking corners, gives less occasion to unthriftiness, than light day and
opennes, than shall shotynge and such gamninge, be in su^me comparison like.
Yet even as I do not show all the goodness, which is in shotynge, when I prove
it stands by the same things that virtue it self stands by, as brought in
by God, or Godlyelyke men, fostered by labor, committed to the sauegarde of
light and opennes, accompanied with provision and diligens, loved and allowed
by every good man's sentence, Even likewise do I not open half the noughtines
which is in cardyng and dising, when I show how they are borne of a
desperate mother, norished in ydlenes, encresed by license of night and
corners, accompanied with Fortune, chance, deceyte, and craftines: condemned
and banished, by all laws and judgments.

For if I would enter, to descrybe the monstruousenes of it, I should rather
wander in it, it is so broad, than have any ready passage to the end of the
matter: whose horriblenes is so large, that it passed the eloquence of our
English Homer, to compass it: yet because I ever thought his sayings to have
as much authority, as either Sophocles or Euripides in Greek, therefore gladly
do I remember these verses of his.

Hasardry is Very mother of lesinges,
And of deceyte, and cursed sweringes,
Blasphem^e of Chist, manslaughter, and waste also,
Of catel of time, of other things mo.


Mother of lesinges) truly it may well be called so, if a man consydre how
many ways, and how many things, he loses thereby, for first he loses his
goods, he loses his time, he loses quycknes of wit, and all good lust to
other things, he loses honest company, he loses his good name and
estimation, and at last, if he leave it not, loses God, and heaven and all:
and instead of these things wins at length, either hangyng or hell.

And of deceyte) I trow if I should not lie, there is not half so much
craft used in no one thing in the world, as in this cursed thing. What
false dise use they? as dise stopped with quicksiluer and hears, dise of a
vauntage, flattes, gourdes to chop and change when they list, to let the
true dise fall under the table, and so take up the false, and if they be true
dise, what shyfte will they make to set y^ one of them with slyding, with
cogging, with foysting, with coytinge as they call it. How will they use these
shifts, when they get a plain man that can no skyll of them? How will they
go about, if they perceive an honest man have money, which list not play, to
provoke him to play? They will seek his company, they will let him pay naught,
yea and as I heard a man ones say that he did, they will send for him to some
house, and spend perchance, a crown on him, and at last will one begin to
say: what my masters, what shall we do? shall every man play his.xii. d.
whiles an apple cost in the fire, and than we will drink and depart: Nay
will an other ^aye, as false as he, you can not leave when you begin, and
therefore I will not play: but yet if you will gage, that every man as he has
lost his.xii. d. shall sit down, I am content, for surely I would wine no
man's money here, but even as much as would pay for my supper. Than speaks
the third, to the honest man that thought not to play, what wyll^ you play
your.xii. pence if he excuse him, tush man will the other say, stick not in
honest company for xii. d. I will bear your half, and here is my money

Now all this is to make him to begin, for they know if he be ones in, and
be a looser, y^ he will not stick at his.xii. d. but hops ever to get it
again, whiles perhaps, he loose all. Than every one of the^ sets his
shifts abroche, some with false dise, some with setting of dyse, some with
having outelandishe silver coins guylded, to put away at a time for good
gold. Than if there come a thing in controversy, must you be judged by the
table, and than farewell the honest man his part, for he is borne down on
every side.

Now sir, beside all these things they have certain terms, as a man would
say, appropriate to to their playing: whereby they will draw a man's money,
but pay none, which they call bars, that surely he that knows them not,
may soon be debarred of all that ever he has, before he learn them. If a
plain man lose, as he shall do ever, or else it is a wonder, than the game is
so deuilysh, that he can never leave: For vayn hope (which hope says
Euripides, destroys many a man and City) dryueth him on so far, In supp^^.
that he can never return back, until he be so light, that he need fear no
thieves by the way. Now if a simple man happen onse in his life, to win of
such players, than will they either entreat him to keep them company whiles
he has lost all again, or else they will use the most dyuelyshe fashion of
all, For one of the players that stands next him, shall have a pair of
false dise, and cast them out upon the bourde, the honest man shall take them
and cast them, as he did the other, the third shall espy them to be false
dise, and shall cry out, har^e, with all the oaths under God, that he has
falselye won their money, and than there is nothing but houlde thy throat
from my dagger, than every man lays hand on the simple man, and takes all
their money from him, and his own also, thinking him self well, that he
scapeth with his life.

Cursed sweryng, blasphemy of Christ) These half verses Chaucer in an other
place, more at large does well set out, and very lively express, saying.

Ey by gods precious heart and his nails
And by the blood of Christ, that is in Hales,
Seven is my chance, and thine is sink and treye,
Ey gods arms, if thou falsely play,
This dagger shall thorough thine heart go
This fruit comes of the ^eched boones two^
Fors^eringe, Ire, falsnes and Homicide. etc,


Though these verses be very earnestly (...) yet they do not half so grisely
set out the hor^blenes of blasphemy, which such gamne^s use, as it is in
deed, and as I have heard my self. For no man can write a thing so
earnestlye, as when it is spoken with ^esture, as learned men you know do say.

How will you think that such furiousenes with wood countenaunces, and
brenning eyes, with staringe and bragging, with heart ready to leap out of the
^elly for dwelling, can be expressed y^ tenth part, to the uttermost. Two men I
herd my self, whose sayings be far more grisely, than Chaucers verses One,
when he had lost his money, swear me God, from top to toe with, one breath,
that he had lost al his money for lack of sweringe: The other, losyng his
money, and heaping oaths upon oaths, one in a nothers neck, most horrible and
not spekeable, was rebuked of an honest man which stood, by for so do doing,
he by and by staring him in the face, and clappyng his fiste with all his
money he had, upon the boorde, swear me by the flesh of God, that if sweryng
would help him but one ace, he would not leave one piece of god unsworn,
neither within nor without. The remembrance of this blasphemy Philologe, does
make me quake at the heart, and therefore I will speak no more of it.

And so to conclude with such gamnyng, I think there is no vngraciousenes in
all this world, that carries a man so far from god, as this fault does. And
if there were any so desperate a person, that would begin his hell here in
earth, I trow he should not find hell more like hell it self, then the life
of those men is which daily haunt and use such ungracious games.


PHIL. You handle this gere in deed: And I suppose if ye had been a prentice at
such games, you could not have said more of them then you have done, and by
like you have had somewhat to do with them.


TOX. In deed, you may honestlye gather that I hate them greatly, in that I
speak against them: not that I have used them greatly, in that I speak of
them. For things be known diverse ways, as Socrates (you know) does prove
in Alcibiades. And if every man should be that, that he speaks or writes
upon, then should Homer have been the best captain, most cowarde, hardye,
hasty, wise and wood, sage and simple: And Terence an ouldeman and a young, an
honest man and a bawd: with such like. Surely every man ought to pray to
God daily, to keep them from such vnthriftynesse, and specially all the youth
of England: for what youth does begin, a man will follow co^monlye, even to
his dyinge day: which thing Adrastus in Euripides pretelye does express,
Euripides in suppl^.
saying.

What thing a man in tender age has most in ure
That same to death always to keep he shall be sure
Therefore in age who greatly longes good fruit to mow
In youth he must him self aplye good seed to sow.


For the foundation of youth well set (as Plato does say) the whole body of
the commune wealth shall floryshe thereafter. If the young tree grow^ crooked,
when it is oulde, a man shall rather break it tha^ straight it. And I think
there is no one thing y^ crokes youth more then such unlawful games. Nor let
no man say, if they be honestly used they do no harm. For how can that pastyme
which neither exercises the body with any honest labor, nor yet the mind
with any honest thinking, have any honesty joined with it. Nor let noman
assure him self that he can use it honestlye: for if he stand therein, he
may fortune have a faule, the thing is more slipperye then he knows of. A
man may (I grant) sit on a brante hill side, but if he give never so little
forward, he can not stop though he would never so feign, but he must needs
run heedling, he knows not how far. What honest pretenses, vain pleasure
lays daily (as it were entiseme^tes or baytes, to pull men forward withal)
Homer does well show, by the Sirenes, and Circes. And among all in that
ship there was but one Ulysses, and yet he had done to as the other did, if a
goddess had not taught him: And so likewise I think, they be easy to number,
which pass by playing honestlye, except the grace of God save and keep them.
Therefore they that will not go to far in playing, let them follow this
counsel of the Poet.

Stop the begynninges.


PHILOLO. Well, or you go any further, I pray you tell me this one thing: Do
ye speak against mean men's playinge only, or against great men's
playinge to, or put you any difference betwixt them?


TOXOPHI. If I should excuse my self herein, and say that I spoke of the one,
and not of the other, I fear least I should as fondlye excuse my self, as a
certain preacher did, whom I heard upon a time speak against many abuses,
(as he said) and at last he spoke against candelles, and then he fearing,
least some men would have been angrye and offended with him, nay says he,
you must take me as I mean: I speak not against great candelles, but against
little candels, for they be not all one (quod he) I promise you: And so every
man laughed him to scorn.

In deed as for great men, and great men's matters, I lift not greatly to
meddle. Yet this I would wysshe that all great men in England had red over
diligently the Pardoners tale in Chaucer, and there they should perceive and
se, how much such games stand with their worship, how great soever they
be. What great men do, be it good or ill, mean men communelye love to follow,
as many learned men in many places do say, and daily experience does
playnelye show, in costlye apparel and other like matters.

Therefore, seeing that Lords be lanternes to lead the life of mean men, by
their example, either to goodness or badnesse, to whether soever they list:
and saying also they have liberty to list what they wiil, I pray God they
have will to list that which is good, and as for their playing, I will make an
end with this saying of Chaucer.

Lords might find them other manner of play
Honest enough to drive the day away.


But to be short, the best medicine for all sorts of men both high and low,
young and oulde, to put away such unlawful games is by the contrary,
likewise as all physicions do allow in physike. So let youth in stead of
such unlawful games, which stand by idleness, by solitariness, and
corners, by night and darkness, by fortune and chance, by craft and
subtlety, use such pastimes as stand by labor: upon the day light, in open
sight of men, having such an end as is come to by co^ning, rather then by
craft: and so should virtue increase, and vice decay. For contrary pastimes,
must needs work contrary minds in men, as all other contrary things do.

And thus we se Philologe, that shoting is not only the most wholesome
exercise for the body, the most honest pastime for the mind, and that for
all sorts of men: But also it is a most ready medicine, to purge the hole
realm of such pestilent gamning, where with many times: it is sore troubled and
ill at ease.


PHI. The more honesty you have proved by shoting Toxophile, and the more you
have persuaded me to love it, so much truly the soryer have you made me with
this last sentence of yours, whereby you plainly prove that a man may not
greatly use it. For if shoting be a medicine (as you say that it is) it may
not be used very often, lest a man should hurt him self withal, as medicines
much occupied do. For Aristotle him self says, that medicines be no meat
to live withal: and thus shoting by the same reason, may not^^^ much
occupied.


TOX. You play your oulde wontes Philologe, in dalying with other men's wits,
not so much to prove your own matter, as to prove what other me^ can say.
But where you think that I take away much use of shoting, in lykening it to
a medicine: because men use not medicines every day, for so should their
bodies be hurt: I rather prove daily use of shoting thereby. For although
Atistotle says that some medicines be no meat to live withal, Hip^o. d^
med. purg.
which is true: yet Hippocrates says that our daily meats be medicines, to
withstand evil withal, which is as true. For he makes two kinds of
medicines, one our meat that we use dailye, which purges softlye and
slowlye, and in this similitude may shoting be called a medicine, wherewith
daily a man may purge and take a way al unlawful desires to other unlawful
pastymes, as I proved before. The other is a quick purging medicine, and
seldomer to be occupied, except the matter be greater, and I could describe
the nature of a quick medicine, which should within a while purge and pluck
out all the unthrifty games in the Realm, through which the commune wealth
oftentimes is sick. For not only good quick wits to learning be thereby
brought out of frame, and quite marred: but also manlye wits, either to
attempt matters of high courage in war time, or else to atcheue matters of
weight and wisdom in peace time, be made thereby very quaisie and faint. For
look throughoute all histories written in Greek, Latyne, or other language, and
you shall never find that realm prosper in the which s^che idle pastymes are
used. As concerning the medicyne, although some would be miscontent, if they
heard me meddle any thing with it: Yet betwixt you and me here alone, I
may the boldlyer say my fantasy, and the rather because I will only wysh
for it, which stands with honesty, not determyne of it which belongs to
authority. The medicine is this, that would to God and the king, all these
unthrifty idle pastymes, which be very bugges, that the Psalm means on,
walking on the night and in corners, were made felonye, Psalm. (...).
and some of that punishment ordained for them, which is appointed for the
forgers and falsifyers of the kings coin. Which punishment is not by me now
invented, (...)
but long agoo, by the most noble orator Demosthenes: which meruayleth
greatly that death is appointed for falsifyers and forgers of the coin, and
not as great punyshmente ordained for them, which by their means forges and
falsifyes the commune wealth. And I suppose that there is no one thing that
changes sooner the golden and silver wits of men into copperye and brassye
ways then dising and such unlawful pastymes.

And this quick medicine I believe would so throwlye pourge them, that the
daily medicines, as shoting and other pastymes joined with honest labor
should easelyer withstand them.


PHIL. The excellent commodityes of shotynge in peace time, Toxophile, you have
very well and sufficiently declared.

Whereby you have so persuaded me, that God wyl^ng hereafter I will both love it
the better, and also so use it the ofter. For as much as I can gather of all
this communication of ours, the tunge, the nose, the hands and the feet be no
fytter members, or instruments for the body of a man, then is shotinge for the
hole body of the realm. God has made the parts of men which be best and
most necessary, to serve, not for one purpose only, but for many: as the
tungue for speaking and tasting, the nose forsmelling, and also for avoiding of
all excreme^tes, which faule out of the heed, the hands for receyuynge of
good things, and for puttyng of all harmefull things, from the body. So
shotinge is an exercise of health, a pastyme of honest pleasure, and such one
also that stops or auoydeth all noisome games gathered and increased by ill
rule, as noughtye humors be, which hurt and corrupt sore that part of the
realm, wherein they do remain.

But now if you can show but half so much profit in war of shotynge, as
you have proved pleasure in peace, then will I surely judge that there be few
things that have so manifold commodities, and uses joined unto them as it
has.


TOX. The vpperhande in war, next the goodness Match. 1. ^.
as scripture says) stands chefelye in three things: in the wisdom of the
Prince, in the sleyghtes and policies of the capitaynes, and in the strength
and cherefull forwardness of the souldyers. A Prince in his heart must be full
of mercy and peace, a virtue most pleasant to Christ, most agreeable to man's
nature, most profitable for rich and poor.

For tha^ the rich man enjoys with great pleasure that which he has: the
poor may obtain with his labor, that which he lacks. And although there is
nothing worse then war, whereof it takes his name, through the which great men
be in danger, mean men without succoure, rich men in fear, because they
have somewhat: poor men in care, because they have nothing: And so every man in
thought and misery: Yet it is a civil medicine, wherewith a prince may from
the body of his commune wealth, put of that danger which may faule: or
else recover again, ^d Ni^o.
whatsoever it has lost. And therefore as Isocrates does say, a prince must be
a warrior in two things, in conninge and knowledge of all sleyghtes and
feats of war, and in having al necessary habilimentes belongyng to the
same. Which matter to entreat at large, were ouerlonge at this time to
declare, and ouermoche for my learning to perform.

After the wisdom of the prince, are valiant capitaynes most necessary in
war, whose office and duty is to know all sleightes and policies for all
kinds of war, which they may learn.ii. ways, either in daily following
and haunting the wars or else because wisdom bought with strypes, is many
times ouercostlye: they may bestow sometime in Uegetius, which entreats
such matters in Latin metelye well, or rather in Poly^nus, and Leo the
Emperor, which sets out al policies and duties of capitaynes in the Greek
tunge very excellentlye.

But chefely I would wisshe (and if I were of authority) I would counsel all the young gentlemen of this realm, never to lay out of their hands.ii. authors
Xenophon in Greek, and Caesar in Latin, where in they should follow noble
Scipio Africanus, D^. S^^.
as Tullie does say: In which.ii. authors, besides eloquence a thing most
necessary of all other, for a captain, they should learn the hole course of
war, which those.ii. noble men did not more wyselye write for other men to
learn, than they did manfully exercise in the fyelde, for other men to follow.

The strength of war lies in the soldier, whose ^hyefe praise and virtue, is
obedience Obedience.
toward his captain, says Plato. Plat. leg. 1^
And Xenophon being a gentyle author, Xen. Ages.
most christianlye does say, even by these words, that that souldyer
which first serves god, and than obeys his captain, may boldly with
all courage, hope to overthrow his enemy Again, without obedience, neither
valiant man, stout horse, Xe^. ^ipp^^
nor goodly harnes does any good at al. which obedience of y^ soldier toward
his captane, brought the hole empire of y^ world, into the Romans hands, and
when it was brought, kept it longer, than ever it was kept in any common wealth
before or after.

And this to be true, Plu^arch^^
Scipio Africanus, the most noble captain that ever was among the Romans,
showed very plainly, what time as he went in to Afryke, to destroy Cartage.
For he restinge his hooste by the way in Sicilie, a day or two, and at a
time standing with a great man of Sicilie, and looking on his soldiers how
they excercised them selves in keeping of array, and other feats, the gentleman
of Sicilie asked Scipio, wherein lay his chyefe hope to overcome Cartage: He
an swered, in yonder feloes of mine, whom you se play: And why says the other,
because says Scipio, that if I commanded them to run in to the top of
this high castle, and cast them selves down backward upon these rocks, I am
sure the would do it.

Salust also does write, Sal. ^. Cat.
yt there were mo Romans put to death of their captains for setting on their
enemies before they had license, than were for running away out of the fyelde,
before they had foughten. These two e^amples do prove, that among the
Romans, the obedience of the souldyer was wonderful great, and the severity
of the Captains, to se the same kept wonderful strayte. For they well
perceived that an host full of obedyence, falls as seldom into the hands
of their enemies as that body fawleth into Ieoperdye, the which is ruled by
reason. Reason and Rulers being like in office, (for the one rules the body
of man, the other rules the body of the common wealth) ought to be like of
conditions, and ought to be obeyed in all manner of matters. Obedience is
nourysshed by fear and love, Fear is kept in by true justice and equity,
Love is gotten by wisdom, joined with liberality: For where a souldyer sees
righteousness so rule, that a man can neither do wrong nor yet take wrong,
and that his captain for his wisdom, can maintain him, and for his
liberality will maintain him, he must needs both love him and fear him, of
the which proceeds true and unfeigned obedience. After this inward virtue,
the next good point in a soldier, is to have and to handle his weapon well,
whereof the one must be at the appointment of the captain, the other lies in
the courage and exercise of the soldier: yet of al weapons the best is, In
Her^. (...).
as Euripides does say, wherwt with leest danger of our self we may hurt our
enemy most. And that is (as I suppose) artillarie. Artillarie now a days is
taken for.ii. things: Gunnes and Bows, which how much they do in war, both
daily experience does teach, and also Peter Na^nius a learned man of Louayn,
in a certain dialoge does very well set out, wherein this is most notable, that
when he has showed excedyng commodities of both, and some disco^modities of
gunnes, as infinite cost and charge, combersome carriage: and if they be great,
the uncertain leuelyng, the peril of them that stand by them, the esyer
auoydyng by them that stand far of: and if they be little, the less both fear
and ieoperdy is in them, beside all contrary wether and wind, which hyndereth
them not a little: yet of all shotyng he can not rehearse one discommoditie.


PHI. That I marvel greatly at, seeing Nannius is so well learned, and so
excercised in the authors of both the tu^ges: for I my self do remember, that
shotyng in war is but smally praised, and that of diverse captains in diverse
authors. For first in Euripides (whom you so highly praise) and very well, for
Tullie thinks every verse in him to be an authority, what I pray you, does
Lycus that overcame Thebes, say as concerning shotyng? whose words as far as
I remember, ^e these, or not much unlike.

What praise has he at al, which never durst abide,
The dint of a spears point thrust against his side
Nor never boldly buckeler bare yet in his left hand
Face to face his enemies bront stiffelie to wythstande, Eurip. in ^er^. furent.

But always trusts to a bow and to a fethered stick
Harnes ever most fit for him which to fly is quick,
Bow and shafte is Armoure metest for a cowarde
which dare not ones abide the bronte of battle sharp and hard.
But he a man of manhood most is by mine assent
Which with heart and courage boulde, fully has him bent,
His enemies look in every stoure stoutelie to a bide,
Face to face, and foot to foot, tide what may be tide.


Again Teucer the best Archer among all the Grecians, Sop^ in (...)
in Sophocles is called of Menelaus, a boweman, and a shooter as in villaynie
and reproach, to be a thing of no price in war. Moreover Pandarus the best
shooter in the world, whom Apollo him self taught to shoot, both he and
his shotynge is quyte contemned in Homer, Iliad ^
in so much that Homer (which under a made fable does always hyde his
judgment of things) does make Pandarus him self cry out of shooting, and
cast his bow away, and take him to a spear, making a vow that if ever he
came home, he would break his shaftes, and burn his bow, lamentyng greatly,
that he was so fond to leave at home his horse and charyot with other weapons,
for the trust yt he had in his bow. Homer signifieng thereby, that men should
leave shoting out of war, and take them to other wepons more fit and able
for the same, and I trow Pandarus words be much what after this sort.

Ill chance ill luck me hither brought
Ill fortune me that day befell,
When first my bow fro the pynne I roughte
For Hectors sake, the Greeks to quell.
But if that God so for me shap
That home again I may ones come,
Let me never inioye that hap,
Nor ever twyse look on the son,
If bow and shaftes I do not burn
Which now so euel does serve my turn.


But to let pass al Poets, Xen. ^yri I^st. 6.
what can be sorer said against any thing, than the judgment of Cyrus is
against shotynge, which does cause his Persians being the best shooters to
lay away their bows and take them to sweardes and buckelers, spears and
darts, and other like hand weapons. The which thing Xenophon so wise a
philosopher, so expert a captain in war him self, would never have
written, and specially in that book wherein he purposed to show, Epist. 1 a^ Q
Fra
as Tullie says in deed, not the true history, but the example of a perfect
wise prince and common welthe, except that judgment of chau^gyng Artillery,
in to other wepons, he had always thought best to be followed, in all war.
Whose counsel the Parthians did follow, Plutarch M. (...).
when they chased Antonie over the mountains of Media, which being the best
shoters of the world, left their bows, and took them to spears and
morispikes.

And these ^ewe examples I trow, of the best shooters, do well prove that the
best shotinge is not the best thing as you call it in war.


TOX. As concerning your first example, taken out of Euripides, I maruayle
you will bring it for y^ disprayse of shotyng, seeing Euripides does make those
verses, not because he thinks the^ true, but because he thinks them fit for
the person that spoke them. For in deed his true judgment of shoting, he does
express by and by after in the oration of the noble captain Amphytrio
against Lycus, wherein a man may doubt, whether he has more eloquentlye
confuted Lycus saying, or more worthelye set out the praise of shootynge.
And as I am advised, his words be much hereafter as I shall say.

Against the witty gift of shotinge in a bow
Fond and leude words thou leudlie do out throw, (...)

Which, if thou will hear of me a word or twain
Quickly thou may learn how fondly thou do blame,
First he that with his harneis him self does wal about,
That scarce is left one hole through which he may ^epe (...)
Such bondmen to their harneis to fight are nothing mete
But sonest of al other are trodden under fete.
If he be strong, his fellows faint, in whom he puts his trust,
Soloded with his harneis must needs lie in the dust,
Nor yet from death he can not starte, if ones his weapon break,
How stout, how strong, how great, how long,
so ever be such a ^reke.
But who so ever can handle a bow
sturdie stiff and strong
VVherwith like hayle many shaftes he shootes
into the thickest thronge:
This profit he takes, that standing a far
his enemy he may spill
When he and his full safe shall stand
out of all danger and ill.
And this in war is wisdom most, which
works our enemies woo.
When we shall be far from all fear
and ieoperdie of our foo.


Secondarily even as I do not greatly regard what Menelaus does say in
Sophocles to Teucer, because he spoke it both in anger, and also to him that
he hated, even so do I remember very well in Homer, that when Hector and the
Trojans would have set fire on the greek ships, Iliad. ^.
Teucer with his bow made them recule back again, when Menelaus took him to
his feet, and ran away.

Thirdlye as concerning Pandarus, Homer does not disprayse the noble gift of
shotynge, but thereby every man is taught, that whatsoever, and how good soever
a weapon a man does use in war, Ho^. Ili. 5.
if he be him self a couetouse wretch, a fool without counsel, a
peacebreaker as Pandarus was, at last he shall through the punishment of God
fall into his enemies hands, as Pandarus did, whom Diomedes through the
help of Minerua miserablye slew.

And because you make mention of Homer, and Troy matters, what can be more
praise for any thing, I pray you, than that is for shootyng, that Troy
could never be destroyed without the help of Hercules shaftes, which thing
does signify, that although all the world were gathered in an army together,
yet without shotinge they can never come to their purpose, as Ulysses in
Sophocles very plainlye does say unto Pyrrhus, as concerning Hercules shaftes
to be carried unto Troy. Nor you without them, nor without you they do ought.
^oph. phil.


Fourthlye where as Cyrus did change part of his bowemen, (...)
whereof he had plenty, into other me^ of war, whereof he lacked, I will not
greatly dispute whether Cyrus did well in that point in those days or no,
because it is not plain in Xenophon how strong shooters the Persians were,
what bows they had, what shaftes and heads they occupied, what kind of war
their enemies used.

But truly as for the Parthians, it is plain, in Plutarche, (...)
that in chaungyng their bows in to spears, they brought their self into
utter destruction. For when they had chased the Romans many a mile, through
reason of their bows, at the last the Romans ashamed of their fleing, and
remembrynge their owide nobleness and courage, ymagined this way, that they
would kneel down on their knees, and so cover all their body with their
shyldes and targattes, that the Parthians shaftes might slide over them, and do
them no harm, which thing when the Partia^s perceived, thinking that y^
Romans were forweryed with labor, watch, and hu^gre: they laid down their
bows, and took speres in their hands, and so ran upon them: but the
Romans perceyuinge them without their bows, rose up manfully, and slew them
every mother son, save a few that saved them selves with runnyng away. And
herein our archers of England far pass the Parthians, which for such a
purpose, when they shall come to hand strokes, has ever ready, either at his
back hangyng, or else in his next fellows hand a leade^ maule, or such like
weapon, to beat d^wne his enemies withal.


PHI. Well Toxophi^^ ^^inge that those examples which I had thought to have been clean against shoting, you have thus turned to the high praise of
shotinge: and all this praise that you have now said on it, is rather come in
by me tha^ sought for of you: let me hear I pray you now, those examples
which you have marked of shotyng your self: whereby you are, and think to
persuade other, y^ shoting is so good in war.


TOX. Examples surely I have marked very many: from the beginning of time had
in memory of writing, throughout all common wealths, and Empires of the
world: whereof the most part I will pass over, lest I should be tediouse:
yet some I will touch, because they be notable, both for me to tell and you to
hear.

And because the storye of the Jews is for the time most ancient, for the
truth most credible, it shall be most fit to begin with them. And
although I know that God is the only gyuer of victory, and not the weapons,
for all strength and victory (says Judas Machabeus) comes from heaven: Ma^h
1. 3.
Yet surely strong weapons be the instruments Ma^h. 2. 14.
And to have engines of war to beat down cities with all: and to have
scoutwatche among our enemies to know their counsayles, as the noble
captain Ionathas brother to Judas Machabeus did in the country of Amathie
against the mighty host of Demetrius. Ma^h. 1. 12.
And beside all this, god is pleased to have goodly tombs for them which do
noble feats in war, and to have their images made, and also their cote
Armours to be set above their tombs, to their perpetual laud and memory:
Ma^h. 1. 13.
as the valiant captain Simon, did cause to be made for his brethren Judas
Machabeus and Ionathas, when they were slain of the Gentiles. And thus of what
authority feats of war, and strong weapons be, shortly and playnelye we
may learn: But among the Jews as I began to tell, I am sure there was
nothing so occupied, or did so much good as bows did* insomoche that when
the Jews had any great vpperhande over the Gentiles, the first thing always
that the captain did, was to exhort the people to give all the thanks to God
for the victory, and not to their bows, wherewith they had slain their
enemies: as it is plain that the noble Iosue Iosu^. 13*
did after so many kings thrust down by him.

God, when he promyseth help to the Jews, he uses no kind of speaking so
much as this, that he will bend his bow, Deut^r^. 3^.
and die his shaftes in the Gentiles blood: whereby it is manifest, that either
God will make the Jews shoot strong shotes to overthrow their enemies: or
at leeste that shotinge is a wonderful mighty thing in war, whereunto y^ high
power of God is lykened. Psalm. 7.63. 75.
David in the Psalms calls bows the vessels of death, a bitter thing, and
in an other place a mighty power, and other ways mo, which I will let pass,
because every man reads them daily: But yet one place of scripture I must
needs remember, which is more notable for y^ praise of shoting, then any y^
ever I red in any other story, and that is, when Saul was slain of y^
Philistians being mighty bowmen, Regu^. 1. 31.
and Ionathas his son with him, that was so good a shoter, as y^ scripture
says, that he never shot shafte in vain, and y^ the kingdom after Saules
death came unto David: the first statute and Regum. 2. 1.
law thateuer David made after he was king, was this, that al y^ children of
Israel should learn to shote, according to a law made many a day before y^
time for the setting out of shoting as it is written (says Scripture) in
libro lustorum, which book we have not now: And thus we se plainelye what
great use of shoting, and what provision even from the beginning of the
world for shotyng, was among the Jews.

The Ethiopians which inhabit the furthest part South in the world, were
wonderful bowmen: insomoche that when Cambyses king of Persie being in Egypt,
(...)
sent certain ambassadors into Ethiope to the king there, with many great
gifts: the king of Ethiop perceyuinge them to be espyes, took them up
sharply, and blamed Cambyses greatly for such unjust enterprises: but after
that he had princely entertained them, he sent for a bow, and bente it and
drew it, and then unbent it again, and said unto the ambassadors, you shall
commend me to Cambyses, and give him this bow fro me, and bid him when any
Persian can shote in this bow, let him set upon the Ethiopians: In the mean
while let him give thanks unto God, which does not put in the Ethiopia^s
mind to co^quere any other man's land. This bow, when it came among the
Persians, never one man in such an infinite host (as Herodotus does say)
could stir the stryng, save only Smerdis the brother of Cambyses, which
styrred it two fingers, and no further: for the which act Cambyses had such
envy at him, that he afterward slew him: as does appear in the storye.

Sesostris the most mighty king that ever was in Egypt, overcame a great
part of the world, and that by archers: he subdued the Arabians, the Iues,
the Assyrians: he went farther into Scythia then any man else: he overcame
Thracia, even to the borders of Germany. And in token how he overcame al men
he set up in many places great images to his own likeness, having in the one
hand a bow, in the other a sharp heeded shafte: that men might know, (...).
what weapon his hooste used, in conqueryng so many people.

Cyrus, counted as a god among the Gentyles, for his nobleness and felicity
in war: Herod (...).
yet at the last when he set upon the Massage^anes (which people never went
without their bow nor their quiver, nether in war nor peace) he and all his
were slain, and that by shotyng, as appears in the storye.

Polycrates the prince of Samos (a very little isle) was lord over all the Greek
sees, and withstode the power of the Persians, Herod. (...)
only by the help of a thousand archers.

The people of Scythia, of all other men loved, and used most shotyng, the
hole richesse and househoulde stuff of a man in Scythia, was a yocke of oxen,
a plough, his nagge and his dog, his bow and his quiver: which quiver was
covered with the skin of a man, which he took or slew first in battle.
The Scythians to be invincible by reason of their shotyng, the great voyages
of so many noble conquerours spent in that country in vain, does well
prove: But specially that of Darius the myghtie king of Persie, which when he
had tarried there a great space, and done no good, but had forweryed his host
with travail and hunger: (...)
At last the men of Scythia sent an ambassador with.iiii. gifts: a bird, a
frogge, a mouse, and.v. shaftes. Darius meruaylyng at the strangeness of the
gifts, asked the messenger what they signified: the messenger answered, that
he had no further commandment, but only to deliver his gifts, and return
again with all speed: but I am sure (says he) you Persians for your great
wisdom, can soon bo^lt out what they mean. When the messenger was gone,
every man began to say his verdite. Darius Judgment was this, that y^
Scythians gave over into the Persians hands, their lives, their hole power,
both by land and see, signifyinge by the mouse the earth, by the frogge the
water, in which they both live, by y^ bird their lives which live in the air,
by the shaft their hole power and Empire, that was maynteyned always by
shotinge. Gobryas a noble and wise captain among the Persians, was of a
clean contrary mind, saying, nay not so, but the Sythia^s mean thus by their
gifts, that except we get us wings, and fly into the air like birds, or
run into y^ holes of the earth like myse, or else lie lurkyng in fennes and
marisses like frogs, we shall never return home again, before we be utterly
undone with their shaftes: which sentence sanke so sore into their hertes, y^
Darius with all speed possible, brake up his camp, and gat him self
homewarde. Yet how much the Persians them selves set by shotinge, whereby they
increased their empire so much, does appear by.iii manifest reasons: (...)
first that they brought up their youth in the schole of shoting, unto.xx.
year of age, as diverse noble Greek authors do say.

Again, because the noble king Darius thought him self to be praised by
nothing so much, as to be counted a good shoter, as does appear by his
sepulcher, wherein he caused to be written this sentence: Darius the king lies
buried here
That in shoting and riding had never pere. S^rab. 15.



Thirdlye the coin of the Persians, both gold and silver had the Arms of
Pers^e upon it, Plutarch. in Ages^^a.
as is customably used in other realms, and that was bow and arowes: by the
which feate they declared, how much they set by them.

The Grecians also, (...)
but specially the noble Athenienses, had all their strength lyinge in
Artillarie: and for y^ purpose the city of Athe^s had a M. men which were
only archers, in daily wages, to watch and keep the city from al ieoperdie
and sodein danger: which archers also should carry to prison and ward any
misdoer at y^ commandment of the high officers, as plainly does appear in
Plato. Plato in (...).
And surely the bowmen of Athens did wonderful feats in many battles, but
specially when Demosthenes the valiau^t captain slew and took prisoners all
the Lacedaemonians beside y^ city of Pylos, where Nestor sometime was lord: the
shaftes went so thick that day (says Thucydides) Thucydid. ^
that no man could se their enemies. A Lacedemonian taken prisoner, was asked
of one at Athens, whether they were stout fellows that were slain or no, of
the Lacedaemonians: he answered nothing else but this: make much of those
shaftes of youres, for they know neither stout nor vnstoute: meaning thereby,
that no man (though he were never so stout) came in their walk, that escaped
without death.

Herodotus descrybing the mighty host of Xerxes especially does mark out,
Herod. in Polym.
what bows and shaftes they used, signifying yt therein lay their chief
strength And at the same time Attossa, mother of Xerxes, wife to Darius, and
daughter of Cyrus, (...)
does enquire (as Aeschylus shows in a Tragedy) of a certain messenger
that came from Xerxes host, what strong and fearful bows the Grecians used:
whereby it is plain, that Artillarie (...) thing, wherein both Europe and Asia^
those days trusted most upon.

The best part of Alexanders host were archers as playnelye does appear by
Arianus, and other y^ wrote his life: and those so strong archers, that they
only, (...)
sundry times overcame their enemies, before any other neded to fight: as was
seen in the battayl which Nearchus one of Alexanders capitaynes had beside the
river of Thomeron. And therefore as concerning all these kingdoms and common
wealths, I may conclude with this sentence of Pliny, (...)
whose words be, as I suppose thus: If any man would remember the Ethiopians,
Egyptians, Arabians, the men of Inde, of Scythia, so many people in y^ east of
the Sarmatianes, and all the kingdoms of the Parthians, he shall well perceive
half the part of the world, to live in subjection, overcome by the might and
power of shotinge.

In the commune wealth of Rome, which exceded all other in virtue, nobleness,
and dominion little mention is made of shoting, not because it was little used
among them, but rather because it was both so necessary and common, that
it was thought a thing not necessary or required of any man to be spoken
upon, as if a man should describe a great feast, he would not ones name
bread, although it be most common and necessary of all: but surely if a
feast being never so great, lacked bread, or had fewsty and noughty bread,
all the other daynties should be unsavory, and little regarded, and than would
men talk of the commodity of bread, when they lack it, that would not ones
name it before, when they had it: And even so did the Romans as concerning
shootyng. Seldom is shootinge named, and yet it did the most good in war,
as did appear, very plainly in that battle, which Scipio Aphricanus had
with the Numantines in Spain, whom he could never overcome, before he set
bowemen among his horse men, by whose might they were clean vanquished.

Again, Cor. (...)
Tiberius fighting with Armenius and Inguiomerus princis of Germany, had one
wing of archers on horseback, an other of archers on foot, by whose might the
Germans were slain down right, and so scattered and beat out of the
feelde, that the chase lasted.^. miles, the Germans clame up in to trees for
fear, but the Romans did fetch them down with their shaftes as they had be^
birds, in which battle the Romans lost few or none, as does appear in
the history.

But as I began to say, the Romans did not so much praise the goodness of
shootinge, when they had it, as they did lament the lack of it, when they
wanted it, as Leo the.v. the noble Emperor does plainly testify in sundry
places in those books which he wrote in Greek, of the sleyghtes and pol^ies of
war.


PHIL. Surely of that book I have not heard before, and how came you to the
syghte of it.


TOX. The book is rare truly, but this last year when master Cheke
translated the said book out of greek in to Latin, to y^ kings majesty, he
of his gentleness, would have me very often in his chamber, and for the
familiarity that I had with him, more than many other, would suffer me to
read of it, when I would, the which thing to do, surely I was very
desirous and glad, because of the excellent handelynge of all things, that
ever he takes in hand. And verily Philologe, as often as I remember the
departing of that man from the university, (which thing I do not seldom)
so often do I well perceive our most help and furtheraunce to learning, to
have gone away with him. For by y^ great commodity y^ we took in hearing him
read privately in his chamber, all Homer, Sophocles, and Euripides, Herodotus,
Thurydides, Xenophon, Isocrates and Plato, we feel the great discommoditie in
not hearing of him, Aristotle and Demosthenes, which ii. authors with all
diligence last of all he thought to have read unto us. And when I consider
how many men he succored with his help, and his aid to abide here for
learning, and how all men were provoked and styrred up, by his council and
daily example, how they should come to learning, surely I perceive that
sentence of Plato to be true, which says that there is nothing better in any
common wealth, than that there should be always one or other, excellent
passing man, whose life and virtue, should pluck forward the will,
diligence, labor and hope of all other, that following his footesteppes, they
might comme to the same end, whereunto labor, lerning and virtue, had
co^ueied him before. The great hinderance of learning, in lackinge this man
greatly I should lament, if this disco^moditie of ours, were not joined with
the commodity and wealth, of y^ hole realm, for which purpose, our noble king
full of wisdom has called up this excellent man full of learning, to teach
noble prince Edward, an office full of hope, comfort and solace to al true
hertes of England: For whom al England daily does pray, yt he passing his
Tutour in learning and knowledge, following his father in wisdom and
felicity, according to yt example which is set before his eyes, may so set out
and maintain gods word to the abolishment of al papistry, the confusion of
al heresy, that thereby he feared of his ennemies, loved of al his subjects,
may bring to his own glory, immortal fame and memory, to this realm, welthe,
honor and felicity, to true and unfeigned religion perpetual peace, concord
and unity.

But to return to shootynge again, what Leo says of shootynge among the
Romans, his words, be so much for the praise of shootynge, and the book
also so rare to be gotten, Leo. 6. 5.
that I learned the places by heart, which be as I suppose, even thus. First
in his sixte book, as concerning what harneys is best: Let all the youth of
Rome be compelled to use shootyng, either more or less, and always to bear
their bow and their quiver about with them, until they be.xl. years oulde.

For since shootynge was necglected and decayed among the Romans, many a
battle and fyelde has been lost. Lco. 11. 50.
Again in the.11. book and.50. chapter, (I call that by books and
chapiters, which the greek book deuideth by chapiters and paragraphes) Let
your souldyers have their weapons well appointed and trimmed, but ab^ue all
other things regard most shootinge, and therefore let men when there is no
war, use shootinge at home: For the leaving of, only of shotynge, has
brought in ^uyne and decay, the hole Empire of Rome. Afterward he
commands again, his captain by these words: (...). 11
Arm your host as I have appointed you, but specially with bow and arrows
plenty. For shootynge is a thing of much might and power in war, and
chyefely against the Sarracenes and Turks, which people has all their hope
of victory in their bow and shaftes: Besides all this, in an other place, he
writes thus to his Captain: Artillery is easy to be prepared, and in time
of great need, a thing most profitable, therefore we straytlye command you to
make proclamation to al men under our dominion, which be either in war or
peace, to all cities, borowes and towns, and finally to all manner of men, (...)
that every sear person have bow and shaftes of his own, and every house
beside this, to have a standing bearyng bow, and xl. shaftes for all needs,
and that they exercise them selves in holtes, hills, and dales, playnes and
wodes, for all manner of chances in war.

How much shooting was used among the old Romans and what means noble
captains and Emperous made, to have it increase among them, and what hurt
came by the decay of it, these words, of Leo the emperor, which in a manner I
have rehearsed word for word, plainly does declare. And yet shotynge,
although they set never so much by it, was never so good than, as it is now
in England, which thing to be true, is very probable, in that Leo does say,
that he would have his soldiers take of their arrowe heads, Leo. 7. 18.
and one shote at an other, for their exercise, which play if English
archers used, I think they should find small play and less pleasure in it at
all.

The great vpperhande maynteyned always in war by artillery, does appear
very plainly by this reason also, that when the spanyardes, franchmen, and
germans, greeks, macedonians and egyptians, each contry using one singular
weapon, for which they were greatelye feared in war, as the Spanyarde
Lancea, the Francheman Gesa, the German Framea, the Grecian Machera, the
Macedonian Sarissa, yet could they not escape, but be subjects to the empire
of Rome, when the Parthians having all their hope in artillery, gave no place
to the^, but overcame the Romans, ofter than the Romans them, and kept
battle with them, many an hundred year, Plutarch. ^ M. ^rass. (...) Spart.
and s^ue the rich Crassus and his son with many a stout Romayne more, with
their bows. They drove Marcus Antonius over the hills of Media and Armenia,
to his great shame and reproach. They s^ue Iulianus Apostata, and Autoninus
Caracalla, they held in perpetual prison, y^ most noble emperor Ualerian in
despite of all the Romans and many other princes, which wrote for his
delyueraunce, as Bell solis called king of kings, Ualerius king of Cadusia,
Arthabesdes king of Armenia, and many other princes more, whom y^ Parthians by
reason of their artillery, regarded never one whitte, and thus with the
Romans, I may conclude, that the borders of their empire were not at the
sun rysinge and sun setting, as Tullye says: but so far they went, as
artillarie would give them leave. For I think all the ground that they had,
either northewarde, farther than the borders of Scythia, or Eastewarde, farther
than the borders of Parthia, a man might have boughte with a small deal of
money, of which thing surely sho tyng was the cause.

From the same contrie of Scythia the Gothians Hunues, (...) Dia^.
and Wandalians came with the same we pons of artillarie, as Paulus Diaconus
does say, and so berafte Rome of her empire with fire, spoil, and waste, so
y^ in such a learned city was left scarce one man behind, that had
learning or leysoure to leave in writing to them which should come after
how so noble an Empire, in so short a while, by a rabble of banyshed bondemen,
without all order and policy, save only their naturalle and daily
exercise in artillarye, was brought to such thraldom and ruin.

After them the ^urkes having an other name, but yet the same people, P. Mela.
^.
borne in Scythia, brought bp only in artillarie, by the same weapon have
subdued and beraft from the Christen men all Asia and Aphrike (to speak upon,)
and the most noble countries of Europe, to the great diminishing of Christ
his religion, to the great reproach of cowardyse of al christianity, a
manifest token of gods high wrath and displeasure over the sin of the world,
but specially among Christen men, which be on sleep made drunk with the
fruits of the flesh, as infidelity, disobedience to Gods word, and heresy,
grudge, euel will, strife, contention, and privy envy, coueytousnesse,
oppression, unmercifulness, with innumerable sorts of unspeakable daily
bawdrye: which things surely, if God hold not his holy hand over us, and
pluck us from them, will bring us to a more Turkishnesse and more beastlye
blind barbarousnesse: as calling ill things good, and good things ill,
contemnyng of knowledge and learning, setting at naught, and having for a
fable, God and his high providence, will bring us (I say) to a more ungracious
Turkishnesse (if more Turkishnesse can be then this) tha^ if the Turks had
sworn, to bring al Turkye against us. For these fruits surely must neades
spring of such seed, and such effect needs follow of such a cause: if
reason, truth, and God, be not altered, but as they are wont to be. For surely
no Turkyshe power can overthrow us, if Turkysshe life do not cast us down
before.

If god were with us, it buted ^ot the turk to be against us, but our
unfaithful sinful living, which is the Turks mother, and has brought him up
hitherto, must needs turn god from us, because syn and he has no fellowship
together. If we banished ill living out of christendom, I am sure the Turk
should not only, not overcome us, but scarce have an hole to run in to, in
his own country.

But Christendom now I may tell you Philologe is much like a man that has
an ytche on him, and lies dronke also in his bed, and though a thief come to
the door, and heaueth at it, to come in, and sleye him, yet he lies in his
bed, having more pleasure to lie in a slumber and scratche him self where it
ytcheth even to the hard bone, than he has redynes to rise up lustelye, and
drive him away that would rob him and sleye him. But I trust Christ will
so lyghten and lift up Christen men's eyes, that they shall not sleep to
death, nor that the turk Christ's open enemy, shall ever boste that he has
quyte overthrown us. But as I began to tell you, shootynge is the chief
thing, wherewith God suffers the turk to punysh our noughtie living with
all: (...).
The youth there is brought up in shotyng, his privy guard for his own
person, is bowmen, the might of their shootynge is well known of the
Spanyardes, which at the town called Newecastell in Illirica, were quyte
slain up, of the turks arrows: when the Spanyardes had no use of their
gunnes, by reason of the rain. I^d now last of all, the emperor his majesty
him self, at the City of Argier in Aphricke had (...) hooste sore handeled
with the Turks arrows, when his gonnes were quite dispatched and stood him in
no service, because of the rain that fell, where as in such a chaune of
rain, if he had had bowmen, surely there shoot might peradventure have been
a little hindered, but quite dispatched and marde, it could never have been.

But as for the Turks I am werie to talk of them partlye because I hate them,
and partlye because I am now affectioned even as it were a man that had been
long wanderyng in strange contries and would feign be at home to se how well
his own friends prosper and lead their life, and surely me think I am very
merye at my heart to remember how I shall find at home in England among
Englysh men, partlye by hystories, of them that have gone before us, again by
experience of the^ which we know, and live with us as great noble feats of
war done by Artillarye, as ever was done at any time in any other common
welthe. And here I must needs remember a certain Fre^chman called Textor, that
writes a book which he names Officina, Te^to^.
wherein he weueth up many brokenended matters and settes out much rifraffe,
pelfery, trumpery, baggage and beggerie ware clamparde up of one that would
seem to be fitter for a shop in deed than to write any book. And among all
other ill packed up matters, he thrustes up in a hepe together all the good
shoters that ever has been in the world as he says himself, and yet I
trow Philologe that of all the examples which I now by chance have rehearsed
out of the best Authors both in greek and latin, Textor (...) but.ii. of them,
which.ii. surely if they were to reke^ again, I would not ones name the^,
partly because they were noughtie persons, and shoting somoche the worse,
because they loved it, as Domitian and Commodus the emperors: partelye because
Textor has them in his book, on whom I looked on bychaunce in the bookebynders
shop, thinking of no such matter. And one thing I will say to you Philologe,
that if I were disposed to do it, and you had leisure to hear it, I could
soon do as Textor does, and reken up such a rabble of shoters that be named
here and there in poets, as would hold us talkyng whiles tomorowe: but my
purpose was not to make mention of those which were feyned of Poets for their
pleasure, but of such as were proved in histories for a truth: but why I
bring in Textor was this: At last when he has rekened all shoters that he
can, (...)
he says thus, Petrus Crinitus writes, that the Scotts which dwell beyond
England be very excellent shoters, and the best bowmen in war. This
sentence whether Crinitus wrote it more leudly of ignorance, or Textor
confirms it more piuyshlye of envy, may be called in question and doubt:
but this surely do I know very well that Textor has both red in Gagu^us the
French history, and also has heard his father or graundfather taulke
(except perchance he was borne and bred in a Cloister) after that sort of the
shotynge of Englisshe men, that Textor neded not to have gone so piuishlye
beyond England for shoting, but might very soon, eue^ in the first town of
kent, have found such plenty of shotinge, as is not in all the realm of
Scotland again. The Scotts surely be good men of war in their own feate as
can be: but as for shotinge, they neither can use it for any profit, nor yet
will challenge it for any praise, although master Textor of his ge^tlenesse would
give it them. Textor neaded not to have filled up his book with such lies,
if he had read the storye of Scotland, (...). M^. ^
which Ioannes Mayor does write: wherein he might have learned, that when
James Stewart first king of that name, at the Parliament holden at Saint
Iohnnes town or Perthie, commanded under pain of a great forfyte, that
every Scotte should learn to shote: yet neither the love of their country,
the fear of their enemies, the auoydyng of punishment, nor the receyuinge of
any profit that might come by it, could make them to be good Archers: which
be unapt and vnfytte thereunto by Gods providence and nature.

Therefore the Scotts them selves prove Textor a liar, both with authority
and also daily experience, and by a certain Proverb that they have among
them in their communication, whereby they give the whole praise of shotynge
honestlye to Englysihe men, saying thus: that every Englysihe Archer bears
under his gyrdle.xxiiii. Scotts.

But to let Textor and the Scotts go: yet one thing would I wysshe for the
Scotts, and that is this, that saying one God, one faith, one compass of the sea, one land and country, one tungue in speaking, one manner and trade in
living, like courage and stomach in war, like quickness of wit to learning,
has made England and Scotland both one, they would suffer them no longer to
be two: but clean gyueouer the Pope, which seeks none other thing (as many a
noble and wise Scottish man does know) but to feed up dissension and parties
betwixt them and us, procuryng that thing to be two, which God, nature, and
reason, would have one.

How profitable such an atonement were for Scotland, John (...)
both Ioha^nes Mayor, and Ector Boethius which wrote the Scotts Chronicles do
tell, and also all the gentlemen of Scotland with the poor co^munaltie, do
well know: So that there is nothing that stops this matter, save only a
few freers, and such like, which, with the dregs of our Englysh Papi strie
lurkyng now among them, study nothing else but to brewe battle and strife
betwixt both the people: Whereby only they hope to maynetayne their
Papisticall kingdom, to the destrution of the noble blood of Scotland, that
then they may with authority do that, which neither noble man nor poor man
in Scotland yet does know. And as for Scottishe men and English men be not
enemies by nature, but by custom: not by our good will, but by their own
follye: which should take more honor in being coupled England, then we
should take profit in being joined to Scotland.

Wales being headye, and rebelling many years against us, lay wild,
untilled, uninhabited, without law, justice, civility and order: and then was
among them more stealing tha^ true dealing, more surety for them that
studied to be naught, then quietness for them that labored to be good: when
now thanked be God, and noble England, there is no country better inhabited,
more civil, more diligent in honest crafts, to get both true and plentiful
living withal. And this felicity (my mind gives me) within these few days
shall chance also to Scotland, by the godly wisdom of our most noble
Prince king Henrye the.viii. by whom God has wrought more wonderful things
then ever by any prince before: as banishing the bishop of Rome and herisie,
bringyng to light god his word and verity, establishing such justice and
equity, through every part of this his realm, as never was seen before.

To such a Prince of such a wisdom, God has reserved this most noble
atonement: whereby neither we shall be any more troubled, nor the S^ottes with
their best countries any more destroyed, nor y^ see, which God ordeyneth
profitable for both, shall from either be any more stopped: to the great
quietness, wealth and felicity of all the people dwelling in this I Will, to
the high renoume and praise of our most noble king, to the fear of all manner
of nations that owe ill will to either country, to the high pleasure of God,
which as he is one, and hates al division, so is he best of all pleased, to se
things which be wide and amysse, brought to peace and atonement. But Textor
(I beshrowe him) has almooste brought us from our co^municatio^ of shoting.
Now sir by my judgment, the Artillarie of England far excedeth all other
realms: but yet one thing I doubt and long have surely in that point doubted,
when, or by whom, shotyng was first brought in to England, and for the same
purpose as I was ones in company with sir Thomas Eliot knight, which surely
for his lerning in all kind of knowledge brings much worship to all the
nobilite of England, I was so bold to ask him, if he at any time, had marked
any thing, as concerning the bringing in of shootynge in to England: he
answered me gentlye again, that he had a work in hand which he names, De
rebus memora bilibus Anglie, which I trust we shall se in print shortly, and
for the accomplyshmente of that book, he had read and perused over many old
monume^tes of England, and in sekyng for that purpose, he marked this of
shootynge in an excedyng old cronicle, the which had no name, that what time
as the Saxons came first into this realm in king Uortigers days, when they
had been here a while and at last began to faull out with the Brittons, they
troubled and subdewed the Brittons with nothing so much, as with their bow
and shaftes, which wepon being strange and not seen here before, was
wonderful terrible unto them, and this beginning I can think very well to
be true. But nowas concerning many examples for the praise of English archers
in war, surely I will not belong in a matter y^ no man doubts in, and those
few y^ I will name, shall either be proved by y^ histories of our enemies, or else
done by men that now live.

King Edward the third at the battle of Cressie against Philip y^ French
king as ^aguinus the french Historiographer plainlye does tell, slew that
day all the nobilite of France only with his archers.

Such like battle also fought y^ noble black prince Edward beside Poeters,
where John y^ french king with his son and in a manner al y^ peers of France
were taken beside.xxx.M. which that day were ^layue, and very few English
men, by reason of their bows.

King Henry the fifte a prince pereles and most vyctoriouse conqueroure of
all that ever dyed yet in this part of the world, at the battle of Dagin court
with.vii.M. fighting men, and yet many of them sick, being such Archers as
the Cronycle says that most part of them drew a yard, slew all the
Cheualrie of France to the number of. XL. M. and moo, and lost not paste.xxvi.
English men.

The bloudye Civil war of England betwixt the house of York and Lancaster,
where shaftes flewe of both sides to the destruction of mannye a yoman of
England, whom foreine battle could never have subdewed both I will pass
over for the pyttyefulnesse of it, and yet may we hyghelye praise GOD in the
remembrance of it, seeing he of his prouydence has so knytte to gether
those.ii. noble houses, with so noble and pleasunte a flower.

The excellent prince Thomas Hawarde now Duke of Northfolk, for whose good
prosperity with al his noble family al English hertes daily does pray with bowme^
of England slew king Iamie with many a noble Scot eue^ bra^t against Flodo^ hill,
in which battle y^ stout archers of Cheshire and Lanchasshire for one day
bestowed to y^ death for their price and country sake, has gotten immortal
name and praise for ever.

The fear only of Englysh Archers has done more wonderful things than
ever I read in any historye greek or latin, and most wonderful of all now
of late beside Carlisle betwixt Eske and Leven at Sandy sikes, where the hoole
nobilite of Scotland for fere of the Archers of England (next the stroke of
God) as both Englysh men and Scotyshe men that were present has toulde me were
drowened and taken prisoners.

Nor that noble act also, which although it be almost iost by time, comes
not behynd in worthiness whyc^e my synguler good friend and Master Sir William
^algraue and Sir George Somerset did with a few Archers to y^ number as it is
said of.xvi. at the Turn pike beside Ha^mes where they turned with so few
Archers, so many Frenchemen to flight, and turned so many out of their Iackes,
which turn turned all france to shame and reproach and those.ii. noble
Knights to perpetual praise and fame.

And thus you se Philologe, in all contries Asia, Aphrike and Europe, in Inde,
Aethiop, Egypt and Jury, Parthia, Persia, Greece, and Italy, Schythia,
Turkey, and England, from the beginning of the world even to this day, that
shotynge has had the chief stroke in war.


PHI. These examples surely apt for the praise of shotynge, I
not feyned by poets, but proved by true histories, distinct by time and
order, has delyted me excedyng much, but yet me think that all this praise
belongs to strong shootynge and drawing of mighty bows not to prickyng
and nere shotinge, for which cause you and many other both love and use
shootyng.


TOX. Ever more Philologe you will have some ouertwhart reason to draw forth
more communication with all, but nevertheless you shall perceive if you will,
that use of prickyng, and desire of nere shootynge at home, are the only
causes of strong shootyng in war, and why? for you se, that the strongest
men, do not draw always the strongest shoot, which thing prouethe that
drawinge strong, liethe not so much in the strength of man, as in the use of
shotyng. And experience teaches the same in other things, for you shall se a
weak smithe, which will with a lipe and turnyng of his arm, take up a bar
of iron, y^ another man thrice as strong, can not stir. And a strong man not
used to shote, has his arms breast and shoulders, and other parts wherewith
he should draw stronglye, one hindering and stoppinge an other, even as a dosen
strong horses not used to the carte, lettes and troubles one another. And so
the more strong man not used to shoot, shootes most vnha^sumlye, but yet if
a strong man with use of shooting could apply all the parts of his body
together to their most strength, than should he both draw stronger than
other, and also shoot better than other. But now a strong man not used to
shoot, at a girde, can heue up and pluck in su^der many a good bow, as wild
horses at a brunte does race and pluck in pieces many a strong carte. And thus
strong me^, without use, can do nothing in shoting to any purpose, neither in
war nor peace, but if they happen to shoot, yet they have done within a
shoot or two when a weak man that is used to shoot, shall serve for all times
and purposes, and shall shoot.x. shaftes, against the others.iiii. and draw
them up to the point, every time, and shoot them to the most advantage,
drawyng and withdrawing his shafte when he list, marky ^ge at one man, yet let
driuyng at an other man: which things in a set battle, although a man, shall
not always use, yet in bickerynges, and at ouerthwarte meatinges, when few
archers be together, they do most good of all.

Again he that is not used to shoot, shall evermore with untowardness of
houldynge his bow, and nockynge his shafte, not lookyng to his stryng betyme,
put his bow always in ieoperdy of breaking, and than he were better to be at
home, moreover he shall shoot very few shaftes, and those full vnhandsum lie,
some not half drawn, some to high and some to low, nor he can not drive a
shoot at a time, nor stop a shoot at a need, but out must it, and very
often to euel proof.


PHI. And that is best I trow in war, to let it go, and not to stop it.


TOX. No not so, but sometime to houlde a shafte at the head, which if they be
but few archers, does more good with the fear of it, than it should do if it
were shot, with the stroke of it.


PHI. That is a wonder to me, y^ the fear of a displeasure, should do more
harm than the displeasure it self.


TOX. Yes, ye know that a man which fereth to be banyshed, out of his
cuntrye, can neither be merry, eat, drink nor sleep for fear, yet when he is
banished in deed, he slepeth and eats, as well as any other. And many men
doubtyng and fearyng whether they should dye or no, even for very fear of
death, preuenteth them self with a more bitter death then the other death
should have been in dead. And thus fear is ever worse than the thing
feared, ^irl. p^d. 3.
as is pratelye proved, by the communication of Cyrus and Tigranes, the kings
sun of Armenie, in Xenophou.


PHI. I grante Toxophile, that use of shotyng makes a man draw strong, to
shoot at most advantage, to keep his gere, which is no small thing in war,
but yet me think, that the customable shoting at home, specially at buttes
and pricks, make nothing at all for strong shooting which doch most good in
war. Therefore I suppose if men should use to goo into the feyldes, and learn
to shote mighty strong shootes, and never care for any mark at al, they
should do much better.


TOX. The truth is, that fashion much used, would do much good, but this is
to be feared, least that way could not provoke men to use much shotyng,
because there should be little pleasure in it. And that in shoting is best, y^
provoke a man to use shotinge most: For much use makes men shoot, both
strong and well, which two things in shootinge, every man does desire. And
the chyefe mayntayner of use, in any thing, is comparyson, and honest
contention. For when a man stryueth to be better than an other, he will
gladly use that thing, though it be never so paynful wherein he would excel,
which thing Aristotle very pratelye does note, saying.

Where is comparison, ^rist. theto. (...) Th^od.
there is victory: where is victory, there is pleasure: And where is
pleasure, no man cares what labor or pain he takes, because of the praise,
and pleasure, that he shall have, in doing better than other men.

Again, (...).
you know Hesiodus writes to his brother Perses, y^ al crafts men, by
contending one honestly with an other, do increase their cu^nyng with their
substance. And therefore in London, and other great Cities, men of one craft,
most commonly, dwell together, because in honest stryuyng together, who shall
do best, every one may wax both cunninger and rycher, so likewise in
shootynge, to make matches to assemble archers together, to contend who shall
shoot best, and win the game, increases y^ use of shotynge wonderfully
among men.


PHI. Of Use you speak very much Toxophile but I am sure in all other matters,
Use can do nothing, without two other things be joined with it, one is a
natural Aptness to a thing, the other is a true way or Knowledge, how to do
the thing, to which ii. if Use be joined, as third fellow, of them three,
proceeds perfectness and excellency: If a man lack the first two,
Aptness and Cunnyng, Use can do little good, at all. For he yt would be an
orator and is nothing naturallye fit for it, that is to say lacks a good
wit and memory, lacks a good voice, countenance and body, and other such
like, ye if he had all these things, and knew not what, how, where, when nor
to whom he should speak, surely the use of speaking, would bring out none
other fruit but plain follye and bablyng, so y^ Use is the last and the least
necessary, of all three, yet no thing can be done excellently without them al
three. And therefore Toxophile I my self because I never knew, whether I was
apt for shooting or no, nor never knew way, how I should learn to shoot I
have not used to shoot: and so I think five hundred more in England do
beside me. And surely if I knew that I were apt, and y^ you would teach me
how to shoot, I would become an archer, and the rather, because of the good
communication, the which I have had with you this day, of shotyng.


TOX. Aptness, Knowledge, and Use, even as you say, make all things perfect.
Aptness is the first and chyefest thing, without which the other two do no
good at all. Knowledge does increase al manner of Aptness, both less and
more. Use says Cicero, is far above all teachinge. And thus they all three
must be had, to do any thing very well, and if any one be away, what so
ever is done, is done very meanly. Aptness is y^ gift of nature, Knowledge,
is gotten by y^ help of other: Use lies in our own diligence and labor. So
that Aptness and use be ours and with in us, through nature and labor:
Knowledge not ours, but coming by other: and therefore most diligently, of
all men to be sought for. How these three things stand with the artillery of
England, a word or two I will say.

All English men generally, be apt for shotyng, and how? Like as that
ground is plentiful and fruitful, which without any tyllynge, brings
out corn, as for example, if a man should go to the myll or market with
corn, and happen to spyl some in the way, yet it would take root and grow,
because y^ soil is so good: so England may be thought very fruitful and apt
to bring out shoters, where children even from the cradell, love it: and young
men without any teaching so diligently use it. Again, likewise as a good
ground, well tylled, and well husbanded, brings out great plenty of byg
^ared corn, and good to the faule: so if the youth of England being apt of
it self to shote, were taught and learned how to shote, the Archers of England
should not be only a great deal ra^ker, and mo then they be: but also a good
deal bygger and stronger Archers then they be. This commodity should follow
also y^ the youth of England were taught to shote, that even as plowing of a
good ground for wheat, does not only make it mete for the seed, but also
riueth and plucketh up by the roots, all thistles, brambles and weeds, which
grow of their own accord, to the destruction of both corn and ground:
Even so should the teaching of youth to shote, not only make them shote well,
but also pluck away by the roots all other desire to noughtye pastymes, as
disynge* cardyng, and boouling, which without any teaching are used every
where, to the great harm of all youth of this realm. And likewise as burning
of thistles and diligent weding them out of the corn, does not half
somocheryd them, as when y^ ground is falloed and tilled for good grain, as I
have heard many a good hus^andman say: even so, neither hot punishment, nor
yet diligent searching out of such unthriftiness by the officers, shall so
throwly wede these ungracious games out of the realm, as occupying and
bringyng up youth in shotynge, and other honest pastyme. Thirdly, as a ground
which is apt for corn and also well tilled for corn: yet if a man let it lie
still and do not occupye it.iii. or.iiii. year: but then will sow it, if it be
wheat (says Columella) it will turn into rye: so if a man be never so apt to
shote, nor never so well taught in his youth to shote, yet if he give it over,
and not use to shote, truly when he shall be either compelled in war time for
his country sake, or else provoked at home for his pleasure sake, to faule to
his bow: he shall be come of a fair archer, a stark squyrter and dribber.
Therefore in shotynge, as in all other things, there can neither be many in
number, nor excellent in deed: except these.iii. things, Aptness, Knowledge,
and Use goo together.


PHIL. Uery well said Toxophile, and I promise you, I agree to this judgment
of yours altogyther and therefore I can not a little maruayle, why English men
bring no more help to shotynge, then nature it self gives them. For you se
that even children be put to their own shifts in shotyng, having nothing
taught them: but that they may chose, and chance to shoot ill, rather then
well, vnaptlye sooner then fitlye, unto wardlye, more easily then well
fauouredlye, which thing causes many never begin to shoot: and moo to
leave it of when they have begone, and most of all to shote both worse and
weaker, then they might shote, if they were taught.

But peradventure some men will say, that with use of shootynge a man shall
learn to shoot, true it is he shall learn, but what shall he learn? marye to
shoot noughtly. For all Use, in all things, if it be not stayed with Cunnyng,
will very easily bring a man to do y^ thing, what so ever he goes about
with much ill fauorednes and deformity.

Which thing how much harm it does in learning both Crassus excellency does
prove in Tullie, and I my self have experiens in my little shootyng. (...).
And therefore Toxophile, you must needs grant me that either English men do
il, in not ioynyng Knowledge of shooting to Use, or else there is no knowledge or
cu^ninge, which can be gathered of shooting.


TOX. Learning to shoot is little regarded in England, for this consideration,
because men be so apt by nature they have a great ready forwardness and will
to use it, al though no man teach them, al though no man bid them, and so of
their own courage they ru^ne hedlynge on it, and shoot they ill, shote they
well, great head they take not. And in very deed Aptness with Use may do
sumwhat without Knowledge, but not the tenthe part, if so be they were joined
with knowledge.

Which three things be separate as you se, not of their own kind, but
through the negligence of me^ which coupleth them not to gyther. And where ye
doubt whether there can be gadered any knowledge or art in shootyng or no,
surely I think that a man being well exercised in it and sumwhat honestly
learned with all, might soon with diligent observing and markynge the hole
nature of shootynge, find out ^s it were an Art of it, as Arts in other
matters have been found out before, seeing that shootyng stands by those
things, which may both be thorowlye perceued, and perfitly known, and such
that never fails, but be ever certain, belonging to one most perfect end,
as shootyng straight, and keeping of a lenght bring a man to hit the mark, y^
chief end in shootyng: which two things a man may attain unto, by diligent
using, and well handlynge those instruments, which belong unto them. Therefore
I can not see, but there lies hyd in the nature of Shooty^ge, an Art, which
by notynge, and observing of him, that is exercised in it, if he be any thing
learned at al, may be taught, to the great forderaunce of Artillarie through
out all this Realm. And true lie I meruell gretelye, that English men would
never yet, s^ke for the Art of shootynge, saying they be so apt unto it, so
praised of there friends, so feared of there enemies for it. Ueg^^^^s.
Uegetius would have masters appointed, which should teach youth to
shoot fair. Leo the Emperor of Rome, shows the same custom, Leo. 6. 5.
to have been always amongst y^ old Romans: which custom of teaching
youth to shoot (says he) after it was omitted, and little head taken of,
Strabo. 11.
brought the hole Empire of Rome, to great Ruin. Schola Persica, that is the
Scole of the Persians, appointed to bring up youth, whiles they were.xx.
year old in shooting, is as notably known in Histories as the Impire of y^
Persians: which schole, ^or. Ta. ^
as does apere in Cornelius Tacitus, as soon as they gave over and fell to
other idle pastimes, brought both them and y^ Parthians under y^ subjection of
the Romans. ^^l^g. 7.
Plato would have common masters and stipendes, for to teach youth to
shoot, and for the same purpose he would have abroad feylde nere every City,
made common for men to use shotyng in, which saying the more reasonably it is
spoken of Plato, the more unreasonable is their deed which would ditche up
those feeldes privately for there own profyt, which lies open generallye for
the common use: men by such goods be made ryther not honester says Tullie.
If men can be persuaded to have shootynge taught, (...)
this aucthorite which follows will persuade them, or else none, and that is
as I have ones said before, of King Dauyd, whose first act and ordinance
was after he was king that all Judea should learn to shoot. If shotyng could
speak, she would accuse England of unkindness and slothfulness, of
unkindness toward her because she being left to a little blind use, lackes her
best maintener which is cunning: of shouthfulnesse toward their own self,
because they are content with that which aptness and use does grant them in
shootynge, and will seek for no knowledge as other noble common welthes have
done: and the iustlier shootynge might make this complaynt, seeing that of
fence and weapons there is made an Art, a thing in no wise to be compared to
shootynge.

For of fence all most in every town, there is not only Masters to teach
it, with his Prouostes Usshers Scholars and othernames of art and Schole, but
there has not failed also, which has diligently and well fauouredly written
it and is s^t ou^ in Priute that every man may read it.

What discommoditie does comme by the lack of knowledge, in shootynge, it were
over long to (...) hearce. For many that have been apt, and loue^ shootynge,
because they knew not which way to houlde to comme to shootynge, have clean
turned them selves from shootynge.

And I may tell you Philologe, the lack of teaching to shoot in England,
causes very many men, to play with the kings Acts, as a man did ones
either with the Mayre of London or york I can not tell whether, which did
command by proclamation, every man in the City, to hang a lan^erne with a
candell, before his door: which thing the man did, but he did not light it:
And so many bye bows because of the act, but yet they shote not: not of evil
will, but because they know not how to shoot. But to conclude of this
matter, in shoting as in all other things, Aptness
Aptenesse is the first, and chyefe thing, which if it be away, neither
Cunning or Use, does any good at all, as the Scotts and France men, with
knowledge and Use of shootynge, shall become good Archers, when a cu^nynge
shypwright shall make a strong ship, of a Salowe tree: or when a husbandman
shall become rich, with sowyng wheat on New markscunnyng, et heath. Cunning
must be had, Cunnyn^^.
both to set out, and amend^ Nature, and also to ouersee, and correct use:
which use if it be not led, and governed with cunnyng, shall ^oo^er go amiss,
than straight.

(...) makes perfitnesse, in doing that thing, (...) unto nature makes a
man apt, and knowledge makes a man cunninge before. So y^ it is not so
doubtful, which of them three has most stroke in shoting as it is plain and
evident, that all three must be had, in excellent shootynge.


PHI. For this communicacio^ Toxophile I am very glad, and y^ for mine ownesak^
because I trust now, to become a shoter, And in deed I thought a fore, English
me^ most apt for shoting, and I saw them dayelye use shotyng, but yet I never
found none, that would talk of any knowledge whereby a man might come to
shotynge. Therefore I trust that you, by the use you have had in shoting, have
so thoroughly marked and noted the nature of it, that you can teach me as it
were by a trade or way how to come to it.


TOX. I grant, I have used shootinge meetly well, that I might have marked it
well enough, if I had been diligent. But my much shootynge, has caused me
study little, so that thereby I lack learning, which should set out the Art
or way in any thing. And you know that I was never so well seen, in the
Posteriorums of Aristotle as to invent and search out general Demonstrations
for the setting forth of any new Science. Yet by my trothe if you will, I will
go with you into the fealdes at any time and tell you as much as I can, or else
you may stand some time at the pricks and look on the^ which shoot best
and so learn


PHI. How little you have looked of Aristotle, and how much learning, you
have lost by shotynge I can not tell, but this I would say and if I loved you
never so (...), that you have been occupied in sumwhat else beside shotynge. But
to our purpose, as I will not require a trade in shotinge to be taught me after
the sutteltye of Aristotle, even so do I not agree with you in this point, that
you would have me learn to shoot with lokyng on them which shoot best, for so
I know I should never come to shote meanelye. For in shotyng as in all other
things which be gotten by ^eachynge, there must be showed a way and a path
which shall lead a man to y^ best and cheiffest point which is in shootynge,
which you do mark your self well enough, and uttered it also in your
communication, when you said there lay hyd in y^ nature of shootyng a
certain way which well perceived and thorowlye known, would bring a man
without any wanderyng to y^ best end in shotyng which you called hitting of
the prick. Therefore I would refer all my shootinge to that end which is
best, and so should I come the sooner to some mean.

That which is best has no fault, nor can not be amended. So show me best
shootynge, not the best shoter, which if he be never so good, yet has he many
a fault easelye of any man to be espied. And therefore meruell not if I require
to follow that example which is without fault, rather than that which has so
many faults. And this way every wise man does follow in teaching any manner
of thing. As Aristotle when he teaches a man to be good he settes not before
him Socrates life which was y^ best man, but chief goodness it self
according to which he would have a man direct his life.


TOX. This way which you require of me Philologe, is to hard for me, and to
hye for a shooter to taulke on, and taken as I suppose out of the mids of
Philosophy* to search out the perfect end of any thing, y^ which perfect end
to find out, says Tullie, is the hardest thing in the world, (...) B^u
the only occasyon and cause, why so many sects of Philosophers has been
alwayse in learning. And although as Cicero says a man may ymagine and
dream in his mind of ^ perfect end in any thing, yet there is no experience
nor use of it, nor was never seen yet among men, as always to heal the
sick, ever more to lead ^ ship without danger, at al times to hit the
prick: shall no Physicion, no ship master, no shoter ever do. And Aristotle
says that in all deades there are two points to be marked, (...). pol. 8. 6
possibility and excele^cie, but chefely a wise man must follow and lay hand
on possibility for fear he lease both. Therefore seeing that which is most
perfect and best in shootyng as always to hit y^ prick, was never seen nor
hard tell on yet among men, but only ymagined and thought upon in a man his
mind, me thinck this is the wisest counsel and best for us to follow rather
that which a man may come to, than y^ which is impossible to be attained to,
lest justly that saying of y^ wise maid Ismens in Sophocles may be verifyed
on us. A fool he is that takes in hand he can not end. (...)



PHI. Well if the perfect end of other matters, had been as perfitlye known,
as the perfect end of shotynge is, there had never been so many sects of
Philosophers as there be, for in shoting both man and boy is in one opinion,
that always to hit the pryck is most perfect end that can be imagyned, so
that we shall not need greatly contend in this matter. But now sir, whereas you
think y^ a man in learning to shoot or any thing else, should rather wyselye
follow possibility, tha^ vainly seek for perfect excellency, surely I will
prove y^ every wise man, y^ wisely would learn any thing, shall chiefly go
about y^ whereunto he knows well he shall never come. And you your self I
suppose shall confess y^ same to be y^ best way in teaching, if you will answer
me to those things which I will ask of you.


TOX. And y^ I will gladlye, both because I think it is impossible for you to
prove it, and also because I desire to here what you ca^ say in it.


PHI. The study of a good Physicio^ Toxophile, I trow be to know al diseases
and al medicines fit for them.


TOX. It is so in deed.


PHI. Because I suppose he would gladly at al times heal al diseases of al men.


TOX. Ye truly.


PHI. A good purpose surely, but was there ever physicio^ yet among so many
which has labored in this study, that at al times could heal all diseases?


TOX. No trewly: nor I thyncke never shall be.


PHI. Than Physicions by like, study for y^, which none of them comes unto.
But in learning of fence I pray you what is y^ which men most labor for?


TOX. That they may hit a another. I trow and never take blow their self.


PHI. You say trothe, and I am sure every one of the^ would feign do so when so
ever he playethe. But was there ever any of the^ so conning yet, which at one
time or other has not be touched?


TOX. The best of them all is glad sometime to escape with a blow.


PHIL. Tha^ in fence also, men are taught to go about that thing, which the
best of them all knowethe he shall never attain unto. Moreover you that be
shoters, I pray you, what mean you, when ye take so great head, to keep
your standing, to shoot compass, to look on your mark so diligently, to
cast up grass diverse times and other things more, you know better tha^ I.
What would you do tha^ I pray you?


TOX. Hit y^ mark if we could.


PHIL. And does every man go about to hit the mark at every shoot?


TOX. By my trothe I trow so, and as for my self I am sure I do.


PHIL. But al men do not hit it at al times.


TOX. No trewlye for that were a wonder.


PHIL. Can any man hit it at all times?


TOX. No man verily.


PHIL. Than by likely to hit the prick always, is impossible. For that is
called impossible which is in no man his power to do.


TOX. Unpossible in deed.


PHIL. But to shoot wide and far of the mark is a thing possible.


TOX. No man will deny that.


PHIL. But yet to hit the mark alwayse were an excellent thing.


TOX. Excellent surely.


PHIL. tha^ I am sure those be wiser men, which couete to shote wide than those
which couete to hit the prycke.


TOX. Why so I pray you.


PHIL. Because to shot^ wide is a thing possible, and therefore as you say
your self, of every wise man to be followed. And as for hittinge y^ prick,
because it is impossible, it were a vain thing to go about it: but in good
sadness Toxophise thus you se that a man might go throghe all crafts and
sciences, and prove that any man in his science coueteth that which he shall
never get.


TOX. By my troth (as you say) I can not deny, but they do so: but why and
wherefore they should do so, I can not learn.


PHILO. I will tell you, every craft and science stands in two things: in
Knowing of his craft, and Working of his craft: For per fyte knowledge
brings a man to perfyte workyng This know Paynters, karuers, Taylours,
shomakers, and all other crafts men, to be true. Now, in every craft, there
(...) a perfect excellency, which may be better known in a man's mind, then
followed in a man's deed. This perfytenesse, because it is generally laid as a
broad wide example before al me^, no one particular man is able to compass it:
and as it is general to al men, so it is perpetual for all time which proves
it a thing for man impossible: although not for the capacity of our thinkyng
which is heavenly, yet surely for the ability of our workyng which is
worldly.

God gives not full perfytenesse to one man (says Tullie) lest if one man had
all in any one science, D^. Inu^^. 8
there should be nothing left for an other. Yet God suffers us to have the
perfyt knowledge of it, that such a knowledge diligently followed, might bring
forth according as a man does labor, perfyte woorkyng And who is he, that in
learning to write, would forsake an excellent example, and follow a worse?

Therefore seeing perfytenesse it self is an example for us, let every man
study how he may come nigh it, which is a point of wisdom, not reason with
God why he may not attain unto it, which is vain ^uriosite.


TOX. Surely this is gaily said Philologe, but yet this one thing I am a
fraide of, lest this perfitnesse which you speak on will discourage men to take
any thing in hand, because before they begin, they know, they shall never come
to an end. And thus despair shall dispatche, even at the first entering in,
many a good man his purpose and intent. And I think both you your self, and
al other men to, would count it mere folly for a man to tell him whom he
teaches, that he shall never optaine that, which he would fainest learn. And
therefore this same high and perfect way of teaching let us leave it to higher
matters, and as for shootynge it shall be content with a meaner way well
enough.


PHI. Where as you say y^ this hye perfitnesse will discorage me^, because they
know, they shall never attain unto it, I am sure clean contrary there is
nothing in the world shall encourage men more than it. And why? For where a
man seith, that though a another man be never so excellent, yet it is possible
for him self to be better, what pain or labor will that man refuse to take?
if the game be onse won, no man will set forth his foot to run. And thus
perfitnesse being so high a thing that men may look at it, not come to it,
and being so plentiful and indifferent to every body that the
plentifulnesse of it may provoke all men to labor, because it has enough for
all me^, the indifferencye of it shall encourage every one to take more pain
than his fellow, because every man is rewarded according to his nigh coming,
and yet which is most meruel of al, y^ more men take of it, the more they leave
behynd for other, as Socrates did in wisdom, and Cicero in eloquens, whereby
other has not lacked, but has fared a great deele y^ better. And thus
perfitnesse it self because it is never obtained, even therefore only does it
cause so many men to be so well seen and per^ite in many matters, as they be.
But where as you think y^ it were fondness to teach a man to shoot, in
lokyng at the most perfitnesse in it, but rather would have a man go some
other way to work, I trust no wise man will discomend that way, except he
think himself wyser than Tullye, De Orat. 3.
which does plainly say, that if he teached any manner of craft as he did
Rhetorike he would labor to bring a man to the knowledge of the most
perfitnesse of it, which knowledge should ever more lead and gyde a man to
do that thing well which he went abonte. Which way in all manner of learning
to be best, Plato does also declare in Euthydemus, of whom Tullie learned it
as he did many other things mo. And thus you se Toxophile by what reasons and
by whose authorite I do require of you this way in teaching me to shoot,
which way I pray you without any more delay show me as farforth as you have
noted and marked.


TOX. You call me to a thing Philologe which I am loathe to do. And yet if I do
it not being but a small matter as you think, you will lack frendeshyp in
me, if I take it in hand and not bring it to pass as you would have it, you
might thyncke great want of wisdom in me.

But advise you, seeing ye will needs have it so, the blame shall be yours, as
well as mine: yours for putting upon me so instauntlye, mine in receyuynge so
fondly a greater burden then I am able to bear. Therefore I, more willing to
fulfill your mind, than hopyng to accomplysh that which you look for, shall
speak of it, not as a master of shotynge, but as one not altogyther ignorant
in shotynge. And one thing I am glad of, the sun drawinge down so fast into
the west, shall compel me to draw a pace to the end of our matter, so that
his darkness shall somethyng cloak mine ignorance. And because you know the
ordering of a matter better then I: Ask me generallye of it, and I shall
particularly answer to it.


PHI. Uery gladly Toxophile: for so by order, those things which I would
know, you shall tell the better: and those things which you shall tell, I
shall remember the better.


TOXOPHILVS. B.
THE SECOND BOOK OF the schole of shotyng.
PHILOL. What is the cheyfe point in shootynge, that every manne labors to
come to?


TOX. To hit the mark.


PHI. How many things are required to make a man ever more hit the mark?


TOX. Two.


PHI. Which two?


TOX. Shotinge straight and keeping of a length.


PHIL. How should a man shoot straight, and how should a man keep a
length?


TOX. In knowing and having things, belonging to shootyng* and when they be
known and had, in well handlynge of them: whereof some belong to shotyng
straight, some to keeping of a length, some commonly to them both, as shall be
told severally of them, in place convenient.


PHI. Things belongyng to shotyng, which be they?


TOX. All things be outward, and some be instruments for every sere archer
to bring with him, proper for his own use: other things be general to every
man, as the place and time ^erueth.


PHI. Which be instruments?


TOX. Bracer, shotynggloue, stryng, bow and shafte.


PHI. Which be general to all men?


TOX. The wether and the mark, yet the mark is ever under the rule of the
wether.


PHI. wherein stands well handlynge of things?


TOX. All together within a man him self, some handlynge is proper to
instruments, some to the wether, sum to the mark, some is within a man him
self.


PHI. what handlyng is proper to the Instruments.


TOX. Standing, nockyng, drawyng, holdyng, lowsing, whereby comes fair
shotynge, which neither belong to wind nor wether, nor yet to the mark, for
in a rain and at no mark, a man may shote a fair shoot.


PHIL. well said, what handlynge belongs to the wether?


TOX. Knowing of his wind, with him, against him, side wynd, full side wind,
side wind quarter with him, side wind quarter against him, and so forth.


PHI. well than go to, what handlynge belongs to the mark?


TOX. To mark his standing, to shote compass, to draw evermore like, to lowse
evermore like, to consider the nature of the prick, in hills and dales, in
strayte planes and winding places, and also to espy his mark


PHI. Uery well done. And what is only within a man him self?


TOX. Good heed gyuynge, and avoiding all affections: which things
oftentimes do mar and make all. And these things spoken of me generally and
brefely, if they be well known, had, and handled, shall bring a man to such
shootynge, as few or none ever yet came unto, but surely if he miss in any
one of the^, he can never hit the mark, and in the more he does miss, the
farther he shoteth from his mark. But as in all other matters the first sleppe
or stayre to be good, is to know a man's fault, and than to amend it, and he
that will not know his fault, shall never amend it.


PHI. You speak now Toxophile, even as I would have you to speak: But let
us r^turne again unto our matter, and those things which you have packed up,
in so short a room, we will lowse the^ forth, and take every pyece as it
were in our hand and look more narowlye upon it.


TOX. I am content, but we will rydde them as fast as we can, because the sun
goes so fast down, and yet somewhat must needs be said of every one of
them.


PHI. well said, and I trow we began with those things which be
instruments, whereof the first, as I suppose, was the Braser. Brac^r*



TOX. Little is to be said of the braser. A bracer serves for two causes, one
to save his arm from the strype of the string, and his doublet from wearynge,
and the other is, that the string glydynge sharpelye and quicklye of the
bracer, may make the sharper shoot. For if the string should light upon the
bare fleue, the strength of the shoot should stop and dye there. But it is
best by my judgment, to give the bow so much bent, that the string need
never touch a man's arm, and so should a man need no bracer as I know
many good Archers, which occupye none. In a bracer a man must take heed
of.iii. things, y^ it have no nails in it, that it have no bucles, that it be
fast on with laces without agglettes.

For the nails will shere in sunder, a man's string, before he be ware, and
so put his bow in ieoperdy: Buckles and agglettes at unawares, shall race his
bow, a thing both evil to the syghte, and perilous for freatynge. And thus
a Bracer, is only had for this purpose, that the string may have redye
passage.


PHI. In my Bracer I am cunnyng enough, but what say you of the shootyng glove.


TOX. A shootynge Glove is chieflye, for to save a man's fyngers from
hurtynge, that he may be able to bear the sharp stryng to the uttermost of
his strength. And when a man shoots, the might of his shoot lies on the
formooste finger, and on the Ringman, for the myddle finger which is the
longest, like a lubber starteth back, and bears no weight of the string in
a manner at all, therefore the two other fyngers, must have thicker lether, and
that must have thickest of all, where on a man lowseth most, and for sure
lowsyng, the formoste finger is most apt, because it holds best, and for y^
purpose nature has as a man would say, yocked it with the thoumbe. Ledder, if
it be next a man's skin, will sweat, wax hard and chafe, therefore scarlet
for the softnes of it and thickness with all, is good to sewe within a man's
glove. If that will not serve, but yet your finger hurts, you must take a
searynge cloth made of fine virgin wax, and Deres sewet, and put next your
finger, and so on with your glove. If yet you feel your finger pinched, leave
shootyng both because than you shall shoot naught, and again by little and
little, hurtynge your finger, ye shall make it long and long to or you shoot
again. A new glove pluckes many shootes because the stringe goes not freelye
of, and therefore the fingers must be cut sho^^, and trimmed with some
ointment, that the string may glyd well away. Some with holding in the nocke
of their shafte to hard, rub the skyn of there fingers. For this there be.ii.
remedies, one to have a goose quyll splettyd and sewed against the nockynge,
betwixt the lining and the ledder, which shall help the shoot much to, the
other way is to have some roll of ledder sewed betwixt his fingers at the
setting on of the fingers, which shall keep his fingers so in sunder, that they
shall not hold the nock so fast as they did. The shootyng glove has a purse
which shall serve to put fine linen cloth and wax in, two necessary things
for a shooter, some men use gloves or other such like thing on their bow hand
for chafyng, because they houlde so hard. But that comes commonly, when a
bow is not round, but somewhat square, fine wax shall do very well in such a
case to lay where a man holds his bow: and thus much as concerning your
glove. And these things although they be trifles, yet because you be but a
young shoter, I would not leave them out.


PHI. And so you shall do me most pleasure: The string I trow be the next.


TOX. String^.
The next in deed. A thing though it be little, yet not a little to be regarded.
But here in you must be content to put your trust in honest stringers. And
surely stringers ought more diligently to be looked upon by the officers tha^
^ther bower or fletcher, because they may deceive a simple man the more
easelyer. An ill stringe brekethe many a good bow, nor no other thing half
so many. In war if a string break the man is lost and is no man, for his
weapon is gone, and although he have two stringes put one at once, yet he
shall have small leisure and less room to bend his bow, therefore god send us
g^od stringers both for war and peace. Now what a stringe ought to be made on,
whether of good hemp as they do now a days, or of flax or of sylke, I leave
that to the judgment of stringers, of whom we must bye them on. Eustathius
(...).
upon this verse of homere Twa^g ^ the bow, and twa^g q the string, (...) 4.
out quickly the shaft f^ue does tell, that in oulde time they made their bow
strings of bullox thermes, which they twyned to gither as they do ropes, and
therefore they made a great twange. Bow strings also has been made of the
hear of an horse tail called for the matter of them Hippias as does appear
in many good authors of the Greek tongue. (...).
Great stringes, and little strings be for diverse purposes: the great string
is more surer for the bow, more stable to prick wythal, but slower for the
cast, the little stringe is clean contrary, not so sure, therefore to be taken
head of, less with long tarienge on, it break your bow, more fit to shoot
far, than apt to prick nere, therefore when you know the nature of both
big and little, you must fit your bow, according to the occasion of your
shootinge. In stringinge of your bow (though this place belong rather to the
ha^dlyng than to the thing it self, yet because the thing, and the handlynge
of the thing, be so joined together, I must need some time couple the one with
the other,) you must mark the fit length of your bow. For if the stringe be
to short, the bending will give, and at the last slyp and so put the bow in
ieopardye. If it be long, the bendynge must needs be in the small of the
string, which being sore twined must needs knap in sunder to y^ destruction
of many good bows. Moreover you must look that your bow be well nocked for
fere the sharpness of the horn shere a sunder the string And that chances
often when in bending, the string has but one wap to strength it with all. You
must mark also to set your stringe streygte on, or else the one end shall
wriethe contrary to the other, and so break your bow. When the stringe
begynnethe never so little to were, trust it not, but a way with it for it is
an ill saved halpeny y^ costs a man a crown Thus you se how many ieopardyes
hangethe over the selye poor bow, by reason only of the string. As when the
stringe is short, when it is long, when either of the nockes be naught, when
it has but one wap, and when it taryethe over long on.


PHI. I se well it is no meruell, though so many bows be broken.


TOX. Bows be broken twice as many ways beside these. But a gain in
stringynge your bow, you must look for much bend or little bend for they be
clean contrary.

The little bend has but one commodity, which is in shootyng faster and
farther shoot, and y^ cause thereof is, because the string has so far a
passage, or it part with the shafte. The great bend has many commodities:
for it makes easyer shootynge the bow being half drawn before. It needs no
bra^er, for the string stops before it come at the arm. It will not so sone
hit a man's sleue or other gear, by the same reason: It hurts not the shaft
fedder, as the low bend does. It suffers a man better to espy his mark.
Therefore let your bow have good byg bend, a shaftemente and.ii. fyngers at
the least, for these which I have spoken of.


PHI. The braser, g^oue, and string, be done, now you must come to the bow,
the chief instrument of all.


TOX. Bow.
Diverse countries and times have used always diverse bows, and of diverse
fashions.

Horn bows are used in some places now, and were used also in Homerus days,
for Pandarus bow, the best shocter among all the Troianes, (...) 4
was made of two Goete horns joined together, the length whereof says Homer,
was.xvi handbredes, not far differing from the length of our bows.

Scripture makes mention of brass bows. Psalm. 17.
Iro^ bows, and style bows, have been of long time, and also now are used
among the Turks, but yet they must needs be unprofitable. For if brass, iron
or style, have their own strength and pith in them, they be far above man's
strength: if they be made meet for man's strength, their pithe is nothing
worth to shoot any shoot with all.

The Ethiopians had bows of palm tree, Hero. ^n (...)
which seemed to be very strong, but we have none experience of them. The
length of them was.iiii. cubits The men of Inde had their bows made of a
read, which was of a great strength. And no maruayle though bow and shaftes
were made thereof, for the redes be so great in Inde, In (...)
as Herodotus says, that of every ioynte of a read, a man may make a fyshers
bote. These bows, Arrianus. 8.
says Arrianus in Alexanders life, gave so great a stroke, that no harneys or
buckler though it were never so strong, could wythstand it. The length of such
a bow, was even with the length of him, In Po^^^
that used it. The Lycians used bows made of a tree, called in Latin Cornus,
(as concerning the name of it in English, I can souer prove that other men call
it false, than I can tell the right name of it my self) this wood is as hard
as horn and very fit for shaftes, as shall be toulde after.

Ovid shows that Syringa the Nymphe, Metamo^. 1.
and one of the maidens of Diana, had a bow of this wood whereby the poet
means, that it was very excellent to make bows of

As for brasell, Elm, Wych, and Asshe, experience does prove them to be but
mean for bows, and so to conclude Ewe of all other things, is that, whereof
perfect shootynge would have a bow made.

This wood as it is now general and common among English men, so has it
continewed from long time and had in most price for bows, among the
Romans, as does apere in this half verse of Uyrgill.

Taxi torquentur in arcus. Uirgslius. G^org. 2.
^.
Ewe fit for a bow to be made on.


Now as I say, a bow of Ewe must be had for perfect shootinge at the
pricks, which mark, because it is certain, and most certain rules may be
given of it, shall serve for our communication, at this time. A good bow is
known, much what as good counsel is known, by the end and proof of it,
and yet both a bow and good counsel, may be made both better and worse, by
well or ill handlynge of them: as oftentimes chau^ceth. And as a man both must
and will take counsel, of a wise and honest man, though he se not the end of
it, so must a shooter of necessity, trust an honest and good bowyer for a
bow, before he know the proof of it. And as a wise man will take plentye of
counsel before hand what soever need, so a shooter should have always iii.
or.iiii. bows, in store, what so ever chance.


PHI. But if I trust bowyers always, sometime I am like to be deceived.


TOX. Therefore shall I tell you some tokens in a bow, that you shall be the
seeldomer deceived. If you come into a shop, and find a bow that is small,
long, heavy and strong, lyinge steyght, not windyng, not marred with knot
gauie, wyndeshake, wem, freat or pynche, by^ that bow of my warrant. The best
color of a bow y^ I find, is when the back and the bellye in woorkynge, be
much what after one manner, for such oftentimes in wearyng, do prove like
virgin wax or gold, having a fine long grain, even from the one end of the
bow, to the other: the short grain although such prove well sometime, are for
y^ most part, very brittle. Of the making of the bow, I will not greatly
meddle, lest I should seem to enter into an other man's occupation, which
I can no skyll of. Yet I would desire all bowyers to season their staves well,
to work them and synke them well, to give the^ heetes convenient, and
tyllerynges plentye. For thereby they should both get them selves a good
name, (And a good name encreseth a man's profyt much) and also do great
co^modite to the hole Realm. If any men do offend in this point, I am afraid
they be those iourny me^ which labor more spedily to make many bows for
their own monye sake, than they work diligently to make good bows, for the
commonwealth sake, not layinge before their eyes, this wise proverb.

Sone enough, if well enough.

Wherwyth euere honest handye crafts man should measure, as it were with a
rule, his work withal. He that is a journey man, and rydeth upon an other
man's horse, if he ride an honest pace, no man will dysalowe him: But if he
make Post haste, both he that owes the horse, and he peradventure also that
afterward shall bye the horse, may chance to curse him.

Such hastiness I am afraid, may also be found among some of the^, which
through out y^ Realm in diverse places work y^ kings Artillarie for war,
thinkynke if they get a bow or a sheafe of arrows to some fashion, they be
good enough for bearing gere. And thus that weapon which is the chief
defense of the Realm, very often does little service to him that should use
it, because it is so negligentlye wrought of him that should make it, when
trewlye I suppose that nether y^ bow can be to good and chief wood, nor yet
to well seasoned or truly made, with hetynges and tillerynges, nether that
shafte to good wood or to thorowely wrought, with the best pinion fedders that
can be gotten, wherewith a man shall serve his prince, defend his country, and
save him self from his enemy. And I trust no man will be angrye with me for
speaking thus, but those which find them self touched therein: which ought
rather to be angrye with them self for doing so, than to be miscontent with
me for saying so. And in no case they ought to be displeased with me, saying
this is spoken also after that sort, not for the notynge of any person
seuerallye, but for the amendynge of every one generallye. But turn we again
to know a good shootynge bow for our purpose.

Every bow is made either of a boughe, of a plant or of the boole of the
tree. The boughe common lie is very knotty, and full of pinnes, weak, of small
pithe, and soue will follow the stringe, and seldom werith to any fair
color, yet for children and young beginners it may serve well enough. The
plant proves many times well, if it be of a good and clean grows, and for
the pith of it is quick enough of cast, it will plye and bow far before it
break, as al other yo^ge things do. The boole of y^ tree is clenest with out
knot or pin, having a fast and hard wood by reasonne of his full grows,
strong and mighty of cast, and best for a bow, if the staves be even cloven,
and be afterward wroughte not ouerwharte the wood, but as the grain and
straight growyng of the wood leadethe a man, or else by all reason it must
sone break, and that in many shiuers. This must be considered in the roughe
wood, and when the bow staves be ouerwrought and facioned. For in dressing and
pikynge it up for a bow, it is to late to look for it But yet in these points
as I said before you must trust an honest bowyer, to put a good bow in your
hand, somewhat lookinge your self to those tokens which I showed you. And you
must not stick for a grote or.xii.d. more than a another man would give if it
be a good bow. For a good bow twice paid for is better than an ill bow once
broken.

Thus a shooter must begin not at the making of his bow like a bower, but at
the byinge of his bow like an Archere. And when his bow is bought and brought
home, before he trust much upon it, let him try and trym it after this sort.

Take your bow in to the feeld, shote in him, sink him with dead heavy
shaftes, look where he co^methe most, provide for that place betymes, lest
it pinche and so freate: when you have thus shot in him, and perceived good
shootynge wood in him, you must have him again to a good cunning, and
trusty woorkeman, which shall cut him shorter, and pike him and dress him
fytter, make him comme round compace every where, and whippyng at the ends,
but with discretion, lest he whyp in sunder or else freete, sooner than he is
ware of, he must also lay him streght, if he be cast or otherwise need
require, and if he be flat made, gather him round, and so shall he both
shoot the faster, for far shootynge, and also the surer for nere pryckynge.


PHI. What if I come into a shop, and spy out a bow, which shall both than
please me very well when I by him, and be also very fit and meet for me when I
shote in him: so that he be both weak enough for easy shootynge, and also
quycke and spedye enough for far casting, than I would think I shall need
no more business with him, but be content with him, and use him well enough,
and so by that means, avoid both great trouble, and also some cost which yo
cunning archers very often put your selves unto, bey^ge very English men,
never ceasynge piddelynge about your bow and shaftes when they be well, but
either with shorting and pikynge your bows, or else with new fetheryng,
peecynge and headinge your shaftes, can never have done until they be stark
naught.


TOX. Well Philologe, surely if I have any judgment at all in shootyng, it is
no very great good token in a bow, whereof nothing when it is new and
fresshe, need be cut away, even as Cicero says of a young man's wit and
style, which you know better that I. For every new thing must always have
more than it neadeth, or else it will not wax better and better, but ever
decay, and be worse and worse. New ale if it run not over the barrel when
it is new tunned, will sone lease his pith, and his head before he be long
drawn on.

And like wise as that col^e which at the first taking up, needs little
breakyng and handlyng, but is fit and gentle enough for the saddle, seeldome
or never proves well, even so that bow which at the first byinge, without
any more proof and trimmynge, is fit and easy to shoot in, shall neither be
profitable to last long, nor yet pleasant to shoot well. And therefore as a
young horse full of courage, with handlynge and breakinge, is brought unto a
suit pace and going, so shall a new bow fresshe and quick of cast, by
sinking and cuttyng, be brought to a steadfast shootyng. And an easy and gentle
bow when it is new, is not much unlike a ^ofte spirited boy when he is
young. But yet as of an unruly boy with right handlyng, proves oftenest of
al a well ordered man: so of an unfit and staffysh bow with good trimming,
must needs follow always a steadfast shotynge bow.

And such a perfect bow, which never will deceive a man, except a man
deceive it, must be had for that perfect end, which you look for in
shootinge.


PHI. Well Toxophile, I see well you be cunninger in this gere than I: but put
case that I have three or four such good bows, pyked and dressed, as you now
speak of, yet I do remember y^ many learned men do say, that it is easier to
get a good thing, than to save and keep a good thing, wherefore if you can
teach me as concerning that point, you have satisfied me plentifullye, as
concerning a bow.


TOX. Truly it was the next thing that I would have come unto, for so the
matter lay.

When you have brought your bow to such a point, as I spoke of, than you
must have an herde^ or wullen cloth waxed. wherwt every day you must rub and
chafe your bow, till it shine and glytter withal. Which thing shall cause
it both to be clean, well favored, goodlye of color, and shall also bring
as it were a cruste, over it, that is to say, shall make it every where on the
outsyde, so slyppery and hard, that neither any weete or wether can enter to
hurt it, nor yet any freat or pynche, be able to byte upon it: but that you
shall do it great wrong before you break it. This must be done oftentimes but
specially when you come from shootynge.

Beware also when you shoot, of your shaft hedes, dagger, knyues or
agglettes, lest they race your bow, a thing as I said before, both unseemly
to look on, and also dangerous for freates. Take heed also of mistie and
dankyshe days, which shall hurt a bow, more than any rain. For then you
must either always rub it, or else leave shootynge.

Your bowecase (this I did not promise to speak of, (...)
because it is without the nature of shootynge, or else I should truble me with
other things infinite more: yet seeing it is a save guard for the bow,
somthynge I will say of it) your bowecase I say, if you ride for the, must
neither be to wide for your bows, for so shall one clap upon an other, and
hurt them, nor yet so strayte that scarce they can be thrust in, for that
would lay them on side and wind them A bowecase of ledder, is not the best,
for that is ofttymes moist which hurts the bows very much. Therefore I have
seen good shooters which would have for every bow, a sere case made of woollen
clothe, and than you may put.iii. or.iiii. of them so cased, in to a ledder
case if you will. This woollen case shall both keep them in sunder, and also
will keep a bow in his full strength, that it never give for any wether. At
home these wood cases be very good for bows to stand in. But take heed yt
your bow stand not to nere a stone wall, for that will make him moist and
weke, nor yet to nere any fire for that will make him short and brittle. And
thus much as concerning the saving and keeping of our bow: now you shall
hear what things ye must avoid, for fear of breakyng your bow.

A shooter chaunseth to break his bow common ly.iiii. ways, by the string,
by the shafte, by drawyng to far, and by freates: By the stryng as I said
before, when the string is either to short, to long, not surely put on, with
one wap, or put crooked on, or shorn in sundre with an evil nocke, or suffered
to tarry over long on. When the stryng fayles the bow must needs break, and
specially in the mids: because both the ends have nothing to stop them: but
whippes so far back, that the belly must needs violentlye rise up, the which
you shall well perreyue in bendyng of a bow backward. Therefore a bow that
follows the string is least hurt with breakyng of stringes By the shafte a
bow is broken either when it is to short, and so you set it in your bow or when
the nocke breaks for lytlenesse, or when the string slyppes without the
nocke for wydenesse, than you poule it to your care and lettes it go, which
must needs break the shafte at the least, and put strunge and bow and al in
ieopardy, because the strength of the bow has nothing in it to stop the
violence of it.

This kind of breaking is most perilouse for the standers by, for in such a
case you shall se some time the end of a bow fly a hoole score from a man,
and that most commonly, as I have marked often the upper end of the bow. The
bow is drawn to far.ii. ways. Either when you take a longer shafte the^ your
own, or else when you shyfte your hand to low or to hye for shootynge far. This
way pouleth the back in sunder, and then the bow fleethe in many pieces.

So when you se a bow broken, having the bellye risen up both ways or toue,
the stringe brake it. When it is broken in two pieces in a manner even of and
specyallye in the upper end, the shafte nocke brake it.

When the back is pouled a sunder in many pieces to far drawing, brake it.

These tokens either always be true or else very seldom mysse.

The fourth thing that breketh a bow is fretes, Freates.
which make a bow redye and apt to break by any of the.iii. ways before
said. Freetes be in a shaft as well as in a bow, and they be much like a
Canker, crepynge and encreasynge in those places in a bow, which be weaker
then other. And for this purpose must your bow be well trymmed and piked of a
co^ning man that it may come round in true compass every where. For freetes
you must beware, if your ^ow have a knot in the back, lest the places which
be next it, be not allowed strong enough to bear with the knotte, or else the
strong knotte shall freate the weak places next it. Freates be first little
pinchese, the which when you perceive, pike the places a bout the pinches, to
make them somewhat weker, and as well coming as where it pinched, and so the
pinches shall dye, and never increase farther in to great freates.

Freates begin many times in a pin, for there the good wood is corrupted,
that it must needs be weke, and because it is weak, therefore it freates.

Good bowyers therefore do raise every py^ and allow it moore wood for fear of
freatynge.

Again bows most commonly freate under the hand, not so much as some men
suppose for the moistness of the hand, as for the heete of the hand: the
nature of heat says Aristotle is to lowse, and not to knyt fast, and the
more lowser the more weaker, the weaker, the redier to freate.

bow is not well made, which has not wood plentye in the hand. For if the
ends of the bow be staffysshe, or a man's hand any thing hoote the bellye
must needs sone frete. Remedy for fretes to any purpose I never hard tell of
any, but only to make the freated place a strong or stronger then any other.

To fill up the freate with little sheuers of a quill and glewe (as some say
will do well) by reason must be stark naught.

For, put case the freete did cease then, yet the cause which made it freate a
fore (and that is weakness of the place) because it is not taken away must
needs make it freate again. As for cuttyng out of freates with all manner of
pecynge of bows I will clean exclude from perfect shootynge. For peced bows
be much like owlde housen, which be more chargeable to repair, than
commodiouse to dwell in. Again to swadle a bow much about with bands, very
seldom does any good, except it be to keep down a spel in the back,
otherwise bands either need not when the bow is any thing worth, or else boot
not when it is marde and past best. And although I know mean and poor
shooters, will use peced and banded bows sometime because they are not able to
get better when they would, yet I am sure if they consider it well, they shall
find it, both less charge and more pleasure to ware at any time a couple of
shyllynges of a new bow than to bestow.x.d of peacynge an old bow. For
better is cost upon somewhat worth, than spence upon nothing worth. And this I
speak also because you would have me refer all to perfitnesse in shootynge.

Moreover there is (...) other thing, which will sone cause a bow be broken
by one of the.iii. ways which be first spoken of, and that is shotyng in
winter, when there is any froste. Froste is wheresoever is any waterish humor,
as is in all woods, either more or less, and you know that al things frosen
and Isie, will rather break than bend. Yet if a man must needs shoot at any
such time, let him take his bow, and bring it to the fire, and there by
little and little, rub and chafe it with a waxed clothe, which shall bring it
to that point, y^ he may shote safelye enough in it. This rubbyng with wax,
as I said before, is a great succor, against all wete and moystnesse.

In the fyeldes also, in going betwyxt the pricks either with your hand, or
else with a clothe you must keep your bow in such a temper. And thus much
as concerning your bow, how first to know what wood is best for a bow,
than to chose a bow, after to trim a bow, again to keep it in goodness,
last of al, how to save it from al harm and euylnesse.

And although many men can say more of a bow yet I trust these things be
true, and almost sufficient for the knowledge of a perfect bow.


PHI. Surely I believe so, and yet I could have heard you talk longer on it:
although I can not se, what may be said more of it. Therefore except you will
pause a while, you may go forward to a shafte.


TOX. What shaftes were made of, in oulde time authors do not so manifestlye
show, as of bows. Herodotus does tell, Hero. eutep.
that in the flood of Nilus, there was a beast, called a water horse, of whose
skin after it was dried, the Egyptians made shaftes. and darts on. The tree
called Cornus was so common to make shaftes of, (...)
that in good authors of y^ latin tongue, Cornus is taken for a shafte, as in
Seneca, and that place of Uirgill, Volat Itala Cornus. (...)


Yet of all things that ever I warked of old authors, either greek or latin,
for shaftes to be made of, (...)
there is nothing so common as reeds. Herodotus in describynge the mighty
host of Xerxes does tell that three great contries used shaftes made of a read,
the Aeth^opians, the Lycians (whose shaftes lacked feathers, where at I maruayle
most of all) and the men of Inde. (...)
The shaftes in Inde were very long, O. Lurt. ^.
a yard and an half, as Arrianus does say, or at the least a yard. as Q.
Curtius does say, and therefore they gave y^ greater strype, but yet because
they were so long, they were the more unhandsome, and less profitable to the
men of Inde, as Curtius does tell.

In Crete and Italy, they used to have their shaftes of read also. The best
reed for shaftes grew in Inde, Pli 16. 3 6.
and in Rhenus a flood of Italy.

But because such shaftes be neither easy for English men to get, and if
they were gotten scarce profitable for them to use, I will let them pass,
and speak of those shaftes which Englysh men at this day most commonly do
approve and allow.

A shaft has three principal parts, the stele, the ^ethers, and the head:
whereof every one must be seuerallye spoken of.

^ Steles be made of diverse woods. as. Brasell. Turkey wood. Fusticke.
Sugercheste. Hardbeame. Byrche. Asshe. Doke. Seruis tree. Hulder. Blackthorne
Beche. Elder. Aspe. Salow.


These wooddes as they be most commonly used, so they be most fit to be used:
yet some one fytter then an other for diverse men's shotinge, as shall be toulde
afterward. And in this point as in a bow you must trust an honest
fletcher. Nevertheless al though I can not teach you to make a bow or a
shafte, which belongs to a bowyer and a fletcher to come to their living,
yet will I show you some tokens to know a bow and a shafte, which
pertayneth to an Archer to come to good shootynge.

A stele must be well seasoned for Castinge, and it must be made as the grain
lies and as it grows or else it will never fly clean, as clothe cut
ouertwhart and against the wulle, can never hoose a man clean. A knottye
stele may be suffered in a bygge ^haste, but for a little shafte it is nothing
fit, both because it will never fly far, and besides that it is ever in
danger of breaking, it flies not far because the strength of the shoot is
hindered and stopped at the knotte, even as a stone cast in to a plain even
still water, will make the water move a great space, yet if there be any
whirlynge plat in the water, the mouynge ceasethe when it commethe at the
whyrlynge plat, which is not much unlike a knotte in a shafte if it be
considered well. So every thing as it is plain and straight of his own nature
so is it fittest for far mouynge. Therefore a stele which is hard to stand in
a bow, without knotte, and streighte (I mean not artificiallye streyghte as
the fletcher does make it, but naturally straight as it grows in the wood)
is best to make a shaft of, either to go clean, fly far or stand surely in any
wedder. Now how big, how small, how heuye, how light, how long, how short, a
shafte should be particularlye for every man (seeing we must taulke of the
general nature of shootyng) can not be toulde no more than you Rhethoricians
can appoint any one kind of words, of sentences, of fygures fyt for every
matter, but even as the man and the matter requires so the fyttest to be used.
Therefore as concerning those contraryes in a shafte, every man must avoid
them and draw to the mean of them, which mean is best in all things. Yet if
a man happen to offend in any of the extremes it is better to offend in want
and scantnesse, than in to much and outragiouse exceeding. As it is better to
have a shafte a little to short than over long, somewhat to light, than over
lumpysshe, a little to small, than a great deal to big, which thing is not
only trewlye said in shootynge, but in all other things that ever man goes
about, as in eating, taulkynge, and all other things like, which matter was
onse excellentlye disputed upon, in the Scooles, you know when.

And to offend, in these contraryes comes much if men take not head, through
the kind of wood, where of the shaft is made: For sum wood belo^ges to y^
excedyng part, some to y^ sca^t part, some to y^ mean, as Brasell, Turkiewood,
Fusticke, Sugar cheste, and such like, make dead, heavy lu^pish, hobblyng
shaftes Again Hulder, black thorn, Serves tree, Beche, Elder, Aspe, and
Salowe, either for their wekenes or lyghtenesse, make holow, starting,
studding, gaddynge shaftes. But Birche, Hardbeme, some Doke, and some Asshe,
being both strong enough to stand in a bow, and also light enough to
fly far, are best for a mean, which is to be sought out in every thing.
And although I know that some me^ shoot so strong, that the dead woods be
light enough for them, and other some so week, that the lowse woods be
likewise for them big enough yet generally for the most part of men, the
mean is the best. And so to conclude that, is always best for a man, which
is metest for him. Thus no wood of his own nature, is either to light or to
heavy, but as the shooter is him self which does use it. For that shafte
which one year for a man is to light and scuddinge, for the same self man
the next year may chance be to heavy and hobblynge. Therefore can not I
express, except generally, what is best wood for a shaft, but let every man
when he knows his own strength and the nature of every wood, provide and fyt
himself thereafter. Yet as concerning sheaffe Arcouse for war (as I suppose)
it were better to make them of good Asshe, and not of Aspe, as they be now a
days. For of all other woods that ever I proved Asshe being big is swiftest
and again heavy to give a great stripe with all, which Aspe shall not do.

What heaviness does in a stripe every man by experience can tell, therefore Asshe
being both swyfter and heuier is more fit for sheafe Arroes the^ Aspe, and thus
much for the best wood for shaftes.

Again likewise as no one wood can be greatly meet for all kind of shaftes,
no more can one facion of the stele be fit for every shooter. For those that be
little brested and big toward the head called by their likeness taperfashio^,
reshe grown, and of some merye fellows bobtayles, be fit for them which
shote under hand because they shoot with a soft lowse, and stresses not a
shaft much in the breast where the weyghte of the bow lyethe as you may
perceive by the werynge of every shafte.

Again the bygge brested shafte is fytte for him, which shoteth right before
him, or else the breast being weke should never wythstande that strong piththy
kind of shootynge, thus the vnderhande must have a small breast, to go clean
away out of the bow, the forehande must have a big breast to bear the
great might of the bow. The shafte must be made round nothing flat with
out gal or wemme, for this purpose. For because roundnesse (whether you take
example in heaven or in earth) is fittest shappe and form both for fast
moving and also for sone per cynge of any thing. And therefore Aristotle says
that nature has made the rain to be round, because it should the easelyer
enter through the air.

The nocke of the shafte is dyuersly made, for some be great and full, some
hansome and little, some wide some narow, some deep, some shalowe, some round,
some long, some with one nocke, some with a double nocke, whereof every one
has his propertye.

The great and full nocke, may be well felt, and many ways they save a
shafte from brekynge. The hansome and little nocke will go clean away from the
hand, the wide nocke is naught, both for breakyng of the shafte and also for
soden slyppynge out of the string when the narrow nocke does avoid both
those harms. The deep and long nocke is good in war for sure keeping in of
the string. The shalow, and rownde nocke is best for our purpose in prickyng
for clean delyueraunce of a shoot. And double nockyng is used for double
suerty of the shaft And thus far as concerning a hoole stele.

Peecynge of a shafte with brasell and holy, or other heavy woods, is to make
y^ end compass heavy with the feathers in fliyng, for the stedfaster shotyng.
For if the end were plumpe heavy with lead and the wood next it light, the
head end would ever be downwardes, and never fly straight.

Two points in peecing be enough, lest the moystnes of the earth enter to
much into the peecinge, and so leuse the glue. Therefore many points be more
plesaunt to the eye, than profitable for the use.

Su^me use to piece their shaftes in the nocke with brasel, or holy, to
counterwey, with the head, and I have seue su^me for the same purpose, bore an
hole a little bineth the nocke, and put lead in it. But yet none of these ways
be any thing needful at al, for y^ nature of a fether in flying, if a man
mark it well, is able to bear up a wonderful weight: and I thike such peecing
came up first, thus: when a good Archer has broken a good shafte, in the
feathers, and for the fantasy he has had to it, he is loathe to leese it, and
therefore does he piece it. And than by and by other either because it is gaye,
or else because they will have a shafte like a good archer, cutteth their
hole shaftes, and peeceth them again: A thing by my judgment, more costlye
than needful.

And thus have you heard what wood, what fasshion, what nockynge, what peecynge
a stele must have: Now follows the fetherynge.


PHI. I would never have thought you could have said half so much of a
stele, and I think as concerning the little fether and the plain head, there
is but little to say.


TOX. Little, yes truly: for there is no one thing, in all shoting, somoche to
be lokedon as the fether. For first a question may be asked, whether any
other thing beside a fether, be fit for a shaft or no if a fether only be
fit, whether a goose fether only, or no? if a goose fether be best, then
whether there be any difference, as concerning the fether of an oulde goose,
and a young goose: a gander, or a goose: a fennye goose, or an vplandish
goose. Again which is best fether in any goose, the right wing or the left
wing, the pinion fether, or any other fether: a white, black, or greye fether?
Thirdly, in setting on of your fether, whether it be pared or drawn with a
thick rybbe, or a thin rybbe (the rybbe is y^ hard quill which deuydeth the
fether) a long fether better or a short, set on nere the nocke, or far from
the nocke, set on straight, or somewhat bowyng and whether one or two feathers
run on the bow. Fourthly in couling or sheryng, whether high or low,
whether somewhat swyne backed (I must use shoters words) or sadle backed,
whether round, or square shorn. And whether a shaft at any time ought to be
plucked, and how to be plucked.


PHI. Surely Torophile, I think many fletchers (although daily they have
these things in use) if they were asked suddenly, what they could say of a
fether, they could not say so much. But I pray you let me hear you more at
large, express those things in a fether, the which you packed up in so
narrow a rowme. And first whether any other thing may be used for a fether or
not.


TOX. That was y^ first point in deed, and because there follows many after,
I will hye apace over them, as one that had many a mile to ride. Pl. 16. 36.
Shaftes to have had always feathers Plinius in Latin, I Pol. 1. 10.
and Julius Pollux in Greek, do plainly show, (...) Polym.
yet only the Lycians I read in Herodotus to have used shaftes without
fedders. Only a fedder is fit for a shafte for.ii. causes, first because it
is leathe weak to give place to the bow, than because it is of that nature,
that it will starte up after y^ bow So, Plate, wood or horn can not serve,
because the will not give place. Again, Cloth, Paper or Parchment can not
serve, because they will not rise after the bow, therefore a fedder is only
mete, because it only will do both. Now to look on the fedders of all manner
of birds, you shall se some so low weke and short, some so course, stoore and
hard, and the rib so brickle, thin and narrow, that it can nether be drawn,
pared, nor yet well set on, that except it be a swan for a dead shafte (as I
know some good Archers have used) or a ducke for a flyghte which lastes but
one shoot, there is no fether but only of a goose that has all commodities
in it. And trewelye at a short but, which some man does use, y^ Pecock fether
does seldom keep up y^ shaft either right or leuel, it is so roughe and heavy,
so that many me^ which have taken them up for gayenesse, has laid them down
again for profit, thus for our purpose, the Goose is best fether, for the
best shoter.


PHI. No that is not so, for the best shoter that ever was used other feathers.


TOX. Ye are you so cunninge in shootynge I pray you who was that.


PHI. Hercules which had his shaftes fethered with Egles feathers as Hefiodus
does say. Heslod. in Scuto. Her.



TOX. Well as for Hercules, seeing nether water nor land, heaven nor hell,
could scarce content him to abide in, it was no meruell though a sely poor
gouse fether could not plese him to shoot wythal, and again as for Egles they
fly so hye and build so far of, y^ they be very hard to come by. 3 Gouse.
Yet welfare the gentle gouse which brings to a man even to his door so
many exceeding commodities. For the gouse is ma^s comfort in war and in peace
slepynge and waking. What praise so ever is given to shootynge the gouse may
challenge the best part in it. How well does she make a man fare at his
table. How easelye does she make a man lie in his bed? How fit even as her
feathers be only for shootynge, so be her quylles fytte only for writing


PHILO. In dead Toxophyle that is the best praise you gave to a gouse yet,
and surely I would have said you had been to blame if you had ouerskypte it.


TOX. The Romans I trow Philologe not so much because a gouse with tryinge
saved their Capitoliu^ and head toure with their golden Jupiter as Propertius
does say very pretely in this verse.

Anseris and tutum uoce fuisse Iouem. Id est. Propertius

Thieves on a night had stolen Jupiter, had a gouse not a (...).


Did make a golden gouse and set her in the top of y^ Capitoliu^, (...)
and appointed also the Censores to allow out of y^ common butche yearly
stipedes for y^ finding of certain Geese, y^ Romans did not I say give al
this honor to a gouse for y^ good deed only, but for other infinite mo which
come daily to a man by Geese, and surely if I should declame in y^ praise of
any manner of be^st living, I would chose a gouse, But the goose has made us
flee to far from our matter. Now sir ye have heard how a fether must be
had, and that a goose fether only. It follows of a young gose and an oulde,
and the residue be^longing to a fether: which thing I will shortly course
over: whereof, when you know the properties, you may fit your shaftes
according to your shotyng, which rule you must observe in all other things
too, because no one fashion or quantity can be fit for every man, no more
then a shoe or a cote can be. The oulde goose fether is styffe and strong,
good for a wind, and fyttest for a deed shaft: the young goose fether is weak
and fine, best for a swyfte shaft, and it must be couled at the first shering,
somewhat hye, for with shoting, it will sattle and faule very much. The same
thing (although not so much) is to be co^sydered in a goose and a gander. A
fenny goose, even as her flesh is blacker, stoorer, vnholsomer, so is her
fether for the same cause courser stoorer and rougher, and therefore I have
heard very good fletchers say, that the second fether in some place is better
then the pimon in other some. Betwixt the wings is little difference but that
you must have diverse shaftes of one flight, fethered with diverse wings, for
diverse winds: for if the wind and the fether go both one way the shaft will
be carried to much. The pinion fether as it has the first place in the winge,
so it has the first place in good fetheringe. You may know it before it be
pared, by a bought which is in it, and again when it is cold, by the
thinness above, and the thickness at the ground, and also by the stifnes and
finesse which will carry a shaft better, faster and further, even as a fine
sail cloth does a ship.

The color of the fether is lest to be regarded, yet some what to be looked
on: lest for a good white you have sometime an ill greye. Yet surely it
stands with good reason to have the cock fether black or greye, as it were
to give a man warning to nocke right. The cock fether is called that which
stands above in right nocking, which if you do not observe the other feathers
must needs run on the bow, and so mar your shote. And thus far of the
goodness and choice of your fether: now follows the setting on. Wherein you
must look that your feathers be not drawn for hastiness, but pared even and
streyghte with diligence. The fletcher draws a fether when he has but one
swappe at it with his knyfe, and then playneth it a little, with rubbing it
over his knyfe. He pareth it when he takes leisure and head to make every
part of the ryb apt to stand straight, and even on upon the stele. This thing
if a man take not heed on, he may chance have cause to say so of his
fletcher, as in dressinge of meat is co^munelye spoken of Cooks: and that is,
that God sends us good feathers, but the devil noughtie Fletchers. If any
fletchers heard me say thus, they would not be angrye with me, except they
were ill fletchers: and yet by reason, those fletchers too, ought rather to
amend them selves for doing ill, then be angry with me for saying truth. The
ribbe in a styffe fether may be thinner, for so it will stand cleaner on: but
in a weak fether you must leave a thicker ribbe, or else if the ryb which is
the foundation and ground, where in nature has set every clefte of the
fether, be taken to nere the fether, it must needs follow, that the fether
shall faule, and droupe down, even as any herb does which has his root to
nere taken on with a spade. The length and shortness of the fether, serves
for diverse shaftes, as a long fether for a long heavy, or byg shafte, the
short fether for the contrary. Again the short may stand farther, the
long nerer the nocke. Your fether must stand almooste straight on, but yet
after that sort, yt it may turn round in flyinge. And here I consider the
wonderful nature of shootynge, which stands all together by that fashion,
which is most apt for quick mouynge, and that is by roundenesse. For first
the bow must be gathered round, in drawyng it must come round compass, the
string must be round the stele round, the best nocke round, the feather
shorn somewhat round, the shafte in slyenge, must turn round, and if it
fly far, it flies a round compace. For either above or benethe a round
co^pace, hyndereth the flyinge. Moreover both the fletcher in making your
shafte, and you in nockynge your shafte, must take heed that two feathers
equallye run on the bow. For if one fether run alone on the bow, it shall
quickly be worn, and shall not be able to match with the other feathers, and
again at the lowse, if the shafte be light, it will starte, if it be heuye, it
will hoble. And thus as concerning setting on of your fether. Now of coulynge.

To she^e a shafte high or low, must be as the shafte is, heavy or light,
great or little, long or short The swyne backed fashion, makes the shaft
deader, for it gathers more air than the saddle backed, and therefore the
saddle back is surer for danger of wether, and fitter for smothe fliing.
Again to shere a shaft round, as they were wount sometime to do, or after the
triangle fashion, which is much used now a days, both be good. For
roundnesse is apt for fliynge of his own nature, and all manner of triangle
fashion, (the sharp point going before) is also naturally apt for quick
entering, De not. (...).
and therefore says Cicero, that cranes taught by nature, observe in flyinge a
triangle fashion always, because it is so apt to perce and go through the air
wythall. Last of all pluckynge of feathers is naught, for there is no suerty
in it, therefore let every archer have such shaftes, that he may both know
them and trust them at every change of wether. Yet if they must needs be
plucked, pluck them as little as can be, for so shall they be the less
inconstant. And thus I have knit up in as short a room as I could, the best
feathers fetheringe and coulinge of a shafte.


PHI. I think surely you have so taken up the matter with you, y^ you have
left nothing behind you. Now you have brought a shafte to the head, which
if it were on, we had done as concerning all instruments belongyng to
shootynge.


TOX. Necessity, the inuentour of all goodness (as all authors in a manner,
do say) among all other things invented a shaft heed, first to save the
end from breakyng, then it made it sharp to stycke better, after it made it
of strong matter, to last better: Last of all experience and wisdom of men,
has brought it to such a perfitnesse, that there is no one thing so
profitable, belongyng to artillarie, either to stryke a man's enemy sorer in
war, or to shoot nerer the mark at home, then is a fit heed for both
purposes. For if a shaft lack a heed, it is worth nothing for neither use.
Therefore saying heedes be so necessary, they must of necessity, be well looked
upon Heedes for war, of long time have been made, not only of diverse
matters, but also of diverse fashions The Trojans had heedes of iron, as this
verse spoken of Pandarus, shows:

Up to the pappe his string did he pull, Illado ^. 4.
his shaft to the hard iron

The Grecians had heedes of brass, as Ulysses shaftes were heeded, when he
slew Antinous, and the other wowers of Penolepe.

Quite through a door, Odysse. 21.
flewe a shafte with a brass heed.

It is plain in Homer, where Menelaus was wounded of Pandarus shafte, ye the
hedes were not glewed on, Iliados. 4.
but tied on with a string, as the co^mentartes in Greek playnelye tell. And
therefore shoters at that time to carry their shaftes without heedes, until
they occupied them, and than set on an head as it apereth in Homer the. xxi.
book Odyssei, where Penelope brought Ulixes bow down among the gentlemen,
which came on wowing to her, that he which was able to bend it and draw it,
might inioye her, and after her followed a maid says Homer, Odysse. 21.
carienge a bag full of heads, both of iron and brass.

The men of Scythia, used heads of brass. The men of Inde used heads of iron
The Ethiopians used heads of a hard sharp stone, Hero (...) Polym
as both Herodotus and Pollux do tell. The Germans as Cornelius Tacitus does
say, had their shaftes headed with bone, and many countries both of old time
and now, use heads of horn, but of all other yro^ and style must needs be
the fittest for heads.

Julius Pollux calls otherwise than we do, where the feathers be the head, I.
Pol. ^: 1^.
and that which we call the head, he calls the point.

Fashion of heads is diverse and that of old time: two manner of arrowe heads
says Pollux, was used in old time. The one he calls (...), descrybynge it
thus, having two points or barbes, lookyng backewarde to the stele and the
feathers, which surely we call in English a broad arrowe head or a swalowe
tail. The other he calls (...), having ii. points stretchyng forward, and
this Englysh men do call a forkehead: both these two kinds of heads, were
used in Homers days, for Teucer used forked heads, saying thus to Agamemnon.

Eighte good shaftes have I shot sith I came, Illa^. ^.
each one with ^ forke head.

Pandarus heads and Ulysses heads were brood arrow heads, as a man may
learn in Homer that would be curiouse in knowing that matter. Hercules used
forked heads, but yet they had three points or forkes, when other men's had
but two. ^intarchus in Cr^^o.
The Parthyans at that great battle where they slew ritche Crassus and his
son used broad Arrowe heads, which stacke so sore that the Romans could
not poule them out again. Commod^s the Emperor used forked heads, D^^odia.
1.
whose facion Herodiane does lively and naturally describe, sa^inge that they
were like the shap of a new moan wherewyth he would smite of the head of a
bird and never miss, other facion of heads have not I red on. Our English
heads be better in war than either forked heads, or broad arrowe heads. For
first the end being lyghter they flee a great deele the faster, and by the
same reason gives a far sorer stripe. Yea and I suppose if y^ same little
barbes which they have, were clean put away, they should be far beter. For this
every man does grant, y^ a shaft as long as it flies, turns, and wha^ it
leueth turnyng it leueth going any farther. And every thing that enters by a
turnynge and boring facion, the more flatter it is, the worse it enters, as a
knife though it be sharp yet because of the edges, will not bore so well as a
bodkin, for every round thing enters best and therefore nature, says
Aristotle, made the rain drops round for quick percynge the air,

Thus, either shaftes turn not in flyeng, or else our flat arrowe heads
stop the shafte in entering.


PHI. But yet Toxophile to hold your communication a little I suppose the ^lat
head is better, both because it makes a greter hoole, and also because it
sticks faster in.


TOX. These two reasons as they be both true, so they be both naught. For
first the less hoole, if it be deep, is the worse to heal again: when a man
shoteth at his enemy, he desires rather yt it should enter far, than stick
fast. For what remedy is it I pray you for him which is smitten with a deep
wound to poull out the shaft quickly, except it be to haste his death
spedely? thus heads which make alytle hole and deep, be vetter in war, than
those which make a great hole and stick fast in.

Julius Pollux makes mention of certain kinds of heads for war which bear
fire in them, Posl^^. 7. Psalm. 7.
and scripture also speaks somewhat of the same. He^o Uran
Herodotus does tell a wonderful policy to be done by Xerxses what time he
beseged the great Toure in Athenes: He made his Archers bind there shafte
heads about with towe, and than set it on fire and shoot the^, which thing
done by many Archers set all the places on fire, which were of matter to burn:
and besides that dased the men within, so y^ they knew not whyther to turn
them. But to make an end of all heads for war I would wyshe that the head
makers of England should make their sheafe arrowe heads more harder poynted
then they be: for I my self have seen of late such heads set upon sheafe
Arrows, as y^ officers if they had seen them would not have been content with
all.

Now as concerning heads for pryckyng, which is our purpose, there be diverse
kinds, some be blonte heads, some sharp, some both blonte and sharp. The
blont heads men use because they perceive them to be good, to keep a length
with all, they keep a good length, because a man poulethe them no ferder at
one time than at another. For in feeling the plompe end always equallye he
may lowse them. Yet in a wind, and against the wynd the wether has so much
power on the broad end, y^ no man can keep no sure length, with such a head.
Therefore a blont head in a caulme or down a wind is very good, otherwise none
worse.

Sharp heads at the end without any shoulders (I call that the shoulder in
a head which a man's finger shall feel before it come to the point) will
perch quycklye through a wind, but yet it has.ii. discommodities, the one
that it will keep no length, it keeps no length, because no man can poule
it certainly as far one time as at an other: it is not drawn certaynlye so far
one time as at an other, because it lackethe shouldrynge wherwyth as with a
sure token a man might be warned when to lowse, and also because men are
afraid of the sharp point for setting it in y^ bow. The second in commodity
is when it is lyghted on y^ ground, y^ small point shall at every time be in
ieopardye of hurrynge, which thing of all other will sons make the shafte
lose the length. Now when blonte heads be good to keep a length wythall, yet
naught for a wind, sharp heads good to perch the wether with al, yet
naught for a length, certain head makers dwelling in London perceiving the
commodity of both kind of heads joined with a discommoditie, invented new
files and other instruments where with he brought heads for pryckynge to
such a perfitnesse, that all the commodities of the two other heads should be
put in one head with out any discommoditie at all. They made a certain kind
of heads which men call hie rigged, creased, or shouldred heads, or silver
spone heads, for a certain likeness that such heads have with the knob
end of some silver spones.

These heads be good both to keep a length withal and also to perch a wind
wythal, to keep a length wythall because a man may certainly poule it to the
shouldrynge every shoot and no farther, to perch a wind wythall because the
point from the shoulder forward, breketh the wether as al other sharp
things do. So the blonte shoulder seruethe for a sure length keeping, the
point also is euerfit, for a roughe and great wether percyng. And thus much
as shortly as I could, as concerning heads both for war and peace


PHI. But is there no cunning as con cerning setting on of y^ head?


TOX. Well remembered But that point belongs to fletchers, yet you may desire
him to set your head, full on, and close on. Full on is when the wood is bet
hard up to the end or stoppynge of the head, close on, is when there is left
wood on every side the shafte, enough to fill the head withal, or when it is
neither to little nor yet to great. If there be any fault in any of these
points, y^ head when it lyghteth on any hard stone or ground will be in
ieoperdy, either of breaking, or else otherwise hurtynge. Stoppynge of heads
either with lead, or any thing else, shall not need now, because every silver
spone, or showldred head is stopped of it self. Short heads be better than
long: For first the long head is worse for the maker to fyle straight
compace every way: again it is worse for the fletcher to set straight on:
thyrdlye it is always in more ieoperdie of breakinge, when it is on. And now
I trow Philologe, we have done as concerning all Instruments belongyng to
shootynge, which every sere archer ought, to provide for him self. And there
remains.ii things behind, which be general or common to every man the
Wether and the Bark, but because they be so knit with shootynge straight, or
keeping of a length, I will defer them to that place, and now we will come
(God wyllyng) to handle our instruments, the thing that every man desires to
do well.


PHI. If you can teach me so well to handle these instruments as you have
described them, I suppose I shall be an archer good enough.


TOX. To learn any thing (as you know better than I Philologe) and specially
to do a thing with a man's hands, must be done if a man would be excellent, in
his youth. Young trees in gardens, which lack al senses, and beasts without
reason, when they be young, may with handling and teaching, be brought to
wonderful things.

And this is not only true in natural things, but in artificial things to,
as the potter most connyngly does cast his pottes when his claye is soft and
workable, and wax takes printe when it is warm, and leathie weke, not when
claye and wax be hard and oulde: and even so, every man in his youth, both
with wit and body is most apt and pliable to receive any cunnyng that
should be taught him.

This communication of teaching youth, makes me to remember the right
worshipful and my singular good master, Sir Humfrey Wingfelde, to who^ next
God, I ought to refer for his manifold benefits bestowed on me, the poor
talent of learning, which god has lent me: and For his sake do I owe my
service to all other of the name and noble house of the Wyngfeldes, both in
word and deed. This worshypfull man has ever loved and used, to have many
children brought up in learning in his house among whom I my self was one.
For whom at term times he would bring down from London both bow and
shaftes. And when they should play he would go with them him self in to the
fyelde, and se them shoot, and he that shot fairest, should have the best bow
and shaftes, and he that shot ilfauouredlye, should be mocked of his fellows,
till he shot better.

Would to god all England had used or would use to lay the foundation of
youth, after the example of this worshipful man in bringyng up children in the
Book and the Bow: by which two things, the hole commonwealth both in peace
and war is chefelye ruled and defended wythall.

But to our purpose, he that must come to this high perfectnes in shootyng
which we speak of, must needs begin to learn it in his youth, the omitting
of which thing in England, both makes fewer shooters, and also every man
that is a shoter, shote warse than he might, if he were taught.


PHI. Even as I know that this is true, which you say, even so Toxophile,
have you quyte discouraged me, and drawn my mind clean from shootynge,
saying by this reason, no man y^ has not used it in his youth can be
excellent in it. And I suppose the same reason would discourage many other mo,
if they heard you talk after this sort.


TOX. This thing Philologe, shall discourage no man that is wise. For I will
prove yt wisdom may work the same thing in a man, that nature does in a
child.

A child by three things, is brought to excellency. By Aptness, Desire, and
Fear: Aptness makes him pliable like wax to be formed and fashioned, even
as a man would have him. Desire to be as good or better, than his fellows: and
Fear of them whom he is under, will cause him take great labor and pain with
diligent head, in learning any thing, whereof proceeds at the last
excellency and perfectness.

A man may by wisdom in learning any thing, and specially to shoot, have
three like commodities also, whereby he may, as it were become young again,
and so attain to excellency. For as a child is apt by natural youth, so a
man by vsyng at the first weak bows, far underneath his strength, shall be as
pliable and ready to be taught fair shotyng as any child: and daily use of
the same, shall both keep him in fayer shotyng, and also at y^ last bring him to
strong shootynge.

And instead of the feruente desire, which provoke a child to be better
than his fellow, let a man be as much stirred up with shamefastnes to be
worse than all other. And the same place that fear has in a child, to
compel him to take pain, the same has love of shotyng in a man, to cause him
forsake no labor, without which no man nor child can be excellent. And thus
whatsoever a child may be taught by Aptness, Desire, and Fear, the same
thing in shootynge, may a man be taught by weak bows, Shamefastness and
Love.

And hereby you may se that that is true which Cicero says, that a man by
use, may be brought to a new nature. And this I dare be bold to say, that
any man which will wisely begin, and constantlye persevere in this trade of
learning to shote, shall attain to perfectness therein.


PHI. This communication Toxophile, does please me very well, and now I
perceive that most generally and chefly youth must be taught to shoot, and
secondarilye no man is debarred therfrom except it be more thorough his own
negligence for because he will not learn, than any disabilitie, because he can
not learn.

Therefore seeing I will be glad to follow your counsel in choosing my bow and
other instruments, and also am ashamed that I can shote no better tha^ I can,
moreover having such a love toward shotynge by your good reasons to day, that
I will forsake no labor in the exercise of the same, I beseech you imagyn that
we had both bow and shaftes here, and teach me how I should handle them, and
one thing I desire you, make me as fair an Archer as you can.

For this I am sure in learning all other matters, nothing is brought to the
most profitable use, which is not handled after the most cumlye fasio^. As
masters of fe^ce have no stroke fit either to hit an other or else to defend him
self, which is not joined with a wonderful cumlinesse. A Cook ca^ not chop
his herbs neither quickelye nor hansomlye except he keep such a mesure with
his choppynge knives as would delight a man both to se him and hear him.

Every hand craft man that works best for his own profit, works most
semelye to other men's sight. Again in building a house, in making a ship,
every part the more hansomely, they be joined for profyt and last, the more
cumlye they be fashioned to every man's sight and eye. Nature it self taught
men to join always welfauourednesse with profytablenesse. As in man, that joint
or piece which is by any chance deprived of his cumlynesse the same is also
debarred of his use and profytablenesse.

As he that is gogle eyde and lokes a squinte has both his countenance clean
marred, and his sight sore blemmyshed, and so in all other members like.
Moreover what time of the year brings most profit with it for man's use,
the same also covers and dekketh both earth and trees with most cu^lynesse
for man's pleasure. And that time which takethe away the pleasure of the
ground, carries with him also the profyt of the ground, as every man by
experience knows in hard and roughe winters. Some things there be which
have no other end, but only cumlynesse, as payntyng, and Daunsing. And virtue
it self is nothing eles but cumlynesse, as al Philosophers do agree in
opinion, therefore seeing that which is best do^e in any matters, is always
most cumlye done as both Plato and Cicero in many places do prove, and daily
experience does teach in other things, I pr^ye you as I said before teatche
me to shoot as f^yre, and welfauouredly as you can imagen.


TOX. Trewlye Philologe as you prove very well in other matters, the best
shootynge, is always the most cumlye shootynge but this you know as well as I
that Crassus shewethe in Cicero that as cumlinesse is the chief point, and most
to be sought for in all things, so cumlynesse only, can never be taught by
any Art or craft. But may be perceived well when it is done, not described well
how it should be done.

Yet nevertheless to comme to it there be many way which ways men have
assayde in other matters, as if a man would follow in learning to shoot
fair, the noble paynter Zeuxes in payntyng Helena, which to make his Image
bewtifull did chose out.v. of the fairest maids in all the country about, and
in beholdynge them conceived and drew out such an Image that it far exceded
al other, because the comeliness of them al was brought in to one most
perfyte comeliness: So likewise in shotynge if a man, would set before his
eyes.v. or.vi. of the fayreste Archers that ever he saw shoot, and of one
learue to stand, of a another to draw, of an other tolowse, and so take of
every man, what every man could do best, I dare say he should come to such
a comlynesse as never man came to yet. As for an example, if the most comely
point in shootynge that Hew Prophet the Kings servant has and as my
friends Thomas and Raufe Cantrell does use with the most semelye facyons
that.iii. or iiii. excellent Archers have beside, were al joined in one, I am
sure all men would wonder at y^ excellency of it. And this is one way to
learn to shoot fair.


PHI. This is very well truly, but I pray you teach me somewhat of shootyng
fair your self.


TOX. I can teach you to shoot fair, even as So trates taught a man ones to
know God, for when he axed him what was God: nay says he I can tell you
better what God is not, as God is not ill, God is unspeakable, unsearchable
and so forth: Even likewise can I say of fair shootyng, it has not this
discommodite with it nor that discommoditie, and at last a man may so shifte
all the discommodities from shootynge that there shall be left no thing
behind but fair shootynge. And to do this the better you must remember how
that I toulde you when I descrybed generally the hole nature of shootyng that
fair shotyng came of these things, of standing, nockynge, drawing,
hewldynge and lowsynge, the which I will go over as shortly as I can,
describynge the discommodities that men co^monlye use in all parts of their
bodies, that you if you fault in any such may know it and so go about to am
end it. Faults in Archers do excede the number of Archers, which come with
use of shootynge without teaching. Use and custom separated from knowledge
and learning, does not only hurt shootynge, but the most weyghtye things in
the world beside: And therefore I maruayle much at those people which be the
mayneteners of uses with out knowledge having no other word in their mouth
but this use, use, custom, custom. Such men more wylful than wise, beside
other discommo ties, take all place and occasion from al amendme^t. And this I
speak generally of use and custom.

Which thing if a learned man had it in hand y^ would apply it to any one
matter, he might handle it wonderfullye. But as for shootyng, use is the only
cause of all fautes in it and therefore chylderne more easly and sooner may be
taught to shote excellentlye then men, because chylderne may be taught to
shoot well at the first, men have more pain to unlearn their ill uses, than
they have labor afterward to come to good shootynge.

All the discommodities which ill custom has graffed in archers, can neither
be quycklye poulled out, nor yet sone reckened of me, they be so many.

Some shoots, his head forward as though he would byte the mark: an other
stareth with his eyes, as though they should fly out: An other win keth with
one eye, and looks with the other: Some make a face with writhing their mouth
and countenance so, as though they were doing you wotte what: An other blereth
out his tongue: An other byteth his lyppes: An other holds his neck a wrye.
In drawyng some fet such a compass, as though they would turn about, and
bliss all the feelde: Other heave their hand now up now down, that a man can
not decerne whereat they would shote, an other waggeth the upper end of his bow
one way, the neither end an other way. An other will stand poyntinge his
shafte at the mark a good while and by and by he wyli give him a whip, and
away or a man wite. An other makes such a wrestling with his gere, as
though he were able to shoot no more as long as he lyned. An other draws
foftly to y^ mids, and by and by it is gone, you can not know how.

An other draws his shafte low at the breaste, as though he would shoot
at a rouynge mark, and by and by he lifts his arm up prick heyghte. An
other makes a wrynchinge with his back, as though a man pynched him behind.

An other coureth down, and lays out his buttockes, as though he should
shoot at crows.

An other sets forward his left leg, and draws back with head and
showlders, as thou ghe he pouled at a rope, orels were afraid of y^ mark. An
other draws his shafte well, until within.ii. fyngers of the head, and than
he stays a little, to look at his mark, and that done, pouleth it up to the
head, and lowseth: which way although sum excellent shooters do use, yet
surely it is a fault, and good men's faults are not to be followed.

Sum men draw to far, sum to short, su^me to slwolye, sum to
quickly, sum hold over long, sum let go over sone.

Sum set their shafte on the ground, and fetches him upward. An other
poynteth up to ward the sky, and so brings him downewardes.

Ones I saw a man which used a brasar on his cheke, or else he had
scratched all the skin of the one side, of his face, with his drawing hand.
An other I saw, which at every shoot, after the loose, lyfted up his right
leg so far, that he was ever in ieoperdye of faulyng.

Sum stamp forward, and sum leap backwarde. All these faults be either
in the drawing, or at the loose: with many other mo which you may easelye
perceive, and so go about to avoid them.

Now afterward when the shafte is gone, men have many faults, which evil
Custom has brought them to, and specially in cryinge after the shafte, and
speaking words scarce honest for such an honest pastyme.

Such words be very tokens of an ill mind, and manifest ^gnes of a man
that is subject to inmesurable affections. Good men's ears do abhor them,
and an houest man therefore will avoid them. And besides those which must
needs have their tongue thus walking, other men use other fautes as some will
take their bow and writhe and wrinche it, to poule in his shafte, when it
flies wide, as if he drove a carte. Some will give two or.iii. strydes
forward, daunsing and hoppynge after his shafte, as long as it flies, as
though he were a mad man. Some which fear to be to far gone, run
backewarde as it were to poule his shafte back. Another tunneth forward, when
he fears to be short, heauynge after his arms, as though he would help his
shafte to fly. An other writhes or runs a side, to poule in his shafte
straight. One lifts up his heel, and so holds his foot still, as long as
his shafte flies. An other casts his arm backewarde after the lowse. And an
other swynges his bow about him, as it were a man with a staff to make room
in a game place. And many other faults there be, which now come not to my
remembrance. Thus as you have heard, many archers with marrynge their face
and countenance, with other parts, of their body, as it were men that
should dance antiques, be far from the comelye port in shootynge, which
he that would be excellent must look for.

Of these faults I have very many my self, but I talk not of my shootynge,
but of the general nature of shootynge. Now ymagin an Archer that is clean
without al these faults and I am sure every man would be delyted to se him
shoot.

And although such a perfyte cumlynesse can not be expressed with any
precepte of teaching, as Cicero and other learned men do say, yet I will
speak (according to my little knowledge) that thing in it, which if you follow,
although you shall not be without fault, yet your fault shall neither quickly
be perceued, nor yet greatly rebuked of them that stand by. Standing, nockyng,
drawyng, holdyng, lowsyng, done as they should be done, make fair shootynge.

The first point is when a man should shote, Standy^ge.
to take such footyng and standing as shall be both cumlye to the eye and
profitable to his use, setting his countenance and all the other parts of his
body after such a behavior and port, that both al his strength may be
employed to his own most auau^tage, and his shoot made and handled to other
men's pleasure and delight. A man must not go to hastily to it, for that is
rashness, nor yet make to much to do about it, for y^ is curiosit^e, y^ one
foot must not stand to far fro the other, lest he stoop to much which is
unseemly, nor yet to nere to gether, lest he stand to straight up, for so a
man shall neither use his strength well, nor yet stand stedfastlye.

The mean betwyxt both must be kept, a thing more pleasant to behoulde when
it is done, than rasie to be taught how it should be done.

To nocke well is the easiest point of all, Nochyn^^
and there in is no cunninge, but only dylygente head gyuyng, to set his
shaft neither to hye nor to low, but even straight ouertwharte his bow,
Unconstaute nockynge makes a man leese his length.

And besides that, if the shafte hand be hye and the bow hand low, or
contrary, both the bow is in ieopardye of brekynge, and the shafte, if it be
little, will start: if it be great it will hobble. Nocke the cock fether upward
always as I toulde you when I described the fether. And be sure always y^
your stringe slip not out of the nocke, for than al is in ^eopardye of
breaking.

Drawing D^awynge.
well is the best part of shootyng. Men in oulde time used other manner of
drawing than we do. They used to draw low at the breast, to the right pap and
no farther, and this to be true is plain in Homer, where he descrybeth
Pandarus shootynge. (...)


Up to the pap his stringe did he pull, his shafte to the hard heed.

The noble women of Scythia used the same fashyon of shootyng low at the breast,
and because their left pap hindered their shootynge at the lowse they cut it of
when they were young, and therefore be they called in lacking their pap
Amazones. Now a days contrary wise we draw to the right ear and not to
the pap. Whether the old way in drawing low to the pap, (...)
or the new way to draw a loft to the ear be better, an excellent writer in
Greek called Procopius does say his mind, showing y^ the oulde fashion in
drawing to y^ pap was naught, of no pithe, and therefore says Procopius: is
Artylla ^ye dispraysed in Homer which calls it (...) 1. Weak and able to do
no good. Drawyng to the ear he prayseth greatly, whereby men shoot both
stronger and longer: drawing therefore to the ear is better than to draw at
the breast. And one thing comes into my remembrance now Philologe when I
speak of drawyng, that I never red of other kind of shootyng, than drawing
with a ma^s hand either to the breast or ear: This thing have I sought for in
Homer Herodotus and Plutarch, and therefore I marvel how crosbowes Crosbowes.
came first up, of the which I am sure a man shall find little mention made on
in any good Author. Leo the Emperor would have his souldyers draw quycklye
in war, for that makes a shaft fly a pace. In shootynge at the pryckes,
hasty and quick drawing is neither sure nor yet cumlye. Therefore to draw
easily and uniformly, that is for to say not waggyng your hand, now upward,
now down ward, but always after one fashion until you come to the rig or
shouldring of y^ head, is best both for profit and semelinesse. Holding
Holding.
must not be long, for it both puts a bow in ieopardy, and also marreth a
man's shoot, it must be so little y^ it may be perceived better in a man's mind
when it is done, than seen with a man's eyes when it is in doing.

Lowsynge Lowsynge.
must be much like. So quycke and hard y^ it ^e with out all girdes, so
soft and gentle that the shafte fly not as it were sent out of a bow case.
The mean betwixt both, which is perfyts lowsynge is not so hard to be
followed inshootynge as it is to be descrybed in teaching. For clean lowsynge
you must take heed of hyttynge any thing a boute you. And for the same purpose
Leo the Emperor would have al Archers in war to have both their heads pouled,
and there berdes shaven lest the hear of their heads should stop the sight of
the eye, the here of their berdes hinder the course of the string.

And these precepts I am sure Philologe if you follow in standing, nockyng,
drawing, holding, and lowsynge, shall bring you at the last to excellent fair
shootynge.


PHI. All these things Toxohile although I both now perceive them
thorowlye, and also will remember them diligently: yet to morrow or some other
day when you have leisure we will go to the pryckes, and put them by little and
little in experience. For teaching not followed, does even as much good as
books never looked upon. But now seeing you have taught me to shote fair, I
pray you tell me somewhat, how I should shoot nere lest that proverb might be
said iustlye of me sometime. He shootes like a gentle man fair and far of.


TOX. He that can shoot fair, lacks nothing but shootyng straight and
keeping of a length where of comes hyttynge of the mark, the end both of
shootyng and also of this our communication. The handlyng of y^ wether and the
mark because they belong to shootyng streyghte, and keeping of a length, I
will join them together, shewinge what things belong to keeping of a
length, and what to shootynge straight.

The greatest enemy of shootyng is the wind and the wether, wind and wether.
whereby true keeping a length is chefely hindered. If this thing were not, men
by teaching might be brought to wonderful near shootynge. It is no maruayle if
the little poor shafte being sent alone, so high in to the air, into a great
rage of wether, one wind tossinge it that way, an other this way, it is no
maruayle I say, though it leese the length, and miss that place, where the
shooter had thought to have found it. Greter matters than sho tynge are under
the rule and will of the wether, as saylynge on the sea. And likewise as in
sailing, the ^he chief point of a good master, is to know the tokens of
change of wether, the course of the wyndes, that thereby he may the better
come to the Haven: even so the best property of a good shooter, is to know
the nature of the wyndes, with him and against him, that thereby he may the
nerer shote at his mark. Wise masters when they can not win the best
haven, they are glad of the next: Good shooters also, y^ can not when they
would hit the mark, will labor to come as nigh as they can. All things in
this world be imperfect and unconstant, therefore let every man acknowledge his
own weakness, in all matters great and small, weyght^ye and merye, and
glorify him, in whom only p^^fyte perfitnesse is. But now sir, he that will
at all adventures use the seas knowinge no more what is to be done in a tempest
than in a caulme, shall soon becumme a merchant of Eele skins: so that
shoter which puts no difference, but shoots in all like, in rough wether
and fair, shall always put his wynninges in his eyes.

Ly^le botes and thin boordes, can not endure the rage of a tempest. Weak
bows, and light shaftes can not stand in a rough wind. And like wise as a
blind man which should go to a place where he had never ben before, that has
but one strayghte way to it, and of either side hooles and pyttes to faule
into, now falls in to this hole and than into that hole, and never comes
to his journey end, but wandereth always here and there, farther and farther
of: So that archer which ignorauntly shoteth considering neither fayer nor
foul, standing nor nockynge, fether nor head, drawing nor lowsyng, nor yet
any compace, shall always shote short and gone, wide and far of, and never
cumme nere, except perchance he stumble sumtyme on the mark For ignorance
is nothing else but mere blyndenesse.

A master of a ship first learneth to know the cum myng of a tempest, the
nature of it, and how to behave him self in it, either with chaungynge his
course, or poullynge down his hye tops and broad sails, being glad to
eschew as much of the wether as he can: Even so a good archer will first with
diligent use and markynge the wether, learn to know the nature of the wind,
and with wisdom, will measure in his mind, how much it will alter his
shoot, either in length keeping, or else in straight shotynge, and so with
changing his standing, or taking an other shafte, the which he knows
perfytlye to be fitter for his purpose, either because it is lower fethered,
orels because it is of a better wyng, will so handle with discretion his shoot,
that he shall seem rather to have the wether under his rule, by good head
gyuynge, than the wether to rule his shafte by any sudden chaungyng.

Therefore in shootynge there is as much difference betwixt an archer that is
a good wether man, and an other that knows and marketh nothing, as is
betwixt a blind man, and he that can se.

Thus, as concerning the wether, a perfyte archer must first learn to know
the sure flyghte of his shaftes, that he may be boulde always, to trust them,
than must he learn by daily experience all manner of kinds of wether, the
tokens of it, when it will cumme, the nature of it when it is cu^me, the
diversity and alteryng of it, when it changes, the decrease and diminishing
of it, wha^ it cease. Thirdly these things known, and every shoot
diligently marked, than must a man compare always, the wether and his footyng
together, and with discretion measure them so, that what so ever the roughe
wether shall take away from his shoot the same shall lust footynge restore
again to his shoot.

This thing well known, and discretelye handeled in shootynge, brings more
profit and commendation and praise to an Archer, than any other thing besides.

He that would know perfectly the wind and wether, must put differences
betwixt times. For diversity of time causes diversity of wether, as in the
whole year, Spring time, Somer, Faule of the leaf, and Winter: Likewise in
one day Morning, Noonetyme, After noone, and Euentyde, both alter the wether,
and change a ma^^es bow with the strength of man also. And to know that this
is so, is enough for a shoter and artillery, and not to search the cause, why
it should be so: which belongs to a learned man and Philosophy.

In consydering the time of the year, a wise Archer will follow a good
Shipman. In Winter and rough wether, small boots and little pinkes forsake the
seas: And at one time of the year, no Galleys come abroad: So likewise weak
Archers, vsyng small and holowe shaftes, with bows of little pith, must be
content to give place for a time.

And this I do not say, either to disco^mende or discourage any weak shooter:
For likewise, as there is no ship better than Galleys be, in a soft and a
caulme sea, so no man shoots cumlier or nerer his mark, than some weak
archers do, in a fair and clear day.

Thus every archer must know, not only what bow and shafte is fittest for
him to shoot withal, but also what time and season is best for him to shote
in. And surely, in all other matters to, among al degrees of men, there is no
man which does any thing either more discretely for his commendation, or yet
more profitable for his advantage, than he which will know perfitly for what
matter and for what time he is most apt and fit. If men would go about
matters which they should do and be fit for, not such things which wylfullye
they desire and yet be unfit for, verily greater matters in the common welthe
than shootyng should be in better case than they be. This ignorauncie in men
which know not for what time, and to what thing they be fit, causes some
wyshe to be rich, for whom it were better a great deal to be poor: other
to be medlynge in every man's matter, for whom it were more honesty to be
quiet and still. Some to desire to be in the Court, which be borne and be
fitter rather for the carte. Sum to be masters and rule other, which never
yet began to rule them self: some always to iangle and taulke, which rather
should hear and keep silence. Some to teach, which rather should learn.
Some to be prestes, which were fy^ter to be clerks. And this perverse
judgment of y^ world, when men mesure them self a miss, brings much
mysorder and great vnsemelynesse to the hole body of the common wealth, as if
a man should were his hoose upon his head, or a woman go with a sword and a
buckeler every man would take it as a great vncumlynesse although it be but a
tryfle in respect of the other.

This perverse judgment of men hinders no thing so much as learuynge,
because commonly those which be unfittest for learning, be cheyfly set to
learning.

As if a man now a days have two sons, the one impotent, weke, s^ckly,
lispynge, stuttynge, and stamerynge, or having any misshape in his body: what
does the father of such one commonly say? This boy is fit for nothing else,
but to set to lernyng and make a pressed of, as who would say, y^ outcastes of
the world, having neither countenance tongue nor wit (for of a perverse body
cu^meth commonly a perverse mind) be good enough to make those men of, which
shall be appointed to preach Gods holy word, and minister his blessed
sacraments, besides other most weyghtye matters in the common welthe put often
times, and worthelye to learned men's discretion and charge: when rather such
an office so high in dignity, so godly in administration, should be committed
to no man, which should not have a countenance full of cumlynesse to allure
good men, a body full of manlye authority to fear ill men, a wit apt for all learning with tongue and voice, able to persuade all men. And although few
such men as these can be found in a common wealth, yet surely a godly dis
posed man, will both in his mind thyncke fit, and with all his study labor
to get such men as I speak of, or rather better, if better can be gotten for
such an hie administration, which is most properlye appointed to gods own
matters and businesses.

This perverse judgment of fathers as concerning the fitness and unfitness
of their children causes the common wealth have many unfit ministers: And
seeing that ministers be, as a man would say, instruments wherwt the common
wealth does work all her matters wtall, I maruayle bow it chau^teth y^ a
pore shomaker has so much wit, y^ he will prepare no instrument for his
science neither knyfe nor aule, nor nothing else which is not very fit for
him: the common wealth can be content to take at a fond fathers hand, the
rifraffe of the world, to make those instruments of, wherwtal she should
work y^ hiest matters under heaven. And surely an aule of lead is not so
unprofitable in a shomakers shop, as an unfit minister, made of gross metal,
is unseemly in y^ commonwealth. Fathers in old time among y^ noble Persians
might not do with their children as they thought good, but as the judgment of
the common wealth always thought best. This fault of fathers brings many a
blot with it, to the great deformity of the common wealth: and here surely I
can praise gentlewomen which have always at hand their glasses, to se if any
thing be amiss, and so will amend it, yet the common wealth having y^ glass
of knowledge in every man's hand, does se such vncumlines in it: and yet win keth
at it. This fault and many such like, might be sone wyped away, if fathers
would bestow their children on y^ thing always, whereunto nature has ordained
them most apt and fit. For if youth be grafted straight, and not awrye, the
hole common wealth will flourish thereafter. When this is done, than must every
man begin to be more ready to amend him self, than to check an other,
measuryng their matters with that wise proverb of Apollo, Know thy self:
that is tosaye, learn to know what thou art able, fit, and apt unto, and
follow that.

This thing should be both cuml^e to the common wealth, and most profitable
for every one, as does appear very well in all wise men's deades, and
specially to turn to our communication again in shootynge, where wise archers
have always their instruments fit for their strength, and wait evermore
such time and wether, as is most agreeable to their gere. Therefore if the
wether be to sore, and unfit for your shootynge, leave of for that day, and
wait a better season. For he is a fool y^ will not go, whom necessity
drives.


PHI. This communication of yours pleased me so well Corophile, that surely I
was not hasty to call you, to descrybe forth the wether but with all my
heart would have suffered you yet to have stand longer in this matter. For
these things touched of you by chaunse, and by the way, be far above the
matter it self, by whose occasion y^ other were brought in.


TOX. Weyghtye matters they be in deed, and fit both in an other place to be
spoken: and of an other man than I am, to be handled. And because mean men
must meddle with mean matters, I will go for ward in descrybyng the wether, as
concerning shooting: and as I toulde you before, In the hole year, Spring
time, Somer, Fall of the leaf, and Winter: and in one day, Morning, Noone time,
After noone, and Euentyde, alters the course of the wether, the pith of the
bow, the strength of the man. And in every one of these times the wether
alters, as sumtyme wyndie, sumtyme caulme, sumtyme cloudie, sumtyme clear,
sumtyme ^ote, sumtyme could, the wind sumtyme mo^stye and thick, sumtyme
dry and smothe. A little wind in a moystie day, stops a shafte more than a
good whiskynge wind in a clear day. Yea, and I have seen when there has been
no wind at all, the air so mistie and thick, that both the marks have been
wonderful great. And ones, when the Plage was in Cambrige, the down wind
twelve score mark for the space of.iii. weeks, was.xiii. score, and an half,
and into the wind, being not very great, a great deal above.xiiii. score.

The wind is sumtyme plain up and down, which is commonly most certain,
and requires least knowledge, wherein a mean shoter with mean gear, if he can
shoot home, may make best shifte. A side wind tries an archer and good gere
very much. Sumtyme it blows a lofte, sumtyme hard by the ground: Sumtyme
it blows by blastes, and sumtyme it continues al in one: Sumtyme full side
wind, sumtyme quarter with him and more, and likewise against him, as a man
with casting up light grass, orels if he take good head, shall sensibly
learn by experience. To se the wind, with a man his eyes, it is impossible,
the nature of it is so fine, and subtle, yet this experience of the wind had
I ones my self, and that was in the great snow that fell.iiii. years agoo: I
rode in the hye way betwirt Topcliffe upon Swale, and Borowe bridge, the way
being sumwhat trodden before, by way fay, ring men. The feeldes on both sides
were plain and lay almost yearde deep with snow, the night before had been a
little froste, so y^ the snow was hard and crusted above. That morning the sun
shone brigh^ and clear, the wind was whistelinge a lofte, and sharp
according to the time of the year. The snow in the hye way lay lowse and
trodden with horse feet: so as the wind blewe, it took the lowse snow with it,
and made it so slide upon the snow in the field which was hard and crusted
by reason of the frost over night, that thereby I might se very well, the hole
nature of the wind as it blewe y^ day. And I had a great delight and pleasure
to mark it, which makes me now far better to remember it. Sometime the wynd
would be not past.ii. yeardes broad, and so it would carry the snow as far as
I could se. An other time the snow would blow over half the field at ones.
Sometime the snow would tomble softly, by and by it would fly wonderful
fast. And this I perceived also that y^ wind goes by streams and not hole
together. For I should se one stream with in a Score on me, tha^ the space
of.ii. score no snow would stir, but after so much quantity of ground, an
other stream of snow at the same very time should be carried likewise, but not
equally. For the one would stand still when the other flew a pace, and so
contynewe sometime swiftlyer sometime slowlyer, sometimebroder, sometime
narrower, as far as I could se. Nor it flewe not straight, but sometime it
crooked this way sometime that way, and sometime it ran round about in a
compase. And sometime the snow would be lift clean from the ground up in to the
air, and by and by it would be al clapped to the ground as though there had
been no wind at all, streightway it would rise and fly again.

And that which was the most marvel of al, at one time.ii. driftes of snow
flewe, the one out of the West into y^ East, the other out of the North in to
y^ East: And I saw.ii. winds by reason of y^ snow the one cross over the
other, as it had been two hye ways. And again I should here the wynd blow in
the air, when nothing was stirred at the ground. And when all was still where
I rode, not very far from me the snow should be lifted wonderfully. This
experience made me more marvel at y^ nature of the wind, than it made me
conning in y^ knowledge of y^ wynd: but yet thereby I learned perfitly that it is
no marvel at al though men in a wind lease their length in shooting, seeing
so many ways the wind is so variable in blowynge.

But seeing that a Master of a ship, be he neue^ so cunning, by the
vncertayntye of the wind, leeseth many times both life and goods, surely it
is no wonder, though a right good Archer, by the self same wind so variable in
his own nature, so vnsensyble to our nature, leese many a shoot and game.

The more uncertain and disceyuable the wynd is, the more head must a wise
Archer give to know the gyles of it.

He y^ does mistrust is seldom begiled. For although thereby he shall not
attain to that which is best, yet by these means he shall at least avoid y^
which is worst Beside al these kinds of winds you must ^ake head if you se
any cloud apere and gather by little and little against you, or else if a shower
of rain belyke to come upon you: for than both the dryuing of the wether and
the thyckynge of the air increases the mark, when after y^ shower al things
are contrary clear and caulme, and the mark for the most part new to begin
again. You must take heed also if ever you shote where one of the marks or
both stondes a little short of a hye wall, for there you may be easlye begyled.
If you take grass and cast it up to se how the wind stands, many times
you shall suppose to shoot down the wind, when you shote clean against the
wind. And a good reason why. For the wynd which comes in deed against you,
redoundeth bake again at the wall, and whyrleth back to the prycke and a little
farther and than turns again, even as a vehement water does against a
rock or an hye braye which example of water as it is more sensible to a ma^s
eyes, so it is never a whyt the trewer than this of the wind. So that the
grass cast up shall flee that way which in deed is the longer mark and
disceyue quycklye a shooter that is not ware of it.

This experience had I ones my self at Norwytch in the chapel field within the
waulles. And this way I used in shootynge at those marks.

When I was in the myd way betwixt the marks which was an open place, there I
took a fether or a little light grass and so as well as I could, learned how
the wynd stood, that done I went to the ^rycke as fast as I could, and
according as I had found y^ wind when I was in the mid way, so I was feign
than to be content to make the best of my shoot that I could. Even such an
other experience had I in a manner at York, at the pri^kes, lying betwixt the
castle and Ouse side. And although you smile Philologe, to hear me tell mine
own fondness: yet seeing you will needs have me teach you somewhat in shotyng, I
must needs sometime tell you of mine own experience, and the better I may do so,
because Hippocrates in teaching phylike, Nippo. (...) morb. vulg.
uses very much the same way. Take heed also when you shoot nere the sea
cost, although you be.ii. or.iii. miles from the sea, for there diligent
markinge shall epsy in the most clear day wonderful chaunginge. The same is
to be considered likewise by a river side specially if it ebb and flow,
where he y^ takes diligent head of y^ tide and wether, shall lightly take a way
al y^ he shoots for. And thus of y^ nature of winds and wether according to
my marking you have heard Philologe: and hereafter you shall mark far mo
your self, if you take heed. And the wether thus marked as I told you before,
you must take heed, of your standing, y^ thereby you may win as much as you
shall loose by the wether.


PHI. I se well it is no marvel though a man miss many times in shootyng,
seeing y^ wether is so unconstant in blowing, but yet there is one thing which
many archers use, y^ shall cause a man have less need to mark the wether, and
that is Ame gyuing.


TOX. Of gyuyng Ame, I can not tell well, what I should say. For in a strange
place it takes away al occasion of foul game, which is y^ only praise of it,
yet by my judgment, it hidreth y^ knowledge of shotyng, and makes men more
negligente: y^ which is a disprayse. Though Ame be given, yet take heed, for at
an other ma^s shote you can not well take Ame, nor at your own neither, because
the wether will alter, even in a minute, and at the one mark and not at the
other, and trouble your shafte in the air, when you shall perceive no wind at
the ground, as I my self have seen shaftes tumble a lofte, in a very fayer
day. There may be a fault also, in drawing or lowsynge, and many things mo,
which all together, are required to keep a just length. But to go forward the
next point after the markyng of your wether, is the taking of your standing.
And in a side wind you must stand sumwhat cross in to the wind, for so shall
you shoot the surer. When you have taken good footing, than must you look at
your shafte, y^ no earth, nor weete be left upon it, for so should is leese
the length. You must look at the head also, lest it have had any strype, at
the last shoot. A stripe upon a stone, many times will both mar the head,
croke the shafte, and hurt the fether, whereof the lest of them all, will cause
a man lease his length. For such things which chance every shoot, many
archers use to have su^me place made in their cote, fit for a little fyle, a
stone, a Hunfyshskin, and a cloth to dress the shaft fit again at all needs.
This must a man look to ever when he takes up his shaft. And the head may
be made to smothe, which will cause it fly to far: when your shafte is fit,
than must you take your bow even in the mids or else you shall both lease
your length, and put your bow in ^eopardye of breaking. Nockynge just is
next, which is much of the same nature. Than draw equallye, lowse equallye,
with houldynge your hand ever of one heighte to keep true compass. To look
at your shafte head at the lowse, is the greatest help to keep a length that
can be, which thing yet hinders excellent shotyng, because a man can not shote
straight perfitlye except he look at his mark, if I should shoot at a line
and not at the mark, I would always look at my shaft end, but of this thing
some what afterward. Now if you mark the wether diligently, keep your
standing justly, houlde and nocke trewlye, draw and lowse equallye, and keep
your compace certaynelye, you shall never miss of your length.


PHI. Then there is nothing behind to make me hit y^ mark but only shooting
straight.


TOX. No trewlye. And first I will tell you what shyftes Archers have found to
shoot straight, tha^ what is the best way to shoot straight. As the wether
belongs specially to keep a length (yet a side wind belongs also to shote
straight) even so the nature of the prick is to shote straight. The length or
shortness of the mark is always under the rule of the wether, yet sumwhat
there is in y^ mark, worcester thye to be marked of an Archer. If the pricks stand
of a straight plain ground they be y^ best to shote at. If y^ mark stand on a
hyl side or y^ ground be unequal with pittes and turninge ways betwyxte the
marks, a man's eye shall think that to be straight which is crooked: The
experience of this thing is seen in pay^tynge, the cause of it is known by
learning.

And it is enough for an archer to mark it and take heed of it. The chief
cause why men can not shoot straight, is because they look at their shaft: and
this fault comes because a man is not taught to shote when he is young. If he
learn to shoot by himself he is a frayde to pull the shafte through the
bow, and therefore looks always at his shafte: ill use confirms this
fault as it does many mo.

And men continewe the longer in this fault because it is so good to keep a
length with al, and yet to shote straight, they have inverted some ways. to
epsy a tree or a hill beyond the mark, or else to have su^me notable thing
betwixt y^ marks: and ones I saw a good archer which did cast of his gere,
and laid his quiver with it, even in the midway betwixt y^ pricks. Su^me thought
he did so, for sauegarde of his gere: I suppose he did it, to shoot straight
wtall. Other men use to epsy su^me mark almoost a bow wide of y^ prick, and
than go about to keep him self on y^ hand that the prycke is on, which thing
how much good it does, a man will not believe, that does not prove it. Other
and those very good archers in drawyng, look at the mark until they come
almost to y^ head, than they look at their shafte, but at y^ very lowse, with a
second sight they find their mark again. This way and al other before of me
rehearsed are but shifts and not to be followed in shotyng straight. For having
a man's eye always on his mark, is the only way to shote streght, yea and I
suppose so redye and easy a way if it be learned in youth and confirmed with use,
y^ a man shall never miss therein. Men doubt yet i^ lokig at y^ mark what way is
best whether betwixt the bow and the stringe, above or beneth his hand, and
many ways moo: yet it makes no great matter which way a man look at his
mark if it be joined with comely shotynge. The diversity of men's standing and
drawing causes diverse me^ look at their mark diverse ways: yet they al led
a ma^s hand to shoot straight if nothing else stop. So that cumlynesse is the
only judge of best lokyng at the mark. Some men wonder why in casting a man's
eye at y^ mark, the hand should go straight. Surely if he considered the
nature of a man's eye, he would not wonder at it: For this I am cerrayne of,
that no servant to his master, no child to his father is so obedient, as
every ioynte and piece of the body is to do what soever the eye biddes. The eye
is the guide, the ruler and the succourer of all the other parts. The hand,
the foot and other members dare do nothing without the eye, as does appear on
the night and dark corners. The eye is the very tongue wherwt wit and reason
does speak to every part of the body, and the wit does not so sone signifye a
thing by the eye, as every part is redye to follow, or rather prevent the
byddyng of the eye. This is plain in many things, but most evident in fence
and feyghtynge, as I have heard men say. There every part standing in fear
to have a blow, runs to the eye for help, as young children do to y^
mother: the foot, the hand, and al wayteth upon the eye. If the eye bid y^
hand either bear of, or sinite, or the foot either go forward, or backward,
it does so: And that which is most wonder of all the one man lookynge
steadfastly at the other man's eye and not at his hand, will, eue^ as it were,
read in his eye where he purposes to smite next, for the eye is nothing else
but a certain wyndowe for wit to shote out her head at.

This wonderful work of god in making all the members so obedient to the
eye, is a pleasant thing to remember and look upon: therefore an Archer may
be sure in learning to look at his mark when he is young, always to shoot
streyghte. The things that hinder a man which looks at his mark, to shoot
straight, be these: A side wind, a bow either to strong, or else to weak, an
ill arm, when a fether runs on the bow to much, a byg brested shafte, for
him that shoteth under hand, because it will hobble: a little brested shafte
for him y^ shoteth above y^ hand, because it myl starte: a pair of windynge
pricks, and many other things mo, which you shall mark your self, and as ye
know the^, so learn to amend them. If a man would leave to look at his
shafte, and learn to look at his mark, he may use this way, which a good
shooter told me ones that he did. Let him take his bow on the night, and
shoot at.ii. lights, and there he shall be compelled to look always at his
mark, and never at his shafte: This thing ones or twyse used will cause him
forsake lokynge at his shafte. Yet let him take heed of setting his shaft in
the bow.

Thus Philologe to shoot straight is the least maysterie of all, if a man
order him self thereafter, in his youth. And as for keeping a length, I am
sure the rules which I gave you, will never disceyue you, so that there shall
lack nothing, either of hittinge the mark always, or else very nere
shotynge, except the fault be only in your own self, which may come.ii.
ways, either in having a faint heart or courage, or else in sufferynge your
self over much to be led with affection: if a man's mind fail him, the body
which is ruled by the mind, can never do his duty, if lack of courage
were not, men might do mo mastries than they do, as does appear in leaping
and vaultinge.

All affections and specially anger, hurts both mind and body. The mind
is blind thereby: and if the mind be blind, it can not rule the body aright.
The body both blood and bone, as they say, is brought out of his right course
by anger: Whereby a man lacks his right strength, and therefore can not shoot
well. If these things be avoided (where of I will speak no more, both because
they belong not properly to shoting, and also you can teach me better, in
them, than I you) and all the precepts which I have given you, diligently
marked, no doubt ye shall shoot as well as ever man did yet, by the grace of
God. This communication handled of me Philologe, as I know well not perfytly,
yet as I suppose truly you must take in good worth, wherein if diverse things
do not all together please you, thank your self, which would have me
rather fault in me^e follye, to take that thing in hand which I was not
able for to perform, than by any honest shame fastnes with say your request
and mind, which I know well I have not satisfied. But yet I will think this
labor of mine the better bestowed, if to morrow or some other day when you
have leysour, you will spend as much time with me here in this same place, in
entreatinge the question De origin anime, and the ioynyng of it with the
body, that I may know how far Plato, Aristotle, and the Stoi^cians have
waded in it.


PHI. How you have handeled this matter Toxoph. I may not well tell you my self
now, but for your gentleness and good will toward learning and shotyng, I
will be content to show you any pleasure whenever you will: and now the
sun is down therefore if it plese you, we will go home and drink in my
chamber, and there I will tell you playnelye what I think of this
communication and also, what day we will appoint at your request for the other
matter, to mete here again.


Deo gratias.
LONDINI.
In aedibus Edouardi VVhytchurch.

Cum priuilegio ad imprimendum solum. 1545.


