By the King.

A Proclamation for the search and apprehension of certain Pirates.
WHereas it has appeared unto us by the Records of our high Court of the
Admiraltie, That William Hull Captain of a Ship called the Talbot of Topisham
in our County of Deuon, And Philip Ward Captain of a Ship called the
Thomasine of Dartmouth in the said County, Christopher Newman, Edward Follet,
and Henry Burt, with diverse others their Accomplices and Associats, serving as
Mariners or Soldiers in the said Ships, respectively stand indicted, for that
they in November 1602. with their Ships in warlike manner appointed within the
Mediterranean Seas, did rob and spoil a Ship called la Serene of Olona in
France, and the goods therein laden, belonging unto diverse Subjects of our good
brother The most Christian King: And not content therewith, did also in most
savage manner commit wilful murder (a crime most foul, odious and detestable
in the sight of God, and man) upon the persons of diverse of the Frenchmen,
being in the said Ship, against the Laws and Statutes of this Realm: We of
our Princely care for the administration of Justice (the maine pillar of our
Estate) do with no less zeal, as well for the satisfaction of foreign
Princes, as for the example of others in like cases offending, intend to
prosecute them, and all their Abettors, Accomplices and Accessaries, with the
greatest severity of our Laws in that case provided: And therefore we will,
and strictly command all and every our Officers and loving Subjects, that
immediately after the sight of this present Proclamation, they and every of them
do make diligent search and inquiry in all places as well exempt, as not
exempt, for the said persons, and all and every of them, and the same, or any
of them so found, to apprehend and commit to the next Jail, there to be
detained, until our high Admiral, or his Lieutenant Judge of our high Court
of the Admiraltie, upon notice given unto either of them, of the persons so
committed, shall take order in that behalf.

And moreover our pleasure is, that no person or persons whatsoever, shall
wittingly or wilfully receive, conceal, harbor, intertaine or lodge the said
Pirates and murderers, or any of them, or any of their said Accomplices and
associats, into their house or houses, after the sight and knowledge of this
Proclamation, (knowing them by circumstances, credible informations, or
otherwise, to be the persons aforenamed) upon pain unto every such person and
persons so receiving, concealing, harboring, interteyning or lodging any of
the said Pirates and murderers, or any of their accomplices, of death and
forfaiture of all their lands, goods and chattels, according to the Laws and
statutes in that case provided.

Given at our Palace of Westminster the xij. day of November 1604. in the
second year of our Reign of GREAT BRITAIN, France, and Ireland.
God save the King.
Imprinted at London by Robert Barker, Printer to the Kings most Excellent
Majesty. ANNO DOM. 1604.


