The first examinacyon of Anne Askewe, latelye martyred in Ginythfelde, by the
Romysh popes vpholders, with the Elucydacyon of Johan Bale.



Psalm 116. The veryte of the lord endures for ever. Anne Astewe stood (...)
God to the (...)

^

Johan Bale to the Christen readers.
Among other most syngular offices (dylygent reader) which the lord has
appointed to be done in the ernest sprete of Belyas, by the forero^ ners of his
la^tre aperaunce, this is one very special to be noted. They shall turn the
hearts of their anncye^t elders into the children. Mala. 4. And the vnbe Ieuers
of their time, to the wisdom of those ryghrouse fathers, as ded Johan Baptyst
before his first coming, Luce 1. That is (says Bedas ca. 68. de temporum
Bede^ prophecy*
ratione) the faith and fervent zele of the prophets and Vpostles shall they
plant in their hearts, which shall in tho se days line and be among men
conuer saunt. and than will break fourth (says he as a very true prophet)
soche horrible persecucyon, as will first of all take from the world, those
mighty heliases by tryumphaunt martyrdom, to the terryfyenge of other in the
same faith. of whom some shall become through that occasyon, most gloryouse
martyrs unto (...). sorts.
Christ also, and some very wicked Aposta taes for sakynge his lyuelye
doctrine. For by the said Bedas testymonye in the beginning of the same
chaptre, two most certain signs shall we tha^ have that the lattre judgment
day is at hand. The return of Isreal's remnaunt unto their lord God, and the
horrible persecucyon of Antichrist. 2. signs.


Confer with this treated scripture and former prophecye of that virtuous
man Bedas, the worlds alteracyon now, with the terryble turmoylyng^s of our
time. And as in a most clear myrrour, ye shall well perceive them at this
present, to be in most quyck workynge. And as concerning the Israelytes or
Israelytes.
Jews, I have both seane and known of them in Germanye, most faithful
Christen beleuers. Neither is it in the prophecye (Osee 3.) that they should at
that day be all converted, no more than they were at Johan Baptystes
preaching, Luce 1. For as Esaye reports, though the posteryte of Jacob be as
the sea sand (innumerable) yet shall but a remnaunt of them convert than unto
their lord God. Esaie 10. And though the lord has syfted that house of
Israel (as broused corn in a syffe) among all other nacyons, Amos 9. Yet
shall not that remnaunt of theirs perysh, but at that day be saved, through
the only eleccyon of preachers
grace, Romano. 11. Now concerning the before said forero^ners, in this most
wonderful change of the world before the lattre end thereof. I think within
this realm of England, besides other Tyndale. Barnes.
nacyons abroad, the sprete of Belyas was not all a sleep in good Wyllyam
Tyndale, Robert Barnes, and soche other more, whom Antichrists vyolence has
sent hens in fire to heaven, as Belyas went before in the frerye charett, 4.
Regum 2.

These turned the hearts of the fathers into the children, soche time as they
took from a great nombre of our nacyon, by their godly preachynges and
writings, the corrupted believe of the pope and his mastrye workers (which were
no fathers, but cruel robbers and de stroyers, Ioa^. 10.) reducynge the^ again
to the true faith of Abraham and Peter, Gene. 15. and Math. 16. The pure
believe in Christ's birthe and passion, which Adam and Noe sucked out of the The
fathers.
first promise of God, Jacob and Moses out of the second, David and the
prophets out of the third, and so fourth the Apostles and fathers out of the
other scriptures, so firmelye planted they in the consciences of many, that no
cruel kind of death could auerte the^ from it. As we have for example their
constaunt dyscyples, and now strong witnesses of Jesus Christ, Johan Lassels
and Anne Askewe, with their other. ij. com Martyrs
panyons, very gloryouse martyrs before God, what though they be not so before
the wrong judging eyes of the world whom the bloudye remnaunt of Antichrist
put unto most cruel death in Smythfelde at London, in the year of our lord,
M. D. XLVI. in Iulye.

If they be only (as was Johan Baptyst) great before the lord by the holy
scriptures allowaunce, which are strongelye adourned with the graces of his
sprete, as faith, force, understanding, wisdom, pacyence, love, long
susseraun ce and soche like. I dare boldelye afferme these 4. mighty witnesses
also to be the same, so well as the martyrs of the prymatyue or Apostles
church. For so Christen martyrs.
strongelye had these those virtues as they, and so boldelye objected their
bodies to the death for the undefiled Christen believe, against the malygnan^t
Synagoge of Satan, as ever ded they, for no tyranny admyttynge any create or
corruptyble substance for their eternal living god. If their blind babyes
Bread.
to prove them unlike, do object against me, the miracles showed at their
deaths more than at these, as that unfaithful generacyon is ever desyerouse
of wonders, Math. 12. I would but know of the^, what miracles were showed when
Johan Baptystes head was cut of in the preson? Marci 6. and when James miracles
the Apostle was byheaded at Jerusalem? Aero. 12. These 2. were excellent
before God, what though they were but miserable wretches, light fellawes,
sedycyouse heretykes, busye knaves, and lowsye beggars in the sight of noble
king Herod and his honorable counsel of rochettes
prelates. For had not rochettes and side gowns been at hand, haplye they had
not so lyghtlye dyed.

If they allege Steven, to maynteyne their purpose, that he at his death
beheld beauen open. I ask of the^ again Steven.
what they were which se it more than his own person? Sure I am that their
wicked predecessors there present, se it not. For they stopped their cares,
when he told them thereof, Actorum 7. If they yet bring fourth the other
hystoryes Lege^des.
of Apostles and martyrs. I answer them, that all they are of no soche
autoryte. as these here before. The popes martyrs in deed, were much fuller of
miracles than ever were Christ's, as his self told us they should be so,
Mathei 24. Yet wrought fryre Forest, Johan Fisher, and Thomas More no myra
cles, Forest. Fysher. More.
what though many be now rege stred in their lives and legendes by the fryres
of France, Italye, and Spain. Besides that Johan Cochleus has written of
them, ad Paulum Po^tificem, ad regem Henricum, and also in their defense
against doctor Sampson. With that Erasmus ded also ad Hutrenu^. P. Writers.
M. ad Gasparem Agrippam, Albertus Pighius, Riuius, Fichardus, and a great sort
more. And as for the holy maid of ^e^t with Doctor Bockynge, though they
wrought great wonders by their life, yet aperednon at their deaths. Of his
own chosen martyrs, Christ looks for Christen martyrs.
non other miracle, but that only they persevere faithful to the end, Math.
10. And never deny his veryte before men. Luce 12. For that worthy vyctorye of
the synncfull world, stands in the inuyncyblenesse of faith, and not in my
racles and wonders, as those wauerynge wits suppose, 1. Joan. 5.

Right wonderfullye will this apere in the ij. mighty conflyctes here after
Anne Askewe.
following, which the faithful servant of Jesus Anue Askewe, a gentylwoman
very young, dayntye, and tender, had with that outragynge Synagoge, in her ij.
examynacyons. about the xxv. year of her age, whom she sent abroad by her
own hand writynge. The handelynges of her other iij. companyons, shall be
showed in other several treatyses at layser. For the glory and great power of
the Gods power.
lord, so many festlye aperynge in his elect vessels, may not now perysh at
all hands, and be vnthankefullye neglected but be spread the world over, as
well in Latyne as Englysh, to the perpetual in famye of so will fullye cruel
and spyght full tyrauntes. Nothing at all shall it terryfye us, nor yet in
any point let us of our purpose, that our books are now in England
condemned and brent, by the Bishops and prestes with their Books co^ dempned.
frantyck affynyte, the great Antichrists vpholders, which seek by all
practyses possible to turn over the kings most no ble and godly enterprise.
But it will from hens forth occasyon us, to set fourth in the Latyne also, that
before we wrote only in the Englysh, and so make Latyne.
their spirytuall wickedness and treason known much farther of. What auayled
it Ioakim to burn Bieremyes proyhecye by the ungracious counsel of his
prelates? Hiere. 36. Either yet An tiochus to set fire on the other scriptures?
1. Macha. 1.

After the Apostles were brought afo God will be known.
re the counsel and strayghilye commanded to cease from preaching, they
preached much more than before. Acto. 4. In most terryble persecucyons of the
pryma tyue church, were the examynacyons and answers, torments and deaths of
the constaunt martyrs written, and sent a broad all the whole world over, as
testyfyeth Eusebius Cesariensis in his ecclesyastyck hystorye. Their coppyes
habounde yet every where. Great slaugh ter and burning has been here in
England for Johan wycleues books, ever Johan wycleue^ books.
sens the year of our lord. M. CCC. LXXXII. Yet have not one of them
throughlye peryshed. I have at this hour the tytles of a C. and XLIIII. of
them, which are many more in nombre. For some of them under one title com
prehendeth ii. books, some iij. some iiij. Yea, one of them contains xij. I
think not the contrary, but ere the world be at a full end, God will so
gloryfye that twentye times condemned heretyke, Canonyse
execrated, cursed, spytted, and spat led at, that all your popysh writers
before his time and after, will be reckened but vile swyneheardes to him, for
the good fauer he bare to Christ's holy Gospel, A very madness is it to
strive against God, when he will have the lon ge hydden inyquytees known. As
the godly wise man Gamaliel said, Acto. 5. If this enterprise that is now
taken gamaliel
against you, be of God, ye shall never be able with all your tyrannouse
practyses to dyssolue it.

Now concerning that blessed woman Anne Askewe, which latelye suffered the
tyranny of this world for right Anne As kewe.
wisnesse sake. In Lyncolne shyre was she borne of a very ancient and noble
stock, Sir Wyllyam Askewe a worthy knight being her father, But no
worthynesse in the flesh, neither yet any worldly nobleness anayleth to god
ward, before whom is no acceptacyon of person, Actorum 10. Only is it faith
with his true love and fear, which True no bylyte.
makes us the accept, noble and worthy children unto God, Joan. 1. Whereof by
his gift, she had wonderful habundaunce. Soch a won was she, as was Lydia the
purple sellar, whose har Lydia.
te the lord opened by the godly prea chynge of Paul at Thyatira, Acto. 16.
for dylygent head gave she to his worcester de when it was ones taught without su
perstycyon, and would no lo^gar be a false worshypper orydolatour after the
wycfed scole of Antichrist. But became from thensfourth a true worshypper,
worship pyng her lord God (which is a sprete and not bread) in sprete and in
veryte, according to that word of his, Joan. 4. The Gospel of Christ bare
she in her heart, asded the holy maid Cecilia, and never after ceased from
the stodye thereof, nor from Ceciliae?
godly co^munycacyon and prayer, till she was clerlye by most cruel
torments, ta ken from this wretched world.

By her do There (dear fryndes in the lord) as ded the faithful Brethren in
france, at the cities of Lions and Vienna by a like faithful young woman
called Blandina. Which was there put to death with. in. mighty Bladina
companyons more among other (as this was) for her Christian believe, about the
year of our lord, C. and LXX. in the prymatyue spring of their Christyanyte.
They wrote unto their Brethren in the lands of Asia and Phrygia very far
of, her mighty strong suffe rings for Christ's faith, which they kne we
nothing of before. I write here unto in England the double process of thy^
noble woman, whereof ye are not ignorant, for so much as it was there so
manyfestlye done among you, Coupled I Anne Askewe.
have these ij. examples together, bycau se I find them in so many points
agree. Blandina was young and tender, So was Anne Askewe also. But that which
was frail of nature in the^ both, Christ made most strong by his grace.
Blandina had iij. ernest companyons in Christ, Maturus, Sanctes, and Attalus,
Companyons.
so feruentlye faithful as her self. So had Anne Askewe iij. fire fellawes, a
gentylman called Johan Lassels her instructour, a pres^e, and a tailor called
Johan Adlam, men in Christ's veryte unto the end most co^staunt. With Bla^
dina were in preson, to the nombre of x. Reca^ters
which renyed the truth and were clerelye forsaken of God for it. Howmanye
fell from Christ besides Crome and Shaxton, when Anne Askewe stood fast by him,
I am uncertain. But I counsel them, as saint Johan counseled the
Laodycyanes, in the miserable estate Tried Gold.
they are now in, to bye them through tried gold of Christ, least they perysh
all together. Apoca. 3. If they had not still remained in that chauncell, whom
Christ commanded Johan in no wise to measure, Apoca. 11. They had The
chauncell.
never so shamefullye blasphemed, like as Bedas also touches in his former
propheeye.

Prompt was Blandina, and of most Iustye courage, in renderynge her life for the
lyberte of her faith. No less lyuelye Courage.
and quyck was Anne Askewe in all her enprysonynges and torments. Great was
the love, Blandina had to Christ. No less was the love of Anne Askewe.
Blandina never faynted in torment. No Racked.
more ded Anne Askewe in sprete, when she was so terrybly racked of Wrysleye
the chaunceller and Rich, that the stryn ges of her arms and eyes were
peryshed Blandina deryded the cruelte of the tyrauntes. So ded Anne Askewe the
mad nesse of the Bishops and their speech men. Read burning plates of iron
and of brass had Blandina put to her sides, Burned.
So had Anne Askewe the flamynge bra^ des of fire. Full of God and his veryte
was Blandina. So was Anne Askewe to the very end. Christ wonderfullye
tryumphed in Blandina. So ded he i^ Anne Askewe, when she made no noise on the
rack, and so cr^estlye afterward rejoiced in him. Blandina was given fourth
to wild beasts to be devoured. So was Anne Askewe to cruel Bys Beasts.
hoppes and prestes, whom Christ calls rauenynge wolves, deuourers, and
thieves, Math. 7. and Joan. 10. Blandina upon the scaffolde boldelye reprehended
the pagane prestes of their error. So ded Anne Askewe when she was fast tied
to the stake, with stomach rebuke that blasphemouse apostata Shaxto^ with the
Bishops and prestes genera Shaxto^.
cyon, for their manifest mayntenaunce of ydolatrye.

Blandina at the stake showed a vysage vnterryfyed. So ded Anne Askewe a
countenance stowte, mighty and ernest Infatygable was the sprete of Bla^
dina. So was the sprete of Anne Askewe. The love of Jesus Christ, the gift of
the holy Ghost, and hope of the crow Graces.
ne of martyrdom, greatly mytygated the paynem Blandina. So ded those iii.
worthy graces, the terror of all torments in Anne Askewe. The strong sprete
of Christ gave stomach to Blandi na, both to laugh and dance. The same mighty
sprete (and not the popes despera te sprete) made Anne Askewe both to re Sprete.
joyce and sing in the preson. So bold was Blandina (says Eusebius) that
with a presumpcyo^ of stomach she co^mo ued with Christ vnseane. I suppose Anne
Askewes lattre examynacyo^, will show her, not to do much less. Gentle was
High sto macke.
Bla^dina to the ^hriste^ beleuers, and terry ble to their adversaries. So was
Anne Askewe very lowlye to true teachers, but scornful and high stomaked to
the enemies of truth. Many were converted by the sufferaunce of Blandina. A
far greatter nombre by the burning of Anne Askewe. Though Blandina we
reyonge, yet was she called the mother Mother.
of martyrs. Many men have supposed Anne Askewe, for her Christen constancye
to be no less. Blandina prayed for her persecuters. So ded Anne Askewe most
feruentlye. The ashes of Blandina Ashes.
and of other martyrs, were thrown into the flood of Rhodanus. What was done
with the Ashes of Anne Askewe and her companyons, I can not yet tell.

All these former reports of Blandina and many more besides, has Eusebius in
Ecclesiastica historia, libro 5. cap. 1. 2. and 3. Hugo Floriacensis, Hermannus
Autors.
Contractus, Uincentius, Antoninus, Petrus Equilinus, and other hystoryanes
more. And as touching Anne Askewe. these ij. examynacyons, with her other
known handelynges in England, are witnesses for her suffycyent. Thus has not
the fire taken Anne Askewe Not all dead.
all whole from the world, but left her here unto it more pure, perfyght, and
precyouse than a fore, as it will also Johan Lassels within short space. So
that concerning her, it may well be said, that Paul verefyeth, 2. Cor. 12.
The strength of God is here made perfyght by weakness. When she seemed most
feeble, Weakness.
than was she most strong. And gladlye she rejoiced in that weakness, that
Christ's power might strongelye dwell in her. Thus choseth the lord, the
folysh of this world to confound the wise, and the weak to deface the
mighty. Yea, things despised and thought very vile, to bring things unto
naught which the world has in most hight reputacyo^. I think if this martyr
were right lie conferred, with those canonysed mar tyrs, which have had, and
yet has still, sensynges and syngynges, massynges and Martyrs
ryngyngesi the popes Englysh church, cause with cause and reason with reason,
(as haplye here after they shall) she should be a great blemysh unto them. An
example of strong sufferaunce might this holy martyr be, unto all them that
the lord shall after like manner put forewarde Example
in this horrible furye of An tichrist, to the glory of his persecuted church.

Amen.
A table compendyouse of this first book.
^ ^ ^ ^ ^ ^ ^ ^ ^ ^ BArnes and Tyndale, pre. 3 Beasts eat the prestes God,
14 Bedas prophecye, pre. 2. 8 Believe in prestes lecherye 36 Blandina with Anne
Askewe, pre. 7. 8. 9 Books conde^pned and brent. pre. 5. 22. 43 Books not yet
answered, 42 Books of Johan Wycleue, pre. 6 Bonner a craftye wolf, 18. 29. 42
Bonner plays the fox 18. 19. 20. 22 Bonner a false surgeon, 24 Boxers of
their God, 26 Bread in a box 26 CAyphas of London, 22. 23. 25. 29 Catholic,
not esteemed, 38. 39 Chancellor of London, 10. 16. 30 Christ's dyuynyte, 9
Christiudged an heretyke, 25 Comparyson of Blandina, pre. 7. 8. 9 Counsels for
recantynge, pre. 7 Crome and Shaxton, pre. 7 Delays of delyueraunce, 40
Doctrine of the supper, 4 Dogs Rhetoryck, 32 Drunkenness of prestes, 14
Druydes, are pagane prestes, 7. 30 Eating diverse, 4 Englysh women learned, 11
England, all for the pope, 30 Eua, an Ankorasse, 26 Examynacyons written, pre.
5. 6 Faith of the fathers, pre. 3 Faith of the pope, 36 Feast of Corpus
Christi, 26 Fire, takes not all away, pre. 9 Forcronners of Christ, pre. 2. 3
Fryres, for their Mass 30 Germans, rayled on, 43 God a sprete and no bread,
pre, 7. 14 God falls and is eaten, 14 God in the box, 26 Guimundus
Auersanus, 9 Hawkynge of Bishops, 20 Helias sprete in our age, pre. 2. 3
Henrye Spenser, warreth, 29 Heresye is Christ's doctrine, 25 Hieremyes
prophecye brent, pre. 5 22 Hilda, a woman learned, 11 Hystoryanes diverse, pre.
9 Hypocrytes resysted, 45. 46 Host, a God of the papystes, 14 James the
apostle, pre. 4 Idolaters without wytt, 14 Ignorant magistrates, 8 In
Godstede, 28 Ioakim brent scriptures, pre. 5. 22 Johan Baptyst, great, pre. 3.
4 Johan wycleues books, pre. 6 Johan wycleue dysputeth, 30 Johan wycleue and
huss, 45 Johan frith offends, 21 Johan Lassels martyred pre. 3. 7 Israelytes
converted, pre. 2 Judas sent to betraye, 12. 21, 25 King, to be honored, 46
Kings godly enterprise, 5. 42 Kings, in Gods cause resysted 45 Kingedom of
the pope, 46. 43 LEcherye honored, 36 Legendes and hystoryes, pre. 4
Lordeshyppes of the clergy 33. 35 MAnne wounded, 7. 24. 26 Marryage of
prestes, 35. 39 Martyrs of the pope, pre. 4 Martyrs hallowed and sensed, pre. 9
Mass, is not of faith, 3. 36 Mass is no good work, 7 Mass, a mamm^trouse
Mazon* 21 Masses pryuate and common, 6. 30 Myce howseled of papystes, 9
Miracles looked for, pre. 4. 5 Mouse eats God, 8 New martyrs of Christ, pre.
3. 4 New artycles of faith, 36 New saints of the pope, pre. 4 Nobylyte,
whereof it ryseth, pre. 6 No field yet gotten, 42 No suertyes for Christ. 11
OBieccyon of papystes, pre. 4 Obey and pray, 45 Offense of prestes
daungerouse, 17 Order of popysh scoles, 14. 15 PEryn, a foxish fryre, 8. 14.
30. 43 Peryn howseleth a mouse, 9, 14 Peryns iij. sermons, 43. 44 Peryn, the
popes ape, 44 Practyse of prestes, 13. 18. 22. 28. 40, 41. Prestes mynystracyon
in sin, 4. 25. (42 Prestes are tempters, 6. 12. 24 Prestes mass helps not,
7 Prestes of Lyncolne, 33. 34 Pryuate masses, 6. 30 QUarellynges of papystes,
32. 38 Questyon very beastysh, 14. 29 Questmonger for antichrist, 3. 5. 25. 28
Racked was Anne Askewe, pre. 8 Reallye, is not of believe, (...) Renyers of
Christ, pre. 7 Receyuynge of the pressed, 7 Rochestre and More pre. 4 Sacrament,
what it is, 2 Sampson and Wynchestre, 43 Scripture judged heresye, 27. 28
Shaxton and Crome, pre. 7. 8 Silence for the pope, 43 Standysh a blasphemouse
papyst, 31 Steven done to death. pre. 4 TEmples God dwells not in, 28
Temptacyo^s of Bo^ner, 21. 22. 23. 31 Thomas walden a fryre, 9 Thomas More and
Rochestre pre. 4 Tyndale and Barnes, pre. 3 Tytles of Wycleues books, pre. 6
UEryte demed heresye, 25 Vypers whelps, 30 Vnsuffycyent make they Christ, 37
WUlter Hunte, a doctor 2^ Whoredom is honored 36 Why Christ is renyed, pre.
7 Wynchestres moust howseled, 8. 14 Wynchestre and Sampson 43 Wynchestre the
popes bear 44 Wynchestre at Vttecht 44 Wits soft and tender 44 Women learned
10 Wrysleye and Rich (...)
God save the king.
The first examinarion of the worthy servant of God mastres Vnne Askewe the
yo^ger dough ter of Sir Wyllyam Askewe knight of lyncolne shyre / latelye
martyred in Smith field. by the Romysh popes vpholders.
The censure or judgment of Johan Bale thereupon, after the sacred Scriptures
and Chronycles.
Of no less Christen constancy was this faithful witness and holy martys
of God, Anne As kewe, nor no less a fast membre of Christ by her might ye
persyste^ce in his veryte at this time of myschefe, than was the before na med.
Blandina in the prymatyne church. This shall well apere in her it. (...)
mynacyons or tyrannouse handelynge^ here following, whom she wrote with her
own hand, at the instant desire of (...) ten faithful men and women, yea
rath^ at the secret mocyon of God, that the truth theroff might be known the
worl de over. Us within short space yt will be^ if the latyne speech can cayrye
yt. Mark well the co^munycacyo^s here both of her and of her examyners, so
proving their spretes as S. Johan the Apostle gives Spretes
you counsel. 1. Io. 4. And than shall ye know the tree by his fruit, and the
man by his work.

Anne Askewe. To satisfy your expectation, good people (says she) this was my
first examynacyon in the year of our Lord M. D. xlv and in the month of
March, first Christofer dare examyned me at Sadlers hall, being one
Christofer dare.
of the quest, and asked if. I ded not believe that the sacrament ^angynge over
the aultre was the very body of Christ realye. Then I demanded this qestyon
of him, wherefore S. Steven was stoned to death: And he said, he could not
tell. Then I answered, that no more would I assoyle his vain questyon.


Johan Bale. A sacrament (says Saint Augustyne) is a sign, shappe, or
symylytude of that yt represeutyth, and no God nor yet thing represented. This
word real or reallye, is not of believe, for yt is not in all the sacred
scriptures. Only is yt Reallye.
sophystycallye borrowed of the paganes Iernynge by wynchestre and his fellawes,
to corrupt our Christen says. Be ware of that filthy poison. The perfyght
believe of Steven, A^torum vij. of Paul Act. 17. and of Solomon, 3. Regum 8. et
2. Parali. 6. was, that God dwells not in temples made with hands. Agreeable
unto this was the faith of this godly woman, which neither could believe that
he dwells in the box. God The ^ors
says, Esaie ^vj. Heaven is my seat, not the box. David says, Psalm. 113^
our God is in heaven, not in the pixt^ Christ taught us to say, wha^ we
praye^ Matthew. 6. Luce 11, our father which art in heaven, and not our father
which art in the box. Now discern and judge.


Anne Askewe. Secondly he said, that there was a woman, which ded testyfye,
that I should read, how God was not in temples made Temples.
with hands. Then I showed him the vij. and the xvij. chaptre of the Apostles
acts, what Steven and Paul had said there in. Whereupon he asked me, how I took
those sentences? I answered, that I would not throw pearls among swyne, for
acornes were good enough.


Johan Hale. An ignorant woman, yea a beast without faith, is herin allowed
to judge the holy scriptures heresye, and against all good laws admitted to
accuse this godly woman the servant of Christ, for ^n haynouse heretyke, for
the only rea^inge Accuser^.
of them. As perverse and blasphe ^nouse was this qwestmonger as she, and ^s
beastlye ignorant in the doctrine of ^elthe, yet is neither of them judged ill
^f the world, but the one permitted to ^accuse this true membre of Christ, and
the other to co^dempne her. Wherefore her answer out of the vij. chaptre of
Matthew, was most fytt for them. For they are no better than swyne, that so
contem pne the precyouse treasure of the Gospel, for the mire of mennys
tradycyons.


Anne Askewe. Thirdly he asked me, wherefore I said, that I had rather to read
five lines in the Bible, than to hear five masses in Masse^
the temple. I confessed, that I said no less. Not for the dysprayse of either
the Epistle or Gospel. But because the one ded greatly edyfye me, and the
other nothing at all. As saint Paul does witness in the xiiij chaptre of his
first Epistle to the Corinthes, where as he does say. If the trumpe gives an
uncertain sound, who will prepare himself to the battle?


Johan Hale. A commandment has Christ given us, to search the holy
scriptures, Io han. 5. for in them only is the life eternal. Blessed is he
(says Christ unto Johan) which reads and hears the worcester des of this
prophecye, Apo. 1. But of the latyne popysh mass, is not one word in all the
Bible, and therefore it perteyneth not to faith. A straight commandment have
almyghtye God given, Deutro. 12. that nothing be added to his word, nor yet
taken from it. Put thu nothing unto Gods word.
his words (says Solomon, Prou. 30.) least thu be found in so doing, a
reproba te person and a liar. S. Paul wylled nothing to be uttered in a dead
speech. 1. Corin. 14. (as are your mass and mattens) but silence always to be
in the congregacyons, where as is no interpretour, for five words (says he)
avails more to understanding, than x. thousand words with the tongue. This
proves temple service of the papystes all the year, to be worth nothing.


Anne Askewe. Fortlye he laid unto my char ge, that I should say, If an ill
The pressed
pressed mynystred, it was the devil and not God. My answ^ re was, that I never
spoke soche thing. But this was my saying, That what so ever he were, which
mynystred unto me, his ill condycyons could not hurt my faith. But in sprete
I received never the less, the body and blood off Christ.


Johan Hale. Christ says, Joan. 6. Have not I chosen you xij. and yet one of
you is a devil? meaning Judas that false and vnfayth Judas.
full pressed. No less says Peter. 2. Pet. 2. of those lye^ge curates, by whom
the truth is blasphemed, and the people made merchaundyce of in their
covetousness. If the ill fruit than, be all one with the ill tree in
noughtynesse, the work of a devil must be deuylysh. God said unto the wicked
prestes, ^sa. j. Licr. 6. Amos 5. and Mala. 2. that he abhorred their
sacryfyces, and also hated them, even at the very heart, willing both heaven
and Sacryfyc^s.
earth to mark it. Into Judas entered Satan, after the soppe was given him,
Io^. 13. where as the other Apostles received the body and blood of Christ.
The table was all one to them both, so was the bread which their mouths
received. The inward receyuynges i^an in Peter and in Judas, made all the
dyuersyte, which was believe and unbelieve, or faith and unfaithfulness, as
Christ largelye declares in the vj. of Johan, The vj. of Johan.
where as he showed before hand, the full doctrine of that mystycall supper.
Only he that believes, has there the promise of the life everlasting, and not
he that eats the materyall bread. Of God are they taught, and not of men,
which truly understand this doctrine.


Anne Askewe. Fifthly he asked me, what I said concerning confession? I
Confession
answered him my meaning, which was as Saint James says, that every man
ought to acknowledge his fa^tes to other, and the one to pray for the other.


Johan Bale. This co^fessyon only do, the scripture appoint us, Iac. 5. as we
have offended our neyber: But if we have offended God, we must sorowfullye
acknowledge it before hym-And he (says Saint Johan, 1. Johan. 1. has
faythfullye promised to forgive us our sins, if we so do, and to cleanse us
from all vnryghtousnesse. If the law of truth be in the prestes mouth,
Prestes.
he is to be sought unto for godly cou^ sell, Mala. 2. But if he be a
blasphemou se hypocryte or superstycyouse fool, he is to be shourned as a most
pestilent poison.


Anne Askewe. Sixthly he asked me, what I said to the kings book? And The
tynges book,
I answered him, that I could say nothing to it, because I never saw it.


Johan Bale. All craftye ways possible, fought this quarellynge qwestm^nger,
or elsthe devil in him, to bring this poor innocent lamb to the slaughter
place of Antichrist. Much after this sort sought the wicked Pharysees by
serte^ of their own Pharysees.
faccyon or hyered satellytes with the Be rodyanes, to bring Christ in danger
of Caesar, and so to have him slain, Mat. 22. Mar. 12. Luce 21.


Anne Askewe. Seventhly he asked me, if I had the sprete of God in me? I
answered if I had not, I was but a reprobate or cast away.


Johan Bale. ^lecte are we of God (says Peter) through the sanctyfyenge of the
sprete. j. Petri j. In every true Christen beleuer dwells the sprete of God.
Io. 14. Their The spre te.
sowles are the sanctyfyed temples of the holy Ghost. 1. Corin. 3. Be that
has not the sprete of Christ (says Paul) is non of Christ's, Roma. 8. To
them is the holy Ghost given, which hears the Gospel and believes it, and
not unto them which will be iustyfyed by their works, Gala. 2. All these
worthy scryptures co^ firm her saying.


Anne Askewe. Then he said, he had sent for a pressed to examyne me, which was
there at hand. The pressed asked Ap.
me, what I said to the Sa crame^t of ye aul^e? and required mo^he to know
therein my me a ninge. But I desired him agay ne, to hold me excused
concerning that matter. Non other answer would I make him, be cause I
perceived him a papyst.


Johan Bale. Mocking prestes (says Esaye) has rule of the lords people.
Whose voices Mockers.
are in their dru^c^nnesse. Bid that may be bydden, forbid that may be
forbydde^. keep back that may be kept back, here a little and there a
little. Esaie xxviii. A plage shall come upon these, for why, they have changed
the ordynaunces, and made the everlasting testament of no^ effect. Esa. 24.
They witholde (says S. Paul) the veryte of God in vnryghtousnesse, Roma. 1.
They bread cockatryce eggs (says Esaye) and we^e A serpent ryseth.
the spyders web. Who so eats of their eggs, dies. But if one treads
upon them, there comes up a serpent, Esaie 59.


Anne Askewe. Eyghtly he asked me, if I ded not think, that pryuate masses ded
help sowles departed. And I said, it was great Idololatrye to believe more in
the^, than in the death which Christ dyed for us.


Johan Bale. Here, ryseth the serpent of the cockatry ce eggs, worckema^lye to
fulfill the afo re alleged prophecye. If their Masses had been of Gods
creacyon, ordinance Masses pryuate.
or commandment, or if they had been in any point necessary for mannys
behoue, they had been regestred in the book of life, which is the sacred Bible.
But therein is, neither mencyon of Mass pry uate nor publyque, several nor
commen, syngle nor double, high nor low, by fore not on horse back, or by
note as they call it. If they be things added by mannys inuencyon (as they can
be non other, not being there named) tha^ am I sure that the scriptures call
them fylthynesse, rust, chafe, draffe, swylle, droncke^nesse, fornycacyon,
me^strue, mannys dyrt, adders eggs, poison, snares, the bread of wicked lies,
and the cup of Gods curse. Their orygynall ground should seem to be taken of
the Druydes or pagane Prestes, Druydes.
which inhabyted this realm long before Christ's incarnacyon, and had than
practysed sacryfyces publyque and pryuate. Look Cornelius Tacitus, Caius Iu
lius, Plinius, Strabo, and soch other authors. That name of pryuacyon added
unto their Mass, clerelye depryueth it of Christen communyon, where one man
eats up all, and dystrybuteth nothing.

How soche ware should help the sow les departed, I can not tell. But well I
wot, that the wounded man betwixt Hie For sowles.
rusale^ and Hierico, had no help of the^, Luce 10. The Samarytane which was
rekened but a pagane among them, was his only comfort. In the most popysh
time was never more horrible blasphemye, than this is. This wickedness
impugneth all the promyses of God concernyn ge faith and remyssyon of sins.
It repugneth also to the whole doctrine of the Gospel. The applycacyo^ of
Christ's sup per, avails them only that be alive, taking, eating, and
drinking that ^s therein mynystred. No More can the prestes receyuynge of that
sacrament profyght an other man, tha^ can his receyuyn (...) prestes recey
uynge.
ge of Baptysme or of penance, as they call it. If it profyteth not the qwyck,
how can it profyght the dead? No sacrifyce is the Mass, nor yet good work,
but a blasphemouse prophanacyo^ of the Lor des holy supper, a manifest
wickedness, an horrible Idololatrye, and a foul abhomynacyon, being thus a
ryte of worshyppynge without the word, yea against the express word of God.


Anne Askewe. Then they had me from thens, unto my lord Mayre. And he Mayre.
examyned me, as they had before, and I answered him dyrectlye in all things,
as I answered the qweste before.


Johan Bale. After this sort was Christ led from the examinacyon of the
clergy to Pylate, Matthew. 17. In that the examynacyon of the qweste and of the
Mayre was all one, ye may well know that they had both one scole mastre, even
the brutysh bishop of London. The ignorant magy Bonner.
strates of England will neither be god lie wise with David and Salomo^, nor
yet enbrace the ernest instruccyons of God, to be learned in the scriptures,
Psa. 2. Sa pie^. 6. but still be wicked mynysters, and cruel servant slaves
to Antichrist and the devil, Apoc. 17. More fyt are soche wytlesse mayres and
graceless officers, Ignorau^ ce.
as knows not whyght from black, and light from darkness. Esa. 5. to feed
swyne or to keep kaddowes, than to rule a christen commynalte. A terryble day
aby death them, which thus orders the innocent. Iaco. 2.


Anne Askewe. Besides this my lord mayre laid one thing unto my charge,
which was never spoken of me, but of them* And that was, whether a mouse
eating the host, received God or no? This questyonded I never ask, but in
deed they asked it of me, whereunto I made them no answer, but smyled.


Johan Bale. Is not here (think you) well fauerd and well fashyoned dyuynyte,
to establysh an article of the Christen faith? Wylye wynchestre answers this
questyon as folysh as it is, in his wise detectyo^ of the Wynchestre.
deuyls sophystrye, fo. 16. Believe (says he) that a mouse can not devour God.
Yet reports he after, in fo. 21. that Chri stes body may as well dwell in a
mouse as it ded in Judas. Than follows fryre fynke, fryre Peryn I should say,
a bachelar of the same scole. And he answers Peryn.
in the end of his third sermon, that the Sacrament eaten of a mouse, is the
very and real body of Christ. And when he has affermed it to be no
derogacyon to Christ's presens, to lie in the mawe of that mouse. He deuydeth
me Diuisio
the one from the other, the sacrament from Christ's body, co^cludinge. That
though the sacrament be digested in the mouses mawe, yet is not Christ's body
there consumed. O blasphemouse beasts, and blind bloderynge Balaamytes.

Because these ij, workmen be scant wyttye in their own occupacyon, I shall
bring them forth h^re ij. old artyfycers of theirs to help the^, Guimundus
Aver Guimundus. Waldenus.
sanus a bishop, to help bishop Steven, and Thomas walden a fryre, to help
fryre Peryn. The sacraments (say they both) are not eaten of myce, though
they seem so to be in the exteryour symylytudes. Forth virtues (says
Guimundus) of holy men, are not eaten of beasts, when they are eaten of them,
li. 2. de c^^pore and sanguine d^^i. No marrye (quoth walden) no more is the
paynters occupacyon destroyed, when a picture is destroyed. Mark this gere for
your learning. But now comes Algerus a monk, more Algerus.
craftye than they both, and he says li. 2 cap. 1. de Eucharistia, that as
well is this meat spirytuall, as materyall, because David calls it the
bread of Angels, and a bread from heaven, Psa. 77. That which is materyall in
this bread (says he) is consumed by dygestyon, but that which is spirytuall
remains uncorrupted.

If we would attend well unto Chri stes dyuynyte, and let these oyled dyuynes
dyspute among old Gossypes, we should sone dyscharge myce and rattes, weak
stomakes and parbreakynge dronkardes, of a far other sort tha^ thus, he that
eats my flesh (says Christ Io. 6. Christus.
and dryncketh my blood, dwells in me and I in him. This eating is all one
with the dwelling, and is neither for myce nor rattes, brent chauncels not
dronken prestes. For as we eat we dwell, and as we dwell we eat, by a
graunded and pe^fyght faith in him. The substance of that most godly
refeccyon lies not in the mouth catynge nor yet in the bellye seadynge, though
they be necessary, but in the only spirytuall or soul eating. No wise man
will think, that Christ will dwell in a mouse, nor yet that a Faith.
mouse can dwell in Christ, though it be the doctrine of these doughtye
dowsepers, for they shall find no scriptures for it. If these men were not
enemies to faith and fryndes to Idolatrye, they would never teach soche
filthy learning. More of this shall I write (God N^ta*
willing) in the answer of their books.


Anne Askewe. Then the Bishops chaunceller rebuked me, and said, that I was
much to blame for vtterynge the scriptures. For S. Paul (he said) forbode
women Women.
to speak or to talk of the word of God. I answered him, that I knew Paul's
meaning so well as he, which is, j. Corinthiorum xiiij. that a woman ought not
to speak in the congregacyon by the way of teaching. And then I asked him,
how many women he had seane, ^go into the pulpett and preach, He said, he
never saw non. Then I said, he ought to find no fault in poor women, except
they had offended the law.


Johan Bale. Ple^teouse enough is her answer here, unto this quarellynge, and
(as apereth) unlearned chancellor. Many godly women both in the old law
and the new, Scripture women.
were learned in the scriptures, and made vtterau^ce of the^ to the glory of
God. As we read of Helisabeth. Marye, and An na the wydowe, Lu. 1. and 2. yet
were they not rebuked for it. yea, Marye Christ's mother retained all, that was
afterwar de written of him, Luc. 2. yet was it not imputed unto her an offense.
Christ bla med not the woman that cried whyls he was in preaching, happy is
the womb that bare the, Luce 11. The women which gave knowledge to his dyscy
Women
ples, that he was risen from death to ly fe, dyscomfyted not he, but solaced
them with his most gloryouse aperau^ce. Mat. 28. Io. 20. In the prymatyue
church, specyallye in Saint Hieromes time, was it a great praise unto women to
be learned in the scriptures. Great commendacyo^s ^eueth our Englysh Chronicles
to Hele^a, Englysh women
Vrsula, and Hilda, women of our na ^yon, for being learned also in the
scrip^ures. Soche a woman was the said Hill ^a, as openly dysputed in them
against ^he superstycyons of certain bishops. But this chancellor by like,
chanced upon that blind popysh work which ^alter Hunte a white fryre, wrote
iiij. Walter hunte.
^core years a go, Contra doctrices mu^ieres, against scole women, or else some
^ther like blind Romysh beggeryes.


Anne Askewe. Then my Lord mayre commanded me to ward. I asked Preson.
him, if suretees would not serve me, And he made me short an swear, that he
would take non. Then was I had to the Country, and there remained xij. days,
no frynde admytted to speak with me.


Johan Bale. Here is Christ yet trodden on the hele, by that wicked serpent
which tempted Christ ^ro
Eua. Gene. 3. His faithful membre for beleuynge in him, is here thrown in
pre de^ on the hele.
son. And no maruele, for it was his own promise, ye shall be brought before
rulers and debytees (says he) for my truths sake Mat. x ye shall be betrayed
of your own nacyon and kyndred, and so thrown in pre son, Luc. 21. If they
have persecuted me, think not but they will also persecute you, Io. 15 This
serpent is again become the prince of this world, and holds the gouerners
thereof captyue, Io. 14. Suertees would have been taken for a thief or a
mourtherer, but not for Christ's member, the bishops chau^cellour being at
hand, nor yet her fryndes permytted to confort her.


Anne Askewe. But in the mean time there was a pressed sent to me, which A pressed.
said that he was commanded of the bishop to examyne me, and to give me good
counsel, which he ded not But first he asked me for what cause I was put in
the Cou^ter: And I told him I coul de not tell. Then he said, it was great
pytie that I should be there without cause, and concluded that he was very
sorye for me.


Johan Bale. O temptacyon of Satan. Christ beyn ge in the solitarye
wilderness alone, was after this flattering sort assaulted first of his
enemy, Matt. 4. This Judas was sent before to give a fryndelye kiss, the Iuda^.
more depelye to trappe the innocent in sna re. But Gods wisdom made her to
perceive what he was. A false prophet is sone known by his fruits, among
them that are godly wise. Mat. 7. She consy dered with Solomon, that more to
profyght are the strypes of a frynde, tha^ the fraudolent kysses of a
deceytfull enemy. Proverb. 27.


Anne Askewe. Secondly he said, it was told him, that I should deny the sa The
Sacrament.
crame^t of the aultre. And I an swered him again, that that I had said, I had
said.


Johan Bale. In thyobrefe answer, she remembered Sa lomo^s counsel, Answer
not a fool, all after hysfolyshnesse. Beware of the^ (says Christ) which come
in shepes clothing, for inwardlye they are most rauenynge wolves, Mat. 7. God
destroys the craf tes of the wicked (says Job) so that they are not, hable
to perform that they take in hand. Job 5


Anne Askewe. Thirdly he asked me, if I were shryuen, I told hymno. Then he
said, he would bring one to me, for to shryue me. And I told him, so that I
might have one Shriff^e.
of these in, that is to say, doc tor Crome, sir Gyllam, or Hun tyngton, I was
contented, because I knew them to be men of wisdom. As for you or any other,
I will not dysprayse, because I know ye not. Then he said, I would not have
you think, but that I or another that shall be brought you, shall be as honest
as they. For if we were not, ye may be sure, the King would not suffer us to
preach. The^ I answered by the saying of Solomon. By commonynge Prechers.
with the wise, I may learn wisdom, but by talking with a fool, I shall take
skathe, Prouer. f.


Johan Bale. Se how this aduersarye co^paseth like a rauenynge lion, to devour
thyslambe 1. Pet. 5. Now tempts he her with Co^ fessy^n, which has been
soche a bayte of Confessyo^
theirs, as has brought in to their nets and snares the myghtyest princes of
the world, both kings and emprours. Se here if they leave any subtylte
unsought, to obtain their pray. Se recke ned by this to win his purpose,
which way so ever she had taken. If she had Practyse
been confessed to him, he had known which way she had been bent. If she had
utterly refused confession, he had more matter to accuse her of. O (...) sede
of the serpe^r. This part played your old generacyon the Pharysees and prestes
with Christ, to bring him in danger of the law, Mat. 2^. and Io. 8. ^o
Christian erudycyon brings this pressed, nor yet good counsels of the scripture.
But as Esaye says. The hypocryte ymagyneth hypocryte
a bhomynacyon against God, to famysh the hungrye, and witholde drink from the
thirstye. Yet shall not the eyes of the seeing be dymme, nor the ears of the
hearing be deffe, Esa. 32. If the king admyt so he preachers (as I can not
thyn Prechers
ke it) a sore plage remains both to him and to his people.


Anne Askewe. Fortly he asked me, if the host The host.
should fall, and a beast ded eat it, whether the beast ded receive God or no?
I answered, Seeing ye have taken the pains to ask this questyon, I desire you
also to take so much pain more, as to assoyle it your self. For I will not
do it, because I perceive ye come to te^p t^ me* And ^e said, it was against
the order of scoles, that he which asked the questyon, should answer it. I
told him. I was but a woman, and knew not the course of scoles.


Johan Bale. Beastlye was that questyon, and of a more beastlye brain
propouned to this woman. Lyttlenede shall other men have to manifest their
blasphemouse folyes. when they do it so playnelye their selves. Who ever heard
before, that their host A fallyn^ ge God.
was a God, and might fall, and be eaten of a beast, till they now so beastlye
told the tale? Though Saint Paul, where as it is ryghtlye mynystred, does
call it the body of the Lord. j. Corin. 11. Yet does he not call it a God.
Though Christ says, This is my body, Matthew. 26. Marei 14. Luce 22. yet says
he not this is a God. For God is a sprete, and no body, Ioannis 4. Where God
is eaten, it is of the sprete, and neither of mouse nor ratte, as Wynchestre
and Peryn, Wynches tree. Peryn.
with other like popysh heretykes have taught now of late by their own hand
wrytynges. Our God is in heaven, and cannot fall nor yet be eaten of beasts.
If they have soche a God, as may both fall, and so be eaten, as thy^ pressed
here confesses, it is some false or counterfert God of their own making. An
Idol
If he may putryfye or be consumed of worms, moule, rust, beast, or fire,
Baruch says, it is an Idol, and no God, Ba ruch 6.

These witless ydolatours have no grace in this age, to hyde their old
legerdemaynes. They fare like those dronken Gossypes, which tell more than all,
wh^ their heads be full of well gyngerdeale. Like old Gossyppes.
The proud crown of the dronken Ephraemytes (says Esaye) shall be tro den
under foot. The prestes and the prophets do stacker, they are so ouerseane
with wine, Esa. 28. They stomble in the streets, and have stained themselves
with blood. Treno. 4. All the dwellers of Judah (says the lord) shall I fill
with dro^ ckennesse, both the kings and the prestes. Droncke^nesse.
I will neither perdon them, spare them, nor yet have pytie on them, Hierc. 13.
And where as that dronckennesse is (says Salomo^) there is no counsel kept,
Pro. 31. In the end, this hypocryte full hypocryte
life himself, allegeth to this woman, a manner used of his old predecessors
in the schools of falsehede. But from the scole of truth he brings nothing
to the confort of her conscience. He declares full workemanlye in this, what
he and his generacyon seeks, by soche their spyrituall and iustyfyenge works,
ex opere operato.


Anne Askewe. Fyftly he asked me, if I Intended to receive the sacrament Howsell
at easter, or no: I answered, that else I were no Christen woman, and that I
ded rejoice, that the time was so nere at hand. And tha^ he departed thens,
with many fair words.


Johan Bale. This hongrye wolf practyseth by all craftye ways possible, to
suck the blood Spirituallye.
of this innocent lamb. Is not that (think you) an holy congregacyon, which
is thus spyrytuallye occupied? Some godly wise men will wondre, that they be
not ashamed. But maruele not of it. For the holy Ghost says, in hy^ fore
judgments, that the same holy mo thet which has hatched the^ up in oils
and in shauynges; is an unshame fast whore, A whore.
Apo. 17. et Dan. 8. Than of very nature must her whelps be shameless chyl
dren. Soche shameless dogs are they Dogs.
(says Esaye) as be never satisfied. Es. 56. wha^ they kylle you (says
Christ) they shall think they do God good ser uyce, Io. 16. so greatly have
their malice blinded them, Sapie^ 2. which is partlye the drokennesse a fore
spoken of.


Anne Askewe. And the xxiij. day of March, my cosyne Brittayne came into the
Counter to me, and asked there, whether I might be put to bail or no: Then
went he immedyatlye unto my lord Baylynge.
Mayre, desyerynge of him to be so good lord unto me, that I might be bayled.
My lord answered him, and said, that he would be glad to do ye best that in
him lay, howbeyt he could not bail me without the consent of a spirytuall
offycer. So requyrynge him to go and spea ke with the chau^cellour of Lon don.
For he said, like as he coul de not commytt me to prison without the consent of
a spirytuall offycer, no more could he bail me without consent of the same.


Johan Bale. True is it here, that is written of S. Johan in the Apocalyppes,
that Antichrist antichrist
is worshypped of the potentates and kings of the earth, Apo. 13. The mayre
of London, which is the kings liefe tenant, and represents there his own
person, stands here like a dead Idol, or like soche a servant slave as can
do nothing within his own city concerning their matters. Who is like the
Beast (says Saint Johan) who The beast
is able to war with him: He has brought all lands and their kyngedomes in
fear (says ^saye) the strength of their cytic^ has he taken away, and
restrained the delyueraunce of their presoners, Esa. 14. The pare^tes of him
that was borne blind, feared this spyrituall tyranny or captyuyte of theirs,
soch time Examples
as they were examyned of the bishop pes for the sight of their son. Joan. 9.
Soche as believed in Christ among the chief rulers of the Jews, would not be
acknowne thereof, for fear of like vyolen ce, Joan. 12. No new thing is it
than I custom.
in that spirytuall generacyon, but a custom of old antyquyte. Both Christ
and his Apostles have suffered like tyranny under them. But never ded they yet
mynystre it to any creature after their exemple.


Anne Askewe. So upon that he went to the chancellor, requyrynge of him as he
ded before of my lord may The chau^ celler.
re. He answered him, that the matter was so haynouse, that he durst not of
himself do it, without my Lord of London were made preuye theru^to. But he
said, he would speak unto my lord in it. And bad him repare unto him the next
morrow and he should well known my lords pleasure.


Johan Bale. Ryghtwysnesse judge they sin, and syn ne ryghtwysnesse, Es. 5.
so vnperfyght is their sight, Io. 12. in that God has given them up to their
own lusts, Romans j. What an haynouse matter is it holden here, to believe in
Christ after the scriptu Faith in Christ,
res, and not after their superstycyouse manner? For non other cause could they
lay to this woman, as ye have heard here before, and as ye shall here after
perceive more largelye. What so ever it be to offen de God or man, their
offense may be no less than prison and death. The Turk Tyra^nye,
is not more ve^geable, than is this spyght full spirytuall generacyon. Yet
boast they Christ's religion, and the holy mother church.


Anne Askewe. And upon the morrow after, he came thydre, and spoke both with
the chancellor, and with lord bishop of London. My lord declared unto him,
that he was very well contended that I should come forth to a co^munycacyon.
And appointed me to apere before him the next day after, at iij. of the clock,
at after none. More over he said unto him, that he would there should be at
that examynacyon, Wylye. Wylye.
soche learned men as I was affeccyoned to. That they might se, and also make
report, that I was handeled with no rygour. He answered him, that he knew no
man that I had more affection to than other. Than said the bysh opp. Yes, as I
understand, Subtyle.
she is affeccyoned to Doctor Crome, Sir Gyllam, Whyteheade, and Huntyngton,
that they might hear the matter. For she ded knowethe^ to be learned, and of a
godly judgment.


Johan Bale. A foxysh fauer was this, both of the chancellor and bishop, and
soche a beny uolent ge^tylnesse, as not only sought her blood, but also the
blood of all them which are here named, if they had than come to this
examynacyon. For the A wolf,
evening before (as I am credyblye infourmed) the Bishop made boast amon ge
his own sort, that if they came thydre, he would tie them a great deal
shorter. A voice was this full like to him that uttered it. For thereby he
apereth, not one that will save and feed, but rather soche a one as seeks to
kill and de stroye. Iohannis 10. The foxes run Foxe^
over the hill of Syon (says ^ieremye) because she is fallen from God.
Threnorum 5. O Israel (says the Lord) thy prophets are like the wylye foxes
upon the dry feldes, Ezechielis 13. The Poet has a byworde, that happy is
he which can take heed by another mannys hurt. I add this here, that ye should
be ware, if ye come in like danger of any soche foxish bishop. By one of his
day deuyls, whom this Cayphas sent to commen with the woman in A pressed.
preson, he knew part of her meaning, and what they were also which fauered
her opynyons. Yea, he craftelye undermined this gentylman which entreated for
her, if ye mark it well. Trust not to much in the flatterouse faunynge of
soche wylye foxes.


Anne Askewe. Also he required my cosyne Bryttayne, that he should ernest lie
persuade me to utter, even the very bottom of my heart. And he swear by his
fydelyte, A thief.
that no man should take any ad uauntage of my words. Neither yet would he
lay ought to my charge, for any thing that I should there speak. But if I
said any manner of thing amys, He with other more would be glad to reform me
therein, with most godly counsel.


Johan Bale. O vengeable tyrant and devil. How subtyllye sekyst thu the
blood of this innocent woman, under a color of fryndelye Judas.
handelynge. God ones commanded the ernestlye, in no case to compass thy
neyber with deceyt, to the effusion of his blood, Leu. 19. But his
commandment, thu reckenest but a Caunterburye tale. By swearynge by thy
fydelyte, thu art not all unlike unto Herod, who^ Herod.
Christ for like practyses, first to put Johan, and than him to death, called
also a most craftye cruel fox, Luce 13. Thu laborest here, to have this woman
in snare, with serten of her fryndes. But God put in her mind at this time, to
reckon the a dog and a swyne. Matthew. 7. and thereupon to have few words.


Anne Askewe. On the morrow after, my lord of London sent for me, at one of
the clock, his hour being appointed at three. And as I ca A false liar.
me before him, he said, he was very sorye of my trouble, and desired to know
my opinion in soche matters, as were laid against me. He required me also in
any wise, boldelye to utter the secrets of my heart, bid dynge me not to
fear in any point. For what so ever I ded O trayte:
say within his house, no man should hurt me for it. I answered. For so much
as your Lordeshypp appointed iij. of the clock, and my fryndes shall not come
till that hour, I desire you to pardon me of geuynge answer till they come.


Johan Bale. In this preventing of the hour, may the dylygent reader
perceive the gredyneffe of this Babylon Bishop, or bloudrhurstie wolf,
concerning this A tyra^t.
pray. Swyft are their fete (says David) in the effusion of innocent blood,
which have fraud in their tunges, venym in their lyppes, and most cruel
vengeance in their mouths. Psalm. 13. David in that Psalm much marueleth in
the sprete that taking upon them the spi rytuall governance of the people,
they can fall in soche frencsye or forgetfulness Murthe rers.
of themselves, as to believe it laufull thus to oppress the faithful, and to
devour them with as little compassyon, as he that gredylye denoureth a piece of
bread. If soche have read any thing of God, they have little minded their
true duty therein. More swyft (says Hieremye) are our cruel persecuters,
than the egles of the air. They Egles.
follow upon us over the mountains, and layepre^ye wait for us in the
wilderness. Trenorum 4. He that will know the craftye haukynge of Bishops
to bring in their pray, let him learn it here. Judas (I think) had never
the x. part of their conning warkemanshyppe. Mark it here, and in that which
follows.


Anne Askewe. Then said he, that he thougt Morel^ bes to devour.
it mete, to send for those iiii. men which were before named, and appointed.
Then I desired him, not to put the to the pain. For it should not need, by
cause the (...). gentylmen which were my fryn des, were able enough to testyfye
that I should say. Anon after he went into his gallerye with mastre Spylman,
and wylled him in any wise, that he should exhort me, to utter all that I
thought.


Johan Bale. Christ shows us in the vii. chaptre of Matthew, and in other
places more of the Gospel, how we shall know a false prophet or an
hypocryte, and wylleth us to be ware of them. Their manner is as the Life the
devil.
deuyls is, flatteryngly to tempt, and deceyt fullye to trappe, that they may
at the lattre, most cruellye ^ee. Soche a won (says David) has not hynge in
his tun ge, but plain deceyt. He lays wait for the innocent, with no less
cruelte than the lion for a sheep. He lurketh to rauysh up the poor. And when
he has gotten him into his net, than throws he him down by his autoryte,
Psalm. 9. This is the third temptacyon of thy^ bishop, that the woman should
utter, to her own confusyon.


Anne Askewe. In the mean while he commanded his Archebeacon to Archedea con.
comme^ with me, who said unto me. Mastres wherefore are ye accused? I answered.
Axe my accusers, for I know not as yet. The^ took he my book out of my hand,
and said. Soche books as this is, has brought you to the trouble ye are in. Be
ware (says he) be ware, for he that made it, was brent in Smythfelde. Then I
asked him, if he were sure that it was true that he had spoken. And he said, he
knew well, the book was of Io han frithes making. Then I A Liar.
asked him, if he were not ashamed for to judge of the book be fore he saw it
within, or yet kne we the truth thereof. I said also, that soche unadvised and
hastye judgment, is a token appare^t of a very slendre wytt. The^ I opened
the book and showed it him. He said, he thought it had been an other, for he
could fyn de no fault therein. The^ I desired him, no more to be so swyft in
judgment, till he through ye knew the truth. And so he departed.


Johan Bale. Here sends he fourth an other Judas of his, to betraye this true
seruan^t of Judas.
God. Mark the good workemanshypp hardelye, and tell me if they be not the of
spring of the serpent. Much are they offended with books, for that they so
play nelye do manifest their myschefes. Johan Frith is a great moate in their
eyes, Johan Frith.
for so turnynge over their purgatory, and heauynge at their most monstruose
Mass, or mammetrouse Mazon, which sygnyfyeth bread or feadynge.
Notwithstanding Daniel calls it Maozim, betokenynge strength or defense,
Dan. 11. because the false worshyppyng ^s thereof should be so myghtelye defended
by worldly autoryte and power. No new thing is it, that good men and Books
co^ dempned.
their books are destroyed now a days, wha^ they touched the myschefes of that
ge neracyo^. For Ioakim the king of Judah, cut Hieremyes prophecyes in pieces
with a pen knyfe, and in his madness threw them into the fire, commaundynge
both Hieremye which taught them, and Baruch that wrote them, to be put to
death. Hieremie 36. When king Antiochus had set upon the aultre of God, the
abhomynable Idol of desolacyon (which is now the poyshmasse, Mat. 24) the bo
kes of Gods law commanded he to be Books brent.
torn in pieces and brent in the fire, sendynge fourth thereupon, this cruel
proclamacyon. That what so ever he was, which had a book of the Lords
Testament found about him, or that endeavored themselves to live after the
laws of God, the Kings commandment was, they should be put to death. 1.
Machabe^rum 1.


Anne Askewe. Immedyatlye after came my cosyne Bryttayne in with diverse Her
fryn des.
other, as Mastre Hawe of Grayes inn, and soche other like. Then my lord of
London persuaded my cosyne Bryttayne, as he had done often before, which was,
that I should utter the bot tom of my heart in any wise.


Johan Bale. This is the fort temptacyon, or craftye calling upon, to utter
her mind, that he might say of her, as Cayphas said Cayphas
of Christ. Matt. 26. what need we any more witnesses? Lo, now ye have heard
a blasphemye or an heresye. How say ye now to it, which are her fryndes? Is
she not gyltye of death? If they should have said nay, unto this, they should
have been so, in as depedaunger as she. This ser pentyne practyse, was as well
to trappe Practyse.
them as her, ^ete it not be unmarked.


Anne Askewe. My lord said after that unto me, that he would I should cre dyte
the counsel of my fryndes in his behalf, which was, that Satan.
I should utter all things that burdened my conscience. For he ensured me, that
I should not ne de to stand in doubt to say any thing. For like as he
promised them (he said) he promy sed me, and would perform it. Which was,
that neither he, nor any man for him, should ta ke me at advantage of any
word I should speak. And therefore Tempter
he bad me, say my mind without fear. I answered him, that I had naught to
say. For my conscience (I thanked God) was burdened with nothing.


Johan Bale. Still follows this ghostlye enemy, hysformer temptacyon, and
calls upon mortal vtteraunce, or vtteraunce full of death, that he might
cry with Cayphas, Luc. 22. what need we further testymonye? Cayphas
Her own mouth has accu sed her. We are able withnesses thereof, sea our own
ears have heard it. Thus lay they wait for blood (says Solomon) and lurk
payuelye for the innocent, without a cause, Prouerbieru^ 1. Consent not (says
he) unto soche tyrauntes, if they entyce the. For though enemies.
their words apere as honye, Prouerbio rum 16. Yet shall the find them in the
end, so ^ytter as wormewode, Prouerbio^um 5. Though that whorysh generacyen
pretends a color of gentylnesse, yet byteth it at the lattre like a
serpent, and styngeth like an adder, throwynge fourth poison. Prou. 23.


Anne Askewe. Then brought he fourth this unsavory symylytude, That if a man
had a wound, no wise surgeon would mynystre help surgerye.
unto it, before he had seane it uncovered. In like case (says he) can I give
you no good counsel, unless I know where with your conscience is burdened.
Counsel.
I answered, that my co^ science was clear in all things. And for to lay a
playstre unto the whole skin, it might apere much folly.


Johan Bale. Has not he (thynkeyow) much need of help, which seeks to soche
a surgeon. Uncircumspect is that pacyent, and most commonly unfortunate, which
goes to a commen murderer to be hea led of his disease. Christ had us
evermore A mu^therer.
to be ware of all soche, unless we would be woryed, Matth^ 7. The nature of
these, Lord (says David) is not to make whole, but to persecute them whom thu
have smytten, and to add wou^ des unto wound, Psalmo 68. Their own Botches.
botches are insanable, Efaie 1. for the multitude of their myschefes, Hiere.
30. The pressed and the Leuyte, which trauayled betwin Jerusalem and Hierico,
healed not the wounded man, yet were they no wounders. Lu. 10. Who can thyn ke
that he will unburden the conscience, which stodyeth nothing else but to over
load it with most greuouse and dau^gerouse burdens; Math. 23.


Anne Askewe. Then ye drive me (says he) to lay to your charge, your ow ne
report, which is this. Ye ded say, he that does receive the sa Gathered store.
crament by the hands of an ill pressed or a sinner, he receives the devil,
and not God. To that I answered, that I never spoke soche words. But as I said
afo re both to the qwest and to my Lord Mayre, so say I now again, that the
wickedness of the pressed should not hurt me, but in sprete and faith I
received Sinon cast.
no less, the body and blood of Christ. Then said the bishop unto me, what
a saying is this? In sprete. I will not take you at that advantage. Then I an
swered, My lord without faith and sprete, I can not receive him worthelye.


Johan Bale. Now shows this Cayphas where about he Goes, for all his false
flattering colors before. And seeing he can win non aduau^tage to his cruel
purpose, of her own co^munycacyon, he shafeth the howgettes of his provided Iu
Bowgettes.
dases and betrayers of innocent blood He brings fourth soche stuff and
store, as that wicked qwest had gathered of her answer to them, to flatter and
to please his tyranny therewith. It is to be feared, that as far was the
fear of God here from the^, as from him / Psalm. 13. for as well practysed they
this myschefe against her, as he. Mark here the natural workynge of a very
full Antichrist. Antichrist.
Be defends sin in his o^w ge neracyo^, and conde^neth virtue in Chri stes
dear member. Malice, pride, whoredom, sodometrye, with other most deuylysh
vices, reckeneth he not to hurt the mynystracyon of a pressed / yet judges it
he an heresye, no less worthy than death, to believe that Christ's flesh and
blood is received in faith and sprete. What though it be Christ's most A sore
h^ resie.
ernest doctrine, Joan. 6. what a sa^nge (says this Bishopp) is this? In s^te.
I will not take you at the worst, says he. As though it were a most haynouse
heresye. But most dyscrete and godly was the womannys answer, declarynge her
a right membre of Christ. Prestes.
where as those prestes, who^ he here de fendeth, are unworthy receyuers and
members of the devil, Joan. 13. and i. Co rin. 11. Thus is an Antichrist here
know ne by his fruits. For he utters blasphemies against God, Daniel 7. Apoc.
13. he calls evil Good, and Good cuyll, Esa. 5. and Prouerbiorum 3.


Anne Askewe. Then he laid unto me, that I should say, that the sacrament
remaining in the pixte, was but bread. I answered that I never said so: But
in deed the qwest asked me Bread.
soche a qwestion, whereunto I would not answer (I said) till soche time as
they had assoyled me this question of mine. Where for Steven was stoned to
death. Steven.
They said, they knew not Then said I again, no more would I tell them what it
was.


Johan Bale. O Idolouse shepehearde (says Zach.) thu sekest not to heal the
wounded, but to eat the flesh of the fat. Zach. 11. The watch men of
Israel (says the lord) are very blind beasts, and Beaste^.
shameless dogs. They have no under standing, but follow their own
beastlye ways for covetousness, Esaie 56. Whoeuer read in the scripture or
autorysed Chronycle, that bread in a box should be Christ's body? Where or
wha^ commanded he his most holy body, so to be bestowed? What have ye to
lay for this doctrine of yours? Are ye not The box.
yet ashamed of your vnreuerent and blasphemouse beastlynesse? will ye still
pluc ke our Christen believe from the right hand of God the eternal father,
and send it to a box of your braynysh deuysynge?

The first boxer of it, was pope Honorius the third in the year of our lord.
Honorius
M. CC. XVI. after the many foldereuelacyons of diverse relygyouse w^men.
Neither was there any great honor given unto it of the common people, till a
sorye solytarye sister or Ankorasse in the land of Leodiu^ or Luke, called Eua
Eua reclusa
after serten visions, had procured of po pe Urbanus the fort, in the year of
our Lord. M. CC. LXIIII. the feast of Corpus Christi to be holden solemn all
Christendom over. Astestyfyeth Arnol dus Bostius, Epist. 6. ad Ioannem
Paleenydorum. Bostius
In all the xij. hundred years a fore that, was it neyter boxed nor pixed,
honored nor sensed vnyuersallye And se what an horrible work here is now, for
the boxinge thereof, and what a great heresy it is to believe that Christ dwell
not therein, contrary both to his own and to his Apostles doctrine. Mar
Iudases.
ke also how this Gods creature is handeled here for it, and how subtyllye she
is betrayed of the Bishops begles and lymmes of the devil.


Anne Askewe. Then laid it my Lord unto me, that I had alleged a serten text
of the scripture. I answered that I alleged non other but S. Paul's own saying
to the Athenianes, in the xvii. cha ptre of the Apostles acts. That God
dwells not in temples made with hands. Then asked he Temples
me. what my faith and believe was in that matter? I an swered him. I believe as
the scripture does teach me. Then A te^pter.
enquired he of me, what if the scripture does say, that it is the body of
Christ? I believe (said I) like as the scripture does teach me. Then asked he
again, what if the scripture does say, that it is not the body of Christ? My
answer was still. I believe as the scripture infourmeth me. And upon this
argument he carried a great while, to have driven me to make him an answer to
his mind. Howbeit I would not, but concluded thus with him, that I believed
therein and in all other things, as Christ and his holy Apostles ded leave
them.


Johan Bale. Se what an horrible sin here was. She alleged the scripture for
her believe, which is a sore and a daungerouse Scripture.
matter. For it is against the popes canon laws, and against the old customs
of holy church. Seus king Henryes days the fort, has it been a burning
matter, only to read it in the Englysh tunge, and was called wycleues
learning, till now of late years. And it will not be well with holy church,
till it be brought to that point again. For it makes many heretykes against
holy church. O insipient papystes. These are your corrupted practyses and
abhomynable stodyes, practyses
to drive the simple from God, and yet ye think, he seyth you not, Psalm 13.
Saint Paul says (Roma. 15.) what so ever things are written in the
scriptures, are written for our ler nynge, that we through pacyence and co^
fort in them, might have hope, and ye will rob us thereof. Christ commanded
Christ.
all peoples, both men and women (Johan. 5.) to search the scryptures, if they
think to have everlasting life, for that life is no where but in them. Yet
will you in pain of death keep them still from them.

For ye take upon ye to sytt in Gods In Gods stead.
stead, and think by that usurped office, that ye may turn over all, 2.
These. 2. But Christ bad us to be ware both of you and your chaplaynes, when he
said. There shall arise false Christ's and false prophets, workynge many
great wo^ ders, and saying. Lo, here is Christ, and there is Christ. Believe
them not. Matt. ^4. And therefore alleged this woman unto your q^estmongers (the
dogs that Christ warned us of, Mathe^ 7.) and now unto yo^ that saying of S.
Panle, Ato. 17. That God dwells not in t^ples Temples,
made with hands / which also we re the words both of Solomon long before 3.
Reg. 8, and of Steven, Acto. 7. in his tynie. That scripture so much offended
you, that ye would needs know thereof the understanding. For soche tex tes as
agree not with the cloynynges of your co^lrrers, and the conueyaunces of your
sorcerers, must needs be seasoned with Aristotle's Physyckes, and sawced with
Johan Sonses subtyltecs. Here Arystotle Sons.
make ye a wonderful turm^lynge to wrynge out of this Woma^nis believe in that
matter, that she myghe either bec^ me a creature of your old God the pope, or
else be burned, yet have she not ones re moved her foot from the hard founda^on
or sauyuge rocte Ihesus Christ. 1. Corinthians. 11. Blessed be his holy name for
it.


Anne Astewe. Then he asked me, why I had so few words? And I an few words.
swered. God has given me the gift of knowledge, but not of vt teraunce. And
Solomon says, that a woman of few words, is a gift of God, Prouer, 19.


Johan Bale. Wha^ Christ stood before Cayphas, he asked him, much aftet this
sort, where for he had so few words? Thu answe rest not (says he) to those
things whi ch are laid Here against the of these men. Nevertheless he held
his peace. Silence.
Mar. 14. But wha^ he was ones through lie compelled by the name of the living
God, to speak, and had uttered a very few words, he took him at soche
advantage, though they were the eternal veryte, as he was able through them,
to procure his death, Matthew. 26. like as this bloudye Bishopp. Bonner, Bonne^
of the same wicked generacyon, ded at the lattre, by this faithful woman.


Anne Askewe. Thirdlye my lord laid unto my charge, that I should say, that
the Mass was ydolatrye I answered him. No, I said not so. Howbeyt (I said) the
qwest ded askeme, whether pry uate Masses ded releue sowles departed, or nor
Unto whom Pryuate Masses.
than I answered, O Lord, what ydolatrye is this? that we should rather believe
in pryua temasses, than in the helthsom death of the dear son of God Than
said my lord again. What an answer was that: Though it were but mean (said
I) yet was it good yuough for the questyon,


Johan Bale. About the lattre days of Johan wycleue, in the year of our lord
a M. CCC. LXXXII. as Henrye Spenser than Henrye Spenser.
Bishop of Norwych, was with a great nombre of Englysh warryours besiegyn ge
the Town of Bypers in flaunders, in the quarrel of pope Urbanus the (...). The
vessels of perdycy on or very organes ^rires.
of Satan, the iiij. orders of beggynge fryres, preached all England over,
that that most holy father of theirs, had lyberallye opened the well of
mercy, and granted clean remyssyon to all them that would either fight, or
give any thing toward the mayntenaunce of those wars in that quarrel of
holy church against scysmatykes and heretykes. For than was this matter of
their popysh Mass.
Mass, in great controuersye like as it is now. More over they promised by ver
tu of his great pardons, to send the sowles departed, to heaven. And diverse
of them said, they had scane them fly up, out of the church yeardes from
their graves thydre ward.

This most deuylysh blasphemye with soche other like, provoked the Johan ^cleue
said Johan wycleue, the very organe of God, and vessel of the holy Ghost
not only to replye than against them at Oxforde in the open scooles, but also
to write a great nombre of books against that pestylent popysh kyngedome of
theirs. life as Martyne Luther has done also in our time, with many other
godly men. And life as those false prophets the fryres ded than attribu te
unto the popes pardons, the remyssyon of sins, the deliverance from da^p
Pardons.
nacyon, and the fre enteraunce of heaven, which peculyarlye belongs to the
precyouse payment of Christ's blood. i. Petri 1. and 1. Ioa^. 1. So do these
false anoyn ted, or blasphemouse Eyssoppes and prestes now, attrybute them
again ^n to their pryuate and public Masses, Druydes.
the popes own wares as prowlynge and pelferynge as the pardons, with no less
blasphemye. The deuylyshnesse of this new doctrine of theyrs, shall be re
felled in my books against fryre Peryn and Wynchestre, and therefore I write
Perin.
the less here.


Anne Askewe. Then I told my lord, that there was a pressed, whychded hea re
what I said there before my lord mayre and them. with that the chaunceller
answered, which was the same pressed. So Chance ler.
she spoke it in very deed (says he) before my lord the mayre and me. Then
were there serten prestes as doctor Standysh and other, which tempted me
Sta^dysh.
much to know my mind. And I answered them always thus. That I have said to
my lord of London, I have said.


Johan Bale. By this ye may se, that the Bishops have every where there
wachme^. least the kings officers should do any thing, Watchemen.
contrary to their bloudye behoue. This Chancellor would not have thus
answered hardelye, so agreablye to her tale, had it not been to their
advantage against her, as here after will apere. Mark here the fashyon of
these temptynge serpents, Standysh and hyssellawes, And tell me if they be not
like unto these rypers whelps which came to Iohans Baptym, Matthei 3. and to
Vypers,
Christ Jesus preaching, Luce 11. I think ye shall find them the same
gegeneracyon.


Anne Askewe. And then doctor Standish A tempter.
desyered my lord, to bid me say my mind, concerning that same text of S.
Paul. I answered, that it was against saint Paul's learning, that I being a
woman, should interpret the scriptures, specyallye where so many wise learned
men were.


Johan Bale. It is not yet half a score of years a go, sens this blasphemouse
Idyote ^dish.
Standish, compared in a lewd sermon of his, the dear price of our redemp
cyon, or precyouse blood of Christ, to the blood of a filthy swyne, like
himself a swyne. And for his good doing, he is now becomen a dawe, a doctor I
should say, of the popes dyuynyte, and a scolas^: Doctor.
call interpretour of the scriptures to his behoue. Here would the swynysh ge^
tylman have proved, both that S. Steven dyed an heretyke, and S. Paul (...)
scysmatyke, for teaching that God dwells not in temples made with hands
Act. 7. and 17. if he might have reasoned out the matter with this woman. But
Swyne*
she took a swyne for a swyne, and would lay no pearls before him, as Christ
had charged her before. Matthei 7. for all their interrogacyons are now about
the temple and the temple wares. Matthei 26.


Anne Askewe. Then my lord of London said he was infourmed, that one shul de
ask of me, if I would receive the Sacrament at Easter, Acenser*
and I made a mock of it, Then I desyered that mine accuser might come fourth,
which my lord would not. But he said again unto me. I sent one to ge ye you
good counsel, and at the first word ye called hympa pyst. That I denied not.
for I perceived, he was no less. yet made I non answer unto it.


Johan Bale. No confortable scriptures, nor yet any thing to the sowles
consolacyon, may come out of the mouths of these spyrytuall fathers, But
dogs rhetoryck Dogs rhetoryck
and curres curtesye, narrynges, brawlynges, and quarellynges When she was in
the mids of the^, she might well have said with David. Deliver me lord from
the quarelouse dealings of men, that I may keep thy commandments. I deal
with the thing that is lawful and right, O give me not over to these
oppressers, let not these proud quarellers do me wrong. Psalm. 118,
Quarellers.
But among all these quarellynges, her accusers might not be seane / which
were the grounders of them.


Anne Askewe. The^ he rebuted me, and said, that I should report, that there
Three score prestes
were bent against me, three score prestes at Lyncolne. In de de (quoth I) I
said so. for my fryndes told me, if I ded come to Lyncolne, the prestes would
assault me and put me to great trouble, as thereof they had made their boast.
And wha^ I heard it, I went thydre in deed, not being afraid, be cause I
knew my matter to be good, More over I remained there. vi. days, to se what
would Prestes.
be said unto me. And as I was in the mynster, reading upon the Bible, they
resorted unto me by ij. and by ij. by v. and by vi. minding to have spoken to
me, yet went they their way es again with out words speaking.


Johan Bale. Rebukes in that generacyo^, are much more redye at hand, than
either Christen admonyshmentes, or gentle exhortacyons, though they be all
spyrytuall^ And that comes by reason of their lord ships, which wa^teth due
fournyshynge Lordshyp
out, unless they have tyrannouse bragges and braulynges. Herin follow they
the examples of their natural pre decessours the Iewysh bishops, pharysees,
and prestes, Joan. 7. and 9. She might full well say, that the prestes were
against her. Forhypocresye and Ido latrye were never yet with him, whose
Hypocresye.
blessed quarrel she took. Mark the fort chaptre of Johan, and so fourth
almost to the end of his Gospel. Behold also how (...) Apostles and
disciples were han deled of the prestes, after his gloryouse as^yon, Acto. 4.
and all that book folo wynge, and ye shall find it no new thing The servant
is no better than her mastre which suffered of that malygnaunt gene racyon like
quarellynges and handelynges, Joan. 15. Se here how they wondered upon her by
couples, for reading the Wonderers.
Bible, as their fore fathers wondered upon Christ for preaching and doing
miracles.


Anne Askewe. Then my lord asked, if there were not one that ded speak unto
me. I told him, yeas, that there wa^ one of them at A pressed.
the last, which ded speak tome in deed. And my lord thait asked me, what he
said? And I told him, his words were of so small effect, that I ded not now
remember them.


Johan Bale. So far was not Lyncolne from London, but the Bishop there had
knowledge of this tragedye. Hereby may ye se their spirytuall occupyenge
Occupyenge.
against Christ and his faithful membirs. God, is the stody (says S. Johan)
of that congregacyon, which is a spirytualte, called Sodom and Egypt. They
rejoice in myschefes among the^ selves, and send massenges one to an other
against Gods witnesses, when they are vexed by them, Apoca. 11.


Anne Askewe. Then said my lord, There are many that read and know the
scripture, and yet do not follow it, nor live thereafter. I said again.
Scripture.
My lord, I would wyshe, that all men knew my conuersacyon and living in all
points, For I am so sure of my self this hour, that there are non able to
prove any dyshonestie by me. If you know any that can do it, I pray you
bring them fourth.


Johan Bale. I maruele that Bishops can not se this in themselves, that they
are also no folowers of the scriptures. But para uenture they never read them,
but as Folowers
they find them by chance in their popish portyfolyoms and maskynge books. Or
else they think all the scriptures fulfilled, when they have said their mattens
and their masses. Christ said to the hypocryte. Why seist thu a moate in thy
neybers eye, and consyderest not the great beam that is in thine own eye?
Luce 6. Matthew. 7. Christ forbode his Bishops under pain of dampna Lordshyp
pes posses syons.
cyon to take any lordshyppes upon them. Luce ii. How is this followed of our
pre lates? He comman^ded them also to pos sesse neither gold nor silver.
Matthew. 10. How is this commandment obeyed? If we looked so ernest lie to
Christ's instytucyons, as we look to the popes to be observed, these would also
be seane to, by act of parliament, so well as prestes marryage whom Christ
never inhibyted. Marryage.
I doubt it not, but this will also be one day scane to. Godly ded this woman
in defending here her innocencye. For S. Peter says, j. Petri 4. Se that non
of you suffer as an evil doer. But in your hard sufferynges, committ your
sowles unto God with well doing, a^ unto your faithful creator,


Anne Askewe. Then my lord went away, and said, he would entytle sumwhat of
my meaning. And so he writ a great cyrcumstaun ce. But what it was. I have
He writes.
not all in memory. For he would not suffer me to have the cop pie thereof.
Only do I remember this small porcyon of it.


Johan Bale. Here wrote he serten artycles of the popes Romish faith, willing
her to subscrybe unto the^, and so blaspheme God or else to burn. His seeking
was here, to make her to worship the first beast, Worship the beast,
whose deadlye wound is healed again Apoc. 13. But she would not so have her
name raced out of the la^bes book of life. Apoca. 20. Rather would she contend
to the end, hoping by the might of his sprete, at the last to overcome, and
so to be clothed with the promised white aparell, Apoca. 3.


Anne Askewe. Be it known (says he) to all men, that I Anne Askewe, do
confess this to be my faith and believe, notwithstanding my reports made
before to the contrary. I believe that they Holy le cherye,
which are howseled at the hands of a pressed, whether his conuersacyon be good
or not, do receive the body and blood of Christ in substance reallye. Al so
I do believe it after the conse cracyo^, whether it be received or reserved, to
be no less than the very body and blood of Christ in substance. Fynallye I
do believe in this and in all papysty^
other sacraments of holy chur che, in all points according to the old
catholyck faith of the same. In witness whereof, I the said Anne have
subscrybed my name. There was sumwhat more in it, which because I had not the
coppie, I cannot now remember.


Johan Bale. All the world knows, that neither in Christ's time, nor yet in
the days of his Apostles, was any soche confession New (...)
of faith, Neither yet in the church that followed after, by the space of
much more than a M. years, What have Christen men's conscience than to do
with soche a progydyouse confession? Are not Christ and his Apostles, teachers
suffycyent enough for our Christian believe, and their holy doctrynes lawful,
but we must have these unsavory brablementes? We must now believe in the
bawdrye of prestes, or that their Sodometrye and Whoredom for want of
marryage, can be no impediment to Canonysed Iecherie.
their Godmakynge. What is it else to be sworn unto the believe of soche
artycles, but to honor their abhomynable Iecherye? O most swynish sacryfyers
of Baal peor, Psalm 105. You is it that the Apostle Judas, in his canonycall
epistle speaks of. Ye have turned the grace of God, into your Iecherie,
denyenge our only governor Ihesus Christ. The holy Priapystes.
Ghost shows us. Apoca. 21. and 22. that no^ are of the new hallowed city
or congregation of the lord, which works abhomynacyon or maynteyneth lies,
as ye do them both here.


Anne Askewe. Then he read it to me, and asked me, if I ded agree to it. An^ I
said again, I believe so much thereof, as the holy scri pture does agree to.
Wherefore I Scripture.
desire you, that ye will add that thereunto. Then he answered, that I should
not teach him what he should write, With that, he went forth in to his great
chamber, and read the same byll before the audyence, which enuegled and wylled
me to set to my hand, saying also that I had fauer showed me.


Johan Bale. In every matter concerning our Christen believe, is the scripture
reckened vnsuffycyent of this wicked genera Vnsuffycyent.
cyon. God was not wise enough in setting the order thereof* but they must add
thereunto their swybber swylle, that he may abhor it in us, as he ded the
Jews ceremonies, Esa. 1. Hiere. 7. Zacha. 7. Amos 5. Michee 6. But this godly
woman would corrupt her fayth^ with no soche beggerye, least she in so doing
should admit them and ^ir po pe to sytt in her conscience above the eternal
God, which is their daily stodye, The pope
2. These. 2, A vyrgyne was shein that behalf, redeemed from the earth and
following the lamb, and having in her fore head the fathers name written.
Apocalypsys 14.


Anne Askewe. Then said the Bishop, I might thank other and no^ my self, of
the fauer I found at Fauer*
his hand. For he considered (he said) that I had good fryn des, and also that
I was come of a worshypfull stock. Then answered one Christofet, a servant to
mastre De^nye. Rather ought ye (my lord) to have done it in soche case. for
God^ sake than for mannys.


Johan Bale. Spirytuall will these fathers be named. Falshed^
and yet they do all to be seane of men, Math. 23. Their old condycyons will
they change, when the black moreane change his skin, and the catte of the
mountain her spotres. Hieremyc 13. If I sought to please me^ (says S. Paul)
I were not the servant of Christ. Gala. 1. When this tyrannouse Bishop can do
no more myschefe, than flattereth he the world, seeking to have thanks where
he has non deserved. Flattery^
And as concerning the love or true fear of God (as is herelayed unto him) he
has non at all, Psalm. 13.


Anne Askewe. Then my lord sat down, and took me the writing to set thereto
my hand, and I writ after this manner, I Anne Askewe do believe all manner
things contained in the faith of the Catholyck catholic
church. Then because I ded add unto it, the Catholyck church, he flonge
into his chamber in a great furye. With that my cosyne Brittayne followed him,
desyerynge him for Gods sake to be good lord unto me. He answered that I was a
woman, and that he was nothing deceived in A woman.
me. Then my cosyne Brittayne desired him to take me as a woman, and not to
set my weak womannys wytt, to his lordshyppes great wisdom.


Johan Bale. Was not this (think you) a sore mat ter to be so greuoslye taken
of this prela te? But that they are naturallye given to soche quarellynges,
Matthew. 23. This word Catholyck was not wont to offend Catholic
them. How becomes it than now a name so odyouse? Paraue^ture through this
only occasyon. They knew not till now of late years (for it come of the
Greek) the true sygnyfycacyon thereof. As that it is so much to say in the. En
glysh, as the universal or whole. Before time, they took it to mean their
oyled co^ gregacyo^ alone. But now they perceive From oil.
that it includes the layte so well as the^ no lo^gar they do esteem it. Other
cause can I non conjecture, why they should now more contempne it than before.


Anne Askewe. Then went in unto him doctor weston, and said, that the cause
why I ded write there Weston.
the Catholyck church, was, that I understood not the church written before. So
with much a do, they persuaded my lord to come out again, and to take my
name with the names of my suerties, which were my cosyne Brittayne and mastre
Spylman of Grayes inn.


Johan Bale. For an holy church will they be taken, Layte.
and seem much to differ from the lewd lowsye layte or profane multytu de of
the common people, by reason of their holy vnceyons and shauyng^s which came
from their pope. Most spe cyallye because they have nothing a do with
marryage, reckened a most co^tagy ouse poison to holy orders, as their fore
said Romysh father has taught, which brings up all his children in Sodom
and Gomor. Jude 1. Apoc. 11. And this Sodomytes.
point have they learned of their predeces sours the old pharysees and prestes,
which were not, sicut ceteri hominu^, as the common sort of men are, but holy,
spirytuall ghostlye fathers, Luce 18. Where for they will not now be called a
catholyck, but an holy spirytual church.


Anne Askewe. This being done, we thought that, I should have been put to bail
immedyatlye, according to the order of the law. Many delays.
Howbeit he would not so suffer it, but committed me from thens to preson
again until the next morrow. And than he wylled me to apere in the guyl de
halle, and so I ded. Notwithstanding they would not put me to bail there
neither, but read the Bishops witynge unto me as before, and so commanded
me again to preson.


Johan Bale. A very seruitute of Egipte is it, to be in danger of these
papystyck Bishops, as in this act does apere. Se what cauyllacyo^s this
Pharao ded seek here to hold this Christian woman still un Phara^
dre his captivity, solouth is the gredye wolf to depart from his desired
pray Joan. 10. These delays and these sendyn ges from Cayphas to Pilate, and
from Py late again to Annas in Paul's, were not else but to seek more matter
against Practyse.
her, and to know more depelye who were her fryndes and maynteners. They that
shall confer the fashyons of this termagaunt Bishop concerning this woman,
with the cruel ma ners of great Pharao in the deliueraun ce of the people of
Israel at Gods com mau^deme^t, Exo. 5. or with the ha^delyn ges of the Jews
spirytualte concerning Christ, Math. 26. and Johan. 18. they shall not find
them all ^nlyke.


Anne Askewe. Then were my suerties appointed to come before them on the next
morrow in Paul's church, which ded so in deed. Not withstanding they would
ones again have broken of with them, by cause they would ^nauerye spirytuall
not be bound also for an other woman at their pleasure. whom they knew not,
nor yet what matter was laid unto her charge. Notwithstanding at the last,
after much a do and reasonynge to and fro, they took a bond of them of
recognysaun ce for my fourth coming. And thus I was at the last, delivered.
Written by me Anne Askewe.


Johan Bale. No veryte (says O seas the Prophet) no mercy, nor yet knowledge
of God, is now in the earth, but abhomynable vices have every where gotten
the ouerhande, one bloudgyltynesse following With pre stes.
an other, Osce 4. Think you that the Bishops and prestea could take so
cruel ways, and would work so false fea tea, if they had the true fear of
God, or yet reckened to feel a ryghtwyse judge at the lattre day? Suppose it
not. Not only minded they to show no mercy Tyrau^tes
to this woman, but also to werye all her fryndes and acquayntaunce, which is
most extreme cruelte and malice.

The other woman, whom they would here most craftelye have delivered with this
(as I am credyblye infourmed) was a serte^ popysh queen, which they had before
provided both ^etraye her, and accuse her. In more depedaunger Practyse
of the law at that time, was this for her false accusement without record,
than was the other which was so fall selye accused. Feign would the prelates
therefore have had her at lyberte, but they feared much to be noted parcyall.
Mark this craftye point for your ler Subtylte
nynge, and tell me if they be not a subtyle generacyon. More of their
spirytuall packynges and conueya^, for the death of this faithful woman, and
most dear membre of Christ Anne Askewe, shall ye well perceive in the lattre
part here following, by her own confession and hand writynge also to the
honor of God and their great dishonor. So be it.


Vain is the conuersacyon, which ye received by the tradycyons of your
fathers, 1. Petri 1.
The veryte of the lord endures for ever. Psalm. 116.
The Conclusyon.
HEre have thu (gentle reader) the first examynacyon of the faithful martyr
of Christ Anne Askewe with my simple elucydacyon upon the same. Wherein thu
may clearly be hold our Bishops and prestes so spirytuallye Bishops.
to be occupied now a days, as is the gredye wolf that rauenouslye ro^neth
upon his pray. For the tyrannouse be hauer in their cruel predecessors ha ue
they no manner of shame. Neither yet cepo^t they their own blasphemouse trea
son against God and his veryte, what though their most wretched conscye^ces do
daily accuse them thereof. The king Kynge^ of God.
dome of God, which is a true faith in his word, or a perfyght knowledge of
the gospel, do not they seek to uphold. But vyolentlye they speak ill of it,
trou ble it, persecute it, chase it, and bannish it, because it is of him and
from within Luce 17. The kyngedome of the pope, Popes kynged^.
which comes with outward obserua cyon of days, persons, places, tymce,
meats, garments, and ceremonies, they magnyfye above the moon, because it is
from without, and to their peculiar aduau^tage in the loyterynge reign of
ydelnesse.

They have thought and yet think by their terryble turmoylynges to turn over
all, and to change the most noble enter prise of our king, yet ones again
layser A change
lie, to their popes behoue. But the godly wise man Salomo^sayth, There is no
polycye, there is no practyse, no, there is no counsel that can any thing
prevail against the lord, Prouerbiorum 21. They reckon that with fire, water,
and sword they are able to answer all books made against their abuses, and
Polycye.
so to dyscharge their inuyncyble arguments (for otherwise they have not
assoyled them as yet) but truly they are sore deceived therein, as shall well
apere. They suppose by consumynge of a score or ij. i^ the fire, they have
gotten the field of the lamb and his host. Apoca. 17. No, they rather by that
mea No field.
nes, add strength thereunto, and so demynysh their own. I dare boldelye say
unto them, that by burning Anne Asfewe and her. iij. co^panyons, they have one
thousand less of their popysh believe than they had before. They think Books.
also by condempnynge and burning our books, to put us to silence. But that
will surely bring double upon them, if they be not ware, Apoca. 18. For if we
should be still. the very stones would speak in these days, Luce 19. And
detect their horrible treason against God and the king.

If they mind to hold their ydell offices still, and here after to have
profyght Counsel.
of their old sale wares, as Diriges, Masses, and soche other. My counsel were
that they ded by them, as they now do by their pope the great mastre and first
founder of them. A subtyle silence is among them concerning him, and has
been ever sens his first putting down. Ye shall not now hear a word spoken
against him at Paul's cross, nor yet against his old iuglynge Silence.
feats. And in deed it is a good wise way to set him up again. Wynchestre
and Sampson made a little brag at the beginning, to seem yet to do sumwhat,
but sens they have repented, and made a large ame^des for it other ways Fryre
Peryn began to write in defense Perryn.
of their monstruouse Mass, but now of late days, and he can not find therein
one blasphemouse abuse iustlye to be reprehended. Men say, there be craftye
knaves abroad in the world in all age^ Well, this polytyck syle^ce would do
well also paraue^ture i other matters. For the more ruffelynges they make, and
the mo take heed
re murder they do, for that ydell king do^ of theirs, the more clear the
veryte apereth, and the more vile their sorcerouse wares. For the more dyrt be
shaken (they say) the more it stynketh.

So outragyously to rail in their prea chynges, of the noble and learned
Germans Germans.
(which of all nacyons loves our king most inteyrlye) for secludynge their
pope and changynge their masses, they do not most wyselye for themselves. They
are not so ill beloved of their cun^aye merchau^tes, which customablye tra
uayle thydre, but they know what is the^ both said and done against the^. By
that Peryns sermons.
means came Peryns book of his iij. most ydolatrouse and foxysh sermons, first
of all to my hands. Wherein he rhetorycal lie calls them, in the hot zele of
his Romysh father, the erronyouse Germans, subtyle witted heretykes, obstynate
adversaries new fangled expositours, perverse sacrame^taryes, blasphemouse
apostataes, wicked wretches, deuylysh liars, lewd lyuers, and abhomynable
beleuers, with soche otherlyke. But certay nelye I know, that they will one
day be eue^ with him and with other like apes of Antichrist, for it. Wha^ the
popes gre Wynchestre.
at da^synge bear, a proud pra^kynge pre late of there is, was the last year
with the emprour Charles at his fourth going against the said Germans, his
bragging begles were not ashamed to boast it in the open streets of Vtrecht in
Hollande, that the pope should again have his full swaye in England. Of a
lykely hode they know there, some secret my steryes in workynge. I say yet,
be ware of that subtyle generacyo^, which seket^ not else but to work all
myschefe.

Gentle and soft wits are often times offended, that we are now a days so
vehement in rebukes. But this would I feign know of them, what modestye they
would use (as they call it) if they modesty
were compelled to fight with dragos. hyders, and other odyble mo^sters. How
pacye^t they woldebe and how gentle, if a rauenouse wolf came upon the^, they
having able weapon to put him a side Surely I know no kind of Christen
charity to be showed to the devil. Of non other nature is Moses serpent, but
to (...) up the serpents of Pharaocs sorcerers, Exodus 7. If we ded suffer any
longar the oak grove of Baal to stand about the aultre of the lord, we should
modye offend his commandment. Oak gro ^e.
Iudi. 6. If I should hold my peace, and not speak in this age, the veryte so
blas phemed, my conscience would both accuse me and condemn me of the
vnconsyderaunce of my lord God. More Co^scye^ce.
precyouse is the thing which is in daily controuersye and parell (which is
now Gods true honor) than is all this worlds treasure here. What Chri sten
heart can abide it, to se the creature yea not of God but of man, to be
worshypped in the stead of God, and say nothing therein?

Solomon says, there is as well a time to speak, as a time to keep silence,
and a time as well to hate, as a hate the^.
time to love, Ecclesiastes 3. With a per fight hate, lord (says Sauid) have
I hated those bloudthurstye enemies, which were in their presumpcyo^ against
the, Psalm 118. Stronglye and with most mighty stomach, are hypocrytes to be
invaded, which will not give place to the reryte. Mark how might elye Moses
resysted Pharao, Helyas king Examples.
Achab, Helyseus Ioram, Zachary Ioas, Daniel the ydolaters, Johan Baptist the
Pharysees and Herod, Steue^ the Jews, the Apostles the Bishops and prestes.
Christ rebuked his dyscyple Peter, and bade him, come after him devil, Math.
16. Yet called be Judas his fryn de, Math. 26. Necessary is it that the elect
flock of God, do hate the unclean fowls, which yet hold their habytacyon in
Babylon, Apoca. 18. Johan wycleue and Johan huss confess in their Wycleue, and
huss.
writings, that they were by strong force inwardlye constrained of God to
work against the great Antichryst Erasmus boldelye uttered it, that God for
the euyls of this lattre age, has provided sharp phesycyanes. Quench not the
sprete (says S. Paul) despise not prophecyes, 1. Thessalon. 5. I put Sprete.
my ernest words into thy mouth (said the lord to Hieremye) that thu
should both destroy and build. Hieremye 1. (...) this suffyse ye
concerning our rebukes, for they are Gods enemies whom we invade.

If ye perceive it and feel it on the other side, that the waves of the sea are
great also, and does horryblye rage in these days, Psalm 92. Co^sydre again
Waves.
(says David) that the lord which dwells on high, is a great deal mygh tyer
than they. As he is of power to cease the storm and to make the wether caulme,
Psalm 106. So is he able to change a fynges indignacyon (which is but death)
into most peaceable fauer and loving gentylnesse, Prouerbiorum 16. For the
heart of a king is evermore ^are and (...).
in the hand of God, and he may turn it which way he will, Prouer. 21. His
eternal pleasure it is, that ye should ho noure your king as his immedyate my
nyster concerning your bodies and lives (...). Petri 2 and that ye should with
all ^en tylnesse obey the temporal rulers. Romano. 13. But soche spirytuall
hypocrytes, both Bishops and prestes, as are continual haters of his
heavenly verite; would he that we should hold for Abhor.
most detestable apostataes and blasphe mouse reprobates, as ded Christ and his
Apostles which never obeyed them, but most sharpelye rebuked them, Mathei 23.
Acto. 20. and 2. Petri 2. The grace of that lord Ihesus Christ, be ever with
them, which ryghtlye hate that synagoge of Satan, as ded Anne Askewe,

Amen.
God stands by the generacyon of the ryghteouse, Psalm. 13.
Thus ends the first examyna cyon of Anne Askewe, latelye done to death by
the Romysh popes malycyouse remnaunt, and now canonysed in the precyouse hloude
of the lord Jesus Christ, Imprented at Marpurg in the land of Hessen, in No
uembre, Anno 1546.
The voice of Anne Askewe out of the 54. Psalm of David, called. Deus in
nomine tuo.
FOr thy names sake, be my refuge,
And in thy truth, my quarrel judge.
Before the (lord) leteme be heard,
And with fauer my tale regard
Loo, faythlesse men, against me rise,
And for thy sake, my death practyse.
My life they seek, with main and might
Which have not the, before their sight
Yet helpest thu me, in this dystresse,
Saving my soul, from cruelnesse.
I wot thu wylt revenge my wrong,
And vysyte them, ere it be long.
I will therefore, my whole heart bend.
Thy graeyouse name (lord) to commend.
From evil thu have, delivered me,
Declarynge what, mine enmyes be,
Praise to God.
The Preface.
Who ever heard any goodness yet reported of Dionothus with his M. and CC.
companyons, whom Augustyne cau sed to be slain at Westchestre in his Augustyne.
churches beginning, because they would not preach as he ded apoynt them, nor
baptyse after the Romysh manner, neither yet hallowe the eastre feast as they
ded. Many a blessed creature, both men and women, have been bre^t sens Ioha^
Wy cleues time and before, for only dysclosynge Wycleue
the pharysees yokes and teaching the Gospels lyberte. And the^ have that baw
dye bloudye Synagoge of Satan dyffamed, blasphemed, conde^pned, execrated and
cursed to hell asmost detestable heretykes and dogs. Where as if they were of
Christ, they ought (in case they we re their haters or enemies) to suffer the^,
Suffer.
to say well of them, to do them good, and to pray for them. Math. 5. Luce 6.
and not thus to use more tyranny over them, than ever ded Saracene, Turk,
Tyran^t or devil. A great dyfference is there of the martyrs whom they make,
from the martyrs whom they canonyse. Of them Dyfferen ce of mar tyrs.
whom they dampne, from them whom they worshypp. Yea, so great a dyfference or
dyuersyte betwyn them (if ye mark them well) as is betwixt gold and dyrt, or
light and darkness.

The martyrs, whose deaths they have Martyrs
procured by all ages of their bloudthurstye church, harkened unto Christ, he
alde of ryghtousnesse, and sought their lord God in sprete, Esa. 51. but the
mar tyrs for the most part, whom they have with so many latyne wawlynges,
torches and candell burnynges, magnyfyed in their temples, harkened to the
pope, healde of his vnryghtousnesse, and sought out his superstycyouse
ydolatryes. In the conferring of their old canonysed Compare
martyrs, with our newlye condemned martyrs here. Anne Askewe and her other
iij. companyons, with soch like, their dyfference will be much more ease lie
perceived. First let us begin with Thomas Becket, which was so gloryou
Becket.
se a martyr and precyouse advocate of theirs, that they made his blood equal
with Christ's blood and desired to cly me to heaven thereby. Many wonderful
miracles could that mytred patron of miracles
theirs do in those days, when the mon kes had fryre Bakons books and knew

(...) (...)


