A PROCLAMATION PVBLISHED UNDER THE NAME OF JAMES King of Great Britanny.

With a brief and moderate Answer thereunto.

WHERETO Are added the penal Statutes, made in the same Kingdom, against
Catholics.

TOGETHER With a Letter which shows the said Catholics piety: And diverse
Aduertisements also, for better understanding of the whole matter.

Translated out of Latin into English.



Et inimici nostri sint Iudices. Deutr. 32. 31.

And let our enemies themselves be Judges.

Imprinted with License. M. DCXI.

THE PREFACE.
THE Christian and discreet Reader will perceive by this Proclamation, into
what hands the Kingdom of England, so renowned for Religion and piety in
ancient times, is now fallen: And how much we, that in other Countries enjoy
freely the means of our salvation, Ex alijs periculu^ facito tibi quod ex vsu
fiet. ex Comico.
owe to Almighty God, and to our Catholic Princes.

Wherefore lighting by chance upon this Proclamation, and considering the good
use that might be made of it, I would not follovv the example of another
faithful and zealous Christian, who did tear in pieces with publik
reproach, such another Edict set up in Eusebius. lib. 8. hist. cap 3.
Nicomedia by Commandment of Dioclesian: but have caused it to be translated
word for word, into Latin and other languages, to the end, that the same
which the Adversaries give out in their private tongue, to terrify the people
of England, being published in other languages, may be of general Omnia ad
aedificatione^ fiant. 1. Cor. 14. 26.
edification, warning, and example, to all other Countries.

He cannot be truly said to live in Christ, nor does he participate with his
holy spirit, that has no feeling of the grievous wounds, which are daily
inflicted in the Multi vnum corpus sumus in Christo; singuli aute^ alter
alterius me^bra. Rom 12. 5.
body of Christ, nor compassion of the sufferings of his poor brethren, and of
the blindness and obstinacy of those that persecute them.

Wherefore let us ask of God Vt conuerta^tur a tenebris ad lucem, and de
potestate Satanae ad Deum. Act. 26. 18.
light for the Persecutors, and patience for them that suffer and for our
selves, that by this Example we may learn to fear his judgments, and to
know and distinguish the Quomodo tunc, is qui secundum carne^ natus fuerat,
persequebatur eum qui secundum spiritum: ita and nunc. Gal. 4. 29.
two different spirits, that appear in this Letter and Proclamation, and take
such warning by the perdition of the one side, that we may be partakers of
the others revvard, in that charity, and Totum corpus, per nexus and
coniu^ctiones constructum and subministratum crescit in angmentum Dei. 2. Cor.
19.
communion of Saints, which we Christians acknovvledge, and Christ our
Savior intends to quicken in our hearts by these examples: to the end that by
these afflictions, and innocent blood, which his Fatherly goodness does suffer
to be shed, his Church may increase in number and (...) Gods glory, and
advancement of his truth, that they testify openly what they believe.

B. D. de Clerimond.

THE PROCLAMATION. By the King.
A PROCLAMATION for the due execution of all former (A) Here is first to be
noted, Gentle Reader, the cunning which these men use in this Title, calling
Laws (to make them pass with more authority) those which in deed, cannot
possibly be Laws. For all politic and civil laws must have their rule and
foundation from the law of God, and the law of nature: and therefore those
humane Precepts which are not grounded upon reason and justice, no^ have for
their end the common good; have neither the force of Laws, nor can truly be so
called. D. Thom. 1. 2. q. 19. art. 2. and 91. art. 3. But the Laws here
alleged, have neither reason nor justice, nor respect to the Weale-publicke,
but proceed only from passion, and for particular ends. Wherefore they ney
there are, nor can be termed Laws.

Laws against (B) They call Recusants those Catholics that refuse to
participate with them, in the errors, and impious Ceremonies of the Protestant
Sect.

Recusants giving the^ a day to repair to their own dwellings, and not
afterward to come to the Court, or within ten miles of London, without special
license. And for disarming of them, as the law requires. And withal, that all
Priests, and Jesuits shall depart the Land by a day, no more to return into
the Realm. And for the administering the Oath (C) It may more truly be called
the Oath of disloyalty and disobedience, as herafter shall be seen.

of Allegiance, according (D) In like manner did the high Priests and chief of
the Jews, allege Law to condemn Christ our Savior. Joan. 19. 7. crying out,
We have a Law, and according to that he is guilty of death.

to the Law.

THOUGH the principal care, that a Religious

(E) The introduction is good, but not well applied. And here the Reader may
observe, to what liberty they are come in the use of words, in which they
follow not Priscian, but Machiauels Laws.

and wise King ought to have, should be for the maintenance, and propagation,
by all godly, lawful, and honest means, of the true (F) The Religion neither
is, nor possibly can be Catholic, which they would authorize with this strange
and newfound manner of speaking. For Catholic is as much to say as
Universal. But we see that the doctrine of English Protestants, is peculiar to
them of England only: and yet not common to them all, nor to the greater part.
For first the most of them, that profess that sect, do it for hope of gain,
or for fear of the penalties inflicted upon Catholics. But that which is most
to be considered is, that amongst them that follow these fancies, and think
they do well, there be as many differences of opinion, as there be different
imaginations. For they have no certain rule of faith, nor what to affirm, and
therefore nothing is so certain and infallible amongst them, as that they have
no certainty and constancy in that which they teach in the affirmative points
of their profession: for in the negative, all Sectaries agree to deny the
Catholic truth.

Catholic, and Christian Religion: and to that effect; as he must plant good
seed with the one hand, so to displant, and root out with the other, as far as
he can, the Cockle (G) Here they tell us what the King should do, and not what
he does: O Rex fac hoc, and viues. Luc. 10. 28.

and tares of Heresy, that do ordinarily grow up, amongst the Lords wheat:
yet has our nature been ever so inclined to (H) The holy Ghost teaches us,
that Mercy and Truth vphould the King: It is understood, if he vphould Truth,
and Mercy. And that Clemency does establish his Royal Throne, Proverb. 20. 28.

Clemency, especially we have ever been so loath to shed (I) It has been the
fashion of many Persecutors, to help themselves with simulation and slight,
when they found by experience, that open violence did not avail them: but,
Totius iniustitiae nulla est capitalior, quam eorum qui cum maxim fallunt, id
agunt vt honi videantur. Offic. lib. 1.

blood in any case, that might have any relation to Conscience (though but of
deceived and disguised conscience) as notwithstanding the care and (K) Zelum
habent, sed non secundum scientiam: they have zeal but want knowledge. Romans
10. 2.

zeal that we have ever carried for the maintenance and propagation of this
ancient, and true Catholic (L) It is neither ancient, nor true, nor
Catholic Religion. And what will not these men affirm, if it may serve their
turn, that have no conscience nor scruple to abuse the world with such
impropriety of words, in things so notorious, and of so great consequence?

Religion which we profess: yet has our said natural Cleme^cie ever
withhoulden us, from putting the law to that due execution against Popish
Priests and Recusantes, which their evil (M) These be their faults and ill
deserts: to receive Priests into their houses, to hear Mass, to frequent the
holy Sacraments, not to communicate with Heretics in their errors and
Sacriledges, to be loyal to God, and obedient to his Church, and to the Prince
also in whatsoever is not against God, and his holy law.

deserts at diverse times toward us, and their insolent (N) They call the
resolution, and constancy of the Catholics in these their trials, Pride and
Arrogancy, with the same truth and liberty of speech that they term the
Novelties of their Sects, Ancient, True, and Catholic Religion. Venite
cogitemus etc. Come let us bethink our selves, to invent something against
Hieremy. Come let us give him a wou^d with our tongue. This was at that time
the counsel of the Jews against Hieremy, or rather against our Lord and
Savior: Et hodie Haereticorum contra seruos eius est cogitatio, vt calumnias
struant, and sanctos viros accusatione praeueniant. Hieron. in cap. 18.
Hieremiae.

and proud carriage, especially of late, did justly deserve at our hands.

But now that their ill behavior at home manifested first by the Priests

(O) The Authors of this Conspiracy, were Puritans and Protestants, to wit,
the Barons Cobham and Gray, and Sir Walter Rawley:

treason imediatly after our entry into this Kingdom, and next at the horrible
Powder (P) There are great presumptions, and it is received amongst Protestants
themselves, that likewise the Authors and inuentors of this Conspiracy, were
some of the same persons that have their hand in these Proclamations, and that
it was one of their accustomed policies, and tricks of State, to make a way,
with some color of Justice, to this new Persecution, long before intended by
some of them: not unlike to another devise wherewith they entangled, and defamed
the pious memory of the Queen of Scotland, Mother to his Royal Majesty, and
took away her life, with the barbarous cruelty, that all men know.

treason, the unnatural Cruelty whereof is never to be forgotten: loined to
this horrible and lamentable accident abroad, we mean that Devilish and
unnatural murder of the late French (Q) What fault had the Catholics of
England, or what can they be imagined to have had in the death of the King of
France? But herin is verified that which Solomon says: Occasiones quaerit qui
vult recedere ab amico. He that is minded to leave his friend, seeks
occasions. Prou. 18. 1.

King, our Dearest Brother, has so stirred (R) How can this agree with the
Kings speech, made to the Parliament, to incense them against the Catholics,
set out in print under his name?

up the hearts of our loving subjects, represented by the Houses and Body of
Parliament, as both the Houses have joined in making an (S) Whether it were by
their petition, or no, it imports little: but it is the ordinary style of
these Statistes. For so the Parliament made petition to King Henry the eight, to
put away his lawful wife, and after to Queen Elizabeth, to change Religion,
and to put to death the Queen of Scotland, and all such iniust and ignominious
Actions must (forsooth) be proposed by supplication. Antiquum obtinent.

humble petition to us to be more wakeful, then hertofore we have been, upon
the Courses (T) O that they would consider their Courses and Steps, with
intent to imitate their innocence and virtuous lives* But alas all this
vigilance is to another end, to wit, to spy what they may lay hold upon. This
is A^s artium, and Scientia scientiarum, the Alchimy of our age, and the
Purseua^ts patrimony.

and steps of the Papists. And to this effect, that we would be pleased, to
put in due execution hereafter, without any longer conniuency, the good (V) It
shall appear by and by, how good and wholesome these Laws be. All the ancient
laws of the Kingdom are in favor of Catholic Religion. Such laws as King
Henry the eight, Q. Elizabeth, and now lastly his Majesty of England, have made
against it, are neither good nor wholesome, but violent, unjust, and pernicious,
both to the Commonwealth, and to the King himself, if he would consider them
with indifferency.

and wholesome laws of this Realm, made against them, the most part whereof
were made before (X) They mean the laws of Queen Elizabeth, which his
Majesty has confirmed, adding to them many other of his own. Et nouissimus
error est peior priore, as shall be seen.

our entry into this Kingdom, and so were we at our Coronation sworn to the
maintenance of them. We have just reason according to their humble desire, to
be more careful then heretofore we have been, in seeing our said Laws put in
due execution; since in this case our (Y) What scrupulosity is this? they make
no Conscience to move Catholic Princes to break the holy Oaths which all
their Predecessors have taken and (...)

Conscience is burdened, in regard of Religion: and since there is (...) their
dwelling places: It is our express will and pleasure to discharge, like as by
these Presents we do discharge, all bypast licenses granted unto them for
their repayring hither. And although this time of Parliament, and the Creation
of our eldest Son, be so unfit and dangerous (F) Trepidauerunt timore vbinpon
erat timor. Danger might be magined but there could be none: they know well
enough, and their conscience tells it them, that there is no fear to be had
of the Recusantes. The fear is theirs: for they live in continual danger,
subject to violent laws, and to the insolency of their Persecutors, because
they will not leave God, nor offend their consciences. Others there be that
force themselves to obey these laws, with known danger to their souls, who
of force must, and do feel inspeakable repugnance, disquietnes, and horror;
considering what a styrring spark the conscience is. These are the men that
with most reason are to be feared, as the most oppressed. If his Majesty will
needs live in fear, without necessity, let him fear these as most wronged by
his laws in that their conscience is restless, and does not suffer them to be
quiet, in so evident danger of eternal damnation. But if as a prudent and
discreet Prince he will take away occasions of fear, let him resolve to take
away the cause of this disquietnes, and so both he and his subjects shall live
in rest. Doubtless it is bad counsel, and the resolution is worse, to press
the Consciences of innocent Subjects without profit or necessity. For as the
Proverb says: Habet musea splenem, and formica sua bilis inest: and as the
Poet says: Furor, iraque mentem praecipitat: fury and displeasure cast men
into desperate attempts. Enead. lib. 2. It had been impossible for any others
save only Catholics, to have had so much fortitude, as to bear so long and
lingering a Persecution, and endure with patience so many sharp and bitter
storms, as the Catholics by Gods assistance have done, and do now in England,
and others in former ages did in other Countries for the same cause. The
Blessed Martyr S. Cyprian before cyted, may suffice for what passed in his
time. Innocents, says he, nocentibus cedunt etc. The innocent give place to
wrongs, the harmeles souls are quiet in their afflictions and punishments,
None of ours do resist the Magistrate, when he is apprehended, nor studieth to
revenge injustice and violence, though their number be greater, and have
possibility to do it. Cyp. ad Demet. And in another place he yields a reason
of that which is said, whereof I shall have occasion to speak more at large
hereafter. Hec interest etc. This difference says he, is betwixt us, and such
as know not God (meaning all Infidels and Heretics) that they in their
adversities murmr and complain: but our crosses and afflictions do not
separate us from truth and virtue, but encourage and strengthen us in our
griefs. Cyp. de Mortalitate.

a time for their abode here, as our Parliament has herupon humbly moved us,
that they might all be sent home and discharged the City, before the Creation
of our said dearest Son: yet have we thought good, to retain so much of our
accustomed Clemency (weyghing so little any of their malicious plots, or the
hazard thereof, during that time, in comparison of our said Clemency) as in
consideration of so important business, as they may have, concerning their
particular estates, in the next Term, we are content to give them time, until
the last day of June, which is after the end of the next Term: after which
said time, they are to repair again to their own dwelling houses, and places
of confining, according to the Law, not presuming at any time hereafter to
repair to this our City and Chamber of London, or to our Court, or to the
Court of our dearest Wife the Queen, or of the Prince our dear Son
whersoeuer, or within ten (G) These Prouiso's and laws, first are needles and
in vain, excluding only such, as of all other are least to be feared, as has
been said: besides that in themselves they are unjust. And how fit the words
before mentioned, be to this purpose, may be seen by other spoken to another
Persecutor, in another like occasion by the same Saint. Ecce quale est etc.
What a thing is this, says he, of which specially we have to treat? Why do
you thus molest the harmles? Why do you oppugn and oppress Gods servants
with reproach and co^tumely of God himself? Do you think it a small matter,
to live spottles with so many other sins, and make your life, as it is, a
sum or compendium of bloody rapines? Is it not enough that true Religion be
subverted by your false superstions, that God is neither remembered nor feared
amongst you? I say, is not this enough, but you will needs add more, and
persecute unjustly good men, that have dedicated themselves to Gods service?
May it not suffice thee (Demetrianus) that thou thy self do not worship thy
Creator, but thou will needs persecute and afflict (sacrilega infestatione)
such as do truly worship him? Thou castest out of their houses, thou spoylest
of their goods and Patrimony, thou loadest with irons and chains, thou
houldest in prison etc. the Innocent, Just, and beloved children of God.

miles of London, without special license had thereunto, under pain of the
severe execution of our Laws upon the contrauenors, and of highest contempt
against our Authority joined thereunto.

And we are likewise pleased, upon the same humble

(H) It were better to speak plainly, and say, Moved by evil counsel.
Cupido and Ira pessimi consultores. Salust. in Iugurth.

petition of our said loving subjects assembled in Parliament, straightly to
command and charge our Justices of Peace, in all parts of this our Realm,
that according to our laws in that behalf, they do (I) God Almighty knows,
and so do the Authors and Inuentors of these Proclamations, that the Catholic
Recusants have none of this kind of Munition. But this they publish to give
more probability to their false suggestions of perils and dangers, and increase
the fear and suspicion, wherewith they have preoccupated the Princes mind,
procuring these Proclamations, and laws by these devises, with so great hurt
both to him, and to the commonwealth. Vita mollis and mala timiditas, neque
domum, neque Ciuitatem recte gubernauerit, Philem. in Enchiridio. Arma militiae
nostrae etc. says the Apostle, and so may the Catholics say: The Arms of
our warfare are not carnal but power from God, overthrowing all wicked
counsayles, and all pride and loftines, that would extol it self against the
knowledge of God. 2. Cor. 10. ^.

take from all Popish Recusants convicted, all such Armor, Gunpowder, and
Munition of any kind, as any of them has, either in their own hands, or in
the hands of any other for them: and see the same safely kept, and disposed
according to the Law, leaving them for the necessary defense of their house and
persons so much as by the Law is prescribed: wherein as our said Justices have
been (K) All this caution is also needless. And if they have been remiss,
it proceeded from their experience, seeing the little ground and profit of this
law. For as I have touched before, if there were any cause of fear; they,
against whom this Law is made, are least to be feared of all other.

hitherto remiss; so if we shall find this our express commandment
neglected, or not diligently executed, as is fit, and as the importance thereof
does require, we will make them know by severe punishment, what it is to be
careless of our Royal Commandment in cases of this nature.

And (...)

(...) command that which is not just, nor can be lawfully obeyed, under so
great penalties? The Apostle taught us in a like case, what to answer: Obedire
oportet Deo magis quam hominibus. Act. 5. 29.

tions, give a certain day to all Priests and Jesuits for transporting
themselves out of our Dominions, between that and the said day, at that time
intimating all rigor unto the^, that should hereafter return within our
Kingdom: yet are we content, (notwithstanding their (Q) There is here no
contempt of his Majesty's favor, in preferring God Almighty his Commandment,
which does not suffer us to be wanting, to the instruction and conversion of
such, as desire to be saved. And would to God these that have authority, would
send men of other Nations also that desire it, or that we knew the language,
and were worthy to be employed in so happy a cause.

Contempt of this former grace twice offered unto them before) to renew now
again the same this third time. And do therefore by these presents declare and
publish, that it shall be lawful for all manner of Jesuits, Seminaries, and
other Priests whatsoever, freely (R) This in good terms is a sentence of
banishment, without any fault, and therefore unjust and obliges not. Over and
besides, the other causes above specified hinder, that it cannot be
accomplished.

and safely to depart forth of the Realm, so as they make their repayr to any
of our ports, between the day of the date of this Proclamation, and the
fourth of July next, for the same purpose, there to transport themselves with
the first opportunity into any foreign parts. Admonishing and assuring all
such Jesuits, Seminaryes, and Priests, of what sort soever, departing upon this
our pleasure signified, as also all other that have been heretofore released
and (S) A good liberty indeed, that may be occasion of eternal slavery. It is
better for them to live free from sin, though it be only of omission, then
from whatsoever imprisonment, or any other annoyance their adversaries can do
them.

set at liberty by our gracious favor, in the same condition, That if any of
them shall herafter return into this our Realm again, that their blood
shall be then upon their (T) Let not his Majesty deceive himself, and think to
be clear with this Protestation. No, out of all doubt the blood that is shed
in this quarrel for those which suffer and send them, is sanguis
Propitiationis: but for those which shed it, or cause it to be shed, it is
sanguis aeternae damnationis, blood of eternal guilt and damnation. I could
wish they remembered and considered with themselves, what befell to the Jews
for giving ear to evil counsel of the Princes, and High Priests of their
Sinagogues, that charged themselves with the blood of the Son of God, saying:
Sanguis eius super nos, and super filios nostros. And so their own malediction
and curse fell upon them, with the obduration and blindness, which until this
day we see among them. Now whether his Royal Majesty, and his Noble Posterity
be liable and obnoxious to the same curse (which God of his mercy we beseech,
that they may be free from) in regard of the innocent blood they have caused to
be shed, it behooves him and them to consider.

own heads, and upon those (V) These that do send the Priests into England,
and especially the chief Pastor of Christ's flock by whose commaundment they
are sent, had rather go in person themselves, then send others, if it were
convenient for Gods service. Their desire is, if it might be, to participate
in the dangers, and spend their lives in the same cause, for which so many of
their Predecessors are known to have shed their blood. Neither is this any
contempt of the Temporal Princes Authority, but a careful accomplishing of
their own office and obligation. The which obligation is seen in the words
of Almighty God to the Prophet Ezechiel. Fili hominis etc. Son of man, I have
placed thee as a watchman or Centinell in the house of Israel. When I speak,
and say unto the wicked, thou shall die the death, if thou do not denounce
this sentence unto him, that he may refrain from his wicked way, he shall die
in his wickedness, but his blood I will require at thy hands. But if thou do
denounce against the wicked, and admonish him to leave his wicked course, and
he will not do it, he shall die in his wickedness, but thou have freed thy
soul. Ezec. 33. 7. And in this case they are commanded to cast aside all
fear, under pain of loosing the favor of him that gives the precept: Dico
vobis amitis etc. I say to you my friends, be not afraid of them that kill the
body, and after have no more to do. Luc. 12. 4.

that send them, seeing that by so doing they shall not only incur the
danger of our laws, but also a high and treble contempt of our gracious Favor
and Clemency, now intended toward them. And in general (since no man can
pretend ignorance of our laws) that all Jesuits and Priests, of what order so
ever, and their senders, may hereby be admonished to beware any further to
tempt our Mercy, in presuming to repair any more within this our Kingdom, in
regard of their known peril, and of the care that we are resolved to have,
for preserving of our good subjects, from their danger of body and soul,
since their (X) They instruct them in true Catholic doctrine, they do not
deceive or peruer^^ny. Neither do they divert the subjects hearts from their
obedience to God or their King. They come for no such end, as is more then
evident. For (alas) Cui bono? what fruit or commodity may they pretend thereby?
I can imagine none. Nay it is certain, that if in this, they were not (without
all comparison) more assured of Almighty God his will and pleasure in sending
them, and undertaking this business, and of the eternal and infallible reward
he has promised, then his Noble Majesty is, or possibly can be, of the truth
of his Sect: they would never put themselves into these dangers. For the
rewards that men can give them, and which they might be imagined to seek, are
nothing to the purpose, nor can avail them after their death, which is
threatened them in these Proclamations, and executed at his Majesty's pleasure.
And this is so strong and irrefragable a proof of these men's innocence, and
sincere intention, that it cannot be answered, but overthrows all their
Pamphlets, Proclamations, Libells, and whatsoever sleights of Statizing
Sophistry hell gates can devise against them. And therefore if I might be
thought worthy to give advise, I would wish them to deal plainly, and speak
clearly the truth, and make a conscience to do that which they are ashamed to
confess in proper speech. Either let them cease to persecute Catholics for
their Religion, or let them avouch it, and profess plainly and openly what
they do. It is want of magnanimity, and cowardice to use these couertures and
maskes, and great simplicity to imagine that they can make the world believe
them, when they speak so contrary to their doings, and walk in a net, and not
be seen.

errand can be no other here, but only for diuerting our good subjects hearts,
from their due obedience both to God and us.

And lastly because the horror and detestation of the Powder

(Y) The Catholics have more horror, and detestation against such Acts, then
those that make all this show. I have touched before that which in this and all
other treasons, may be objected, which they do impute unto them that have as
little hand in them, as themselves; as they know full well, and here in part
bewray, imputing to English Catholics the death of the late King of France,
wherein all the world knows, they neither had, nor possibly could have any
hand.

treason in the minds of our Parliament bred amongst other things, that Oath
of (Z) This is a matter mistaken, and the Statistes are farwyde, that think to
draw Subjects by violence to their Allegiance, and fidelity by force. For to my
understanding, and to any man's else, that will judge indifferently, there can
be no more direct cause of disloyalty to Kings, then to constrain their
Subjects to infidelity, and enforce them to be disloyal to God the King of
Kings, and Lord of all.

Allegiance to be taken by our subjects, so highly impugned by the Pope, and
his followers, as we are enforced by our (A) His Majesty's pen had been ill
employed, and himself very ill advised, as by effect is seen, if the Book had
been his. For it has been reproved in all Kingdoms, and confuted almost in
all Languages, with loss of reputation, and note of small learning, and less
discretion in the Author. For although the Pamphlet was published in his
Majesty's Name: yet it is generally held, that the Name only was his: and
verily they who hold this opinion, do him more service, and honor his
Majesty more, then the others, that father so seely a work upon so wise, and
learned a Prince, as his Majesty of Great Britanny, is known to be.

own pen, to take in hand, the mayntenance of our cause, for that Oath: which
howsoever odious it was to the Pope, yet was it devised as an Act of great
favor, and Clemency toward so many of our subjects, who though blinded with
the (B) Woe be to you, says the Prophet, that call evil good, and good evil,
that make darkness light, and light darkness. Isay 5. 20.

superstition of Popery, yet carried a dutyfull heart toward our obedience.
For hereby was there a separation and distinction made between that sort of
Papists, and the other pernicious sort, that (C) This is a manifest
calumniation, and slander, wherewith malicious people, have possessed his
Majesty, and depraved his understanding, to make him more intractable in his
false religion, and more implacable with Catholics.

couple together that damnable doctrine and detestable practice before
mentioned. Therefore in consideration, that the said Oath serves to (D) A
pretty devise when all other fail, to draw away money from them. But I will
foretell you the success. Non gaudebit tertius here is: Quia pretium sanguinis
est. It is the price of blood, and cannot prosper.

make so true and merciful distinction between these two sorts of Papists,
as is allreadie said: we cannot but hold it most convenient, for the weal of
all our good subjects, and discovery of bad people, that greater care shall be
used hereafter, in the general ministration of this Oath (E) And when all
should take it, what profit would redound to the King? verily none at all, but
rather great harm, as already has been said, and shall be said more at large
hereafter.

to all our subjects, then has been heretofore used.

And therefore it is our express will and pleasure, and accordingly we do
heerby straightly charge and command, all and singular our Bishops, Justices of
Assise, Justices of Peace, and all other our Officers, whom it may concern,
to minister the same, to all such persons, and in all

(F) This Oath cannot in any case be lawful, for the end which they do^
p^etend: nor is it a Law that which approves it. But in this, as in many other
things, they abuse evidently the word (Law) to credit their dealings in these
lawless practices. Neither can it have any true conueniency: for a thing so
violent and unjust cannot be convenient, either to assure the safety of his
Majesty's person, or of his Royal succession: nor to appease the disquietnes
and fear, which he may conceive, either upon just or unjust cause, but all
quite contrary, as has been said. The self sam^ comparison houldeth (as the
Philosopher says) between the King and his Subjects, the Father and his
children, the Shepherd and his flock. Similis est comparatio. Arist. 8.
Ethic. A good and true Prince indeed, ought to be able to govern his people,
not only uprightly, but also with love, and courtesy. For it is unfitting that
a shepherd should hate or persecute his flock. Arch. de lege and Just. But
what faith the Poet in this case? Qui Sceptra duro saeuus Imperio regit, Timet
timentes: metus in auctorem redit. Oed. ac. 3. Ille tot Regum parens Caret
sepulchro Priamus, and flamma indiget ardente Troia. Sen. in Hecub.

such cases, as by the law they are enabled; knowing that the meaning of the
law was, not only to authorize the^ to do it, when they would, and to forbear
it at their pleasure, but to require it at their hands, as a necessary duty
committed to them, and imposed upon the^, as persons of chief and principal
trust under us, for the good and safety of us, and our estate.

Given at our Palace of White Hall, the second day of June, in the eight
year of our Raygne of Great Brytaine, France, and Ireland.

A LETTER OF A GENTLE WOMAN OF QVALITY, residing on this side the seas,
written to her Husband in England, exhorting him to constancy in the
persecution.
Translated out of the Latin Copy.
GOOD Sir. I humbly thank you for the care you have taken in giving me notice
of that which passes, and am right glad to see you so resolute: our Lord give
you grace to continue constant unto the end. And seeing God has given you light
to discern what does most import you; I beseech you for his love remember,
that to go back at any time herafter, or leave this holy Resolution, for humane
respects, should be for your greater condemnation. And although the love you
bear unto me, and to your children, with other respects of flesh and blood,
might cause in you some strife and contradiction: yet (good Husband) do not in
any case suffer your fervor to wax cold. As for our children they are so well
allied, that there is no fear they can want, being of the years they are, and
all well considered they have enough left them. But if notwithstanding all
these hopes should fail them; yet they live under the protection of their
heavenly Father, and under his providence, which is more to be esteemed then
all the treasures of the world.

As for my self, or any thing that may concern me do not afflict your self
in any case, for by Gods grace and favor, I shall receive more comfort in
suffering poverty with you, for so just a cause, then in enjoying all that we
have hitherto possessed. Nay, fetting. aside the obligation I have to you and
my children, I would choose to live with less then the Kings Majesty must
allow us, supposing the most rigorous execution of his law: yea rather to loose
all, then you should admit the least disquietnes, or stayn in your conscience.

Consider how little this world is to be esteemed for it self, how vain,
uncertain, and troublesome it is, and that the greatest part you have enjoyed
of it hitherto, has been spent in satisfying your own desires, and the least
in his service that gave you all you have. You must also remember, that the
goods you possess are but lent you: for the true Lord and owner is God
himself, who in a trice can take all from you, and in such sort that they
shall not avail you, either for your body, or for your soul. Consider then
with your self his infinite goodness in giving you means to enjoy an
everlasting inheritance, only for leaving willingly those temporalities,
whereof in very truth you are but a Steward. It is therefore great reason you be
thankful, and hold your self most happy to have this occasion, and to have
found that precious Jewel, for which the wise Merchant sold all that he had.
By this means you shall be partaker of that blessing, which by the supreme Judge
himself is promised to such as suffer persecution for Justice.

And howsoever your Father may urge and press you, with the overthrowing of
your house, and undoing of your posterity; you must remember always, that
the obedience we owe to God, must have the first place, and that without this
all other virtues loose their value, and be unprofitable. Here also the holy
Prophets observation makes much to our purpose, who affirms out of his own
experience of many years, That he never had seen the just man forsaken, nor
his posterity come to want. And our Savior says. He that for my sake does not
leave his Father, Mother, Wife, Children, and whatsoever else he has, is not
worthy of me. Whereas on the other side, he promises to such as forsake all for
his love, an hundred for one in this world, and afterward eternal life.

Let us therefore settle our selves in this truth, and establish this good
purpose in our hearts, not to admit for temporal respects, any thing against
our conscience, which at the dreadful day of doom must judge us. And what
would it atravle us to gain the whole world, with loss of our souls for ever?

It is not sufficient for our salvation, to believe with the heart the truth
which is taught us, if we do not make public profession of it before all the
world, when occasion requires. Not that we ought to hazard our selves without
just cause, for without it we may not offer our selves to danger. And therefore
if you fear to be urged with the Oath, I think it better that you procure
some Protection from the King to prevent your adversaries, then to be
constrained to refuse it in public judgment: and this favor you may procure
by friendship, and so free your self from his Majesty's displeasure. But if in
case it should be thought more for Gods glory, to refuse it publicly in open
Sessions, (I speak plainly my mind) I do wholly submit my self to Gods good
pleasure, and my judgment to yours, and to others that know better what is best
to be done.

Neither do I think it convenient, that you depart the Realm without
license, least by your absence your enemies take occasion to accuse you of
contempt to his Majesty and his laws, and thereupon proceed to all the rigor,
which their malice can devise against your Religion. For this, as you see,
would be of little edification to others, and great loss of reputation to your
self, and of that merit, which you might gain with God, taking the other
course.

Wherefore (my dear Husband) I humbly beseech you, dispose your self to
embrace the very worst that can befall you in this occasion, and offer it all
with a cheerful heart, to our Savior, who loves the joyful giver. And assure
your self, that you have nothing to fear for me, for I have set up my rest,
and am ready for all that God shall appoint. And if it prove affliction, I
doubt not, but by his assistance it shall turn to joy and contentment;
considering for whom, and for what cause it is suffered.

That which I desire greatly is, that you consider your debtes. For indeed if
all we have were our own, let it all go in Gods name for his love, but we
must not leese willingly that which is not ours. And therefore I have sent you
an estimate, so near as I can remember, of your present estate. And if it be
your pleasure, I will find means to come and see you: but for this purpose
provide me some house, whither I may retire my self securely. And with this I
have fulfilled your desire, acquainting you with my opinion, peradventure with
more words then are necessary, of purpose to assure you, that you need take no
care for me, nor for any thing that may concern me: nor afflict your self
with any fear of any trouble, loss, or persecution that may befall you for
the love of God. All the rest I commit to his divine Providence, beseeching him
to succor and assist us both with his grace and favor. Amen.

AN ADVERTISMENT TO THE READER, FOR THE BETTER understanding of the former
Proclamation, and Answer.
BY that which has been said, the discreet and disapassionate Reader will
easily discern, two Non est nobis colluctatio, aduersus carnem and sanguinem:
sed aduersus Principes and ot Potestates tenebrarum. Ephesians. 6. 12. Quis Regem
Saul incitauit, in Dauidem? Quis excitauit Doech Syri nequitiam, vt sanctum
virum proderet, etc. Nisi spiritus malus* Ambr. in Psalm. 118. 2.
different spirits encountered in this action. The one turbulent and unquiet,
disguised by art, and with false colors of Estate, to discredit the truth. The
other mild, plain, peaceable, and quiet, disposing men to suffer for truth,
what and whenever shall be thought necessary. And if any man be desirous to
know more in particular the affections, operations, and effects that these two
opposite spirits work, where they find entrance, he may easily trace and find
them out, by their footesteps in this Proclamation, Laws, and Letters.

The spirit Nos autem, non spiritum huius mundi accepimus, sed spiritum qui ex
Deo est, vt sciamus quae a Deo donata sunt nobis. 1. Cor. 2. 12.
of this world causes in his followers, first an ouer-weening conceit of
themselves, and a secret Omnis qui male agit, odit lucem: and non venit ad
lucem, vt non arguantur opera eius. Joan. 3. 20.
auersion from that soueraygne light that should discover unto them, their
errors and miseries, filling their hearts with a world Ita grauis culp^ est
conscientiae, vt sine iudice, ipsa se puniat. Ambr. de Poen. l. 2. c. 11.
of disquietnes, and their souls with restless fears: and in a word making
them in their apprehensions, words, and works, like unto himself.

And all this befalls them: because living (as the Scripture says) sine Deo
in hoc mundo; they wander up and down environed with a thick Qui ambulat in
tenebris, nescit quo vadit. Joan. 12. 35.
cloud of error and gross Ignorance, not only of supernatural matters of
faith, but consequently also of natural and moral truth, not having eyesight
nor understanding to consider, that no power has that force against invincible
O magna vis veritatis: quae, contra hominum ingenia, calliditatem, solertiam,
contraque fictas omnium insidias, facile seipsam defendit! Ci. Pro M. Caelio.
truth, which truth in all occasions has against lies and falsehood: which
naturally of it self is so weak Tam imbecille est mendacium, vt fortes
deprimat atque debilitet. Chrysostom. hom. 57. in Joan.
timorous, and subject to falling, that neither shaddows of laws, nor
authority of lawmakers are able to support it any longer, then their sins
endure, for whose punishment it is permitted.

On the other side you may see the clear judgment, wherewith the children Non
sumus noctis neque tenebrarum filij: sed lucis, and diei. 1. These. c. 5. Non
accepistis spiritum seruitutis in timore: sed spiritum adoptionis filiorum Dei.
Romans 8. 15.
of light, that be guyded by the other spirit do live, their promptitude,
disposition, and quietness of mind; their tranquillity of conscience, and their
security in their greatest dangers; their cherfulnes and alacrity in the
midst of the furnace of persecution: for they live wholly Quos non tenet
voluntas propria, eos non terret crudelitas aliena. Aug. in sermon. 5. S.
Vincentij.
resigned, their hopes and fears reposed in the determination and good
pleasure of Almighty God, whither they are sure that no enemy can enter, to
bereave them of the treasures which already they Eia gaudium quod non datur
impijs: sed eis qui te gratis colunt, quorum gaudium tu es ipse, and ipsa est
vita beata, gaudere a te, de te, propter te: Ipsa est, and non altera. Bona
quippe vita est, gaudium de ve^itate. hoc est enim gaudium de te, qui es
veritas. Aug. super illud Matthew. ^. Pater nost. etc.
possess: and much less of the inexplicable rewards which they hope to
attain, not by the fantastical presumption of special faith, with which the
Protestants deceive themselves and their followers; but by the certain
assured, and infallible means, which Christ Jesus our Redeemer left to the
holy Catholic Church, his beloved espouse. And with this experience, hope,
and lively faith, which this Church affoardeth the^, they grow to such
indifferency in all indifferent things, and to such Resolution in the rest,
that (as we see) to save their souls, they make no reckoning, of whatsoever
their adversaries can take from them.

From this same spirit and heavenly light, proceeds their inclination and
readiness to captiuate Quicumque ex vobis non renuntiauerit omnibus quae
possidet, no^ potest meus esse discipulus. Est haec renuntiatio expedita ratio
ad acquisitionem, vsumque rerum, quae super aurum and lapide^ pre^io^u^ multum
long sunt pretiosiores: and in summa, cordis humani ad calestem conuersationem
translatio, and initium vnde ad Christi similitudinem euadamus: qui cum dives
esset, propternos pauper est factus. Perfecta autem renuntiatio in eo
consistit, vt id assequamur, ne ad ipsius etiam vitae affectionem propensi
simus, and responsum mortis habeamus, vt non simus fidentes in nobis ipsis.
Huiusmodi autem renuntiatio initium sumit ab alienatione rerum externarum,
veluti a possessionibus, ab inani gloria, a viuendi consuetudine, a rerum
inutilium amore, quemadmodum suo exemplo nobis ostenderunt Sancti. Basil. l.
Reg. fus. ad inter. 8.
their judgments, and surrender their wills, denying and sacrificing
themselves, with great facility to the will of God, in so important occasions,
and things of such weight, as we see mentioned in the former Letter. And from
the same fountain is derived the profound humility and invincible patience,
wherewith they suffer the wrongs and injustice of so long and violent a
perfecution. And if this be seen in persons, who either in regard of their sex
Quod infirmum est Dei, sortius est hominibus 1. Cor. 5.
and cenditio^, or for their tender years should in all likely hood faint and
give ground with the terror of these threatening Edictes; what shall we say of
those valiant Haec est vera fortitudo, quae naturae vsum and sexus
infirmitatem, mentis deuotione transgreditur. Aug. de Vid.
and old beaten soldiers, that have been many years trained and exercised
in these like conflictes: and of the constancy, comfortes, and feruorous
inspirations which they receive continually from the abundance of this holy
sprit?

These men replenished with this spirit, and thus furnished as we have said,
find in their humiliation Nihil excelsius humilitate quae tamquam superior
nescit extolli: quia nemo affectat quod intra se iudicat Ambr. in Luc. l. 8. c.
17.
honor, freedom in their mean estate, in their poverty Viuitur exiguo
melius: natura beatis Omnibus esse dedit, si quis cognouerit vti. Claud. 1. R^f.
quietness, in the absence of those things, that Ad omne fortuitum bonum
suspiciosi and pauidi. Sen. epist. 28. ad Lucil.
others most esteem and seek after, security. And in all these wants, yea in
the greatest storms of persecution, they possess that tranquillity and Pax
multa dilige^ tibus lege^ tuam: and non est Ilis scandalum. Psalm. 118 ^6. Haec
dicit Dominus Redemptor tuus, Sanctus Israel, Ego Dominus Deus tuus docens te
vtilia, gubernans te in via qua ambulas. Vtinam attendis^es mandata mea: facta
fuisset sicut lumen pax tua, and iustitia tua sicut gurgites maris. Isa. 48. 17.
peace of mind, that solyd joy and content, which their Adversaries (as may be
seen in all their proceedings) neither find in their sensual pleasures and
prosperity, no^ yet can imagine nor understand. For if they did, or that his
Royal Majesty himself had found or tasted in the least degree, that which
others enjoy in abundance, either amongst his Puritans in Scotland, or with
his Protestants since his coming into England: he would not be so Motus est
actu^ imperfecti. de Not. lib. 3. cap. 2.
restless, as to our great grief be seems to be, nor spend so much time as
he does, in seeking that which he finds not, and pursuing with continual
labor of body and mind, that which he cannot overtake.

This hydden Quem qui inuenit homo, prae gaudio vadit and vendit vniuersa quae
habet, and emit eum. Matthew. 13. 44.
treasure of contentment, which all men seek after, but all do not find,
because they seek it not where it is to be found, is only to be had in the
steadfast and settled faith, hope, charity, and obedience of the Catholic
Church: for which these suffer persecution, the others persecute. And the very
persecution it self (though the persecutors do not know it) is the Quoniam
quod est honoris, gloriae, and virtutis Dei, and qui est eius spiritus, super
vos requiescet* 1. Petr. 4. 14.
shortest way, that can be to find it. Yea our Savior who is the fountain,
and fulness of all contentment, is so gracious, and so grateful to these that
suffer for his sake, that presently he Audiuit Jesus quia eiecerunt eum for as
extra Synagogam: and cum inuenisset eum, dixit ei, Tu credis in filium Dei? at
ille ait, credo Domine: and procidens, adorauit eum. Et dixit Jesus: In
iudicium in hunc mundum veni, vt qui non vident videant, and qui vide^t
caecifiant. Joan. 9. 35.
seeks them, and discovers himself unto them, filling their souls with
his heavenly joys.

The abundance of vain and transitory pleasures of this world, and all
excess of earthly Nouerca virtutis prosperitas. Beatulis suis sic applaudet,
vt noceat: sic obsequitur, vt deijciat: dulcia propinat, vt inebriet. Joan.
Sarisoe. lib. 1. c. 1. de Curialium nugis.
prosperity inueigleth the heart, not well grounded in the knowledge and fear
of Gods judgments, and draws the will of man out of it self, and from her
center, in pursuit of many things, that being affected without measure, and
loved out of their order and place, are so far from satiating the soul with
that which it seeks in them, that they bring new necessities and wants,
stir up new hunger and thirst, and inflame new desires, and consequently
bring forth new Afflictions, Cumque me conuertissem ad vniuersa opera quae
fecerunt manus meae, and ad labores in quibus frustra sudaueram vidi in omnibus
vanitatem and afflictionem animi. Eccl. 2. 11.
Perturbations, and Cares, until the very wearines of their fruitless desires,
and experience of their losses and harms, oblige such as have the least spark
of true wisdom and light, to retire themselves home to themselves, and to
enter into the secret of their own souls, where, and in no Tantum permittitur
Diabolus tentare, quantum tibi prodest, vt exercearis, vt proberis, vt qui te
nesciebas, a teipso inueniaris. Aug. in Psalm. 61. Ecce Regnum Dei intra vos
est. Luc. 17. 21. Iustitia and pax and gaudium in Spiritu sancto. Romans 14. 17.
part else is found that sovereign good, which all do seek after, but none
finds, nor enjoys, but only such as have learned to live in Adest Deo qui
illum cogitat, qui eum intuetur, qui in ipso sperat: adest, and iuxta Deum est,
qui extra se non fuerit. Ambros. in Isaac.
themselves, and in God, the storehouse of all felicity.

And many times it is so Dives difficile intrabit in Regnum caelorum. Matthew.
19. 23.
necessary for eternal salvation, and always so Si vis perfectus esse, vade
and vende quae habes, and da pauperibus, and veni and sequere me. Matthew. 19. 21.
convenient, for the good government, comfort and perfection of this present
life, and for the attayning of the quietness, and contentment which all men
seek, that such as have discretion and experience, to know Qui inter ea, quae
natura desiderat, desiderium suum clausit, cum ipso Jove de felicitate
contendit. Sen. epist. 23. Est questus magnus pietas cum sufficie^tia. Habentes
autem alimenta and quibus tegamur, his co^tenti simus: Nam qui volunt diuites
sieri, incidunt in tentationem and laqueum Diaboli, and desideria multa
inutilia and nociua, quae mergunt homines in interitum and perditionem. Radix
enim omnium malorum est cupiditas, quam quidam appetentes errauerunt a side,
and inseruerunt se doloribus multis. 1. Tim. 6. 6.
the good and evil, that may be in the use or abuse of Gods Creatures, deprive
themselves willingly, and of their own accord, of the superfluities, which
Persecutors Maxima paupertatis propugnatione defenditur, quem nullus Rex,
nullus Imperator vincere possit. Auaro homines, tineae, vermes, quin and ipsum
tempu^ officiunt. Ipse seipsum inutilem, vilem, ac timidum ad omnia reddit.
Chrysostom. hom. 84. in Matthew.
can take from them, and cast them away as impediments of their felicity,
thereby to get out of the In circuitu impij ambulant. Psalm 11. 9. In temporalium
rerum cupiditate, quae septem dierum repetito circuitu, tamquam rota voluitur:
and ideo non perueniunt in octauum, idest in aeternum. August. in Psalm. 161.
Labyrinth of sin, wherein the Children of this world (like unto mil-horses)
travail blind fold in a circle of misery all the day long, and at night find
themselves where they were in the morning, and at the hour of their death in
the same or worse estate, then when they began to live: never coming to any
end of their desires, nor attayning to the soueraygne knowledge of the charity
and love of Christ, so full of true contentment and heavenly light, that in
comparison of it the holy Apostle Saint Paul, esteemed as dirt Omina arbitror
vt stercora, vt Christum lucrifaciam. Phil. 3. 8.
and corruption, all the pleasures and contentme^ts that this world can affoard.

And if at any time it happen (as many times it does) that the love and
affection to transitory things, breeds in our hearts any coldness, or
remissnes in Gods service, it is an Ideo terrenis felicitatibus amaritudines
miscet Deus, vt illa quaeratur felicitas, cuius dulcedo non est fallax. Aug.
sermon. 29. super Matthew.
especial favor, and an infallible testimony of his love to us, to suffer
some tribulation or persecution to fall upon us, thereby to rouse us up, and
spur us on, to pursue with Mala quae nos premunt, ad Deum venire compellunt.
Greg. hom. 14. in Luc.
more diligence and fervor, that which so much imports us to attain. And if
any tribulation or affliction whatsoever, that serves to this purpose, is to
be esteemed and desired, as a soueraygne medicine that assures health in a
dangerous sickness: how much more should we embrace willingly, and with
comfort, that which falls upon us, only Quis vobis noceat, si boni
aemulatores fueritis; Sed and si quid patimini propter iustitiam beati. 1. Pet.
3. 14.
for justice, and for the profession of our faith, or for the works of
charity, to which we are Sic enim persecuti sunt Prophetas qui fuerunt ante
vos. Matthew. 5. 14.
bound by general or special obligation? For in these occasions of
persecution, there can be no doubt (as in other cases there may be) whether
they fall on us for our own fault, or no.

I am persuaded, that I do the office of a friend, to such as persecute the
Catholics, and especially to his Royal Majesty of Great Britanny (who I hope
does it by inducement of others, and not of his own inclination) in
discovering unto them this Dulcis praesens vita est, and multae plena
voluptatis non tamen omnibus, sed ijs tantu^ qui illi sunt affixi. Quod si quis
aeternam contemplatus fuerit, hanc nullius pretij existimabit. Na^ and corporu^
pulchritudo, quoad pulchrius non deprehenditur, in admiratione habetur: vbi
vero aliud praestantius apparuerit, illa prior despicitur. Chrysostom. hom. 66. in
Joan.
Mine, and hydden Treasure of riches, which is evident they know not. For if
they did, or had any true apprehension of it, they would rather desire Vtinam
quinos exercent conuertantur, and nobiscum exerceantur. Tamen quamdiu ita sunt
ve exerceant nos, non eos oderimus: quia in eo quod malus est quis eorum, virum
in finem perseueraturus sit, ignoramus. Aug. in Psalm. 54.
to be persecuted, then persecute others for this cause. And not to oblige them
to seek examples a far off, nor to turn their eyes from their own Country,
nor from the effects of this very persecution, I will give them instance and
example in a person of their own Nation, which together with the other before
mentioned, may suffice to prove, and give sufficient notice, of that which here
we speak of: that is, of the excellency of the inward comfort, and joy, which
God gives in the midst of their greatest tribulation, to such as serve him
in truth, and suffer adversity for his sake.

In the History of the persecution of England, gathered by the Bishop of
Taracona, we have a notable Martyrum glorias ad hoc diuino consilio a Dei
populis frequentari nemo est qui nesciat, vt and illis debitus honor dicetur,
and nobis virtutis exempla monstre^tur. Vt enim infirmatur peccator aduersis:
ita iustus tentationibus roboratur. Chrysostom. sermon. 1. de Martyribus.
example of a Catholic Gentle woman, of the same Country, who having lost
her goods for Sic dimicarunt aduersus peccatum Sancti. Chrysostom. vt supra.
Recusancie, and notwithstanding all this enforced often to chang her abode
removing from one Country to another with great trouble and disquietnes of her
own person and famylie, not to be known of those, whom they call their
Bishops, that did persecute her for her Religion. In the midst of all these
changes and bodily disquietnes, she lived in so great serenity, Pax Dei
exupera^s omnem sensum, custodit corda. Phil. 4. 7.
peace, and quietness of mind, that it caused admiration in all that knew her:
and her inward Joy Perfecta virtus habet quietis tranquillitatem and
stabilitatem. Iniustus perturbationis plenus est, suis suspitionibus
offligitur: maiores vibices vulnerum in eius animo sunt, quam in eorum corpore
qui verbera^tur. Amb. de vita bea, cap. 6.
and contentme^t was so exceeding great, that they that were about her, heard
her often repeat, that nothing troubled her so much, as that she could not
repay God Almighty the favor he had showed her, in suffering her goods to be
taken from her, and therwithall freeing her of many unprofitable O curas
hominu^! o quantum est in rebus inane! Pers. 1.
cogitations, and cares, which ordinarily accompany that estate, and giving her
Non quasi insipientes, sed vt sapientes: redimentes tempus, quoniam dies mali
sunt. Ephesians. 5. 15.
more leisure, to attend to the service of God, and the Sicut nullu^ est
momentum, quo homo non vtatur Dei bonitate and misericordia: Sic nullum debet
esse momentum, quo eum praesentem non habeat in memoria. Omne tempus in quo de
Deo non cogitas, hoc te computa perdidisse. Hugo de claust. any. l. 1.
salvation of her soul: and for this cause, and for this only respect,
accounted the Necesse est facere sumptum qui quaerit lucru^. Plau. in Asin. Si
dederit homo omnem substa^tia^ domus suae, pro dilectione, quasi nihil
despiciet eam. Cant. 8. 7.
loss of all she had, a gainful bargain, although she had not left it, as
indeed she did, for her fidelity to God Almighty, and her Religion. And the
comfort Contemn diuitias and eris locuples: contemn gloriam and eris
gloriosus: contemn supplicia inimicorum, and tunc ea superabis: contemn
quietem and tunc eam recipes. Chrysostom. in Ep. ad Hebr.
which she found in these and such like Considerations, was so exceeding
great, even in the greatest troubles and afflictions, that she prayed daily to
Almighty God, not Ineffabilis Dei bonitas hocetiam prouidit, vt in hac breui
and exigua vita agones essent and labores, in illa vero quae aeterna est,
Corona and praemia meritorum. Beda sermon. 18. de sanct.
to reward in this world, the small service she had done him, but that he would
be pleased, to send her some corporal infirmity or sickness, to temper the
exceeding joy, which inwardly she found, in all the troubles of her
persecution, and not Magnarum hic vigor est mentium, and valde fidelium lumen
est animaru^, incunctanter credere quae corporeo non videntur intuitu: and
ibifigere desiderium, vbi nequeas infer conspe ctum. S. Leo. ser. 2. de
Ascens.
to be detained from the sight of her Creator, whom she so dearly loved. If
she should dye without due penance and satisfaction, her ordinary Si quotidie
nos oporteret tormenta perferre, si ipsam gehenna^ paruo tempore tolerare, vt
Christum videre in gloria venientem digni essemus, and sanctorum eius numero
sociari: Nonne dignum erat pati omne quod triste est, vt tanti boni, tantaeque
gloriae participes haberemur. Beda. sermon. 18. de sanct.
prayer was, that she might pass her Purgatorius ignis debet perficere,
quicquid tu minus hic feceris: quia pignus fructus poenitentiae quaerit
altissimus. Bern. sermon. 3. de S. Andr. Ita Domine in have vita purges me, vt
talem me reddas, cui iam eme^datario igne non sit opus. Aug. super. Psalm. 37.
Purgatory in this life. And it seems that God heard her prayer; for he
visited her with continual sickness and pains, which increased in such manner
some years before her death, that it was strange how she Si Passio Redemptoris
ad memoriam reducitur, nihil tam durum est, quod non aequo animo toleretur.
Isid. de summo bo.
could live, and endure them. And yet in her greatest extremity as the Story
says, she was so cheerful Sancti viri, cum multa se proficere virtutum
prosperitate considerant, quodam supernae dispensationis moderamine exerceri se
etiam tent^^i^^^bus exultant: quia, tanto robustius acceptam virtutum gloriam
custodi^^t, quanto tentationis impulsu concussi, infirmitatem suam humilius
agnoscu^^. Gregor.
and merry, that she encouraged all that were about her, especially at the time
of her death, whereat was present the person that gave this Relation, with
another venerable Priest, afterward a Martyr, from whom I received as much
as here I have set down, and diverse other particularityes which be not in the
Story.

One about the rest is memorable, and very fit for our purpose in this place,
that Catholics may learn to abhor all unlawful communication with
Schismatickes and Heretics, as the Apostles, and disciples of Christ, and
their successors in the Primitive Church have taught us by many examples, and
is the very case, and the only cause, why the Catholics whom they call
Recusantes, suffer so grievous persecution, at this present, in England.

This virtuous and devout Gentlewoman, perceauing her self to draw near to
her end, and happy passage to a better life, amongst many other matters of
edification, and comfort to them that were about her, and her friends then
present, recomme^ded one thing unto the^, with especial charge, that her body
might in no case be buried, where any profane service or sermons of Heretics
were to be used, for she desired to continue after her death as she had lived,
though to her cost, free from all communication with the^. And God almighty was
pleased to do her the favor, and to accomplish her desire. For although it
could not be excused, to carry her body to the parish Church, with the
solemnity accustomed, yet mea^s was wrought, that no Minister was present, nor
to be found at her buryall. And so having performed secretly the rites of the
Catholic Church before the body was brought out, it was buried without any
service or Ceremony of Protestants. And the night following, before there
could be any Service (as they call it) in the Church where it was buried, a
principal person for his devotion, found means to effect it, and with his
own hands opened the grave, and accompanied with two trusty servants, took
out the Coffin with the body, and put it in holy ground in a more decent place,
where no heretical service is used, and where it is kept till this present
day. And in this sort God was pleased to accomplish the pious desire of this
holy woman deceased, as he does many times, fulfill the like desires of his
friends, living and dead, for the comfort and instruction of others.

And by the measure of these two Gentlewomen, and of their fidelity, zeal, and
constancy in Gods cause and service, I frame a conceit of all the rest, that
in England, or elsewhere suffer for Catholic Religion. They be the true and
living Temples of the holy Ghost, the Haec locutus sum vobis, vt gaudium meum
in vobis sit: and gaudium vestrum impleatur. Joan. 15. 11.
Comforter of all true hearts, and theirs no doubt are continually replenished
with Patacletus Spiritus veritatis, quem mundus non potest accipere, quia non
videt eum, nec scit eum, apud vos manebit, and in vobis erit. Joan. 14. 16.
his holy comfortes, singing always within themselves spiritual and heavenly
songs, and recording psalms Cantantes and psallentes in cordibus vestris
Domino: gratias agentes se^per pro omnibus, in nomine Domini nostri Jesus
Christi, Deo and Patri. Ephesians. 5. 20.
of Iubily and thanksgiving: and amidst the troops of deceived people that
languish in sin and misery, they have the privilege, not only to believe In
nullo terreamini ab aduersarijs, quae illis est causa perditionis, vobis autem
salutis, and hoc a Deo; quia vobis donatum est, pro Christo, non solum, vt in
eum credatis, sed vt etiam pro illo patiamini. Phil. 1. 29.
truly and firmly in Christ; but also to suffer for his sake, which is to be
highly esteemed, as a Quem diliget Dominus castigat: flagellat autem omnem
filium quem recipit. In disciplina perseuerate, ta^quam filijs vobis offert se
Deus. Heb. 12. 6. Quia acceptus eras Deo, necesse fuit vt tentatio probaret te.
Tob. 12. 13.
prerogative, proper to Gods particular friends, and granted to none, but to
such as he loves dearly. So that indeed if there be any happiness upon earth,
it is to be thought that they enjoy it, and in more abundance then the rest:
yea doubtless they find that eternal happiness and that Omnis qui reliquerit
domum etc. propter nomen meum, centuplum accipiet, and vitam aeterna^
possidebit. Math. 1^. 19. Repletus sum consolatione, superabu^do gaudio in omni
tribulatione nostra. 2. Cor. 7. 4.
hundredth for one, which Christ our savior has promised to such, as forsake
all for his love, and embrace his Cross, and follow him; and undoubtedly
performs it, when on our part there wants Qui amat patrem aut matrem etc.
plus quam me, non est me dignus: and qui non accipit crucem suam and sequitur
me, non est me dignus. Matthew. 10. 37.
not disposition to receive it.

From hence it comes, that such as have experience of this comfort in
suffering for Christ, and have been trained up in this Military disciplyne,
under his Banner, are no whit dismayed with these threatening Proclamations: but
keep Insuperabili loco stat animus qui externa deseruit. Inexpugnabilis, qui
vbi aliena disposuit, fecit sibi pacem, nil concupiscendo, nil timendo. Sen.
ep. 33. Perfectorum est, non facile mu^danis moueri, non turbari metu, non
dolor vexari: sed qua si in littore tutissimo, aduersus insurgentes fluctus
saecularium procellaru^, me^tem immobilem fida statione placidare. Hoc
firmamentum Christianis mentibus Christus inuexit. Ambr. de Jacob. and bea. vi.
cap. 6.
their standinges, and with great equability and alacrytie of mind, expect the
charge and execution of these severe laws. Nay when it seems convenient for
Gods greater glory, and the saving of souls, they meet the persecutor in the
midway, and offer themselves to all kind of perils, as we see the virtuous
woman, that wrote the Letter before set down, did to animate her husband; and
the Priests and Religious men, of whom the Author of this Edict complains
so much, do daily, as we see. And by their own confession and complaint, and
their daily experience, may be inferred as much as we have said, to wit, that
these sovereign comfortes, that Gods servants feel in such cases, and the
cordial medicines that give such life, alacrity, and courage, in so hot and
dangerous assaults, come from above, ministered by the heavenly Physician,
Father of Mercyes, and helper in all necessities, Qui consolatur nos in ommi
Tribulatione nostra; for whose love their suffer. It is evident, I say, that
they are supernatural and from heaven, and therefore out of the persecutors
reach so far as they do not Non videt eum ne^ scit eum. Joan. 14. 17. Quia si
cognouisses and tu, quae ad pacem tibi, nunc autem abscondita sunt ab oculis
tui^ etc. Luc. 19. 42.
apprehend them, and much les are able to hinder them, or take Gaudebit ^or
vestrum: and gaudium vestrum nemo tollet a vobis. Joan. 16. 22.
them from us, when we suffer as we should for this cause, howsoever God permit
them temporal power, to bereave us of such temporal comfortes, and
commodities, as we willingly leave without loss, to gain our selves, and do
our duty.

I will not detain my Reader, proving this experience by example of those
valyant and renowned Captains S. Antony, S. Paul, and others, that overcame
the invisible enemy hand to hand: nor of those heroycall champions S. Laurence,
S. Vincent, S. Sebastian, and others that gained their Crowns in bloody
battle, and Alij ludibria and verbera experti, vincula and carceres, in
occisione gladij mortui sunt, non suscipientes redemptionem: circuierunt
egentes, angustiati, afflicti, quibus dignus non erat mundus, in solitudinibus
etc. Hiomnes testimonio fidei probati. Heb. 11. 37.
triumphed over the Tyrants and Persecutors of their time. I pass over
infinite number of such like, who in former ages being possessed, and
replenished with these heavenly comfortes, felt no want of any visible humane
creature, of no company in the wildest deserts, of no light in the darkest
dungeons, no fear in the greatest dangers, no want of courage in the cruelest
torments, nor any terror of death it self, for their hearts were
strengthened with inward joys; they found within themselves Celestial
company, they were illuminated with an invisible light, they felt secret
contentment and exultation with the assured possession of a sovereign good,
greater Vir insipiens non cognoscit, and stultus non intelliget haec. Psalm. 91.
7. Fide Moses natus, occultatus est me^sibus tribus a parentibus suis: eo quod
vidissent elegantem infantem, and non timuerunt Regis Edictu^. Heb. 11. 23.
Fide Moses eligebat magis affligi cum populo Dei, quam temporalis peccati
habere iucunditate^, maiores diuitias aestimans the sauro Egyptiorum,
improperium Christi: aspiciebat enim in remunerationem. Heb. 11. 29. Fide
reliquit Egyptum non veritus animositatem Regis: inuisibilem enim tamquam
videns sustinuit. Heb. 11. 27.
without comparision, then all the goods which their adversaries could take
from them, or the evils they could devise against them: in so much that the
Judges that condemned them to death, and the bloody executio^ers of their
sentences, were amazed and astonished at their Resolution and Consta^cy, as we
see the Authors and Actors of these Tragedies in England are at this day.

For want of understanding the Mystery of this divine comfort, which these
holy men felt inwardly in their souls; their adversaries attributed their
admirable patience and alacrity, some to want of sense, some to Art Magic,
and inchauntments.

And from the very self same root of ignorance proceeds that these present
persecutors persuade themselves that they can terrify Gods servants with these
heavy Edictes and Laws, or extinguish Haec fides Diabol^ vicit. Co^tra hanc
portae inferi praeualere non possunt. Tanta enim diuinitus soliditate fu^data
est, vt eam neque haeretica vmquam corruinpere prauitas, nec Pagana potuerit
superare perfidia. S. Leo sermon. 2. anniuers. assump. Dominicae.
Catholic Religion with any art Pretiosa in co^spectu Domini mors Sanctoru^
eius. Non vllo crudelitatis genere destrui potest Sacramento erueis Christi
fundata Religio. S. Leo sermon. 1. in not. Pet. and Paul.
or violence of humane persecution. For contrary to their expectation, we see
that instead of effecting their designements, they add new fuel to that
sacred and Celestial fire, that burns in the others breasts, and kindle new
fervor and zeal to profess and propagate that divine truth, which with these
politic means they would extinguish.

And for their further satisfaction in this point, they may please to consider:
if they permit liberty to those who by office are bound to teach the Catholic
faith, they execute their function: if they put them in In Euangelio laboro
vsque ad vincula, quasi male operans: sed Verbum Dei non est alligatum. 1. Tim.
2. 9. Ille in quauis condition seruitutis liber est, qui amore non capitur,
auaritiae vinculis non tenetur, metu ^riminis non obligatur. Securus spectat
praesentia, quem non terrent futura. Amb. de Joseph.
prison, their doctrine and example does more good in public, then they could
possibly have done before in secret: if they put them to death, for every one
they take away, spring up Non minuitur persecutio^ibus Ecclesia sed auget^r:
and semper Dominicus ager segete ditiori vestitur, dum grana quae singula
cadunt multiplicata nascuntur. S. Leo ser. 1. in not. Pet. and Paul. Hoc habet
proprium Ecclesia, vt dum persecutio^em patitur, floret: dum opprimitur,
crescit: dum contemnitur, persistit: dum laditur, vincit: dum arguitur,
intelligit: tunc stat, cum superari videtur. Hilar. l. 7. de Trinit.
many young pla^ts; for the blood of Martyrs is, and ever has been the true
seed of the Catholic Church. And verily let Statistes plot and practice
whatsoever they can devise, seeing, it has pleased the great seeds-man, to sow
so much of this fruitful seed in England, no man that understands any thing
of God Almighty his proceeding in such cases can doubt of the conversion of
that Country to the Catholic faith.

If they imagine that by impouerishing the Catholics, the Priests at length
shall want compete^t maintenance, they are likewise Non est sapientia, non est
prudentia, non est consilium co^tra Dominum. Prou. 21. 30.
deceived in this; for first their maintenance depends Respicite volatilia
caeli, non serunt, neque metunt, and Pater vester caelestis pascit illa: and
qua^to magis vos modica fidei. Matt. 6. 26.
not only upon them: and although it did, yet for one that falls by these
practices, many Faciamus viro Dei coenaculum paruum, and ponamus ei in eo
lectulu^, and mensa^* and sellam. and ca^delabrum: vt cum venerit ad nos,
maneat ibi. 4. Reg. 4. 10.
are converted, and arise from sin. And the infallible wisdom of God
Almighty, has a thousand ways Considerato lilia agri, quomodo crescu^t, neque
laborant, neque nent etc. Nolite ergo solliciti esse dicentes, quid
ma^ducabimus, aut quid bibemus, aut quo operiemur? scit enim pater vester quia
his omnibus indigetis. Quaerite ergo primum Regnum Dei and iustitiam eius, and
haec omnia adijcie^tur vobis. Matthew. 6. ^8.
to provide for his Children, that their adversaries cannot imagine. Not only
in so populous and plentiful a Country, and amongst people so grateful,
liberal, and pious, as is the English Nation, but even in the Deserts Traduxit
populu^ suum per d^sertum, quonia^ in aeternum misericordia eius. Psalm. 135. 16.
of Egypt, amongst the wild beasts, and in the Dungeons Dixit Angelus Domini
ad Habacuc^, fer prandium quod habes in Babylonem Danieli, qui est in lacu
leonu^. Dan. 14. ^^4.
of Babylon amongst the hungry lions. And without all doubt the same God, that
imployeth Quando ^isi vos sieve sacculo and pera, and calce^mentis: number quid
aliquid defuit vobis? at illi dixerunt Nihil. Luc. 22. 33.
them in his business, has Nolite solliciti esse, dicentes, quid manducabimus,
aut quid bibemus, aut quo operiemur: haec enim omnia gentes inquirunt: s^it
enim Pater vester quia his omnibus indigetis. Quaerite ergo primum Regnum Dei
and iustitiam eius, and haec omnia adij^ientur vobis. Matthew. 6. 31.
care to mayntaine them: and rather then they shall want, he will multiply
Dixit vidua ad filium suum, affer mihi adhuc vas. Et ille respondit, non habeo:
stetitque oleum: 4. Reg. 6.
oil in the vessel, and cause the heavens to Dixit Dominus ad Moysen: Ecce
ego pluam vobis panes de caelo. Egrediatur populus and colligat quae sufficient
per singulos dies. Exodus 16. 4.
rain bread, and the fowls Abscondere in torrente Ca^i^h. Coruis praecepi, vt
pascant te ibi. 3. Reg. 17. 4. Corui deferebant Eliae panem and carnes mane:
and similiter panem and carnem vesperi. 3. Reg. 17. 6.
of the air to feed them, as he did to his servants in other times. And when
all fails, rather then they will fail, or leave the souls of their
Contrymen vnsuccoured in so great necessity, and peril to be lost, they
will apply themselves to learn occupatio^s, as the blessed Apostle Saint Paul
Laboramus, operantes manibus nostris maledicimur, and benedicimus 2. Cor. 4. 12.
did, and maintain themselves by their hand-labour, with double glory and
double reward. The Apostle S. Paul because he would neither be chargeable to
others, nor fail in the diligent execution of his office, labored Ipsi
scitis, quoniam ad ea quae mihi opus erant, and his qui mecum sunt,
ministrauerunt manus istae. Act. 20. 34. Gratis Euangelium Dei eua^gelizaui
vobis nam quod mihi deerat, suppleuerunt qui venerunt a Macedonia. 2. Cor. 11.
7.
by day, and spent the night in preaching, and Vna autem fabbathi cum
conuenissemus ad frangendum panem, Paulus protraxit sermonem vsque ad mediam
noctem. Act. 20. 7.
administration of holy Sacraments; as these other will also do, rather then
leave their station: so that as long as there is any people in England, so long
as his Royal Majesty, or his successors shall have subjects to govern, there
will not want Priests and Religious men amongst them, to help their souls.

And suppose he could make an end of all his own Contrymen, God would raise
up men of other Nations to learn the language, and supply their want; as we
see he does in the Conversion of the Indians, and of other Gentiles, and has
always done in the Catholic Church, and especially in time of Persecution:
for he never fails to succor his friends.

They be also deceived, which imagine that the impouerishing of Catholics, is
a way to make them Protestants, and forsake their faith: for if they consider
well, they shall find a contrary effect, and the error arises by mistaking
the grounds of the Protestants sect, and Catholic Religion. True it is, that
riches, honor, and temporal commodity is the foundation of Statisme, and from
whence the Persecutors take their aim, and measure all their actions and
procedinges: as it cannot be denied, but that Radix omniu^ malorum est
cupiditas: quam quidam appetentes, errauerunt a fide, and inseruerunt se
doloribus multis. 1. Timoth. 6. 10.
covetousness, and Quomodo vos potestis credere qui gloria^ ab inuicem
accipitis: and gloria^ quae a solo Deo est non quaeritis? Joan. 5. 44. O
Timothee deuita oppositiones falsi nominis scientiae: quam quidam promittentes,
circa fidem excideru^t. 1. Timoth. 6. 11.
ambition are the two pillars and suporters of all false sects. But they must
understand, that the Catholic faith stabilitate sua consistit, stands fast
by it self, it relyeth not upon any humane foundation, but the eminency of it,
is settled upon the infallible truth, and upon the soliditie and perfection of
the doctrine it self, founded in true poverty of heart, and in contempt of
temporal honor, wealth, and all the rest which worldlings esteem. And by
this poverty, and contempt of transitory superfluities, it is not only
preserved in purity, but enlarged, and increased: so as the possession and
inordinate desire of riches, is the most effectual way to weaken and diminish
it: and this removed, it cannot fail. And the reason is evident.

For Love being the chief of all the affections of man's mind, and as it were
the key, the stern, and rudder of our will, by which all the other passions of
the soul are commanded: he that by the grace of God has learned to
ouer-maister his Love, does thereby put his whole life in order, and with great
facility shakes of a thousand impertinent desires, which like so many
maleparte retayners, eat out their Master, without doing him any service: and
once voyding his house of these idle, and unprofitable hangers on, his soul
freed from many vain hopes, and fears, remains in peace, his understanding
receaueth light, to see reason, and his will is ready to obey it, and put in
execution whatsoever God Almighty commands, without Cognoscentes se habere
meliorem and mane^tem substantia^. Heb. 10. 34.
desire of any thing, that may hinder this freedom and happiness, or difficulty
to admit any loss that may increase it, much more when there is peril of
sin, as in this our case.

This is that which our savior Christ Jesus taught us in the examples of the
builder, Luc. 14. 30.
and of the King that makes war: for he says, it is necessary for these to
be aforehand, and have abou^dance of money to put in execution their work: but
for the spiritual building and warfare it is not necessary. But to the
contrary, he which in this kind is to raise the highest buildinges, and obtain
the greatest victoryes, and follow Christ our Captain, with perfection, must
be the freest Si vis perfectus esse, vade, vende quae habes, and da pauperibus,
and habebis thesaurum in caelo, and veni sequere me. Matt. 19. 21.
from all superfluities, that may hinder or diuent him: and then he enters
into the power of God Almighty, and takes possession of his riches, when he
perfectly Nisi quis renuntiauerit omnibus quae possidet, non potest esse meus
discipulus. Luc. 14. 33. Virtus in infirmitate perficitur: libenter igitur
gloriabor in infirmitatibus meis, vt inhabitet in me virtus Christi. 2. Cor.
12. 9. Propter quod placeo mihi in infirmitatibus, in contumelijs, in
necessitatibus, in persecutio^ibus pro Christo. Cum enim infirmor, tune potens
sum. 2. Cor. 12. 10. Infirma mundi elegit Deus, vt confundat fortia. 1. Cor. 1.
27.
relinquisheth his own.

And this was the reason why in the primitive Church, when the Christians
esteemed greatly their faith, and contemned their riches, thousands Exhortatus
est eo^ Petrus, dicens: saluamini a generatione ista praua: and appositae sunt
in illa die animae circiter tria millia. Act. 2. 40. Loquentibus autem illis ad
populum, superuenerunt Sacerdotes, and Magistratus templi, and Sadducaei,
dolentes quod docerent populum, and annu^tiarent in IESV resurrectione^ ex
mortuis. Et inieceru^t in eos manus, and posuerunt eos in custodia^. Multi
autem eoru^ qui audierunt verbum crediderunt: and factus est numerus virorum
quinque millia. Act. 4. 1.
were converted at every sermon of the Apostles, and they professed their faith
without Et virtute magna reddebant Apostoli testimonium resurrectionis IESV
Christi Domini nostri: and gratia magna erat in omnibus illis. Act. 4. 33.
fear, notwithstanding all the threatenings and cruelties, that could be
devised against them.

Then they cast Neque quisquam egens erat inter illos, quotquot enim
possessores agrorum aut domorum erant, vendentes afferebant pretia eorum quae
vendebant, and ponebant ante pedes Apostolorum. Diuidebatur antem singulis
prout cuique opus erat. Act. 4. 35.
their goods at the Apostles feet, and willingly of their own accord, did
that which now these other suffer: But this violence teaches them, to make a
virtue Felix necessitas quae ad meliora compellit.
of necessity, and profit of their enemies. And the infinite benefits which
they find in poverty, cause many to love and esteem it highly, who otherwise
by all liklyhood, had never come to know it, if the experience of these Exi in
vias and sepes, and compelle intrare, vt impleatur domus mea. Luc. 14. 23.
rigorous Proclamations had not been. And this precious and wholesome Scire vti
paupertate, maxima felicitas est. Sen. de Mor. Prima front rigida ac
subtristis paupertas est, minaxque aduentus eius. At cum in familiaritatem
semel admissa fuerit, minime sumptuosa, secura, ac facilis hospes erit. Redige
te ad parua, ex quibus cadere non possis. Inest paupertati (sine qua nihil est
(...)
lesson they owe to their adversaries.

I re(...) which his Majesty of Great Brita^ny and such as counseled him,
seem to have intended. For it is a great absurdity in reason, and against
common sense, to procure any end by contrary means, and to take courses, which
of their own nature and by Gods ordinance, help, increase, and vphould the
very same things, which they seek to overthrow. And it is little better then
madness once to imagine that one or few, by force In consilium eoru^ non veniat
anima mea. Maledictus furor eorum, quia pertinax: and indignatio eorum, quia
dura. Diuidam eos in Jacob, and dispergam eos in Israel. Genesis 46. 6.
or deceit can hinder any long time, that which so many with justice, Nihil in
terra sine causa fit. Dissipat Dominus cogitationes malignoru^, and apprehendit
sapientes in astutia illorum: ne possint implere manus eorum, quod coeperant.
Job. 3. 6. 12.
truth, and reason desire to set forward, and especially with so great valor
and resolution, as is seen in this case.

But be it, that man against man, upon these terms may hold out for a time:
yet certain it is, that there is no power upon earth that can resist the
omnipotency and providence of God, whose Iuxta voluntatem suam faciet Deus, tam
in virtutibus caeli, quam in habitantibus terrae. Et non est qui resistat manui
eius, and dicat ei, quare fecisti? Dan. 4. 32.
will is a law, and (maugre all policies and practices of such as dare oppose
themselves against him) must needs prevail. And who can make doubt of God his
will and pleasure in this case? so that it is easy to conjecture what Haec
dicit Dominus. Visitabo contra eum, and contra semen eius, iniquitates suas and
adducam super eos omne malum quod loquutus sum ad eos, and non audierunt.
Ierem. 36. 31.
issue all these hurly-burlies will have, and what will be the end of this bloody
conflict. And that it is only want of consideration, and of the light of
grace, that weak and impotent men take arms of defiance against their
Creator.

Alas how much better were it, that they entered into consideration with
themselves, what they do, and upon how uncertain grounds, and by Cum feriant
vnum, non vnum fulmina terrent:
Iunctaque percusso turba pauere solet.
Cumque dedit paries ve^turae signa ruinae,
Sollicito vacuus fit locus ille metu.
Quis non e timidis, aegri contagia vitat,
Vicinum metuens, ne trahat inde malum?
Ovid. lib. 3. de Ponto. Eleg. 2.
others example, learn to prevent Gods judgments, before they fall upon them.
It is the property of creatures without reason, to bite the arrow that has
wounded them, and when they be hurt to revenge themselves on those that stand
nearest to them, never considering from Causa illa putanda est prima, vnde
motus principium. Meteor. 1. c. ^. Seruos Dei and Christi laesos vltio diuina
defendit, and quanto mayor fuerit persecutionis iniuria, ta^to iustior fit, and
grauior pro persecutione vindicta. Nec vmqua^ impiorum scelere in nostrum nomen
iusurgitur, vt non statim diuinitus vindicta comitetur. Cyp. ad Detrianum.
whence it came.

They are fearful, and suspicious, and carry a watchful eye and heavy hand
upon such as in their opinion may be the immediate instruments of Gods wrath
upon them, but they never reflect upon their Rex lugebit, and Principes
induentur moerore, and manus populi terr^ conturbabuntur. Secundu^ viam eorum
faciam eis, and secundum iudiciaeorum iudidicabo eos: and scient qui^ ego
Dominus. Ezech. 7. 22.
own sins, nor remember the innocent blood which they have shed, which cries
up to heaven continually for punishment; nor the eternal law and justice of
God, for execution whereof all Creatures obey, as instruments Armabit creaturam
ad vltionem inimicorum. Sap. 5. 18.
of revenge, when the sentence is once denounced.

Oh that they would seriously consider the disasterous and miserable Aspice ex
alio tormento quod timeas: Respice in alieno exitio quod pauescas: euita foueam
in quam alium videris incidisse coram te: pericula aliena in te pertimisce
Isid. in Syn. soli. l. 1. c. 10. Istuc est sapere, non quod ante pedes mod^ est
videre: sed etiam illa quae futura sunt prospicere. Terent. in Adelpho.
ends of such, as in tymes-past have attempted the same that now these do. I
mean of Nero, Decius, Julian, and such like, who in former ages, either by
blood and violence, or by flattering and deceit, or by both together
afflicted and persecuted Gods Church. His unspeakable patience and mercy, held
his Ne dixeris, pecca^i, and quid mihi accidit triste? Altissimus enim est
patiens redditor. Eccl. 5. 4.

Raro antecedentem scelestum

Deseruit pede poena claudo.

Horat. Od. l. 3. od. 2.


hand from revenge for a time, and let them run on, whilst it seemed conuenyent
to his infinite wisdom; but after wards he stopped their course in the
midst Vidi impium superexaltatum, and eleuatum sicut cedros Libani: and
tra^siui, and ecce non erat, and quaesiui eum, and non est inue^tus locus eius.
Psalm. 36. 35. Vltiones pro cultoribus Dei saepe repetitas inuenies: in ruinis
Regum, iacturis opum, dispendio militum, diminutione castrorum. Nec hoc casu
^ccidisse aliquis existimet, cum iam pridem Scriptura diuina posuerit, Mihi
vindicta^ and ego retribuam. Vnde manifestum est, non per nos, sed pro nobis
accidere cu^cta ista quae descendunt de Dei indignatione. Cyp. ad Demetrianum.
of their puissance, and overthrew them in the height of their pride; and from
the top of the Castles that they had built in the air, he threw them down
headlong into the everlasting torments, prepared from the beginning of the
world, for Angels and for such other, as by their examples and suggestio^s
raise themselves against God. I need not stand upon this, the Stories Non
reliquit hominem nocere eis: Corripuir pro eis Reges. Psalm. 104. 14. Currus
Pharaonis and exercitum eius proie^it in mare: abyssi operuerunt eos,
descenderunt in profundum quasi lapis. Exodus 15. 4. Si habes intellectu^, audi
quod dicitur. Non accipit personas Principum, nec cognouit tyra^num: subito
morientur, and in media nocte turbabuntur populi: and pertransibunt, and
auferent violentum absque manu. Job. 34. 20.
are full of these examples.

Therefore let no man deceive himself, be he King or Cou^sellour, public or
private person, that has any hand Vi quod est, praeter naturam est. Phys. c. 3.
Qui terret, plus ipse timet: sors ista Tyrannis
Conuenit, inuideant claris, fortesque trucident,
Muniti gladijs viuant, septique venenis,
Ancipites habeant arts, trepidique minentur.
Caludian. ad Honorium.
in these iniuryes: let them know with whom they deal, and persuade
themselves, that no humane policy, nor force can preserve the^ in Attendite
me, and obstupescite and supponite digitu^ ori vestro, and ego quando
recordatus fuero pertimesco, and concutit carnem meam tremor. Quare impij
viuunt, subleuati sunt, confortatique diuitijs? Domus eorum securae and
pacatae, and non est virga Dei super eos etc. Job. 21. 5.
prosperity any long time: for neither heaven can suffer them, nor earth
sustain them, nor any of Gods creatures forbear them longer, then he
withhouldeth their force, either expecting their repentance that have sinned,
or because the day Ecce anni tres sunt ex quo venio quaerens fructum in
ficulnea hac: and non inuenio. Succide ergo illa^, ad quid terra^ occupat? Luc.
13. 7.
of execution is not yet come, or the offenders not come Generatione quarta
reuertentur hac: nec dum enim completae sunt iniquitates Amorrhaeorum. Genesis 15.
16.
to the pitch of their iniquity, or that, the Et dictum est illis vt
requiescerent adhuc tempus modicum, donec co^pleantur conserui eorum, and
fratres eorum qui interficiendi sunt, sicut and illi. Apoc. 6. 11.
number of his elect, and the Omnia in mensura, and numero, and pondere
disposuisti. Sap. 11. 21.
degree of their Meritts, and the measure of glory, or punishment due to each
part, is not yet fulfilled.

But let us leave old examples of other Countries, and coming nearer home,
consider that which fell out in the time of King Qui regnare facit hominem
hypocrita^ propter peccata populi. Job. 34. 30.
Henry the Eight, and what happened to the Subito defecerunt: perierunt propter
iniquitatem suam. Psalm. 72. 18.
Protectors of King Edward his son, and what Queen Elizabeth did, and how she
ended, and in her (...) (...) Nempe hoc indoctis, quorum praecordia nullis
Interdum, aut leuibus videas flagrantia causis.
Quantulacumque adeo est occasio, sufficit, irae.
Chrysippus non dicet idem, nec mite Thaletis
Ingenium, dulcique senex vicinus Hymetto:
Qui partem acceptae saeua inter vincla cicutae
Accusatori nollet dare.
Et infra -- Quippe minuti
Semper, and infirmi est animi, exiguique voluptas
Vltio. Continuo sic collige, quod vindicta
Nemo magis gaudet, quam femina.
Iuuen. Sat. 13. Men's praua semper in laboribus est, quia aut molitur mala quae
inferat, vel metuit ne sibi ab alijs inferatur: and quicquid contra proximos
cogitabat, hoc contra se cogitari a proximis formidat. Gregor. mor. lib. 11.


Subjects. She as a woman, timorous, and apt by nature to conceive fears and
suspicions, by buzzing such matters into her head, was easily drawn by her
Counselors, and Servants, which way, and to what they listed. But that his
Majesty so noble a Prince, and of so great experyence, should be led by such
womanish passions, were a thing little agreeing, either to the conceived
Opinion of his Person, or the Dignity of his Place, or Courage of his Mind.

If the Catholics had intended to do any harm to Queen Elizabeth, they
neither wanted ability, nor in so long time could have wanted occasions to do
it. But they neither intended, nor imagined any such thing, as is more then
evident by the event. Neither desire they to his Royal Majesty any In fide
omnes vnanimes, compatientes, fraternitatis amatores, misericordes, modesti,
humiles, non redue^tes malum pro malo 1. Pet. 3. 8.
harm, great or little (God forbid they should:) they desire his union to the
Catholic Church, and his eternal salvation, after a long and prosperous
raygne upon earth, and in one word, vt conuertatur Mea est vltio: and ego
retribuam. Deuteronomy. 32. 35. Nec maledictum pro maledicto, sed e contrar^o
benedicentes: quia in hoc vocati estis, vt benedictionem hereditate
possideatis. 1. Pet. 3. 8. Videte, ne quis malum pro malo alicui reddat: sed
semper quod bonum est sectamini inuicem, and in omnes. 1. These. 5. 15.
and viuat.

But notwithstanding if his Majesty should still run on (which God forbid) in
violent courses, and struggle against Gods i^stice, it is reason and necessary,
that he should be put in remembrance, that neither his Proclamatio^s, nor his
Oaths, nor his Armies, nor his Guard, nor any other humane providence, or
prevention, can free him from the divine Nemesis, whom he has so often, and
so many Ephraim pascit ve^tum, and sequitur aestum: tota die mendaciu^ and
vastitatem multiplicat. Iuxta vias eius, and iuxta inuentiones eius reddet ei
Dominus. Ose. 12. 2.
ways provoked. For she Ira in indign atione eius: and vita in voluntate eius.
Psalm. 29. 6. Auferes spiritum eorum and deficie^t: and in puluerem suum
reuertentur. Psalm. 103. 29.
pierces the thickest rampires, she assayleth the strongest Castles, she
enters into the most Anima mea, habes multa bona posita in annos plurimos:
requiesce, comede, bibe, epulare. Dixit autem illi Deus, Stulte hac nocte
animam tuam repetent a te. Quae autem parasti, cuius eru^t? Luc. 12. 20.
secret and retired closetts, where they whom she pursues, can neither run
from her, nor make resistance. And in the midst of their ioylity and triumph,
when they think In eadem hora apparuerunt digiti quasi manus hominis
scribentes in superficie parietis Au^^ae Regiae, MANE, THECEL, PHARES. Tunc
facies Regis commutata est, and cogitationes eius conturbabant eum: and genua
eius ad se inuicem collidebantur. Dan. 5. 5.
least of their danger, she intimates (F) unto them the dreadful sentence of
eternal damnation. Quando eleuatum est cor patris tui, and spiritus illius
obfirmatus est ad superbiam: depositus est de solio Regni sui, and gloria eius
ablata est. Dan. 5. 20. Tu quoque filius eius non humiliasti cor tuum, cum
scires haec, sed aduersus dominatore^ caeli eleuatus es. Dan. 5. 22. etc.
Idcirco ab eo missus est articulus (...)


The (...) others. For they are so Scuto circumdabit te veritas eius: non
timebis a timore nocturno etc. Psalm. 90. 4.
compassed, and defended with heavenly truth, that the fire cannot touch them:
only the Nullus est captiuus, qui animo est liber. Epi. in Ench.
bands of their mortality are dissolved, the Tamquam aurum in furnace probauit
eos: Deus tentauit eos, and inuenit eos dignos se. Sap. 3. 6.
rust of humane infirmities purged, and the brightness and splendour with which
they remain after they be Iustitia custodit innocentis viam: impietas autem
peccatorem supplantat. Prou. 13. 6.
cleansed, and Fulgebunt iusti, and iudicabunt nationes. Sap. 3.
purified with this fire, shows to the world the Non reliquit hominem nocere
eis: corripuit pro eis Reges. Psalm. 114. 14.
force and sweetness of the law of God. His holy Benedictus Deus eorum, qui
misit Angelum suum, and eruit seruos suos qui credideru^t in eum. Dan. 3. 95.
Et Petrus ad se reuersus dixit: Nu^c scio vere, quia misit Dominus Angelu^
suum, and eripuit me de manu Herodis, and de omni expectatione plebis
Iudaeorum. Act. 12. 11.
Angel will come down from heaven, as he did in the other occasion, and make a
place of Si coram hominibus tormenta passi sunt, spe^ illoru^ immortalitate
plena est Sap. 3. 4.
Recreation, and pleasure of that, which was prepared for the pain and In
paucis vexati, in multis been disponentur. Non tanget illos tormentu^ mortis*
^^si sunt oculis insipientium mori, illi autem sunt in pace. S^p. 3. 2.
torment of his servants. Nihil obtines, S. Leo. ser. in not. Sancti Laurentij.
nihil proficis, saeua and caeca crudelitas: subtrahitur tormentis tuis materia
mortalis, and Laurentio in caelos abeunte, tu deficis. Segnior est fla^ma quae
foris vssit, quam quae intus acce^dit. Saeuis, persecutor, in Martyrem:
saeuisti, and auxisti palmam, dum aggeras poena^. Nam quid ad victoris gloriam
ingenium tuum non reperit, quando in honorem transierunt triumphi, etia^
instrumenta supplicij?

Most truly and lively does S. Leo represent unto us in these words the
present case of Catholics, that live in this English persecution in the
person of Saint Laurence, and of the Emperor Valerianus and his Ministers.
Blind Qui odit fratrem suum, in tenebris est; in tenebris ambulat, and nescit
quo vadit: quia tenebrae obcaecauerunt oculos eius. 1. Joan. 2. 11.
and barbarous Cruelty (says he) what have thou gotten? The mortal substance
is withdrawn from thy torments: Saint Laurence is received into heaven, and
what is become of thee? The fire that appears outwardly, and burns his
body, is much more remiss, then that which inwardly inflameth his soul. Thou
insultest over Saint Laurence but thy Cruelty increases his reward. What has
not thy invention effected, to make famous his victory, seeing the very
instruments of his torments are turned into ensigns of his Triumph and
glory? Thus S. Leo. And it is most true, that they help Ecce prophanus hostis
numquam beatis paruulis tantum prodesse potuisset obsequio, quantum profecit
odio. Aug. sermon. 10. de Sanctis.
and honor Gods servants more in procuring their harm, then they could by
their favors. This secret fire which S. Leo speaks of, does purify without
inflaming, does illustrate without diminishing, it does Videbat Moses quod
rubus arderet, and non combureretur. Exodus 3. 3.
comfort without consuming. This is that Celestial fire, which Christ our
Savior came to kindle upon Ignem veni mittere in terram: and quid volo, nisi
vt accendatur? Luc. 12. 49.
the earth, and what does he desire, but that it burn and increase? This fire
is so active, that if once Dominus Deus tuus ignis consumens est. Deuteronomy. 4 24.
it take hold of a loyal heart, it presently Nos reuelata facie gloriam Domini
speculantes, in eamdem imaginem transformamur a claritare in claritatem. 2.
Cor. 4. 18.
changes and tra^sformeth it into it self. It replenisheth the understanding
with Est lux vera, quae illuminat omnem homine^ venientem in hunc mundu^. Joan.
1. 9.
heavenly light, and fills the soul with fortitude and joy. (...) shall I
say, when I contemplate your In omnibus tribulatione^ patimur, sed non
angustiamur: apporiamur, sed non destituimur: persecutionem patimur, sed non
derelinquimur: deijcimur, sed non perimus. 2. Cor. 4. 7.
manifold afflictions, the Chains that you have honored, the Prisons that you
have sanctified, the Reproaches that you have suffered, and amidst all these,
the Excipientes verbu^ in tribulatione multa, cum gaudio Spiritus sancti, ita
vt facti sitis forma omnibus credentibus in Macedonia, and in Achaia. 1. These.
1. 8.
great Alacrity, cherfullnes, and contentment that you have showed?

You have comforted the afflicted with your doctrine and example: you have
encouraged the weak with your fortitude: you have edified the whole Church of
God with your patience and charity: you have given joy Pretiosa in conspectu
Domini mors Sanctorum eius. Psalm. 115. 15.
to heaven and earth by your precious death, imitating herin the Son of God,
both in the substance and manner of suffering, in your Country, in the sight
of your friends, slaundered, and stricken even to the death, by those for whose
sake you offer your Judah, osculo filiu^ hominis tradis? Luc. 22. 48. Coeperunt
illum accusare, dicentes: hu^c inuenimus seducentem gentem nostram, and
prohibentem tributu^ dare Caesari. Luc. 23. 2. Co^mouet populum, doce^s per
vniuersam Iudaeam. ibid. 5. Gens tua and Pontifices tradiderunt te mihi. Toan.
18. 35. Et cum iniquis deputatus est. Luc. 22. 37.
labors, and give your lives. O blessed and most happy Triumphers, that bear
upon your breasts, stigmata Mihi autem absit gloriari, nisi in cruce Domini
nostri Jesus Christi: per quem mihi mundus crucifixus est, and ego mundo. Ego
enim stigmata Domini Jesus in corpore meo porto. Gal. 6. 14. 17.
Jesus Christi! Predestined of God, ennobled with his grace, to be the lively
representatio^ of the Scimus quonia^ diligentibus Deum omnia cooperantur in
bonum, ijs qui secundum propositum vocati sunt Sancti, quos praedestinauit
conformes fieri imagini filij sui. Romans 8. 28.
Image of his Son! O that these unworthy arms of mine, might once embrace
those glorious bodies of yours, mortified with Christ and put to death for his
love! O that I might once se my self on my knees before those holy Relics,
rent and torn in pieces for his love, and lifted up into the air, in token
that the Truth, for which they died, has gotten the victory.

The Earth whereon you trod, and in which you suffered, is worthy to be
honored for her riches, abundance, fertility, and other natural endowmentes,
and for the good disposition of the people it brings forth; but above all,
for her ancient faith and piety. But that which it got by possession of
quietness and peace, is much inferior to that, which it has gained in this
persecution by the blood of Gods servants shed in it, wherewith being
ouerflowed, and made fertile, it brings forth fragrant flowers of patience,
and fruit of benediction. Your Name is now made famous throughout the A vobis
diffamatus est sermo Domini, non solum in Macedonia and in Achaia, sed in omni
loco fides vestra quae est ad Deum profecta est. 1. These. 1. 8.
whole world, and many remote Nations, and Countries, which before had no
notice, nor ever heard of yours, now love and esteem it, as highly favored of
God, and desire to hear of your proceedinges, and of your Infirma mundi elegit
Deus, vt confundat fortia^, vt non glorietur omnis caro in co^spectu eius. 1.
Cor. 1. 27. Sic dicere videtur: Nolite turbari, si cum vos inter Lupos mitto,
tamqua^ oues and colu^bas esse iubeo. Nam etsi possum contrariu^ quoque
praestare, and non permittere, vt grave aliquid patiamini, nec lupis tamquam
oues subiecti sitis, sed efficere, vt leonibus terribiliores euadatis: tamen
sic expedit fieri. Hoc and vos illustriores faciet, and meam quoque declarabit
virtutem. Chrysostom. hom. 34. in Matthew.
victoryes, and to be partakers of your merits and prayers.

Gaudeas (...) Majesty, and to the Estate of the Realm gathered together in
Parliament, in the first place to ratify and confirm all the Laws made in the
time of Queen Elizabeth against the Papists.

The Laws of Queen Elizabeth confirmed in this Parliament, are these that
follow.
WHOSOEVER shall deny that VVome^ are incapable of all spiritual jurisdiction
and function. Mulieres in Ecclesia taceant: non enim permittitur ijs loqui. 1.
Cor. 14. 35. Turpe est enim Mulierem loqui in Ecclesia. ibid. If it be an
unseemly thing, as the Apostle says, that a woman should speak in the Church;
how much less may she rule and command it?
all spiritual Authority and Jurisdiction in the Kingdom of England, does of
right belong to the Queen, shall be held for a Traitor, and incur the
punishment thereto belonging. Parlam. An. 1. Eliz. Cap. 1.

Whosoever being demanded and required shall He is a Traitor in their
Nomenclator, that will not swear false.
refuse to swear, that the Pope of Rome neither has, nor can have any
spiritual Jurisdiction in the Kingdom of England, shall be held for a Traitor,
and stand liable, and subject to the punishment thereto belonging. Parl. An. 1.
Eliz. Cap. 1.

Whosoever shall affirm, and say, that the Queen is an It deserves
punishment to be an Heretic, and not to call an Heretic by his true name.
Heretic, or a Schismatike, shall incur the same penalty. Parl. An. 13.
Elizab. Cap. 1.

Whosoever shall go about to dissuade any of her Subjects, from the Religion
which is professed in England, and induce him to follow, and believe the Such
another Law made the Scribes and Pharisees, against Christ. Conspirauerunt
Iudai, vt si quis Jesus co^siteretur esse Christu^, extra Synagogam fieret.
Joan. 8. 22.
Roman faith, shall incur the same penalty. Parl. 23. Eliz. Cap. 1.

I pass over for breuities sake the particular Laws, by which they would
banish out of that Kingdom, under the name of Treason, all the means,
instruments, and outward signs of Christian Piety. As for example, the
Sacrament of Confession, the use of Agnus Dei, of Rosaries, of Medals, holy
Images and other such like things are condemned as Acts of Treason: yea a
Priest is made Traitor for only his function, without any other crime. The
words of the Law are these:

What Jesuit soever, Priest, or Deacon having taken holy Orders by Authority of
the Bishop Without this Authority there is no spiritual Clergy: which is in
favor of Ministers wives and children; otherwise their marriage were not
lawful.
of Rome, that from henceforth presume to enter into this Realm, ipso facto
shall be guilty of high Treason, and subject to (...)

2. The Churchwardens and Constables of every Town and Parish, or the chief
Constable of the Hundred, shall once every year present the monthly absence
from Church of all manner of Popish Recusants, and the names of every of their
Children, being of the age of nine years and vpwardes, abiding with their said
parents, and as near as they can, the age of every of their Children: as also
the names of the servants of such New penalty, and reward to accusers of
Catholics.
Recusants, at the general or quarter Sessions of that Shyre or Liberty. And
in default of such Presentment to be made, the said Constable, Churchwarden,
or high Constable shall for every default so made, forfait twenty shillings.
And such as are diligent in making this Presentment, shall have a reward of
forty shillings to be leuyed out of the Recusants goods.

3. All that are, or hereafter shall be, upon indictment convicted of Recusancie,
shall for every month after such conviction, without any other indictment or
conviction, forefayte twenty pounds, to be paid into the A new addition to the
former grieua^ce.
receipt of the Exchequer yearlie; except in such cases, where the King shall,
and may by force of this Act, refuse the same, and take two parts of the Lands,
Farms, and Tenements of the said offender, to his own proper use.

4. Every such Recusant indicted and convicted as aforesaid, shall have left the
third part only of his Pater meus caecidit vos virgis, ego caeda^ scorpionibus.
Let his Majesty consider if this be good counsel.
Lands and Leases, to, and for the maintenance, and relief of himself, of his
wife, family and children. And the King, nor his Successors cannot dimise,
lease, or put over, any part of the said two parts to any Recusant, or for any
Recusants use.

5. The Bishops in their Diocese, or any two Justices of the Peace within the
limits of their Jurisdiction (out of Sessions) may require any person of the
age of eygteene years, or above, whether convicted of Recusancy (...)

That they will do their To this they are bound without this oath: and so it
might have been very well spared.
best endeavor, to disclose and make known unto his Majesty, his heirs and
Successors, all Treasons and Traiterous conspiracies, which they shall know, or
hear of to be against him, or any of them.

That they do abhor and abjure as How came the English Parliament by
authority to censure doctrine? who delivered them this Power? who made them
assurance of Gods infallible spirit?
impious and heretical, that opinion that says, that Princes excommunicate or
deprived by the Pope, may be deposed by their Subjects, or other whatsoever.

That they If they do not believe it, nor indeed can believe it without gross
ignorance, why will they enforce them to swear false, or what get they by this?
do believe, and are resolved in their Consciences, that neither the Pope, nor
any other person has power to absolve them of this Oath, or of any part
thereof.

That they He that swears false had need of absolution from the sin, but
needs no dispensatio^, because the Oath has no force to bind, as in this
case. And the inuentors of this oath, without doubt, either did not understand,
or for anger and passion did not consider, nor remember, that by such violence
as this, enforcing Gods people against their consciences to swear false, and
consequently sin, they bring the case to the law of nature, and little
imagine what both divine and humane laws permit in such occasions. For if they
had reflected upon the inconvenience, they would never have made choice of a
mean so contrary to al good ends, that either King or people in reason ought
to pretend.
do acknowledge this oath to the ministered unto the^ lawfully, and by good and
full Authority: and that that they do renounce all dispensations and pardons to
the contrary. And that they do plainly and sincerlie acknowledge all these
things, and swear according the express words, and the plain and common
sense, and understanding of them, without any evasion or secret reseruatio^.
And that they do make this recognition and acknowledgment heartily, willingly,
and truly, upon the true faith of a Christian.

The rest of the Laws against Catholics.
WHOSOEVER shall depart out of the Realm of England, to serve any foreign
Prince or Potentate, not having first taken the Oath aforsaid, shall be reputed a
felon, and leese goods and life.

Item. If any Gentleman or person A new Law to make vagabounds.
of higher Degree, or any that has borne, or does bear any office in the
Camp, go out of the Realm, to serve any forrayne Prince, before he be (...)
intertaine any Jesuit or Seminary Priest, or shall discover any Mass to have
been said, and the persons that were present at such Mass, and the Priest that
said the Mass, or any of them within three days next after the offense
committed, shall not only be free from all penalty, if he be an offender, but
also shall have In humane policy these means may seem effectual, but against
God they are little worth: Only they serve to put jealousy and distrust. A
work of Satan to destroy charity, and neighborhood in the Commonwealth.
the third part of the forfayture of all that shall be forfayted for such
offense, so that all the forfaiture do not exceed the su^me of an hundred and
fifty pounds.

Item. That no Popish Recusant shall Degeneres animos timor arguit. Aeneid. 2.
come into the Court, or House, where the Kings Majesty, or the Prince is,
unless he be commanded so to do, by the Kings Majesty, his heirs and
sucessors, or by Warrant in writing from the Lords, and other of the most
honorable privy Counsel, upon pain to forfayte, for every time so offending
an hundred pounds, the one moity to the King, the other to him that will
discover, and sue for the same.

Item. That all Popish Recusants, that have forborne coming to the Church,
abiding in the City, or within ten miles about (except they be Tradesmen, men
of occupations, or such as have their dwelling there, and no where else have any
house) shall depart It is evident malice and deceit to possess the Kings mind
with these needless fears.
from the City of London, and ten miles compass of the same, within three
months after the end of this Parliament, upon pain of an hundred pounds, the
one half to the King, the other to him that will sue for the same by Action of
debt.

Item. All Recusants are This also argues needles fear: for the Recusants of
all others are least to feared.
confined to their houses, and may not depart more then five miles from the
place of their abode, without license obtained in scriptis of the Kings
Majesty, or some other that by that Statute is enabled to give it, and with
those limitations and restrictions therein likewise specified. And he that is
found faulty herin, shall incur the penalty and forfayte as a Recusant
convicted.

Item. No Recusa^t shall practice the com (...) of his wife. And every woman
that shall be married in other form, then aforesaid, shall be disabled, not only
to claim any Dowry of the inheritance of her husband, or any Ioyntry of the
lands of her husband: but also of her widows estate, and frankba^k in any
customary lands, whereof her husband died seized: Nor can enjoy any part of the
goods of her husband, by virtue of any custom of any City, or place where the
same shall lie, or be. And if it chance that the woman to whom the Recusa^t is
married have no lands or goods, whereto he may be entitled, he shall forfayte an
hundred pounds, the one part or moity to the King, and the other to him that
shall sue for it.

Item. The Recusa^t for every child that is A Law against Baptism.
not baptized (by their unlawful Ministers) according to the Laws of this
Realm, shall pay an hundred pounds.

Item. For every one that is buried not according to the Ecclesiastical Laws
of this Realm, the party that causes him to be so buried, shall forfaite
twenty pounds.

Item. The children of any Subject within this Realm, not being Souldiars,
Mariners, or Merchants, or their Apprentices or Factors, that go beyond the
seas, without license of the Kings Majesty, or six of the privy Counsel: that
then such as shall go beyond the seas, shall have no benefit of any goods or
chattels, that may any way come or fall unto him, until after his return, he,
before a Justice of Peace, take Quime negauerit coram hominibus, negabo eum
coram Patremeo quiest in caelis. An ill change to loose an everlasting
Kingdom, for a little te^porall inheritance.
the Oath: to wit, abjure his faith, and obedience to the Sea of Rome. And who
shall send the said children, shall forfaite an hundred pounds.

Item. That all persons beyond the seas that are not Merchants, nor their
Factors, nor Mariners shall presently at their return take the Oath before
mentioned, before a Justice of Peace: and in all other things conform
themselves etc. Otherwise they shall have no benefit (...) to draw from them
their money by secular Authority, they remain subject to the authority, and
open to all injuries of the Bishops, who do daily Principes co^uenerunt in
vnum aduersus Dominu^, and aduersus Christu^ eius. Psalm. 2. 2. Qui habitat in
caelis irridebit eos.
trouble and molest them: And in like sort, to the high Commissioners, who have
from his Majesty authority to persecute the Catholics, and punish their faith,
as in other Countries, the Inquisitors have from the Sea Apostolic to defend
Catholic truth and punish heretics.

Thus Gentle Reader thou have seen briefly set down the good and wholesome
laws made by the last Parliament of England, and published under the Princes
name. How good and wholesome they are, it is needles for me to say. Themselves
speak for themselves, and make manifest what they are, and from what motives
they are proceeded. The best is, they have not power over any constant, and
resolved mind, nor can take from them any thing that they may not loose by many
other ways, and is not in their own hands to recompense with manifold
interest, even in the present felicity of this life, besides the reward we hope
for in the next: which profits also to increase comfort in this, to such as
will avail themselves by the good and wholesome aduises to be found in this
book. And in fine, this is a cause in which a man may loose his head, and have
noe hurt, and being once grounded in the love and obedience of Christ, these
Laws loose their force, as afterward shall be seen.

THE EXECVTION OF THE FORMER LAWS.
IT might have been excused to occupy the Reader with this Relation; seeing the
rigorous execution of these Laws, is otherwise sufficiently known to such, as
live where this language is understood. But because I found it in the latin
copy, it was not to be omitted in the translation, at least it may serve to
give to understand what feeling good men, in other Countries have of our
afflictions, and perhaps move the Princes heart to commiseration, if he have
time, and patience to read it. Thus then is it set down in the Authors words
as follows.

THE Laws, as we have seen, are grown both in number and rigor under his
MAJESTY of ENGLAND that now is: and for the execution of them is given much
more scope and authority to inferior Officers, then in the Raygne of Queen
Elizabeth was accustomed: whereby may be easily gathered without any other
proof, the manifold iniuryes that Catholics suffer in England at this
Surrexit interea Rex nouus super Aegyptum: and ait ad populu^ suum: Ecce
populus filiorum Israel multus and fortior nobis est; venite, sapienter
opprimamus eum etc. Praeposuit (...)
time. But how much more their Adversaries strive to oppress them, so much
more God extends his favor, and Fatherly protection over them, as in all
ages, and other like occasions has been seen. And the same Providence that
permits these troubles to fall upon them, gives them strength to endure
them, not only with patience, but with alacrity.

The deuisers of this form of government, and (...) scum, and refuse of the
Common wealth: such as their bad life and misdemeanour has brought into
necessity; such as weary of robbing by the high ways, and other infamous
occupations, take it for a more secure and easy kind of life, and most
agreeable to their former courses, and bringing up, to become Bishops
Purseuantes, and so offer themselves to that ministry, before they be called.
By all which his Maiestyes most honorable Counsel, and all other men may
easily understand, how exorbitant the wrongs are, that by virtue of these
Laws are offered to the subjects, being executed by such Ministers, armed
with public Authority, and the Kings Warrant, to commyt, without the fear
of punishment (which before did keep them in awe) whatsoever insolency and
injustice they list.

They use ordinarily to beset the Catholics houses (especially where they hope
to find a booty) and scaling the walls by night, and breaking open the doors
in the dark, to the amazement of the familyes, make that spoil and havoc,
which such manner of people are like to do in such occasions.

To the baseness of the persons, and rigor of the Laws, may be added another
thing worth the noting, to wit, the extorsion of the penalties by a new
stratageme of Astronomy and computation of times of their own. For example,
the law is, That every Recusant pay twenty pounds a Month, for not going to
Church. What do these ingenuous Executours? The ordinary account that the
Astronomers gather by the motion of the Planets, does not content them: by this
the year, as wese, is divided into twelve Months: but it is not for them;
they will have it by weeks, and so find thirteen Months in the year: and by
this account extend the penalty of that Statute upon the Recusants. Now what
reason, equity, and justice is in this, let any indifferent man consider. The
Laws of themselves are rigorous and odious, and these set them on the tenters,
stretch them out beyond their nature, and execute them with more rigor, then
the Lawmakers did intend: Viderit vtilitas.

By this example you may gather many others, which for breuity I omit. Here
somebody may doubt, seeing the Indignation of the Persecutors of this time is
greater, or at least equal to that of Queen Elizabethes time; how comes it
to pass, that now there is not so much blood shed, and Martyrdom of Priests,
and of their receauers as then? To this I answer; that experience has taught
them, how much they loose by open cruelty. And they find it more for their
advantage, to consume the Catholics by hunger, rather then to kill them by
the sword. For making them away by little and little, they die many deaths;
the manner of their dying is more painful, and less spoken of; so that by
this device they double their cruelty, and yet have a color to pretend
Clemency and commendation of Mercy. Nay, that which is more, they would make
the world believe, they persecute no man for Religion.

And for this cause, having persuaded his Royal Majesty to follow the
footsteps, and renew the persecution of his Predecessor, they devised this new
Oath against the Popes Authority, to reduce (at least in outward appearance) to
matter of State and Treason, that which is merely a point of Catholic
doctrine. And with this color they begin a fresh to martyr Priests, seeing
other punishments will not make them afraid, and spoil Lay-Catholikes more
then ever: and yet, forsooth, they persecute no man for Religion. I wot not
whence it comes, (whether from the great opinion that they have of their
wits, or the little of ours) that they persuade themselves, that they shall be
believed, when their words are so contrary to their doings.

In the fore said Laws, as they are extended in English, they forbid so often,
and so largely the things pertaining to Religion, as they repeat two hundredth
and seauenty times, the Name of Priests, Altars, Masses, Seminaries, Jesuits,
Colleges, Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction, Faith, Sea Apostolic, Bishop of
Rome, Head of the Church, Images, Churches, Agnus Dei, Madals, and Grains
hallowed, Beads, Breuiaryes, Masse-bookes, Life of Saints, and the like: and
for every one of these Marks and Tokens of Catholic Religion, they put a
penalty, and many of them they forbid under pain of death. And
notwithstanding, that with these Laws and Proclamations, they publish openly
to the whole world their hatred against Catholic Religion: yet they blush not
on the other side to affirm, and will needs be believed, that they, forsooth,
as I have said, persecute no man for Religion, but all is for Treason and
Practices against the State.

I desire the Reader here to judge, whether the things mentioned, or use of
them, be crimes against the State, or that the State be well erected, where
these acts of Piety and Religion are punished as Crimes. To be short: All
these Treasons and Crimes imputed to Catholics, are comprised in one, to wit,
to be faithful servants of Christ, and obedient children of his Church. This
is the Crime of Crimes, and Treason of Treasons: this is the offense under so
many, and so different names and titles condemned, and punished by these Laws.
This, in fine, is the ground, sum, and substance of this Persecution,
prosecuted so many years, and now renewed and increased, as here may be seen.

There was some few years past a Conspiracy of seven or eight young
gentlemen, who induced (as the report goes) by a train of some chief
Protestants, intended with one fire to extinguish another, which had endured
many years, devouring and consuming the bowels, and best substance of their
Country. But howsoever it was begun and intended, let it be as their greatest
Adversaries will have it (notwithstanding the public voice, and many
presumptions prove, that it was an Invention of State, and a mere trap to
entangle them:) Let us, I say, grant, that the same men, that put it in
execution, were they, that laid the plot, and were the Authors: Let us grant
all this, and what else they can desire: yet with what conscience, and with
what reason, should any be made partaker of the danger or punishment, that had
no part in the Action? that neither gave any consent, or had any notice of what
was intended? For if we admit this course of Justice and this manner of
proceeding: if the fault of one, or of a few may be extended to a whole
community, perforce all Comon-wealths must go to wrack: yea mankind must
perish, all the whole world must down at a blow. For by this Law, and manner
of government they cannot stand. The Law of God and his divine justice has a
far different proceeding: for it says expressly that he only that commytteth
the fault shall be punished, Iustitia iusti super eum erit, and impietas impij
erit super eum: Ezech. 18. 2.
anima quae peccauerit, ipsa morietur. Why then should that which was
undertaken by indiscreet zeal and want of Consideration in one or two, be
imputed to the Religion, or to the rest that do profess it, without any
participation of the Crime?

The Catholic Church has most holy and just laws, and such as do swerve
from them, do in such sort perish, that she nevertheless remains blameless.
For why, she neither does, nor permits, nor approves any evil. The faults
be personal and of private men; the doctrine is universal which admits no
faults; these belonged to some few, and pass with time; the other is
everlasting, and the cause common to all that be present and to come. And
therefore we publish these Laws to the sight of the whole world: we answer and
print these Proclamations in diverse tongues, because the notice of this case
belongs to all the Catholic Church, which as one body, though dispersed in
diverse Countries, must needs feel the injustice and violence offered to so
principal a part, and pray for the remedy.

A COVNTER-COMMAVND CONTAINING CERTAIN LAWS, AND HEAVENLY INSTRVCTIONS,
opposite to the former: by which, if they be well understood, the other be
disanulled, and loose their force.
I.
THE sovereign Majesty of God has distuiginshed the estates of Superiors and
Inferiors, dividing the obligations of obeying and commanding amongst men,
with great equality, justice, and order: and his divine Will is, that each of
them should know and maintain his own: so that whilst Princes contain
themselves within the limits of their Jurisdiction (be their personal
demeanor whatsoever) they must be obeyed. And so said S. Polycarpe: Docemur
Potestatibus and Magistratibus a Deo constitutis, cum honorem qui nostrorum
animorum Eu^eb. l. 4. cap. 14.
saluti, nostraeque Religioni nihil afferat detrimenti pro dignitate tribuere.
But if at their pleasure, they will usurp more then is due unto them, and
enforce men to sin; in this case the law of our Sovereign enters and
obliges, and our loialty and fidelity to him is put in proof.

Whilst we live in this life, as S. Augustine says, and have use of these Aug.
propos. 71. cap. 11. ad Romans
temporal things necessary to the same, we must obey Princes, to wit, those
men, that do administer and govern humane causes by lawful Authority, in
matters that do properly appertain to this life. But in other matters that
belong to faith and to our obedience due unto God, and his spiritual Kingdom,
(in which we live by the title of Christians) we ought not to subject our
selves to any man whatsoever, that would take from us that which God has given
us, for our eternal salvation. Wherefore says this holy Doctor: If any man
persuade himself, that because he is a Christian, he is not bound to pay
Tribute, and give Reverence and Obedience to such as govern him in temporal
affairs, he is greatly deceived: But much more, if he think that this
obedience byndeth him in such manner, that Secular and Civil Magistrates, have
thereby power to intermeddle in any thing to the prejudice of Religion; but that
the law which Christ our Savior left us, is inuiolably to be kept; to wit, to
give to Caesar, that which belongs to Caesar, and to God, that which belongs
to God. Thus far S. Augustine. And this is the first law in our favor. In
effect: That to every one be given, that which is his.

II.
IN the high Court of Parliament in heaven, is enacted An Iustitia tua, iustitia
in aeternum: and lex tua veritas. Psalm. 118. 142.
eternal Law, whereby Justice and Truth are made invincible, and of necessity
one time or other, early or late, they must prevail. And therefore as it is
great Omnium legum est inanis censura, nisi diuinae legis imaginem gerat. Aug.
lib. 9. de Ciu. Dei. Audite Reges and intelligite: discite Iudices finium
terrae, praebete aures, vos qui co^tinetis multitudines, and placetis vobis in
turbis nationum: quia data est a Domino potestas vobis, qui interrogabit opera
vestra and cogitationes scrutabitur: quoniam cum essetis ministri regni illius,
non recte iudicastis, nec custodistis legem iustitiae, neque secundum
voluntatem eius ambulastis. Sap. 6. 2.
imprudency, proceeding from want of superior light, to make Laws and
Proclamations contrary to this eternal Law: so likewise it is an Audi
consilium and suscipe disciplinam, vt sis sapiens in nouissimis tuis. Multae
cogitationes in cord viri: volu^tas a ute^ Domini permanebit. Prou. 19. 20.
exceeding Comfort to all such as suffer for Righteousness sake, to know and be
sure, that though heaven and earth shall pass, yet no one tittle of this
heavenly Law can fail.

III.
GOD Almighty by his unsearchable, yet most just judgment, does many times give
Jerusalem quae occi(...)
leave to the bad, to afflict and (...)

VII.
POVERTY, Reproach, Banishment, Imprisonment, yea Death it self (terribilium
terribilissima) are much more terrible in Co^surgamus aduersus fortunam, and
quicquid inciderit, sciamus non esse tam magnum quam rumore iactatur. Sen. Ep.
93.
appearance, and imagination, then they are in real experience in themselves.
The Torments wherewith they threaten us, if they be violent, they cause a
speedy dispatch, if they be remiss they are borne with facility. And
whatsoever we can possibly suffer in this life, is less Non sunt condignae
passiones huius temporis ad futuram gloriam quae reuelabitur in nobis. Romans 8.
18. Id quod in praesenti est mome^taneum and leave tribulationis nostrae, supra
modu^ in sublimitate aeternum gloriae pondus operatur in nobis. 2. Cor. 4. 17.
Quid tam poenale quam semper velle quod numquam erit: and semper nolle quod
numquam non erit? Bern. de Co^sid.
then nothing, compared with the good, or evil that follows Eternity: which
good or evil, who so assisted with the spirit of Truth, does seriously ponder,
he will not only suffer with patience, but with joy Placeo mihi in
infirmitatibus meis, in contumelijs, in necessitatibus, in persecutionibus, in
angustijs pro Christo. 2. Cor. 12. 10. In vobis gloriamur in Ecclesia Dei, pro
patientia vestra in omnibus persecutionibus, and tribulationibus quas
sustinetis, vt digni habeamini in Regno Dei, pro quo and patimini. 2. These. 1.
4.
and desire, whatsoever is laid upon him, for this cause.

VIII.
ANIMALIS Homo cum in honor esset, non intellexit: comparatus est iume^tis
insipientibus, and similis factus est illi^. Psalm. 48. 13.
homo, such as live only by sense, and dark-sight of Imagination, without
discourse, not examyning, nor reflecting upon their ways, but giving scope to
natural appetites and inclinations, without settled belief of immortality, or
certain hope or fear of the distributio^ of punishment, and reward in the
life to come, cannot give a just value of the felicity or misery of this
present life, nor be competent Animalis homo non percipit quae sunt Spiritus
Dei 1. Cor. 2. 14.
Judges in this case. All that is present, is of it self so Mundus transit and
concupiscentia eius: qui autem facit voluntatem Dei manet in aeternum. 1. Joan.
2. 17.
short and momentany, that it admits no discourse. For seeing it begins
to be, and ends in one, and the self same instance, before it can be
measured, it is past; we may, if you please, by way of prevention and memory,
compose a duration present, joining that which is to come and as yet is not,
with that which was and already is past. And to reduce this fiction of the
Imagination to account, we must of force enter into the Sanctuary Quam bonus
Israel Deus his qui recto sunt cord! Mei autem paene moti sunt pedes, paene
effusi sunt gressus mei: quia zelaui super iniquos, pacem peccatorum videns
etc. Psalm. 73. 1. 2. 3. Existimabam vt cognoscerem hoc, labor est ante me:
donec intrem in Sanctuariu^ Dei, and intelligam in nouissimis eorum. Ibid. 16.
17.
of Eternity, where these outward senses, and our foolish Imagination loses
her sight: and therefore she would persuade us, that there is nothing beyond her
reach. And from this Error of the Imagination and sense arises all Heresy,
Atheism, and Infidelity, which like another deluge ouerflow the world.

But reason and faith go on further, and pass to contemplate the inviolable
Decrees, and Edictes of the eternal law of God, Original and Example of all
other Laws, both of Grace and Nature, and by which heaven and earth are
governed, and all Angeli in aeternis and immutabilibus legibus, praeuident
rerum mutationes: and Dei voluntatem, in ipsis legibus immutabilib Dei. Aug. 9.
de Ciuit. c. 22.
these changes of times consist and have their being: and from hence a
faithful heart, enlightened with illustratio^s (...) and infallibly give Vbi
est mors victoria tua? vbi est mors stimulus tuus? Deo autem gratias, qui dedit
Victoriam per Dominum nostru^ Iesum Christu^. 1. Cor. 15.
us victory, and reward us with a Et in circuitu sedis sedilia viginti quatuor,
and super thropos viginti quatuor seniores sede^tes circu^amictivestimentis
albis, and in capitibus eorum coronae aureae. Apoc. 4. 4.
Crown of immortal glory.

XI.
IS there any man of so little discourse, or so base minded, that will not
desire to suffer a moment with Christ, to reign Qui vicerit non laedetur a
morte secunda. Apoc. 2. 11. Qui vicerit Vestietur Vestimentis albis: and non
delebo nomen eius de libro vitae and confitebor nomen eius coram Patre meo, and
coram Angelis eius. Apoc. 3. 5. Vincenti dabo manna absco^ditum, and calculum
candidum, and in calculo nomen nouum scriptu^, quod nemo scit nisi qui accipit.
Apoc. 2. 17. Qui vicerit dabo ei sedere mecum in throno meo: sicut and ego
vici, and sedi cum Patre meo in throno eius. Apoc. 5. 21.
with him afterward in glory for ever?

XII.
THE servant Non est discipulus super Magistrum, nec seruus super Dominum suum:
sufficit discipulo, vt sit sicut Magister eius, and seruo sicut Dominus eius.
Matthew. 20. 24.
cannot justly complain, if his Master use him no worse, then he does his
Deus proprio Filio non pepercit, sed pro nobis omnibus tradidit illum. Romans 18.
32. Pater Filium in mundum venire ad passionem voluit sed tamen amauit eum quem
ad passionem misit. Sic electos Apostolos Dominus non ad mundi gaudia, sed
sicut ipse missus est ad passiones in mundum mittit, and tamen amantur qui ad
tollerandas passiones inter scandala peccatorum mittuntur. Greg. hom. 6. in
Euang.
only son. Neither is the fault of Christo igitur passo in carue, and vos
eadem cogitatione armemini. 1. Pet. 4. 1.
justice in the Camp, where by law it is established, and in practice, that
as well in the labors and dangers of the war, as in dividing the spoils,
honors, and rewards, there be equal distribution, and respect had of the Si
autem filij, and heredes: heredes quidem Dei, coheredes autem Christi. Si tamen
compatimur, vt and conglorificemur. Romans 8. 17. Ideo fortium diuidit spolia,
pro eo quod tradidit in mortem animam suam. Isa. 53. 12.
common soldier his deserts, as of his Captain.

XIII.
ATRVE and Omne quod natu^ est ex Deo vincit mundum: and haec est victoria quae
vincit mundum fides nostra. 1. Joan. 5. 4.
lively faith in Christ Jesus does animate us, and encourage us in all our
difficulties. Hope of Scimus quoniam cum apparuerit si nilis ei erinius,
quoniam videbimus eum sicuti est: and omnis qui habet hanc spem, in eo
sanctificat se. 1. Joan. 3. 3. Et si coram hominibus torme^ta passi sunt: spes
illorum immortalitate plena est. Sap. 3. 4. Debet in spe qui arat arare: and
qui triturat in spe fructus percipiendi. Cor. 9. 10.
reward does make them easy. Charity Charitas numqua^ excidit, patiens est,
benigna est. 1. Cor. 13. 4. 8. Fructus autem spiritus est charitas, gaudium,
pax, patientia, longanimitas etc. Gal. 5.
makes sauoury and sweet whatsoever is suffered for Christ. And finally
fervent prayer and devotion obtayneth by law Si manseritis in me, and verba mea
in vobis manserint: quodcumque volueritis, petetis, and fiet vobis. Joan. 15.
7. Elias homo erat similis vobis passibilis: and oratione orauit, vt non
plueret super terram, and non pluit annos tres and menses sex: and rursum
orauit, and caelum dedit pluuiam, and terra dedit fructum suum. Iac. 5. 17.
and promise that cannot fail, all relief and succor, that according to
divine Providence shall be necessary.

XIIII.
SVCH as will enjoy the Vos estis qui permansistis mecum in tentationibus meis,
and ego dispono vobis, sicut disposuit mihi Pater meus regnu^, vt edatis and
bibatis super mensam mea^ in regno: and sedeatis super Thronos iudica^tes
duodece^ tribus Israel. Luc. 22. 28.
Prerogative of fauourits, must be content to endure the examination and
proof. True friends are not Amicos probabis ex calamitate in vita, and
communicatione periculorum (...)
known but by doubtful occasions. And if Christ would not enter into (...) of
the Indifferent bonum latitudinem habet, quae est in salute, decore, diuitijs,
gratia, nobilitate and ceteris. Haec plerisque nocuerunt, qui ea non cum
sapie^tia and iustitia possideru^t. Horum vsus optimus, si virtutibus regitur:
at sine gubernatione virtutum, fraudi esse incipiunt quae possent esse
vtilitati. Ambr. de Noe and Arca. c. 32.
use of these transitory things, and they do not profit us hoarded up, or
possessed with inordinate affection, but Mensuram bonam and confertam and
coagitatam and superfluentem dabunt in sinum vestrum. Luc. 6. 38.
contemned, and well employed. For as the Inn is to the trauayler, so the
value of them consists in Vsus est optabilior habitu* Finis enim vsus. Arist.
moral. lib. 1. c. 3. Tu^c solum est pretiosa pecunia, quando vsu largiendi
desinit possideri. Boet. de consolat.
their use: and by their employment in virtuous and good uses, they produce
inestimable benefits, and in such as despise them true Quid praecelsius illo
viro qui contemptu^ habet pecuniarum, and velut ex arce quadam despicit hominum
cupiditates? Ambr. Of sic. lib. 1. c. 14. Contemn quae saeculi sunt, and
Dominicae passionis opprobrium praefer diuitijs: operaberis in Dei nomine, and
eris peccatoribus terrori, and Regibus reuerentiae. Ambr. in Psalm. 118. Sensit
Alexander testa cum vidit in illa
Magnum habitatorem: quanto felicior hic, qui
Nil cuperet, quam qui totum sibi posceret orbem:
Passurus gestis aequan dapericula rebus.
Iuuen.
valor and nobility.

XVIII.
DOUBT less he makes a very good bargain, that purchases the joys of
heaven with what Considerandum est fratres dilectissimi, and identidem
cogitandu^, renuntiasse nos mundo, and tamquam hospites and peregrinos hic
interim degere. Magnus in patria nos carorum numerus expectat: frequens nos
amicorum and copiosa turba desiderat, iam de sua immortalitate secura, and
adhuc de nostra salute sollicita. Ad hos auida cupiditate properemus etc. Cyp.
lib. de immort. in fine.
loss soever of earthly things, which will we, nil we, at one time or other
must be separated, either they from us, or we from them; only God knows,
where Victus and vestitus Christianorum diuitiae sunt: facile contemnit omnia
qui se semper cogitat esse moriturum. Hier. Epist. ad Paulinum. c. 8.
and how soon. Therefore thrice happy are they that leave such incertainties
with so gaynfull conditions, and for so glorious a cause.

XIX.
THERE be many ways Rara si constat forma mundo, Si tantas variat vices, Creed
fortunis hominum caducis, Bonis credi sugatibus. Constat, aeterna positu^q^
lege est, Vt co^stet genitum nihil. Boethius lib. 2. metro. 3. Stulte hac nocte
anima^ tuam repetent a te. Quae autem parasti, cuius erunt? Luc. 12. 20.
to loose the goods of this world, but who so loses them for Christ, does
not loose them, but lets Thesaurizate vobis thesauros in calo, vbi neque
erugo, neque tinea demolitur. Matt. 6. 20. Hoc dico fratres. Tempus breue est:
reliquu^ est, vt qui habent vxores, ta^quam non habentes sint: and qui flent,
tamquam non flentes, and qui gaude^t, tamquam non gaudentes and qui emunt,
tamquam non possidentes: and qui v^untu^ hoc mundo, tamquam non vtantur. 1.
Cor. 7. ^^. Si vis perfectus esse, vade vende quae habes, and da pauperibus,
and habebis thesaurum in caelo: and veni sequere me. Matthew. 19. 21.
them out for interest, for they yield him an hundieth for one, present payment
in this world, and for the world to come immensum gloriae pondus. Excessive
gain I confess, yet made lawful by Super omnia bonasua constituet eum.
Matthew. 24.
Statute of the great King of Kings

XX.
IF we know this law, and will believe it, we have a sufficient Fides est
sperandarum substantia rerum, argumentum non apparentium. Hebr. 11. 1.
pawn and assurance of the reward promised. If we do not believe, or waver and
stagger in our faith, let us Probatio fidei vestrae patientia^ operatur. Si
quis autem indiget sapie^tia, postulet a Deo, qui dat omnibus affluenter, and
non improperat. Iac. 1. 5.
pray fervently to God Almighty, who is always ready to hear and help us.

XXI.
(...) (...) inter delicias corporis and cordis, quod illae cum non habentur,
grave sui desiderium accendunt: habitae vero in satietatem and fastidium
vertunt. At contra, spirituales deliciae cum non habentur, in fastidio sunt:
cum vero habentur, in desiderio. Tantoque amplius esuriuntur, quanto ab
esuriente amplius comeduntur. Greg. hom. 36. in Euang.
delightful Non habet amaritudinem conuersatio illius, nec tadium conuictus
eius, sed laetitiam and gaudium. Sap. 8. 16.
company of friends, that be with them in all places, and protect them in all
occurrences. In fine, they possess their lives in patience, for that which Si
quod non videmus speramus, per patientiam expectamus, and spiritus adiuuat
infirmitatem nostram. Romans 8. 25.
they hope, and have death in desire by that which Mihi viuere Christus est,
mori autem lucru^. Coarctor autem e duobus, desiderium habens dissolui, and
esse cum Christo multo magis melius: permanere autem in carne magis necessariu^
propter vos. Phil. 1. 21.
they feel, and the reward Scimus quoniam si terrestris domus nostra huius
habitatio^is dissoluatur, quodae dificationem ex Deo habemus, domum non
manufactam, aeternam in caelis. 2. Cor. 5. 1. Scio cui credi^l, and certus sum,
quia potens est depositum meum seruare in illum diem. 2. Tim. 1. 12. Ego enim
iam delibor, and tempus resolution is meae instat. In reliquo reposita est mihi
corona iustitiae, quam reddet mihi iustus iudex: non solum autem mihi, sed and
ijs qui diligunt aduentum eius. ^. Tim. 4. 8.
of eternity, as it were in their hands, and therwithall walk confidently:
and constantly in the midst of this furnace of Persecution, which in all
probability cannot endure long, in so great extremity, as it is.

XXVI.
IN this respect, their goods, their liuinges, their honors, yea life it
self, if they serve for any thing, or be any thing worth, are doubtless this:
and this is the service they can do us, to be Quae stultitia est illic
relinquere vnde exiturus es and illucnon praemittere quo iturus es? Illic ergo
tuam colloca substantiam, vbi habes and patriam. Chrysostom. in. c. 6. Matthew. Si
vis esse mercator optimus foenerator egregius. da quod non potes retinere, vt
recipias quod non potes a mittere* da modicum, vt recipias centuplum da
temporalem possessionem, vt consequaris hereditatem aeternam. Aug. Epist.
spent in Gods service, and to be Hi qui amicti sunt stolis albis, qui sunt,
and vnde venerunt? and dixitmihi: hi sunt qui venerunt de tribulatione magna,
and lauerunt stolas suas, and dealbaueru^t eas in sanguine agni. Ideo sunt ante
Thronum Dei: sedens in Throno reget illos, and deducet eos ad vitae fontes.
Apoc. 7. 14.
lost for his love.

XXVII.
THERE is one commodity and merchandise richer then all the rest, to be
esteemed without comparison above gould or silver, or the most precious
Jewels, the pearl which every prudent merchant should seek after, and buy at
what price soever: that is, the Amico fideli nulla est comparatio: and non est
digna ponderatio auri and argenti contra bonitatem fi^ei illius. Eccles. 6. 15.
Sapictia infinitus thesaurus est hominibus, quo qui vsu sunt, participes facti
sunt amicitiae Dei: venerunt mihi omnia bona pariter cum illa, and
innumerabilis honestas per manus illius, and laetatus sum in omnibus. Sap. 7.
Ecce qui elongant se a te peribunt: perdidisti omnes qui fornicantur abste.
Mihi autem adherere Deo bonum est, and ponere in Domino Deo spem meam. Psalm.
72. 27. Quid est long a Deo fieri? quid est abs Deo fornicari? est non amare
amore casto. Forte diuitias and aurum eius amas, and fundos, and pecuniam, and
equos, and familiam, and cetera? Absit* Amor castus ipsum solum amat, quia in
ipso habet omnia, per quem facta sunt omnia. Deo adhaerere nihil est melius
quando eum videbimus sicuti est. Adhuc peregrinus es, nondum adhaeres per
praesentiam: fluctuas adhuc, praemitte ad terram hanc ancora^ and inhaere per
spem. Aug. in Psalm. 7^.
love and friendship of God. Let us therefore endeavor to live and die in his
favor. Let it Omnis huius saeculi quaestus, animarum dispendium est. Omnium
detrimentum libenter passus est, qui volebat Christum lucrari. Quod and si
m^rabiliter dixerit, minus tamen expressit, qua^ accepit Ipse suum detrimentu^
homo sit, quo fiat lucrum Christi. Ambr. epist. 44. Cum vita hominum
praeuaricatione damnata coepisset esse miserabilis, debuit dari finis malorum,
vt mo^s restitueret quod vita amiserat. Malitia hominum mors intrauit in
mundum: and quae non fuit in natura, in naturam conuersa est. Sed facta est
mors pretiosa, postquam vnius morte mundus redemptus est, and mors eius vita
est omnium. Haec more (...)
cost what it will, whether riches, honors, troubles, perilles, life, death,
or what else soever: for he that has God for his portion, and enters into
sure possession (...) (...) Per mare pauperiem fugiens, per s^xa, per ignes.
Epist. lib. 1. Epist. 1. Horat.

Vsque adeo solum ferrum mortemque timere,
Auri nescit amor? pereunt discrimine nulio
Amissae leges, and pars vilissima rerum.
Certamen mouistis opes?
Lucanus de bello Parsalico lib. 3.
the earth: why should not the Love of God, the Zeal of his Truth, and the
hope and desire of eternal felicity be as powerful in our Christian hearts,
as these other base appetites in the children of the world? Why do not we that
profess our selves Christians, forsake Si militibus saecularibus gloriosum, vt
host deuicto redeant in patriam trium phantes: quanto potior and mayor est
gloria victo diabolo ad paradisum triumphantem redire, and vnde Adam peccator
eiectus est, illuc (prostrato eo qui ante deiecerat) trophaea victricia
reportare? Offerre Deo acceptissimum munus incorruptam fidem and virtutem
mentis incolume^? Comitari eum, cum venerit vindicta^ de inimicis recepturus?
Lateri eius assistere cum sederit iudicaturus? Coheredem Christi fieri? Angelis
adaequari? cum Patriarchis, cum Prophetis, cum Apostolis, caelestis Regni
possessione laetari? Durat fortis and stabilis religiosis hisce meditationibus
fundata men's, and aduersus omnes Diaboli terrores and minas mundi, animus
immobilis perstat, quem futurorum certa and solida fides corroborat. Cyor. lib.
de exhort. ad Mart. c. 11. sub finem. Absque perseuerantia nec qui pugnat
victoriam, nec palmam victor consequitur. Nutrix est ad meritum, soror
patientiae, constantiae filia, amica pacis, propugnaculum sanctitatis. Toll
perseuerantiam: nec obsequium mercedem habet, nec beneficium gratiam, neclaudem
fortitudo. Sola est cui aeternitas redditur: vel potius quae aeternitati
hominem reddit, dicente Domino: Qui perseuerauerit vsque in finem, hic saluus
erit. Bern. Epist. 129.
our houses, and leave our Cittyes unpeopled, in pursuit of these sovereign
Treasures? Why do we not offer our selves to the infallible adventure of Beatus
qui vbique te ducem habet, Domine Jesus. Nos populus tuus and oues pascuae tuae:
sequamur te, per te, ad te. Trabe nos post te in odorem vngue^torum tuorum:
quia tu es via, veritas, and vita. Via in exemplo, veritas in promisso, vita in
praemio. Verba enim aeternae vitae habes, and nos cognoscimus, and credemus,
quia tu es Christus filius Dei viui. Bern. sermon. 2. de Ascens. Filii hominum
sub tegmine alarm tuarum sperabunt. Inebriabuntur ab vbertate domus tuae: and
torrente voluptatis deliciarum tuarum potabis eos, quia apud te est fons vitae.
Da amantem, and sentit quod dico: da desiderantem, da in ista solitudine
peregrinantem, atque sitientem, and fontem aeternae patriae suspirantem: Da
talem, and scit quid dicam. Si autem frigido loquor, nescit quod loquor. Si ea
quae inter delicias and voluptates terrenas reuelantur amantibus, trahunt;
quoniam verum est, trahit sua que^que voluptas: quomodo non trahet post se
reuelatus a Patre Chrstus? Quid enim anima fortius desider at, quam veritatem?
Aug. Tract. 26. in Joan.
attayning them, as do these blessed souls, who by God Almighties Fatherly
providence, live under those most happy Laws? Happy, I call them, for those
whom they put in certain possession of their everlasting inheritance; though
miserable and unhappy for those that make them.

XXX.
IF the glorious Angels of God that penetrate the Mysteries of divine
providence, and see how great splendour and majesty the wounds of the blessed
Martyrs, and the scarres of persecution give in the government of the world:
If, I say, these blessed Spirits should again take flesh, and live amongst
men, they would choose no other habitation or place of abode, but where they
might labor Est pulch^itudo vniuersa creaturae per h^^ tria inculpabilis:
Damnatione peccatorum, exercitatione iustorum, perfectione bono(...)
and suffer most, and live in most danger, and end this mortal life, for the
love of our Savior Christ Jesus, and for his service: to (...)

Mother chose rather to loose her Kingdom, and her Liberty, yea Life and all,
then to loose the faith which her Son now persecuteth. And has there been
seen, or heard a thing more prodigious in our days?

Let not his Noble Majesty forget himself and his subjects so much, as to
prefer the whispering of some few faygned friends, without any honorable trial
of the Cause, and in a matter that imports so much the salvation or damnation
of his own, and so many millions of souls. Let him not, I say, without
further examination, reject the pious and memorable example of his holy Mother,
and settled judgment of so many of his Ancestors, and of all other Christian
Kings and Kingdoms, and of all other men renowned for their Wisdom,
Experience, and holy life, that have bettered the Christian world, with
Ciuility, Learning, Piety, and good manners: I say ALL, without exception,
since Christ his time; and so truly, that they cannot name any one wholly of
their side, till at length Luther and Calvin, and some such like Apostata's
(men of small learning, and much less good report for their dissolute
behavior, and in that regard unfit to be Teachers and Tutors to Princes) raked
out of Hell, and out of the sink and dunghill of their own sensuality, the
poisoned doctrine wherewith they have infected the sincerity of Christendom,
and made this havoc that we se, especially in the Northern Countries of
Germany, France, England, and others.

The ouer-weening of themselves, avarice, interest, sensuality, and desire to
live at liberty, have brought them into such dullness of spirit, that they
understand not, nor consider, that supernatural faith, contrary to all that
which they look after, and for which the Catholics suffer so much, is
doctrine revealed from heaven, and no humane Audite verbum Domini: haec dicit
Dominus Deus, vae Prophetis insipientibus, qui sequu^tur spiritu^ suum, and
nihil vident. Quasi vulpes in desertis Prophetae tui Israel, errant, vident
vana, and diuinant mendacium, dicentes: Ait Dominus, cum Dominus no^ miserit
eos. Ezech. 13. 2. 3. 4. 6.
invention or devise.

The sovereign Mysteries of this holy faith must be received by Forma^ habe
sanoru^ verboru^ quae a me audisti: bonum depositu^ custodi. 2. Tim. 1. 13. 14.
Fratres state, and tenete traditiones quas didicistis, sieve per sermonem, sieve
per epistolam nostram. 2. These. 2. 15.
lawful Tradition, and believed with humility, piety, and devotion; and not
irreuerently Sicut qui mel multu^ comedit, non est ei bonum: sic qui scrutator
est maiestatis opprimetur a gloria. Prou. 25. 27.
discussed with malepart pride, nor examined by only humane reason, which
doubtless of it self, without help from above, how much so ever it strive to
ascend, can never reach unto them.

It is clear, and out of doubt to any understanding, not perverted, that of
God and his works we must believe many things, which here we cannot
understand. And it is most reasonable and just, that we subject our wits to
assent to his Truth, as we subject our wills to the obedience of his Law. For
in very deed he were but a silly God, and of small Majesty, if we could
comprehend all that he does.

Let us therefore in this life, believe that which he commands, and the
Catholic Ecclesia est columna and firmamentum veritatis. 1. Tim. 2. 15. Tenet
me in Ecclesia conse^sus (...)
Church teaches, which governed by his divine spirit cannot err: and having
settled our faith upon this sure foundation, live with that purity and sanctity,
that he desires, and the same (...) dinary actions of man's life, and in the
discourse and contemplation (what shall I say) of invisible things: yea of the
grossest and basest works of Nature. The contentions of Philosophers teach us,
how little certainty, and less evidence they have in their profession. And
many times we cannot conceive how artificial things are made, until we be
taught. Amongst all these occasions to err, none is so often, or so easily
deceived, as he, that presumes most of his wit, according to the old English
proverb, when he wily beguileth himself.

In this incertainty, who will adventure his salvation upon his own discourse,
and much less upon Caluins or Luthers, or any such like? It was a singular
Mercy of Christ, to leave us our greatest treasure, under the custody Miraculis
inchoata: spe nutrita: charitate aucta: vetustate firmata etc.
of Faith, not subject to the varyances of men's humors and opinions.

It may suffice us, that we believe the same faith, that our Forefathers held
(I wis as wise as we) for more then a thousand years together; and before
them those which taught them to believe, by Prescription from the Apostles
time. If any man be so incredulous or so malepart, as to contend, si quis
contentiosus esse velit, it may suffice for answer to all his objections, We
have no such custom in the Catholic Church, as S. Paul answered to the
Corinthians.

If the Kings most Excellent Majesty would be pleased once to enter into an
indifferent consideration of these things, and the like, with earnest desire to
save so many souls, as hang upon his: If he would seek the Truth in her
fountain, and reducing the Conclusions on both sides to their Principles,
examyne and ponder the weight of the proofs, as in other cases of less
importance he has done, with appl^use of the world. If, I say, he would once
reject all other respects, and resolve upon this one Main, Important Point: I
doubt not, but that with such heavenly illustrations (as in like cases God of
his loving providence is wont to affoard,) he would quickly wynd himself out
of the Labyrinth of Error, into which his Infancy was brought before he could
prevent it, and from whence Custom, humane Policy of Estate, and Company of
flatterers, and double-harted Friends never suffered him to get out, nor to
enter into a true consideration, and survey of the manifould obligations his
Majesty has to deliver himself, and his people from the thraldom, and
captivity, in which they live.

Such as have risen to that height of Riches, and Estate wherein their now
stand, by the ruins of Catholic Religion, will no doubt hold on the same
course, as long as they can, and seek still to make their part good;
notwithstanding it be with injury to Gods honor Religion, and Truth. And
therefore his Royal Majesty will prudently se, what counsel may come from
such kind of interest, unless their for(...) made for a time to be dissolved.
This Ignorant homo quid ante se fuerit, and quid post se futurum sit: quis ei
poterit indicare? Labor stultorum affliget illos, qui nesciu^t in vrbem
pergere. Eccles. 10. 14. 15.
Labyrinth, wherein such as adventure to travail without Emitte lucem tuam, and
veritatem tuam: ipsa me deduxerunt, and adduxerunt in monte^ sanctum tuum, and
in tabernacula tua. Ps. 42. 3.
a guide, first leese their aim, and then themselves in error, is but set for
a summer. This mortal life, that we live is nothing else, but a Referet
vnusquisque propria corporis, prout gessit, sieve bonu^, sieve malum. 2. Cor. 3.
10.
representation or Comedy, whose Scenes and Acts pass by days, hours, and
momentes till it be ended; and a Vidi cuncta quae sunt sub sole, and ecce
vniuersa vanitas. Eccles. 4. 11,
game at Chesse, wherein when the Mate is given, as well the King, and the
Rooke, as the Pawn, and the rest are shuffeled together, and cast Omnia quae
de terra sunt, in terram conuerte^tur, and om^es aquae in terram reuertentur.
Eccles. 4. 11.
into the bag, out of which they were taken.

Here though many affect Non accipit personas Principum, nec cognouit Tyranum
cum disceptaret contra pauperem: opus enim manuum eius sunt vniuersi. Job. 34.
19. Domini est terra and plenitudo eius, orbis terrarum and vniuersi qui
habitant in ea. Psalm. 33. 1.
to be Lords, it cannot be; they are but Insudore vultus tui comedes panem
tuum, donec reuertaris in terram de qua sumptus es, quia puluis es, and in
pulerem reuerteris. Genes. 3. 19.
Lieftenants, and Read ratione^ villicationis tuae: iam enim non potes
villicare. Luc. 16. 2.
Stewardes, bound to give an Assimilatum est Regnum caelorum homini Regi^, qui
voluit rationem ponere cum seruis suis etc. Et tradidit eum tortoribus,
quoadusque redderet vniuersum debi^um. Matthew. 18. 23. 24.
account; how much soever they please themselves with the opinion, and borrowed
names, preventing that Vita vestra abscondita est cum Christo in Deo: cum autem
Christus apparuerit vita vestra, tunc and vos apparebitis cum ipso in gloria.
Colos. 3. 4. Tamquam aurum in furnace probauit illos, and in tempore erit
respectus illoru^. Fulgebunt iusti, iudicabunt nationes, and dominabuntur
populis, and regnabit Dominus illorum in perpetuum. Sap. 3. 6.
they shall be hereafter, though as yet it do not appear.

Here all are Non habemus hic Ciuitatem permanentem, sed futuram inquirimus.
Heb. 13. 14.
Tennants at will, Strangers Obsecro vos tamquam aduenas and peregrinos
abstinere vos a carnalibus desiderijs, quae militant aduersus animam. 1. Pet.
2. 11.
and Pilgrims, none has perpetuity in the palaces he builds, nor in the
gardens and groves he planteth for others to enjoy: the hours of his abode are
Iuxta fide^ defu^cti sunt omnes isti co^fitentes, quia peregrini and hospites
su^t super terram: qui enim haec dicunt, significant se patriam inquirere. Heb.
11. 23.
already cast up, and his steps Breues dies hominis: numerus mensium eius
apud te est. Job. 14. 5.
numbered: and therefore wise men take heed how they load Omnis qui in agone
contendit, ab omnibus se abstinet. 1. Cor. 9. 25. Ideo nos deponentes omne
pondus and circumstans peccatum, per patientia^ curramus ad propositum nobis
certame^. Heb. 12. 1.
themselves with burdens they cannot bear, or entangle themselves in things,
whereof they cannot give good In omnibus operibus tuis memorare nouissima, and
in aeternum non peccabis. Eccles. 7. 40. Nouissime vero veniunt and reliquae
Virgins, dicentes: Domine, Domine aperi nobis: At ille respondens ait: Amen,
Amen dico vobis, nescio vos. Matthew. 25. 13.
account, when it shall be exacted.

In this Comedy, Game, Pilgrimage, or call it what you please, what can his
Royal Majesty enjoy more then other men? He cannot eat, cloth, sleep, or
disporte himself but for one. If he be used to more pleasures, he feels more
wantes. And if they be more delicate or more frequent, they cause short life
and less Propter crapulam multi obierunt. Eccles. 7. Deliciarum assiduu^ vsus
relaxat vires corporum, vnde morborum and lassitudinum copia egregie proficit,
and senectae rudimenta in iuuentute praecludunt. Plut. lib. contra volupt.
health. And as for his pastimes, they are common, not only to his servants,
that bear him company, but to the beasts that serve him, or more properly
themselves. For as the actions are to them more natural, and more vehement the
instinct, so their pleasure is greater.

Is it then credible, that for these delights and pastimes, that end by moments
as they begin: for these riches that rott and perish of themselves, and cannot
be kept: for these honors that vanish as smoke, dissolved with every wynd,
his Majesty will put in hazard his part of Eternal Honors, Riches, and
Contentmens with God and his Angels in everlasting glory, that admits no
distaste, nor can have end? And that which is said of the King, has much more
force and consequence in the rest, who deeply engage the loss of their souls
for far smaller pleasures and delights.

If his Noble Majesty lift his eyes up to heaven, and contemplate the Life, the
Kingdom, and the Eternal Felicity which his blessed Mother enjoys, and shall
do whilst God is God, because being put to her trial, she chose rather to
loose her earthly Kingdom, her liberty, and her life, then to leave her faith:
the same faith, as I have said, which now the King her son does persecute:

And if it please his Majesty to descend with his mature consideration to the
Ad vos ergo Reges, sunt hi sermones mei: vt discatis sapientiam, and non
excidatis, non subtrahit personam cuiusquam Deus, nec verebitur magnitudinem
cuiusquam: quoniam pusillum and magnum ipse fecit, and fortioribus fortior
instat cruciatus. Fiet iudicium durum in ijs qui praesunt: exigua concedetur
misericordia: potentes autem potenter tormenta patientur. Sap. 6. 10. 8. 2.
Quis putas tunc moeror erit? Quae tristitia? cum separabuntur impij a consortio
Sanctorum, and a visione Dei, and traditi in potestate Daemonum? ibunt cum
ipsis in ignem aeternum. Ibique semper erunt in luctu and gemitu. Ibi erit
dolor intolerabilis, foetor incomparabilis, timor horribilis, mors corporis and
animae, sine spe veniae Vbi nec qui torquet aliquando fatigatur, nec qui
torquetur aliquando moritur: sed sic morientur vt semper viuant, and sic viuent
vt semper moriantur. Hugo lib. de anima. Anima in inferno posita, been esse
perdidit, and esse non perdidit. Vnde semper cogitur, and mortem sine morte,
and defectum sine defectu, and finem sine fine pati: quatenus ei and mors
immortalis, and defectus deficiens, and finis infinitus est. Greg. lib. 4.
Dialog. cap. 45.
places of Torments, he shall their behold those which have wrongfully injured,
and violently persecuted the just and innocent, especially for their faith and
Religion: who now together with their accomplices are there making good, and
paying the score of all the Sacriledges, Murders, and other Outrages, done in
dishonor and despite of their Maker, and of their and our Mother the
Catholic Church: not only suffering for their own personal crimes, but for
the sins and damnation of all others that have perished by occasion of their
fall: and for all the profanation, spoil, wast, and dissolution of
Christianity, that by their Authority, Aid, or Example has been caused in
any part of the world: for that all these sins run upon their account, and
for them they must suffer punishment: and not only for offenses past, but as
many as begun by them, shall be continued, multiplied, or increased until the
worlds end. For accordingly, and in proportion, their torments shall
increase, till all iniquity be ended, and all sinners receive their final
sentence in body and soul, to be endured whilst God is God: for so his justice
requires, that no good work be unrewarded, nor any sin unpunished in this
present life, or in the life to come.

Between these two extremes of glory and pain his Majesty stands, and with
him all the rest, that be partakers in this Cause: every man's hour-glasse is
turned, and their time slippeth away irreuocably, and with great speed: and in
all liklyhood they have past allreadie the greatest and best part of their
days. O that he would pause a little upon this consideration, and before he be
engaged so far, that he cannot go back, retire himself into the Closet of
his own soul, and there in secret, with quietness and repose, consult with God
and his own Conscience, whether it will be better for him to employ the remnant
of his days in remedying former errors, and so assure unto himself an
everlasting Kingdom, in company of his blessed Mother; or following Queen
Elizabethes steps, and sporting himself, as she did, the rest of his days,
with loss of his own, and so many millions of souls as depend upon his,
bear her company for ever.

Let no man flatter and deceive himself, nor be deceived with vain opinions.
There is but one God, and one Truth, and one way to heaven, by true faith, true
hope, and true Charity: for all must be gounded in truth, which can be but
one. One heaven will not hold Queen Mary of Scotland, and Queen Elizabeth of
England: as their Religions, their Lives, and their Deaths were contrary, so
infallibly be the places of their eternal abode. His Majesty has relation to
both; and yet it is in his hand and choice, by Gods grace, which of them he
will follow.

And if together with the salvation of his soul, he will establish also his
Royal Estate upon earth to himself and his Posterity; were it not a thousand
times better for him, to lay his foundation, and build upon the settled Religion
and rightful descent from King Henry the 7. and from other his renowned
Catholic Ancestors, then upon the ruins of Schism and Heresy, brought in
by the dissolution of King Henry the 8. and continued with so many violences
and deceiptes, as were used with some color of Justice in Queen Elizabethes
days, to hold her up, and her broken Title on foot? If he follow her and her
Father, he casts himself and his into a world of inevitable and endless
inconveniences: whereas if he prudently reject the unchristian devises, invented
to give Authority to their errors, and sins, wholly impertinent to his right;
and repair for his Title to the root, and take his Religion from whence his
right must come: if he will have it without controversy, he may with a wet
finger put remedy to all. The End is Excellent, and the Means are Easy: he
has Examples in other Kingdoms, and what would he have more?

The Sect of the Protestants in England, is a motly of many colors, a mass
of many metalls, and just the Statua of Nabuchodonosor, of gould, silver, and
brass, borrowed of others, and with earthen feet, which are only their own,
and continually decay.

He that will make a durable building, must lay a sure foundation, and raise
his work by level, otherwise though it may make a fair show for a while: yet
certain it is, the higher that it rises, the nearer it is to ruin. And hence
comes the fall of Princes, the decay of Common wealths, and the change of
earthly Monarchs, from one lynage or people to another, because they were not
well founded, or not well continued.

There cannot possibly be devised any other Religion so fit for Kings (I mean
such as will be Kings, and not Tyrants) nor so profitable to Common wealths, as
is the Christian Catholic Religion, given by Christ Jesus, for the benefit of
men; for by inward sweet motions, and force, it restrayneth all excesses in
those that govern, and in those that are governed, it works obedience and
subjection, for Justice and Conscience sake, and keeps them in love and
loyalty by the secret instincts of Reason and Grace, when other inferior
respects should be wanting.

Notwithstanding that God Almighty has ordained the holy Laws and Decrees of
his Religion for the eternal salvation of Mankind; yet, for that one good
principle always helps another: in consequence the same Religion is so
commodious and fit, for the preservation of secular Estates, as if it had been
ordained for nothing else.

And it is just as the sinews in a man's body, wherewith the bones and other
solid parts are tied together in such sort, that although in the politic
government there may be errors and faults: yet where this Religion
florisheth, and is kept in due reverence, it supplyeth all other wants, and
houldeth together the parts of the Commonwealth, not only in ordinary
sicknesses, but in perilous diseases: and keeps it from death ruin, and
decay, when all other remedies have lost their force. And for this reason the
prosperity of such Kings and Kingdoms, as have care to preserve the purity
and sincerity of this Religion, are secure and durable, because it reduces all
Estates to the grounds of Truth and Justice, which only are permanent. And for
the same reason such as profess other Sects, must of force live in continual
disquietnes, and stagger with daily fear, and suspicion, because the pillars
of their Security may fail them, and fall by many accidents.

If with this new Oath, and Obligation to go to the Protestants Churches, and
other outward protestations, whereto his Majesty intends to bynd his
Subjects, they became Protestants indeed, and left to be Catholics in their
hearts; it were something to the purpose (though on his part not well done for
the things in themselves be unlawful:) but seeing it falls out clean
contrary, and neither this nor any other good is gotten by them, the longer
they be used, and the further they go forward, the more his Majesty loses by
them. For they must needs cause in the parties injured, and in their friends
and well-willers hart-burning, against the Authors of such violent proceeding,
and less reputation and good will to his Majesty every day, contrary, as I
suppose, to the security he intends, and to all that, in prudence he should
procure.

Such as stand at his elbow, and set him ( Sapientes Consiliarij Pharaonis
consiliu^ dederunt insipiens. Isa. 9. 11.
forward in these Actions, though his Majesty play the game: yet it is evident
they make good their own, and not his. Quaerunt quae sua sunt, non quae Regis,
aut Christi. They are diligent, vigilant, and effectual in all, that may bring
them profit, but it is not the Kings, as presently shall be seen. In other
things they are prudent, but in this they are short. Here passion blyndeth,
the matter is mistaken, and thenfore they must needs fail in the means. For
the cause which they would maintain being in it self unjust, they can bynd no
man's conscience by any violence to approve it (how soever some may dissemble
for flattery or fear) which avails little to the Kings purpose. Wherefore
till they can find out some proportionable means, to persuade men of
judgment, that they have Justice on their side, and that their opinions are
true, and the Catholic Religion false, which (as they well know is
impossible) all the rest they can do to make their cause seem good, is wholly
unprofitable.

And together with this, supposing that which is most true (although such as
be about his Majesty endeavor to conceal it) that the number of such as be in
their hearts Catholics, and believe all that the Recusants profess, is
greater without all comparison, then these that be formally heretics: and that
even amongst those that were furthest out of the way, many come every day to
understand the Truth, and many to profess it: It were much better, and far
more proportionable for that which his Majesty intends (if he intend to quiet
his Kingdom, and assure his Royal Estate to himself, and his Successors, when
he should be pleased to do no more) at least to suffer men's consciences to be
free (seeing for the reason alleged, he cannot tie them) and by this means
content all, and oblige all to love him, and serve him, and especially those
that now he houldeth in greatest iealousy, to be his most loyal Subjects, and
most obedyent and more sure to him, then any of the rest: then contrary wise
using violence, without necessity, where it can have no place, whilst he
labors to content a few, cause just indignation in multitudes, which can
bring no good, and in time may be occasion of many inevitable harms.

Moreover, for the intent which his Majesty has to unite his two Kingdoms of
Scotland and England, in one, under the Title of Great Bryttaine, what mean
can be devised more effectual, then that which only has unity in it self,
and consequently virtue to unite others, and which only has means to preserve
it self, and such as embrace it in unity? The Catholic faith has this
propriety to unite, and with her secret virtue, and force to reduce such as
live dispersed like savage and wild people, to the estate of men, and perfect
use of reason, in civil life, teaching them to bridle their passions, and
conquer their ill customs, and amend their manners, and abandone their former
vices and sins: and in sine, to yield their wills to rule and reason, making
them men, and Christian men, faithful to God and dutyfull to their
Commanders, which before were barbarous, rebellious to God and to their
Princes, and little better then beasts.

This the ancient, Histories that treat of the peopling of many parts of
Europe, do teach most evidently, where men lived like bruyte beasts until
they were instructed, and reformed with this holy Religion. And at this day we
see, in Brasile, and many parts of the Indies, that Catholic Religion has
effected with great facility, that which souldyers and Arms could not do,
drawing the people out of the caves, mountains and woods, which before they
inhabited every one by himself, to build towns and Cytties in the playnes,
and live sociably in Community, frequenting the Churches and holy Sacraments,
and all other acts of Christian profession, with great piety and devotion. And
both the Histories of these Countries, and such as come from thence testify,
that with this Catholic discipline they have profited so much in ciuility,
moral conversation, and politic life, that in many places they are nothing
inferior to the ancient Christians, yea in some parts they go beyond them, in
the exercises of Christianity, and in all that is commendable in a moral life:
in so much as the Governors of these Countries laying down their arms, and
giving over attempts of war many times used with much bloodshed, and little
effect, have thought it a better course, and more proportionable to their end,
to send them teachers to instruct them in the Catholic faith, because they
see by experience, that with this mean they bring to pass easily in few
months, that which they could not do by force in many years.

The same may be said of some Nations here in Europe, which have professed
enimity and deadly hatred, time out of mind, one against another, by reason of
bloody wars and hostility, that had passed between them, and by means of
this sovereign band of unity, have been reconciled, and brought to live under
one Government, with great peace and friendship, which doubtless could never
have been done, nor so inueterate and violent humors tempered, but by this
sacred and sweet lenitiue of Catholic Religion. And for this reason it is
called Catholic; because as it is common to all, so it is fit for all, and a
common band with peculiar effect, to reunyte and tie together such, as the
waywardnes of man's miserable nature, has drawn to auersion and divided.

Extremes, if they are to be made, one must needs have some means to unite
them, and those which agree in one third, and so principal a mean of union,
as is the Catholic faith, with hope and charity, and in such a body of
Religion, as agrees in those virtues, may easily preserve themselves in amity
and accord, though in some lesser matters there arise differences. Will you
have a proof of this near home, and proper to this purpose? I my self in
diverse parts have known Englishmen and Scotts (notwithstanding their old
auersion and antipathy, almost turned into nature, yet being Catholics) to
live together in great amity and friendship.

Neither must it seem strange: for the communication in the same faith, the
common use of the same Sacraments, and common fountain of grace, piercing and
dividing betwixt the marrow and the bone, does cleanse the rust and canker of
corrupt natures instinct, and remove all National quarrels and emulations. And
without doubt, neither can his Majesty find, nor any other man devise, any
other so proportionable a mean as this, to make his two Kingdoms one, or to
preserve any long time the amity begun between them: considering the deadly
hatred, fastered and inueterated causes of disunion, which they have carried in
their bowels for so many ages past.

Non adhaeret testa ferro* Nature cannot do it, nor Art bring it to pass.
Only this heavenly confection, is able to work this great wonder. And the
reason more in particular may be, because this Religion, once entering and
taking root in men's hearts, it is as the Scripture says, Virtus Dei ad salutem,
subduing in man, whatsoever is of man, to the obedience of our Savior God, and
Man Christ Jesus, whereby man cease to be himself, and that which before he
was to himself, and is transformed into a lively member, and part of the
Mystical body of Christ, and for reverence and due respect to his Head,
yields dutiful obedience to all lawful Superiors, whether they be
spiritual or temporal, to each of them in that which appertains to their
charge, as to the Substitutes and Lieftenants of him, to whom all subjection is
due. And as this is voluntary proceeding of conscience and love: so it causes
concord and good will to all others of the same body, without difference, many
times to such, as for personal respects deserve little to be obeyed or loved.

This is the true root and reason of estate: this is the true and only policy,
to effect union: this is the only proper method of curing old inueterate soars
of discord; and the only way to heal effectually, those that so long time have
layen festering. And howsoever at this present they be covered, and
ouer-healed, they be not hoale in the bottom, and therefore must be prudently,
and perfectly healed, least with new occasions they break out again, with
greater violence and extremity then ever before.

And to hasten this breach, I cannot imagine how his Majesty, or any for him,
could devise a more effectual or more speedy means, then he has taken in
hand, powling and impouerishing the native Englishmen Catholics, to enrich and
advance strangers and heretics, to whom he gives their goods, and
dispossesseth them of their Patrimonyes, and Lands, which their Ancestors had
lawfully enjoyed many hundred years, only because they will not swear that
which they think to be false, nor go, against their Consciences, to the
Protestants Churches, without any other offense to the King, or Commonwealth.
Who can look on this, be he never so great an enemy of Catholic Religion,
that will not loath it, especially considering that those who suffer these
wrongs, are the best Subjects, most innocent, and of more virtuous and
exemplary life, then any other of the Commonwealth.

Suppose they were deceived in their belief, houlding for true the Religion,
which all their Ancestors, even from the Apostles time have believed: for their
adversaries cannot give instance, where, when, or by whom, any point of that
which they believe and profess, was invented, or brought in, since the
Apostles time, notwithstanding their cavil of Ceremonies, and other accidents
out of the substance, which may be added, altered, or taken away, as times and
oceasions require, without prejudice to the faith or Religion, to which they
appertain. But, as I say, supposing the Catholics lived in error and
misbeliefe, this same error authorized by so long Prescription (as I have
said) deserves not punishment, but pardon and toleration; especially it being,
as their greatest enemies must needs confess, without any hurt to the Common
wealth: for none can deny, but that the Recusants life and conversation is of
much more edification and good example, in all manner of Christian virtue, then
any of the rest.

And this, and no other thing is the cause, that their Adversaries finding in
them no faults of their own, are forced to accuse them of other men's offenses,
and to calumniate and slander them, with false imputations (as the old
Persecutors did the Christians of the primitive Church:) and this also is the
cause of so unusual and improper manner of speaking, as may be observed in
these Proclamations and Laws. And they are drawn by necessity to this manner
of proceeding, and forced to charge them with secret crimes, for indeed all
that passes in public, whereof the world may be wytnes, is in their favor.
And therefore they urge them, what they think, and not only that, but what
they would think in time to come, upon conditional cases, which are never
like to be. A strange manner of proceeding, and not heard of in other places.
But to this miserable perplexity and suspicion men come, that will govern
without God, and his Truth.

And if these things of themselves cannot but move to compassion any true
English indifferent heart, of whatsoever Religion the party be; what an ey-sore
must it needs be, and what hart-burning, think you, does it cause, to see
withal the spoil of these innocent subjects, turned to mayntaine the pride
and superfluities of Strangers: some of them making their nestes in the tops
of the Noblest, and fruitfullest trees, that is, planting themselves in the
best Houses and Familyes, and occupying the chiefest Offices and Rooms of the
Common wealth: and others returning home to their Country laden with the
spoil of Catholics goods, who doubtless least of all others, feel their
own harms, as men best armed with patience, and most comforted with the
considerations abouesayd, and the like, to suffer all that comes for Christ.

But for the rest, no doubt, but their hearts are filled with indignation, and
bytternes, whatsoever Religion they profess, and much more those of other
Sects, and most of all those that be furthest of from Catholic Recusancie,
as men less mortified, more styrring, and more ready to be moved to anger,
disdain and revenge, howsoever they may cover it for a time. And this
generally out of National passions, and affections, which no doubt are more
vehement, and more inflamed, where there concurreth also particular respects.
And at this day you shall hardly find any one famylie of worth in England, that
by one way or other, in the root, or in the branches, has not alliance, or
interest in the cause persecuted.

The experience of forty years, and upward, wherein they have persecuted the
Catholics in that Kingdom, supposing by that way to root out their
Religion, is a strong argument amongst many others, to convince their
Adversaries, that they hold a wrong course: for all the world sees, that by
this persecution Catholics have increased, both in number and zeal, and with
them, the means that God has ordained for their preservation, both at home
and abroad. For within the Kingdom there be at this day many more Priests and
Religious men, to teach the Truth to such as desire it, then were when Queen
Elizabeth made the first Capital Laws against them. And generally Catholics
are more constant, and more ready to endure the penalty of the Laws, and the
Colleges for the bringing up of such, as God selecteth for the mayntenance of
this cause, are more in number every day. And as their afflictions continue, so
their friends increase, and the more their virtue is tried, and their cause
more known, the more readiness they find, and more desire in all good men to
help them.

This experience in truth, were there nothing else, does plainly demonstrate,
that his Majesty in prudence of Estate (though he had no greater Motyues)
should bethink himself of some other course, and use more proportionable
means, to bring about his Honorable Designments.

And doubtless if his Judgment and other Natural Gifts be answerable to the
report, he will easily see the conuenience, by that which has been said,
setting passion and bad Counsel aside. For what man is there of any
understanding, that having been troubled forty years together, with one and
the self same infirmity, and using all that while the same diet, the same
Physicians, the same method in curing, and the self same medicines, and yet
with all this time, trouble, and cost, finds himself no whit the better, but
every day worse: Who I say (if he be in his wits) will not take counsel with
other Physicians, and at the least make trial of that which they prescribe,
for the recovery of his health.

If therefore his Gracious Majesty desire to attain to these Honorable ends,
to wit, the establishment of his Kingdom, and the security of his Royal
Person, and Posterity, together with their Advancement, and increase of
Reputation and Estate, he will pass no further in these blind by ways of his
unfortunate Kinswoman (if I may so call her) and Predecessor. For though there
were no other inconvenience in them: yet this one may suffice to a generous
Spirit, not to be enforced to seek frienship with Infidels, nor depend upon
the Rebels of other Princes as she did, and other things very ill beseeming so
renowned a Nation, and the Person of a Christian Queen. Whereas contrariwise,
if he would favor them, which most of all men deserve it, and desire all
manner of happiness to him, and his; he might have Honorable friendship, and
amity with the greatest Princes in the world, and thereby find entrance to
match his Children with their equals; and not, as otherwise he must of force,
with their inferiors in blood: and that which is worse, with Heretics and
Infidels, who howsoever they respect one another, and use amongst themselves
flattery, the truth is, by all Laws, Haereticu^ homine^ post vnam, and
secu^dam correptionem deuita: scie^s quia subuersus est qui huiusmodi est, and
delinquit, cum sit proprio iudicio co^demnatus. Tit. 3. 10. C. infames 6. q. 1.
C. alieni 2. q. 7. Ant. Gazaros C. de haereticis. c. 2.. haeretici. li. 1. and
6. Glo. Verb. Diuina. c. de su^ma Trinitate and fide Catholica, vocat
haereticos infames, si^que eos repellit a testimonio. p. 1. l. 3. ff. de
testibus.
divine, and humane, and by the general consent of all the Christian world,
they are incapable of honor, and held for ignoble and infamous.

If his Majesty look after interest, and desire honor and riches together,
he shall, without comparison, gain more (houlding correspondence with the Sea
Apostolic, as other Catholic Princes do) by the quietness of his Kingdom, by
sparing many unlawful and impertinent expenses, which then will not be
necessary, and by the sincere affection and love of his subjects; then with all
the Proclamatio^s, Oaths, Statutes, Praemunires, pilling, powling, and other
violent courses: all which might have some color of necessity in Queen
Elizabeth's days, but for many just causes (as has been seen) are not only
ill-beseeming and dishonorable to his Noble Majesty that now is, but very
preiudicious and hurtful to his Estate.

Again: If he seek to spend the rest of his days in quietness, and to have a
joyful and happy old age, it is a plain case, that the life of a Catholic,
that lives according to his belief, is much more comfortable and pleasant,
without all comparison, then the life of an Heretic, or a wicked liver; for
when bodily pastymes fail the body, or rather the body fails them; then is
most necessity of the inward comfort of the mind, and where these also be
wanting, the pains of hell begin in this life. And so Gods just judgments
require. And it is an Iussisti Domine, and ita factum est, vt sibi ipsi poena
sit omnis animus inordinatus. Aug. lib. 1. Confess.
inviolable Law, that a disordered mind is a continual cause of his own
punishment and torment.

The greatest cause why this counsel may perhaps be less liked of by some,
is because the profit thereof cannot be known, but by experience. And where
men's passions are uncontrolled, their imagination perverted, their
understanding preoccupated with false suppositions, and their wills
ouergrowne, and as it were festered with contrary customs, they cannot feel
the sweetness of virtue, unless they be strengthened with particular grace from
heaven, and overcome the repugnance of nature and sense, to make this trial.

This vale of misery, this place of our habitation and abode, is a common Educ
de custodia animam mea^, ad confitendu^ nomini tuo: me expectant iusti donec
retribuas mihi. Psalm. 141. 8. Dominus soluit co^peditos. Ps. 145. Vnde sumus
co^pediti? corpus nostru^ ornamento nobis fuit: peccauimus, and co^pedes inde
accepimus. Quae sunt compedes nostrae? mortalitas ipsa. Aug. in Psalm. 161.
Prison or Gaile, where all the Inhabitants, as well the Judge, as those that be
judged, the King that commands, as the Subjects that obey, are all sentenced
to death. Statutum est omnibus hominibus semel mori. The difference of this
Prison from other particular Prisons, is, that in this, the pains and
pleasures, the burdens and benefits are divided with equality, and to every one
is assigned with great justice, only that, which is his own.

Here the high Justice of heaven, has appointed to every person in particular,
of what degree and condition soever, his prison and chains. Some bear them
with ease, others draw them with pain, and many of ignorance and passion
charge themselves with other chains, which Gods hand has not laid upon them,
and put themselves in prisons and fetters that be not his.

These be the Peccare non est libertas, nec pars libertatis: peccare est potius
non posse, qua^ posse Quicu^que enim facit quod sibi non expedit, quanto magis
hoc potest, tanto magis aduersitas and peruersitas possut in illum. Ansel. c.
de fort.
prisons, fetters, and chains, wherewith the world, that is to say, the vanity
of worldly men, the flesh, and the Devil, each of them hold in captivity those
which yield them homage and subjection: and they be of infinite sorts and
fashions, which the prisoners themselves make for themselves, with diverse
occasions, in the forge of their own imaginations and wills; the fiend of
Hell setting their hearts on fire, and blowing the bellows to inflame the
disordinate appetites, that his other two companions, the World, and the Flesh,
and He also himself many times does kindle with their suggestions. And from
this forge proceed all the sins and disorders, the miseries and confusion,
that we see in Propterea captiuus ductus est populus meus, quia non habuit
scientia^: and nobiles eius interierunt fame, and multitudo eius siti exaruit.
Propterea dilatauit infernus animam suam, and aperuit os suu^ absque vllo
termino: and desce^dent fortes eius, and populi eius, and sublimi gloriosique
eius ad eum. Isa. 5. 13.
the sons of men. And from the self same furnace, issue the gross clouds of
smoke, which darken the understanding of the Heretic, that he cannot see his
errors: and of the sensual distracted Catholic, that he considers not the
deformity of his life, when it is contrary to the holy Faith that he professes.

These are the prisons and chains, that properly make men Sede^tes in
tenebris, and in vmbra mortis: vinctos mendicitate; and ferro. Psalm. 110. 6.
slaves, and enthrall them more then the prisons and chains of wood or iron,
as a wise Epictetus.
Philosopher said, who being asked why he procured not his liberty (for he was
a slave to one of the Emperor Nero his favorites) answered, that he was more
at liberty then his Master, for his Master was subject to diverse passions and
perturbations of mind, and to many vices, which had no rule over him. And his
answer was most true; for there are no prisons so strong, nor chains so heavy
and troublesome, as these that hold both body Omnis qui facit peccatum, seruus
est peccati, Io. 8. 34. A quo quis superatus est, huius and seruus est. 2. Pet.
2. 19. Gaudenti homini and carcer latus est, and tristi pratum angustum est.
Aug. in Psalm. 141.
and soul in captivity.

Other chains Leo victus est saeuiendo: agnus vicit patie^do, conuersa sunt
corda hominu^ ad timorem Christi: coeperu^t Reges, coeperunt nobiles miraculis
co^moueri, prophetiae adimpletione turbari, videre in vnum nomen concurrere
genus humanum, and quid facerent? Multi ex nobilibus elegerunt ignobilitatem,
and dimittentes domos suas, and substantias suas distribuentes pauperibus,
elegerunt paupertatem in saeculo, nobilitatem in Christo, and tenent Regias
potestates, and sunt tamquam in compedibus. Vnde hoc? Ne progrediantur ad
illicita, compedes acceperunt, compedes sapientiae: compedes verbi Dei ferrea
sunt, quamdiu timent: ament, and aurea erunt. Aug. in Psalm. 149.
there are, not of Iron, but of Gould, not for the punishment of slaves as the
former, but for the honor and authority of freemen and children; so far from
weighing down those that wear them, that they set them at liberty, and
deliver them from the misery, and captivity of the other, drawing Felix
necessitas, quae and meliora compellit. Aug. epist. 45. Aspera est patientia
indoctis hominibus, and non permanebit in illa excors. Audi fili, accipe
consilium intellectus. Inijce pedem tuum in compedes illius, and in torques
illius collum tuum: subijce humerum tuum, and porta illam, and ne accedieris in
vinculis eius. Ecclesiast. 6. 25. In opere enim ipsius exiguum laboris, and
cito edes de generatione illius. Ibidem. 20.
with sweet violence, and withdrawing them from all that may enthrall, or do
them hurt. In these chains was tied the Apostle S. Paul, when passing by
Ephesus, he said to the Christians, that he went to Jerusalem bound in spyrit,
not knowing what should befall him there, but that the holy Ghost in all places
by which he passed, did forwarne him, that chains and tribulations did expect
him in Jerusalem.

Both these kinds of chains bynd the spyrit, because both are spiritual,
though coming from different spirits. The one from the unclean spirit of
malice and sin, the other from Gods holy spirit of Truth. This heavenly
spirit byndeth hand and foot, such as be his, and makes them do, and suffer
whatsoever he pleases, not only without contradiction, but with alacrity,
enclosing in such manner their wills in his, that they will not live without
it a footstep, nor a moment, for all the goods in the world: for in it they
find riches, contentment, and rest, and as in a strong Castle, security and
defense; such liberty in these chains, and such freedom of heart, as they can
suffer no violence, nor any creature do them harm.

With these goulden chains of true Wisdom, and Charity, and Christian zeal
of the salvation of souls, God almighty draws out of England, and
transporteth to other Countries, such as he has chosen for Teachers and Lights
of that people, and after that he has strengthened and adorned them with his
heavenly grace, and armed them sufficiently with virtue, and learning, and
experience necessary for their charge, he calls them back again, bound in
spirit to the self same place, from whence he took them first, to rescue such
souls, as the enemy has taken, out of the power of darkness, and to break the
chains wherewith he keeps them prisoners, and to preserve such as be free,
that they fall not into the like captivity.

Which holy enterprise of Justice and Charity they undertake with such
resolution, that notwithstanding they forsee in these Laws and Proclamatio^s
troubles, imprisonments, and deaths that expect them, where they intend to
go, yet they make no account of them, nor of any other thing that the power of
man can invent against them, so they may do their duty, in testifying and
making known the Kingdom of God, to such as live in darkness and know it not.

Such as are employed in these affairs, carried along and comforted with this
divine spirit, the Spirit of Isa. 11. 2.
Wisdom and Fortitude, be not dismayed with these thu^derclaps, nor can they
fear any thing contrary to the fear of God. This excludes all other fears;
and therefore they respect more his pleasure, and commaundment, sweetly and
effectually insinuated unto them by his divine inspiration, and by the
obligation of their duty then any outward thing, that their adversaries, can
devise against them. And so when they are pressed to it, they confidently
answer to these Proclamations and Laws, the same that S. Paul answered in the
very same case: Sed nihil Act. 10. 24.
horum veror, neque facio animam meam preciosiorem me; dummodo consummem cursum
meum, and ministerium quod accepi a Domino Jesus, testificari Euangelium gratiae
Dei. I fear none of these dangers, nor esteem my life more precious then my
self, so I may fulfill my course and the charge which I have received from
our Lord Christ Jesus, to testify the good tydinges of Gods grace, and mercies.

If God Almighty would be merciful to this our Most Noble Prince, now
deceived, and to such as by evil counsel keep him prisoner in Adams chains:
if the Sun of Justice would cast his gracious beams upon them, and
illustrate in such manner their understandings, and mollyfie their hearts, that
once they might prove in themselves the glory of a good Conscience, and by
that come to know in some part, the inexplicable comforts that such, as suffer
for the Religion which they persecute, do feel and enjoy: I doubt not, but
that quickly there would be an end of this bloody Tragedy.

And to awake Dedisti significatione^, vt fugia^t a facie arcus. Psalm. 59. 6.
them out of this dream of feigned security wherein they live, and open their
eyes to see how much God is displeased with their proceedings, they want not
examples of his severe Justice eexcuted now and then upon their companions,
taking them away suddenly, when they were least ready for their account, that
by these examples others may take heed, which is a singular favor: for by
chastising some few he inuiteth to his mercy the rest, to whom he gives time
and occasion of repentance.

Within these few years there have dyed suddenly at diverse times in England,
four of the privy Counsel, and their deaths are so much the more markable,
as they were less provided for. For this is the misery of sudden death, when
it ouertaketh a sinner, and neither gives him warning, nor leisure to repent.
One of these was the Lord High Treasurer, a worldly wise man, though not wise
for himself: who having spoken vehemently at the Counsell-Table, in a business
touching Sir John Lusons land (as was said) and bowing down his head, as
though he would rest, he that sat next him thinking to awake him from sleep,
found him dead without the least remembrance of the Eternal Judgment, to which
he was called so at unawares, as he left astonished all that were present.

The second was the Lord Thomas Popam.
Chief Justice of England, a man of cruel, harsh condition, and a grievous
persecutour of Catholics. He took one day in the morning (as many times he
used to do) certain easy pills for his health, and after having to sign some
Writs, or, as others say, Warrants to apprehend Recusants, suddenly found
himself so ill that he could not go abroad, as he had determined. From his
chair he would have cast himself upon his bed, but he Cor durum habebit male
in nouissimo: and qui amat periculum in eo peribit. Eccles. 3. 27.
dropped down dead. He had before co^playned of conuulsions, and great pains
in his body, but he showed no memory of God, more then in his life time he was
accustomed.

The third was also a privy Counselor that occupied the Name and Place of the
Archbishop of Canterbury, a great Politician, and one of the plotters, as is
reported, of the New Oath, and Powderworke, wherein it was founded; as he had
been of many other Stratagems Been co^surgit diluculo qui quaerit bona: qui
autem inuestigator malorum est, opprimetur ab ijs. Pro. 11. 27.
and devises against the Catholics. He ended his life, as the former, without
time to prepare himself for the great account.

He was of base Parentage, but by his diligence and wit, he scambled up to the
height from whence he fell. First he got into service with the L. Chancellor
Sir Christopher Hatton, as his Chaplain and Examiner. His Master was greatly
favored of the Prince at that time, and a secret favorer of the Catholics.
And in this point M. Bancroft flattered him so cunningly, that he got his good
will, and much money under him.

After his Masters death, he was able to do for himself, and (as is reported)
bought the Bishopric of London of Sir Ferdinand Gorge, Gentleman of the
Queens Chamber for three thousand pounds. And having gotten into that place,
with desire to ascend, (though against his conscience) afflicted Gods servants
both at home and abroad, with many sleightes and devises. In fine by these
ways, walking always with a goulde^ staff in his hand, ascendit forte
Cathedra^ (as one merrily said of his Predecessor) he passed from London to
Lambeth, and there played the wolf in a sheephards weed. At length (as he had
allwaies a styrring brain) it disquieted him so much, that he could not
sleep, and for remedy he took of a Paracelsian Physician a dormytall
medicine, wherewith he slept so profoundly, that he awaked no more, only they
hard him groan pitifully and strugle with death, and in this manner he ended
with terror of his friends, and servants that were present, leaving to them,
and to us, and to all the world an example to fear the just Viru^ iniustu^
mala capient in interitu. Psalm. 139. 12.
Judgments of God.

His Predecessor in John Whitgift.
Canterbury Sea and President of the privy Counsel, died in a manner after
the same fashion. Upon (I know not what) occasion, he made a bitter inuectyue
at the Counsell-Table against Vae duplici cord and labijs scelestis and
manibus malefacietibus, and peccatori terram ingredienti duabus vijs. Eccl. 2.
14.
the Catholic Religion, notwithstanding he knew it in his conscience to be
the only Truth, and having ended his speech he bowed down to take up his
spectacles, and being taken suddenly with an Apoplexy, that made him
speachlesse, was carried from the Councell-Table to his House, and a few hours
after departed this world, to receive his Judgment and Reward.

These four great Statesmen, all of the privy Counsel, dyed one after
another suddenly, without any signs of contrition, or memory of God, as has
been said: and in this consists the observation and example, for otherwise to
him that lives well, no death is untimely; though it cannot be without
mystery, that God sends to so many Privy Counselors in England this manner
of death in these times. But of all the rest the most miserable, and of
greatest terror and example for the Kings Royal Majesty, is the death of
Queen Seminauerunt triticum and spinas messueru^t: hereditatem acceperunt, and
non ijs proderit. Ier. 12. 13. Quantu^ glorificauit se, and in delicijs fuit,
ta^tum date ei tormentum and luctu^, quia in cord suo dicit, sedeo Regina, and
Vidua non sum, and luctu^ non videbo: ideo in vna die venie^t plagae eius. Mors
and luctus, and fames, and igne comburetur, quia fortis est Deus, qui iudicauit
eam. Apoc. 18. 7.
Elizabeth his Predecessor, which being so notorious, and so well known to
his Majesty, for breuities sake, and for respect to her Person I will omit.

Many such like examples, no doubt, happen in England, but are more noted in
two sorts of people. The one, of such as in their conscience have knowledge of
the Truth, and outwardly deny it, and oppugn it for temporal respects, as it
is thought the two Archbishops did: the other of such as have a violent
auersion from Catholic Religion, and upon hatred and spleen, persecute such
as profess it, as did the L. Chief Justice, and other such like.

Well the Kings Majesty, and his Counselors cannot deny but God Nemo potest
dicere Dominus Jesus, nisi in Spiritu sancto. 1. Cor. 1. 2. 3. Considera opera
Dei quod nemo possit corrigere que^ ille despexerit. Eccles. 7. 14. Qui odit
correptionem vestigiu^ est peccatoris, and qui timet Deum co^uertetur ad cor
suu^. Eccl. 12. 7.
deals mercifully with them in giving them these public examples, as
watch-wordes and warninges to make them look about them. It may please him
also to give them grace to lay them to their hearts, and make benefit of them.
But this also is mercy, and a special favor of God, who only knows the
true causes of all that is done, or neglected; and has in his hand, as well the
times, oportunityes, and occasions, as the hearts of Kings and Princes, to
dispose them as he lists.

I have many times set my self to consider, how it comes to pass, or what
may be the cause, that God does suffer the Kingdom of England, where the
Standard of Christ's Cross was first publicly advanced, and that in former
ages did flourish so much in all kind Tempus est vt incipiat iudiciu^ a domo
Dei: si aute^ primum a nobis, quis finis eorum qui non credu^t Euangelio? Et si
iustus vix saluabitur, implus and peccator vbi parebunt? 1. Pet. 4. 17 Si in
ligno viridi haec faciunt, in arido quid fiet? Luc. 23. 31.
of piety and devotion, to fall so far from the ancient Religion, as to
persecute it with such vehemence, as we se, and become a deadly enemy to the
Sea Apostolic, which (as all confess) taught them first the faith of Christ;
and to whom in ancient times they were so obedient and devout, that no people
in all the Christian world was more.

To this (me thinks) may be answered the same which Origin writes in his
Commentary upon Job, that as the contention then was indeed principally not
between the evil Spirit and Job, but betwixt God and the evil Spirit, and
the trial to be made in the person of Job, whether the Devils temptation or
Gods grace had greater force in his free will: so now also in this Controversy.

The Devil avouched stiffly that the holy man served God (as many bad
Christians donow a days) only for interest, and that if he would propose him
to the battrie of tribulation, he should find him like a piece of glass, ready
to break in pieces. But (says Origin) his maker that knew him to be no
brickle glass, but a fine diamond, and his charity unfeigned and invincible,
put him to the trial, and got the victory, as always he does in such, as
adhere unto him. For his hand is omnipotent, and makes them as himself,
Almighty. Those which at this day are specially assaulted by the Devil, and
tried by Gods permission and license, are the Catholics of England, to his
Debemus gratias agere Deo semper pro vobis fratres dilecti a Deo, quod elegerit
vos Deus primitias in salutem, in sanctificatione spiritus, in fide veritatis,
in acquisitione^ gloriae Domini nostri Jesus Christi. 2. Thessal. 2. 13.
great honor, and the edification of his Church. And they are most happy
which he chooses and makes worthy of victory in this trial: and a thousand
times miserable and unhappy be they that make themselves Satan's instruments in
the trial, and exercise of Gods Saints.

But howsoever it be, God Almighty is, and will be glorified, whether the
persecution cease or endure. For assuredly none shall be lost but Et tunc
reuelabitur ille iniquus etc. cuius aduentus est secundum operatione^ Satanae
in omni seductio^e iniquitatis ijs qui pereunt, eo quod charitate^ veritatis
non receperunt, vt salui fierent. Ideo mittet illis Deus operationem erroris,
vt credant mendacio, vt iudicentur omnes qui non crediderunt veritati, ed
consenserunt iniquitati. 2. Thessal. 2. 8.
false hearted Christians, and those which Christ calls the Children of
perdition, which would have deserved damnation for other sins, though there
had been no persecution for Religion. And the sincere, pure, and fine mettald
Catholics, have so much greater glory, by how much greater proofs they suffer
of their fideliy: and withal they serve for patterns and watch-bels to all
other Christians to awake us from sleep, and teach us, what Benedictus Deus
etc. qui regenerauit nos in spem viua^ per resurrectione^ Jesus Christi ex
mortuis, in hereditate^ incorruptibilem conseruatam in caelis in vobis, qui in
virtute Dei custodimini per fidem in salutem, paratam reuelari in te^pore
nouissimo, in quo exultabitis, modicum nunc si oportet contristari in varijs
tentationibus. 1. Pet. 1. 3.
account we ought to make of faith, and obedience to God and his Church, and
the equability and indifference of mind wherewith we should bear such troubles,
as his divine Majesty is pleased to send us, persuading our selves certainly,
that he disposes all things sweetly for Vt probatio vestraeifidei multo
pretiosior auro, (quod per ignem probatur) inueniatur in laudem and gloriam,
and honore^ in reuelatione Jesus Christi. 1. Pet. 1. 16.
our greater good, and as his Maiestyes Mother of happy Memory was wont to say,
Never sends adversity, but that he gives a heart to bear it.

Moreover the same Origin affirms, that he had found in ancient records, how
Moses to comfort the people of God in the afflictions which they suffered
under the Egyptians, and to strengthen their confidence and trust in Gods
promises, composed the history of Job, and distributed it amongst the Tribes
and families, with command that they should read it, and hear it with
attention, to the end they might learn to imitate the holy man's patience and
magnanimity, and see by experience how God succoureth his servants in their
troubles, and rewards their suffering, as he did his faithful servant Job.

And for the same purpose the Holy ghost ordained, that the four Evangelists
should commit distinctly, and with particularity to writing, all the paces of
the poor, humble, and afflicted life of the Quem cum non videritis, diligitis,
in quem nunc quoque non videntes, creditis: credentes autem exultatis laetitia
inenarrabili and glorificata, reportantes finem fidei vestrae, salutem animarum
vestrarum. 1. Pet. 1. 8.
Son of God, and his bitter Passion and Death, and how after so many
troubles, afflictions, and pains he was raised to everlasting glory, figured
in the restoring of Job to his former prosperity. And so we see that the
Apostle S. Iac. 5. 10.
James sets before us these two patterns and examples of Patience: and
because his words are much to our purpose for Confirmation and Conclusion of
all that we have said, with them I will end this Treatise. Ecce Iudex ante
ianuam assistit. Exemplum accipite, fratres, laboris ac patientiae, Prophetas,
qui locuti sunt in nomine Domini. Ecce beatificamus eos qui sustinueru^t.
Sufferentiam Job audistis, and finem Domini vidistis: quoniam misericors est
Dominus and miserator. Lo the everlasting Judge stands at our gate: my
brethren, take for example of labor and patience, the Prophets that in times
past have taught us by Gods appointment, and in his name. Lo we hold for
blessed and happy, those that have suffered for him. You have heard the
patience of Job, and seen the end of our Savior; for he is full of mercy, and
inclined to use it to all that put their trust in his help. To him therefore be
all honor and glory for ever and ever. Amen.

MOY(...) those glorious souls, when they were presented before their
Creator, and to hear his voice, when he gave them the Crown of their
suffering, and martyrdom, which he had promised. And this is that which gives
us life, and courage to press and put our selves forward (by the mercy of our
Lord) to come to that degree of happynes which our Brethren have already
obtained.

Thus wrote those famous Confessors to S. Cyprian: and it comes fit for this
time, place, and purpose therewith to shut up this matter. No man can pierce
into the secret drifts, and dispositions of Gods infinite wisdom, nor define
how long this persecution shall endure, or what end, or vpshot it shall have:
but this we are assured, and the very Id vnum cogitate verum esse, Iudices,
viro videlicet bono, nihil mali accidere posse, nec viuo, nec mortuo: nec vm
quam illius res a Dijs immortalibus negligi. Socrat. apud Platon. in Crit.
Heathens by light of reason came to know it, that no harm can befall to the
good man, neither alive nor dead: and that Infer iniuria^ maximum malorum
esse: and peius iniuria^ infer, quam pati. Probat. Plato. in Gorgia.
it is a greater misery to do, then to suffer injury. Filius quidem Matthew. 26.
24.
hominis (says our Savior) vadit sicut scriptum est de eo: vae autem homini
illi per quem filius hominis tradetur: bonum erat ei, si natus non fuisset homo
ille. And as it fared with Christ, so it falls out with his servants. The days
and hours of their trouble and persecution are limited: and this comfort they
have, that how heavy soever they be, they shall have an end, and their reward
is everlasting: as on the other side the punishment of their adversaries (if
they do not repent) shall be endless.

It rests therefore that all good Christians settle themselves in perfect
conformity with Gods holy will, endeavoring to live virtuously, and glorify
him in their sufferings, with certain hope in his mercy, that (so doing)
cannot fail them. Ita Pet. 4. 19.
and hi qui patiuntur secundum voluntatem Dei, fideli Creatori suo co^mendent
animas suas in benefactis. This is the counsel of S. Peter, and the sum of
all that has been said, wherewith all such as suffer for this cause, may be
certainly assured, that Nee mihi accidit hoc fortuito, sed mihi id co^stat
mori iam, and a laboribus liberari, mihi melius extitisse. Atque hanc ob
causam, ijs a quibus accusatus sum, aut a quibus conde^natus sum, non habeo
quod succensea^: qua^uis non hac mente accusauerint me, atque damnauerint: sed
quia mihi nocere se crediderunt. Socrat. apud Platon. in Crito. sub finem.
nothing can harm them here, and much less in eternity; but that all shall
turn to their greater comfort and good. Quia diligentibus Deum omnia
cooperantur in bonum. So that we may conclude with S. Chrysostom, specially in
this case, Quod nemo laeditur, nisi a seipso. None can do us harm, if our
selves be not to blame. This is the exellencie of man, and his true Freedom,
and Nobility of those that suffer for this Cause, that they may loose their
heads, and have no hurt.

THE PRINTER to the Reader.
WHILST this book was in printing there came to my hands fresh letters out of
England, with Aduertisment of new Laws enacted against the Catholics, this
last Parliament: as though the former were not enough, to prove the Patience of
those which suffer, and the miserable estate of the Lawmakers. They mention
likewise a memorable case, wherein is discovered Gods great mercy with sinners,
and his care and providence over his chosen, many times when they least think
of it, and have most need. (F) Romans 8. ^8.


The Letter says thus.
ONE of the Laws of this Parliament is, that the New Oath be tendered to all of
eyghtene years and upward, unless they be Barons. A new encumbrance to no
other purpose, but to make more odious those which without necessity make such
laws, and to confirm our experience, that ill Consciences be always
accompanied with suspicions and fears; besides the forcing of men to perjury.
For I do not see, but that when any man swears against his conscience, though
it be true, he incurreth perjury. Neither do I see, what it can avail the
Kings Majesty, if all his Kingdom swear what he pleases, if first he
persuade them not that it is truth which they swear. For he is never a whit
the more secure, that all his people commit perjury. Besides the very obliging
them in this manner to swear, makes them less true unto him: for suspicion
and iealousy is the bane of friendship. And how can they love him, of whose
love and fidelity he professes himself to doubt? For if he trusted them, he
would not in all wisdom and prudence, proceed in this rigorous manner, so to
burden their consciences by forcing them to perjury. And this is the general
opinion here with us. By virtue of this Law they have put to death a Priest,
called Cadwalledour, that in this manner refused the Oath. And for the same
cause have they condemned many others, both men and women, to loss of their
goods, and to perpetual imprisonment; casting them into the common Iailes
amongst thieves and malefactors, thinking thereby to make breach in their
Consciences with this vexation.

They have likewise made a Law against Women, who, as has been said, had the
privilege of women in Queen Elizabeth's days. This Law commands, that such
as will not go to Church, and communicate (with the Caluinists) be put in
prison, till their Husbands redeem them, by paying ten pounds a month, or the
third part of their goods. And it cannot be imagined, what confusion this Law
makes in the whole Realm, where many Husbands be Protestants, and their Wives
Catholics.

An other Priest they have also condemned in Oxford for the same Oath; who
living in the common Iaile, it happened that there were two Caluinists
malefactors chayned together, and one of them moved by the presence of the
Priest, with desire to inform himself of the Catholic Religion, but hindered
by the two Laws against Reco^ciliation and Persuasion, and with the chain, so
that he could not speak to the Priest, but that his fellow must know it, nor
seek the others consent without danger of the Law. After much perplexity, and
many conflicts, he resolved to open himself to his companion, as he did, and
brought him likewise to desire his salvation; and so came both together to the
Priest, and being instructed, they renounced their heresy, and resolved to die
in the Catholic faith.

After they were condemned, as they were carried to execution, the
Caluinist-Ministers came about them, offering to exhort them after their
manner: but the prisoners cast them of with contempt, and being asked the
cause, answered, that their doctrine had brought them to the gallows, and
seeing it could not help them to heaven, they had resolved to die Catholics: and
if they had lived in the same Religion, wherein they desired to die, they had
never come to that infamous death: but seeing things past could not be undone,
they most willingly accepted the punishment, which God had laid upon them, with
great confidence and assurance, that for the merits of our Saviors passion and
death, he would receive theirs, and their hearty repentance, in some recompense
of their former sins. And so died with great edification, and example to the
people, verifying in England that which Christ said to the Princes of the
Jews, Publicani and Meretrices praecedent vos in Regno Dei.

The Caluinists or Protestants (call them as you list, for they be either) have
entrenched themselves in this Island, like so many mutined souldiars, that have
gotten a strong Hold, and there they make Laws at their pleasure, disguising
their unlawful proceedings with honorable terms, and honest manner of speech,
and (as it seems) persuade themselves, that others must understand them
accordingly. But it is impossible, that so evident a truth can be hid under
their bushel. The nature of truth challenges her place in the view of the
world, and for themselves it most imports, that truth be laid open and
discovered, to the end that when all other respects should fail, yet the just
fear of infamy may moderate their excesses, or at least keep in others by
their example; as the Poet says:

-- Auidos vicinum funus vt aegros
Exanimat, mortisque metu sibi parcere cogit:
Sic teneros animos aliena opprobria saepe
Absterrent vitijs. --
Horat. lib. 1. sermon. 7. I have also heard these days reported by persons of
credit lately come from Spain, another case worthy to be known; for it
confirms not a little that which has been said; to wit, that the Catholic
faith the Sicut palma florebit
more it is trodden down, the more it rises: the more it is cropped, the deeper
root it takes, and the more it is oppressed with persecution, the more it
spreads it self, and every day gayneth more ground, and more opinion and
authority in all good men's minds, and is more loved and esteemed of all.

The report is also, that about the same time that in England they banished by
Proclamation all Priests and Religious men from London their Court; God
Almighty inspired a Stranger Caesar Bogacio.
to call them, by his last Will and Testament, to the Court of Spain, leaving
them commodious dwelling, both for the situation, and capacity of the houses,
and all his goods, to make an English College in Madrid, moved, as they say,
by that which he had seen in the Seminary of Valliadolid, as a near
Neighbor to it, when the Court was there. And two circumstances concur in
this action, worthy to be noted: one that he began this College in the
Catholic Court, the very same day, that his Majesty of England had prefixed
for the Priests to depart out of his. The other, that the party who gave this
gift, did it under condition, that no memory should be made with men, of that
which he did. But for the very same reason I have taken this occasion to
remember him. For honor of right belongs only to them that fly it, and God
Almighty uses to reward not only in heaven, but in this world also works of
virtue done purely for his sake.

This Gentleman was an Italian, borne in the City of Luca, although for his
long continuance in the King of Spain his service, he was accounted as one of
that Country. And here likewise it is to be considered, that Antonius Bonuiso,
the Man that with his charity maintained the Lord Chancellor of England and
Martyr Sir Thomas More, pattern of loialty in Kings Counselors, and
servants, all the time that his Lord King Henry the eight kept him prisoner in
the Tower of London, because he would not consent to his unlawful outrages,
was of the same City of Luca. And the same Bonuiso afterward with great
liberality intertayned in his house at Louayne the Priests and secular
Catholics that left England in the beginning of Queen Elizabeth's persecution.

And if any man ask me what correspondence there is, or what occasion of amity
between England and the State of Luca, that from thence should arise men so
eminently well affected to English Catholics in such occasions as these? There
can be given no other cause (as I suppose) but the good pleasure of Almighty
God, that laid hand upon Abacuc, and carried him from Iudaea by the hair of
his head, to feed his Prophet in the dungeon of Babylon: and chose Zachaeus for
his Host in Jericho, and the house of Lazarus, and his sisters in Bethania for
his ordinary Inn, and would not do this favor to any of the Scribes or
Pharisees in Jerusalem, nor to any other Inhabitant of that City. This is a
privilege which our Savior grants to whom he pleases; and we can give no
other reason, why he does it, but his holy will. Only by experience we see,
that he will not be served of every man's house, nor of every man's person, or
goods, in these like occasions. In fine, he is Lord and Owner of all: Domini
est terra and plenitudo eius. And as the Princes of the earth do not serve
themselves indifferently of all, but of their best beloved, and most trusty
servants, in things of their particular liking: so it fares with this great
Lord of Lords. And as it is a favor when he gives any man means and
possibility to do good works: so is it a double, and far greater favor, to
give him withal, prudence, good occasion, and desire to do them, and to bestow
profitably that which God has left to his disposition. And amongst all the
employments, that can be in this world of temporal goods, there is none so
certain, and of so great interest, as that which Christians have, under the
government of Infidels, that spoil them, and make havoc of their goods,
because they will not forsake their faith, nor consent to their error. For
these men (doubtless) in lieu of the little which they can leese for God,
receive even in this world the comforts and pledges of eternal salvation
(whereof has been spoken above) and soon after shall enter into his riches
that have no measure, and enjoy the treasure of everlasting felicity, and be
made partakers of his Kingdom for ever.

THE PRINCIPAL HEADS contained in this Book.
1. THE Preface to the Reader. Page 1. 2. The Proclamation against Catholics,
and Answer thereunto. Page 7. 3. A Letter of a Gentlewoman residing on this
side the seas, written to her Husband in England, exhorting him to constancy in
the persecution. Page 27. 4. An Aduertisment to the Reader, for the better
understanding of the former Proclamation, and Answer. Page 31. 5. An
Apostrophe to the Martyrs and Confessors that suffer for Christ. Page 69. 6.
An Abstract or brief sum of the Laws that are termed good and wholesome,
made by his Majesty and the Parliament of England, against Recusants of that
Kingdom. Page 73. 7. The execution of the said Laws made against Catholics.
Page 95. 8. A Counter Command of certain Laws and heavenly Instructions,
opposite to the former against Catholics; by which, if they be well
understood, the other be disanulled, and loose their force. Page 103. 9.
Profitable Considerations, for the Kings most Excellent Majesty, and those of
his Counsel, concerning the affliction of his Catholic Subjects. Page 127.
10. A Letter written to S. Cyprian in the name of the whole Clergy of Rome,
declaring the comfort, and consolation of those that then suffered persecution
for Christ. Page 168. 11. A Letter written out of England, concerning new Laws
enacted in the last Parliament, against Catholics, and added to the former.
Page 171.

FINIS.

