HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE

DIEV ET MON DROIT

By the King. A Proclamation, prohibiting the bringing in of any Commodities
traded from the LEVANT, into this Kingdom; as well by Subjects as Strangers,
not free of that Company: Also containing a publication of certain Statutes,
for the restraint of all His Majesty's Subjects, from Shipping any Commodities
in Strangers Bottomes, either into this Kingdom, or out of the same.
IT is a great part of Our Princely care, to maintain and increase the trade
of Our Merchants, and the strength of Our Navy, the one being as the Veins
whereby wealth is imported into Our Estate, and the other as principal Synewes
for the strength and service of Our Crown and Kingdom: Whereas therefore the
Society and Company of Our Merchants trading the LEVANT Seas, have by the
space of thirty years past, at the least, had a settled and constant
possession of Trade in those parts, and have had the sole bringing in of all
the Commodities of those Countries, as namely Currants, Cotton Woolls, Wines of
Candie, Galls, etc. Whereby Our Kingdom has been much enriched, Our great
Ships and Mariners set on work, and the Honor and fame of Our Nation and
Kingdom, spread and enlarged in those remote parts: And whereas, for their
further encouragement, the said Company have had, and enjoyed by Letters
Patents under the great Seal of England, as well in the time of the late
Queen, as in Our own time, privilege for the sole bringing in of the said
Commodities, with general prohibitions and restraints, as well of natural
Subjects, being not free of that Society, as of all Strangers and Aliens
whatsoever, to bring in any of the said Commodities, contrary to the
Privilege of the said Company:

We minding the upholding and continuance of the said Trade, and not to suffer
that the said Society shall sustain any violation or diminution of their
liberties and privileges, have thought good to ratify and publish unto all
persons, as well subjects as strangers, the said privilege and restraints, to
the end that none of them presume to attempt any thing against the same: And do
hereby straightly charge and command all Our Customers, Comptrollers, and all
other Our Officers at the Ports, and also the Farmers of Our Customs and their
Deputies and Waiters, that they suffer not any Currants, Cotton wool, Wines of
Candy, Galls, nor any other Commodities whatsoever, brought from any the
foreign parts or Regions, whereinto the said Company have used to Trade, to
be landed, except only such as shall be brought in by such as are free of
the said Company.

Furthermore, whereas there has been in Ancient time, diverse good and
politic Laws made against the Shipping of Merchandises in Strangers
Bottomes, either inward or outward, as namely the Statutes of 5. Rich. 2. 4.
Hen. 7. 32. Hen. 8. etc. Which Laws have of later years been much neglected,
to the great prejudice of the Navigations of Our Kingdom: We do straightly
charge and command, that the said Laws be from henceforth duly put in
execution, upon the great and grievous pains therein contained, and upon pain
of Our high indignation and displeasure toward all Our Officers and Ministers,
which shall be found flacke and remiss in procuring and assisting the due
execution of the said Laws.

Given at Whitehall, the seventeenth day of April, in the thirteenth year of
Our Reign of England, France, and Ireland, and of Scotland the eight and
fortieth.
God save the King.
Imprinted at London by Robert Barker, Printer to the Kings most excellent
Majesty. ANNO DOM. 1615.


