royal blazon or coat of arms HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE By the King.
A Proclamation for restrayning of the serving of Fee-Deere.
IT is manifest by that which We receive from all parts of Our Kingdom, That
the great and extraordinary Frost and Snow, which happened in the end of this
year, has destroyed great numbers of Dear, both of Red and Fallow, in all
Our Parkes, Forests and Chaces; and it is to be doubted, that those which have
escaped the storm of the weather, are so weakened, and surfaited by the
extremity of the cold, as they will hardly hold out the next Winter; So as if
there be not some course taken how they may be restored again, Our grounds
will be utterly destroyed and consumed a long time: For remedy whereof, We have
thought fit to make stay of the serving of all Fee Dear, and all Dear by
Warrants, as well to Our Justices of Oyer and Terminer of Our Forests, both on
this side and beynod Trent; and to all other Our Officers great and small, as
Lieutenants, Rangers, Fosters, Verdurers and Keepers; that either by custom,
by pretense of their Offices, or by any other Warrant whatsoever, do claim to
have any Fee-Deere, either within the survey of Our Exchequer, or of Our Duchy
of Lancaster. And to the end that Our said Justices of Oyer and Terminer, and
all other Our Officers claiming right of Fee-Deere; and all Our Lieutenants,
Rangers, Verdurers, Keepers, and all other Our Officers of any Our Forests,
Parkes, and Chaces, may the more speedily take knowledge of this Our pleasure,
We have thought good to make the same known to them by this Public
signification; whereby We do straightly charge and command, as well Our
Justices of Oyer and Terminer, beyond and by hither Trent, and all Officers and
Ministers, as well within the Survey of Our Exchequer, as of Our Duchy of
Lancaster of what degree soever, and all Rangers, Verdurers, Fosters or
Keepers, in any our Parkes, Forests and Chaces, that they do forbear to give
out their Warrants for any Dear, Red or Fallow, claimed by them as Fees
incident to their Offices and places. And do likewise will and command all
Keepers and Vnderkeepers, to whom the serving of such Warrants do appertain,
either of Red Dear or Fallow, That they shall not serve this year any
Fee-Deere to any of the Officers before mentioned, or to any other, demanding
Dear by what Warrant soever, except only by Warrant under Our own hand and
Signet; as they will answer to Us upon peril of Our displeasure.

Given at Our Palace of Westminster the xxij. day of April, in the thirteenth
year of Our Reign of England, France, and Ireland and of Scotland the 48.
God save the King.
Imprinted at London by ROBERT BARKER, Printer to the Kings most Excellent
Majesty. ANNO DOM. 1615.


