By the Lords of His Majesty's Privy Council.
WHereas in diverse Ports of this Kingdom, the Officers of the said Ports do
exact a certain petty duty, commonly called Head-money, upon every
Passenger, as well at their going forth, as at their entrance into the Kingdom,
which is now absolutely taken away and ablished, by a Treaty some few years
since made and concluded betwixt His Majesty and the most Christian French
King, that now is, both in these His Majesty's Kingdoms, as also in the Realm
of France, and all other Dominions belonging to that Crown, as concerning
those of the English and French Nation: These shall be to let you know, that
His Majesty intending (as always he has done) really to observe the said
Treaty in that and all other Articles therein contained, has given strait
charge and commandment, that no Officer, nor other person whomsoever, shall
presume hereafter to exact or demand the said Head-money, upon any Subjects of
His good Brother the most Christian French King, that shall have occasion to
pass at that Port, or any the members thereof, either at his going forth or
landing, but that it may be free for all such persons, of what condition or
degree soever, against whom there shall be no other particular cause of
restraint to pass, as aforesaid, without the exaction of this or any duty of
the like nature whatsoever. To which His Majesty's Royal pleasure and express
commandment; We do in his Highness name straightly charge and command you and
every of you, whom it may concern, to conform your selves, that you do not
henceforth demand, or suffer to be demanded the said pretended duty,
commonly called Head-money, nor any thing in the nature or Lieu thereof, as you
will answer the contrary at your peril, and as you will avoid His Majesty's
high displeasure.

Given at the Court at Whit^hall the fifteenth of March, in the fifteenth year
of His Majesty's Reign of England, France, and Ireland, and of Scotland the
one and fifty, 1617.
To all Majors, Portreeues, Customers, Comptrollers, Searchers of Ports, and
all other His Majesty's Officers whom it may concern, and to every of them.
G. Cant. Pembroke. Th. Edmonds. Fr. Bacon, Canc. T. Arundell. Tho. Lake. T.
Suffolk. James Hay. Iul. Caesar. Lenox. F. Carry.


Imprinted at London by Bonham Norton, and John Bill, Deputies and Assigns of
Robert Barker, Printer to the Kings most Excellent Majesty. AN. DOM. M.DC.XVII.


