royal blazon or coat of armsIAMES by the grace of God King of England,
Scotland, France and Ireland, Defender of the Faith, etc.
To the (...) in Our County of (...) and to every of them greeting.
We will and command you, that you warn and cause to come xxiiij. honest
lawful and discreet men of your said (...) before the Clerk of the Market of
Our Household, and throughout Our Realm of England, or before his lawful
Deputy or Deputies for Our said County of (...) and every part thereof as well
within Liberties as without, to appear at (...) upon (...) being the (...) day
of (...) next coming by eight of the clock in the forenoone of the same day,
then and there to hear and do upon their several oaths, as they and every
of them shall be for Us and on Our behalfes required, according to the Laws and
Statutes of Our Realm: And moreover that you send your Precepts according to
the tenor hereof to all your petty-Constables or Tithing men of every Parish
and Hamlet within your said (...) thereby commanding them to inform themselves
what Weights or Measures are kept or used within their several Constableries,
and that they specially warn all Millers, Bakers, Brewers, Inholders,
Vintners, Mercers, Grocers, Drapers, Alehouse-keepers, Butchers, Chandlers,
Smithes, Weauers, Farmers, Malsters, Tailers, Glouers, Clothiers, Clothworkers,
Fullers, and generally all Artificers, Tradesmen, or any other person or
persons whatsoever within their Constableries or Tithings, that uses or has
any Weights or Measures whatsoever sealed or not sealed, to bring or send their
said Weights and Measures at the day and place aforesaid, to be duly examined
with Our Standard; And also that they require the Bakers and Victuallers to
bring thither with them their Bread of all sorts, to be tried whether the true
Assize be kept therein; And that the said Constables or Tithing-men do bring
thither and present to Our said Clerk of the Market or to his Deputy fair
written and fixed to Our Precept, as their return thereof, a true note of the
names of the Parish or Hamlet whereof they are Officers, and the name of the
Parish whereof the Hamlet is a part, with the true names, surnames and
additions of all the persons appointed to be summoned by them as aforesaid, And
withal a note of all the Weights and Measures which every or any man uses or
has, and your self or selves to be then and there present and attendant, and
to make a due return of this Our Command and Precept; Indorsing thereupon the
true names of all the Parishes and Hamlets whereof you have summoned the
Officers to appear, together with the said Officers names: And moreover that
you give notice to such Our Justices of Peace within or next adjoining to your
(...) that they may be present to see the due execution of this Our Service,
according to the intent of Our late Proclamation on this behalf: And hereof
fail not as you will answer the contrary at your peril.

Dated under the Seal of the Office aforesaid the (...) day of (...) in the
(...) year of Our Reign of England, France and Ireland, and of Scotland the
(...)

