THE KEY of Knowledge. Containing sundry godly Prayers and Meditations, very
necessary to occupy the minds of well disposed persons.

EPHE. 4. Vnus Dominus, vna Fides, vnum Baptisma.

Imprinted at London by William Seres.

An Almanac for.xvij. years.
Anno. dom. Easter whitson^ Dom. leter day. day. 1572. F. F. 6. Apriell. 25.
May. 1573. D. 22. March^ 10. May. 1574. C. 11. Apriell^ 30. May. 1575. B. 3.
Apriell^ 22. May. 1576. A. G 22. Apriell^ 10. June. 1577. F. 7. Apriell. 26.
May. 1578. E. 30. March. 18. May. 1579. D. 19. Apriell^ 7. June. 1580. C. B 3.
Apriell. 22. May. 1581. A. 16. March^ 14. May. 1582. G. 15. Apriell^ 3. June.
^583 F. 31. March^ 19. May. 1584. E. D 19 Apriell^ 7. June. 1585. C. 11.
Apriell^ 30. May. 1586. B. 3. Apriell. 22. May. 1587. A. 16. Apriell^ 4. June.
1588. G. F 7. Apriell. 26. May.

January has xxxi. days.
The day has 8. hou. 26. min. The night has 15. ho. 34. mi. 1 A New years
day. 2 b Octa of Stephen. 3 c Octa of John. 4 d Octa of Innocents. 5 e Titus
Pan. bish. 6 f Twelfe day. 7 g Tran. William. 8 A Felix and Ian. 9 b Lucian. 10
c Paul first hermit. 11 d Ignius martyr. 12 e Archade martyr. 13 f Hillary
martyr. 14 g Felix priest. 15 A Isidore martyr. 16 b Maurice. 17 c Depo. of
Anthony. 18 d Prise martyr. 19 e Wolstan bishop. 20 f Fabi^n and Sebast. 21 g
Agnes virgin. 22 A Uincent martyr. 23 b Emerice. 24 c T^uothe disciple. 25 d
Conversion of Paul. 26 e Policarpe martyr. 27 f Chrysostom doctor. 28 g
Theodore. 19 A Ualery bishop 30 b Bartilde Queen. 31 c

February has xxviii days.
The day has 9. hours 33. min. The night has 14 hou. 2^. min. 1 d Fast, 2 e
Purifi. of Mary. 3 f Blase martyr. 4 g Gilbert confessor. 5 A Agathe virgin. 6
b Amandis bishop. 7 c Dorethe virgin. 8 d Angule virgin. 9 e Paul bishop. 10 f
Appoluie virgin. 11 g 12 (...) Scolastice. 13 b Eu^rage virgin. 14 c Ualentine
martyr. 15 d 16 e Faustine bishop. 17 f Iuliane virgin. 18 g Policron bishop.
19 A Simon marier. 20 b 21 c Sabine and Iuliane. 22 d Hildred virgin. 23 e
Fast. 24 f Mathie Apostle. 25 g LXIX martirs. 26 A Peter's chair. 27 b
Augustine bishop. 28 c O^wald bishop.

March has xxxi. days.
The day has 11. hour 24. min. The night has 12. ho. 36 min. 1 d David
bishop. 2 e Chadde confessor. 3 f Martine. 4 g Adrian martyr. 5 A Phocas and
Eus. 6 b Uictor and victorine. 7 c Perpetue 8 d Apoline martyr. 9 e Agape
virgin. 10 f Gregory bishop 11 g Aggeus prophet. 12 A Theodore martyr. 13 b
Leo bishop. 14 c Peter martyr. 15 d Longin martyr. 16 e Quirin Martyr. 17 f
Gertrude virgin. 18 g Edward King. 19 A Joseph the hus. of Ma. 10 b Cutbert
bishop. 22 c Beuidict Abbot. 22 d Affrodose bishop. 23 e Theodr^e priest. 24 f
Fast. 25 g Annune. of mary. 26 A Castor martyr 27 b Ludgar bishop. 28 c Dorothe
martyr. 29 d Uictorine. 30 e Sabine virgin. 31

April has xxx. days.
The day has 12. hours. 26 min. The night has 11. houre^. 34. mi^ 1 g
Theodore virgin. 2 A Mary Egiptian. 3 b Richard bishop. 4 c Ambrose bishop. 5 d
Martian and mar. 6 e Sextus martyr. 7 f Ephem^e virgin. 8 g Denise martyr. 9 A
Perpetuus martyr. 10 b Martus martyr. 11 c Guthlake. 12 d Apolline martyr. 13 e
Sotherd martyr. 14 f Tiburt martyr 15 g Osmond bishop. 16 A Isidore bishop. 17
b Amcete bishop. 18 c Eluther^ bishop. 19 d Tibertus con. 20 e Hermogenes. 21 f
Quintine. 22 g Elete Bishop 23 A Ge^rge martyr. 24 b wilfride confess. 25 c
Mark Euang. 26 d Anastace bishop. 27 e Uitalis martyr. 28 f Peter of Milan. 29
g Clete bishop. 30 A Dep^. of Erkenwald

May has xxxi. days.
The day has 15 hours 2^. min. The night has 8 hours 46. mi^ 1 b Phillip.
and Jacob. 2 c Athanasius bishop. 3 d Inuen. of the cross. 4 e Christopher. 5
f Goddard archbish. 6 g John ante port. latin. 7 A John of Beuerly. 8 b Appe.
of Michael. 9 c Tran of Nicho. 10 d Gordiane. 11 e Poncrase martyr. 12 f
Uictorius martyr 13 g Seruatius confess. 14 A Boniface martyr. 15 b Sophia
virgin. 16 c Brandon bishop. 17 d Transla, of Barnard. 18 e Dioscor. martyr.
19 f 20 g Dunston confess. 21 A Barnardine 22 b Helene Queen. 23 c Petronell.
24 d Julian virgin. 25 e Desidery martyr. 26 f Adelmer confess. 27 g Augustine
confess. 28 A German bishop. 29 b Nicodeme. 30 c Corone martyr. 31 d Felix
bishop.

June has xxx. days.
The day has 16. hours 30. min* The night has 7. h^u. 30 min. 1 e Nicodeme.
2 f Erasmus. 3 g Basil. 4 A Mercell martyr. 5 b Petrocino confess, 6 c Boniface
bishop. 7 d Medard and Bil. 8 e Transla. Edmound. 9 f Iuan confess. 10 g
Trans^a^ wolstan. 11 A The longest day. 12 b 13 c Anthony con. 14 d Basilids
con. 15 e Uitemodeste. 16 f Trans. Richard. 17 g Botolph confe. 18 A Exupirie
bishop. 19 b Geruasius mar. 20 c Tran. Edward. 21 d Walburge virgin. 22 e
Albane martyr. 23 f Fast. 24 g John Baptist. 25 A Tran. of Egelie. 26 b John
and Paul. 27 c Creseens martyr. 28 d Fast. 29 e Peter and Paul. 30 f Comme.
of Paul.

July has xxxi. days.
The day has 16. hours. The night has 8 hours. 1 g Octa. John Baptist. 2 A
Ui^ita. of Mary. 3 b Tran. of Tho Apost. 4 c Transt. of martyr. 5 d Octa. of
Peter. 6 e ^oe virgin martyr. 7 f Depo. of Grimbal. 8 g Cirill bishop. 9 A vij.
brethren martyr. 10 b Dog days begin. 11 c Nabor and Felix. 12 d Tran. of
Benedict. 13 e Private martyr. 14 f Tran. of Osmond. 15 g Renelme king. 16 A
Enastasij. 17 b Arnulph martyr. 18 c ^nfine and Iustine. 19 d Praxede virgin.
20 e Margret virgin. 21 f Appolina. virgin. 22 g Mary Magdalen. 23 A Christine
virgin. 24 b Fast. 25 c James Apostle. 26 d Anne mo. of Marye 27 e Seven
sleepers. 28 f Sampson bishop. 29 g Felix and his fellow 30 A Abdon. and Sen.
31 b

August has xxxi. days.
The day has 15* hours 11 min. The night has 8 hours 48. mi^ 1 c Laminas
day. 2 d Stephen bishop. 3 e Finding of Stephen. 4 f Iustine priest. 5 g Festum
muis. 6 A Trans. of Christ. 7 b Feast of Jesus. 8 c C^^acke and his fe. 9 d
Roman martyr. 10 e Laurence martyr. 11 f Tiburt martyr. 12 g Clare virgin. 13
A Ipolite virgin. 14 b Exalta crucis. 15 c Assump. of Mary. 16 d Roche martyr.
17 e Octa. Laurence. 18 f Magnus martyr. 19 g Bernard confessor. 20 A Dog days
end. 21 b Jews martyr. 22 c Octa. assump. 23 d Fast. 24 e Bartilmew Apo. 25 f
Jews King. 26 g Seuerine. 27 A Augustine confessor. 28 b John's beheading. 29 c
Rufine martyr. 30 d Felix and Audacte 13 e

September has xxx. days.
The day has 12 hours 35. min. The night has 11 hou. 25 min 1 f Gilis
bishop. 2 g Anthony martyr. 3 A Lupe bishop. 4 b Tran. of Cutbert. 5 c Bertine
Abot. 6 d Eugine confessor. 7 e Enurcius bishop. 8 f Nativity of Mary. 9 g
Siluius bishop. 10 A Gorgony martyr. 11 b Prothy and Iacunt. 12 c Martinian. 13
d Amanii. 14 e Holy Roode. 15 f Lambert martyr. 16 g Edith virgin. 17 A
Timotheus. 18 b Uictor and Coron. 19 c January martyr. 20 d Fast. 21 e Matthew
Apostle. 22 f Maur^cius. 23 g Ueela virgin. 24 ^ Andochius martyr. 25 b Firmin
bishop. 26 c Cipria^ and Just. 27 d Cosme and Damian. 28 e Exuperie bishop. 29
f Michael Archangel. 30 g Jerome priest.

October has xxxi days.
The day has 10 hours 50 min. The night has 13 hours 10 mi 1 A Remegius
bishop. 2 b Leodagere martyr. 3 c Candidie martyr. 4 d Frances martyr. 5 e
Faith virgin. 6 f Gerionis. 7 g Mary and Mar^. 8 A Apolinaris martyr. 9 b
Pelagie virgin. 10 c Linus confessor. 11 d Denice and his fell. 12 e Nicolaus
Bishop. 13 f wilfrid bishop. 14 g Tran. Ed. King. 15 A Calixt bishop. 16 b
Wolfran bishop. 17 c Michael of the mo. 18 d Luke Evangelist. 19 e Etheldred
virgin. 20 f Frideswide virgin. 21 g Austreburt virgin. 22 A xi. M virgins. 23
b Mary Solomon. 24 c Roman bishop. 25 d Maglore bishop. 26 e Crispin and
Eris. 27 f Fast. 28 g Simon and Jude. 29 A Narcissus bishop 30 b Germyne
confessor. 31 c Fast.

November has xxx. days.
The day has 8. hours. 52. min. The night has 15. houers. 8. mi. 1 d All
Saints. 2 e All souls 3 f Winfride virgin. 4 g Amatius. 5 A Let priest. 6
b Leonard. 7 c wilbrode. 8 d Four crowned. 9 e Theodore 10 f Martine. 11 g
Martine bishop 12 A Brief bishop. 13 b Pattern martyr. 14 c Tran. Erkenwall. 15
d Macute bishop 16 e Dep. of Edmond. 17 f Init. Regni, Elizabeth 18 g Octa.
Martine 19 A Eelizabeth martyr. 20 b ^omond King 21 c Pres. of Mary 22 d Cecily
virgin. 23 e Clement Martyr. 24 f Grisagon martyr. 25 g Katherine virgin. 26
A Line martyr. 27 b Uitales martyr 28 c Rufus martyr. 29 d Fast. 30 e Andrew
Apostle.

December has xxxj. days.
The day has 7. hours 36. min. The night has 16. ho. 24. min. 1 f Elegy
bishop 2 g Liban martire. 3 A Dep. of Osmond. 4 b Barbara virgin. 5 c Sabba
bishop 6 d Nicholas bishop. 7 e Octa-Andrew. 8 f Con. of Mary 9 g Ciprian
bishop. 10 A E^lalie virgin. 11 b Antippe 12 c Damasc. confessor 13 d The
shortest day. 14 e Nicasius virgin 15 f Otholy virgin. 16 g O Sapientia 17 A
Lazarus confessor 18 b Gracian bishop 19 c Uenetia virgin 20 d Fast. 21 e
Thomas Apostle. 22 f xxx. martirs. 23 g Uictor virgin. 24 A Fast. 25 b
Christmas day. 26 c Stephen martyr. 27 d John Euagelist. 28 e Innocents day. 29
f Thomas Becket 30 g Trans. of James 31 A Syluester martyr.

A rule to know when the terms begin and end with their returns.
Hillary term begins the xxiij. of January, and ends the xij. or xiij.
day of February, and has iiii. returns. yt is Oct. Hill. Qui Hill. Cra. Pur.
Octa. Pu.
Easter term begins xvij days after Easter day and e^deth ye monday next
after ye asceneio^ day and have five returns. yt is Qui Pas. Tres Pas Qui Pas.
Crae Asc. Men. Pa.
Trinity Term begins the xij. day after Whitsonday and continues xix days
and has iiij returns. yt is Cra. Tri. Octa. Tri. Qui. Tri. Tree. Tri.
Michaelmas Term begins the ix or x. day of October and e^deth ye xxviij or
xxix of Noue^ber and has viij returns Also that eight days before any term
begin, ye Exchequer opens, excep^ trinity term, for the^ it opens but four
days before. yt is Octa. Mi. Qui. Mic. Tres. Mic. Mense mi. Cra. Any. Cra.
Mar. Oct. mar. Qu. mar


TO THE RIGHT Honorable and verteous Lady, the Lady Elizabeth Russell etc. T.
A. wishes increase of honor, with happy proceedinges, in grace and virtue.
POntanus in his 19. chapter de magnificentia, among other things makes
mention of one Aconitanus, that presented unto Alphonsus King of Calabria, a
Box of Amber, very curiously and artificialy wrought, which being opened by the
King: had nothing else but a little sflye enclosed within. Surely (said
Alphonsus) the reward is but small, notwithstanding a Prince that measures it
not so much by the price, as by the rarenes thereof, accountes it for a most
precious present. And having so said, he stood a great while amazed,
bethinking himself, with what kind of reward he might worthily recompense
him that gave a gift so geason: Madam I offer not unto your honor an Amber
Box with a Fly, as Aconitanus did, nor my cap full of water as Synctes did, nor
mine ha^dful of leaves, as another Persian did, and yet the thing that I offer
agrees in one respect to all these three, and again in one point differs
from one of them only. It agrees with all three in baseness: and it differs
only from the Amber Box, which preferred a glosing and bewtifull show to the
outward vewe, and yet had nothing with in it but a thing of naught: much like
unto an house, which outwardlye is very sumpteously adorned, yelding a port of
great majesty and magnificence to the eye, but when a man is entered in to it,
there is nothing to be seen but only the bare wales. Whereunto the thing
that I offer is clean contrary: For it yeldeth no glorious nor glistringe
gloss nor any color of delighte unto the eye: notwithstanding I have so
provided that the matter therein contained shall suffice to commend it without
the help of any external ornaments. And having at last brought the same to
perfection, I could not call to reme^beraunce any person of estate, on whom I
had greater cause to bestow it, then upon your honor. For considring, your
courteous and amiable acceptatio^ of those few ragged verses, which, about
two years paste I presumed to tender unto your discreet judgment, I must
needs confess that, from that time to this present day, I have been depely
indebted unto your good Ladyship. And now, somewhat what to discharge my self
of that continual burden, and to make satisfaction in part, of the debte
which I have so long owed: I have compiled this little book of Prayers
grounded upon the divine promises contained in the sacred Scriptures, which I
have adventured to publish under the patronag of your Ladyships name, craving
that as often soever, as God shall put it in your mind to withdraw your self
into your closet, there to meditate upon the heavenly promises, of our most
merciful Father, (as your vexteous mind is very seldom, or never at all,
otherwise inclined,) that then you would vouchsafe to take this book in hand,
and turning to any title whatsoeuer^ may serve your turn, to apply the prayer
following unto your present purpose. But perchance you will say that there are
already extant^ diverse and sundry books of prayers, which have been set fourth
by men of greater understanding and riper judgment then I, and therefore it was
a needeles and superfluous travail to wade any furthar in that matter. Indede
Madame I grant that there are many prayer books published, but yet I am of this
opinion that if there were ten times as many, yet there were not to many. For
the common proverb is, B^num, quo ^^o^munius, eo melius: The more common a
good thing is, the better it is And therefore will I hardly be persuaded, that
my labor could any way have been better employed, then in such causes as
concern the advancement of Gods glory, and the propagation of virtue. Well
such as it is I have presumed to offer unto your honors i^dgement, with
assured hope, that you will deem of it, as your noble nature has been always
inclined to judge of them that attempt the like enterprises: and that you will
accept it as a sure toke^ and testimony of his loyal affection and ready
duty, that would think himself happy to be accoumpted but as the least in
the number of those that would be always at your Ladyships commandment.

Thomas Achelley.

Morning Prayer.
O Almighty and most merciful Father, who of thine unspeakable love, and
pity, toward the disobediente, and lost children of Adam (when we were
carried away thorough sin, and ignorance to damnation, following Satan,
after the blind, and unbridled lusts of the flesh) did reconcile us to
thee by grace, and adopcion in Christ Jesus, the righteous and immaculate
Lamb, by faith and sure confidence, grounded on the merits of his death
whereby we are redeemed from the eternal prison of death and damnation, have
mercy upon us, mos^e merciful and loving Father, and so quicken our dull and
heavy minds, by the inspiration of thy holy spirit, that we may shake of
this dead sleep, and continualy watch in thee, abandoning the worckes of
darcknes, and walking in the worckes of light, whereby we may be worthy to walk
in this holy vocation (where unto thou haste called us (and with thine elected
saints, to sing praises unto thee, and at all seasons and times, to glorify
thy holy name. And among all other benefits which thou of thy free mercy,
doste daily and hourly, most abundantly bestow upon us, we yield thee mortal
thanks, for yt thou haste vouchsa^ed to pres^rue us both this night and all
the time and days of our life, under the shadow and protection of thy wings,
keeping our eyes waking in thee, without any idle dreams, or fantasies, that
might disturb our minds from the meditation of thy grace, and haste safely
brought me to the beginning of this day, from the drousy grave of my bed,
which manifestly, resembles in lying down my death, and in rising up a
manifest tipe and figure of my resurrection. Therefore since thou of thy mercy
haste raised me up from this earthly reast, wherein my mortal body, and
corrupt nature has been partly recreated from the labors and trauayles, which
I daily sustain in this terestrial pilgrimage, vouch^a^e also I beseech thee,
to direct me with thy holy spirit, both this day and ever that all my doings
may tend to thy glory and to the commodity of my neighbou^.

And grant most, merciful Father, that the residue of my whole life, from
he^ceforth may he gided happly under thy tuition, whereby all manner of
darkness, misbeliefe infidelity, and carnal lusts, and affections, may be
utterly chased, and driven out of my heart, and that I may be justified and
saved, both body and soul, through a right and perfect faith, in Christ Jesus,
and so walk in the light of thy most holy word and commandments, all the
days of this my frail and transitory being. Arm us with thy grace, most
merciful father, and strengthen us, by thine assistaunce, to vanquishe the
power of the sinful flesh, and Satan, yt having victory in the end, we may
joyfully triumph in thy salvation, that art ye God of our strength and might.
Endue our blind hearts with thy heavenly spirit, that being strong in faith,
although ^eeble in ye flesh, we may so rule the bridle of our course, both now
and ever from henceforth, that we sleep not in sin (as ye unbelievers do)
which have no hope of resurrection in Christ Jesus, but following the motion of
their own common sense, are so linked and tied to ye ground, that their gross
capacity is not of force to look up, and to be hold the brightness of thy
divinity, which art God from the beginning, and for everlasting, world without
end. To whom with the son, and the holy Ghost be al honor and glory for
ever, and ever, Amen.

A Prayer for Evening.
O Almighty and most merciful Father, maker of heaven, and earth, with all
that is therein, whose works are insercheable, whose mercy is in^^nite, whose
power is above the Clouds of heaven, we beseech thee of thy accustomed
fatherly piety, and pity, that thou will vouchsafe to be our watch man,
this night and ever to guard us from all our enemies, both bodily or ghostly,
that endeavor to disturb the external rest of our body, or to assalt the
infernal Closet of our Conscience, with any sinful suggestions, or deuilish
devises of Satan our mortal foe, and deadly adversary. We acknolege and
confess most merciful Father, that of our selves, we are not worthy to lift
up our eyes toward heaven, much less to presume in presenting oureselues
before thy divine majesty, with confidence that thou will hear our prayers,
or incline to our petitions, if we call to remembrance the unworthiness of our
own merits and deserts, for we are nothing else but a lump of sin,
conceived and borne in iniquity, following the right path of our natural
imbecilitie, and weakness in Adam, ever more prone and apt to follow the filthy
appetite of our own desire, like unbridled Colts, and rejecting the wholesome
discipline, and instructions of thy most holy will and commandments. Our own
consciences accuse us, and our own sinz bear witness against us, that we are
nothing else but miserable wretches, subject to corrupcion, clothed with
iniquity and not of our selves able to thinck as much as one good thought, so
that we are not able to abide the extremity of thy straighte judgment,
knowing that by the worckes of the flesh we are condemned to death yet quickened
in the spirit and justified by grace, in Christ Jesus. We know most merciful
Father that thou art a righteous Judge such a one as visits the sinz of the
Fathers, upon the Children to the third and fourth generation, and do not
Justify the sinners, and them that walk in the way of iniquity, but punishest
the falts of al such as transgres thy holy laws and commandments.

Notwithstanding most merciful Father, seeing thou have promised to here us,
whenever we repent us of our sinz, from the bottom of our heart and
unfeignedly do call upon thy name for help, we have presumed to appeal to thy
Throne of mercy, humbly confessing our manifold sinz and offenses, and craving
remission of our trespasses, in ye bowels of thy only begotten son Jesus
Christ, our intercessor and savior. Have mercy therefore upon us O Lord, and
forgive us our offenses, instruct us with thy holy spirit, to enter into
examination of our own selves and by a steadfast faith in Christ Jesus, with
worckes correspondent to the same, we may earnestly and heartily repent, from
the very bottom of our hearts, and ever hereafter to thirst after thy law,
and statutes, even as the heart desires the brooks of water. And last of all,
for as much as it has pleased thee of thy heavenly wisdom, to prepare, and
orde^^e the night for man to rest, and refresh himself after his daily
trauayles, grant we beseech thee most merciful Father, that as our bodies do
take a careless sleep, so contrarily, our souls may contin^allye watch in
thee, expectting dilligently that happy time when our Lord Jesus shall appear
for our deliverance out of this mortal life into another more blis^ull and
happy life, the joys whereof noe man's capacity is able to conceive, much les
is the tongue able worthily to express the happiness thereof.

To that life we beseech the to bring us for Jesus christ his sake.

A Prayer for the increase of faith.
O Almighty and most merciful Father the everlasting fountain, and well
spring of al grace, and goodness, whose mercy is incomprehensible, and power
infinite, thou the eternal Jehovah, in whose hands are all the corners of the
earth, and the strength of the hills is thine also, whose omnipotent power,
fashoned the Sea, and prepared the dry land, have mercy upon us, miserable and
wretched sinners, and incline thy fatherly ear, unto the voice of our prayers.

Increase most heavenly father in our minds, the sparckes of true faith, and
Christianity that, being always guarded with the defense of thy holy word, we
may have power and force to renounce, and resist the terrible invasions, of
our mortal enemy Satan, who continualy rangeth about, like a roaring Lion,
seeking whom he may denoure.

And since we are chanced in these perilous times, wherein naught but
iniquity reigns, and Antechrist aduaunceth himself in thy temple exalting
himself above all that is called God, infecting thy poor disposed ^^ock, with
the poisoned dr^gges of damnable heresy, illuminate we beseech thee most
merciful father our blinded eyes, with the true light of thy heavenly grace,
that being armed with ye shield of thy divine inspiration, we may thereby be the
more emboldned to withstand the daily and innumerable assalts of our ghostly
enemy, that continually labors by all means possible to wreste the word
of truth and understanding out of our hearts and to throw us headlong into the
bottomless lake of everlasting perdition, and whereas without the inspiration
of thy heavenly grace, we are not able so much as to think a good thought,
and much les able to resist the sinful allurements of our corrupt flesh, the
world and the Devil, therefore we crave of thee most heavenly Father, that
thou will vouchsafe to make perfect that good work, which thou have be
gonne in us, not suffering those few sparckes of thy heavenly grace which thy
spirit has planted in our hearts, to be extinguished, or quenched, by means
of our weakness and inconstancy, but augmenting in our minds the zeal of thy
word, we may be able to render an accou^pt at that dreadful day, of the hope
and faith which we have in thee, by the merits of thy son Jesus Christ, our
Messiah and Savior, whom thou have vouchsafed to send into the earth, here
to be incarnate of the pure virgin Mary, and having received the image of our
humanity, to offer him self as an acceptable sacrafice, upon the alter of the
most bitter Cross and by the ^ffusion of his most precious blood, to pay the
ransom of our offenses unto thy divine majesty, whereby he reconciled us
unto thee, our heavenly Father, whereas otherwise we had been subject to the
thraldom, of everlasting damnation.

To thee with the same Jesus Christ, thy son, and the holy spirit, covnited
al three in Godhead, and distinguished in person, be all honor and glory for
ever, and ever, Amen.

A Prayer for grace to persevere in faith.
O Eternal God, and everlasting Father, the author and fountain of all
goodness, the multitude of whose benedictio^s, and benefits, far pass and
exceed, the compass of humayne reason and capacity, indue our frail minds
with the grace of thy heavenly spirit, that mortifiing our own desires, and
affections, our only joy and delight may be placed in the perpetual
consideration of thy heavenly promises, and renouncing all care, and regard of
worldly business, which commonly withdrawes our minds from the contemplation
of thine infinite mercies, we may be wholly addictted to ye service of thy
divine majesty, in spirit, and true humulitie of mind, rejoicing together in
Psalms, Hymns, and spiritual Songs, comforting one another in thy promise
of that day, wherein thou have promised to make us fellow ^eyres of thine heavenly
inheritance, with Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, in that celestial mansion,
which thou haste ordained for thine elect, since the beginning of the world.
And because by reason of our natural corruption, which we have successively
receued, since the fall of our great Grandfather Adam, we are all naturally
bente and inclined to go astray strengthen most merciful Father our feeble
spirits, with inspiration of thy heavenly grace, that being armed against all the assaults of the flesh, the world, the Devil, and Antichriste, that
Capital enemy of thy word, we may have our consciensces clear, from all
manner temtations, and altogether vacant to the Meditation of the promises
expressed in the Gospel of thy son Jesus Christ, our savior. Endue us
with the divine influence of thy spirit, that we may never be carried away
with the flesh, but by the operation of thy grace, in our hearts, we may be
able to mortify, and subdue our carnal afections and wordly desires whereby our
zeal may be the more enflamed to ensue the heavenly motions of thy holy
spirit, which directs the minds of them that fear thee, in the perfect
pathway of light, and understanding. Grant this most merciful father, for
thy Son Christ his sake, to whom with thee and the holy Ghost, be al honor
and glory, from this time forth for evermore.

A prayer for unity in Religion
O Everlasting and most merciful Father the fountain of all grace, and
goodness, which art the God of peace, love, unity and concord, and the just
revenger of disce^tion, debate and confusion, thou seeste, how miserably thy
holy congregation is rent, torn and divided into diverse sects, and
contrarieties in religion, while the carnal professors of thy name, in cloak
of pretended holiness set forth and maintain such beggarly traditions, as the
appetite of their gross fantasy leads them unto, shaking of the sweet
yoke of thine undefiled law wresting the letter thereof to serve the dissolute
motion of their carnal cogitations, mainteining in steed of thy pure and
sincere word, the fleshly ceremonies of their own devise, and invention whereby
it comes to pass that so great dissension reigns now adays in the world,
and that so many sects schisms, and heresies are daily set a broach in
every place, to the unspeakable perturbation of the course of thy word, and
utter subversion of diverse common wealths, which ought chiefly to be
maintained by the uniform consent and judgment, touching the word, and by
the perfect band of Amity, concerning temporal causes.

But now whereas men set aside the right rules, and or dinaunces of thy blessed
word, plantinge in steed thereof, orders and tradicions of their own
imaginations, how can it come to pass that christian peace and unity of
spirit, should dwell among us. Therefore grant O most merciful Father, that
we thy pore dispersed sheep which have so long ben tossed and turmoyled with
tempests of this tumultuous times, may at the last by the direction of thine
heavenly Spirit, be reduced into one foulde, acknoweleging thee our most
loving shepehearde, and merciful Father, thy son Jesus Christ, our only
savior and Mediator to thy divine majesty, the holy ghost our comforter,
which by the mouth of thy son Jesus Christ, thou did promise to send unto
us, which spirit assures our spirits that we are pertakers, inheritours, and
fellow Citizens of that heavenly Jerusalem, which thou promysedst to all them,
that unfeignedly walk in thy statutes and trust only to be saved by the blood,
and passion of thine only begotten son Jesus Christ, our Messiah, the only
red^emer of all mankind. Remove O most merciful Father, from our eyes, the
darcke shadow and veil of ignorance, that abandoning all the dregs of
erroneous sects, and heretical schisms, we may be gathered all together into
the unity of thy word; and confess that there is but one eternal God, and
one heavenly Father, which thou art, and one Faith and one Baptis^e which we
all profess, that call upon thy name. Grant also most merciful father ye we
whose minds, and opinions are noted most repugnant, and contrary in faith may
he altogether covnited into one judgment; and opinion in religion, which may
be grounded only upon the foundations of thy Proph^tes, and Apostles Jesus
Christ, himself being the head corner stone. And since there is but one faith,
which directs us into the way of salvation, grant we beseech thee, that by
the operation of thy holy spirit, we may be brought to such an agreement, and
uniformity in Religion, that we may glorify thee our heavenly Father, with one
only spirit, and general consent of conscience whereby we may be reduced
from the captivity of eternal ignorance, and be made all the sheep of thee
our most merciful and bountiful shepherd, To whom with. etc

A thanks giving for restoring of the Gospel.
WE render unto thee most merciful Father, immortal thanks, for that thou
have vochsafed, to send thine only begotten son Jesus Christ, into the world
to take our shape, and nature upon him and to submit himself to the bitter
passion of the Cross, to redeem us wretched sinners, which before were
thrales and bond slaves to the horrible sormente of everlasting damnation.

O what condign thanks are we able to render unto thee, that in the least
respect, may be able to counter payse thy fatherly kindness and love, which thou
daily shewe^t unto us, most miserable and wretched sinners.

Thou have sent thy Christ our Savior, to redeem us from the bondage of
sin, death, and damnation, and that not with Gold nor Silver, but with his
most preci^use blood, once offered upon the Cross to pay our general
ransom

The promises which thou did make to our 'forefathers, in figures and
shadows, thou have openly performed to us in the open sight of the whole
world, in sending that M^essias, to take our sins upon him, to be scourged for
our off^nces, and to bear the burden of our iniquities* Again, thou have
manifested to us the perfect pathwaye of salvation, by the mouth of thine only
begotten son Jesus Christ, and that not in figures, nor shadows, but in
express words, saying (Hoc fac and viues) do this and thou shall live, which
to our forefathers thou declaredst covertly, and in ye dark shadows of
secret mysteries, and that not by thy son Jesus Christ but but by thy
prophets which were men mortal as we be, and were inferioure to thy son,
both in divine power, and also in dignity of person. For how much the servant
or bondsman is inferior to the heir, so much are the Prophets inferior to thy
son, and heir, Christ Jesus, whom our mortal eyes have seen of late days,
personally here in the earth, and reasoned with him face to face and even at
his own mouth have learned what is the will of thee our most loving Father,
and most merciful creatoure. And moreover because it was thy good pleasure to
take away the presence of thy son, from mankind as concerning the flesh,
we yield thee most hearty thanks that thou would vouchsafe to se^d down
thine heavenly spirit, into the hearts of all thy sons Apostles, which
spirit informing their spirits, of thy divine will, provoked them by writing
to reuele thy promises of salvation (whereof thy son preached) unto the
posterity of all ages, for evermore, wher^y both we that now live, and the
remnaunte of all future years may learn to direct their steps, as with a true
line, or rule, into the way of thy commandments.

And since in recompense of all these thine unspeakable benefits, thou
requirest no other sacrafice, but thanks giving with contrition of heart,
therefore with vncessaunt prayers we will magnify thy holy name, recordi^g
thine innumerable benefits, with Psalms of thanks giving in the midest of
the congregation for ever, not doubting, but thou of thine infinite goodness,
wilt accept the thanks which we yield to thy dyuine Majesty, as proceeding
from the very bottom of our unfeigned hearts. To thee most merciful Father with
thy son Jesus Christ and the holy ghost, be all honor and glory for ever,
Amen.

A Prayer for abolishing of Superstition.
O E^ernall and most merciful Father, who by thy divine wisdom, did lay
the foundations of heaven, and earth with the Sea and all that is therein, have
mercy and compassion of thy pore flock, dispersed through the whole earth for
the constant profession and testimony of thy heavenly word, and deliver them
at last, from the tirrany of Pharao, ye terrible persecutoure of thy poor
members.

And because that in all Lands many depart into voluntary exile, whose
conscience cannot sustain to see thy true word corrupted with the
superstitious traditions of mortal men, we beseech thee most heavenly Father
to inspire the dew of thy spirit, into the hearts of all Christian Kings,
and Princes, in whose hands consistes the reformation as well of ecclesiastical
as civil and politic causes: that by the motion of the same spirit they may be
the more feruentlye enflamed with the zeal^, and love of thy glory and be the
more ^ircumspectly bent to plant the seeds of thy true Religion, through all
their dominions, kindle most (merciful Father) in their hearts a desire, to
deface all blind ceremonies, and supersticious idolatry, which in any respect,
may seem prejudicial, or derogatory, to thy glory let them break down their
hill alters, hew down their groves, burn their Images with ^ire, ye no one
monument of them be left upon the earth, and that when they are sought for,
their place may not be found, so that the name and memory of them may decay,
and perish with the as^hes, of their consumed timber. Let their moltion Images
be consumed with fire, and their graven Shrines be brought to confusion. For
thou art a might^e God, and agelous God, one that cannot suffer a mate, or pere
in thy Dominion. Thou will be worshipped in truth and righteousness of heart,
and not with blockishe and senseless Images, ye work of men's hands, which have
ears and hear not: eyes, and see not: noses, and smell not: mouths, and eat
not: hands, and feel not: feet, and go not: but are carried hither and
thither, upon men's shoulders, like senseless stocks as they are, in no
respect, resembling any figure of divinity or Godhead. And because the use of
these fantastical Idols, tends especially to ye prejudice and prophanatio^
of thine omnipotent and divine power, (who have commanded by express words
in thy law, that we should not make to our selves the likeness of any thing
in heaven, or earth, or in the waters to bow unto) Grant, we beseech thee, thy
grace, to all princes, and potentates, that bear as well the spiritual sword,
as ye title of temporal government, that they may be moved with thine heavenly
motion, to purge thy church from all the dregs of superstition, and Idolatry,
whereby thy poor flock yt is now dispersed through the whole world, may be
brought again into one uniform consent of Religion, serving thee in lowlines
and pureness of heart, ab^^doning all the rabble of Romayne traditions, and
idolatrous ceremonies, cleaving only to the rule of thy holy gospel revealed by
thy son, Jesus Christ our lord and Savior. To whom with the Father and the
holy Ghost, three persons and one God, be all honor and glory world without
end. Amen. A prayer for the preservation of our noble Queen Elizabeth.

WE yield unto thee, (most mighty, and merciful Father) immortal thanckes,
for that it has pleased thee of thy mere mercy and fatherly bountye, after
the storms of so many troublesome times, to conduct us into the comfortable
port of tra^quilitie, by the hand of thy most gracious servant, and our dear
sovereign Lady, Elizabeth. When we were as sheep, wandering astray in ye
wilderness, thou ordainedst her Majesty, to be our Shepeheard, to gather us
again into thy shepefould. When we had been long lossed hither and thither,
with the outrage and cruel fury of tira^nicall persecution, like a poor
weatherbeate^ Bark, that has been continually turmoyled and tossed, on the
perilous surg^s of the outrageous and swelling seas, findinge no sure road,
nor harber wherein to rest, but continually in danger, either to sinck into
the san^s* or to be overwhelmed with waves, or violently to be dashed in pieces
against the main rocks: Even then (I say) when we dispayred utterly of
sauegarde, standing still in fear of the hazard of everlasting confusion, thou
committedst the helm, to be guyded by her graces wisdom, who at last
conducted us into the haven of this long desired peace and tranquillity.

Therefore whereas thou have placed her in the regal throne, to be our David,
our Josias, our Samuel, yea to be our Sheepeheard and ring-l^ader, in the way
of true holiness, and sincere Religion. Inspire her mind with ye manifold
blessings of thy grace, that she may walk all the days of her life, in the
path of thy commandments, and happily discharge her duty, in that
stewardship, and dispensation, which thou have committed to her Majesty's
hands. Inflame her mind more and more with the love of thy holy gospel, ye all
her deeds, thoughts, and practices, may tend to the propagation, and planting
of thy word and true Christian religion, in these her Majesty's Dominions.
E^cline the motions of her virtuous disposition, above all things to seek
thine honor and glory, to sow the seeds of the Catholic faith, abundantly in
all places, to cut of ye brood of superstition and Idolatry, to constitute
true Preachers of thy word, and establish every where thine holy gospel, and
true religion. Preserve her, most merciful father, (as hitherto thou haste
most myraculously done) from the deuilish devises, and practices of her
enemies, that she may have a long and happy reign, among us, to the
a^^auncement of thy glory, and joy and comfort of all her subjects Let her
natural disposition co^tin^e to her ^ocs terrible, to her subjects ami^ble,
to her offe^ders merciful, to the virtuous bountiful, indifferent to al men,
and in all respects, partial in no point, neither in causes ecclesiastical,
nor yet in matters concerning politic government. Assist her, mo^^ merciful
Father, with the might of thy heavenly Spirit, to quayle the pride of the
triple headed Romish Ce^berus, to banishe his beggarly ceremonies, to abridge
the term^ of his reign, and finally to cut of and prevent the seeds, that
continually strive to spring up from abominable superstition, and Idolatry.
Grant her grace, most merciful Father, to run the remnant of her race, in
the right path of thy commau^dements, declining neither to the right hand, nor
to the left, but so vsinge all times thy heavenly word, as the rule, and
compass, to direct her course. Preserve her grace, (most merciful Father) in
continual health of body, and quietness of mind, that she may be always
able to rule the bridle of her charge, and to execute right and Justice, to all
sorts and degrees, to the aduaunceme^t of thy glory, and the universal
commodity of her* Majesty's subjects. And finally grant (O most merciful
father) that when it shall please thee, to end the term of her days in this
world, thou will make her partaker of those celestial joys, which are
prepared for them that fear thee, since the foundation of the world. Grant
this, most merciful father, for thy dear son our lord Jesus Christ his
sake. To whom with thee and the holy Ghost, three persons and one God, be all
glory and honor, world without end.

A Prayer for the Council and Nobility.
ALmighty and most merciful Father, whose power is infinite, and works
incomprehe^sible, vouchsafe to direct the hearts of the Nobility of this
Realm, with the divine motion of thine heavenly spirit, that all their actions
and endeavors, may especially tend to the aduaunceme^t of thy holy word, and
secondly, to the common commodity and peace, of the weal publik: whereby our
Country may be free from all seditious tumults, and civil commotions, that may
cause the hinderau^ce of thy holy gospel, or the decay of ye whole state of
the common wealth. Endue their minds, most merciful Father, with true
humility of heart, that they may al be content with their present estate, not
attempting further then their degree or calling: but always to seek thy honor
and glory, carefully to show their natural duty, and allegiance to their
Prince, obediently to bestow their travail, for the increase of public
peace, and utility, diligently. Whereby thy name may be continually gloryfied,
thy commandments followed, and the state of the common wealth, happily
maynteyned. Through Jesus Christ our savior. Amen.

A prayer for the Spirituality.
ILluminate, we beseech thee, most merciful Father, the eyes of all them, whom
thou have appointed to be the Shepeheards and leaders of thy children Israel,
that they may faithfully, and truly feed them with the heavenly Manna, of thy
son Jesus Christ his gospel, reducing thy lost sheep in the wilderness,
into thy sheep sold, again byndinge up their former sores, and applying such
wholesome medicine, and spiritual consolation, unto their diseases, whereby they
may be won and reconciled unto thee, their true pasture, from whom they have
so long wandered astray. Give grace, most^ heavenly Father, to all those to
whom thou have distrybuted thy talent, yt by their vigilant study, and
careful diligence, they may some gain five m^e, to those five they received,
some three, some two, and every man according to the portion which thou have
lent them: not hyding the same in the ground, as the unprofitable servant did,
whereby no benefit* redou^ded to thee that did le^d the same. Plant most
merciful Father, in their hearts, a zeal to dyscharge the co^maundeme^ts
without respect of love, or dignity of person, and that without all
hypocrysie, or pretended holiness. Give them grace to prosecute the sum of
their message, without all manner of fear or dread, not doubtinge to speak
before Princes, and sharply to rebuke iniquities, (as they Prophet Nathan
reproved David). Let them not be mapleasers, or such as for affections sake
winck at offenses, and reprove not ye sinners of their sins, whereby ^hey
might be reclaymed from their wicked ways, to the embracinge of thy holy
commandments. Let them not be such, as flatter, or fawn upon Princes, for
promotions sake, gapinge for worldly dignity, not regarding the execution of
the office whereunto they are called. Kindle, O Lord, in their hearts, a
continual care, and desire, to convert sinners into ye way of righteousness.
Launcing their incurable sores, cutting away the buds and sproutes of sin,
applying spiritual Physic to their maladies, whereby they may be brought
again into the society of the Congregation, and from thenceforth learn to
ensue the path of virtue* and understanding: even as the vinecutter uses to
handle a dead^Uine, to cut away ye superfluous sprroutz to water it, and to
add fresh earth unto the root, whereby at last the old sap, and liquor may
return into her branches again. Give them grace, O Lord, to Preach they true
word only, not intermedling ye traditions, or inventions of men, but the pure
Gospel of thy son Jesus Christ, which gives light unto the simple, and is
as sweet to the Soul, as the honey comb is to the external taste of the
mouth, Let the^ cut of the course of all Romish superstition, and abominable
Idolatry, of the whore of Babylon, let them sow the seeds of thine
infallible virtue, and teach their ^locke, to serve thee in truth, and
humility, with the sacrifice of thankes-geuing, and co^trition of heart. Give
the^ grace to express that doctrine in their living, which they have preached
out of thy Book, that they may be an example to the flock, of verteous
living, temperance, humility, and lowliness of mind, that their godly life
may inflame us, to imitate ye same with true zeal and sincerity of heart:
Whereby, at the last we may altogether arrive hahely at the celestial
Jerusalem, and heavenly land of promise, from the tyrannical slavery of this
earthly Egypt, wherein like paynefull Pilgrims, we have so long time wandered,
Where, with the elect, we may be made partakers of those everlasting joys,
which thy son Jesus Christ purchased for us: by the merits of his death and
passion. To whom with thee, and the holy ghost, be all honor and glory, for
ever, and ever. Amen.

A prayer for the Layetie.
Give grace, O heavenly Father, to all the Commons of this Realm, that their
chiefest care and study, may be bent to seek thy honor and glory, and to walk
all the days of their lives, in the way of thy commau^deme^ts: Next that to
have a reverent care, of the duty and allegeau^ce, that they owe to their
Prince, and all the rest of her maiestrates, that are put in authority under
her, that every man may live quietly in his vocation, having continually the
fear of thee our heau^ly father, before their eyes, exercisinge honestly what
lawful trade so ever they profess, to thy glory, and the commodity of ye
co^mmon wealth. Give them grace, most heavenly Father, to know themselves, to
submitt themselves, to their superiors, to live in perfect peace, and obedience
to their elders, without envy, strife, or debate, not stirrers up of any civil
dissentions, or co^motions, nor presuming to press, or clyme higher then their
degree, but refraninge themselves from all manner crimes, she winge their good
will and obedience to their Prince, and Maiestrates, like servants to their
masters, or children to their parents. That they may (...) altogether in the
yoke of perfect unity and concord, every one to his power supplyinge his
neighbors necessity, and cherefully impartinge his portion, to him that
wants. Whereby we shall have a flowinge commonwealth, with abundance of
peace in our cities, without all manner of inconvenience or misorder. Every man
studiously exercisinge his trade with thy fear before our eyes. And our duty
to our Prince and country faithfully performed. Through Jesus Christ our
Savior, Amen.

A prayer in general for the whole body of the common wealth.
Look down, we beseech thee, most merciful Father, with the eyes of thy
mercy, upon thy poor congregation, militant here in earth, that being
protected with the shield of thy heavenly grace, we may be aable to resist the
terrible assalts and invasions of satan, with Anti Christ his chief minister,
which daily, and hourly, seek with strong temptations, to seduce us from the
most comfortable meditation of thy heavenly word, and promises, and to
eclipse the eyes of our hearts, with the obscure cloud of error, and
ignorance, whereby we might be thrown into the botto^lesse lake, of
everlasting death, and damnation. And had it not been for thy divine
providence, and protection, (most merciful Father) the enemy had long ag^ne
devoured us, yea he had so wiped, and blown us away, ye scarce any
remembrance of our being had remained on ye earth Wherefore since it is thy
good pleasure, that the name of Israel, should not be utterly extinguished,
give us grace, to (...) our steps in the path of thy co^maundeme^ts that all
our deeds, words and thoughts may tend to thy glory, and ye commoditi^ of
the common wealth. Endue, we be sech thee, the mind of our soueragine Qu^ene,
Elizabeth, that above al things she may seek thy honor, and glory the
maintenance of true religion, and the prosperous, and quiet state of her
subjects. Direct the minds of her Majesty's Counsel, and ye rest of the
nobility, that they may always live in thy fear, with ^rue obedience to ye
prince, devising such laws, and statutes, as may be most auailable to the
conservation, and public commodity of the commonwealth. Inspire the minds of
such as thou have called to be the ministers of thy word, wc the spirit of
truth, and understanding, that they may preach the pure doctrine, of thy
heavenly word, reuokeing sinners into the way of repentance, and amendment of
life, to embrace the sweet yoke of thy law, whereby their souls may be saved
from everlasting ^aln^ati^n. G^ue grace, most heavenly Father, to all the
(...) of this Realm, yt above al^ things they may la^our to follow thy
commandments, to live in due obedience to their Prince, and Magiestr^tes, and
to be ruled by the wholesome and spiritual counsel of their p^stours. And (...)
thy grace in general (most merciful Father) to the whole body of the Realm,
that altogether, both the Prince, Nobility, Clargy, and (...) may chiefly
(...) to abua^ce thy Gospel, and secondly the happy and prosporous ^ate of the
common wealth. Through Christ. etc.

A Prayer for patien^e in trouble.
ALmighty and most m^rcifull Father, which art the only stay, and comfort of
all them that are afflicted with the scourge of adversity: bow down thy
merciful ear unto the voice of my lamentation, which am nothing else but a
lump of sin, every hour declyninge from thy commandments, into the
reprobate way of iniquity, yt I must needs confess, that mine own merits,
and deseruinges, have justly procured this worthy plage, wherein like a vile,
and wretched (...), I am entangled, But thou (O most merciful and louinge
Father, you art always ready to show mercy, to the repentant sinner, which
have promised to put all my offenses, and misdeedes, out of thy remembrance,
whenever I repent, from the bottom of my heart: have mercy upon my miseries,
and velease me of this adversity, which has worthily chanced, by reason of
the innumerable multitude of my sins. And if it be thy good will, and
pleasure to prove the more (...), with temtations, or any other kind of
afflection, that thou shall lay on me, then vouchsafe, most merciful Father,
to arm me with the spirit of (...) which it has pleased thy divine Majesty
to lay upon me. that I murmr not at thy works, neither blaspheme thy name,
when I am in misery, but that I may always have in mind, that thou art a
merciful judge, and a revenger of iniquity, to whom only it beelongeth, to
throw down to hell, (...) to raise up to heaven against where, with thy son
Jesus Christ and the holy Ghost. etc.

A prayer against temptation.
O Lord Jesus Christ, ye only defense, and pyller of our estate, the hope and
confidence of all them, that sleep in the veil of this wicked world, which
by the merits of thy most precious death, and passion, did overcome death,
and triumphest over the sting thereof, in thy heavenly kingedome: give strength,
unto us feeble, and impotent sinners, against the r^aringe Lion, which
continually wandreth about seekynge whom he may devour, ende^ouringe always
with subtle awaitinges and strong temtations, to withdraw our minds, from
the faith which we have in thee of everlasting life, into a reprobate sense,
to give ourselves up to the (...) lust^ and affections of the flesh, to
uncleanness, Idolatriy, innumerable other like abhominatio^s, that are chief
adversaries and enemies to the spirit of truth and understanding. Thou
therefore that art the i^^aculate Lamb, ye vanquisher of sin, death, and
hell, give unto us thy little sheep the strength and virtue of thy spirit, that
being in our own selves weak, and feeble, and in thee, strong and valiant, we
may be able to withstand and subdue all the assaults of the Devil, yt our
ghostly enemy may not triumph over us, but being co^querors through thee, we
may give thanks to thy mercy, which never leaves them destritute of
suc^oure, whose only confidence, and a^^iance, is reposed in the sure defense,
and sauegerde of thy mercy Thou know, O Lord, yt we are but earth and ashes,
subject to corrupsion, and mortality, the flesh ever rebellinge against the
spirit, whereby we are always more prone, and apt to run the carles race of
ignorance and iniquity, then to frame our steps in the narowe and strayte
path of virtue, and understanding. Therefore, illuminate we beseech thee, our
blind eyes, with ye light of thy heavenly spirit, that abhoring ye works of
darkness, and preuaylinge against all temptations of the world, the flesh, and
the Devil, we may be wholly bent to serve thy divine Majesty, in truth and
understanding, sauinge always an assured hope of a glorious resurrection on
thy right hand, where we may be pertakers of that joyful sent^nce of life,
which thou will pronounce to all them that shall inherit that heavenly
kingdom, with thee, our only redeemer, and Savior. To whom with the Father,
and the holy Ghost. etc.

A prayer for the obtaining of wisdom.
O Almighty Lord, and most merciful Father, the fountain, and welspring of
all heavenly gifts, and graces, give me wisdom to know what thy will and
pleasure is: for I thy servant and ye son of thy hand maid, am a feeble
person, engendered, and created of the frail substance of the flesh, environed
round about with the dark shadow, and ^ayle of ignorance, yt by means
thereof the beams of my mind are so obscurely eclipsed, that I cannot once
look up upon the brightness of thy divine Majesty, nor excercyse my self at
all in contemplation of the mysteries of thy heavenly word, and promises,
whereby I might save my soul from hell. Inspire therefore (most merciful
Father) my dull and heavy mind, with the light of the true wisdom, and not
with worldly wit, and policy only, which concern humayne affairs, but with
the true understanding of thy sacred scripturs wherein thou have made a
faithful promise of eternal salvation, to all them that unfeignedly believe,
that Jesus Christ, is the son of God, and the only redeemer of all mankind.
Thou know, O Lord, that my dull capacity is far to gross, to attain to
ye knowledge, and understanding of thy judgments, (...) laws* for I am but
mere corruption, and of a most frail nature. And thou how can I that am but
earth, and ashes, conceive the meaning of thy divine mistries? surely, by no
means, except ye motion of thy spirit dire^ mine unconstant, and wavering
mind in the right way of truth, and understanding, whereby I may be always
inflamed, to meditat^ upon thy promises, contained in thy holy Gospel wherein
thou have promised everlasting life, to all those that with a steadfast faith
believe, yt by ye means of Jesus Christ, his passion, they have obtained free
remission, of their sins. To whom with ye Father, and the holy Ghost, be all
honor; and glory, now and evermore. Amen.

A prayer against the aduarsaries of the truth.
ALmighty, and most merciful Father, which art the way, the truth, and life,
deliver me from the hands of them that imagine mischieffe, and think upon
deceyt all ye day long, whose tongues are more sharp the^ a two edged sword,
and ye poison of Aspes is under their lips. Behold, most merciful Father,
from thy heavenly throne, thy vineyard which the Boar rooteth up, and never
suffers ye tender branches to spring above the ground, but as fast as they bud
fourth, he spoils them, not sufferinge the same to attain to their full
maturitie, and perfect ripenes. Arise O Lord and revenge thine own cause, how
long shall thy Ielozy sleep, for ever? O remember the afflictions of thy
servants, that are oppressed with the tyranny of Pharao, and ouerladen with
the intolerable burden of the Egiptian taskes. Thou see our misery, and
thraldom, and how we are every day, in danger to be (...) of the enemy. And
for thy sake only, do we suffer reproach al ye day long. A rise therefore O
Lord, like a mighty man of war and as a stout giant refreshed with wine.
Look down, and behold, how thy stock is scattered abroad, by means of
the outragiousnes of the wolf, who continually seeks to root out, and
utterly to extingush the name of Israel. Take Arms in hand, and strike in
thyn^ own cause, and confound thine enemies, with the fire of thy heavy
displeasure. So shall thy poor dispersed ^locke, b^ reduc^^ again at last
into one fould, and (...) continual praises to thee, the author of our
liberty, and our auenger. To whom with the Son and the holy Ghost, be all
honor and glory. etc.

A thanks giving to God for his benefits.
WE render unto thee, (most merciful father) immortal thanks, for the
manifould and daily benefits, which thou of thy mercy, without any desert of
ours, have most abou^dantly poured upon us, since the time it pleased thee to
inspire into us the breath of life, framinge our corrupt bodies in form of
thine own likeness, placing us in thy pleasant Paradise, there to remain in
most happy and fortunate estate, if through the subtle allurementes of Satan,
our ghostly enemy we had not transgressed thy commandments. We thank thee,
also, most merciful Father, for that when we were condemned by our own
transgression, in our great Grandfather Adam, thou of thy Fatherly love, and
natural compassion, yt thou had on mankind, did send down, thy only
begotten Son Jesus Christ to take our corrupt Nature upon him, and to humble
himself to the shameful death, of the Cross, thereby to redeem us wretched
sinners, from the bondage of hell, whether for our disobedience, we were justly
condemned: and to pay the ransom of our offenses, whereby thy wrath: that
was worthyly inflamed against us, might be appeased, and we lost sheep at last
reco^cyled to thee our pitiful pastoure, and most merciful Father. We yield
thee also immortal thanks, most merciful Father, for that it has pleased
thee to reveal thy holy Gospel unto us, by thy Son Jesus Christ, whereby we
might obtain remission of our sins, and through faith, might have a sure
confidence that by the merits of Jesus Christ his passion, we are delivered
from the intolerable curse of the law, and are made partakers of that
heavenly kingdom, prepared for us since the foundation of the world. For these
thy most bountiful gifts, and all other thy benefits, daily and hourly
powered upon us, we heartily thank thee, most loving and merciful Father.
Beseching thee that thou will give us grace, through the operation of thy
heavenly spirit in our minds, so to order our life, and conversation, that we
walk in true holiness, and sincerity of heart, behauing our selves so
circumspectly in this wretched world, that at the last day, we may be found
faltles, and be received into the number of the^, to whom this joyful
sentence shall be pronounced: Come ye blessed of my Father, possess ye
kingedome, which was prepared for you, from the beginning of ye world. To
which kingdom, we beseech thee, most merciful Father, for the merits of thine
only son our Savior Jesus Christ, to bring us speedely out of this vale of
misery, and sorrow: where with the society of ye elect, we may singe praises
to thee our most merciful Father, world without end: To whom with thy Son
Jesus Christ, our Savior, and the holy Ghost, three in unity, and one in
trinity be all honor, glory, power, dominion and might, from this time
fourth for evermore.

A prayer to God the Father.
O Almighty, and most merciful God, the Father, eternal, which haste been
from the beginning, and so shall remain world with out end: Thou that createst
all living creatures, and last of all man, breathinge the breath of life into
them, by a natural instinct, and disposition, every thing to follow his own
kind, saving man only above all the rest, whom thou hadest formed after thine
own image, and indude him with reason, more then natural, whereby he might
discern the good from the evil, and learn to eschew such things as might
be hurtful unto him: Even he I say above all the rest, transgressed the
commandments of thy Majesty, inclining to his own lusts and affections,
without any regard or fe^^e of thee, his only Lord and maker. Whereby he
was expelled out of the garden of Eden, that place of pleasure where once thou
hadest placed him. But (Oh) what thanks shall we yield unto thee, (most
merciful and loving Father, that did^est vouchsafe, of thy mere mercy, and
Fatherly love, toward us, to send down thine only begotten son Jesus
Christ, to be our redeem^r, and Savior, to deliver us out of the mouth of
hell, whither our own deserts had worthily condemned us? we will singe a
Psalm of thanks giving, and worship toward thy holy temple. For what other
reward are we able to give unto thee, that may in any respect worthily counter
veil the least spark of thy Fatherly pyttie, and kindenes? surely none. For
of our own selves, we are not able so much as to think a good thought,
without the motion of thy spirit, much less to do any such good deed, yt
might be aunswerable to the innumerable multitude of thy benefits always
bes^owed upon us Accept therefore, (most merciful Father,) our sacrifice of
thanks giving, and bow downeth neeare to our humble petit^ons that proceeds
from vn^^yned lips. And since it has pleased thy divine Majesty, to give up
thy only begotten Son Jesus Christ, to the death of the Cross, for our
redemption, vouchsafe, O Lord, so to direct our minds, in the way of thy
co^maundeme^ts that we may partly seem worthy of the inestimable price of so
great a benefit, as the ransom of our iniquity has cost: and keep ye eyes
of our mynds always waking, that we fall not a sleep in sin, as they do,
which have no hope of resurrection from the dead. Engender in our hearts the
true zeal of thin undefiled word, and religion, that we may be alwaeis
meditatinge upon thy promises, and not found idle, nor unprovided when the
good man of the house shall come: but yt we may be found wakinge in thee, with
plenty of oil in our lamps, as the five wise Uirgins had* O draw us near
unto thee, by the operation of thy heavenly grace, and hear our prayers,
forgive us our offenses, comfort us in our afflic^tions, and forgive our
enemies, as we hope to have forgeuenes of all our sins at thy hands, by the
meri^es of our Savior Jesus Christ, let not mine enemies triumph over me, nor
ye roaring Lion devour me, but protect me always most merciful Father, under
ye shadow of thy wings that I may strongly and constantly withstand his
invasions, by ye undoubted hope, and confidence that I have reposed in thy
mercy: And grant that I may die in thy true faith, and rest with thee, in thy
everlasting kingdom. To whom with thy Son Jesus Christ, and ye holy Ghost:
be all honor and glory for ever and ever.

A prayer to God the Son.
O Most merciful Jesus, and only Savior of all mankind, whose love to us all
was so pure, and unfeigned, that thou did not deny to take our flesh upon
thee, and to submit thy self to the death, in offeringe up thine own bodey,
as a sweet smelling sacrifize to appease the indignation of thy father, who
was worthyly inflamed for the transgression, and breach of his holy
commandments. O sweet Jesus, the only author of our salvation, our most
loving mediator to thy Father, have mercy upon me, and cast me not away whom
thou with thy pressious blood haste ^edeemed: O reject me not, for I am the
price of thy passion, thou with the effusion of thy most pretiou^ blood, half
paid the ransom of mine iniquity, and made a full and perfect satisfaction
for my offenses. O then look down upon my miseries, consider my distress:
Behold the hell that torme^teth my conscience, as often as I call to
remembrance, my life so wickedly past, and the innumerable multitude of my
sins, which are more in number the^ the hears of my head, or the sands of
the Sea. Give me grace, to repent my wicked life, with Mary Magdelen, and to
wash thy feet with the moisture of my tears and lamentation. Give me grace,
to be sorry for my sins and to weep with Peter, and to cry with the thief,
that hanged on the right side, at ye time of thy passion. Lord remember me
when thou co^mest into thy kingedome. O give me grace to call my self to
remembrance, to examine mine own conscience, to recount the number of my
sins, and to cast my self flat prostrate at ye feet of thy mercy,
bewayllinge my sinful life, with many a river of tears, to acknowledge mine
own wickedness unto thee, to crave remission of my faults, and by the
continual tears of repentance, to recover thy favor again, and to die there
in. Give me grace to lead a new life, to put of the person of Adam, and to be
regenarate and newborn in thee, my Lord and Savior. Give me grace, sweet
Jesus to cry Peccaui with David, and unfeignedly to lament my sins. Give me
grace sweet Jesus to return again with the prodigal or lost Son, and to
cry: Father, I have sinned against heaven and against thee and I am no more
worthy to be called thy Son: make me as one of thy hired servants, O sweet
Jesus have mercy upon me, and forgive me my sins, renew a right spirit within
me, wash me with Isope, and I shall be made whyter then Snow: for unto thee
belongs mercy, and with thee is plentiful redemption. O think not upon ye
offenses of my youth wherein I have raunged to much at randon, like an
unbridled coult, neglecting the way of understanding and loathing the path of
thy co^maundeme^ts. I acknowledge freely, yt if thou sholdest deal with me
according to justice, I have deserved everlasting death, neither should I be
able to abide thy sharp judgment, but should sink down into the botto^les
dungeo^ of eternal damnation. But having a sure and certayue confidence,
fixed on the ancer, or hold, of immovable faith, I undoubtedly believe, that
by thy merits, I am made partaker of everlasting life, being freely justified,
with absolute remision of all my sins, since the first hour of my Nativity.
Which faith, I ground neither on the merits of any mortal man, neither upon
any Romish Pardons, or Indulgences, but only upon thee, my Lord and Savior,
who with thy most precious blodsheding, have paid the price of my iniquity,
and suffered thy glorious body to be mangled and torn for my transgression.
Give me grace, sweet Jesus, so to order the rest of my life, as becomes a
true Christian to do, walkyng in the light of thy holy Gospel, and eschewing
ye works of darkness, behauinge my self obediently to my superiors, louingely
to my fellows, and conrtiousely to mine inferiors, bearinge no grudge in my
conscience, offering wrong to no man, but patiently to sufier injuries without
desire of revenge: forgeueinge every man, whatsoever he has done against
me, as I my self would desire to be forgeuen of thee my sweet Savior, and
only redeemer. Give me grace sweet Jesus to persevere in my faith till ye end,
that all mine actions may be done in the name of Jesus, and all my thoughts
upon Jesus, both at my down lying, and up rysinge, all the term of my life, and
at the very instant of death, when I fetch the last gasp, my mind may be
withdrawn with no idle or fantastical cogitations, but continually excercised
in the meditation of the sweet and comfortable name of Jesus, Jesus. Jesus. To
thee, sweet Jesus, with ye Father, and the holy Ghost, be all honor and glory
for evermore. Amen.

A prayer to God the holy Ghost.
O Holy, and blessed spirit, which being true, and ever lasting God, with God
the Father, and God the Son, proceedest from the^ both coequall in deytie and
dignity of person, which art the only comforter of them yt travail in this
earthly Pilgrimage, and by thy heavenly wisdom directest them yt right way, to
attain to heavenly understanding of the will of God. Quicken, most holy
sprite, by thy heavenly breath, the minds of them yt before were dead through
sin, make merry the hearts of yt faithful penitent bring into the way of
truth all such as have erred, and wandered astray in the vale of error and
ignorance, comfort the souls of all them that hunger and thurst, after
righteousenesse, and suffer persecution for the Testimony of the Gospel,
enrich the^ plentiousely with heavenly gyfts which pray unto thee in the name
of Jesus Christ, our only mediator, and redemer. Purify our hearts, we
beseech thee, with the fire of thy love, that all yt course of our frail and
mortal life, may be directed by thy heavenly motion, as with an infallible
rule and compass, that cannot lightly err. Mortify in us all worldly care,
carnal lusts, concupiscence, couetousenes, wrath, gluttony, pride, and all
other sinful inclinations, that may wythdrawe us from the contemplation of thy
glorious deity. Renew our spirits within us, that we may seem regenerate, or
newborn as infantes, and illuminate our minds, with thy heavenly benefits,
and spiritual gifts that our bodies may be made thy temples, without spot, or
blemishe, at that dreadful day when every man must yield account of the works
of his body. Lead us into the way of truth, and suffer us not to be carried
away, with diverse and strange doctrine, but always to remain in that doctrine
whereof thou art the author: and vouchsafe to strenghten our minds in the
same, that if an Angel of heaven should teach any other doctrine, then that
which thou have already taught, we may not believe him, but whosoever preaches
any doctrine contrary to that we have received, we may houlde him accursed.
Strengthen our souls, against all assaltes, of our ghostely enemy Satan, and
his chief minister, Antichrist, yt seeks by all means possible, to remove
the foundations of our faith, and to pull the word of truth out of our hearts
and to throw us, headlonge, into the dungeon of error, and ignorance.
Strength us against ye vain allurementes of the wicked woeld, and against all
vnclea^ lusts of the flesh, that we being replenished with thy holy breath,
may be found pure and sanctified in thee and do those things only that may
be acceptable in thy sight. To whom, with the Father, the Son and the holy
Ghost: be all honor and glory, now and for ever Amen.

A prayer to the blessed Trinity.
O Most glorious, and blessed Trinity, the Father, the Son, and the holy
Ghost, three persons, and one God, omnipotent, and everlasting without,
beginning, or ending, whom we do confess to be one in trinity, and three
in unity, have mercy upon me, save me, and defend me, from all mine enemies
both bodily, and ghostly, and by thy merciful goodness, and cleamency,
vouchsafe so to direct my mind, in the way of thy commandments, that all my
doings may be acceptable before thee, which art the God of my strength and my
salvation. I beseech thee also, most blessed and glorious trinity, that those
s^arkes of faith, that by thy heavenly grace are already planted in my heart,
may by the operation of thy divine breath within me, every day more and more
inflame, and by contiuall meditation of thy holy scriptures, increase mightily
within me, to the suppression of vice, and advancement of virtue: whereby I may
walk worthy of that profession, whereunto thou haste called me: walking in the
same, with true zeal, and simplicity of heart, all the days of my life. I
beseech thee also, (most blessed Trinity,) that thou of thy accustomed mercy,
and love, wilt make perfect in me, that good work, which thou haste begone,
and lead me in all truth, and godlynes, having my mind always fixte upon
thee, my most louinge and merciful Father, cause me always to think, and
speak and to do those things, that may he acceptable to thee, and restrain
my tongue, from all idell and dishonest talk, because, that at yt dreadful day
of judgment, I am to render an account, of every idell word, that I have
spoken during the term of my former life. Keep my heart, and body, my senses,
my doings, my talk, and communication in thy holy laws, and in ye works of
thy commandments. Give me grace, to lead an upright life, without ^ffence to
my brethren, obedient to mine elders, loving to all sorts, and degrees,
envious to no man, but framing my life uprightly and innoc^ntly my conversation
orderly, and honestly, my doings circumspectly, and virtuously, having thy
fear before mine eyes, in all my thoughts, deeds, and words, when Ilie
down, and when I rise up, at my last and, and ever more Amen,

A prayer before the receiving of the communion.
O Sweet Jesus, the Son of the everliving God, you gave thy body, to be
cruelly tormented, to the death, to deliver and redeem me most miserable and
wretched sinner, yt by ye law was dead in iniquity, and subject to the
misery of eternal damnation: have mercy upon me, poor miserable wretch, whom
the multitud of mine offenses does, so terrify, and drive into such mere
desperation, that I dare not once look up upon the brightness of thy glory, nor
presume to present my self before thy divine Majesty, in hope to obtain
remission of my sins, but depending only upon a sure faith in thee, my Lord
and Savior by whose death and passion, I am assuredly informed by faith, that
I am freely justified, with absolute remission of all mine offenses. Wherefore
I most humbly appeal unto thy Throne of mercy, crying with the Publicanne,
Lord have mercy upon me, thy mercy pardon my faltes, bind up my wounds, and
pour in thy sweet oil, like a good Samaritan, whereby I may be purified, and
purged, from those naughty tares of sin, which have plowed me, even as a
shadow, follows the body, from the very instant of my Nativity. I come as
an abiecte wretch, and reprobate to thee yt art the mediator and intercessor,
to reconcile me, to thy Father, (from whose sauoure I fell for transgression of
his commandment, in my great Grandfather Adam:) most humbly desiring thee,
to heal mine infirmity, and sickness to wash away my sin, and filthynes,
to illuminate my blyndenes, to conduct me to the right way, that now wander in
the wide dessert of error, to comfort me, destitute of all help and goodness.
I confess most sweet Savior, that I am but earth and ashes, a confused
Chaos, and lump of sin and of my self not worthy to look up toward heaven,
much less to presume unto thy holy table, to the communication of that most
blessed Sacrement of thy body, whereof whosoever eats worthylie, with a
steadfast and inmoueable faith in thee, has everlasting life: but whosoever
eats thereof unworthily, (as Judas did,) eats his own dampnation,
Therefore although I come like an unclean sinner, be^^^ polluted both in body
and (...), yet reposinge my whole faith, and confidence in the merits of thy
passion I have presumed to come to thy table, to be made partaker of that
unspeakable ben^^te of thy death, feedinge outwardly upon materyall bread, but
inwardly by faith upon thy blessed body: the bread representing a perfect
figure and remembrance, of thy body, and the wine, of thy blood, which was
shed upon the Cross for my redemption. Give me grace sweet Jesus, to confess
my sins with the Publicane, and to cry, Lord be merciful to me a sinner:
and yt with Mary Magdeline, I may wash thy feet with ye tears of
repentance, give me grace, to reconcile my self to my brother, while he is in
the way, to examyne mine own consience, and if in ought I have offended any
man, first of all to desire forgiveness at the hands of thy divine Majesty,
and next of him whom I have trespassed: I my self to forgive all men,
whatsoever they have done, said, or imagined against me, even as I hope to
have remission at thy Fathers hands, of all mine offenses, by the merits of
thy precious death and passion. Give me grace to search my conscience so
narowly, that if any one s^r^ple do stycke in my mind, I may humbly confess
it, before the feet of thy mercy, craving pardon thereof, with grace necessary
to leave a new life. That with a p^^e heart, and clear conscience, confessing
my sins from ye bottom of my heart, I may this day, receive ye Sacrament of
thy precious body and blood, to my souls health, that thou from henceforth
may dwell in me, and I in thee for ever, whereby I may obtain, and attain
to that long desired mark, whereto the race of all true Christians tends,
that is everlasting life, in that heavenly Jerusalem, where all the elect
Saints shall live for evermore, world without end. In the mean sp^ce, until
it shall seem good to thy Ma^estie, to abridge ye course of my days in this
life, I humbly desire thee, (most sweet Savior,) to admit me to the
communion of thy Supper, that I may be worthy to be accounted a member of thy
mystical body here in earth, among ye number of thy chosen Saints, in thy
congregation. And after the receipt of thy body, and blood, vouchsafe I bes^che
thee, to illuminate the eyes of my heart with the light of thy heavenly spirit,
that Satan enter not into me, as he did into Judas, but grant that the rest
of my life may be so ordered, that sin may be subdued in me, thy glory
advanced, thy faith embraced, and thy holy commandments studiously
followed, through the merits of thy passion. Amen.

A thanks giving after the receiving of the Communion.
I Render most hearty and infinite thanks, unto thee, sweet Jesus, for thine
unspeakable goodness, because thou have fed me this day with thy most precious
body, and blood, in the S^crament, whereby I am justified by an inmoueable and
constante faith in thy grace and passion, being made an undefiled member of thy
church. A Temple for the holy Ghost, and a fellow heir or partaker in thy
glorious kingdom, in the bosom of Abraham, where the spirits of the elect
shall rest for evermore. Grant therefore sweet Jesus, that this Sacrament which
I have received, may through the operation of the holy Ghost, be to me a
purgation, and clensing of all my sins, a spiritual stre^gthe against my
bo^^ly frailty, a preparature, and preseruature against ye te^ptatyons of
Satan, a bridle, and mean of restraint against ye untamed lusts of the flesh a
defense against worldly troubles and adversity, and finally a perfect medicine
of life, and a continual remembraunc^ of thy blessed passion: by means whereof
I stand in assured hope of eternal salvation, with free justification, and
remission of all my sins. So that it may conduct and guide me in the way, and
when I am out of the way, it may reduce me, when I slide it may uphold me,
when I fall it may raise me up again: when I live, it may be a salve to my
soul: when I am weak it may stre^gthe^ and confirm: when I am in darkness,
it may illuminate me, with the light of true faith, and understanding. Let ye
receiving thereof excuse so effectual an operation in my heart, that I never
joy in other comfort but in thee, that I never feel other sweetenes but thee,
yt I never seek other place of refuge but thee, yt my mind be enamoured upon no
other lover but thee, that I seek for no other succoure but at thee, and that
I trust in none other but in thee, mine only Lord and redemer, who did not
deny, to have thy most precious body scourged, and mangled, and thy blood to
be shed most abundantly, for my sake: whereby I might be brought from error,
to truth, from ignorance, to understanding from darkness, to light, from
vanity, to verity, from mortality, to immortallitie, ^ro^ corruption to
incorruption, from damnation to justification, from eternal death, to the
inco^prehensible joys of eternal ly^e and salvation* To thee sweet Jesus,
with the Father, and the holy Ghost be all honor, and glory from this time
forth for ever more, world without end. Amen.

A prayer to be said when ye take a journey by land.
O Almighty Lord, and most mercifall father, ye wachman of them that sleep,
the Physicion of them that are diseased, the comfort of the^ that are
afflicted, the garder and protector of them that are in any danger, or
adversity, vouchsafe, I beseech thee, to send down thine heavenly Angel, to
be my guide, conductor, and leader, in the way where I walk that by thy
gracious protection, I may be defended from all mine enemies, both Ghostly and
bodily, and from all perils, or dangers, yt by any extraordinary means may
be fall me, if I be alone without company, keep my mind free, from all manner
idle fantasies, and fond cogitatio^s, that may withdraw me from the
meditation of thy heavenly word, and let al my thoughts consist in the
contemplation of thy comfortable promises, and commandments. And if it so
chance that I travail in the company of others, I beseech thee, so to direct
my tongue, that no word of ribaldrie, or dishonest talk proceed out of my
mouth, but that al my communications, thoughts, and deeds, may tend to the
advancement of thy glory, and to the edification both of me, and all else that
shall hear it. Send down, most heavenly Father, thy messenger to conduct me,
as thou dydst young Iobias in his journey to Rages, which most mercifully
defended him from the jaws of the monstrous Fish, and from the power of the
evil spirit. Thou have promised, that thou wylt at all times be ready both to
hear their prayers, and minister present help to all them, that unfeignedly
call upon thy name: incline therefore thine ear unto me, most merciful
Father, which power forth my prayers, before ye throne of thy mercy, and
vouchsafe to guard me under the shadow of thy wings, that I may safely
travail in trade of my vocation, without danger of any ghostly enemy, that
may hurt the soul, or any other human chance, or casualtie, that may
annoye the body. Direct, most merciful Father, the proc^^se of my business to
a happy and prosperous end, and that I may return with as good and perfect
health, both of body and soul, as I take my journey: so will I praise thee, in
the congregation of ye righteous, with a Psalm of thanks giving to thy name,
for ever and ever. Amen.

A prayer to be said when ye make a voyage by sea.
O Almighty Lord, and most merciful Father, maker of al things, who by
thine insearcheable wisdom dyddest create that mighty globe of the world,
the heavens, earth, sea, and all things else therein contained: vouchsafe I
beseech thee to be mine aid, and defense, in this dangerous viage, which I
have presumed to take, reposing mine only trust and confidence in thy mercy,
to be delivered and preserved from all manner dangers, and ieopardies, that may
happen either upon the sea or on the dry land. Thou know most merciful
Father, that all those that travail by sea, are subject to the hazard of
diverse calamities, either to be tossed at the pleasure of the wind and waves,
either to be dashed violently upon the main rocks, or to stick in ye quick
sands, or to be dispoyled both of life, and goods, by the tyranny of
Pirates. But yet what cross or affliction so ever happen unto me, I must
acknowledge freely, yt it is but a just punishment for mine offenses, because
from the first house of my nativity, I have been more apt and prone, to
follow the filthy app^tite of mine own desires, then to exercise myself in the
tr^e way of thine undefiled law. Notwithstanding, what cross soever thou
shall think good to lay upon me, yea, although I were devoured of ye waves,
and swallowed down into the deapth of the Whales belly, yet will I not
despair of thy mercy, for thou art the same God for ever, thy right hand is
not shortened, neither is the greatness of thy power diminyshedde, When ^onas
lay three days and three nyghtes in the Whales belly, yet did thou at
last deliver him safe and sound, and sent him to preach thy name to ye great
city of Niniue. Thou art yet the same God, thou wast at ye time, neither is
thy power abridged at all. Although I were never so shaken with wyndes,
turmoyled with tempests, tossed with the waves, yea although I were utterly
devoured of the Whale, yet art thou able to deliver me from all these dangers,
yea, from the very jaws of death. To thee therefore do I make my supplicatio^s,
to thee do I power forth my prayers, for thou only art the castle of my
comfort, my bulwark, my watchman, my keeper, my defender, the sure rock and
hope of my salvation. To ^hee only it belongs to direct my course safelye
into the haue^, to protect and save me from the cruelty of ye water, to lead
me forth, to bring me in, to be my only stay and defense, whether I sleep or
wake, live or die, sincke or swim, upon the waters, as well as upon the land,
and briefly in all places, and in all times and seasons. Thou know (most
merciful father) that this trade is not of my devising, nor yet proceeding of
any human invention: but thou of thy mere mercy, did reveal the mystery
thereof to thy servant Noe, in commaundyng him to frame an Arc, that might
fleet upon the floods, wherein he and his family only were saved, when all
the world else, for the greatness of iniquity perished altogether, and were
utterly confounded in the waters. Grant therefore most merciful Father, that
this voyage, which I have presumed to take only upon a sure faith, and
affiaunce in thy mercy, may turn me to no damage, or misfortune, but that I
may be safely conducted, both forth and home again, by thy merciful
protection, and assistance. So will I yield thee immortal praises, for thy
fatherly benefits, and my tongue shall record the works of thy glory, for
ever and ever. Yet, (Father) not my will, but thy will be fulfilled. To thee
with thy son Jesus Christ, and the holy Ghost, three persons and one God, be
all honor and glory, for evermore. Amen.

A prayer for Monday morning.
I Render unto thee immortal thanks, most merciful Father, for the sweet
sleep, and comfortable rest that thou of thy mercy have given me this night to
recreate my weary limbs of the continual labors, and trauayles, which I was
borne to sustain. And for as much, as thou have commanded me by thy holy
word, to redeem the time, and always to be exercised in some good work, and
never to spend the time in idleness, I most humbly beseech thee, that thou
wylt vouchsafe to look upon me, with the eyes of thy mercy, and by the
illumination and inspiration of thy heavenly spirit, so to direct all my
counsayles, labors, and studies, that being replenished with thy grace, I may
so spend this day according to thy most blessed will and ordinance, that I may
circumspectly shun, and eschew all such ways as may provoke, or kyndle thy
displeasure against me, or that in any respect, may tend to my neighbors
damage. Give me grace, to remove the veil of vanity out of my heart, that I
may always have thy fear before mine eyes, living honestly, and uprightly in
my calling, aboundyng in all manner good works, proceeding from a sound and
vncorrupt faith, that my conversation may be found pure before thee, without
either spot or blemishe, my living may be temperate, and modest, with
mediocritie, and not sauouring of any incontinencie, or immoderate
superfluity: whereby all my doings may be acceptable before thy divine
majesty, to the praise and glory of thy most blessed name. Stir up my mind
continually, to have thy promises, and benefits in remembrance, that all my
thoughts, and cogitations, may be exercised in the consyderation of them, and
not falling backewarde to my wonted iniquity, as the dog uses to return
again to his vomit, or the sow that has been clean washed to wallowe
again in the mire. Give me continual quietness of mind, without any
vexation or sting of conscience, that I may have some taste, and feeling of
thy everlasting joys, that these dregs, and chafe of the world may seem
loathsome, and fylthy unto me, in comparison of those heavenly pleasures, that
are prepared for the elect since the foundation of the world. To which joys
we beseech thee (most merciful father) to bring us, for Jesus Christ his sake:
To whom, etc.

A prayer for Monday evening.
ALmyghtie and most mercyful Father, which at the creator of all things,
did by thy heavenly wisdom ordain the day for man to travail in, and to
exercise him self in the labors parteyning to the trade of his vocation: and
the night for us to re^^ from our daily labors, and to refreshe our frail
bodies, with some sweet and natural sleep, whereby we might be ye better
enabled, every man to labor in his calling, and profession according to thy
holy will, and commandments: Uouchsafe we beseech thee (most merciful
father) that we thy poor pylgrimes, that daily travail in runnyng this our
earthly race, in hope to win the crown of everlasting glory, by ye merits
of Christ Jesus, may enjoy continual health of body, and soul this night and
ever, and that we may be preserved from al temptations of Satan, who is ever
ready, when we be idle, to seduce us from thee our Savior, into the broad way
of everlasting death and damna^ion. And whensoever our bodies take their
natural rest, yet our minds may be always bent and fixed upon thee, the
eyes of our understanding, may always watch in thee, that art our only Lord
and most merciful defender. Give us grace, whenever we lie down, every
night to examine our conscience, and enter into account of those deeds,
which we have done the day before, and all the rest of our life time. And if
we find, that we have done any good deed, give us grace to ascribe the same to
thee, that art the only fountain and author of al goodness, and to
acknowledge freely our own^ imperfection, how that of our selves, we are not
able to think so much as one good thought, much less to do any good or
godly action, that should seem to proceed of our own forwardness, or
aptness thereunto: for we are nothing else but sin and corruption: and then
how should an evil tree bring forth good fruit? Again, if we find that
we have sinned against thee, either in thought, word, or deed, (as we do
seventy times seven times every day:) give us grace, most merciful father, to
acknowledge if before thy divine majesty, and with the tears of earnest and
unfeigned repentance, to crave thy mercy with forgeuenes both of that, and all
other crimes and offenses, which we have committed against thee since the time
of our birth. Or else if we find that we have by any means enda^maged our
neighbor, give us grace to reco^cile our selves, and to clear our conscience,
before we lie down, whereby we may sleep both sweetly, and soundly, in Christ
Jesus, without any idle cogitatio^s, or fantastical dreams, that may
disturb our minds from the meditation of thy word: and if we dream at all,
let us dream of thee our merciful Father: and such godly lessons and precepts
that we have seen sleeping, to follow and prosecute the same actually, waking.
Through Jesus Christ our only memediatour and savior. Amen.

A prayer for Tuesday morning.
I Render unto thee, (most merciful father) immortal thanks for that thou
of thy mere mercy and Fatherly bounty have granted this night past to be
prosperous and healthful unto me, without any perturbation either of body or
soul. And because thou have promised by the mouth of thy holy prophets, that
thou wylt hear my voice, wh^soeuer I call upon thee by faith with humble
supplications, and repentance of my sins: I beseech thee likewise, that thou
wylt so prosper all mine actions, and endeavors this present day, that al
things that I do say or think, may redeunde to thy glory, to the commodity
of my neighbor, and to the damage of no man whatsoever, neither in thought,
word, nor deed: but that all my doings may be directed by thy governance,
to eschew sin, to do that is righteous in thy sight, and at all times, in
all places, and in all respects, to have a reverent fear of thee before mine
eyes, to walk circumspectly and so uprightly in my vocation, to put of the
person of Adam, and to put on the new man, to order my conversation agreeable
to thy will, to serve thee in spirit and truth, with the sacrifice of thanks
giving, and contritio^ of heart, to lay sure hold on the anchor of faith, with
an undoubted, and steadfast hope of resurrection to eternal life. Illum^na^e
mine eyes most merciful Father, with the beams of thy heavenly spirit, that
I walk not in darkness, as the children of unbelief do, which have no hope
to arise from the dead. Give me grace to abandon all worldly carfulness, to
tame mine own lusts, and affections, to do ye thing that is right, and
diligently to walk in the light of thy commandments: For thou only art the
true light, thou know no going down, thou art God from everlasting, and
world without end. Increase most merciful father, the gift of faith, that I may
truly believe in thee, and in thy promises made unto me, and that neither by my
negligence, nor by my infirmity of the flesh, nor by greatness of temptation,
neither by the subtle crafts, and assaults of the devil, I may be driven
from faith in the blood of my savior Christ Jesus. Strengthen (most
merciful Father) my feeble nature against all assaults of the world, the
flesh, and ye devil, that I may always have a sure confidence in thy only
mercy, never to start away from thy grace to seek for help of man, but
continually to cleave to the multitude of thy mercies, who art able to exalt
the humble and meek, and to pull down the mighty from the throne of their
pomp and glory Give me grace to have thee in mind, whatsoever I do to honor
thee, to fear thee, to call upon thy name, when I am in trouble, and to repose
my whole trust in the greatness of thy power and mercy, with an assured hope
to be preserved from all perils, both bodily, and ghostly, and at the last
when I have ended my race in this transitory pylgrimage, to obtain the crown
of everlasting joy, and felicity, in that celestial Jerusalem, which thou
haste prepared for all them that fear thy name, since the creation of the
world, throuh Jesus Christ our savior, Amen.

A prayer for Tuesday evening.
O Almighty and most merciful father, I acknowledge and confess, that I am
not worthy to lift up mine eyes toward heaven, muchlesse to presume to present
miselfe before thy divine majesty, I being but earth and ashes, a lump of
sin and iniquity, subject to death and corruption, if I enter into
examination of mine own deserts: for ye infinite multitude of mine offenses
bear witness against me, that by mine own works I am under the dreadful
curse of the law, and in extreme danger of everlasting death and damnation:
for in sin was I begotten, and in sin has my mother conceived me, I
confess that there is no goodness in me, but any apt and forward
inclination, to eschew the good, and to follow the evil: to raunge after ye
lusts of mine own desires, to wander astraye out of the way of
righteousness, and through my daily disobedience, to kindle thy wrath, and
heavy displeasure against me, and contiqually to heap sin upon sin, to
run a madding after the fantasies of mine own mind, and never to harken to
the voice of thy commandments. Yet this one comfort have I, yt Jesus Christ,
by his precious death and bloodsheddyng, has paid and the ransom of my
iniquity, and made a full agreement, and perfect atonement between God and man,
being a continual intercessor for me, and a most loving mediator betwixt his
father and me, to appease his fury, and to receive me into his favor again.
Therefore most merciful father, seeing thou haste not denied to give up thine
only begotten son, to the shameful death of the cross, to redeem me from
the bondage of death, and hell: Inspire I beseech thee my mind with thy
heavenly spirit, that I may do such things as please thee, and turn to
kill sin, with all other ungodly lusts and concupiscence, that I may be
made a sweet smelling sacrifice to thee, and the temple of ye holy ghost for
ever, and that I may live uprightly and honestly in my calling, without
reproof, ensuing ye right pathe of thy holy commandments. And for as much
as it has pleased thee to ordain the night for men to rest in, and the day to
labor, grant I beseech thee most merciful Father, that I may so take my
bodily rest, that my soul may continually watch for that happy and joyful
time, when Jesus Christ shall appear for my deliverance out of the miseries of
this transitory lyse. And in the mean season that I be not overcome by any
pha^tasies, dreams or other temptations, but may have my mind, always fixed
upon thee, to love thee, fear thee, and rest in thee for ever: Moreover that
my sleep be not excessive, or ouermuche after the insatiable desires of the
flesh, but so much as may suffice to content and satisfy my feeble nature,
whereby I may be the better disposed to live in all godly conversation, to the
glory of thy holy name, and the commodity of my neighbor. To thee with the
son and the holy ghost, be al honor and glory for ever and ever. Ame^.

A prayer for Wednesday morning.
O Almighty and most merciful father, have pity, and compassion upon the
weakness of me thy unworthy child, and be thou pressed, and ready (O heavenly
father) to help me, and with thy heavenly spirit to assist my weak spirit,
against all assaults of the wicked world, the flesh, and the devil, which
strive continually with fair allurementes and prouocations to draw my mind
from thy commandments, into the hartfull and damnable way of error, and
iniquity: but mine only stay and confidence is in the multitude of thy
mercies, with a sure and certain hope, that thou wylt so direct my steps,
both this day, and ever hereafter, that all my thoughts, words, and deeds,
may be found acceptable in thy sight, and according to the godly live and rule
of thy undefiled law. Therefore I beseech thee (heavenly father) to show thy
mercy upon me, and to prosper me in whatsoever I go about in thy name: so that
thou geuyng me light, I may learn to know what things are acceptable before
thee, and by the virtue of thy grace, I may have an earnest yeale, and desire
to follow the same in my life, to ^ay glory, and the commodity of my neighbor.
That thou being my guide and leader, I may walk in the path of understanding,
and righteousness without stumbling or wandering astray: for in my self I have
nothing but mistrust, and inabilitie to do any thing, yt may please thee,
saving only by the motion of thy holy spirit in my mind, which spirit assures
my spirit, that the mean to please thee, is a constant and immovable faith
in Christ Jesus, with repentance of my sins, and amendment of life, to
ensue the steps of equity, and understanding: to cleave to ye steadfast
rock, of thy heavenly word, and promises, to love my neighbor as my self,
for hereby shall it be known that we be thy children, if we love one another:
to give over my portion to ye poor, to take up my cross, and follow thee, to
abound in all manner good works, which are the fruits of faith in Christ
Jesus. Give me grace, most mercyful father, to kill the buddes of sin in my
flesh, to bridle mine own destres, to keep my body in subjection, whereby I
may be sanctified in thee, and made an undefiled ^^^ple for the holy ghost,
full of the spirit of truth and understanding. And since it has pleased thee
of thy fatherly pity to preserve me from all perils and dangers, both of body
and soul, this night, and all the rest of my life time, till this present
hour, I beseech thee also most merciful father, to protect me with thy grace,
all this day, and ever hereafter, that I may safely walk in my vocation, with
thy fear before mine eyes, in all things that I take in hand. And vouchsafe
most merciful father, so to direct the re^nant of my course, which I have yet
to run in this life, that at the last I may come to dwell with thee, in thy
everlasting kingdom, and there to have fruition of eternal joy and
felicity: through Jesus Christ, our only mediator and savior. Amen.

A prayer for Wednesday evening.
O Merciful Lord Jesus, I beseech thee to be favorable to me, a wretched
sinner, that all my life time, have followed the lusts of mine own mind, and
never harkened to thy voice, whereby I might live in thy law, that thou have
appointed for me. Put away I beseech thee, all my sins out of thy
remembrance, wash me clean with thy precious blood, sanctify me with thy
bitter passion and death, cleanse me thoroughly, restore me again to the
innocence, which thou gave me in baptism, that I may be truly regenerate,
and borne a new in thee my sweet savior and only redeemer, so yt I may
acknowledge thee only the author of my redemption, and the principal cause of
my justification: and to show my fel^e a thankful Samaritane, for that thou
have vouchsafed, by thy death and bloodshedding, to purge me from the leprosy
of sin, and al kind of uncleanness: yielding thee immortal thanks
continually, for that and all other gracious benefits, which thou of thy
fatherly liberality, and bounty, vouchsafest daily to bestow upon me. And
among all the rest give me grace, sweet Jesus, to have always in remembrance
thy sincere love, fatherly affection, and gracious charity toward me, in
that thou have vouchsafed to take my nature upon thee, to be made man in all
respects like unto me, (sin only excepted) and for my sake to be borne in a
stable, and as an infant to be wrapped in clothes, to be swadled, and laid in
a maunger, there to be fed with the material milk of thy blessed mother, the
virgin Marie. For my sake sweet Jesus, thou have sustained hunger, cold,
poverty, and many other agonies did thou sustain for me, most miserable and
wretched sinner. Thou have suffered thy self to be betrayed, to be
apprehended, and taken shamefully, to be bound unworthily, to be beaten
cruelly, to be condemned unjustly, and to be brought to that shameful death of
the cross, where for my sake thy precious body was rent, and torn, and thy
most sweet blood aboundauntly shed, where thou yeeldedst up the ghost to
God the father, and descendedst again into the grave, like a dead man, but
dyddest rise again the third day, and ascendedst into heaven, where thou
sit at ye right hand of God the father, from whence we look for thy
coming again, to judge the quick and the dead, at what time we stand in
assured hope, to be made jointly possessours and fellow heirs in thy kingdom,
in eternal joy for ever. Therefore sweet Jesus, seeing thou haste not spared thy
own precious body, but gave it up as a sweet smelling sacrifice on the
altar of the cross, thereby so redeem me from death, and to make a full
satisfaction for my offenses: direct, I beseech thee, my (...) so in this life,
yt I may be worthy of that v^catio^ whereunto thou have called me, to have an
especial ^are, and regard of thy commandments, and to follow them as
nearely as I can, in all truth and singleness of heart, to yield du^
obedience to my betters, to labor paynefullye, and at times convenient in my
trade, and at night when I lie down to recreate my body after my daily
labors, give me grace to confess my sins unto thee, to implore thy mercy,
with the tears of unfeigned repentance. And though my limbs take their
natural rest, yet let my mind continually watch in thee, exspectyng that
joyful day, when I shall be made partaker of thy celestial joys, which shall
never end, To thee sweet Jesus, with the father, and the holy ghost, be all
honor. etc.

A prayer for Thursday morning.
O Almighty, and most merciful father, I hartyly beseech thee, vouchsafe to
look down, with the eyes of thy mercy upon me, a most vile and miserable
sinner, which lie here prostrate before the feet of thy mercy, craving
remission of my manifold sins and wickedness, from the very bottom of my
heart, acknowledging freely, that I am no more worthy to be called thy son,
the multitude of mine offenses is so great and infinite. Yet for as much as thou
art the god and Father of all comfort which desire not the death of a sinner,
but rather that he should turn from his wickedness and live: and like a true
pitiful Samaritan art sorry to see mely thus wounded with the sting of sin
and iniquity, make me I pray thee, by infusion of thy comfortable oil into my
wounds, to run repentantly with the lost Son, and unfeignedly to bewail mine
offenses at ye feet of thy mercy, crying, Father, I have sinned against
heaven, and against thee, I am no more worthy to be called thy Son, make me
as one of thy hired servants. Give me grace, always to repent my sins with a
co^trite heart before thy divine Majesty, without either dissemblinge, or
cloking of them, for thou art the god of light, thou see whatsoever is done
in darkness, and from thy eyes there can be nothing co^cealed: have mercy
therefore (most merciful Father) upon me, forgive me my trespasses, as I
forgive them that have trespassed against me: forgive me my debt, and have
compassion upon mine infirmity, for thou Lord art a merciful God, full of
pity and compassion such a one, as is sorry for my afflictions, with thee is
abundance of comfort, and plenty, of redemption, thou only art ye god of my
health and salvation: besides thee I knowledge none other god, neither in heaven
above, nor i^ the earth beneth, neither in the water under ye earth, tho^ only
art almighty, thou only from the beginning art everlasting, world without
end. O bow down thine ears (most merciful Father) to the voice of my
lamentatio^, for against thee only have I sinned, thee only have I offended,
and justly for my disobedience provoked thy wrath, and indignotion against me,
yet I poor sinner do accuse my self unto thee, dear Father that I have sore
and greuousely offended thy goodness and Majesty, in committing of diverse and
manifold haynouse offenses against thee, for I have not kept the least of thy
most holy and godly co^maundeme^ntes, but have wandered astraye from my youth,
following mine own unbridled affections, declining from ye sacred precepts of
thy holy law, and starting aside like a broken bow I have not honored thee
like my god, I have not obai^d thee like my Father, I have not served thee like
my creator, but have all my life time spurned at the way of righteousness,
and understanding, offending thy divine Majesty ever both in thoughts, words,
and deeds, which continually I commit against thee, O my merciful God and
loving Savior, I am sorry for my sins, even from the bottom of my heart, yea
my soul mourns most merciful Father, to the death, for the innumerable
multitude of my sins. The only hope I have of obtaining thy mercy, is in the
merits of thy Son Jesus Christ, my Savior. Thou have diverse and sundry
times by the mouth of thy holy Prophets, pronounced forgiveness of sins, if
I repent from the bottom of my heart, vouchsafe therefore most merciful
Father, to look upon my misery, and as thou sparest thy plague from the great
City of Niniue, when they repented: even so most merciful father withdraw
thy rod from me, that lie prostrate at ye feet of thy mercy, bewailinge my
sins with the unfeigned lamentation of hartye repentance. Forgive me my
offenses, most merciful Father, and renew a right spirit within me, conduct me
by the virtue of thy grace, to run ye rest of this earthly course which yet
remains that my footesteppes never slide: but that I may so spend this day,
(to the beginning whereof thou haste safely brought me) and the re^nant of my
life in this world yt all my thoughts, words, and works, may tend to thy
glory, and to the commodity of my neighbor, so that I may have a joyful
resurrection at what time thy Son Jesus Christ my savior, shall come to
judge both the quick and ye dead. To whom with thee and ye holy Ghost be all
honor and glory for ever and ever.

A prayer for Thursday evening. etc.
O Lord, which only art god, true gracious and merciful, which commaundest
them that love thy name to cast all their fear and care upon thee, promysing
most mercifully, thy self to be their protector from their enemies, their
refuge in danger, their governor in the day, their watchman in ye night, who
keep Israel, and do neither slumber nor sleep, but have thine eyes
contineuallie bent upon the^ as the egle on her you^geons protecting them under
the shadow of thy power, as the hen gathers her chickens to geather,
covering them under the shadow of her wings: I beseech thee of thy bountiful
goodness O Lord, to forgive me my sins wherein I have offended thee this
day, and heretofore in my life time, and to receive me under thy protection
this night and ever, that I may rest in perfect quietness both of body and
soul. Grant most merciful Father, that the external eyes of my body may
take their sound and natural sleep, but let the inward eyes of my heart and
mind continually watch unto thee that the weakness of the slesh cause me not
to offend thy divine Majesty. Let my mind at all times have an inward
feelynge of thy goodness toward me, that the memory of thy manyfold benefits
never slide out of my remembrance, but that at all times I may be styrred up
to praise thy name, and to yield thee thanks for the innumerable gifts that
thou of thy mere mercy and Fatherly liberality, without any desert of mine
have freely bestowed upon me, since the first hour of my nativity. Let thy
praise sound in my mouth, late and early, at midday and midnight, in all
places, at all times and seasons. Plant in my heart most merciful Father, a
true desire and perfect zeal to thank thee, for all the benefit^s that I have
daily received at thy hands, that I may turn back with ye Samaritan, and
praise thee, and not to depart as ye other ix. Lepiers did, who feeling
themselves cleansed of their filthynesse, yet returned not at all to give God
thanks Instruct me I beseech thee in thy divine judgments that when I have
safely passed this night under thy protection, I may spend ye next day, I all
my life following in holiness and purity of conversation, crying continually,
come Lord Jesus, come, for thine electes sake, come quickly, Amen. That at the
last I may happily ariue at the port of that everlasting rest, which by thy
mercy thou have promised to all the^ that unfeignedly love ye name of Jesus: To
whom with the Father, and the holy Ghost be all honor and glory for ever. Amen.

A prayer for Fridaye morning.
ALmighty and most merciful Father, I beseech thee for thy Son Jesus Christ
his sake, to grant me thy heavenly grace that with immovable zeal I may
seek after those things that may please thee, and circomspectly shun all
kind of ways that may move or prouake thy wrath against me. And when I have
once known perfectly what thy will and pleasure is, give me grace to seek the
same carefully, to fulfill it perfectly, and to walk in the same vigelantly,
to the honor and glory of thy most holy name Order my lyuinge so that I may do
those things which thou requirest of me, and that with unfeigned devotion
without all pharisicall pretended holiness. Give me grace that I may know it,
and have will and power to do thereafter, least if I know my master his will
and due it not, I be beaten with many stripes. Above all things give me grace
to seek thy honor and glory, with all things else which he most convenient
for my salvation in Christ Jesus. Make my wa^es I beseech thee most merciful
Father, sure and straight before, that if wealth abound I fall not unto pride
and presumption, or if I fall into adversity I be not driven into desperation,
as to loase ye faith which I have in my Lord and Savior, or to blaspheme thy
most holy mame with words of reproach as they do, whose heart Satan has
possessed, and rooted the seeds of virtue and understanding out of their
hearts. Only give me a necessary living, sufficient to maintain my self
honestly, with mediocritie, and without superfluity or idle excess. Give me
not to much, lest I wax proud and so forget thee, that art ye author of my
wealth and mine only vpholder: neither to littell lest I be forced to attempt,
dishonest and extraordinary shifts, without any care or respect either thy
heavenly laws and commaundeme^ts, or the decrees of my prince and country.
Give me grace ever to rejoice in thee, and that I may never be sorrowful for
any thing, but that may draw me from thy law, or wherein I have sinned
against thy divine Majesty. Be thou mine only comfort above all other, to
recreate me when I am in perplexity, to protect me both at my down liinge and
vprysinge, let me not be merry with the joy that is without thee, neither let
me delight in any thing but in thee, and the cross of Christ Jesus: make me to
lift up mine heart continually to thee, when I am either in prosperity or
fallen into aduersatie. Make me humble without ipocrisie, merry without
lightness, sad without mistrust, sober without dullness, true without dou
blenesse, fearinge thee without desperation, trusting in thee without
presumption, teling my neybour his falts without dissimulation, giving other a
good example of perfect and godly lyuinge, yt they which behold it may be the
more enflamed to trend the like trace and to glorifiy god in all his gifts.
And finally grant most merciful Father that seeinge (I have taken sufficient
rest this night past, and that the day is come) wherein thou have appointed me
to do all such godly and necessary business, as may be to thy glory, ye
profit of my neighbor and health of my soul: I may so pass the same in thy
fear, that I be in danger of no trouble or perturbatio^ ^ther of body or
mind but evermore constante in faith by the blood of Christ Jesus my Savior
and redeemer. To whom with thee and ye holy ghost be all honor and glory for
ever and ever. Amen.

A prayer for Friday evening.
I Render unto thee, (most merciful Father, all possible thanks and praises,
for that thou of thy mere mercy and Fatherly pity, have guarded me all this
day, and the rest of my life time under ye wings of thy heavenly protection:
desyringe thee with the tears of my lamentation to put all my wickedness out of
thy mind which I have committed against thy divine Majesty since the time of
my conception Thou haste promised by the mouth of thy holy Prophet that at
what time soever a sinner does repent him of his sins from the bottom of
his heart, thou will put all his wickedness out of thy remembrance: forgive
me therefore most merciful Father, and with the eyes of thy mercy look down
upon me as thou did look upon Peter thine Apostle when he lamented his
sin and was sorry for his offenses, let me be regenerate in spirit, and learn
from henceforth to walk in thy laws all the days of my life. Make me to
lift mine heart often times unto thee, and when I fall make me to think upon
thee and be sorry for mine iniquity with steadfast purpose of amendme^t and grace
of thee, to perform the same. Grant me understanding to know thy will to
follow such conversation as may please thee, to repose my whole trust and
confidence in the multitude of thy mercies, whereby I may walk without blame
in my calling, doing right to every man, and injury to no man, but after the
example of thy Son Jesus Christ to suffer wrong patiently without desire of
revenge, to pray for mine enemies, and to love them that persecute my life,
Grant grace in all kind of humility to follow ye steps of thy son Jesus
Christ, that pure and immaculate Lamb. And when my body has taken his
natural rest give me a desire to shake of all slothfulness and drowsiness,
that my lims may be strong to sustain my labors, that pertayne to my
present, vocation, and that all mine accions may be done in thy name, and
referred to thy glory, to the commodity of the common wealth. Through Jesus
Christ our Savior Amen.

A prayer for Satterday morning.
O Almighty Lord and most merciful Father, whose power reaches above the
clouds, and thy glory through all the world, who only beholdest the counsels,
devises and works, yea the very thoughts of all men, that serchest the inward
cogitations, yea the very heart and raynes. I most humbly beseech thee, that for
as much as thou have graciously preserved me this night, I may not spend this
day after my own mind and pleasure which is always evil and wicked, but
earnestly look upon and diligently follow thy fatherly will, thy everlasting
counsel, thy healthful word and pleasure which is always good, perfect and
holy, and that I may fulfill ye same with all possible care and dylige^ce, that
thy divine name may be always sanctyfied voth now and evermore of me
miserable siner. Inspire my mind with thy heavenly spirit, that my ways may
be directed according to thy Godly will and commaundeme^ts, that my feet
slide not out of the paths of righteousness, yt my mind imagine not upon
wickedness, yt my tongue speak no blasphemies against thee, but that all my
thoughts, words and works, may be to guided by thy ye grace I never provoke
thy wrath nor displeasure against me, as for my sins and offenses of my
youth, I beseech thee to put them out of thy remembrance for thy great mercyes
sake and never think upon the^ hereafter. For I confess and acknowledge that
I am a miserable and wretched sinner, I have wandered out of the way of virtue
since my youth, and have followed the brutishe inclination of my corrupt nature,
like ye senseless beasts of the earth, whose eyes are still fatsened on the
ground, consideringe no further the^ the time present, without any knowledge or
fore sight of the time to come. Thou know O Lord that I am but hay and
grass, that flourishes this day, and to morrow is cut down and cast into the
fornice: so little hold or stay is there in the life of man, yt he cannot
assure himself of one hour longer then thy good pleasure shall permit him.
Ten times happy therefore is he that can spend this little time of being, which
thou haste granted him according to the rules and precepts of thy holy
commandments. Wherefore since I am but mortal, made of earth and ashes, and
always prone to fall from thy statutes, illuminate I beseech thee, the eclipsed
eyes of my gross understanding, with the light of thy heavenly spirit, that
I may spend this day, and all the rest of my life hereafter in such wise as
my doings may be acceptable in thy sight, and commodious to the common welthe
through our only Lord and Savior Jesus Christ. Amem.

A prayer for Satterday evening.
O Merciful God and heavenly Father, whether I sleep or wake, live or dye I
am always thine, wherefore I beseech thee hartelie that thou will vouchsafe to
take care and charge of me, and not to suffer me to perish in the works of
darkness, but to kyndle the light of thy countenance in my heart, that thy
godly konwledge may daily increase in me through a right and a pure faith,
and that I may always be found to live and walk after thy will and pleasure,
to have my mind and cogitacions bent upon thee, whether I sleep or wake or
what thing else so ever I do that I may stick fast to thee, by a pure and
unspotted faith, in my savior Christ Jesus. Be thou (O merciful father) my
watch man and my keeper, from ye terryble assaults of Satan, and his wicked
ministers, keep my heart from the imaginations of iniquity, yt I may be pure
in thee, and an unspotted spouse to thy Son Christ Jesus. When I lay down
my self, to recreat my lims with sleep, which thou have appointed for the
satisfaction of my trayle body, let me not be troubled or assailed with any
unclean cogitations, but keep my mind still waking in thee, to repose my
trust in thy mercy, that ye external eyes of my heart may be evermore
excercised in meditacio^ of the comfortable promise. To whom with the Father,
the Son and the holy ghost be all honor and glory now and ever more. Amen.

A prayer for Sunday morning.
O Almighty god and most merciful Father, whom the tables of thy
commandments, delivered to the hands of thy servant Mayses upon the Mount
Sina: among other precepts did give charge unto thy chosen children of
Israel, that in six days they should do all such works and labors, as
they had to do, and rest from labor the seventh day: grant we beseech thee,
that since we have happily passed over this whole weke under thy gracious
protection, we may not only rest this day from our daily travails but that
we may abstain also from the works of sin and iniquity, and sanctify this
day to thee, with prayers and thanks giving, abou^ding in all works of love and
charity, as thou have co^m^unded in thy holy word, that we may be found pure
without spotte or blemish at that day when thy Son Jesus Christ shall come
to judge the world with righteousness and equity. And forasmuch as thou have
ordained this day among the rest wherein we should meet altogether with
brotherly love and affection, to yealde thee praises for the innumerable
benefits we have received at thy hand, to acknowledge thy fatherly love and
pity toward us from time to time, and to give thee thanks in general for
all and universal thy benifites hitherto bestowed upon us, we humbly beseech
thee to grant us thy holy spirit that we may be the more zelousely
inflamed to serve thee in true holiness and integrity of life: and by ye
operation of that spirit we may kill all carnal lusts, unlawful pleasures,
occupiscence, and all other spots of uncleanness, whereby we may be made thy
child by adopcion and grace, and our bodies ye temple of the holy ghost,
being thoroughly purged and purified from the dregs of iniquity and
abhominotion. Give us grace most merciful Father, to spend this day to thy
pleasure in all good works and charity, proceeding from an undefiled faith in
Christ Jesus, that we fall not into no kind of danger, but that all our
doings may be or^e^ed by thy governance, to do always that is righteous in
thy sight, through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

A prayer for Sunday Evening.
WE render unto thee everlasting praises (most merciful Father) for that of
thy gracious favor and love toward us, thou have vouchsafed to preserve me
all this day and the rest of my life hitherto, under the shadow of thy most
merciful protection: besechinge thee also to take me to thy tuition this
present night and ever, that we be not tempted with any suggestion of Satan,
but being thoroughly armed with ye holy ghost, we may have power and force to
resist his assaults by a sure faith and confidence in ye blood of thy blessed
son, our Lord and Savior Christ Jesus. Give us grace to repent us of our
sins unfeignedly, to crave remission of them incessantly, to embrace thy holy
word and commandments sincerely, and to express them in our lyuinge
effectually: whereby we may walk uprightly in our conversation, with sure and
certain hope of resurrection to eternal life by the merits of Christ Jesus,
that we may be found wakinge and watchinge for his coming, when he shall come
to judge the world with equity, and to reward every man according to the
works of his body. Grant us grace most merciful father, to behave our selves
so uprightly in this life, that the^ we may be made pertakers of thy kingedome
with thy elect: there to live in eternal joy and filicitie world without end.
Amen.

FINIS.
The Letany.
O God the father of heaven: have mercy upon us miserable sinners.

O God the father. etc.

O God the Son redeemer of the world: have mercy upon us miserable sinners.

O God the Son. etc.

O God the holy Ghost proceeding from the Father and the Son have mercy upon
us miserable sinners.

O God the holy ghost. etc.

O holy blessed, and glorious Trinity, three persons and one God, have mercy
upon us miserable sinners

O holy, blessed and glory etc.

Remember not Lord our offenses, nor the offenses of our forefathers, neither
take thou vengeance of our sins, spare us good Lord, spare thy people whom
thou have redeemed with thy most precious blood, and be not angry with us for
ever.

Spare us good Lord.

From all evil and mischief from sin, from the crafts and assaults of the
Devil, from thy wrath, and from everlasting damnation.

Good Lord deliver us.

From blindness^ of heart, from pride, vain glory, and hypocrisy, from envy,
hatred and malice, and all uncharitableness.

God Lord deliver us.

From fornication, and all other deadly sin, and from all the deceites of the
world, ye flesh and the Devil.

Good Lord deliver us.

From lightning and tempest, from plague pestilence and famine, from battle
and murder, and from sudden death.

Good Lord deliver us.

From all sedition and pryuie conspiracy, from all false doctrine and herisie,
from hardness of heart, and contempt of thy word and commandment.

God Lord deliver us.

By the mistry of thy holy incarnation, by thy holy nativity and circumcision,
by thy baptism, fasting and temptation.

Good Lord deliver us.

By thine agony and bloody sweat, by thy Cross and Passion, by thy precious
death and burial, by thy glorious Resurrection and Ascentio^, and by the
coming of the goly Ghost.

Good Lord deliver us.

In all time of our tribulation, in all time of our wealth, in the hour of
death and in ye day of judgment.

Good Lord deliver us.

We sinners do beseech thee, to hear us O lord God and that it may please
thee to rule and govern thy holy Church universally in ye right way.

We beseech thee to etc.

That it may please thee to keep and strengthen in the true worshipping of
thee, in righteousness and holiness of life, thy servant Elizabeth our most
gracious Queen and governor.

We beseech thee to etc.

That it may please thee to rule hur heart in thy faith, fear, and love, and
that she may evermore have affia^ce in thee, and ever seek thy hoor and glory.

We beseech thee to etc.

That it may please the to be her defender and keeper, giving her the victory
over all her enemies.

We beseech the to. and.

That it may please thee to illuminate all Bishops, Pastors, and Ministers of
thy Church, with true knowledge and understanding of thy word, and that both
by their preaching and living they may set it forth and show it accordingly.

We beseech thee to. and.

That it may please thee to indue the Lords of the counsel, and all the
Nobility with grace wisdom and understanding.

We beseech thee to. etc.

That it may please thee to bless and keep the Magestrates, giving them grace
to excetute justice, and to maintain truth

We beseech thee to. etc.

That it may please thee to bless and keep all thy people.

We beseech thee to. etc.

That it may please thee to give to all nations unity peace and concord.

We beseech thee to. etc.

That it may please thee to give us an heart to love and dread thee, and
diligently to live after thy co^mau^deme^ts

We beseech thee to etc.

That it may please thee to give all thy people increase of grace, to hear
meekely thy word, and to receive it with pure affection, and to bring forth
the fruitis of thy spirit.

we beseech thee to. etc.

That it may please thee to bring into the way of truth all such as have erred
and are dceaued.

We beseech thee to etc.

That it may please thee to strengthen such as do stand, and to comfort and
help ye weak hearted, and to raise them up that fall, and finally to beat
down Satan under our feet.

We beseech thee to etc.

That it may please thee to succor help and comfort, all that be in danger
necessity and tribulation.

We beseech thee to. etc.

That it may please thee to soccour help, and comfort, all that be in danger
necessitte and tribulation.

we beseech thee to. etc.

That it may please thee to preserve all that travail by land or by water,
all women labouringe of child, all sick persons and young children, and to
show thy pity upon al prisoners and captives.

we beseech thee to. etc.

That it may please thee to defend and provide for ye fatherless Children and
widows, and all that be desolate and oppressed.

we beseech thee to etc.

That it may please thee to have mercy upon all men

we beseech thee to. etc.

That it may please thee to forgive our enemies, persecutours and flaunderers,
and to turn their hearts.

we beseech thee to. etc.

That it may please thee to give and preserve to our use the kindly fruits of
ye earth, so as in due time we may enjoy them.

we beseech thee to, etc.

That it may please thee to give us true repentance to forgive us all our
sins, negligences and ignoraunces and to endue us with ye grace of thy holy
spirit, toamend our lives according to thy holy word.

we beseech thee to. etc.

Son of God, we beseech thee to hear us.

Son of God, we be etc.

O lamb of God that take away the sins of ye world.

Grant us thy peace.

O lamb of God yt take away the sins of yt world.

Have mercy upon us.

O Christ hear us.

O Christ hear us.

Lord have mercy upon us.

Lord have mercy upon us.

Christ have mercy upon us.

Christ have mercy upon us.

Lord have mercy upon us.

Lord have mercy upon us.

Our father which art in etc.

And lead us not into. etc.

But deliver us from evil.

The versicle.

O Lord deal not with us after our sins.

The Answer.

Neither reward us after our iniquities.

Let us pray.

O God merciful Father, that dispisest not the sighing of a contrite heart,
nor the desire of such as be sorrowful, mercifully assiste our prayers, that
we make before thee in all our troubles and aduarsities, whenever they
oppress us, and graciously hear us, that those evils which ye craft and
subtlety of the Devil or man works against us be brought to naught, and by
the providence of thy goodness they may be dispersed, that we thy servants
being hurt by no persecution, may evermore give thanks unto thee in thy holy
Church through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

O Lord arise, help us, and deliver us for thy name sake

O God we have hard with our ears and our Fathers have declared unto us, the
noble works yt thou did in their days and in the old tune before them.

O lord arise help us and deliver us for thy thine honor.

Glory be to the father. etc.

As it was in the be etc.

From our enemies defend us O Christ.

Graciously look upon our afflictions.

Pitifully behold ye sorows of our hearts.

Mercifully forgive the sins of the people.

Favorably with mercy hear our prayers.

O Son of David have mercy upon us.

Both now and ever vonchsafe to hear us O Christ.

Graciously hear us, o christ graciously hear us O Lord Christ

The versicle.

O Lord let thy mercy be showed upon us.

The Answer.

As we do put our trust in thee.

Let us pray.

WE humbly beseech thee (O father) mercifully to look upon our infirmities,
and for the glory of thy names sake, turn from us all those evils that we
most righteously have deserved, and grant that in all our troubles, we may
put our whole trust and confidence in thy mercy, and evermore serve thee in
holiness and pureness of living, to thy honor and glory: through our only
mediator and advocate Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

A prayer for the Queens majesty.
O Lord our heavenly Father, high and mighty, King of Kings, Lord of Lords,
the only ruler of Princes, which do from thy throne behold all the
dwellers upon the earth, most heartily we beseech thee with thy favor to behold
our most gracious soucraigne Lady Queen Elizabeth, and so replenysh her with
the grace of thy holy spirit, that she may always incline to thy will and
walk in thy way Indue her plentifully with heavenly gifts: grant her in
health and wealth long to live, strengthen her that she may vanquish and
overcome all her enemies. And finally after this life she may attain
everlasting joy and felicity: Through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

A prayer for Pastors and Ministers of the Church.
Almighty and everlasting God, which only workest great meruayles, send
down upon our Pastors, and Ministers, and all congregations committed to
their charge ye healthful spirit of thy grace, and that they may truly please
thee. Pour upon them the continual dwe of thy blessing: Grant this (O Lord)
for the honor of our advocate and mediator Jesus Christ.

O God heavenly Father, which by thy Son Jesus Christ have promised to all
them that seek thy kingdom, and the righteousness thereof, all things
necessary to their bodily sustenaunce: Send us we beseech thee, in this our
necessity. such moderate rain and showers, yt we may receive ye fruits of
the earth to our comfort, and to thy honor: through Jesus Christ our Lord Ame^

The blessing.
THe peace of God which passes (...) understanding keep our hurtes and minds
in the knowledge and love of God and of his Son Jesus Christ our Lord. And
the blessing of God almight^, the father the son and the holy Ghost, be among
us and remain with us always. Ame^.

FINIS.

