royal blazon or coat of arms HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE By the King.
A Proclamation extending a former Proclamation for the Restraint of Shipping
any Commodity in Strangers Bottomes, either into this Kingdom or out of the
same, unto the special case of Wines of the growth of France, to be imported
into this Kingdom, either by Subject or Stranger, according to a Statute in
that case provided.
WHereas We did publish Our Royal Proclamation, bearing date the seventeenth
day of April last past, as well for the maintayning of the Trade of the LEVANT
Company in Particular, as for the quickening and putting in due execution of
diverse good and politic Laws against the Shipping of Merchandises in
Strangers Bottomes, either Inwards or Outward; In which Our Proclamation the
Statutes of 5. of Richard the second, 4. of Henry the seventh, and 32. of
Henry the eight are expressed, But the Statute of 5. Elizabeth concerning
Wines of the growth of France, is not therein mentioned, otherwise, then as it
may be contained in general terms. Now forasmuch as it imports the State
and strength of Our Navy (whereof Our Fleet of Baourdeaux, and other Our
Shipping, Trading for Wines into France is a notable portion) That the said Law
of 5. Elizabeth, be no more disobeyed or neglected, but that it be straightly
and severely executed: We do hereby charge and command, That the branch of
the said Law of 5. Elizabeth which concerns the Importation of Wines of the
Dominions and Countries belonging to the Crown of France, in such Vessels
only, whereof our Subjects are Owners or Part-owners, be from henceforth
diligently and severely put in execution, and that no person, either Alien,
Denizon, or Our natural borne Subject, do presume to bring in any Wines into
this Our Realm of England, contrary to the true intent and effect of the said
Law, Upon pain, as well of confiscation, as is in that Law expressed, As also
of Our high indignation and displeasure, both toward the Offenders, and
toward all Our Officers and Ministers, which shall be found slack and remiss,
in procuring and assisting the due execution of the said Law.

Given at Royston the twelfth day of October, in the thirteenth year of Our
Reign of Great Britain, France and Ireland, and of Scotland the nine and
fourtieth.
God save the King.
Imprinted at London by Robert Barker, Printer to the Kings most excellent
Majesty.

Anno Dom. 1615.


