By the Kings Majesty's Commissioners, for transposing and changing the days
and times of Faires, Marts, or Markets, upon reasonable Compositions, and
establishing of them.
I R

HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE

royal blazon or coat of arms
WHEREAS diverse Grants have formerly been made, as well from his Majesty as
his Progenitors, under the great Seal of England, unto sundry Bodies Politic
and Corporate; and unto private persons, of Faires, Marts, and Markets; to be
kept within several Towns within his Majesty's Dominions of England and
Wales, for the benefit of his Subjects in general.

His Majesty being lately informed, that sundry of the said Faires, Marts, and
Markets; throught the improuidence of the first Procurers; or by other
accidents, are found inconueniently appointed for the days of the week, and
times and seasons of the year: rather to the subjects prejudice then benefit.

His Majesty therefore (nothing more desiring, then the ease, benefit and
contentment of his Subjects, in case of this nature, so much concerning the
public Commerce in general) has been sithence graciously pleased to grant
his Commission, under his great Seal of England, directed to some of his
learned Council, and others whose names are here under subscribed: Giving them
thereby authority to compound and agree for reasonable fines, with all and
every person and persons; Bodies Politic and Corporate, and others houlding
any Faires, Marts, or Markets by grant or prescription from his Majesty or
any his Predecessors, for altering, transposing, changing, and accommodating
such Faires, Marts, or Markets, to such days of the week and times of the
year as might become most commodious and beneficial for his subjects, without
special suite to be made therefore.

These are therefore to give notice unto all such as shall be desirous to
alter, transpose, or change their Faires Marts, and Markets to more convenient
days, times and seasons, by new graunts from his Majesty then formerly they
have been. That they repair unto the house of Mistress Pierce in Chancery Lane
near unto the Subpena Office, where one of the Commissioners will attend, that
they may be reasonably dealt withal, according to the tenor of his Majesty's
gracious Commission in that behalf made.

The Commissioners for this Grant.
Sir Henry Yeluerton Knight, his Majesty's Attorney General. Sir Thomas
Couentry Knight Solicitor. Sir Edward Mosley Knight, Attorney of the Duchy. Sir
Robert Douglas Knight, Treasurer of his Highness household. Esquires.
William Allison. William Angel,
Gentlemen.
Thomas Powell, Daniell Powell, John Hill, Richard Downs


