By the Kings Majesty's Commissioners, for granting free VVarrens, and other
things of that nature.
I R

HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE

royal blazon or coat of arms
THE KINGS most Excellent Majesty tendering the quiet, ease, and contentment of
his loving Subjects: AND for the better preservation of each man's Game of all
sorts in their own lands and possessions, from common hunters, Potchers and
the like: which his Majesty understanding diverse of his Subjects are desirous
off, has been graciously pleased to grant his Commission under his great
Seal of England, directed to some of his learned Counsel and others, whose
names are subscribed, for compounding and agreeing with all such as will
compound for free and Charter Warren, to be granted to them and their Heirs
under the great Seal of England: AND for erecting Parkes and Warrans, in each
man's several possessions: AND for renewing Charters and Graunts of that
nature, with diners other benesits, and more ample privileges, and speedy
remedies by his Majesty's said Grant, so to be obtained, against such
inconuenienes of Hunters and Potchers, more then the common or Statute laws,
without the help of his Majesty's grant, can yield and afford: for Warrens or
Parkes are not to be holden or erected but by Charter or Prescription, as by
the said Commission may appear.

The Command and commodity of the privilege of Chartr'd grounds, and
warrens, grounded upon law and experience.
1 It does enfranchise the land, by giving an interest in the game to the owner
of the ground, excludes and others* who otherwise without the Kings grant
have as much interest in as the own: neither will any action lie against a man
for taking or killing his game, or any recovery be had without the kings
grant, but action of treaspasse. 2 It has great immunities and freedoms,
whereof other grounds are destitute. 1. Eliz. Rast. 3. 3 The trespasser shall
incur the payment mentioned in the kings grant, which other Warrens want. 4
Warren ground is not subject to the statute made against the conversion of
tillage, into pasture: whereby an arable ground out-worne and barrened by
corn, may so be employed to greater benefit, till it be fruitful for corn
again. 5 Treaspasses shall incur imprisonment for three years, and make
fine and ransom, and put in sureties not to offend again, and the final
punishment is abiuration. 6 The garden of wards that the destroys or annoies
such grounds, shall be punished in wast. 7 The delinquent incurreth the danger
of the Statute laws, and the penalty of the kings Charter and common laws.
The Pattentie or his assigns without malice, may justify the death of a
wilful offender, hounting on these licenced grounds if he will not submit
himself to the kings peace.
1 It is good to all persons and grieuance to none. 2 They be subject to a suit
by the kings writ of Quo warranto, that keep and maintain Warrens without
the kings grant, whereby he may by his Attorney general ceaze their
libertyes. 3 The new Patentie has full power to punish Potchers and pertty
hunters by the law. 4 The barren and wast grounds may be won to be fertile,
and gained to be several and good. 5 This kind of ground will be made fit for
Tillage, and fruitful for corn, and not subject to the statutes for decaying
tillage. 6 The fear of these punishments, hereby to be inflicted will keep
men's grounds in quiet. 7 It shall be an occasion and preserve men's hedges,
corn, and sheep, more from petty hunters, Potchers, etc.
The charge of passing this grant under the Seal, shall not be great, as in
other Cases.

The Office hereof is kept at Sir Henry Bretons house in Drury lane next the
sign of the Griffine nere Drury house where you shall have further
satisfaction and direction herein.

The Commissioners for this grant.
Sir Henry Yeluerton, Knight, Attorney general. Sir Thomas Coventry, Knight,
Solicitor. Sir John Townsend, Knight, Sir Henry Breton, Knight, Henry Gibbe,
esquire, George Peckham, esquire.

