Letters to restrain carrying of Packets by Shippers, etc.
AFter our hearty commendations. Whereas it has pleased his Majesty, by his
Proclamation, bearing date the fifteenth of May, 1609. to express his Royal
pleasure, for the orderly going and coming of such Carriers and Posts, as are
in due manner established by the Post-Masters reciprocally, both on this side,
and on the parts beyond the Seas; and likewise his Majesty's intention in the
said Proclamation, has for diverse important reasons, been further explaned
and enlarged, by the Lords of his Majesty's most honorable Privy Council,
wherewith we doubt not but you are thoroughly acquainted.

Now, forasmuch as special complaint has been made by the said Postmasters,
and the Posts employed under them, that they suffer great wrong and detriment,
by the overmuch carrying, and bringing into this Realm of Letters and Packets,
by Shipers, and Masters of Ships, besides their freight Letters, especially to,
and from the Ports of Zeland and Flanders, contrary to his Majesty's said
Proclamation, and the order of his Majesty's Privy Council aforesaid. For
redress whereof, and for the relief of the said Posts, whereby they may be
the better enabled to perform their duties and service to his Majesty: These
are to will and require you, and every of you, whom it may concern, That you
do henceforth, not only see his Majesty's said Proclamation and order, in all
points duly observed and performed; but that further you do make diligent
search for all Letters and Packets, that shall be so brought in, and carried
forth, especially by any the said Shippers of Zeland, and the Ports of
Flanders. And in case you shall find any Letters or Packets, either in the
charge of any Shippers, or Masters of Ships, besides their freight Letters, or
in the hands of any other passengers, not thereunto by good warrant authorized;
We do hereby in his Majesty's name straightly charge and command you, to
take them into your possession, and thereof to make present delivery into the
hands of Matthew de Quester, his Majesty's Postmaster for foreign services;
for so it is his Majesty's pleasure and command. And hereof you may not fail,
as you will answer the contrary at your perils.

From White Hall the sixth of February, 1618. Your loving Friends, THO. LAKE.
ROBERT NAVNTON.
To our loving friends, the Searchers of the Port of London, Grauesend and
Dover, and to the Searchers of all other his Majesty's Ports, and other
Officers to whom it may appertain.
Imprinted at London by BONHAM NORTON and JOHN BILL, Printers to the Kings most
Excellent Majesty. 1618.


