A Treatise of the state and disposition of the world, with the alteracions
and chaunginges thereof through the great conjunctions of the.iii. highest
planetes, called Maxima, Mayor, Media, and Minor, declaringe the very time, the
day, hour and minute, that God created the Son, Moon, and Sterres, and the
places where they were first set in the heavens, and the beginning of their
mouynges, and so continued to this day whereby the world has received influe^ce
as shall be declared by example from the creation unto this present year, and
also to the year of our lord, M.D.LVIII. to come.

THE GREAT CONIVNCIONS OF THE three highest Planettes, Saturn, Jupiter, and Mars,
that are called, Mayor, Media, and Minor.
ASPTHOLOME says in centiloqui, verbo. 50. all the mutations, chaunges, and
alteracions, that happen in this world, among the Creatures, are known by
the hundredth and twentye conjunctions, among the seven planettes, of the
which.vi. are most pryncypall.

THe first is betwyxte Saturn and Jupiter in the beginning of Aries, the
which is but ones in.ix. hundredth.liii. years, and. lxxxxi, days, so that in
eyghte of these comunctions remain seven other years from their beginnings,
the influence of this coniunctyon causes great and marvelous chaunges, and
notable alteracions, through all the clymattes of the world, and sygnyfyeth
new sects, and chaungynge of customs laws, and disposicions among the
people, and mutacyons of great Empires, Kyngedomes, and Lordeshyppes, and also
great plages, pestylence, and mortalyte, and of all other universal things
that is notable through the world, because of the slow mouynge of them,
their orbs and cyrcles ar so hye and great, for the spear of Saturn is from
the earth, six hundredth thousand, thousand, five hundredth thousand, three
hundredth thousand, fifty thousand, seven thousand, and five hundredth miles,
and the thicknes of his orb is within five hundredth thousand thousand miles,
of as much, and his compass, is nereby three fold as much as his heyght, and
the very sterre of Saturn is.ix. times greater then all the earth.

The second conjunction is also betwyxt Saturn, and Jupiter, in the
beginning of every triplicite, the which is but ons in two hundredth.xxxviii.
years, and two hundrethe and.xv. days. Whose influence brings in mutacions,
and alteracyons of these sects, disposicions, and notable things above said,
according to the nature of the tryplicites. Also Saturn and Jupiter is
joined.xii. time together in every triplicite, that is to say, in every twenty
years, they are ons joined in every sign of one tryplicite, whose influence
makethe alteracyon of these things aforesaid, according to the nature of the
signs, in whom this conjunction fallethe, for the time of.xx. years, and then
at the entrance into an other triplicite, the influence alters according to
the nature of the triplicite.

And this conjunction of.xx. years is the third of the.vi. pryncypall. Also
Saturn has in every triplicite ten reuolucions by whose influence is known
the remaining and chaungynge of these sects, and dysposicions aforesaid,
according to the entrance of Saturn into the mouable or fyry signs, and also
according to his nature. Furthermore according to the conjunction of Jupiter to
the other.vii. planettes, so alters and changes the sects, customs, and
laws, that are first brought in by the great co^iunctions, as when he is
joined with Saturn, he brings in the Iewyshe law, and causethe mankind to
be styfe, and stubbourne, against the true law, of Christ: with Mars the
Caldes law, that worshypped the fire, and other false images, with the Son,
the Egyptians law that worshypped the Son, Moon, and Sterres, even as all
things had been destened to come by them of necessyte, with Venus, the
Saracens law, the which was al together lechery, regarding neither order,
nor law, but all in common, and oftymes, against kind, with Mercury, the
Christians law, and al other lerning, perteyning to the knowledge of God, and
his works, with the Moon, the inconstancy of al laws, and contrary
disputacio^s of these aforsaid, according to other planetes that the Moon has
aspecte unto: and thus as Jupiter betokens laws, Mars does sygnifie batels,
the Son peace and concord: Mercury lerning and knoweledge, and after their
co^iunctions, thus consider their influences as says Albumasar.li. de magis
coniunctionibus, tract.ii. differetur octa.

The.iiii. conjunction is betwixe Saturn and Mars in the beginning of Cancer,
the which is but ons in.xxx. years, whose influe^ce brings in wars,
debates, and battles, and much contrariousnes, for these things aforesaid.
Also a conjunction betwyxte Jupiter and Mars signifies tempests of weather,
with rain, and snow, and corruption of the air, and also strife, debate, and
batell.

The fyfth conjunction is betwyxte the Son and Moon at the entrance of the
Son into Aries of whose influence comes yearly dispositions.

The.vi. is of the Son and Moon in every moves, of whose influence comes
monthly and wekely, dispositions. Also the Moon is joined withal the planetes
ons in a month, whereof comes daily inclinatio^s, so that al most from a, M.
years to every day, the alteration and disposition of al creatures may be
known by these.C. and.xx. conjunctions aforesaid, also to have the true
computation and calculacion of the beginning of these co^iunctions ye must
considre, that in their reuolutio^s they come not to the same point where they
began correspondinge the zodiake of the viii. spear by, iii. minutes in one
year. Whose hole course is.vii. M. years, wherein is contained nereby.viii.
great conjunctions betwyxte Saturn and Jupiter in the beginning of Aries

Also the zodiake of the. ir. spear changes and alters the beginning of
these* great conjunctions xxvi. seco^des in one year, whose hole course is
xlir. thousand years, wherein is contained.lii. conjunctions, betwixt Saturn
and Jupiter in the beginning of Aries.

Also ye must consider the space of the day that the Son did stand still,
and not remove in the time of Iosue, and also the.x. hours in the time of
Ezechie, the which does alter the beginninges of these great co^iunctions, so
that the perfyt calculacion known, their marvelous influence shall surely be
prognosticated

Furthermore know ye that the.x. spear goes round about in. xriiii. hours
and draws all the other speres and planetes with hi^, so that all the world
has thereby influence, and inclination, every hour, and minute, so that from
every hour of the day, till.xlix. M. years, ye may consydre the influences
and inclinations of the sterres and planettes, after the science of Astronomye.

How many great conjunctions has been betwyxte Saturn, and Jupiter, in the
beginning of Aries, sense the creacyon of the world, until this present
year, and of their sygmfycations.
FROM the creacyon of the world to the birth of Christ is diverse opynions of
years, both of the Hebrews, and Latyus, whose difference is within xxir. or
xxx. years the which is about.v. thousand.iii. hundredth.xliii. years: so that
from the Creacyon of the world to this present year, is. vi, thousand.viii.
hundredth.lxxxx. years, in the which time has been vii. great conjunctions
betwyxte Saturn and Jupiter in the beginning of Aries.iii. before Noyes
flodde, and.iiii. after, and for to know the true times of these conjunctions,
ye shall understand that the Son, Moon, and Sterres, was create the.iiii.
day of the world, being the time of VER in the month of March, in the
vernall point of the equinoctial, the Son, and Moon, being under Aries, in
the mids of heaven, also all the planettes was set in their own proper
houses, in the degrees of their exaltacions, and dygnites, also after some
opinions Saturn, Jupiter, Mars, and the Son was set in the.iiii. angles,
Jupiter in the ascendent in the.xv. degree of Cancer, the Son in the mids of
heaven in the.xix. degree of Aries, and also the Moon, was about the first
quarter, beginning her course from the Bull, going by the head of the Dragon,
and so coming to a conjunction with Mercurye, the which was the first
conjunction of the world, and thus passing by all the planettes till she was
joined with the Son, the. xxvii day after their creacion, the which by
putting to the three first days before their creacion, makes a perfyt
lunacion of.xxx. days. Also the planettes keeping their coursses from the
places of their creacion, Saturn and Jupiter was joined together about.xv.
years after, in a earthlye triplicite, in the sign of the Bull, at the which
time Cayme was borne the first murderer, that afterward slew his brother
Abell, with other great alteracions, that befell in the world, at that time, by
Caimes generacyon. Also at a hundredth, and.xv. years, and.xli. days, was an
other coniuncion in the.xxii. minute of Libra in an eayry triplicite, in the
which time was borne Seth, the son of Adam and his generacio^, of whom was an
alteracion and contrary disposition to the generation of Cayme. Also at.iii.
hundredth.liii. years, and an hundredth and.lv. days was another conjunction
betwyxte Saturn and Jupiter, in a warry triplicite, in the.vii. degree of
Scorpion, about the which time, the generation of Cayme, began to bylde
Cytyes, and Towns, for the safegarde and defense of their spoils and tyranny.

Of the first great conjunction betwyxte Saturn and Jupiter, in the beginning
of Aries, in a fyrye triplicite.
THE first great conjunction was in the year five hundrethe.xxxviii. after
the creacion, the which did sygnyfye the holiness of Enos, of the generacyon
of Seth, and of his good living toward GOD. Also in the five hundredth.lxxxxi.
was an other conjunction in the fyrye triplicite, in the.xii. degree of
Sagittary, the which did contynewe till the holiness of Seths generacyon by
Malaleell, Iareth, Euoche, and Mathusale. etc.

Of the.ii. great conjunction.
THE.ii. great conjunction was in the year of the world a thousand.iiii.
hundredth.lxxxxviii. the which did signify the generation of Lameth, that
slew Caym by whose children was first found al crafts, and sciences liberal,
with many other unnatural vsages, first invented by their generation

Also in the year of.ii. M. and.xxi. was a middel conjunction betwixt Saturn
and Jupiter in a watery triplicite in the.xiiii. degree of Cancer, the which did
naturally signify some great and wondrous alteracion by water, as apered by
Noyes flud, that was sent miraculouslye to punyshe, and dystroy the lecherous,
and myscheuous people for their sin.

Of the third great conjunction.
THe.iii. conjunction, was in the year.ii. thousand.iiii. hundredth.lviii.
and.xxii. years, after Noys flod, about this time reigned the generation of
Noy, Cem, Cham and Iaphet, the which divided the world, in three paxtes, in
Europe, Affryke, and Asia, and of them came.ii. thousand. and.iiii. C.
persons, besides women and children. Also in the year.ii. M.iiii.
hundredth.lxxxxviii. was a middell conjunction betwyxte Saturn and Jupiter, in
a carthy triplicite, in the eyghtene degree of Virgo, the which did sygnifye
the time of Nemroth, the first beginning of all covetousness, with the byldynge
of the tower of Babylon, where the deuysion of languages was first made. And
afterward succeeded the Idolatry of Belus, the which began the first
worshyppinge of false images. Also in the.iii. thousand and two hundredth
years, was a coniunctyon called Mayor, betwyxte Saturn, and Jupiter, at the
entrance into a ayry triplicite, in the sign of Aquary, by the which was
sygnyfyed great and marvelous sygnificacions, as the birth of Abraham and his
generacio^, with the promesses of god made to Abraham. etc.

Of the fourth great conjunction.
THe fourth great conjunction was in the year.iii. thousand four hundredth
and xviii. the which did sygnyfye the time of Sirapis or Apis, with the blind
ydolaterye of the Gentyls, and many other alteracions, as the storye tells,
also in the.iii. thousand and.vi. hundredth years after, was a myddle
conjunction in a watrye tryplicite, that did sygnifie the birth of Moses,
with all his holiness and works. etc.

Of the.v. great conjunction.
THe fyfth conjunction was in the year.iiii. thousand three hundredth. 78. the
which did signify the division of the kingdom of the Hebrews, and the
captyuite of the Iues, and the alteracions of the kingdom of Rome. etc.

Of the.vi. great conjunction.
THe.vi. conjunction was in the year.v. thousand.iii. hundredth.xxxviii. and but
v. years before the birth of Christ, at the which time was right great
alteracyon, for all mankind was redeemed from the bond of the devil, and made
the children of god. etc

Of the.vii. great conjunction, for the which I have specially written this
treatise aforesaid, because it began.vi. C. years before our time, and
co^tynueth nereby.iiii. hundredth years after, of the which iiii, hondreth
years.xii. of them shall be prognosticated according to the conjunctions,
Maxima, Mayor, Media, and Minor.
THe.vii. conjunction, was in the year.vi. M.ii. C, lxxxxiii. and in the year
of our Lord, nine C.lv. and before this time about.iii. C. years, at the end
of.x. reuolutio^s of Saturn, was the time of Machomet, whose marvelous sect
is known well enough, and by other.x. reuolutions of Saturn, from the time
of Machomet unto this our present time is also known, the dyuersitie and
manyfolde alteracions of this sect as the herises of Arians Pagauns, and false
christen men. Also about this aforesaid great conjunction began the scismes
and dissencyon among the Bishops of Rome, and great battle for setting up of
images with great pestilence and death in the time of the Emperor Leo with
other, much disce^cion bewixte the English men and the Danes in the time of
king Adelston, Edmonde, Eldred, and Edwyn. Also in the year of our Lord a. M.
and. xxxii was a middle conjunction in the sign of Virgo: and was changed from
a fyry triplicite in to an earthly triplicite, about the which time was Pope
Syluester, and king Knaght of England, with such alteracions and wars as
was about that time.

Also after other.x. reuolucyons of Saturn in the year of our Lord a. M. a C.
and lvi. was an other conjunction in a earthly triplicite in the. 27. degree of
Capricorn, about the which time began the two orders of begging freers, the
one of S. Dominic, and the other of S. Fraunces, and Adrian was Bishop of Rome,
and Richard king of England, with many alteracions both by wars, famine and
death, that happened about that time.

Also in the year of our Lord a M.ii. C. and.xxv. was a conjunction betwyxe
Saturn and Jupiter, by the chaungynge of the triplicite into the.xx. degree of
Aquary, as says Henricus de Machlimia, the which was about king John's time
of England, and Frederick the second Emperor.

Also in the year of our Lord a. M.iii. C. and.xlv. the.xxiiii. day of March
about the xir. degree of Aquary, was a great conjunction both of Saturn,
Jupiter and Mars, and both before and after that conjunction was a Minor
conjunction of Saturn and Mars, the first was in the year a M.iii. C.lvii.
the.ii. in the year a M.iii. C.xxvii. after the which conjunction did follow
marvelous alteracio^s, as great drought, and lack of water, with much penury
and scarsnes, of sustenance both for man and beast, and also pestilence with
great death.

Also in the year a thousand four hundredth and.iiii. was a conjunction in a
watrye triplicite in the.xx. degree of Pisces, about this time was the scisme
and dyssencion betwixt the three Bishops of Rome, Innocencius, Gregorius, and
Alexander, and the time of Henry Bolynbroke king of England, and shortly
after that time, was a great froste in England, that lasted fyftene wekes
long.

Also in the year a. M.iiii. C.lxxxix. the x. reuolucions of Saturn was fully
ended, the which was about.xlviii. years sense, so that the said Saturn has
made but one reuolucion and a half, until this present year, in the which
time has been no small alteracion and chaungyng, if ye mark it well. Also in
the year a thousand. v^ hundredth and.xxx. Saturn began his reuolucion
again, departing from the conjunction of Jupiter in Cancer, the which
reuolucion shall contynew to the year a. M.v. hundredth and.lx. the which is
about.xiii. years after this our present year.

Furthermore, ye shall know, that in the revolution figure for the year, in the
beginning of Saturnes reuolucyon, Jupiter was set in a moveable sign in the
house of religion being retrograde, the which does signify unsteadfastness of
laws, faith, and customs, for the time of this Saturmens revolution, because
that Jupiter is not strong in the figure and also lodged in an unsteadfast
place. Furthermore ye shall know, that in the time of this revolution, the
wether shall stand chiefelye with moystnes, and by watery more then with
drought, and the earth shall bring forth all growing thing right well, and
many cold syckenes of flume shall reygne, as dropses, goutes, poses, and such
like. Also no great universal wars are like to reygne in this reuolucion, but
according to the application of Mars to the other planettes, as chyefelye,
when he is joined with Saturn, he causes the people, and specially the
Saturniens, and those that be under Mars, to be of preuey sects and councels
in hye matters of the faith, laws, and religion, and also to move war and
battle in such causes. And thus consider of all the other planettes as he
joins with them. Also if ye marvel why in this reuolucion of Saturn, the
time shall stand most with varyacion, alteracyon of faith, laws, religion,
and customs, know that in the fygures of the year, at the beginning of
Saturnes reuolucion, the lord of that year did commytte his power and
dysposycyon to Jupiter, the sygnyfycatoure of faith, and laws, and by his
retrogradacyon is sygnyfyed the wekenesse and inconstantnes of the aforesaid
faith, and laws, and because the Lord Jupiter being in the house of
relygion, and in a moveable sign, it is sygnyfyed thereby, the mutacyon and
great alteracyon thereof, and chyefelye among the relygyon professors, and
teachers of the same, so that the perfect stablisment and ceasing of this
varyacyon, is not like to be fullye ended in all peoples hertes, unto the end
and term of this said reuolucyon of Saturn.

And thus fynallye, all these great conjunctions considered, and these. ^.
reuolucyons of Saturn, with the fygures and places of the planettes, at the
begynuynge it may well be prognostycated of the dysposycion alteracyon, and
chaungynge of the people, even from the Creacyon until.xlix. thousand year
be ended; the which is the course of the. ir. spear (if it please god to
suffer the world so long.)

To whom pray we daily to send us grace and good dysposycyon, that through
wisdom, we may rule with the Sterres as says Ptholome, the prince of
Astronomyes.

FINIS.
Thus ends this little treatise compyled by Anthony Askham In the year of our
Lord. M. D.XLVII.
IMPRYNTED AT LONDON IN FLETEstrte at the sign of the George next to Saint
Dunstones Church by Wyliyam Powell.

In the year of our Lord M. D.L. the last day of Ianuarye.


