By the King.
THE Kings Majesty intending to follow the godly and honorable Statutes and
Ordinances of Household of his most Noble Progenitors, straightly charge and
commands, that all Vagabonds and Masterlesse folk, boys and girls, and
other idle persons which have used to hang on, haunt, and follow the Court,
shall depart from thence within four and twenty hours after this
Proclamation made, upon pain of his Majesty's grievous displeasure, and such
further pains, as in the said Statutes and Ordinances be limited and
appoited. And further, that no Artificer, Laundrer or Laundresse, other then
such as shall be specially licensed, shall follow the Court: And they that
shall be so admitted, to have with them no manner of young children, or other
servants, either of men or women kind, then shall be specially limited and
enrolled. And moreover, that no Officer of the Household, nor any other person
or persons lodged within his Majesty's most Honorable House, do suffer any
Vagabonds, Masterlesse folks, boys or other idle persons whatsoever, to
resort into their Chambers, and Offices at any time, upon pain of imprisonment
in the Marshalseas, and further punishment at his Majesty's will and pleasure.
Also that all Lords and others that have lodging in the House, shall forthwith
send the names of their servants to the Knight Marshall to be Registered; and if
they shall put any of them away for misdemeanour, to send him to the Marshall,
that he may be discharged accordingly. Further, that no chamber-keeper presume
to keep boys, or scrapers of trenchers, other then such as shall be thought
meet and convenient to be allowed. And lastly, his Majesty straightly charge
and commands his Knight Marshall, and all such Officers and Ministers as be
attendant about the Court under him and every of them, to do their uttermost
and best endeavor from time to see his Majesty's commandment, above
specified, specially observed, obeyed and kept, as they will avoid his
Majesty's grievous displeasure, and answer to the contrary at their perils.

Given at Whitehall, the tenth day of November, in the sixteenth year of Our
Reign of England, France, and Ireland, and of Scotland the two and fiftieth.
Imprinted at London by Bonham Norton, and John Bill, deputy Printers for the
Kings most Excellent Majesty.

ANNO. M.DC.XVIII.


