HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE
royal blazon or coat of arms
By the King.
A Proclamation concerning Alehouses.
WHereas for the suppressing of the great disorders daily used in Alehouses
and Uictual-houses, many good and wholesome Laws and Orders have been
devised, which have not taken such effect as We desired, because the same have
not been so duly executed as they ought to be. We have therefore appointed
certain Patentees to take knowledge thereof, and to compel the
Ale-house-keepers Licensed, to keep good Orders, by pressing them upon the
penalties of their Recognizances, taken to Our use; In the proceeding wherein
We are also informed that the Recognizances taken for that purpose, in most
Counties of Our Realm (being the only Tie We have upon that Lawless kind
of people) are either altogether defective, or not duly certified, so that
these unruly persons still remain at liberty: And that there are diverse of
them that take authority to themselves to keep Alehouses, as though they
were Licensed, and yet are not: Both which sorts we are desirous to draw into
better Order, and to that purpose We have caused certain Articles of
direction (bearing the Date hereof) to be published, which hereby We streitly
Will and Command to be executed by such as the same shall any ways concern,
and as they will give an account unto Us when We shall require it. And because
We would not have Our Subjects that dwell in parts remote from Our City of
London to be ouertrauelled hereabout, and all to be drawn hither to Our said
City: We have given Order to the Pattentees, taking the allowance of Our
Chief Justice of the Kings Bench, to appoint Committees from time to time,
such as shall be known to be of experience and integrity to prosecute in those
more remote Counties, such forfeitures as shall grow due unto Us by the said
Recognizances.

Given at Newmarket the nineteenth day of January in the sixteenth year of Our
Reign of Great Britain, France and Ireland: Anno Dom. 1618.
By the King.
Articles of direction, touching Alehouses.
FIrst, That the Justices of Peace of every County, City, or Town Corporate
within this Kingdom, and the Dominion of Wales, Do once every year in the
Months of April and May, assemble themselves, either at a special Sessions,
or such other meeting as they shall appoint for that purpose (respecting the
ease and conueniencie of the people of the Country) and there call before them
or any two of them (whereof one to be of the Quorum) all such persons as do
sell Ale or Beer by retayle in any place (as well within Liberty as without)
within such County, City, or Town Corporate* and then and there taking true
Certificate, and Information from men of Trust; who be persons of honest
Conversation, and who not. And to give License to such persons, as they in
their discretions shall think meet, to keep Common Alehouses, or
Uictualling-houses, within the places where such persons dwell.

THat in the Licensing of the said Uictualers, and Ale-house-keepers the form
of the Recognizance, hereafter following, and the Condition thereunto annexed
be used and none other.

Memorandum, Quod Anno Regni Dom. nostri IACOBI, Dei gratia Regis Angliae,
Franciae, and Hiberniae fidei defensor. etc. and Scotiae Coram Iusticiarijs
dicti Dom. Regis ad pacem in Comitat. praedict. conseruand. etc. manuceperunt
pro Victular. viz. vterque manucaptor. praedict. sub poena quinque librar. and
praedict. assumpsit pro seipso sub poena x. li. Quas Concesserunt, etc. Sub
Condition sequent.

THe Condition of this Recognizance is such, that whereas the above bounden is
admitted and allowed by the said Justices to keep a Common Alehouse, and
Victualling-house, until the first of April next ensuing the date hereof, and
no longer, in the house wherein he now dwells, at in the said County of and
not elsewhere in the said County. If therefore the said shall not, during the
time aforesaid, permit or suffer, or have any playing at Dice, Cards, Tables,
Quoits, Loggets, Bowls, or any other unlawful Game or Games in his House,
Yard, Garden, or Backside; Nor shall suffer to be or remain in his house any
person or persons (not being his ordinary household servant) upon any Sabbath
day, or Holy day, during the time of Divine Service or Sermon: Nor shall suffer
any person to lodge or stay in his house above one day and one night, but such
whose true Name and Surname he shall deliver to some one of the Constables, or
in his absence to some of the Officers of the same Parish the next day
following, unless they be such person or persons as he or she very well
knows, and will answer for his or their forth-comming* nor suffer any person
to remain in his or her house, Tippling or drinking, contrary to the Law; nor
yet to be there Tippling or drinking after nine of the clock in the night time,
nor buy or take to pawn any stolen goods; nor willingly harbor in his said
House, or in his Barnes, Stables or other-where, any Rogues, Vagabonds, Sturdy
beggars, Masterlesse men, or other notorious offenders whatsoever: Nor suffer
any person or persons to sell or utter any Beer or Ale, or other victual by
Deputation, or by color of his or her License. And also if he shall keep the
true assise and measure in his Pots, Bread, and otherwise, in his uttering of
his Ale, Beer and Bread; and the same Beer and Ale to sell by scaled measure,
and according to the assise, and not otherwise. And shall not utter or sell any
strong Beer or strong Ale above the penny the quart, and small Beer or small
Ale above a halfe-peny the quart, and so after the same rates. And also shall
not utter nor willingly suffer to be uttered, drunk, taken, and tipled any
Tobacco within his said House, Shop, Cellar, or other place thereunto
belonging, that then, etc.

That every Alehouse-keeper and Uictualler so to be Licensed, do enter into
Recognizance with two able sureties to be bound in five pounds a piece, and the
principal ten pound at the least for the performance of the Condition of the
said Recognizance, which shall endure but for one whole year, and then to
determine, unless it shall seem fit to the Justices of Peace to renew ^he
same again by taking a new Recognizance of the same Condition: And whatsoever
Date the Recognizance shall have, it is to endure but until the said Months
of April and May, or one of them.

That the Clerks of the Peace, Town Clerks, or their Deputies respectively
be called to attend the Justices of Peace at such their meetings or
assemblies, and that they do there take the Recognizances aforesaid of every
Uictualler or Alehouse-keeper Licensed, and do duly enter them amongst the
Records of the Sessions of the Peace in their charge, whereby his Majesty may
be duly answered of the forfeitures that shall be made of the parties so bound.

That the Clerks of the Peace and Towne-clerkes aforesaid, or their Deputies
shall within some convenient time after the taking of the said Recognizances,
fair engrosse the Recognizance and Condition in Parchment, which they shall
keep as the Original, and send a true Copy of the said Recognizance examined
with the said Original, to every Alehouse-keeper allowed, whereby he may the
better inform himself what he and his sureties are bound to observe.

That the Clerks of the Peace, and Towne-clerkes or their deputies do write
out and bring with them to every Sessions of the Peace, or other meeting of the
Justices, a Register Book containing the true names, surnames and places where
every Alehouse-keeper or Uictualler that is Licensed does dwell, to the end it
may appear to the Justices of the Peace who be Licensed, and by whom, and who
be not, and what other alterations have been from time to time for the placing
of men of honest and good conversation, and displacing others of ill behavior.

That the Clerks of the Peace and Town clerks, and their Deputies may take
of every Alehouse-keeper for their fee, for performing of the services
aforesaid at the time of the acknowledgement of the said Recognizances, the fee
of eighteen pence and no more, over and above the fee of twelve pence allowed
for the Justices clerks by the Statute, which shall be paid to the said
Justices clerks.

That in case the Alehouse-keeper not knowing of the Justices meeting, or being
hindered by sickness or other such like impediment shall fail of admittance at
the general or public assemblies, and shall notwithstanding be admitted or
Licensed by two Justices of the Peace (whereof one to be of the Quorum) The
Recognizance with condition fair engrossed in Parchment in the form
prescribed as aforesaid shall forthwith or at the next Sessions at the furthest
be returned to the clerks of the Peace, or the Towne-clerkes respectively
under the hands of the Justices, before whom such Recognizance was taken,
together also with the said Fee of eighteen pence for the entering, registring,
making and delivering of a copy under his hand to the Alehouse-keeper as
aforesaid.

That none be Licensed or allowed to keep an Alehouse that has not one
convenient lodging at least in his or their houses, for the lodging of any
passenger or traveler, and to have always in her or their houses good and
wholesome small Beer or Ale of two quarts for a penny, for the relief of the
Laborer, Trauailer or others that call for the same.

That the Justices of Peace within their several Precincts, do not permit or
suffer any unlicensed Alehouse-keeper, or Uictualer, to sell Beer or Ale, but
that they proceed against them, by all due and lawful means whatsoever: And
that they be very careful, from time to time, to cause the Brewers to be
proceeded against, in their general and Quarter Sessions, for delivering
Beer, or Ale, to such vnlicenced persons, according to the Statute in that
case provided.

That the Clerks of the Peace, and Towne-Clerkes respectively do once every
year, in Trinity Term, make and bring in a Brief, of all such
Recognizances, as shall be taken within every County, City, and Town
corporate, into the Office of the Patentees (appointed by them for that
purpose) to the end all concealements of Recognizances, taken in that behalf,
may be discovered; and the benefit accruing unto his Majesty, by such as
wilfully break the same, may be more duly prosecuted: Of which, that his
Highness be not defrauded, Order is given to the Patentees that with the
allowance of the chief Justice of the Kings Bench, there be appointed
Committees in every County, for the recovery thereof, from time to time.

That the Justices of Assise in their Circuits, and Justices of Peace, at their
general Sessions of the Peace, do from time to time, enquire of the due
execution of these presents, and of all other abuses, disorders, and
misdemeanors whatsoever, committed, or suffered, against the provisions
aforesaid, and the true meaning of them.

Given at Newmarket the ninteenth day of January, in the sixteenth year of Our
Reign of Great Britain, France and Ireland. 1618. God save the King.
Imprinted at London by Bonham Norton and John Bill, Printers to the Kings most
Excellent Majesty. ANNO. M.DC.XVIII.


