A true Copy of his Majesty's License Granted to James Maxwell Esquire, for
the buying and transporting of Calue-skinnes.
IR
HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE royal blazon or coat of arms
JAMES by the Grace of God, King of England, Scotland, France, and Ireland,
Defender of the Faith, etc.
To the Treasurer, Chauncellor, under Treasurer, and Barons of our Exchequer.
And to all other Our Officers, and Ministers of the same Court. And to all
Majors, Sheriffs, Bayliffes, Constables, Customers, Conptrollers, Searchers,
and Keepers of all and every Our Ports, Havens, Creekes, and Passages. And to
all other Our Officers, Ministers, and Subjects whatsoever to whom in this case
it shall or may appertain, Greeting.
Whereas we by Our Letters Patents bearing Date at Our Palace of Westminster
the XXVI. day of February, in the VII year of Our reign of England, France,
and Ireland, for the considerations therein mentioned, have given and granted
for Us, Our Heirs and Successors, free License, Power, and Authority, unto Our
well-beloved Servants, Arthur Bassano, Andrew Bassano, Ieronimo Bassano, Edward
Bassano, Scipio Bassano, Antony Bassano, and unto Daniell Bassano, and William
Bassano, and every of them. That they the said Arthur Bassano, Andrew Bassano,
Ieronimo Bassano, Edward Bassano, Scipio Bassano, Antony Bassano, Daniell
Bassano, and William Bassano, and every of them their, and every of their
Assigns by themselves, or by their Deputies, Servants, or Factors, or any of
them being Englishmen, Denizens, or Strangers, shall or may at their pleasure
liberty and free will for and during the term of 7 years, to begin immediately
from and after the XXVII, day of August, which then should be in the year of
Our Lord God 1614. at all times, and from time to time lawfully bargain for,
buy and provide or cause to be bargained for, bought or provided of any person
or persons, and within any City, Town, Borough, place or places within this
Our Realm and Dominions of England and Walls, so many Dickers of Leather of
Calue-skinnes as shall amount in the whole to the number of 6000. Dickers,
accompting ten dozen of such Calue-skinnes to every Dicker. And the same so
provided and bought at all and every time and times during the said term of 7.
years, before by these Presents granted, in any Ship or Ships, Vessel or
Vessels, Bottom or Bottomes, being of Our said Realm and Dominions, Hoyes,
and other Vessels prohibited to cross the Seas only excepted, to ship, lade,
transport, and carry over, or cause to be shipped, laden, transported, or
carried over from any of the Ports, Havens, Creekes, or Passages of this Our
Realm and Dominions of England and Wales, into any the parts beyond the Seas
being, or which at the time of such shipping or transporting shall be in amity
with Us, Our Heirs or Successors. And in such proportions, quantity, and
number, as to them or any of them shall be thought meet and convenient, and
there from time to time at their free will and liberty to utter, sell,
distribute, and dispose to their and every of their, best profit commodity and
advantage, without any danger, forfaicture, loss, penalty, or molestation,
against them or any of them, by Us, Our Heirs or Successors, or to Our or
their use, or behoof to be had levied, lost, forfaicted, or recovered, and
without any manner of let, int^rruption, or disturbance of any other person or
persons whatsoever. Any Statute, Proclamation, or restrainct thereof*
heer^tofore made to the contrary thereof, notwith^tanding. Paying unto Us, Our
Heirs and Successors, for every Dicker of Calue-skinnes, which shall happen to
be transported by virtue of that Our License, five shillings of Lawful English
money, the payment thereof to be from time to time made to the hands of Our
Collectors of Our Customs in every of the said Parts, Havens, Creekes, or
places where any of the said Calue-skins shall be shipped or laden to be
transported as aforesaid, as by Our said Letters Patents amongst diverse other
Graunts, Licenses, Prohibitions, and other things therein contained more
plainly may appear.

The Grant.
Know ye that we, as well in consideration of the good and faithful service to
Us heretofore done by Our trusty and well-beloved James Maxwell Esquire, one of
our Gentlemen Vshers daily Wayters, as for the duties and sums of money
herein reserved to be payable to Us, Our Heirs and Succ^ssors. Of Our special
grace, certain knowledge, and mere motion, have given and granted, and by
these Presents for Us, Our Heirs and Successors, do give and grant free
License, power, and authority unto the said James Maxwell, his Executors,
Administrators, and Assigns. That he the said James Maxwell, his Executors,
Administrators, and Assigns, by him or themselves, or by his and their
Deputies, Servants, or Factors, or any of them, being Englishmen, Denizens, or
Strangers, shall and may at his and their pleasure liberty and free will, for
and during the term of XXI. years, to begin immediately from and after the
end, The Term of years.
expiration, surrender or other determination, of the said term of 7 years
before mentioned to be granted, at all times, and from time to time lawfully
bargain for, buy, and provide, or cause to be bargained for, bought, or
provided of any person or persons, and within any City, Town, Borough, place
or places, within this Our Realm and Dominions of England and Wales, so many
Dickers of Leather of Calue-skinnes, as shall or may amount in the whole to the
number of Eighteen thousand Dickers, accounting ten dozen of such
Calue-skinnes to every Dicker. And the same so provided and bought, The number
of Dickers.
at al and every time and times during the said terms of XXI. years, before
by these presents granted, in any Ship or Ships, Vessel or Vessel, Botom or
Bottomes, being of Our said Realm and Dominions, Hoyes, or other Vessels
prohibited, to cross the Seas only excepted; to Ship, laid, transport, and
carry over, or cause to be Shipped, layden, transported, and carried over from
or out of any the Ports, Havens, Creekes, or passages of this Our said Realm
and Dominions of England and Walls, into any the parts beyond the Seaes being,
or which at the time of such Shipping, or transporting shall be in amity with
Us, Our Heirs or Successors. And in such proportion quantity and number, as to
him them or any of them shall be thought meet and convenient. And there from
time to time at his and their free will and liberty, to utter sell destribute
and dispose to his and their best profit, comodity and advantage, without any
danger, forfaicture, loss, penalty, or molestation against him or them, or any
of them, by Us, Our Heirs or Successors, or to Our or their use or behoof, to
be had, levied, lost, forfaicted or received: And without any manner of let,
interruption or disturbance of any other person or persons whatsoever. Any
Statute, Proclamation, or restrainct thereof, heretofore made to the contrary
thereof notwithstanding: Paying unto Us, The Payment
Our Heirs and Successors, for every Dicker of Calue-skinnes which shall be
transported by virtue of this Our License, five shillings of lawful English
money, the payment thereof to be from time to time made to the hands of Our
Collectors of Our Costomes in every of the said Ports, Havens, Creekes, or
places, where any of the said Calue-skinnes shall be Shipped, or layden to be
transported as aforesaid.

And we will, and grant by these Presents for Us, Our Heirs and Successors:
That the said James Maxwell, his Executors, Administrators, and Assigns, his
and their Deputies, Factors, and Servants, and none other shall during the said
Term of XXI. years by these Presents granted, have exercise and enjoy, the
whole full and sole liberty, License, and power of and for transportation of
Calue-skinnes out of Our said Realm and Dominions of England and Wales. And
therefore we do for Us, Our Heirs and Successors, straightly charge and
command all and every person and persons whatsoever, of whatsoever estate,
degree, or condition they be: That none of them other then the said James
Maxwell, his Executors, Administrators, and Assigns, and his or their
Deputies, Factors, and Servants, during the said Term of XXI. years, before
by these Presents granted, shall bring or send, or cause to be brought or sent,
or by any manner of means or coullor, transport, convey, or ship out of this
our Realm and Dominions of England and Wales, any Calue-skins during the
continuance of this Our Grant and License.

And we do expressly prohibit and forbid all transportation whatsoever of any
Calue-skinnes, by any person or persons whatsoever, out of this Realm and
Dominions of England and Wales during the said Term of XXI. The prohibition
years, before by these Presents Granted, other then by the said James
Maxwell, his Executors, Administrators, and Assigns, his and their Deputies,
Factors, or Servants, upon pain of such imprisonment, penalty, or forfaicture,
as may be lawfully inflicted on them and every of them for their contempt and
disobedience in that behalf. And for the better finding out of any such
conueying, transportation, or coulorable, passing of Calue-skinnes contrary to
the effect, and true meaning of this our present License or Grant, we do by
these Presents strictly charge and command all Our Customers, Comptrollers,
and Searchers, and all other Our Officers in all Our Ports, Havens, and
Creekes, within Our said Realm and Dominions of England and Wales: That at all
times during the said Term of XXI. years, when and as often as they or any of
them shall be thereunto willed or required by the said James Maxwell, his
Executors, Administrators, or Assigns, his or their Deputies, Factors, or
Servants: That they and every of them shall with all diligence, and by all
lawful ways and means they can try out and search for all such Calue-skinnes
as shall be shiped, embarked or laden, to the intent to be carried or
transported out of Our said Realm and Dominions of England and Wales, contrary
to the meaning or intent of these our Letters Patents, and to arrest, seize,
and carry away, and detain the same as forfaicted: The one moity of all which
forfaictures to be to the use of Us, Our Heirs and Successors, and the other
moity thereof, we do by these Presents give and Grant to the said James
Maxwell, his Executors, The Charge.
Administrators, and Assigns. And further, we will and command all Our
Customers, Comptrollers of Our Customs, and other the Officers of Us, Our
Heirs and Successors, that they do not only permit and suffer the said James
Maxwell, his Executors, Administrators, and Assigns, his and their Deputies,
Factors, and Servants, quietly and peaceably to provide, bring, Ship, lade, and
transport the said number of 18000. Dickers of Calue-skinnes according to the
tenor and true meaning of this Our License and Grant, at all times during the
said Term of XXI. years by these Presents Granted, and by all the said time
to have and enjoy the full and whole effect and benefit of this Our License.
But also to forbear by any manner of means to trouble or molest him, them, or
any of them, for the buying, providing, lading, shipping, transporting, or
uttering of the Premises or any part thereof as aforesaid.

Willing and commanding, all Majors, Sheriffs, Bailiffs, Constables,
Customers, Comptrollers, Searchers, and all other Officers of Our said Realm
and Dominions of England and Wales, not only to permit and suffer the said
James Maxwell, his Executors, Administrators, and Assigns, his and their
Deputies, Factors, and Servants, to have take and enjoy the full and whole
benefit, commodity and profit of this Our present License and Grant, but also
that they be ayding, helping, and asisting to him and them in the execution
thereof, when they shall be thereunto required, during the said Term by these
Presents Granted. To which or to a duplicate thereof we do for Us, Our Heirs
and Successors, charge and command all Our Officers, Ministers, and Subjects,
to give as much credit, as behooves to be given to a Grant and License under
Our Great Seal of England: And also to permit and suffer the said James
Maxwell, his Executors, Administrators, and Assigns, his and their Deputies,
Factors, and Servants, to enjoy and quietly to use the whole effect and benefit
of this Our Grant and License, without any manner of let, impediment,
hinderance, impeachment, vexation, denial, or contradiction, as you and every
of you will answer the contrary at your uttermost perrills. And to the intent
we may be certainly informed during the said Term of XXI. years, what number
of Calue-skinnes shall be yearly transported and carried out of this our
Realm and Dominions of England and Wales, by virtue of this Our License: And
at what Ports, Havens, Creekes, and places, and may be truly answered and
sati^fied of such Customs and duties as shall be due and ought to be paid
unto Us, Our Heirs and Successors, of and for the same according to the effect
and true meaning of these Presents.

Our will and pleasure is, and we do charge and command that Our Colectors,
Customers, Comptroulers, and such Our Officers of every the said Ports,
Creekes, Havens, and places aforesaid, where any of the said Calue-skinnes
shall be laden and shipped by virtue of these Presents to whom it shall
appertain from time to time, not only make perfect and certain enteries
thereof into their Custome-Bookes. But also shall indorse the several number
and quantity of the said Calue-skinnes shall be laden and shipped, either upon
this our License or duplicate thereof, which for that purpose shall be left,
with the said Collectors, Customs, Comptrollers, and Officers of the said
Ports, Creekes, and Havens, where such entries of the said Calue-skinnes shall
happen to be made, and shall also yearly in the Term of Saint Michaell the
Archangell, during the said Term of XXI. years, certify a true note in
writing unto Our Court of Exchequor at Westminster, of all such number of
Calue-skinnes, as by virtue or coulor of these Presents shall be there shipped,
or laden, to be transported as aforesaid, to the end that the certain quantity
and number of the said Dickers of Calue-skinnes so to be transported, and the
time and place of the shipping and transporting thereof may from time to time
plainly appear, as is aforesaid.

Prouiso.
Provided always, and our will and pleasure is, that the said James Maxwell,
his Executors, Administrators, and Assigns, nor any of them, their or any of
their Assigns, Deputies, Factors, or Servants, shall not Ship, lade,
transport, or carry any Calue-skinnes by virtue or coulor of this Our License,
out of the Ports, Havens, or Creekes of Chester and Leuerpoole, or any of them,
or out of any Port, Haven, or Creek being member of the said Port of Chester,
during such time as any other Grant for transportation of Calue-skinnes out of
any the said Port, Haven, and Creek of Chester, shall happen to continue and
be in force. And this Our License and Grant, nor any thing therein contained,
shall not extend to avoid, prejudice, or impeach any former Grant or License
whatsoever heretofore by Us, or by Our late dear Sister Queen Elizabeth, made
to any person or persons, bodies politic and corporate, for the transporting
or carrying of Calue-skinnes out of this Realm and Dominions of England and
Wales, but that they and every of them may from time to time freely enjoy the
benefit of all such former Grants and Licenses so by Us, or by the said late
Queen Elizabeth formerly made, and Granted in as ample manner as if these
present Letters Patents had never been had or made, any thing before in these
Presents mentioned to the contrary notwithstanding.

Although express mention of the true yearly value or certainty of the
premises or any of them: Or of any other gift or Grant by Us or any of Our
Progenitors or Predecessors to the said James Maxwell, before these times made,
in these Presents is not made: Or any Statue, Act, ordinance, provision,
Proclamation, or restraint before this time, had, made, set forth, ordained or
provided, or any other thing, matter, or cause whatsoever, to the contrary
notwithstanding: In witness whereof We have caused these Our Letters to be made
Patents.

Witness Our Self at Westminster the Twelfth day of June, in the Thirteenth
year of Our Reign of England, France, and Ireland, and of Scotland the Eight
and Fortieth.
A Copy of the Lord Treasurers Letter directed to Sir John VVolstenholme
Knight, Henry Garway, and Abraham Jacob, Esquires, Farmers of his Majesty's
Customs.
AFter my hearty commendations* Whereas the Kings Majesty by his Highness
Letters Patents, bearing Date the XII. day of June, in the XIII. year of his
Reign, did Grant unto James Maxwell Esquire, a License for XXI. years, from
and after the expiration, surrender or other determination of the like License
formerly Granted to Arthur Bassano and others, (which was determined some
years ago) for the said James Maxwell by himself, his Deputies, Servants, or
Factors, to provide and buy within the Realm of England and Dominions of
Wales, the whole number of Eighteen thousand Dickers of Calue-skinnes,
accompting ten dozen to every Dicker, and the same to Ship, and transport in
any Ship or Vessel, in any Ports of England or Dominion aforesaid, (the Ports
of Chester and Leuerpoole only excepted) paying unto his Majesty for every
Dicker shipped as aforesaid, the some of five shillings, the payment whereof to
be made to the hands of his Highness Collectors of Customs and Subsidies, in
any Port or Creek where the same shall be shipped. And withal straightly
prohibiting the transportation of any Calue-skinnes, by any other, then the
said James Maxwell, his Deputies, Factors, and Servants.

By which said Letters Patents, his Majesty gives straight command to all
his Highness Officers what soever, to be ayding and assisting to the said James
Maxwell in the execution of the premises when they shall be thereunto required.
Notwithstanding Master Maxwell enformeth me, that some quantities of
Calue-skinnes have been shipped out of some of the out Ports without any
License from, or notice thereof had by himself or his Assigns. Now seeing,
that not only his Majesty's Letters Patents aforesaid give straight charge to
the contrary, but also by a Statute in the XVIII. year of her late Majesty's
Reign, a penalty of forfaicture of all Leather shipped without License, and
treble the value thereof is imposed upon the Owners of the same: And further,
the like penalty is set upon all Customers, Comptroulers, Farmers, and
Superuisors of Customs and Subsidies, that shall not be accomptant to his
Majesty for the Custom thereof, besides the forfaicture of the ships
wherein it is shipped, and the Masters and Mariners of the same ships, to
forfaict all their goods, and to have a years imprisonment. These are
therefore to pray and require you not only to give straight order to all your
Deputies in such Ports as Master Maxwell, or his Assigns shall nominate unto
you, to see the contents of the said Letters Patents duly effected: but also
to signify this charge hereby given by me, to all the Customers, Comptrollers,
and Searchers of the several Ports, that they duly observe the same upon
pain of the penalty set by the said Statute, which shall surely be inflicted
upon them if they offend. And for their better direction, Master Maxwell will
send to every Custom House a printed Copy of the said Letters Patents, that
every man whom it shall concern may take special notice thereof: And hereof
praying you not to fail, I bid you farewell.

From the Court at Whitehall this second of February. 1622. Your Loving Friend.
MIDDELSEX.


