THE DESCRIPTION OF HEAVEN. OR, A Divine and Comfortable Discourse of the
Nature of the Eternal HEAVEN, the Habitation of God, and all the Elect.

Composed in Latin, by Cunradus Aslachus.

And Converted into English, by Raph Jennings.

LONDON, Printed by A. M. for John Bramridge, and are to be sold at his Shop
near Strand Bridge. 1623

To the Worthy and no less ennobled by Virtue, then Descent, Mr. RICHARD
LIGGINS, Gentleman.
WE read in the Gospel (thrice Noble Sir) that the three sage Visitors were
guided unto Christ by a Star. No Sarre, but the star-like luster of your
manifold Virtues has conducted ^ee in this Dedication unto you. Ingenious
Monuments are the best preservatives of Fame, and the best Antidotes against
oblivion, when d^crepidn^s and old Age sets up wrinckled and gray hairs as the
works of their triumph; they can add and bestow a life of a longer ex^^^^^
and en^^^^ce; to which, the, Venutian, ^^tirist in his Sapphicks astipulateth,
where speaking of the Honorable memorial, imparted by a learned Pen, he says

-- et centum meliore * Signis munere donat. Statues.
I have presumed upon your Patronage, and am now a Suitor for pardon of my
presumption, requesting you to accept this slender tractate, that it may pass
current, as a Seal of the Service, and a testimonial of the dutiful
Affection of

Your quotidian Orator, RALPH IENNINGS.

A DISCOVRSE OF THE NATVRE of the Eternal HEAVEN, GODS Seat, and Habitation.
CHAP. I.
Wherein is declared the knowledge of this Eternal Heaven, to be both
delectable and necessary unto a Christian.
IF some men so affect the notion of far remote Nations, the view of well
fortified Towns, and strong compacted Castles, and some to sail the
tempestuous seas, though with peril of their lives: who can account the
Heavenly world, and the sacred City of I^houahs habitation, the most spacious
mansions of the blessed Angels, and the most delectable Paradise of Gods Elect
to be unworthy the notion, intelligence, or contemplation of a Christian;
there is our true Country and home, whereunto we shall be transported, and as
into a new Colony be translated, after the tedious pilgrimage and
peregrination of this our life is consummate. Here perpetual shipwreck,
exile, war, and all kind of calamities must be endured: But there is a quiet
haven, there is a Sanctuary, there is a stately city, where we shall be secure
from all hurt, and free from all encombrances. There no more shall we want the
beams of the Sun, or Moon, or any other Stars, God himself shining in his
luster and infinite glory, shall make us glister with his admirable rays: so
that we shall in splendour equalize the stars: No more shall we there see in
a glass, nor riddle, but we shall behold God face to face; there we jointly
commixe with them, both glad and joyful, we shall behold the bright companies
of Angels; there shall we view the radiant assemblies of sacred Patriarchs,
Prophets, and Apostles; there shall we observe the infinite number of Crowns,
of joyful and tryumphant Martyrs, and Saints; to conclude, here shall be no
more sorrow, wailings, trouble, wrath, or death; continually and in every place
perfect wisdom shall accompany us, mirth, glory, beauty, and immortality. O
happy and glorious company! O holy banquet! O desirable feasts! where is no
anxiety, where is wisdom without ignorance, memory without oblivion,
understanding without error, and reason resplendent without darkness: O
blessed are they that dwell there, and sing praises to God for ever.

Does it not, I pray, much concern us to know which it is, and what manner of
Country it is, wherein we ever hereafter shall live with Christ and all the
Saints, not one or two year but for all eternity? I think there is none so
sottish in worldly affairs, who if he were to depart out of any one country
into another, would not desire to know before hand the manner, temper,
situation, bounds, the nature and condition of the Inhabitants of that place
whither he is resolved to remove. And art thou, O man, so d^ll and insensible
in heavenly things, that albeit every moment thou art a harnessing and going to
that everlasting place, yet have not a desire as travelers use, to
fore-conceiue the place? Attend what Gods word admonishes thee, Phil. 3.20.
Our conversation is in heaven, from whence also we expect our Savior the lord
Jesus And again, If you then be risen with Christ, seek those things which
are above, where Christ sits at the right hand of God. S^^ your affections
on things above, and not on things below on earth. Go to then, whilst we
travel in this mortal race, set we all our study to learn and foreknow
which it is, and what manner of immortal Country which we shall enjoy for
ever, and ponder we with our selves seriously, with what wing^s we once
elevated out of the ruinous prison of this life, we may take our flight to
that Life eternal.

CHAP. II.
That the Oracles of the Sacred Scriptures are the only means whereby we
attain unto the notion of the highest Heavens.
WEll, now let us view what helps there are which may eleuate us up unto the
top of this Heaven, that we may search out and know the nature of it. Thou art
too weak, and all thy wings are cut off wherewith thou were wont to climb unto
the Celestial altitude; thy Geometry and Arithmetique will not avail thee,
thy Perspectiue skill will not profit, thy observations will not help; and why
so? the Heaven of heauers is not contained by sense, the original of humane
science, nor subject to reason, as by secondarie means: nor is it granted
unto us to pierce into the knowledge hereof by the light of Nature. If you
enquire of the Philo^ophers concerning it, it will be to as much end, as if
you ta^ke to a dead man. Pliny, the most painful Incumbent in Natures
secrets, was in despair of ever knowing it, when he says, To search out any
local place, beyond, or above this visible world, neither does it appertain
unto the world, nor can any conjecture of men's minds conceive it. And Aristotle
himself the Prince of Philosophers was inscient of this Heaven, even when he
held, That there was no Body, no place without, of further then the Sideriall
Sky. If you question Cicoro of this Heaven, he will send you to the Milk
white circle in Scipios Dream of the Starry Heaven Others, will send you to
the Fortunate Islands, and to I know not what fields of Elyseo^; and no wonder,
when as the eye has not seen, nor care heard, nor has it entered into Man's
heart, the things that God has prepared for them that love him. How then may
we ascend unto the knowledge thereof? Lo, the holy Scriptures lead unto it.
Hence may thou learn in a copious manner, even from Gods Word, as much as
can be known, and as much as concerns thee to understand, concerning this
great Mystery. But thou shall under stand every circumstance more fully, when
thou shall atriue thither, and see God face to face. To shut up all, now we
see through a glass darkely, then face to face; now know we in part, then
shall we know, even as we are known. Let us therefore for a while use the
Glass of the Scriptures, until after this life, we may both see and enjoy it
in the perfection thereof.

CHAP. III.
Wherein the diverse Names of this most supreme Heaven, are recited and
explayned.
But before we relate further, what this Heaven is, it will be worthy our
labor to lay down and weigh the several appellations thereunto attributed,
in and by the Scriptures; and of these some are proper, and some are assigned
unto it by a comparatiue similitude thereof to other things. Of the first kind
are these; The third heaven, 1. Cor. 12.2. And the heaven of heavens, 1. Kings
8.27. First, it is nominated the third heaven, in respect of the two inferior
and lower heavens, the ayerie and starry firmaments, above both which it is
highly exalted, as is extant, Chap. 2. Next, it is named the heaven of heavens,
in regard of the sublimitie thereof; because it is raised above all other
Heavens, which is well extant in the Etymology of the word, as shall be further
noted hereafter; But after a figuratine speech and after a similitude drawn
from lower things, it has these names; First, it is called a house, John 14.1.
also a dwelling place, Psalm. 2.4. and throne of God, Esa. ^6.1. because God
does more especially dwell therein, as in his Court and prime City of
residence. What then say you, can God who is infinite and immeasurable be
comprehended and enclosed in Heaven? By no means: for (as Solomon says Behold,
the heaven of heavens cannot ^^ntaine thee, how much less this ^ouse that I
have builded, 1. Kings ^.27. and David confesses the ^^me when he says,
Whither shall ^^goe from thy spirit, or whither ^^all I fly from thy presence?
If I ^^scend up into heaven, lo thou art ^here, or into hell, thou art there
al^^ Psalm. 139.7, 8. The same thing (...) some measure was also know^^^ to the
Philosophers. lambi^^^s says, He is present sudden^^ wheresoever it pleases
him, (...) incorporeall subsistence has nothing of force any where to ^^nder
it; and much more the di^^ne nature cannot be so detai^ed by any
circumscripture of ^lace, that it should not be every where. And Porphyrius
^^eakes excellently to the same ^^rpose, That that has a body ^^^nes not
whither it will, by a ^^^call condition and estate, for a place stands
together with a heap. Nor again is it withheld in corporeal bounds; for that
which in some kind lies in a heap, may be forced into a narrow place, and may
be a local condition be changed: but what is compact and free from
accumulatiue magnitude, this cannot be contained of those things which are
accumulatiue, and exists from all local motion.

Therefore God is not included in any bound or place, but is wholly within and
without all things, no where shut in or out; solely containing all things, yet
contained of none. Neither is he therefore commixt in created substances; but
he is wholly in every thing, and yet wholly in himself, as says Instin
Martyr, which is more fully confirmed and explayned in these words, Epist. ^7.
Ad Dardanum; God is every where wholly in himself. How, every where in
himself? Every where, because (...) he is absent in no place, but ^holly in
himself, because he (...) not contained in those things (...) which he is
present, as if he would not be without them. But that the Scripture often
times ^ttributeth unto GOD, who is ^^measurable Infinite, as it were ^^finite
habitation; as where it is said, The lord has prepared his Throne in the
heaven, Psalm. 103.19. and he sits in the heaven, Psalm. ^.4. It is done for
these causes especially: First, because God has made choice of this high^^t
heaven as his chief Seat and ^^gall throne for his Majesty; out of which
notwithstanding he is present to all, sees all, and mightily and wisely
governs all things; Who is like to the Lord our God, who dwells on high,
and humbles himself to view the things that are in heaven, in earth, and in
every place, Psalm. 113.5, 6. And hence it is, that we pray not, Our Father
which art every where, albeit that be true, but, Our Father which art in
heaven. Secondly, because God does without all means of temporal life,
manifest in Heaven himself, and his eternal good things to the blessed
society of Angels and men, and there does afford himself more fully to be
enjoyed and known, yea there he is all in all, 1. Cor 15.28. For example, The
soul of man although it be spread through the whole body, yet is said chiefly
to reside in the brain, as in her prime receptacle; because that sitting here
as in her Palace, she does ^^ect her special functions, the ^^se and motion,
to which the ^^newes, arteries, and veins are ^eruitours, and perform the
^^nction of Ambassadors, and ^ttendants, to the well ordering of all other
parts of the body; in a like manner conceive God, as of the minds
vniuersa^ties: whence Augustine in his Questions of the Trinity, If God be in
every place totally, why is he said to dwell in the ^eauen more th^n in the
earth? Because the knowledge of the Divinity is greater in the holy Angels,
and in the Souls of the Saints, when they are with God in heaven, then being
on the earth; for as in this mortal body, some more understand the Divinity,
some less: so God is said more to be in heaven, then in earth; because there
his substance is more fully understood of the heavenly Inhabitants, then of the
earthly Region. Lastly, because God would withdraw the minds of his Elect from
the things of this life, and eleuate their minds and cogitations unto that
Kingdom prepared for them from the beginning of the world, in which he now
sits at the right hand of Majesty, viz. God and man, continually making
intercession for them to the Father: whereupon, with good reason Saint Paul
exhorts us, that we should seek after heavenly things, where Christ sits
at the right hand of God, Coloss. ^.1, 2. And hence it is, that when Christ and
all holy ones pray, they lifted up their hands toward heaven, because there is
the glorious dwelling place of God. The other appellation of the highest
heaven, is Tropicall, and Heaven by a figurative speech, is called Paradise;
and this term is deviued from the Caldean word, Pardes, whence the Grecian
deriueth the word (...), or Paradise, which properly signifies a green plot,
an Orchard, or Garden, bearing fruit, or set with fruit-bearing trees,
delectable to man, as Cant. 4.12. a Paradise of Pomegranats; and in old time
the Grecians used to call those (...), which now the multitude call Fish Ponds:
But more especially Paradise does signify (...), that most pleasand Garden,
wherein our first Parents were placed by God; in which Garden being planted by
God in the Country of Eden, was a piece of ground lying near to Babylonia
Sturanitida, or rather Edenitida, not far from Mesopotamia, watered about with
the River Tigris, and other fruitful Brooks; and hereupon is the name of
paradise often used in relating the Heaven of the blessed, as Luke 23.43. This
day shall thou be with me in Paradise: But that you should not think that
Christ speaks here of the earthly Paradise, which long before was quite ruined,
for that most woeful fall of our first parents, as Jerusalem and Sion were,
mark what Sain Paul shows you. He was rapt up into the third Heaven, which
he after calls Paradise: whence may be gathered, that the Heaven of the
blessed, and the heavenly Paradise were all one to him; and in this sense it
seems to be taken by that old King Zoroastres, he having some insight into
this Heaven, where he says, Because the Soul being the bright fire of the
Father, and of an immortal subsistence, and the mistress of life, seeks
Paradise. Thirdly, this Heaven by a Metaphor, is called Abraham's bosom: for as
children returning home from their Schoole-taxes at night, are as it were
closed in their fathers bosom: so we also, who in this life are the sonns of
Abraham, who is called the father of all believers, are gathered together into
a most secure Haven, and as it were the bosom of Abraham; that is to say, into
a place provided for Abraham and his elect children, expecting that full glory
of blessedness which will follow in the last day of Judgment, in which we shall
be crowned in most absolute manner, with all joy, glory, and immortality after
this life's dissolution. Moreover, it is sometime called the heavenly Jerusalem,
and the City of the living God, and Sion, the heavenly Canaan, and by other
names of this kind, conducing to the nature of this heaven of the blessed. But
having sufficiently said of the names, I haste to the distinction, and
definition.

CHAP. IIII.
The Definition of the highest Heaven, and the Analysis thereof.
THE Heaven of the Blessed, is the highest expansion, the house of God, and of
blessed Angels and Men. All the numbers of this Definition are partly declared
above; the rest shall hereafter be more at large explayned: which that we may
do, these six things are briefly to be handled in a Methodicall order:

1. Whether there be any Heaven of the Blessed? 2. Whether it were created, or
not? 3. At what time it was created? 4. Whether it be Corporeal, or
Incorporeall? 5. Where it is, and in what place? 6. What kind of Heaven it is,
and how great?
First, no man will doubt whether there be any Heaven of the blessed or not:
who has been never so little conversant in the holy Scriptures; for there are
so many testimonies thereof, that no man without great stupiditie and
senselessness can deny it, of which kind these are plain, Psa. 103.19. God
has prepared his Seat in the heavens, and his Kingdom is above all kingdoms.
Psalm. 68.34. He sits in the Heaven of Heavens. Psalm. 115.16. The Heaven of
Heavens are the Lords. And Christ himself says, John 14.2. In my fathers
house are many mansions. I go to provide you a place, and where I shall
provide you a place, I will return and take you ^^i^h me, that you may also be
where ^am; and that we may carry our solues as free Denizens of heaven, from
whence we expect our Savior, Phil. 3.20. Hence then I re^^^^e those, who
being damna^^ly conceited, deny this heaven (...) the blessed. If the heaven of
^^e blessed be the Seat and House. If God, wherein he dwells; ^^d if it be
the place in which Christ God and Man does a^^de; and if it be the Mansion
^^^ce wherein we shall perpetu^lly dwell with Christ, certainly it must
necessarily follow to be something: but we have ^^ooned the Mayor by
alleadgements both of Scriptures, and Authorities; therefore also the ^^imor by
infallible consequence must follow.

Secondly, there is a very great controversy amongst very profound Scholars,
whether this Heaven were created or not. Some say, it is a void, or intricate
place, an empty space, everlasting, immeasurable, spiritual, and all
ouer-spread with most radiant beams of the Deity, and that it is a certain
immense light, shining forth of God himself, in which God was from
everlasting, according to that saying, 1. Tim. 6.15. God dwells in that light
which cannot be approached. Of the same mind was Augustine, Stenchus, the
Bishop, and some others, as Zanchius relates in his first book and fourth
Chapter, De Operib. Dei: But on the contrary, others, and that more truly, have
thought, that this heaven was sometime made by God, and they more correspond to
the Scripture: for whatsoever is in ^^lature uncreate, it is needful that the
same be infinite and immeasurable; for every creature (...) of a finite
constitution, God ^^ely is unmeasurable and infi^^te. But who will call the
hea^^n immense or infinite as God him self? when the Scripture makes an
eloquent diffe^^^ce betwixt God the maker of heaven and earth, and his ^^^t or
throne, viz. the heaven, ^^^after more fully in the ensu^^ng Chapter shall
appear. Let them then confess the Heaven (...) be made by him; and who is
(...) impudent that dare, contrary (...) the apparent truth of the Scriptures,
deny the whole hea^^n to be made by God? when (...) the Porch, or prime entry
in^^^ the Bible he may find, Gene. (...). In the beginning, God created the
Heaven, and the Earth. Heaven in that place, even in that term, comprehending
in it the whole expansion resident above the earth, and in which the highest
heavens is comprehended, and must needs follow, that also to be formed of God
in the beginning; yea and God also is nominated manifestly to be the former of
this heaven. It is said, Hebr 11.9, 10. By faith stayed Abraham as in a strange
land, in the land of promise, he stayed in the Tabernacles with Isaac and
Jacob, coheyres in the same promise: for he expected that sure founded City,
whose former and maker was God. What City, I pray you, expected he? Was it
not the heavenly Jerusalem, the heaven of the blessed, of the which the same
Abraham afterward entreats in Chap. 12.22. which ^one but the King of all
Kings God himself, has founded ^^d builded most artificially. It ^^hooueth
thee then to confess and credit this Heaven celestial ^ometime to be builded
by God ^imselfe, and him only.

Thirdly, it cannot easily be ^ollected out of the holy Scrip^^res, when this
heaven was cre^ted, but it is probable, on the ^^^s;t day, together with the
Star^^^ Firmament, since there is no ^^ntion of the creation thereof in the
works of the other days: of which mind are ma^y both ancient, and later
W^i^ers. Lactant. Lib. 2. diu. inst. ca. 1. first of all, God made heaven, and
founded it on high, because (...) should be the seat of God himself the
Builder, and then ^ee framed the earth, and set it ^^der heaven, which man and
all kinds of beasts should inhabit. And Danaus on the Phisiques, Tract. 4.
cap. 12. The highest heaven was made on the first day; but it consists not on
the two Elements, but of a certain third more simple Essence. And here for our
brevity sake in an apparent cause, cease I to induce any more testimonies at
all to prove it.

Fourthly, we are now to consider, whether this heaven be of a Corporeal, or
Incorporeall substance and nature, local, or void of place totally. We
affirm it to be corporeal, since a corporeal nature cannot subsist but in a
corporeal subject, and a proportion must needs exist betwixt the place, and
the thing placed, Zanch. Lib. 1. cap. 4. Of the works of God. The humane
nature of Christ, and of ^^ery person elect, which must abide in this heaven,
is of a corporal nature; it is necessary therefore the heaven so to be ^lso:
for a body is contained in (...) body. Therefore Acts 3. the ^eauen is said to
contain in it ^^e body of Christ: but say ^hou, those bodies are glorious
^^d spiritual, as the Apostle ad^onisheth us, when he says, It is ^^en a
living Body, but shall rise ^gaine a spiritual, 1. Corint. 15.44. and therefore
they have no need of any corporal place. I an^were, Glorious bodies cease ^ot
to be Physical and Natural, ^^t they cease to be mortal and ^orruptible; that
is, they retain and keep their natural and es^^^tiall properties: and
therefor Job says, Chap. 19.20. The ^^ne that I am, and no other ^^^ll I be
seen, and the same eyes shall be beheld also after that worms have eaten
that body of mine, when I arise again, then I shall see God in my flesh. But
our bodies do leave off accidental matters, as frailties, and sundry
passions; glory therefore is not a destroyer, but a perfecter of Nature, not
annihilating, but exalting it. But whereas the Apostle says, That the Body
shall arise spiritual, that must not be understood of the substance, but of
the qualities, namely, of the spiritual estate and condition of man after the
Resurrection, which is plain out of the very Text, where he says, 1 Cor.
15.42, 43, 44. Our Body is somed in corruption, but is raised in glory, and
incorruptible, it is sowed base, but raised glorious, it is sowed weak, but it
is raised strong, it is ^s;owed mortal, (...) it is raised spiritual. The
^^he body shall arise, yet en^owed with certain contrary qualities; for that
which before ^^s mortal, shall be made im^ortall; what was foul and
dis^^nourable, shall be made glo^ious and bright; what was ^eake, shall be
invested with ^^rueilous valor and egregi^^^s prowess; that that was be^^ee
subject unto diverse functi^ns and passions, as Nourish^ent, Generation, Sleep,
Wea^somnesse, Diseases, Griefs, ^^c. shall hereafter have full im^unitie from
all these. Paul therefore opposes not two na^^res, or bodies different, the
Corporal and the Spiritual, but the various qualities of one and the same
bodies amongst them^elues. Therefore since that the glorious bodies differ not
from the natural, so far as their substance, that is, their essential
qualities ortiue; to wit, the manner and the form: but in respect of some
peculiar qualities, they be not merely spirits, but spiritual bodies, which
cannot subsist or stand with a bodily place. And moreover, the judgment of all
ancient and modern Writers concur with this opinion, concerning the highest
heaven; as Damascen li. 2. says, That this heaven contains all heavenly
natures, God only excepted: whereupon it must necessarily be a finite and
corporeal substance. And Zanchius in his Lib. 1. Chap. 4. de Oper. Dei, says,
I call not that heaven of the blessed, a substance totally incorporeall, since
that I perceive it not to be a spiritual thing, as are the souls and spirits
of Angels, for our bodies shall abide in it: but then ought there to be some
proportion and conueniency betwixt the place, and the thing placed, which
ve^^ly cannot be betwixt a body placed, and a place merely incorporeall: nor
do I simply call it a corporal substance for difference sake, etc. I conceive
then this Heaven to be such a body, that it may be called spiritual. And so
Danaeus: That highest heaven which was crea^ed on the first day, is a most
excellent work of God, as no man will deny; and by and by, Although it was
created with the ^^rth, yet it had matter separate from it by Gods wonderful
power, and that not on the fifth, as Aristotle says, but the third, euely
differing in nature from the water, and the earth, not being subject to those
mutations. These things understood and granted, one may easily conceive,
whether the heaven merit to be called local, or illocall; for if it be
corporal, why is it not also nominated local? It is therefore called, The
place of the blessed, the Bosom of Abraham, and the City of supernall
Jerusalem: and if Hell be a place as it is said, Luke 16.28. why also is not
the place of the blessed local? But thou will say, Aristotle acknowledged no
place beyond the Starry heaven, nor yet any body. Well, be it so: but on the
contrary, Christ affirms there to be both place and bodies, when he says, I
shall go and get you a place, and when I have provided it; I will come again
and take you to me, that where I am, there may ye be also, John 14.2. Now
leave I it to your choice, to give credit to Christ, who is the truth coming
forth of this supreme Heaven, or rather to an Aristotelean Ethicke, profane
and ignorant of these mysteries.

Fifthly, but now where, and in what place this Heaven is, it is further to be
considered of us: We do affirm, as the Scriptures every where affirm also,
(...) to be exalted above both the other heavens fore mentioned: for in that
very place is the heaven of the blessed Saints, where the feat and habitation
of God (...), and where the blessed Angels have residence with him; even there
the very Elect, together with the blessed Angels jointly enjoy eternal life.
For Christ him self questionless nomina^^d Paradise a place of the blessed.
when he says, This day shall thou be with me in Paradise; that is, as Saint
Paul interprets it, in the third heaven; yea Christ affirms, He has in his
Fathers house many mansions prepared for his holy ones. Then certainly, the
Seat of God, and of the blessed society of Angels and men, is in the highest
above both the other heavens: for, The heaven of heavens is the Lords, the
earth he assigned to the sons of men, as the Psalmist says; this term
heaven of heavens, in the Hebrew phrase signifies, the most Sublime and
Supreme Center, in like manner as these terms, God of Gods, Lord of Lords,
and King of Kings, are accepted for the highest and most eminent God, Lord, and
King. This note is also the holy Angels Halelluiah, Glory to God in the
highest, and peace on earth. Where he punctually distinguishes betwixt the
earth, and the Lords most holy mansions. And again, in Deuteronomy. 4.39. God is
above in Heaven: and Psalm. 113.4. Jehovah is elevated far above all Nations,
above all Heavens is his glory; who can equallize our God Ie^^nah, who
inhabiteth in the highest?

Also the seat of Angels and blessed Saints, is said to be in the same heaven;
for the Angels continually see the face of the Father which is in heaven: and
Paul says, Our conversation is in heaven: In which heaven? In these he adds,
whence we expect our Savior, into which himself is already ascended. The
heaven therefore of the blessed is planted by God far above all other heavens
in the highest altitude. Again, hence it follows, the heaven of the blessed
to be there, whither Christ himself is ascended in his own body: for Christ
has made regresse unto his Father, whence he went out, whose seat is in the
kingdom of the blessed, as is clear in that of John 7.33. Yet a little while
am I with you, and after retire unto him who sent me: and again, John 16.28.
I went out from my Father into the world: and again, I leave the world, and
retire unto my Father. And Christ is substantially ascended above those visible
heavens, to wit, the ayerie and starry firmaments, as Ephesians. 4.10. He that
descended, is the same who ascended above all heavens, that he might
accomplish all things: Hebr. 4.14. he is said, to have pierced the heavens:
and Hebr. 7.26. he is exalted above all heavens: and again, Hebr. 1.3, 4. and
Ephesians. 1.20. He is said to sit at the right hand of God in the highest
Heavens: and as says Augustine, Christ elevated his body to heaven, he
abstracted not his Majesty yet from the earth, according to his corporal and
carnal presence, which the word assumed, he is ascended into the heaven, he
is not here; there he sits at the ^ight hand of his Father, and ^^t he is
here also, for his maiesticall presence retired not. And Cyrill on John is
consonant ^eereto, No man doubts when Chirst ascended to the heavens, albeit he
was here by his virtuall presence of the spirit, he is totally absent in his
carnal. Again, it is requisite, that the ^aithfull believe, that though
Christ is corporally absent, yet does he vertually govern us and all things
else, being continually present with those that call upon his name. And in the
same sense is Vigill the Martyr; The Son of God (quoth he) according to his
Humanity, departed from us, but according to his Divinity he says to us,
Lo, even I am with you unto the end of the world: for those whom he left, and
from whom he departed according to his Humanity, according to his Divinity,
he neither left nor forsook: for in the form of a servant he is in heaven
absent from us; but in the form of God, wherein he departed not from us, he
is present now on earth with us. And this is the judgment of the Ancient
concerning Christ his peregrination into the Heaven of the blessed. But as
Saint Augustine ad^^onisheth us, It is a needless ^ouerlurious fantasy to
search ^here and how the Lord pre^^nce is seated in this most high ^ace; only
we are to believe (...) to be in heaven, for it is not ^^r our frailty to
discourse of ^^destiall secrets, but it rather ^^^cernes our faith to be wise
^odestly, concerning the digni^^ of the Lords presence. It is ^^en clear, that
the heaven of ^^e blessed is the most high Pa^^ce of God and the blessed
An^^ls, placed and confirmed a^^ue the two other heavens, to ^^it, the ayerie
and Syderiall fir^^ments.

Sixthly, It remains lastly to ^ee surueyed, what and how ^^eat this heaven is:
In quality ^^is most eternal incorruptible, ^^d clear: I term it eternal,
not because it existed without beginning; but because it is ever to endure
without all end and decay. Whence that of Augustine, Hence then my soul sees
how far it is eternal above all times, when thy house which cannot be
trauersed over, though respective to thee it cannot be coeternall; yet
incessantly adhering to thee, it admits not the least temporal intermission.
And as Ambrose, Paul (says he) exhorts us to covet mansions in the highest
heavens, which are eternal, but that is incorruptible which in that eternal
time of her durance, has an immunitie from all change and alteration, or the
least corruption. Paul therefore auerres, that heavenly Jerusalem which Abraham
expected to have firm fundaments, that is, most sure and immo^^ueable ^^ounds;
and (as in the Ap^^^^^ps) that celest all City is made of pure gold, and
established on (...) most firm and precious foundation, described also to be
cor^^borate with invincible walls; (...) which things, describe and ^otifie the
perpetuity and incorruptible existence of this ^eauen. But their conceit is
im^ious and vain, who conceyt this heaven to have also resided without
beginning from eterni^^^: If so be that an eternal habitation must needs be
reciprocal to an eternal God; alas, ^he Lord wants no place, since that his
extent exceeds al place, ^e being of a most simple es^ence, which is as well
without (...) within all things, as Zanchlus and the ancient Divines affirm;
and most clearly is this City celestial, portraytured in the description of
the terrent Jerusalem, Revel. 21. ver. 23. There is want neither of Sun, or
Moon, to yield luster therein; for Gods glory gives it a plenary
Illustration, namely, the heavenly Jerusalem, whereof the Lamb is the Lamp;
and as Augustine aptly says, That most Imperial City is incomparably clear,
where are Victory, Verity, Dignity, where are Sanctity, Life, and Eternity.
Nor sings Zanchius any less excellently of the splendour of this supernall
City, That most supreme Heaven shall shine with a far more excellent light,
it shall want no Sun, nor Moon; for the glory of God is the light thereof.
Again, nor must we suppose as some do, the illustrious Sunne-beame of that
essential glory to reflect and issue from God, as from the Sun, and heaven
to be illustrate with it: for whatsoever is in the essence of God, and demeanes
therefrom, is participator, like as the Son and Holy Ghost, which proceed
ordinarily from the Father: and this sole title is only given unto Christ;
namely, that he is the splendor of glory: that light therefore whereby the
heaven is illustrate as from a cause efficient, and whereby the souls of the
blessed are illuminate, that they may perceive God is a created subject, or
matter.

But the quantity of the supreme Heaven is depiete under the figure of the
holy City, as Apocal. 21.10. where it is called That great city; by which
term^ certainly, he instanceth the latitude thereof to be excessive, the
magnitude both incomperable, and incomprehensible; yet declares he it to be
finite, when he ^ntimates it also possibly circundate by the Angel: it is by
Christ also verified to be a most large City, when he affirms it to have very
many habitations therein, even in his Fathers house. But of the definition of
the perpetual Heaven, and the most excellent frame and fabric thereof, this
may suffice: Now view we the Sections flowing from hence.

CHAP. V.
Wherein is disprooued the opinion of those who affirm, that the heaven of
blessed ones is nothing but God himself, (...) a celestial joy, or suppose
that joy d^ffused through all things there.
IHE generation of error is fruitful, but of Truth, nothing less: This has
brought forth infinite monsters of vices and prodigious opinions; the other
receives not her own issue. Let us see then whether it be agre^able to truth
which we have affirmed, That the heaven of blessed ones is the habitation of
God, and all the Saints, that it is a place of joy, and situate above the
other heavens; will not those prodigeous dreams of some, soon languish, and
vanish as smoke at Sunne-rising, who suppose that the Heaven of blessed ones,
is nothing but God himself, or the joy of the blessed, and therefore to be in
no place, but every where diffused in the heaven, in the air, in the earth, in
hell? oh lamentable madness! Do not these sacrilegious ones tremble, thus to
confound the Creator with the thing created? God is infinite and
uncircumcised, but the heaven is finite and circumscribed, as the place,
seat, and throne of God, the Mansion of our heavenly Father, wherein Christ,
the Angels, and all the elect, enjoy eternal joy: shall not then God be one
thing, and his Throne, heaven another? He contains, and with his Majesty
fills all things, he cannot be contained and comprehended by nothing. Whence
I gather this, GOD is infinite, but the Heaven of the blessed ones is finite;
because God being infinite, cannot be limited according to that, 2. Kings
8.27. The Heaven of heavens cannot contain thee. Therefore God must be one
thing, and this Heaven another.

There is a monstrous Opinion like unto this, which mayntaineth, that the
Heaven of blessed ones, is nothing but the joy it self, wherewith the blessed
after this life shall be affected: but let those see with what countenance
they can confound these things, which the Scripture so evidently and apparently
does distinguish between themselves, when it makes a clear difference
between Heaven, or the place of blessed ones and blessedness it self,
saying, The righteous shall shine as the Sun, in the Kingdom of their
Father, Math 13.43.

Moreover, the Kingdom of glory is one thing, and the glory it self is
another, wherewith the righteous shall be adorned. What? the kingdom of
heaven shall be one, and the same unto all, as Christ says, John 17.24.
Father, those which thou have given me, I will that where I am, they also be
with me. And 1. Thessal. 4.17 We shall be caught up in the Clouds, to mere
the Lord in the Air, and so we shall always be with the Lord. And, I will
take you to my self, that where I am, you may be. But that Celestial glory
shall not be one, and the same to all, but differenced by some degrees: For
one shall be the glory of Christ's, as greater, another of Angels, another of
Men, as the Apostle insinuates, 1. Corinthians. 1^.41, 42. when he says, One
beauty of the Sun, another of the Moon, another of the Stars: and so
shall be the Resurrection of the dead. The same Daniel teaches, Chapter 12.3.
when he says, They which instruct others, shall shine as the Splendour in the
Firmament, and they that justify many, shall be as the Stars for ever.
Whence it is apparent, that the Kingdom or Mansion of the blessed, is one
thing; but the glory it self another, which the Saints shall enjoy for ever.

Furthermore, the Heaven of the blessed, seeing it is erecte^ and placed by
God, in a most sublime Seat above all other visible heavens: How I pray you,
can it exist at once in all places, as in the Heaven, the Air, the Water, the
Earth^ etc. Is not this contrary to the order of Nature, which does not admit
two or more bodies in one space of the same place, without the penetration of
their dimensions, and the great confusion of the thing? Nay, no natural body
can be at once in many places. All which things, and far more absurd, will
he be compelled to admit, who maintains, that the heaven of the blessed is
every where.

I pretermit here infinite testimonies of Scripture, which do evidently
testify that this heaven is not every where, but placed above the others.
Admit that it were so, how should Christ descend there-hence into the lowest
parts of the earth? How is he returned thither, by penetrating and passing
through all the other Heavens? For as much as he could not descend else where
from thence, nor ascend thither again, if he perpetually lived in the same as
diffused through all things. What difference also should there be between the
abode of the saved, and damned, if this Heaven were dilated through all places.
Now the Scripture affirms, that there is a great distance between the abode
of the blessed and tormented, when it says, Between us (that is, we which
are in the place of the blessed) and you (which live in hell, in the place of
the tormented) there is a great Gulf placed, in so much that they who would
pass from hence to you, cannot, nor from thence hither. Whereupon Hierome in
6. Caput. ad Ephesians. says, It is an impious thing to affirm that the evil
angels should be believed, to enjoy that heaven, of which God says, Heaven
is my Throne. Whence it follows, that this heaven is not every where, but
placed above these visible heavens.

But that which they are wont to object here as unanswerable, is of no
validity if it be examined: God is every where. God is in the Heaven of the
blessed: Therefore the Heaven of the Blessed is every where. It is (...)
Paralogisme laboring with the contagion of four terms: For the Proposition
is understood of the general presence of God, by which he is present to all
his creatures: but the assumption is understood of the perfect exhibition of
Gods glory, which is in the heaven of the blessed: and there is ^ore infer^ed
in the Conclusion, then was in the Promises.

The like Argument may be if you say, God is every where. God is in the earth:
Therefore the earth is every where. But they vige moreover, that it is
necessary, that the Celestial habitation of God, wherein he is resident, is as
largely spacious as God himself, otherwise it could not be his Seat.

But I say, that the heaven of the blessed, after a certain manner, is as
largely spacious as God himself, and is not so largely spacious: therefore God
after a certain manner, is in the heaven of the blessed only; yet not only
there, but every where: which allegations considered in a diverse respect, admit
no impiety. God is in the heaven of the blessed, and not every where; so fa^re
forth, as there only he exhibiteth, and without all measure imparteth his
glory to the blessed Angels, and men, and demonstrateth himself to them face
to face, to be seen and enjoyed, of which thing we spoke more above in the
third Chapter. And after this manner, the abode of the blessed is as largely
patent as God himself. But by his general presence, wherein he is present to
all creatures in heaven and earth, and does govern and conserve them; and
after a peculiar manner, wherein he is always present by his grace and spirit
to his Church, although militant in this world, not only in the heaven of the
blessed does he exist, but without it, yea every where. Peradventure thou
dislikest the distinction: but it is produced out of the very Texts of the
Scripture, and not from man's brain: for thus it speaks: God is in the Heaven
of heavens, and the Heaven of heavens are in the Lord. Heaven is my Th^one;
that is, in the perfect ministration, and manifestation of his glory. But, the
Heavens of Heavens do not contain thee; that is, after his general presence,
wherein he is present to all his creatures; and peculiar, wherein he is
present to his Elect. This explication also the sequent sayings of Scripture
do confirm: God dwells in the highest, who nevertheless does lowly behold
the Heavens and the earth. And in another place; God has established his
Throne in the Heavens, and yet his Kingdom is present to all. Also, the Lord
is in the Heavens of ancient heavens, whose excellency is over Israel, and
whose strength is in the higher clouds. Thou are fear^full O God, from thy
Sanctua^^es. The mighty God of Israel, he gives strength and might to his
people. But why do we longer dispute of the nature of this eternal heaven? Why
do we prosecute the absurd opinions of others concerning it? let us rather
hasten to the illustrious felicity of the blessed in this Heaven For as I
actan de Institut. divine. lib. 3. cap 37. says, What does it profit a man to
be so made, that he may look with an upright bo^v toward heaven, and search
heavenly things, unless he discern God with an upright mind, and his
meditation be conversant in the hope of eternal life.

CHAP. VI.
Of the happy condition and estate of the blessed in the Kingdom of heaven.
But to whom has ever so great dexterity of wit* or copious perfection of
tongue or Pen been imparted, that was al^l^, I will not say, to decorate in
words, but to enuntiate that transcendent glory and felicity of the blessed in
the Celestial Kingdom? for easier it is to pronounce what is not, then what
is in that eternal life. There is no death, there is no mourning, there is no
weariness, no infirmity, no hunger, no thirst, no heat, no corruption, no
want, no tribulation, no sorrow. Behold, we have declared what is not there:
But will thou know what is there? That which the eye has not s^ene, nor the
care heard, nor has entered into man's heart, what God has prepared for those
that love him. Yet the Scripture which alone chalketh the way to eternal life,
seems to decipher the celestial blessedness in two things, viz. in the
privation of evils, wherewith in this mortal state we are afflicted; and in
the plenary fruition of all good things, by whose hand and steps being
conducted, we will discuss a few things concerning them.

Alas, what an Ocean of maladies do ouerwhelme as well the Soul, as the Body
in this languishing life? How great a fierceness of rigorous dolours, do with
more then hostilit^^ invade her? How great troops of fordid vices do on every
side besiege her? Who can resolve us, how great tyranny this miserable, crazy,
infirm body of ours, wheresoever it be, is always obnoxious unto? To how
many, both by Sea and Land, Battles, Banishments, destructions, and dangers of
deceyts is it exposed? Lastly, how sleeting, and fallible is the miserable life
of mortal men? And as Seneca says, Epist. 1^. Some then begin to live, when
they should give over: yea, some desist to live, when they should begin. And in
what part of the earth are we secured from the snares of death, which is every
moment to be expected? What? this our life is replenished with so great evils,
that in comparison of it, death it self may be judged a remedy, and not a
punishment: for therefore has God made it short, that the tribulations which
could not by prosperity be conquered, nor taken away, might be mitigated by
the brevity of the time.

Alas! this Life is an emulatour of cruel Death: wherefore then will thou wish
to thy self a happy Life? Is not this madness? No man will have or endure a
long evil Supper: For tell me, what will thou have an evil thing?

I think, in all thy actions, cogitations, and desires, thou would have
nothing that is naught; thou will not have evil Land, evil Corn, no^ an
evil Garment: and what madness is this, that almost all men covet to enjoy a
long evil life? But why do I call it long? If thou should live all that
time from whence Adam was sent out of Paradise till this day, surely thou
should see that thy life was not long: Nay, how long is the life of every
one man? add a few years, lead long old age, What then? Is not the hour
early? Let us therefore learn this one thing, to contemn this life; no man
can well live it, unless he contemn it. There can to no man happen a secure
life, who too much meditateth on the prolonging it. When therefore, when shall
we be freed from those infinite molestations of this life? Truly, in this
Pilgrimage of ours there is no freedom to be expected; but when we shall be
reduced by CHRIST out of this exile into our natural Country; Then all
servitude wherewith we are oppressed being taken away, we shall enjoy
Delight, Liberty, and Security never to be consummate. But from whence is
that? God himself will wipe away every tear from their eyes, and Death shall
no more appear, nor mourning, nor lamentation, because going before, they are
departed, Apocalyp. Chapter 21. verse 4. This life of men, not only by the
alteration of age, but also by the ruin of Souls for sins committed, does
enter by many Deaths: So Life that is truly eternal, is neither the
alteration of the body, nor of the mind; nor is there controversy of
cogitations, nor diversity of opinion, no perturbation hindering the
stabilitie and tranquillity of the mind.

Lastly, it is the Kingdom of the living, wherein there is no night, no
sleep, (the Image of death;) no meat or drink, the sustenance of humane
infirmity; no sickness, no grief, no medicine, or Suites, or Merchandise; no
Arts, no Money, the beginning of evils, the cause of dissentions, the root of
hatred, but the Kingdom of the living; not of those that dye any more for
sin, but the true life of those that live in Christ Jesus our Lord. Oh true
Life of all, at all moments to be wished: Neither shall we there expect only
a mitigation and deliverance of those evils, wherewith we are here infested;
but we shall be infinitely replenished with abundant treasures of good
things; because the Son adorned with the three exquisite Properties: perfect
Complacencie, absolute Wisdom, imperious Dignity, shall excellently shine.

And what would she have beside? that that perfect complacency shall spring
from two Fountains; whereof the one flows from God, the other from the
celestial Congregation. From God all solid delight, as from the foundation and
primary fountain does proceed; and that chiefly from the most delectable
vision of the divine glory. Unto this not a few Saints have elevated themselves
in this frail and transitory Life: Whereupon the Apostle says; We are the
dear sons of God: but it is not manifest what we shall be: for we know it
will be that when it is manifest, we shall be like unto him: because we see
him as he is, and who so has this hope, purges himself as he is pure.
Moreover, from the full sense of the divine love. Thus David comfort
himself: I shall see thy face in Righteousness; when I awake, I shall be
satisfied with thy Countenance, Pleasure is at thy right hand for ever.

These Banquets are delicious, which the heavenly ghests sitting in the
Kingdom of heaven with Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, shall eternally enjoy: Oh
Banquets to be defired! The impious men delight themselves in the multitude of
their Gold, in the multitude of their Silver, in the multitude of their
possessions, in the multitude of their various wealth, in the drunkenness of
their sumptuous, and luxurious Feasts. All tend to delight: but they know not
where they may attain to that which is stable and enough; the one out of
luxury, another from. Ambition, and the confluence of Clyents; this from his
lover, the other from the vain ostentation of Learning. False and short
delights deceive all those; as Drunkenness recompenseth the content of one hour
with the heaviness of a long time; but let those rejoice in temporal things,
which have not known to affect eternal goods. But what shall be thy delights,
O thou lover of God? Thy Gold shall be peace, thy Silver peace, thy
Inheritance peace, thy Life peace: Thy God shall be all in all to thee; thou
shall cate him, that thou may not hunger; thou shall drink him, that thou
may not thirst; thou shall be illuminated by him, that thou may not wax
blind; thou shall be supported by him, that thou may not faint; he total
absolute, shall possess thee totally absolute; thou shall suffer no
perplexities there with him, with whom thou shall inherit all.

Oh how the Saints shall exult in glory, rejoice, be joyful, and delight;
they shall enjoy glory, and be delighted with eternal felicity; there they
shall not only taste how sweet God is, but shall be filled and satiated with
miraculous suauitie, nothing shall be wanting to them, nothing shall hinder
them; Christ being present, shall fulfull every desire of theirs; they shall
not wax old, languish, nor corrupt any more: Perpetual health, happy
eternity shall confirm the sufficiency of their blessedness; there shall
be no Concupiscence in the members, the rebellion of the flesh shall no more
arise, but the whole condition of man shall be immaculate and quiet, nature
shall continue whole and sound without any blemish or wrinkle any more.

Lastly, God shall be all in all, and his presence shall satiate all the
appetites of soul and body. Consider, consider therefore, O mortal men, that
to be the true transcendent joy, which is not conceived of the Creature, but
of the Creator; which when thou shall receive, no man shall take from thee,
when all mirth otherwise acquired, is but mourning; all delight, dolor; all
sweet, sour; all beauty, deformity; and every thing that does glad, is
grievous. Next unto God, who is our supreme felicity, and chiefest delight,
the conversation and familiarity of Saints and Angels adds no small
complacencie; there the assembly of holy Angels, there the glorious company of
the Apostles, there the number of triumphant Prophets, there the innumerable
Congregation of faithful Martyrs: neither is there that thou should fear
any thing to be taken from thee by the multitude of the Inhabitants in the
celestial blessedness. I say, the Inheritance is Christ's, by which we are
Coheyres. By the store of possessours, it is not diminished, neither is it made
straight by the abundance of Inhabitants, but it is as great to many, as to a
few, so to each one, as to all. Moreover, in profound knowledge and wisdom,
all the Saints shall here excel, as Paul teaches when he says, We know in
part, we prophecy in part: but when it shall come which is finished, then that
which is in part shall be abolished. Here we see through a glass and
obscurely, but then we shall see face to face, now we know in part, then we
shall know perfectly; there is memory without oblivion, reason without error,
wi^^ without all perturbation, a body without corruption: and with how great
dignity and majesty the godly shall be crowned in that future life, the same
Paul expresleth, when he says, If we suffer together, we shall reign
together. And Saint John, Thou ha^t made us Kings and Priests v^^o God, and we
shall reign on the earth. And of the Servants of God living in heaven, amongst
other things he says, They shall reign in the world without end. O blessed
Kingdom of Paradise! O blessed Region of Delights! after which we sigh from
this valley of tears. Oh, how happy are they which inhabit there, and praise
GOD world without end.

Now thou have understood the condition of the Soul, we will briefly declare
what shall be the Bodies state: They also shall shine with so many Gemmes
exquisitely glittering; that is, with perpetual glory, remarkable splendour,
and datelesse immortality. Oh, oh, how great is this complacencie, that for
this dyrt and dross, which we carry about in this body, with a glorious
countenance we shall behold GOD in the Eternal life! The Body is here sown
obnoxious to corruption, it shall rise incorruptible; it is sown ignominious,
it shall rise in glory. But from what Author (say thou) is this so great
glory? Christ himself shall transform this dejected body, that it may be
made conformable to his glorious body.

Do thou desire Splendour here? or requirest thou beauty? Behold, we
shall shine as the light of the Firmament, as the most resplendent stars: For
the righteous shall shine as the Sun in the Kingdom of Heaven: Neither shall
here be any envy for the unequal brightness; because the Unity of Charity
shall reign in all. Also most exquisite beauty is deciphered unto us in the
description of that Heavenly Jerusalem, Apocalypse. Chapter 21. which appears
by those precious things, as Gold, Silver, and Precious Stones. What City, I
pray you, is that, but that Celestial Church, which like a Spouse is neatly
and gayly adomed, to be always at band in her Spouses sight: neither need
we fear, that by the coming of death, this glory shall be made less
continual.

Set Eternity before thine eyes, which no circumscription of times can ever
measure. Consider now, O man, consider how wonderful great this complacencie
will be to thee, how acceptable thy future security will be, because thou
shall never fall from it by any death whatsoever. Neither can he be but
joyful always, and well pleased, who when he was subject to death, is made
secure of his Immortality.

Here is no rest, no security, whiles yet burdened we groan in our selves,
expecting our Adoption, the Redemption of our body: But when this mortal body
shall put on Immortality, then there shall be no more assault of Diabolical
fraud, no opinion of heretical wickedness, nor no impiety of unfaithful
people; but all things shall be so pacified and ordered, that in the
Tabernacles of the upright and just, the voice of Triumph and Health shall
only be heard. There the Saints shall praise God for ever and ever; and in
the light of his brightness they shall triumph: There, whatsoever is to be
beloved, is present; nor can the thing be desired, which is not there at hand;
all which shall be there, shall be good.

We shall there be at leisure, and see; we shall see, and love; we shall
love, and give laud that we are, which shall be for ever and ever. For what
other end have we, but to come to that Kingdom, which has none end. If thou
love Riches, why do thou not put them there where they cannot perish? If
thou love Honor, there it is to be wished, where no unworthy one is
honored: If health be affected, let it be there desired, where nothing is
feared: If life be loved, there it may be acquired, where it is never to be
ended by Death any more. Oh! we to foolish, who so much wish and desire this
life, which compared to the Eternal, may rather be termed a death: why do
we not rather aspire to that eternal life? What tongue is sufficient to
express, or understanding to conceive, how great the supernall Joys of that
City are, to be in the assemblies of holy Angels, to be with the blessed
Spirits of the Builder of glory, to see the present countenance of God, to
behold the uncircumcised light, to be diseased with no grief of death, to
be ioyed with the gift of perpetual incorruption.

In this mortal life, nothing is more pleasing to us, then to see our
Country, to behold our Parents and friends. And why do we not hasten and
run, that we may see our heavenly Country, and salute our parents and
friends. A great number of great ones do expect us there; a frequent company
of parents, brothers, sons, do desire us, now secure of their own safety,
as yet solicitous of our welfare; to come to this sight and salutation, how
great joy is common to us and them? Hasten, O hasten thither, I say,
wheresoeuerye live: for if ye so love that miserable and brittle life where ye
live with so great labor, and where ye scarce satisfy the necessaries of the
body, by running, caring, persuading, sighing, by so much the more ye ought to
love that eternal life, where ye shall sustain no labor, where is always
the chiefest Security, the chiefest Felicity, happy Liberty, happy
Blessedness.

Oh when therefore, when shall we be delivered out of this filthy and
unsavory paunch? When shall we be made like unto the Angels? When shall we
shine like the Stars? When shall we see God face to face? When will that day
come, when neglecting all care for to morrow, we being most happy, shall
depend on GOD alone, the Author and Giver of eternal life? But it will be
some time (doubt not) when God shall wipe away every tear from the eyes of all
his: And then, lamentation, nor labor shall no more appear, nor Death it
self, which shall be wholly discomfited in the victory which God gives us
through JESUS CHRIST. And fastening the invincible Anchor of our Hope in this
most delectable promise of God, let us corroborate the cause of this Celestial
Contemplation.

Si been quid seci. De^ gratare datori.
Si male quid feci, noueris esse meum.
FINIS.
B G. To his Friend the Translator.
AN laudem ingenij cultum,
vel nobile doctae
Artis opus, tibi quod scire
Minerua dedit?
Nil mihi quod laudem restat,
charissime Iennings,
Namque operam celebrat
mellea Suada tuam;
Macte tua virtute graui,
pulchrum que decorem
Ingenij, and famam fac tueare tui.
Baptista Goodallius.

THy better part obscured by th'radiance
Of Light celestial, detected is.
Proceed, and be thou free, the Critic glance
Of slothful Ignorance there is none can miss.
Translated is that man from Enuies sting,
Whose industry in morning years does spring.
JAMES FOIL.

FINIS.

