To the Ministers and Churchwardens of (...) A Copy of his Majesty's Letters
directed to the most Reverend Father in God, the Lord Archbishop of Cant. of
the tenoure that ensues.
MOst Reverend Father in God, Right trusty and right wel-beloued Counselor,
We greet you well.
The Inhabitants of our Town and Manor of East-Greenwich in our County of
Kent, have made known unto Us by their humble Petition, that their Parish
Church and steeple is grown into such ruin and decay, as the charge of
repayring it will amount to the sum of one thousand pounds. And because they
are very poor and utterly unable to compass so great a work of themselves,
though they have alreadi^ given testimony of their willingness, in disbursing
the sum of three hundredth pounds toward it: Forasmuch as the Work is pious and
the Town a place of mark, in regard of our Mansion House and often residing
there: We have been pleased to vouchsafe Our Princely furtherance to so
religious and charitable a business, nothing doubting but that you likewise
will give it all possible assistance, both by your own example and by
encouraging the zeal and devotion of Our loving Subjects thereunto, especially
of those of the Clergy. Wherefore We do by these our special Letters
require and authorize you, to give order to the Bishops of the several
Diocesses throughout the Province of Canterbury, that they forthwith cause the
Ministers and other zealous persons of their Diocesses, both by their own
example in contributing, and by exhortation to others, to move Our people
within their several charges, to contribute to so good a work, in as liberal
manner as they may; and the money collected to send to the Bishops of the
Diocesses, to be by them delivered over to you, or to such as you shall
appoint, to whom the Inhabitants or Churchwardens of that Town of
East-Greenwich may repair for it. And these Our Letters shall be your
sufficient warrant and discharge in this behalf.

Given under Our Signet at Our Court at New Market, the 13. day of December, in
the fifteenth year of Our Reign of Great Britain, and of Scotland the
fiftieth.
To the right Reverend Father in God, my very good Lord and Brother, the Lord
Bishop of Norwich.
NOw because it is a work of piety to repair and uphold the Houses of God,
and it were a disgrace to the Truth of Religion, that what has been founded
in the days of our Predecessors, should not be vpheld in the time wherein the
Gospel of Christ does so clearly and brightly shine, I pray your Lordship to
give the best furtherance you may unto this work, not only by permitting, but
also by exciting men within the Diocese, to extend their devotion in this
behalf. Whereof not doubting, I leave you to the Almighty.

From Lambith the 13. of January. 1617. Your Lordships loving Brother, G. CANT.

LEt my Brethren of the Clergy, and the Churchwardens, use their best
expedition and readiness for the publishing and speeding of his Majesty's
Letters aforesaid, and to return this Brief, with the money collected, to the
Official of your Archdeaconrie in whose Jurisdiction you dwell, or to his
Register, that by the said Official or Registers the same may be returned to
me, or to my Chancellor, to be sent unto me speedily.

This 20. of October, 1618. Io. Norwich.


