JAMES by the grace of God King of England, Scotland, France, and Ireland,
defender of the faith, etc.
To the chief Constables, and Bailiffes of the Hundred of (...) and to every
of them in our County of (...) greeting.
We will and command you that you warn, and cause come xxiiij. honest,
sufficient, and discreet men of your said Hundred, before the clerk of the
Market of our household, and through our Realm of England, or his lawful
Deputy within the Verge, as well within liberties as without to appear at (...)
upon (...) being the (...) day of (...) next ensuing the date hereof, by eight
of the clock in the morning of the same day, Then and there as well to rate,
cease, and tax the prices of all kind of Corn, Grain, Victuals,
Horse-meate, Lodging, and other things for the expenses of our household and
train in this our Progress, as also to hear and to do upon their several
Oaths, as they and every of them shall be, for us, and on our behalf required
according to the laws of our Realm. And moreover that you give warning to all
petty Constables, of every Parish and Hamlet within your said Hundred, to
command all Bakers, Brewers, Inholders, Tiplers, Tauerners, Mercers, Drapers,
Chandlers, Butchers, Smithes, Weaueres, Millers, Farmers, Cornesellers, and all
other persons within your said Hundred, who have, use, or occupy any manner of
Weights or Measures, sealed or not sealed, every of them to appear with the
same, the day, hour, and place aforesaid, to see them duly examined with our
Standard. And then the Bakers and Victuallers bread of all sorts to be showed
for the perfect intelligence of the true assize thereof: At which time and
place aforesaid, all your officers to be present and attendant, to make due
return of this our commandment; together with the names and Surnames of the
aforesaid Jurors and Artificers into the court in due form of writing, as ye
will answer to the contrary at your perils.

Dated under our Seal of the Office aforesaid the (...) day of (...) in the
(...) year of our Reign of England, etc.
royal blazon or coat of arms

James, by the grace of God, King of England, Scotland, France, and Ireland
defender of the faith, etc.
to the (...) of the (...) of(...) and to every of them in our County of (...)
Greeting.
We will and command you that you warn, and cause to come xxiiij. honest,
sufficient, and discreet men of your said (...) before the Clerk of the market
of our household, through our Realm of England, or his lawful deputy within
the Verge, as well within liberties as without, to appear at (...) upon (...)
being the (...) of (...) next ensuing the date hereof by eight of the clock in
the morning of the same day: Then and there to rate cease, and tax the prices
of all kind of Corn Grain Victuals, Horsemeate Lodging, and other things
for the expense of our household and train in this our Progress as also to
hear and to do upon their several Oaths, as they and every of them shall be
for us* and on our behalf required according to the laws of our Realm. And
moreover that you give warning to all Bakers, Brewers, Inholders, Tiplers
Tauerners, Mercers Drapers, Chandlers* Butchers, Smiths, Weauers, Millers,
Farmers, Corne-sellers and all other persons within your said (...) who have,
use, or occupy any manner of Weights or Measures, sealed or not sealed every of
them to appear with the same, the day, hour and place aforesaid; to see them
duly examined with our Standard* And then the Bakers personally to appear with
their bread of all sorts, to see it weighed for the perfect intelligence of the
true assize thereof: At which time and place aforesaid, all your officers to be
present and attendant to make due return of this our commandment; together
with the names and surnames of the aforesaid Jurors and Artificers in the
court, in due form of writing, as ye will answer to the contrary at your
perils.

Dated under our Seal of the Office aforesaid the (...) of (...) in the (...)
year of our Reign of England, etc.

