JAMES by the grace of God, of England, Scotland, France, and Ireland King,
defender of the faith, etc.
To the chief Constables and Bayliffe of the Hundred or Division of (...) in
our County of (...) and to every of them, Greeting:
We will and command you, that you warn, and cause to come, xxiiij, honest
and discreet men of your said Hundred or Division, before the Clerk of the
market of Our household, and throughout our Realm of England, or his lawful
Deputy, in and through our said County of (...) and every part thereof,
as well within Liberties as without, to appear at (...) upon (...) being the
(...) day of (...) next by eight of the clock in the forenoone of the same
day: Then and there to hear and do upon their several Oaths, as they and
every of them shall be for us, and on our behalfes required, according to the
Laws and Statutes of Our Realm: And moreover that you send your Precepts
according to the Tenor hereof, to all your petty Constables or Tythingmen of
every Parish and Ham^et, within your said Hundred or Division, thereby
commanding them, that they specially warn all Millers, Bakers, Brewers,
Inholders, Vinteners, Mercers, Grocers, Drapers, Alehouse-keepers, Butchers,
Chandlers, Smithes, Weauers, Farmers, Malsters, Tailors, Glouers, Cloathiers,
Cloathworkers, Fullers, and generally all Artificers, Tradesmen or any other
person or persons whatsoever, within their Constablery or Tything, that uses
or has any Weight or Measures whatsoever, sealed or not sealed, to appear
with all their Waights and Measures the day and place aforesaid, to see them
duly examined by our Standerds: And then the Bakers and Victuallers bread of
all sorts to be showed for the perfect intelligence of the true assise thereof,
and that the said Constables or Tythingmen do bring thither and present to our
said Clerk of the Market or his deputy fair written, and fixed to your
Precept, as the return thereof a true Note of the names of the Parish or
Hamlet whereof they are officers: and the manner of the Parish whereof the
Hamlet is a part, with the true names and surnames, and their Additions of all
the persons appointed to be summoned by them, as aforesaid, and withal a Note
of all the Weights and Measures, Beams and Balances, which every or any man
uses or has: And your self or selves, to be then and there present and
attendant, and to make a due return of this Our command and Precept:
Indorsing thereupon the true names of all the Parishes and Hamlets, whereof you
have summoned the officers to appear, as you will answer the contrary at your
peril:

Dated under the Seal of the Office aforesaid the (...) day of (...) in the
(...) year of Our Reign of England, etc.
royal blazon or coat of arms

BY virtue of a Precept in his Majesty's name to me directed, These are to
charge and command you, that you warn two of the most sufficient men within
your Constablery or Tything, neither of them being a tradesman, if conveniently
you may, to appear before the Clerk of the Market of his Majesty's most
honorable household, or his Lawful Deputy, at (...) within this County of
(...) on (...) the (...) day of (...) next coming by eight of the clock in
the forenoone of the same day, to serve the kings Majesty upon a Jury for that
service: And that you specially warn all Bakers, Brewers, Inholders, Vintners,
Alehouse-keepers, Victuallers, Butchers, Chandlers, Grossers, Mercers,
Cloathiers, Cloathworkers, Fullers, Weauers, Tailors, Smithes, Glouers,
Witetawyers, Millers, Maulsters, Corne-masters, Farmers, and generally all
Artificers, Tradesmen, and all other persons whatsoever within your Constablery
or Tything, that have or use any Weight or Measure, to a appear before the
said Clerk of the Market, at the time and place aforesaid, bringing or causing
to be brought thither at the same time, all such Weights and Measures, as they
or any of them use or have, either sealed or unsealed, to have them duly
examined with his Majesty's, Standerds: And that you bring with you fair
written, all the true names and surnames with the several faculties or
additions of every person so summoned, or to be summoned by you, to appear as
aforesaid, together with a true Note of all the Weights and Measures, Beams
and Balances, that every such person has or uses, with the true manner of
the Parish or Hamlet whereof you are officer. And further that you repair to
all the Victuallers houses and what bread you shall find there of the Bakers
bread of several sorts, to bring the same with you, with the names of the
Bakers that made the same, that trial may be made of the true Assizes
thereof: And that you yourselfe do make your attendance at the time and place
aforesaid, and do in due manner make full return of this Precept in due time,
as you will answer the contrary at your peril.


