By the King.
A Proclamation commanding the due execution of two Statutes against falsifying
of Wool, and woollen Yarne, for the better maintenance of clothing.
Having taken into Our princely care and consideration, the maintenance and
increase of the clothing of this our Kingdom, as the principal native
commodity thereof, whereunto there are principally incident two considerations:
The one of the manufactures depending thereupon: and the other of the materials
of wool and woollen yarne, out of which the cloth is made and wrought: And
being informed of the great and intolerable abuses of the Broggers,
Forestallers and Ingrossers of wool, which partly by neglect, and partly by
color of license have not only been cause of the high prices and dearth of
Woolls, to the decay and discouragement of the Clothier, but also by their
sundry falcifications and corruptions in the mixtures of the said Wools, do
daily both deceive the Clotheir in that he buys, and disable him to make his
Cloth of that true and perfect making which he ought: Against which
inconveniences there have been principally devised and enacted two Statutes:
The one in the eight year of the reign of King Henry the sixth, the fifth
Chapter; and the other in the fifth and sixth years of King Edward the sixth,
entitled an Act limiting the times for buying and selling of Wools. We
therefore out of Our Royal zeal to the common good of Our people, do by this
Our Proclamation by the advice of Our Privy Council, publish and declare, and
straightly charge and command, as well our Treasurer of England, Chancellor of
our Exchequer, and all other our Judges, Barons of our Exchequer, our Attorney
general, Our Justices, Officers, and Ministers, according to the several
duties of their places, respectively: as also all Our subjects in general, to
use their best care and diligence, that the said Statutes before mentioned, be
duly kept and observed, and diligently and carefully prosecuted and put in
execution, upon pain, not only of the penalties and forfeitures in the said
Statutes contained, but also of our high indignation, and such prosecution and
censure as shall be fit.

Given at Our Manor at Greenewich, the xxxi. day of May, in the thirteenth
year of Our Reign of England, France and Ireland, and of Scotland the 48.
God save the King.
Imprinted at London by Robert Barker, Printer to the Kings most excellent
Majesty. ANNO DOM. 1615.


