To the right reverend Father in God, my very good Lord and Brother, the Lord
Bishop of London.
Right reverend father in God, my very good Lord, I have received from his
Majesty his Princely letters, written in favor of the Inhabitants of the Town
of Wesell; the tenor whereof here ensues.

MOST Reverend father in God, right trusty and right-wel-beloued Counselor,
We greet you well. Whereas the Magistrates of the City of Wesell, situate
in the confines of Germany, by their special messengers sent hither, have
represented unto us, that where heretofore for long continuance of time, their
said City has been a place of succor and retraite to many afflicted
Strangers, such as have been exiled for the profession of true Religion, as
well from this Kingdom of ENGLAND, as from other Countries, are now fallen
into great miseries and distresses, as well by the continual calamity and
spoils of the war, which heretofore they have endured, as more perticularly
some four years since, by the sudden and woeful surprise of their City by
Marquis SPINOLA, general of the King of Spain his Army, and ever since by the
surcharge and oppression of a mighty Garrison of almost four thousand
Spaniards and other nations: By reason whereof the said City is become so
impouerished (the welthier Citizens having retired themselves from thence) as
they are not able any longer to sustain the charge, neither of the Ministry,
nor of the Free-schoole, which heretofore they have erected for the propagation
of Gods true religion: nor of the multitude of their poor people, which are by
the calamities aforesaid infinitely increased of late, without the beneuolent
assistance of others; and to that end having humbly besought us for a
charitable contribution to be levied amongst our subjects: We in tender
commiseration of their distressed estate, and in gratitude for the benefits
which heretofore they have affoorded to others, when God enlarged them with
means and occasion, are graciously pleased to grant their request. Wherefore
we do require and hereby authorize you to write your letters to the several
Bishops of the Diocesses in your Province, that they do give order to the
Ministers and other zealous men of their Diocesses, both by their own example
in Contribution, and by exhortation to others, to dispose our well-beloved
subjects in their several charges to a charitable and bountiful contribution
toward their relief. And for the better advancing thereof, our pleasure is
that those Collections made in the particular parishes, be returned to the
Bishops of the Diocesses, and by them transmitted to such persons, as by the advice and nomination of the said messengers you shall think convenient to
appoint. Given under our Signet at our Manor of Greenewich, the seventh day of
June in the 16 year of our reign of England, France and Ireland, and of
Scotland the 51.

Hereby it appears that God has been pleased so far to try the faith and
patience of these his children, as that they who formerly gave relief unto
others, yea to diverse of our Countrymen in the time of persecution under Queen
MARY, are now constrained to seek relief of others, which should incite us to
enlarge the bowels of our compassion toward them, taking knowledge of God his
mercy the more upon us according to his own saying; It is a more blessed thing
to give, then to receive, which cannot be better expressed of our parts, then
by having commiseration and a fellow feeling of them, making the same
profession of faith which we do, yet do suffer such adversity, and so
remarkable a calamity: I pray your Lordship therefore, to your power, to
advance and set forward this work, which tends to no other end but to the
honor of Almighty God. And to send the money contributed unto me, that so it
may be delivered over to Philip Burlamachie and some other Merchant strangers,
so to be conveyed to the Town of Wesell, according to his Majesty's gracious
direction. In the mean time I leave you to God, and remain

Your Lordships very loving brother. G. CANT.
Lambehith: June 25. 1618.

AS my Chancellor at the reading of these letters did entreat you my brethren
of the Ministry to advance this collection to the uttermost of your power, so
I pray you all, and every one of you, that you will use both the best arguments
and means to enrich and make as good as may be this Collection, and with as
much speed as may be to return the same unto me, that so I may satisfy both
his Majesty's desire, and my Lord of Canterburies direction. And so I leave you
to God his protection.

Your loving friend Io. London.
THE money that shall be gathered by virtue of these letters, to be given unto
the Archdeacons Officialls, or Regesters, that it may be presently conveyed
into the hands of my Lord of London.




