By the Kings Majesty's Commisioners, for granting free VVarrens, and other
things of that nature.
HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE

royal blazon or coat of arms
THE KINGS most excellent Majesty's, tendering the quiet, ease, and contentment
of his loving Subjects: AND for the better preservation of each man's Game of
all sorts in their own lands and possessions, from common hunters, Potchers
and the like: which his Majesty understanding diverse of his Subjects are
desirous of, has been graciously pleased to grant his Commission under his
great Seal of England, directed to some of his learned Counsel and others,
whose names are subscribed, or compounding and agreeing with all such as will
compound for free and Charter Warren, to be granted to them and their Heirs
under the great Seal of England: AND for erecting Parkes and Warrens, in each
man's several possessions: AND for renewing Charters and Grants of that nature,
with diverse other benefits, and more ample privileges, and speedy remedies by
his Majesty's said Grant, so to be obtained, against such inconveniences of
Hunters and Potchers, more then the common or Statute Laws, without the help
of his Majesty's grant, can yield and afford: for Warrens or Parkes are not to
be holden or erected but by Charter or Prescription, as by the said Commission
may appear.

The Command and commodity of the privilege of Chartr'd grounds, and Warrens,
grounded upon law and experience.
1 IT does enfranchise the land, by giving an interest in the game to the owner
of the ground, excludes all strangers, who otherwise without the kings grant
have as much interest therein as the owner: neither will any action lie against
aman for taking of killing his game, or recovery be had without the kings
grant. 2 It has great immunities and freedoms, whereof other grounds are
destitute. 5. Eliza. Rast 43. 3 The trespasser shall incur the payment
mentioned in the kings grant, which other Warrens want. 4 Warren ground is not
subject to the statute made against the conversion of tillage, into pasture:
whereby an arable ground outworne and barrened by corn, may so be employed to
greater benefit, till it be fruitful for corn again. 5 Trespassers shall
incur imprisonement for three years, and make fine and ransom, and put in
sureties not to offend again, and the final punishment is abiuration. 6 The
garden of wards that destroys or annoies such grounds, shall be punished in
wast. 7 The delinquent incurreth the danger of the statute laws, and the
penalty of the kings Charter and common laws.
The Commodity.
1 IT is good to all persons and grieuance to none. 2 They be subject to a suit
by Quo Warranto, that keep and maintain Warrens without the kings grant. 3
The new Patentie has full power to punish Potchers and petty hunters. 4 The
barren and wast grounds may be won to be fertile, and gained to be several and
good. 5 This kind of grownd will be made fit for Tillage, and fruitful for
corn. 6 The Merchant shall be furnished with Furs for cold Countries, to the
maintenance of Mariners and shipping. 7 The increase of Conies, in many barren
wast grounds will be so great, that it will in those places keep down the
price of victuals. 8 The fear of these punishments, hereby to be inflicted,
will beat down Idleness the root and cause of mischiefs. 9 It will be an
occasion to preserve men's hedges, corn, and sheep, more free from petty
hunters, Potchers, etc. The charge of passing this grant under the Seal,
shall not be great, as in other Cases.
The Office hereof is kept at Sir Henry Bretons house in Drury Lane above Drury
house, next to the sign of the Griffin, where you shall have further
satisfaction and direction herein.

The Commissioners for this Grant.
Sir Henry Yeluerton, Knight, Atterney general. Sir Thomas Couentry, Knight,
Solicitor. Sir John Townsend, Knight. Sir Henry Breton, Knight, Sir George
peckham, Knight, Henry Gibbe, Esquire.

