By the King.
A Proclamation declaring His Majesty's pleasure concerning Sir Walter
Rawleigh, and those who adventured with him.
WHereas We gave License to Sir Walter Rawleigh, Knight, and others of Our
Subjects with him, to undertake a Uoyage to the Country of Guyana, where they
pretended great hopes and probabilities to make discovery of certain Gold
Mines, for the lawful enriching of themselves, and these Our Kingdoms: Wherein
We did by express limitation and Caution restrain, and forbid them and every
of them, from attempting any Act of hostility, wrong, or violence whatsoever,
upon any of the Territories, States, or Subjects of any foreign Princes, with
whom We are in amity: And more peculiarly of those of Our dear Brother the
King of Spain, in respect of his Dominions and Interests in that Continent.

All which notwithstanding, We are since informed by a common fame, that they,
or some of them have, by an hostile invasion of the Town of S. Thome (being
under the obedience of Our said dear Brother the King of Spain) and by
killing of diverse of the inhabitants thereof, his Subjects, and after by sacking
and burning of the said town, (as much as in them for their own parts lay)
maliciously broken and infringed the Peace and Amity, which has been so
happily established, and so long inuiolably continued between Us and the
Subjects of both our Crowns.

We have therefore held it fit, as appertaining nearly to Our Royal Justice
and Honor, eftsoons to make a public declaration of Our own utter mislike
and detestation of the said insolences, and excesses, if any such have been by
any of Our Subjects committed: And for the better detection and clearing of the
very truth of the said common fame, We do hereby straightly charge and
require all Our Subjects whatsoever, that have any particular understanding and
notice thereof, upon their duty and alleagiance which they owe Us, immediately
after publication of this Our pleasure, to repair unto some of Our Privy
Counsel, and to discover and make known unto them their whole knowledge and
understanding concerning the same, under pain of Our High displeasure and
indignation; that We may thereupon proceed in Our Princely Justice to the
exemplary punishment and coertion of all such, as shall be convicted and found
guilty of so scandalous and enormous outrages.

Given at Our Manor of Greenwich, the ninth day of June, in the sixteenth
year of Our Reign of England, France and Ireland, and of Scotland the one and
Fiftieth.

God save the King.

Imprinted at London by Bonham Norton, and John Bill, deputy Printers for the
Kings most Excellent Majesty.

ANNO M.DC.XVIII.


