A LITELL treatise of Astronomy, very necessary for Physyke and Surgerye,
declarynge what herbs, and all kind of medecynes are appropryate and under
the influence of the Planetes, signs and constellacyons. And also the parts
and members of the body thereto correspondynge, and how ye shall bring the
virtue of the Heuens and nature of the Sters to every part of man's body
being deseased or sick to the sooner recoueraunce of health. And also how to
chose the most luckey days and times for the above said, the which shall be
appointed by the Almanacke yerelye, according to the course of the Moon,
passing by all the Signs and Sterres in one reuolucion gathered and set forth
by ANTHONY ASKHAM Physicio^ in the year of our Lord God M. D. L. the twelfe
day of Februarye.

THOMAS PAYNEL
Repulse the beginning of every malady
For medecines ministered not in dew season.
Does not relyeue or help the mysery
Of such as has by long contraction
Dyfferred the time of mynistracion.
Whereby their maladye fercely might increse
Nature corrupted the body to deface.
In time to minyster medecynes the sick does relyeue
And wine out of time does the much damage
Increase of pains the pacyent does achieue
But in time to take plasture the sore does assuage
Al things in season should have their passage
Remedy for desease in time to procure.
Thus all things are subject to time and to measure.
Finis quod Thomas Paynel.
: THE EPISTLE to the Reader.
IT is manyfeste and well known, good Reder, that al herbs stones, gummes,
and metalles, has their generacions, disposicyons, virtues and proprietyes of
the Son, Moon, and Sterres, so that every herb has certain Sterres
appropryate and addicte unto them, of whom they receive such influence and
operacyon, as is according to the nature of the Sterres, the which is known
of long time by daily experience, in considering their mouinges, their
co^iunctions and aspectes. And also markyng their influences, and propertes at
such like times aforsaid Also by further experience, the Philosopher has
found forth seven Sterres orrotical in seven several heavens or speres, and of
sundry influences and operacions, and according to such men of such like
condycyon, they have given them names, as Saturn, Jupiter, and Mars, and so
forth.

Also all the rest of the Sterres are fyxed in the eight heaven, or spear
emonges whom are ymagened. xii. beasts called signs, and. xxviii. other
constellacions, and by such like experyence of influences, has named a
certain number of Sterres to be a Ram, to be a Bull, to be a Lion, to be a
Scorpion, to be a Bear, to be a Dog and so forth Also the heavenly Sterres
has certain commyxtion with the elements, and the Elements with them, so
that all things made of the Elements, receives certain qualytes and
operacions sensible, by an Elementall power, and also they receive certain
operacyons, and virtues insencible and occulte, by a celestial and heavenly
power, as all herbs and medecines solutisse are either, hot, dry, moist, or
cold, by the elementall power, and also by the celestyal power, some purge
color, some melancoly, some fleume and some from the head, some from the
stomach, some from the heart, some from the liver, and so forth of the which
no man knows no other cause but the alonely propertye and virtue of the
heavens.

Also furthermore it is known and expert how the planetes signs, and
constellacions does work perticulerly in diverse parts of man's body, and
specially the seven planetes, unto whose influence all other Sterres are
obedyente and agreeable, furthermore know that the Son, and Moon are chief
of al other planetes, for the Son is the minister of al lively propertye, and
gives al things life, and makethe all herbs to grow, till they come to their
perfection.

Also the Son draws first from the root the lively moisture, that makes
the herb to grow, and wax.

Saturn holds the matter together in the root stalk and leaves.

Jupiter gives the temperature, benefete, shap, and fasshyon, and the ayrie
humor and smell.

Mars hardens and gives the woody stalks and strength.

The Son gives a contynual increase of life, by a lively hete.

Venus gives the flowers, fayrenes and temperate humor.

Mercurye gives the bark and sede, the preueand occulte properte

The Moon gives the leaves, and warry humor.

And thus understand of all other things both of stones, gummes, and
metalles, and also of the body and sundry parts of mankind, furthermore
know that the first and most pryncypall workman is the father of heaven, the
which having in the Godhead, in the mind divine, and in the henuen archetypi,
the edees simylytudes, and the images of all things create, before the
creation of the world, the which at the proper instant of the creatyon he
has infused these symylitudes and images, being even percelles, and powers of
the Godhead in all his creatures, and as he has made all things of naught,
so are yet al things naught, the which wants these edees, similitudes,
images and powers of the Godheade, for he is Omnia in omnibus, secondarye he
has create instruments as second causes the which are the Son, Moon, and
Sterres, whose matter, influence and operacyons is nothing but by his power
infused, the which he has made alonelye to declare his glory and high
workemanshippe to his intellectyfe creatnes.

Also know that the Son is the princypall workman of God, and the planetes
are instruments and toles wherewith the Son works, and the signs and
constellations are other mean instruments to the planetes, and the Element
are the matter that they work upon, and all things made of the four
elements, are the substaunces and bodies with life schape and faryon that they
make of the Elements, as man, beast, fyshe, foul, herb and stone.

Also know that the Moon is the lowest of all the planetes and next to the
Elements, having the lest and swyftest course of all the other planetes, and
is the mediatrix, cariare and daily instruments, and co^ueyre of the virtues
and propertyes of all the other planetes, from the one to the other, and is also
the commixter and ioynere together of all the heavens and elements as by
example, when the Son comes to us ward in spring time and at all other
times he gyuethe light to all the Sterres and planetes, and this light by an
occulte virtue, is mouyng and lively, and is conveyed by the Moon to the
element of the fire, and there is made a lively heat.

Also the Moon, and the elemente of the fire does convey it to the eleme^tes
of the air, where it is made a temperate lively heat, and from the air to
the water, and so receives an humorall moisture in conceruing the temperate
lively heat fynallye the earth, the which is the mother and matter of all
the other things, and this lively hete entering and opening the pores of the
earth, and also of the roots and seeds of herbs, gives quicnynge, and
mouynge upward again from the center, and by the elemente of the water,
mynystred by the Moon a conseruyng moisture, and by the Air and fire a
temperate lively heat, the herb begins to spring and appear sensible.
Then the Moon in her course passing by the Sterres, signs or constellation
of Saturn mynystreth the influence of Saturn to the herb, the which thicketh
and keeps the matter i^ rotes stalks and leaves together, by the element of
the earth.

Also in passing by Jupiter she ministers his influence to the herb, in
giving temperature shape facion and smelle, by the elemente of the air, and in
passing by Mars, by Venus, by Mercury, or by their Sterres and co^stellacions
ye shall understand in like manner.

Also if the Moon should not have this ministracion daily emonges the planetes,
this succession of the growing of herbs should not follow ordinatelye, and
oftentimes we se daily decay and let of these procedinges, the which the
cause is of the conjunctions and aspectes of contrary planetes to the
procedinges thereof, as at such time, when Venus and Mercury should bring
forth the flower fruit and seed. Then at that proper instant or at the
entrance of the reuolucion figure, Saturn and Mars, being in dygnites, does
thick and make cold, dry, and earthy and utterly sleeth that tender matter and
lively humor, whereof the flouer and sede should have been ordained and made,
and thus fynallye the Moon having daily administration of all manner of
propertyes of herbs, both elemental, and celestial, it shall be declared by the
course of the Moon in the signs, the time of ministryng of herbs and
medecines for all parts of the body, the which times shall be known by the
Almanacke as is before said, wherefore now to conclude gentell reader I have
written this little treasyse, not for leraned men but al only for the
unlearned English reader, that they may partly perceive the workynge of the
omnipotente power, in his instruments, the heuens and elements in the
elementates, or inal things that are made of the.iiii. elemente to the high
laud and praise of the Deyte, to whom be all glory world without end Amen.

FINIS.
The deuysion of this book.
THe first part declares the influence of the seven planetes in herbs,
stones, gummes, and mettalles, and in the parts of man's body, and also in what
signs, constellations and stars, every planete has most dominion and
lordship.

The second part declares the influence of the.xii. signs, in herbs stones
gummes and mettalls, both by their own influence and by the influences of the
planettes, that has lordshyp in them, and also certain degrees, wherein
diverse stars are set, being pryncipall stars of sundry constellations, be
longing to certain planettes, and also what part of man's body the sign
governs, and how to bring the virtues of the Heavens and Sterres to what
part of man's body that ye will.

The third part declares by example how ye shall bring the virtue of the
Sterres to every part of man's body, by the course of the Moon, with a table
of the signs and Planetes, and how ye shall know in every sign what
planetes has dominacion therein, whereby ye may lyghtlye perceive the herbs and
medecynes belongyng to the said planetes, the which shall be ministered in that
sign, for that part of the body, the which the sign governs, the Moon
being in the said sign.

Also there follows the tryplicites of signs and tryplycytes of the parts of
the body, and how ye shall minister in the one sign for the other, and to
the one member for the syckenes of the other, with a table for the same, also
there is a another ministracion after the ma^sions of the Moon.

HERE BEGINS the first part, the which treats of the seven planets,
and first of the herbs, stones, gums, and mettalles that are appropriate to
the planet Saturn.
Of herbs, SEngrene, Affodyll, Serpentary, Rewe, Common, blake Elebore,
Mandragon, Opium, black Figs, Pyne tree, Cypress tree.

And of stones, Sapphire black Jasper, Chalcedon, Magnes, and the black
Onichinus, a litel stone of Jude.

Of Gummes, black pytche.

Of metalles, the Marcasita of base Gold, Lead, and Antimony

The parts of man's body that Saturn rules and governs.
Saturn governs the liver and gall, and the flesshely part of the stomach,
and holds and restrains all manner of fluxes.

The signs of heaven in whom Saturn has great strength and Lordeshyppe.
Saturn has domynacyon, and lordeshippe in Capricorn and Aquary, and in
Libra, because of his exaltacions, and in all things continued under these
signs.

In what constellacion df heaven, Saturn has lordship and dominion.
The constellacion of the black Raven is of the number of seven Sterres
emonges whom is a payle Sterre upon the left wyng of the Raven the which has
disposicion and influence of Saturn at the aforesaid day of the.xvi. degree
of Libra, and al other things contained under the co^stellacyon aforsaid, at
that present time.

Of herbs, stones, gummes, and mettalles, that are appropriate to the planette
Jupiter.
Of Herbs.
HOuselyke, or Sengrene, Basyll, Buglosse, Mynte royal, Enulacampana,
Violettes, Cockle Maces Spickenarde, Poplere, Asshe, Beche, Almondes,
Walnuttes, Pyonye roots, Mirabolaynes, white Figs, Pears, Apples, Prunes,
Olyues, Rabarbe, Manna, Wheat, Barlye, Raisens, Lycoresse, Sugar.

Of stones, Iacinet, Berell, Saphere, Tute, Smaragde, grene Jasper, and all
other stones, that are grene in color.

Of gummes, Mastycke, Storaxe.

Of Mettalles, Tynne, Silver, and Gold.

The parts of man's body that Jupiter rules and governs.
Jupiter rules the womb, and navel, the short rybbes, withal the bowelles,
and also the right hand and the left ear, and the natural spirit, the
veins, Raynes, back, and buttockes.

* The signs of heaven that Jupiter has dominion and lordeshyppe in
Jupiter has lordshyppe in Sagitarye, and Pisces, and in Cancer, where he is
exalted, and also in all things, contained under these. iii. signs.

The constellacions of heaven wherein Jupiter has influence.
Jupiter has dominacion in the constellacion of Elpheia, and in the great
Horse in the third degree of Sagittary, and in the third degree of Pisces, and
in all these herbs and stones that are under these two constellacions at the
degres aforesaid.

* The herbs, stones, gummes and mettalles, that has influence of the planet
Mars.
Of herbs.
DOgfenel, Arnoglossa white Elebore, Garlyke, Radyshe, Laurel, Napellus,
Scamonie, Thystel, Netrell, Sperewort, Onyons Lekes, Mustarde.

Of stones, Adama^t, Magnes, the blood stones, Jasper, Amatysie.

Of Gummes, Euphorbium Armoniake.

Of Mettalles, Iron, Read brass Sulphire, or Brymstone.

The parts of man's body that Mars rules.
Mars governs the raynes, stones, matrice, and genitall seed.

The signs of heaven in whom Mars has great dominacion.
Mars has domynacyon, and lordeshyppe in Aries and Scorpio, and in Capricorn,
because of his exaltacion, and in all things contained under these signs.

The co^stellacions of heaven in who^ Mars has dominion.
Mars has lordeship in the constellacyon of Plciades, the seven Sterres, of
Aldebaran, of the Lions heart, of the Ravens wynge, of Alchameche, of Elpheia,
of the Scorpions heart and of the shulder of the great horse, in the.xxii.
degree, of Taurus, in the third degree of Gemini, in the.xix. degree of Virgo,
in the. xvi, degree of Liora, in the iiii degree of Scorpio, in the.iii. degree of
Sagittary, in the.vii. degree of Capricorn, and in the iii. degree of Pisces,
and in all thing that are contained under these constellacyons, and specyallye
at the days of these degrees aforesaid.

The herbs, stones, gummes, and mettalles, that are appropryate to the Son.
Of herbs.
HElytrope, or Marygoldes, Poligon, Piony, Celidon, Citraria, Gynger, Gentia^,
Diptayne, Veruaine, Laurel, Cedre, Palm, Asshe, Iue, Peper Amaracus, Vynes,
Mynte royal, setwal, Saffron, Balm, Honey, Lignum Alloes, Cloves, Cinamonde,
Calamus Aromatycus, Amber, Musk, Rosemarye.

Of stones, the Egle stone, oculus, Carbu^cle, Chrisolite, Iris, Helitrop the
grene Iacincte, Topazion.

Of gummes, mastycke, Balm,

Of mettalles pure gold.

The parts of man that the Son governs.
The Son rules the Brain, the heart, the thyghes, the mary, the right eye,
and ye spiritual life, ye mouth, the tongue, with all the organs, and
instruments that belongs both to the outward and inward se^ses, also the
hands, feet and synewes, with the virtue fantastical.

The signs of heaven wherein the Son has gretest dominacion to us of
England.
The Son has the greateste lordeshyp in Leo, and also in Aries, Taurus,
Gemini, Cancer, Virgo, and Libra, and in all things contained under these
signs, and is the chief workman, to whom all other planettes are but
instruments.

The constellacions of heaven, in whom the Son has the greatest influence to
us in England.
The Son has influence in Andromeda, in the head of Algoll, in Pleiades, in
Aldebaran, in the Got, in the great Dog, and little Dog, in the Lions
heart, in the tail of the great Bear, in the winge of the Raven, in the virgyn
spycke, and in Alchameth, and in all things contained under these
co^stellacions. Also about the degres appointed in the signs where the most
pryncipal Sterres of these constellacyons are set, the Son suffers
alterations according to the nature of the planettes, of whom these sterres
has influence, from time to time by the course and passage of the Moon, yt
ministers from the one, to the other, as I have said before in the epistle.

* The herbs, stones, gummes, and mettalles, that has influence of the
planette Venus.
Of herbs.
PAnax, Callitrychum, Veruen, Violette Maidenheare, Valeryan, Time, Rose,
Mirtus, Ambre, Musk, Sanders. Coliandre, sweet Fygs, Pears Oranges, and
Pomgranattes.

Of stones, Berel, Chrysolite, Smaragde, Sapphire, grene Jasper, the Egle stone,
Asure, Coral, and all other of sundry and grene color.

Of gummes, Ladanum, Benjamin, Gallia, Muscate, and all sweet smelling Gummes.

Of mettalles, Silver and yelow or read brass.

Of the parts of man's body that Venus governs.
Venus rules the flesh and fatnes of the womb, the share and navel and also
the back and buttockes.

The signs of heaven, in whom Venus has dominacion.
Venus is the lady of Taurus, and Libra and of Pisces, because of her
exaltacion, and in all things contained under these three signs.

what constellacyons are ruled by Venus.
Venus rules the navel of Andromeda, in the.xxii. degree of Aries, Aldebaran
in the third degree of Gemini the great dog in the.xvii. degree of Cancer,
the great Bear in the seven degree of Libra, the vyrgin spicke, in the.xvii
degree of Libra the Elpheia in the third degree of Sagittary, the vultur cades
in the.xvi. degree of Aquarye and of all other herbs, stones, Gummes, and
mettalles, that are contained under these constellacyons, at the days of those
degrees aforesaid.

The herbs, stones, and metals that has influence of the planette Mercurye.
Of herbs.
PEntafilon, Mercurye, Philonium, Fumiter, Pimpernel, Maioran, and Perslye.

Of stones, Smaragde Achates, Porphiret, Topazion.

Of mettalles, Quicksiluer, Tin and the marcasita of Silver.

* The parts of man's body that Mercury rules.
Mercurye governs the mylte, stomach, bladder, matryxe, and the right ear,
with the virtue of reseyuynge.

The signs of heaven in whom Mercurye is the Lord.
Mercurye is Lord of Gemini, and Virgo, because of his honor therein, and in
all things contained in these two signs.

The constellacion of Heaven in who^ Mercury has dominion.
Mercury has dominion in the navel of Andromeda, in the.xxi. degree of Aries,
and in the litel dog, in the xxi. degree of Leo, and i^ the virgi^ spicke in
the.xvii. degree of Libra, and in vulture cadens, in the.xvi. degree of Aquary,
and in the tail of Capri. and in all things contained under these
constellacions in the days of the degres aforesaid.

The herbs, stones, gummes, and mettalles, that has influence of the Moon,
Of herbs.
LVnary, Palm, Isope Rosemary, Agnus castus, Olyua, Chamelion.

Of stones, Selenites Perle, Berell.

Of mettalles, the marcasyta of silver, and pure silver.

What part of man's body the Moon rules.
The Moon governs pertyculerlye the brain, longes, backebone, the left eye
and stomach, and all the excrementes of the body, and generally the Moon
rules all the hole body* by diverse and sundry times as she passes by ye.
xii, signs

The sign of heaven wherein the Moon has dominacion.
The Moon is the lady of Cancer, and is honored in Taurus, so that all things
contained under these signs are ruled by the Moon.

In what constellacion of heaven the Moon has dominacion.
* The Moon has damynion, in the tail of the great Bear, in the. vii degree
of Libra, and in all things contained under these co^stellacions, in the day
of the degree aforesaid.

HERE BEGINS the.ii. part, the which treats of the.xii. signs and of
the appropriation, and influence that they have in Herbs, Stones, Gummes and
mettalles, and in the pertycular parts of man's body, and what principal
Sterres of certain constellacions, are contained in every sign, and first of
the sign of the Ram called in the Almanacke Aryes.
depiction of Ares: ram

ARies is a sign of.xiii. sters and has properly ye herb Sage, Sticados worm
wode, Citru^, Calamente, Maioran, Penyryall, Isope, Betonye, Rewe, Chelidon,
Rosemarye, Horehounde, Accorus, Mynte, Camomyll, Veruaine, Roses, Violets,
water Lylly, Popy, Myrtus, Petymorell, Alkikengy, Gurdes, Purcelayne, and all
manner of medecynes, made of these, as Siroppes, Iuleps, Confections,
electuaryes, playsters, oyntmentes, and so forth.

Also he has all the other herbs, stones, gummes, and mettalles, that are
contained in the influence of the Son and Mars, because it is the house of
Mars, and the exaltacyon of the Son. Also Aries has a great part of the
co^stellacion of Andromeda the which conteyneth.xxii. sterres, emonges whom a
pryncipal star is called the navel of Andromeda, in the.xxi. degree of Aries,
the which gives influence to all the things under Venus and Mercury in the
day of the degree aforesaid. Also Aries governs the head and face, so that
in all manner kind of me decines gene^ for any sickness of the head and face,
they shall be myxed with some things under the Son. Mars or the sign Aries, the
Moon being in the said sign of Aries. Also if it be about the.xxi. degree,
then shall ye myxe some things under Venus, and Mercury, with the above said,
and so by these medecines shall be brought the virtue of the heuens, and nature of
the Sterres into the proper head and face by the only course and
ministracion of the Moon in this sign of Aries.

depiction of Taurus: bull

TAVrus is a sign of.xxxiii. sters, and has properly ye brod leaued Veruen,
or the garden Veruen, and all the other things contained under Venus. Also
Taurus has the constellacion of Algol the which contains.xxvi. sterres, and
it gives influence to black Ellebore, Mugwede, and the Adamant stone, in
the.xviii. degree of Taurus because the head of Algol is set in that degree.
Also all that are under Saturn, and Jupiter, has influence at this aforesaid
degree, because this Sterre is called the head of Algol is of the nature of
Saturn and Jupiter. Also the.vii. Sters, are set in the.xxii. degree of Taurus,
being of the nature of Mars, so that all things under Mars are contained under
that degree* Also this sign governs the neck of man, so that the Moon
being in this sign, it is good to minister all kind of medecines, to al
deseses in the neck, mixinge the said medecines with part of these things
under the influence thereof, whereby the virtue of the heavens and nature of the
Sterres are conveyed to the neck, by the course of the Moon, being in this
sign as is aforesaid.

depiction of Gemini: twins

GEminie is a sine of.xix. sters, and has the small leaued Veruayne, and of
all other things contained under Mercurye. Also in the third degree he has
the red star Aldebaran, the Bulls eye, the which gives influence to
Titimal and Wod bind, and the Rubye, and the Carbunele stone, and all under
Mars, and Venus in the aforesaid degree. Also Gemini rules the arms, and
shoulders, and to bring the nature of the sterres, by medecynes to these
parts of man, ye shall understand as is aforesaid in Aries, and Taurus.

depiction of Cancer: crab

CAncer is a sign of.ix. sterres and has the herb Synphiton, Isop Horehounde
Lycorysshe, Time, Squilles, Pulyal royal, Fenell, Calament Penyrial, Betony,
Rewe, Buglosse, Borage, Violettes, Iuiubes, sweet Pomgarnades, Popies, water
Lyllye, Lyuerworte, Malles, Maydenheare, Sorell, Gourdes, and Plantayne, and al
other medecines made of these, and al things contained under the influence of
the Moon. Also in the.vii. degree rises a ster called ye Got, the which is a
constellacio^ of.xiiii. sters under whom has influe^ce Mintes, Mugwede and
Mandrage, and the Sapphire stone, and al things under Saturn, and Jupiter in
that degree. Furthermore in the.xxvii. degree is a fair twinkling sterre in ye
great dogs tongue, a constellacion of.xviii. sters, under who^ has influence
Sauine, Mugwed, Dragonce, and the Berell stone, and al things under Venus in
that degree. Also Cancer rules the breast, longes, stomach and lacertes, and
to bring the nature of the sters to the mynistration of these parts by
medecines mixed with the appropriate things belonging to the said sterres, ye
must do as is before written in the other signs.

depiction of Leo: lion

LEo is a sign of xxvii. sterres and has the herb Clauer, Wormewod, Mintes
Calamente, Time, Eupatory, Pulyal royal, Licoresse, Penirial, Sage, Fenel,
Citru^, sweet Appyls, sweet Pomgranates, Buglosse Borage, Balm, Maioran,
Rosemarie, Enulacampana, Rose, Mirtus, Berel, Fumiter, Endife, Liuerworte
Waidred, Accory, Purslayne, Lemmondes and al other kind of medecines made of
these, and all things contained under the Son. Also in the.xxii. degree
ryseth a sterre called ye little dog, a constellacion of.ii. sters under who^
has influence marigold flowers, Pulial roial, and the stone, Achates, and all
under Mercurye in that degree. Also Leo, governs the heart, stomach, liver,
and back, and to bring the nature and influence of the Sterres, do as is
aforesaid.

depiction of Virgo: woman holding a quill or feather (?) in left hand, and
right hand upraised

VIrgo is a sign of.26. sterres and gyuethe influence of the herb Caloment,
Fenel Wormewod, Time, Sage, Rosemarye, Roses, Purselayne, Endyffe, Lyuerwort,
Cicory, and these that are appropriate to the aforesaid, and al other kind of
medecynes made of these, and to al contained under Mercurye. Also in the xxix.
degree rises a Sterre called the kings ster or Lions heart, the which has
Celidon, Mugwede, Mastike, and the stone Granate, and al things that are under
Jupiter, and Mars in that degree. Also virgo, governs all the bowelles, and
bottom of the stomach, and to bring the influence of these sterres to the
parts of man ye^ must understand, and do as before is said in the other signs,

depiction of Libra: scales

LIbra is a sign of.viii, sterres and gyuethe influence to the herb called
Scorpiuron, wormewod Eupatorium, Horehounde, Time. Calamente, Sparagus,
Perslye, Smallage, Alexandre, Penyroy all, Isope, Carui, Hartestonge, water
Lyllye, Endyffe, Violettes, Cicorye, Lupulns, Purselayne, Saxifrage, and all
other kind of medecynes made of these, and to al things contained under
Venus. Also in the. vii degree ryseth a sterre called the tail of the great
Bear, a constellacyon of.vii. sterres the which gives influence to the herb
Cicorye, Mugwede, and the flowers of Peruincle, and to the Magnes stone in that
degree. Also in the.xvi. degree is a sterre called the Ravens wynge that has
under hi^ ye herb Docke, or Quadragium, Hyostianus, black Gu^frey, and the
black Onichinus stone, and all that are under Saturn, and Mars, in the
aforesaid degree. Also in the,xvii. degree of Libra, ryseth a sterre called the
virgyn spycke, the which gives influence to the herb Sage, three leued grass,
Peruincle, Mugwede, and Mandrage, and to the stone Smaragde, and to al those
under Venus and Mercury, in that degree. Also Libra, governs the raynes,
thighs, and buttockes, and when ye will minister any medecines to these parts
of the body, prepare the Moon to be in this sign, and mix the medecines
with some of these things appropriat unto these parts of the body, and so
the virtue and nature of the sterres to the aid, comfort and put tynge away of
the sickness from that part of the body.

depiction of Scorpio: scorpion

SCorpyo, is a sign of.xxii. sters and has the herb Mugwede, Calament,
Eupatorie, Time, Accorus, red Madder, Nepta, Myntryall, Matricaria, Nettels,
Parataria, Horehounde, Roses, Myrtus, and all other ki^d of medecines made of
these and gives influence to all things under Mars. Also in the fourth degree
ryseth a sterre called Alchamech the which has Plantayne, and the Jasper
stone, and all things under Jupiter and Mars, in that degree. Also Scorpio
governs the genytall and mattice, and to bring the virtues of the sters unto
these parts, do as before is said in Libra.

depiction of Sagitarrius: centaur wielding a bow and arrow

SAgyttarye is a sign of.xxxi sterres, and has ye herb Anagallus, and all
that is under Jupiter. Also in the third degree ryseth a constellacion called
Elpheia the which has Rosemarye, Trifoyle, Iue, and the stone Topazion, and
all that are under Mars and Venus in the day of the aforesaid degree. Also
Sagittarye rules the share bone, and the over parts of the thyghes, and to
bring the virtue of the heavens and Sterres to these parts by medecynes, do
as is aforesaid in the other signs.

depiction of Capricorn: goat

Capricorn is a sign of xxviii. sters, and has the herb Lapathu^, a Docke
and al other herbs contained under Saturn. Also in the seventh degree ryseth
a sterre called the Scorpions heart the which gyneth influence to the herb
Aristologia the longer, and to Saffron, and to the stones Sardens, and
Amethystes, and to all things under Jupiter and Mars, in that degree Also
Capricorn governs the knees, and to bring the virtue of the Heavens and
Sterres to these places of the body, mark these things under these planettes
signs, and constellacions, geuynge influence in this sign, and do as before
is said.

depiction of Aquarius: naked man pouring water into a river from jars in each
hand

AQVArie is a sign of.24. Sters, and has ye herb Dragons, and all things
contained under Saturn and in the.xvi. degree is a sterre set whose hole
co^stellacion is called the Vulture cadens, the which gives influence to the
herb Sauery, and Fumiter, and to the stone Chrysolite and to all these under
Venus, and Mercurye in the.xvi. degree. Also in the.xiiii. degree ryseth a sterre
called the tail of Capricorn, the which has the herb Maioran, Mugwed
Nepta, Pulyall royal, the root of Mandrage, and the Chalcedoni stone, and all
these that are under Saturn and Mercuri, in the.xiiii, degree, Also Aquary
governs the calfe and small of the legs and to have the virtue of the sters
in these places mynister the herbs under their influence, as is aforesaid.

depiction of Pisces: three fish

PIsces is a Sign of. 34, sters, ye which has the herb Aristoloci and all
things under the in flue^ce of Jupiter, and in the third degree ryseth a
sterre called ye shulder of the great horse, the which has all the kinds of
the herb Aristoloch, and all that are under Jupiter and Mars in the.iii.
degree. Also Pisces rules the feet, and to have the virtue of the sterres
brought to the feet by medecynes ministerde as is before said.

HERE BEGINS the third part the which declares by example how ye shall
bring the virtue and nature of the heavens, and sterres to what part of the
body that ye will, and first for the sickness of the head as says Messahala.
WHen ye shall minister to any syckenes of the head any kind of medecines what
so ever it be, first mark when the Moon is in Aries, and then myxe your
medecynes with some of these herbs, Stones, Gummes, or Mettalles, according
to the purpose of your medecines, as are under the Son Mars or the sign of
Aries, and if it be about the.xxi. degree of Aries, ye shall myxe your
medecynes with part of these that are under Venus and Mercurye, and so the
Moon shall mynister unto the syckenes of the head the influence and virtues
of the Heavens and Sterres, the which has domynation and influence in these
herbs and things so ministered unto the health and amendynge of all deseases
in the head, and thus ye shall understand of al other parts of the body.
Furthermore ye shall understand for a general rule, that ye shall not touch
any member with fire or Iron, the Moon being in the sign thereof at any
time. Also notwithstanding it is good to give any other kind of medecynes as
Digestyues, Mitigatyffes, Comfortatyffes, Expulsyffes, Maturatyffes,
Mundyfycatiffes, Restrictiffes, Aperityffes, Alteratyffes, and Dyuertyffes,
either by Fome^tacyon, Epithimaes, Saccellacions, Odoracio^s, Fumigatio^s
Iuleppes, Siroppes, Infusions, Liniamentes, Oyntmentes, Cerotes Plasters,
Electuaries, Confectio^s or any kind of mynistracion what so ever it be, and
for the more ready knowledge hereof, I have set a brife table to know what
planette, has most dominacio^ in every sign, that the things under them may
be mynistred under their proper sign for every pertyculer part of the body
as hereafter follows.

FINIS
Aries the head. Son. Venus. xxi. the nauel of Andromeda Mars. Mercury.
Taurus the neck. Venus, Saturn. xvi. the head of Algol. Moon. Jupiter.
Gemini the arms, shulders, and hands. Mercury. Mars. iii. Aldebaran. The
tail of the Dragon. Venus. Cancer the breast, longes and stomach. The Son
Saturn. vii. the Got. Jupiter. Jupiter. Venus. xvii. the great Dog. Venus.
Leo the heart, stomach, liver. and back. Mars. The Son. xxii. the little
Dog. Mercurye. Virgo the bowels and bottom of the stomach. Mars. Mercury.
xix. the Lions heart. Jupiter. Libra the raynes, thyghes, and buttockes. Venus,
vii. the tail of the great Bear. Saturn. xvi. the Ravens wynge. Mercurye.
Venus. xvii. the vyrgyn spycke. Mercury. Scorpio the genytalles and matrice or
mother. Jupiter. Mars. iiii. the Sterre Alchameche. Mars. Sagittary the share
bone and over parts of the thyghes. Mars. Jupiter. iii. the Elpheia, Venus.
Capricorn the knees. Jupiter. Saturn. vii. the Scorpions heart. Mars. Aquarye
the calfe, and small of the legs. Venus. Saturn. xvi. Vulture cadens.
Mercurye. Saturn. xiiii. the tail of Capricorn. Mercurye. Pisces the feet.
Jupiter. Jupiter. iii. the shulder of the grate Horse. Mars.

ALso know that often and many times the ministracion of medicines to the
syckenes of the head may not be prolonged to the Moon be in Aries, wherefore
ye may then set the Moon in Leo, or Sagittarye, mixinge the herbs of the head
with their other medecines because of the concordance and tryplicite, of signs
in their qualities. Furthermore if ye can not tarry the coming of these two
signs, then at any time myxe your herbs of the head with all other kind of
medecines that ye will give for the head, and so shall always the virtue of the
heuens and sterres be conveyed to the head, and thus understand of the other
signs and parts of the body.

A table of the triplicites of the signs and members of man.
Aries. For the head. The heart. The thyghes. Leo. Sagittarye. Taurus For the
neck. The bowelles. The knees. Venus Capricorn. Gemini. For the arms
shulders and hands, the reins. the legs. Libra. Aquarye. Cancer. The breast
and longes, the genitalles, and the feet. Scorpio. Pisces.

Also know that there is a triplicite of the parts and members of man as
there is in the signs of heaven, so that many times may be ministered medicines
to the one membre for the sickness of the other, as medecynes mynistred to the
heart or thyghes, helpethe the sickness of the head, and so forth as appears
in the table above said.

ALso there is an other mynistracyon according to the.xxviii. ma^sions of the
Moon, as when ye will minister any medecynes yt is moist of operacion for what
purpose or to any part of the body that ye will, ye shall consider when the
Moon is in a moystye mansion, and then minister. Also the kind of moist
medecines, are Digestiffes, Mollificatyffes, Maturatiffes, Alteratyffes,
Mytygatiffes, Solutyffes, and so forth. And when the Moon is in a dry mansion,
ye shall minister al dry medecines of operacion, whose properties are for the
most part to hold and restrain, to mitigate, to alter, and to divert. etc. And
when the Moon is in a temperate mansyon, ye shall conserve health and comfort
by all kind of medecines, furthermore forgette not to mix your medecines with
the medecines aforesaid belonginge to the sterres and parts of man's body that
the influe^ce of the heuens may be brought to these parts of the body, that ye
do minister for, and for this purpose here does follow a table of the mansyons
of the Moon, declaringe the moystye, dry, and temperate mansions, and the
degres thereto correspondinge in all the.xii. signs of Heaven.

Aries. vii. temperate. Aries. xx. temperate. Taurus. ii. dry. Taurus. xv.
moist. Taurus. xxviii. moist. Gemini. xi. dry. Gemini. xxiiii. temperate.
Cancer. vii. moist. Cancer. xx. temperate moist. Leo. ii. dry. Leo. xv.
moist. Leo. xxviii. temperate. Virgo. xi. moist. Virgo. xxiiii. temperate.
Lybra. vii. temperate. Libra. xx. moist. Scorpio. ii. moist and cold.
Scorpio. xv. moist. Scorpio. xxviii. dry. Sagittarye. xi. moist. Sagittarye.
xxiiii. moist. Capricorn. xiii. temperate. Capricorn. xxvi. moist. Aquarye.
ii. temperate. Aquarye. xv. temperate. Aquarye. xxviii. dry. Pisces. xi, dry.
Pisces. xxiiij. moist.
FINIS.
IMPRYNTED AT LONDON IN FLETEstrete at the sign of the George next to Saint
Dunstones Church by Wyllyam Powell.

In the year of our Lord M. D. L. the.xx. day of March.


